THE PROPOSITIONS OF OWN ROE O NEILE SENT TO COL. MONCK, And a Cessation for
three months concluded between them:

Together with a Letter thereupon, sent by a Gentleman at Dundalk to his friend
at CORCK.

Printed at Corck, in the year of our Lord God, 1649. Are to be sold at Roches
building.

The Propositions of General Owen O Neile, the Lords, Gentry, and Commons of
the Confederate Catholics of Ulster: To the most Honorable and most potent,
the Parliament of England.
IN primis That all Laws, Statutes, Penalties made, past or concluded against
the Roman Catholics their Ministers or professors their liberty or exercise
of the said Religion, since the twentieth year of Henry the eight, be
repealed, reclaimed and perpetually taken off, and that act to extend to the
said party and their issues, and successors for ever.

2. The said General Owen O Neile desires that an act of Oblivion be passed
to extend to all and every of his party for all things done since the beginning
of the year 1641.

3. They desire that General Owen O Neile be provided for with a Competent
Command in the Army befitting his Worth, Place and Quality.

4. They desire that all Lands taken Illegally from the said party and every
of them, or their Ancestors since 1o Iacobi be restored to them.

5. That the said party be made capable and Entrusted, in all Commands
Martial and Civil by Sea and Land.

6. That all Incapacities, Inhability, and distrust hitherto by Act of State or
otherwise, against the said party be taken off.

7. That on both sides all Jealousies, hate and aversion be laid aside, unity,
love and amity be renewed and Proclaimed between both parties.

8. That General Owen O Neile be restored and put in possession of his
Ancestors Estates, until it be tried whether the same estates were illegally
taken away or not.

9. That the said party be provided with and possessed of a Convenient
Seaport in the Province of Vlster.

That the Army belonging to General Owen O Neile and his party be provided
for in all points as the rest of the Army shall be.

Copia Vera. Owen O Neile.

SIR,
I Have received yours of the 25. of April and I have seen your order given
to Captain Hugh Mac Patrick Mac Mahon to treat and conclude a peace with me in
the behalf of your self and the Forces under your Command. I have perused
your propositions and conceiving there are some particulars in them which at
the first view the Parliament of England may scruple to grant, I have made a
small alteration in some of them, being well assured that by it you will not
receive the least disadvantage, but it will rather prove a means to beget an
increase of their good opinion toward you and your party which I believe your
reallity, fidelity and action in their service will sufficiently merit, and in
case you approve of them as I have revised and altered them, I desire you to
send them to me signed and sealed by you that I may present them to the
Parliament of England, to obtain their favorable answer in return of them,
and in the mean time I desire that according to this enclosed paper, three
months cessation be condescended unto and agreed between us, and inviolably
kept between our forces during the said time,

Dondalke 26. April, 1649. George Moncke.

A second Copy of Owen Roe O Neile's Propositions as they were corrected by
Colonel Monck and sent to the Parliament to be granted.
1. IN primis, That such as shall join with General O Neile in the service of
the Parliament of England in this Kingdom, may have liberty of Conscience for
themselves and their issue.

2. The said General O Neile desires an act of Oblivion be passed, to extend
to all and every of his party for all things done since the beginning of the
year 1641.

3. They desire that General O Neile be provided for a competent command in
the Army befitting his worth, place and quality.

4. They desire that they may enjoy all those Lands that were in their
possession at the beginning of this war for themselves and heirs, during their
fidelity to the Interest of England.

5. That all Incapacity, Inhability and distrust hitherto by acts of State or
otherwise against the said party be taken off.

6. That on both sides all Jealousies, hate and aversion be laid aside, unity,
love and amity renewed and practiced between both parties.

7. That General O Neile may be restored and put in possession of his
Ancestors Estates or some other estate equivalent to it in reward of his merit
and the good service that he shall perform in the Parliament of Englands
service in the preservation of their interest in this Kingdom.

8. That the Army belonging to the General O Neile and his party be provided
for in all points as the rest of the Army shall be.

9. That the said party be provided with and possessed of a convenient
Seaport in the Province of Ulster.

And I do upon receiving a Confirmation of those desires undertake and promise
in the behalf of my self and the whole party under my Command, Faithfully
and firmly to adhere to the Parliament of Englands service in this Kingdom
and to maintain their Interest hereafter with the hazard of our lives and
Estates against all opposers whatsoever.

Given under my hand and Seal.
Colonel George Monck his Propositions to General Owen Roe O Neile.
THat there be a Cessation of Arms between the forces under the Command of
General Owen O Neile and the forces under Command of Colonel George Monck,
for the space of three months beginning the first of this instant May, before
which time be ended I am certain to receive the Parliaments answer to your
propositions.

That upon all occasions during the said time we be ready to assist one
another till a more absolute agreement be made and condescended unto by the
Parliament of England.

For such Creats as pay me contribution I shall be contented that they likewise
pay contribution to the forces under General Owen O Neiles Command, provided
that I may have liberty to bring in such Creats of the Province of Vlster under
Contribution to me, who have not yet paid any to the forces under my Command.

If any provisions arrive into any Harbor under my Command for the use of
General Owen O Neile, or any under his command; that freedom be given to him
to send and fetch those provisions thence with safety, provided he continues
an enemy to the enemies of the Parliament of England in this Kingdom.

To my worthy friend (...) at Corck in Munster.
SIR,
YOu may wonder my obligations being so great toward you, that my returns of
acknowledgement should be so seldom as they have been, but you must know there
is no defect in my desires to be at your ears often, it is only the
preservation of my liberty and safety in these parts that makes me forbear the
frequency of such Intercourses. I am confident these letters, this Messenger,
and the enclosed papers, which I here send you, (containing a true Copy of the
Propositions and Letters of Agreement between Owen Roe O Neile, and Col. George
Monck) will be able to give you some account of the passages in these parts,
and will make you assured that I do not forget the respects I owe unto you.

I must confess to you, that (as you ever conceived) I never could imagine that
the Parliament proceedings would have advanced to so high a degree of rage and
wickedness, as I see they are now come to, and are resolved to Act by. But
being amazed at the Kings Murder, And seeing the Gangreane does so cruelly
spread, I will impart to you my resolution. That I am resolved to get into your
parts with the first convenience, and adheare to you there, whose actions are
more conducing to the preservation of our Religion, Law, and common Interest,
then any where else, that I can find. But that this my so sudden resolution
may not be conceived the fruit of some vain fear, miscariage in my self, or
light desires to abandon my former principles. I shall give you a right
understanding of all the motions and passages of my soul, since I was
acquainted with this late treaty between Colonel Monck and Owen Roe O Neile,
that thereby you may judge of the ground of these my designs and distasts and
my resolutions taken thereupon.

And before I consider the particulars of the treaty, the thing it self is so
Odious unto me, that if they could have made the best bargain to be imagined
for the English safety, The manner of it, would have appeared to me very
unsavory.

For although it cannot be denied that almost the whole Irish party (in regard
of their Confederacys and combinations) have not been innocent in all
particulars, of that vast Ocean of English blood that has been shedd. Yet it
is most clear that the plotters and contrivers of this Treason, and the
unnatural and butcherly executioners thereof, are that party principally,
which are now headed by Owen O Neile. For although many of the Pale, with
others of Conaught, Leinster and Munster, entertained the design, when they
saw it was so far spread, and the English so much weakened in their persons and
possessions, yet it cannot be denied but this Kingdom had still many
moderate-minded men, that lothed their Country-mens barbarity, and could never
be drawn to adheare to their party in their least consent. Now for the
Parliament Agents to gather up these men (and these only) that have been drunk
with the blood of their brethren, and to fortify them with Arms, Counsels,
and conjunction of forces, that thereby they may preserve to themselves the
Triumphs of their cruelty and Treachery, and to lapp them up in their
affections with promises of reward, if they will persevere to act with them the
ruin of the King and Monarchy, the destruction of the remnant of the English
Protestants, and the ancient Irish who have now declared their loyalty, and
submitted to, and consociated with them, are things that I much loathe, and can
no way embrace.

Besides if you consider the passages of the Treaty, you will easily be drawn
(I suppose) to cast away your former entertained scruples, and not condemn me
for being out of love with mine.

For first: The title to Owen Roes propositions excludes all other of his
Nation but such as will join with him, though they be far more capable of
peace and pardon then himself or his party.

2. He and his party who in a late paper of theirs styled the Parliament of
England, Monstrofum Parliamentum (The Monstrous Parliament) when (as then) it
had not besmeared it self with Royal, Sacred, and Noble Blood, as since it
has done. Yet now where he sees them Act like himself, he has taught his
tongue to quaver and calls them The most Honorable and Potent Parliament. When
all Honor is persecuted by them, and no power exercised by them but brutish
violence, and extreme Tyranny.

3. In the second Proposition: That an Act of Oblivion be passed to extend to
all and every of Owen O Neiles party for all things done since the year 1641.
you shall find that Monck approves of it totally without the least reserve of
punishment to any the most bloody plotters and murderers whatsoever that are
in that crew, which maks me more in love with my Lord of Ormonds Peace then I
was before.

4. It Is propounded by Owen Roe, and approved by Monck, that he shall have a
Seaport to himself to make use of, for the perfecting of his designs, when
(as we hear) the least Traffic will not be allowed to you in Munster.

5. Although Col. Monck do a little pare his Propositions concerning the
repealing of Statuts against Roman Catholics since Hen. 8. lest he should
offend the people, And though he do not absolutely undertake to grant him all
his Ancestors Lands (which when he is once styled O Neile he will challenge to
be the six escheated Countyes) yet by Moncks letter he is assured that he
shall not receive the least disadvantage thereby. All which directions,
counsels and assurances (I am confident) Col. Monck would not have used
toward him, if he had not had a Parliament foundation to warrant him.

Thus you see those men who lately were utter enemies, have confederated
together to ruin Monarchy and the Protestant Religion, merely to raise
themselves, and support their own faction. They will not here allow the King to
make use of his own subjects, to revenge His Fathers Blood, to Reinthrone
himself, to reestablish Religion and the Laws, and just liberties, And yet
they allow themselves a latitude of calling in any party, though the most
bloody and inhumane, to assist them, in the carrying on their wicked designs.
We have seen Col. Jones his Letters, censuring the Lord of Ormonde, for
joining the Irish to his party (though the best and least culpable of them) and
yet the same Jones (whose head and hand is in this Treaty and conclusion)
thinks it allowable in himself to close with the worst, and that upon their
own terms. And though Col. Moncks hypocrisy (in correcting Owen O Neile's
seventh Article) will not allow that unity and amity shall be publicly
proclaimed between them, yet he is willing it shall be practices, and they
shall mutually asist one-another against all opposers whatsoever. That is the
KING and all in Authority under him.

The Consideration of these things has left such an impression upon my soul,
that I am resolved to make speed to you, noe way desireing to live under their
Commands, whose actions increase in horror, and beget new afflictions to all
honest English hearts. So praying you to forbear further writing to me, because
I mean speedily to see you, I rest.

Your assured friend and Servant.
Dundalk May: 20. 1649.
FINIS.

