A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Dying Words OF Ockanickon, AN Indian King, Spoken to
JAHKURSOE, His Brother's Son, whom he appointed KING AFTER HIM.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark, Bookseller, in George-Yard in
Lombard Street, 1682.

A LETTER sent from New Jersey in America to a Friend in London.
Dear Friend,
I Having this short opportunity, have nothing to present thee with but the
Dying Words of an Indian King, who died in Burlington, and was Buried amongst
Friends according to his desire; and at his Burial many Tears were shed both by
the Indians and English; if thou art willing to Print it, I desire thee to send
me some; So in Love and great have, I rest thy friend,

Burlington the 12th of the 5th. Month, 1682. John Cripps.

A TRUE ACCOUNT Of the Dying Words of Ockanichon, Spoken to JAHKURSOE, WHOM He
appointed KING after Him; Spoken in the Presence of several, who were Eye and
Ear Witnesses to the Truth thereof.
IT was my desire that My Brother's Son, Jahkursoe should be sent for to come
to me to hear my last Words, whom I have oppointed KING after me. My Brother's
Son, This day I deliver my Heart into thy Bosom, and would have thee love that
which is Good, and to keep good Company, and to refuse that which is Evil; and
to avoid bad Company. Now inasmuch as I have delivered my Heart into thy Bosom,
I also deliver my Bosom to keep my Heart therein; therefore always be sure to
walk in a good Path, and never depart out of it. And if any Indians should
speak any evil of Indians or Christians, do not join with it, but to look to
that which is Good, and to join with the same always. Look at the Sun from the
Rising of it to the Setting of the same. In Speeches that shall be made between
the Indians and the Christians, if any thing be spoke that is evil, do not join
with that, but join with that which is good; and when Speeches are made, do not
thou speak first, but let all speak before thee, and take good notice what each
man speaks, and when thou have heard all, join to that which is good. Brother's
Son, I would have thee to cleanse thy Ears, and tak^ all Darkness and foulness
out, that thou ^^^ist take notice of that which is Good and Evil, and then to
join with that which is Good, and refuse the Evil; and also to cleanse thy Eyes
that thou may see both Good and Evil: and if thou see any Evil do not join
with it, but join to that which is Good Brother's Son, Thou have heard all that
is past: now I would have thee to stand up in time of Speeches, and to stand in
my Steps, and follow my Speeches as I have said before thee, then what thou
do desire in Reason will be granted thee. Why should thou not follow my
Example inasmuch as I have had a mind to do that which is Good, and therefore
do thou also the same. Whereas Sehoppy and Swanpis were appointed Kings by me
in my stead, and I understanding by my Doctor that Sehoppy secretly advised him
not to Cure me, and they both being with me at John Hollingsheads House, there
I my self see by them that they were given more to Drink than to take notice of
my last Words, for I had a mind to make a Speech to them, and to my Brethren
the English Commissioners, therefore I refused them to be Kings after me in my
stead, and have chosen my Brother's Son Jahkursoe in their stead to succeed me.

Brother's Son, Indians and Christians, as I have been. I am very weak,
otherwise I would have spoken more; and in Testimony of the Truth of this, I
have hereunto set my Hand in the presence of us,

Witnesses,
Thomas Budd, Sarah Biddle, Mary Cripps, Anne Brown, Jane Noble.

An imitation of the Indian Marks,
The Mark of Ockanickon, King, now deceased. The Mark of Jahkursoe, the
intended King. The Mark of Matollionequay, Wife to Ockanickon the Old King. The
Mark of Nemooponent, a Prince. The Mark of Tellinggrisee, the Indian Doctor

Henry Jacob Falckinburs, Interpreter.

FINIS.

