THE PETITION Of Sir Philomy Oneale Knight, General of the Rebels, in Jreland,
and of the Lords, Nobility and Commanders of the Army of the Catholics in
that Kingdom.

Presented to the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons now assembled in the
High Court of Parliament in England.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. for John Thomas.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons now Assembled in the high Court
of Parliament in ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of Sir Philomy Oneale Knight, General of Jreland, and the
Lords and Nobility Commanders of the Army of Catholics in Jreland.
Declares,
TO this Honorable and high Court, that there has bin sevetall Petitions
formerly delivered to the Lords of the Council of this Kingdom, wherein our
grievances and oppressions have bin at large set forth and our great desires
expressed by the same for the relief of our sufferings and our humble Demands
for tolleration in our Religion and Liberties in the exercise thereof and the
confirmation of our Ancient Laws and Privileges, by former Acts of
Parliament, confirmed and granted to us in the Reigns of former Princes of
England, but the same our Petitions have bin rejected and no favor showed to
us, but all severity that possible could in execution of the Laws of latter
times made against those of the Catholic Religion, which enforced our taking
up Arms for the defense of the same. There has likewise been humble
Remonstrances and Declarations as well presented to your Lordships as published
publicly in this Kingdom, but the same has also bin disregarded and
rejected, not so much as obtaining any Answer thereto, as may any way gain us
hope of our future enjoyment of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, by which
being brought to despair of any redress of our grievances, and many
oppressions by which we have bin over burdened withal hitherto, yet
notwithstanding our Requests could not be hearkened unto, but in both Kingdoms
by both Councels repulsed, that we might clear our selves of obstinate
refusal to use and try all lawful and dutiful means that may be to the King
and his Parliament, for the satisfying our just desires to the uttermost, We
do yet again in the behalf of our selves, and all of the Roman Catholic
Religion, to present our humble Declaration and Petition to your Lordships and
the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament, In which we declare.

1. That whereas they have since their taking up Arms bin by diverse false
Papers and Pamphlets declared to have used inhumane and savage Cruelties, and
most bloody Massacres against the persons whom they have overcome in
skirmishes, which have opposed and endeavored to destroy not only our
Religion, but Lives and fortunes, which by the Laws of God, of Nature and
reason, we are bound to Maintain and uphold, by which we have bin made
infamour to all men, even in foreign Nations, for which we are much grieved;
We therefore to clear our selves of this Scandal and Defamation, do say and
protest, that since our taking up Arms we have not used any Cruelty to the
adverse party, otherwise then have happened to fall by the Sword in Battle,
of which we have tasted, or if we have taken Prisoners we have preserved and
kept them with respect, as is in War used, till we have seen the usage of
our men taken by the other part, and even as they have been dealt withal so
have we, which we conceive to be but just and Congruent to the law of Arms;
But for dismembring, dis-joynting, ripping up Women with Child, and sleying of
Jnfants, we are innocent concerning the same as to our selves, and if any of
the ruder sort of Soldiers have been guilty of the same, when we were
acquainted therewith we severely punished them, as for Example, one Trahon for
Ravishing a Woman with Child, and after ripping her up, was sentensed to be
hanged in Chains for his vile fact, which was accordingly performed, and
others have been punished for the like offenses.

2. That by Order from the Parliament all Declarations, Papers, Writings, or
Pamphlets, whereby we are called Rebels, and Traitors, to our King and
Country, and Scandalyzd, disgraced and maliciously abused, may be restrained
and called in.

3. That the Paliament would be pleased to conceive that our desires are not to
withdraw our selves from the subjection of our Lawful King or obedience to any
Laws by his Majesty and Parliament, made for good Government, that destroys
not our Religion, Laws and Liberties, for the exercising of the same according
to the Ordinances of the Roman Catholic Church, but endeavor to vindicate
the same to the loss of our Lives and Fortunes.

4. That we are ready and willing io submit our selves to his Majesty, upon
any lawful, honorable, and reasonable Conditions, but no conditions being
propounded by his Parliament, that may be any way safe for us to yield unto,
and perceiving the distractions and divisions between the King and his
Parliament whereby they Concur not so well together as is desired, we are
vnresolved what to do in any way of submission till there be a Concurrence and
agreement between King and people, and in the mean time we must be enforced
to do what we can to preserve our selves and Estates.

5. And lastly, that the Parliament would be pleased to admit and appoint a
meeting between the Lords and Nobility of our Army and the Lords Commanders in
the English Army, whereas conditions of Truce and Cessation of Arms between
both may be offered and Concluded, for a certain time, which shall be thought
Convenient to setle the present and particular divisions, between the King and
his Parliament; And in the mean time to consider of Articles and prapositions
whereby a final and Perpetual Pacification may be made and Confirmed by the
States of both Kingdoms.

These our desires and humble requests, we pray may be taken into the
Consideration of the high Court of Parliament with all Expedition and an Answer
of the same returned, by which we may know what to trust to.

And we shall Pray, etc. Oneale. Osmond. Antrim. Montgarret. Nettersfield.
Dilom. etc.

Averred by Thomus Etherington Clerk.

FINIS.

