A TRVE COPY OF A Letter, sent from the Lord of Inchiquine to the Honorable
Collonell Michaell Jones, Commander in chief of the Parliaments Forces in
Leinster, AND Governor of the City of Dublin,

With Colonel Jones his Answer, To the Lord of Inchiquines said Letter.

DVBLIN Printed by William Bladen 1649.

The Lord of Inchiquins Letter to Colonel Michaell Jones.
Sir.
THE sight of some late past Letters ebtweene his Excellency and you, have by
their passages given me more then Common reason to suspect, that a
misunderstanding of our grounds is the greatest cause that foments an unhappy
distance between us at the present, of how great a Consequence to all our
security and felicities a union would be, as it is obvious to the lowest
apprehension, so ought it not to be contemned by the highest: but to be the
labor of us all to descend from those heights which may wyden a breach, and lay
hold on those things that most conduce to peace; it has pleased God to make me
one of his meanest Instruments to preserve him a remnant (hitherto of
Protestants persevering in their first Principles) by my Sword which self same
work I am still intending, but should esteem the happiness greater if you
would please to effect it now by my pen or word by how much I prize a Conquest
over the mind more then the body and esteem the retaineing of a friend more
then the subduing of an Enemy. Sir it is not for Christians to descend to a
War like Cocks into a pit, and fight without knowing how the quarrel
began, Blood must be accounted for, and therefore is not on light Causes to
be-spilt; besides the Sword has a mouth to devour Justice, but no eyes to see
how to defend it: if you please therefore before it have exhausted any drop
from either party: to expostulate the matter your self, or by any other whom
you will appoint, with a divine or two added to them (in a fair and handsome
debate) I shall meet you with the like both in number and quality where it may
please God to bestow such a blessing as we are not yet apprehensive of; and I
Conjure you as you intend that really which you pretend verbally, (the
establishment of the English intrest and Protestant Religion) that you contemn
not this nor any other means which shall be offered you for your just
satisfaction. If you shall, the ill consequences that may attend it will
inevitably fall upon you, and I shall with quiet to my Conscience have
acquitted my self that I have in thus seeking performed the duty of a
Christian and to you also (if you please to follow it) the office of

20 Iunij 1649. Your Friend and Servant Inchiquine


Colonel Jones Answer to my Lord of Inchiquins Letter.
My Lord
I recieved your Lordships of the 20th Instant by your Trumpet, which being the
same in substance with those (not long since) passing me with the Lord of
Ormonde, And that your Lordships, containing nothing new, or more then what was
in those others, I must therefore, without further answer (as to so much,)
refer your Lordship to what has been then Answered and Replied.

As for that Conference by your Lordship now Propounded and desired It cannot
be, in prudence, admitted, especially in matters of this consequence, and in
times when such debatings must needs be Dangerous, as being subject to
whatsoever constructions, and misconstructions also.

But so well am I satisfied in the Justice of my Cause (whereupon the Lords
blessing has dwelt Visibly, as still it does) that I am fixed to my just
Principles, whence by Letters or Discourses I am not to be removed. And I wish
heartily your Lordship had done likewise.

Your Sword has been (I confess) prosperous but remember my (Lord) the cause
in which you then appeared the same with this now by Us here maintained against
those bloody Rebels.

But Now, is your Lordship with them most unhappily joined, to the admiration
of those who knew your Lordships former professions, and your once and again
renewed engagements ( Now. in that your late Confederacy and Countenancing of
them in their ways, are you become one of them in that guilt of Blood, where
withal they, and the whole Land is defiled. And with them (deserting your
first principles) do you Now set your self against those of the Protestant
Religion of which once you were, and whereunto you still profess your self a
friend, and whereof they are mortal and professed Enemies.

Your Cause therefore being so varied your Lordship cannot promise your self
the same Providence as formerly: which we do and may confidently expect, and
the rather, our trust being in God alone; not in our own strength, whereas your
powers and number is that you boast off, and in which you rest your selves
principally.

All which I desire may be by your Lordship Seriously and timely Considered,
for regaining and preserving to your self a good Conscience, and for staying
the effusion of more English and protestant blood, which if by your means
spilt, it must lie heavy on you, and on your Posterity.

I conjure you therefore as you intend that really which you pretend verbally,
the establishment, of the English interest, and Protestant Religion, that you
contemn not this wholesome Council now given you. If you shall, the ill
Consequences that now attend it, will inevitably fall on you and I shall with
quiet to my Conscience have acquitted my self, that I have herein performed the
duty of a Christian, and to you also (if you please to follow it) the Office
of (my Lord)

Dublin June 21th 1649. Your Lordships Friend and Servant Mic: Jones
For my Lord of Inchiquine.


