The Marquess of ORMONDS Letter to His Majesty KING CHARLES II.

Wherein is truly related the manner of Colonel Jones sallying out of Dublin,
Aug. 2. 1649. with the loss on both sides, and the Prisoners taken.

With the true state and condition of his Army at this present before Dublin,
which is beseiged with 40000 Horse and Foot.

And the taking of the two strong Castles of Ballishannon and Athy, Aug. 8.

Whereunto is added His Majesty's Answer to his Letter, Aug. 11. 1649.

August 22.

Printed in the Year, M.DC.XLIX.

The Marquess of Ormonds Letter to His MAJESTY.
SIR,
IN my last I gave your Majesty notice of the reports of some Regiments of the
English Rebels (under the command of Cromwell) which as yet never came for
Ireland: If any such intention was (I believe) they were prevented by your
Majesty's Ships; for I had information, some of the Rebels Ships were chased
into Beaumorris, Anglesey and Milford Havens.

July 24. After the taking of Dundalk, Tredah and Trim (of which I gave your
Majesty account in my last) we drew with the body of our Army toward Dublin;
and in our march surprised two Forts Jones was raising at Lowzey Hill, I caused
their fresh water to be cut off: by means whereof, they were deprived of the
benefit of their water mils; upon this the houses at Lowzey Hill were set on
fire, except the College, out of which the Rebels were beaten (though not
without some loss on both sides) and putting a strong guard therein: which
upon occasion might be relieved from the Kings-end, where most of my Lord
Inchequin's foot were quartered to block up the River.

The next day I gave command (to Sir Thomas Armstrong, with his Regiment and
Sir William Vaughan's) to fall upon Sir Adam Lofthouse his house at Rathfarnam,
within three miles of Dublin, which in 24 hours was surrendered, with much
treasure in it. After we had drove away into our Quarters, all the Horse and
Cows that grazed within three miles of the City, we drew down with our whole
Army to beseige Dublin, consisting of 28000 Horse and Foot; 3000 of which were
commanded to Baggotfrath, on the South of the Town, and there to raise two
Forts (which were of my Lord of Inchequin's foot, most of which had served the
Rebels formerly in several Garrisons we had taken, and listed themselves in
his service.

August 2. The Rebels of the City made a sally out, and fell upon our Quarters
at Rathmines and Baggotfrath, where my Lord Inchequ^n's foot Quarters lay (and
whether through treachery or cowardice) consisting (as I have told your
Majesty) formerly of their party, that had taken up Arms upon surrender of
Garrisons, many of which were killed and taken Prisoners upon their first
approach; we lost also some pieces of Ordnance, which were but newly drawn down
thither, and not planted: The Alarm being given Sir Thomas Armstrongs, and Sir
William Vaughans, and Colonel Gerards Regiments, being of my Lord Iaafs
Brigade, fell upon Joneses party (which was 3000) the dispute was hot on both
sides for an hour, but before our main body was come up (which was not engaged
at all) the Rebels were retired into the City, leaving dead upon the place
above 400 men; and we hear they have above 200 of their men wounded, both of
horse and foot: the loss on our side was near as many as of theirs, they took
a hundred Prisoners of ours, which is the most; I have sent for a list of their
names to have them exchanged.

Upon this, we drew off with our Army three miles from Dublin, where we
embodyed the scattered Brigade with our Army, who upon my Lords foot not
standing one shot, disordered them.

August 8. We drew again our whole Army before Dublin, with the additionall
Forces not then joined with our body; My Lord Ards with 8000 Scots, 4000 of my
Lord of clanrikards, my Lord Inchequin was in Munster then with his two
Regiments of Horse, to suppress some insurrections in that Province occasioned
by some of General Oneal, party who since is joined with our Army, his Forces
being 8000 horse and foot.

We are now before the City with an Army of 40000 Horse and Foot, and have
straightly beseiged it, but Jones I believe will trouble us no more with his
sallies: neither do I fear Cromwell, dares he but venture to set footing in
IRELAND; I have caused several works to be raised against them, and have
almost finished our Line, and hope shortly to give your Majesty a good account
of this place.

August 8. 4000 brave horse of the Duke of Lorains are landed at Kingsale, and
5000 foot her Majesty of Sweden has sent me: I had almost forgot to tell your
Highness of my Brothers death, who unfortunately was shot in this fight.
Yesterday we took two Garrisons of the Rebels, which were Ballishannon and
Athy; and since that two prizes were taken, two Merchants laden with Wines,
which came very seasonably to the Leaguer. In my next I doubt not but by Gods
help to give your Majesty an account of this City, and hope to see you in full
possession of this Kingdom, maugre the fury and malice of all your traitorous
and bloody Enemies: I rest,

From the Leaguer before Dublin, Aug. 9. 1649. Your humble Servant, ORMOND and
OSSORY.
POSTSCRIPT.
THere was a design by some of Cromwels Confederates for the betraying of Cork
to him for a landing place for his Forces from England, but was timely
prevented by the Loyalty and Care of this Gentleman the Bearer hereof, who can
more at large inform your Majesty in every particular.



His MAJESTY'S Letter to the Marquess of ORMOND.
MY LORD,
I Received yours the 11th of this present, with the good news of the landing
of the Duke of Lorain's and the Swedish Forces; I shall wait the good hour to
hear of the surrender or taking of Dublin; which I shall desire you to
expedite, before Cromwell's visit, which I hope is prevented. I sent My Servant,
Mr Harbart, to you, but I bear not of his arrival: My purpose (by Gods
permission) is to be with you within forty days. Farewell.

S. Jermains Aug. 11. 1649. CHARLES II.

FINIS.

