THE TRVE DEMANDS OF THE Rebels in Ireland.
DECLARING The Causes of their taking up ARMS.

Sent into England by Sir Phelom O-Neale, their General:

TO The Honorable and High Court of PARLIAMENT.

Vlster, February 10. 1641.

Published for prventing false Copies already extant, or that may be hereafter
printed.

Avowed by R. P. Gent.

LONDON Printed by John Hammond* 1641.

THE Irish Rebels Unreasonable DEMANDS.
My LORD,
I Am commanded by the Noble men, Knights and Gentry of our Army now resident
within the Provinces of Lemster and Vlster, to give your Lordship an account of
'the reasons that have induced us to take Arms, that the same might be
presented to the rest of the Lords of the Council of this Kingdom; by which
means our desires might be made known to the King and State assembled in
Parliament in the Kingdom of England, hoping thereby to procure redress of
our manifold grievances and oppressions, where with we have been for a long
time together afflicted, and could never yet obtain any remedy of the same,
neither by our humble Petitions, nor otherwise; we never having been desirous
to use violence to obtain the same, until now of late. This State assembled
for the most part of English, and them of the Irish Nation, joined as members
thereof with them, being altogether disaffected to our Religion, have
endeavored what in them lay, to take from us our liberties and laws formerly
enacted by Parliament, with the consent of several Princes and Parliaments in
England; whereby we have used and exercised our Religion according to the due
rites, and holy and necessary ceremonies thereof, which served as decent
ornaments to set forth the honor and glory thereof, whereby we suppose God is
honored, and with it well pleased. Which to defend and preserve, being now
ready to fall to decay, and be brought to destruction:

We have been forced to betake our selves to our Arms, to defend our Religion
and liberty: And if the same may be again restored, and our Religion
tolerated, we shall willingly lay down our Arms in such manner as follows.

1. We desire the Laws of Queen Mary concerning our Religion in the use and
exercise thereof, may be again renewed, and now again by Act of Parliament,
as well the Parliament of England as this Kingdom, may be established and
confirmed to us and our posterity.

2. That the Laws and Statutes made and enacted in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth and King James, against us and our Religion, may be by the Parliament
of both Kingdoms, repealed and annihilated, viz.

I. That all Statutes made and enacted in either Kingdom against any in holy
Orders of the Catholic Religion, as Priests, Jesuits, Monks, Friars,
Capuchins, and the like, either for their execution or banishment, may be
repealed, and an ordinance by Parliament of this Kingdom made, whereby they
may have free liberty in any part of the Kings dominions, to use and exercise
their several functions to educate, teach and instruct all such as are
descended of Catholic Parents, or are inclinable and desirous to be of the
Roman Religion, without incurring any punishment either corporal or in their
estates, or by imprisonment, banishment, or the like.

I. That all Acts and Statutes against public Recusants, taking away their
means and land may be repealed, and that they may freely and publicly profess
their Religion, without such trouble and punishment.

II. That those laws made for the abolishment of Abbyes Pryories and
Monasteries, may b^ repealed, and an Act of liberty made by this State to all
holy and devont men, that will build and up-reare the same again, to do it
without any let or impediment, and that the Ancient demeanes and Revenews of
right appertaining and belonging to the same, may be again to them restored to
the mainteynance of those orders of Holy men, for which they were first
ordained and erected.

IV. That we may have free correspondency by Embassages, or otherwise with his
Holiness at Room, touching any thing concerning our Religion, that we may
have at all times a Nuntio Resident amongst us to inform us of his Holiness
pleasure upon all occasions tending to our souls good, and salvation.

V. That all Laws and Ordinances hereafter enacted in this Kingdom, may be by
select Counsels of Roman Catholics for the Romish Religion. And only of
Protestants for theirs, and jointly together in matters concerning the Civil
and Politic government of the State.

VI. That we may no more be subject in this Kingdom to the Crown of
England, and the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom; but altogether governed by
this State, and may have placed over us such a Governor, or Viceroy, as may be
well accepted of by us, that we may willingly submit our selves to his
subjection and obedience.

My Lord,

Vlster Febr. 10. 1641. Your Lordships to command, Phelom O Neale.


