O Friends! No Friends, TO KING, Church and State.

OR, Thames, Twede and Tyne paraell'd with Romes Tyber and King-poysoning Po.

WITH Positions and Practices from Rome and from Rhemes, from Edinburgh and
Geneva, poised to some purpose, as the Case now stands:

AND, Presented to all impartial Patriots and Presbyterians.

By Veridicus, praeterea nihil.

LONDON, Printed by R. Austin. 1648.

Thames, Tweede, and Tyne paralleld with Romes Tiber, and King-poysoning Po.
TO unbowell my acts, yea intentions to the censorious and itching times with
Athenian ears, desiring novelties more insatiably then Messalina and Proculus
new lusts, or materia prima, the first matter, new forms, nothing now venting
but news and toys, even Bibles themselves less looked on or after then
Bables, Pamphlets, and Ballads, all solid books being slighted by the vulgar as
Pearls by Hogs, and Gold by Fools, and turned by misspent time into
eare-tickling news, as Religion in our late abused peace, in most places was
turned all into Rites and Ceremonies, as Bottle-Ale into froath, or as they say
of Sycomore trees, their barks being more then thrir brier: there being lately
by a near friend of mine a Treatise penned called Ominous Court Ravens croaking
Kings above Laws, silenced by Laws sacred and secular, and being as soon
rejected by as presented to some Stationers for the press, because it was too
solid and judicious for the light headed staggering intoxicated times, fed
rather now (like the Gospells prodigal) with husks, hawes and light Awnes then
with solid meat, yea with lusted Quails rather then Manna; I having seriously
perused that elaborate work amongst other discussions useful for the times,
(had it seen the light) I noted the poisonous packs and fatal fardells of
Popish Counselors, Favorites and Abettors, to Protestant Princes, fully
unripped. Now to set footing or to wade after where the unprinted Manuscript
broke the ice, I desire, as the case now stands, to anchor all Fluctuations and
doubts, that all the blinded eyes in the Kingdom were Swalllow-like, rubbed
with Celedine or Collirium, and that all insatuated brains were purged with
Hellibore, to discern what firm friends Papists have been to Protestant
Princes ever since Papisme, chiefly Jesuitisme was hatched (like all other our
late renewed Heresies) from hell it self: and to look with in partialll eyes
into their plots often effected, if according to their sanguinnolent positions,
commented by their practices in all States, they be not and ever have been as
sure friends to Orthodox Princes, as Hawks to innocent Doves, Hounds to hunted
Hares, Wolves to Lambs, and all kinds of Serpents, from the Basilisk and great
Regulus to the little Dipsas, to all of humane races, yet hinc nostri fundi
calamitas, here is our foreseen wrack and woe, that these Serpents that we
have so long fought against to crush them, as Pigmees against Craines, yea as
Meleager against the Calidonian Boar, and the Roman Regulus against the great
Serpent at Bagrada, must now by a promiscuous Toleration of an Hotch-potch and
Gallamawfrey of all Sects, if some powers as their pates and pens may rule the
Roast, be warmed again in the bosom of our Church and State to sting us to
death, whom the sword of War with the effusion of Hecatombes of blood has so
long endeavored to crush and curb like Cockatrices or Crocodiles in their
shells, or as State-firing, Church-poisoning Snakes in their heads, which to
prevent what afterward (like Trojans after-wise) we may repent, as well as
ruinated Germany, and the Palatinate, by Papal Imperiallists; let us not be
hoodwinked any more, nor carried like Hawks blindfolded on the fist, and
though Popery now like a little river swallowed into a great Sea, seem to be
drowned in the vast gulphs of greater Heresies, and more horrid blasphemies
then either Michael Servetus vomited out in Geneva, or Simon Magus in Samaria,
or Montanus with his Priscilla, or Arrius, or Ebion, or Cerinthus in the
Primitive times, or Munster, or David George, or Familist, or Enthusiast in
Belgia, or Ket, or Hacket, or Ardington, or Coppingger here in England, as our
zealous Ministers in London have protested against them, though now the great
Antichrist, as some think, now come into the world as the great Dragon has
devoured in a manner Popery the lesser Antichrist, as the greater sound is said
to drown the lesser, and the greater light to dim the lesser, yea as Naturians
tell us, as a Serpent eats a Serpent before he comes to be a Dragon, yet never
the less as a lesser Bodkin may stab a Caesar, every Jesuitized Papist
according to their doctrine and practices being armed as a Ravillack, a Parry,
a Lopus, a Lupus, a Jaques Clement still, with a Bodkin, a Pistol, a poison
even for a suspected regal Protestant. Antagonist against their Hierarchy, as
well as against the two French Henry's, much more a detected Adversary to their
proceedings, as some of the Germane Fredericks and Henry's, and our English
Henry the 8. knowing still how to hit the Basilicall vein, how ever they have
lately pretended to be Caesar's best Catholic Subjects, as good as any man ever
hanged upon his hedge, as true friends to him as ever Judas pretended himself
toward Christ, Ioab to Abner, weeping Ismael to Gedeliah, Jer. 41.6. yea as
the French Laffin to the great Byron, and our English Banister to his Duke, or
any other Traitors to Potentates, and States, whom these Quoy-ducks have
betrayed, as Sinon once did Troy, Zopirus Babylon, and our English York
Deventree to the Spaniards; yea, however as flattering Zibaes they stole away
the ear and heart of regality for a time so far from true hearted
Mephibosheths, 2 Samuel 16.3. as to be thought to stand and fight for Casar, and
to side with him and with his Religion, as the wolves should take part with the
Shepherd against the Sheepheards Dogs that keep the Flocks, and that the best
Centinells over the flocks should be no better then painted Traitors, as though
Cataline Romes Firebrand, and his Catilinarians were only the best Bulwarks of
and Benefactors unto Caesar, the Senate and the Plebeians, and Lucius Sicinius,
called the Achilles of Rome, and Marcellus the Sword of Rome, De his and Aliis
vide Sibel. in supple. lib. 6. c. 3. and Valor. lib. 5. cap. 2.
and lingering Fabius the Atlas of Rome, and Tully the Father of his Country,
and Codrus the Father of the Senate, should be counted as Tobiah and Sanballat,
and Hamman were to the Jews, or every one of them like Hannibal, a professed
enemy and adversary to the Romans, this were as though Penelope, Lucrece and
Susanna should be thought as dishonest as once the Popes Mazoria, the Grecian
Hellena, or any Italian Curtizans and the Corinthian Lais and Thais, the Roman
Flora, and our English Conquerours Arlet or Harlot, yea the shameless Pasiphae
were as honest as Abraham's Sarah, or Willowbies Avisa, so incurring by this
crosse-capering, no less then this curse, of calling evil good, and good
evil, light darkness, and darkness light, Esa. 5.20. the Crow white and the
Swan black, a Plebeian a Preacher, a Mechanic a Minister, a Dunce a Doctor; a
Tailor a Teacher, a Mute a Vowell, a Dulman a Divine, and a Divine a Dry vine,
a blind Guide a seer, a Barne-Babler a brave Benclark, a poor arrogant
ignorant a Prophet, a cloud a Juno, a Figure a Cipher, and a Cipher a Figure;
Asinus ad Liram, asinus ad Tribunal, an Ass a Musician, yea an Ass a
Magistrate, and Balaams Ass a Minister, reproving Prophets, and Saul seeking
Asses a Mushrump Prophet: in such an Hysteron Proteron and Phaetonian
confusion, as though this giddy-headed age should turn every thing topsie
turvy, susque deque the heavens to stand still, as Celum once in the Comody
called Lingua, and the dull earth to move, as Copernicus once conceited all
things running on wheels, as some Grandees and Professors rotten at the core,
go to heaven the clean contrary way.

So it is and so it has been for any Jesuitized Papist by his pate, or purse,
or arm, (for all his charms) to help any Protestant Prince, to establish any
Religion, though Episcopized, but his own, as if a Millstone, or wedges of lead
or irons tied about a swiming man's neck should help him to swim to the shore;
or as though a handful of soot, ink, or tar, should better then clear water,
oil of Lillies, or of Tartar, help a man to wash his face, and to take out all
abstersive spots: I am as sensible as the Spider of the least touch of her web,
that this pressed point in diebus illis in our ill days, in B. Quondams time
had been durus sermo, a harsh doctrine, it would have incurred either a
silencing, chiefly at the Court with, Prophecy not this in Bethell, for it is
the Kings Chapel, Amos 7.13. or it might have incurred a currish censure of a
slit nose, or a cropped ear in touching Papists Favorites to many Prelates, to
their little Laud be it spoken, in many things both political and
Ecclesiastical, as familiarly sympathizing as Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.5. or
as Herod and Pilate reconciled: amongst other demonstrations more then
Mathematical, this is one that for many bypast years Episcopacy tutoring
Regality, that it sailed betwixt two Rocks, the Scylla of Popery, and the more
dangerous Carybdis of Puritanisme, as then all true zeal for Reformation was
nicknamed, of the two evils minimum eligendum, the less being to be chosen,
Queen Elizabeth, and two succeeding Monarchs after her, were persuaded that
more favor and connivance was to be used to the first as birds of their own
feather, then to the last as more factious, and so more perilous to Church and
State: And for this purpose to make up their mouths, and to set a gloss and
vernish on their false and frivolous surmises and suggestions, one Owen a
Papal Proctor, in his Antipareus, and Omerod a scurrilous fellow in his
picture of a Puritan, and the disguised Author of Lisimachus Nicanor, with
many such Panders for the Scarlet Whore, chiefly that great Dick Ecclesiae
Bankcroft the petty Pope of Canterbury in his Theses Periculosa, out of the
writings of some Presbyterians, culls out some positions dangerous and
State-firing, as they are branded, which are wrested and wrung so as a man his
nose till it give blood, and so set on the Tenterhooks of construction as that
Tyrant in History racked out every short guest to fit a long bed, to the
equallizing of Presbyterians in their positions, if not practices, to be as
great Antagonists to the peace and safety of Princes, as the worst of Papists
which ever filled the Trojan horse of any State with the armed Greeks of
Traitors: but they may put all in their eyes which they gain by their sophistry
and prevarications, making as Bellarmine that Tortus in his torturing the Greek
and Latin Fathers and other Postillers, quid libet ex quolibet, every thing of
any thing: for he that seriously peruseth Vrsinus his Exercitations, Lib. 2.
Exer. 4.
Peter Marter upon the Judges, chap. 3. Calvin's Institutions, Lib. 4. cap. 20.
Sect. 24.
Daneus his Politickes, lib. 3. c. 6. and l. 6. c. 3.
the Scotch Buckanan de Iure Regni, page 12.13.58.61. and the zealous Goodman,
p. 180.184.186. and Knox his History of the Church, p. 265. and his Epistle to
the English, p. 98. and a book de Obedientia, p. 26.259.139. printed by some
Exiles in Geneva in Queen Mary's days, out of whom pretermitting others, these
Spiders though from flowers gather poison, and he shall see that the substance
and result of all they write, is only thus much in effect, that si principes
tyrannidem exerceant contra Deum cjusque veritatem, eorum subditi non tenentur
obedire, if Princes exercise tyranny against God, and his truth and Gospel,
their Subjects are not bound to any active obebience more then the people were
obliged by Oath to obey Saul in his cruel mandates of massacring the Lords
Priests, 1 Samuel 22.17. and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14.45. or Elias to go to that
Idolatrous King who sent his Captains of fifties for him, 2 King. 1. or Elisha
(after the slavish subjection of the Turkish Bashawes to their Ottomans) to
yield his head to that Tyrant who swore to take it of, 2 Kin. 32. or the Jewish
Captives to worship Nabuchadnezars Image, Dan. 3.18. or Irene to worship her
Fathers Idols, which she pulled down as Gideon Baals groves, though with the
reluctance of authority, Judge. 6.31. or no more then any were subjected to
yield any obedience to Maacha after she was deposed for her Idolatry, 2 Chapter 15,
16. or to Athalia, legally deposed by Iehojada and the Peers of Israel for her
usurpations and her cruelties, or to Vzzah after he was extruded his Regiment
for his Leprosies by those Priests whose office he abused, all subjection being
in ordine quoad Deum, only in God, for God, and as to God in things legal
warranted by God according to the precept and practice of S. Peter, Acts 5. and
Romans 13.4.

However for my part, as being homo ecclesiae, a man Orthodox and not willing
to patronize any error, if once convicted, if any can prove that ought in
these recited Authors is erroneous, as he that reads Scultetus his Medulla
Patrum, Illiricus his Catalogue of the witnesses of the Truth, M. Perkins his
Apology, and the writings of the Fathers, shall see in Cyprian, Tertullian,
Basil and Augustine himself, chiefly in Origin, gross mists and clouds in
these and others, counted the lights of the Church, as there is some dross in
every Age in the best gold, or if any can prove these their opinions to be
private Tenets, and not according to the Analogy of faith, nor according to
the Nicen and the other three first General Counsels which Gregory so
respected, nor according to the 39. Articles agreed upon and received by our
Church: then I say, I am not bound to plead for them further then the truth is
their Proctor, nor tied jurare in verba magistri, to call them, as Cyprian
called Tertullian, my Masters, or to rest on them as the Pithagoreans on their
Masters ipse dixit, as on a Delphick Oracle, since sequor Cyprianum quatenus
Cyprianus Scripturam, I follow Cyprian and all other others so far as they
follow the Scriptures which all must search, Ioh. 5. and to whom si runpantur
Ilia codri, if the Devil should storm and all his upstart Heretics burst
their guts, we must have recourse, tanquam ad lidium lapidem, as to the
touchstone of all truths, Acts 11. without which quid mihi cum centum
Cyprianis, cum centum Augustinis, what have I to do with all the Fathers,
Councels and Divines ancient and modern? yet thus much I say further for them,
though my task be only to shred them from the poisonous positions of Papists,
and though my resolutions be not to discuss nor determine the maine point that
exercises the pens, tongues, and pates of all the Politians in the world,
howsoever being chiefly successive, like the Infantaes of Spain, the Dolphins
of France, and the Princes of Wales, though intrenching upon tyranny,
injustice, and misgovernment, may be opposed or deposed, as not willing without
a calling, to put my finger in a flame which I cannot quench, so I will be so
far from a distasted fruit called Medlar, as new perhaps as dangerous to him
that meddles with it too much, as once bulls blood to Themistocles, the raw
Polipus to Diogenes, or a Fico from a jealous Italian, that I will not so much
as recite, as I could at large the verdicts of some learned modern Civilians,
Divines and Politicians in this so much controverted point: but only like the
finger in the Dial, that points at the hour, refer every Sceptick and
scrupulous spirit for his satisfaction, to Soto Major de Justitia and Iure,
quest. 4. art. 1. to Vasquez in his illustrious Controversies, lib. 1. cap. 26.
Number. 22. to Pizell in Rub part 1. cap. 2. number. 25. Gregory Tholosanus, that
learned Civilian in his 6. Book of his Commonwealth, cap. 19. as also in his
22. Book, c. 7. and 14. and his 23. Book, c. 1. and his 26. Book, c. 4. 7. to
Decianus his Criminalls, lib. 7. c. 47. to Covarraus his various Resolves, l.
3. c. 6. and to the elaborate Althusius in his Politicalls: But least some
should object, that these produced were Papists, professed Antagonists to Princes
unpapized, yet he that is booked, and has leisure to read, may see their
verdicts paralleled in substance, by Gentilis of the right of War, l. 1. c.
23. and by Aristotle, though a Pagan, in his Politikes, l. 7. c. 47. chiefly by
our modern learned Arnisaus who spends many pages in quarto upon the very
subject of describing, composing, reforming, resisting, or deposing a Tyrant:
for me to interpose my opinion, if not judgment after these, were to light a
candle to the Sun, though absit arrogantia, I have had a Caesar's resolution of
Iacta est alea, to fear no colors, to bear sail in a storm, and have never
been wont to be bird-mouthed for a good cause, nor to new-trize it with Metius
Suffetius, to sleep in a warm skin, nor to be like the Fox and the Mouse, not
to trust to one securing hole in the ground, or the wall, and though I dare by
Gods grace, venture as far as Luther once to Worms, Jerome of Prague to
Constance, or as Latimer who was persuaded his zeal to the truth would cost
him his hearts blood; so at this instant to stand the Church and State in
stead, however the times should whirle, or the scales be cast, though I dare do
ought legal, though it should be misconstrued, brevibus Gyris and carcere
dignum, worthy of Jereremies bonds, or John Baptists beheading, yet I suspend
my further discussions, or determinations in this tickle point at this time;
yet this maine reason obstructs my pen in this point, these Forraigners
recited, have given full satisfaction in this controverted question, how far
the lusts of misgoverned Kings may be kept within the banks and limits of
municipall Laws; and themselves, if they be obstinate in courses tending to
ruination of Church and State, may be moved to better carriage, or removed, as
also because some of these alleged chiefly Tholosanus Lib 24. Reip. c. 5. and
lib. 20. c. 5.
and Arnisaeus De tyrannide in exercitio.
, as also Hottoman in his ancient Laws of France, lib. 1. and Zionetta in his
Tripartite defense Part 3. number. 25. and 28. and seq.
, and Bossius in his book of a Prince Number. 55. and seq.
, and Philadelphus in his second Dialogue of the affairs of France, and
Farinus in his Criminal Questions, with other Humanists and Divines, have more
plainly and punctually, proceeded in instructing their times what Rights,
Privileges, and Powers the States and Parliamentary Tribunes for a people,
have and ever had as true Patriots for their Countries, and State-Physitians,
to purge out such peccant humors and lop off such unprofitable sprigs as once
Gaveston to Edward the second, and Mortimer to a French Queen, and some ever
about Dionisius, and Allexander, and Tiberius, and Caligula, and Craesus the
Lidian, which were the Pests of Princes, as any may consult with my Marginalls
Patritius de Rep. l. 5. tit. 5. p. 229. de Regno, l. 4. p. 222. Antimaehavill,
l. 1. p. 108. 104, 105. and Tholosanus de Repub. lib. 4. page 15.
, and made them worse then they were by nature, but they have also ascribed
power unto them, even to purge the head it self from the bad fumes of ill
counselors distempering it; yea to cure even the Kings evil when the disease
grew dangerous spreading as a Gangraene, and infectious to all the body
political and Ecclesrasticall, chiefly when incurable by all admonitory and
persuasive cordialls, for which cause such Parliamentary Peers have ever had,
as they say, honorable titles of Ephorists amongst the Lacedaemonians, of
Patritians amongst the Romans, of Senators in Venice, of Electors the very
pillars, ribs, sides, and strength of the Empire in Germany, many Bases latera
columna corpus imperii, apud Bullam Charoli, 5. cap. 3.12, 24.26.
, of Rulers, 1 King. 4.1, 2, 3. Elders, Number. 11.16.17. heads of the people,
Deuteronomy. 33. in Sacred Writ, with other such dignified Titles in Antiquity and
Honors, as any may peruse more at large in Cytrem his Chronicles, in Zwingers
great Theater, Volumne 8. in Alexander ab Alexandro, his Geniall days, lib. 6.
cap. 24. in Junior Brutus de Vindice quest. 3. and in the 11. discussion of him
that is the Author of the political Treasury, such for authority as the
greatest Princes, even Darius, Pyrrhus, Agamemnon, Augustus, Trajan, the Roman
Caesar's In Suetonius, Lampridius, Tacitus his Annalls, l. 1. and Pliny in his
Panegyricks.
, the great Persian Assuerus, Esther 1.3. the Kings of Israel, Jer. 26.10. and
the Kings of Nineve, Joh. 3.7. have ever consulted with usually with as good
success as those that have slighted them like Rehoboans, and preferred young
Phaetons, Green blades, and rash Rawheads before them, have had success
thereafter, 1 King. 12.18.16. yea besides the powers given them by the body of
a people, by these recited, he that consults with Boterus, lib. 4. cap. 3. and
with Althusius his Politics, from the 193, 194. page to the 223. page shall
see these Parliamentary powers in a conglobed body of reforming Censors and
Senators to have been very great in all times, even equallized with these Magna
Consilia, great Courts in Spain, and with those great Diets and Assemblies in
Germany, and the great Court in Paris, and that Rota Romana and other places of
Judicature amongst the Venetians, Polanders, Rhagusians, and other parts, so
extolled by that great Beuclark Budaus in his last book of his Senate, and by
Hottoman in his History of France, cap. 10, 11. and by Borrheus of the
Authority of the great Counsel, number. 170. yea not to be like Plutarks Lamia,
quick-sighted abroad, and to shut up our eyes at home, he that consults with
our Oxfords case in his Politics, lib. 3. cap. 5. and with Sir Thomas Smith in
his English Government, lib. 2. cap. 2. shall receive much satisfaction,
unless he be hoodwinkt, how far a legal Parliament may curb, direct, or
correct what is merely regal in a Persian humor or Tumor of quod libet
licet, of every lust for law, which is illegal, especially by perusing the
elaborate pains of our Teologicall Lawyers, M. Pryn in the Parliamentary
passages in Hungary, France, Suevia, Spain, Italy. Bohemia, Denmark,
Scotland, and how far they have been improved against such Princes as have
split the ship of State by misgovernment, or dilacerated their people by
tyranny, or spunged them by injustice, such men-Monsters for Monarchs as were
once Ecclinus in Sabellicus his Chronicles, lib. 8. cap. 3. and Phereus in
Tullies Offices, lib. 2. and Melancthons Chronologies, lib. 2. and Aristobulus
in Josephus his Antiquities, lib. 13. cap. 18. as also Macrinus, Nero,
Phraates, Vedius Pollio, and many more, whose tyrannies as incurable as cruel,
are fully related by Tholosanus Lib. 6. cap. 18.
and the French Bodin Lib. 2. cap. 6.
, in their Commonwealths, by Lipsius Lib. 6. cap. 5.
, and Danaeus Lib. 6. c. 3.
, in their Politics, by Valerius Lib. 9. c. 14.
, and Aelianus Lib. 13. and 14.
, in their Histories, Melancthon in his Chronicles, lib. 4. and Gorlicius in
his Political Axioms, Axiom. 16. these with many more The three Herod's
Maximium, Antiochus, Adonizebeck, Scylla, Dionisius.
, how far they have been crossed, limited, bridled, censured in the severest
manner, all may better drink at the fountains heads and be satisfied in their
scruples, by consulting the large Tracts of the Authors quoted, then by my poor
pitchers, if I should draw ought or lap ought from them, as Poets in another
stream out of Homers basin.

These things being thus premised, it being extra alam, without both the
sphaere of my purpose, and not correspondent to the title of this Tractate, to
discuss this maine controverted point, how far Regality turned to Tyranny
may be opposed or deposed, about which most Civilians, yea Divines also, are as
much divided, pro and contra, as the Poetized Deitles in Homer and Virgil,
about the Grecians and the Trojans, some siding with the one, some with the
other, Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo, so that I may hoc agere,
keep me only to my proposed and intended point, to clear our English Thames
and Scotch Twede from running in such sanguinolent streams of regal and
legal blood estused, both by guns and gowns in war and peace, as some lay to
their charge in such Torrents and Heeatombes as have run daily from Po and
Tiber, to the turning all States where Jesuits have acted, into red seas of
blood, and washed Protestant Princes out of their Thrones: for which cause to
open the eyes of the blinded Baalites, and to stop the mouths and blunt the
horned pens of such blatrant beasts as Jurwicius in his book of the Professors
of the fifth Gospel, of Possevine, in his book of the Atheism of Protestants,
of Rainolds in his Calvin's Turcisme, of Gifford in his Preface before that
book, of Feverdentius upon Jude, of Turner in one of his Orations against Queen
Elizabeth, of Cocleus, Bolsecus, Eudaemon, Scurrilous Kellison in his Survey,
and other Romish Rabshekahs who divulge all puritanicall Protestants no better
then Atheists, worse then Turks, Jews, worst of Heretics in the Church, worst
of Traitors and Catilnarians in all States, Lisymachus Nicanor stretching much
to parallel them in the last with the worst of Pontificians in his Invectives
either for a larger Rotchet, like Parsons once, and Eccius, or for a Cardinals
Hat, or for a Miter with Wolsey: however the former imputations be abundantly
cleared, and retorted upon themselves by Doctor Willet in his Tetrastilon, by
Gabriel Powell and Doctor Beard, in their learned books of Antichrist, by Mr.
Squire upon the Thessalonians, Doctor Sutcliffe in his Turkish Papisme, Doctor
Field in his fifth book of the Church, and many more, yet to quench this last
brand, cast upon both our Patriots and Presbyterians of being as small friends,
nay as intestine foes to all Caesar's and their safeties, as the most malignant
Massemongers, pestilent Priests, and Jebusiticall Jesuits, as fire may come
forth from the repercussions of slint and steel; I desire to light a candle of
truth to all sorts from our Dan to Bersheba; yea to this present and to future
ages throughout Europe, to see the evident difference as much betwixt them, as
betwixt Wolves and Lions, Doves and Serpents, in these subsequent positions,
practices, postures, and passages propounded in these Queres.

First, what Belgic Scotch or English Puritan (no not Brown, Penry, nor
Martin Mar Prelate) ever preached or printed, that Princes, if they be
Heretics and Tyrants, of Papists new minting and moulding, that is
contradictory in judgment and practice to every novell Opinion, Idolatry,
Superstition and Heresy in their Hierarchy, not down right for the
Antichristian Papacy, but chiefly if so opposite to them and their Dotages in
Doctrine and Discipline, that they seek to resist crush or curb their
blasphemies by Statute, Laws, Edicts, Mulcts, Decrees, Exiles, Imprisonments,
as Christian Emperors have done, (what ever Anabaptists and Libertines blatter
to the contrary) as appears by Eusebius in his life of Constantine, lib. 3.
cap. 62.63. Ambrose in his Explication upon Luke cap. 15. as also by Augustine,
in his 48. Epist. and some Constitutions of the two Theodosians and others in
the Common Law Vide Theodos. l. 1. cod. de Trinitate and Cunctis cap. de Haeret.
, that then as absolute Tyrants, they may eo nomine, be deposed, being first
excommunicated, as were the Othoes, Henry's and Fredericks in Germany,
Childerick in France, and our English Deborah here in England, by five Popes,
their great Monarch of the Church (as they call him) supreme under Christ,
having power in ordine ad Deum, in his relation to Christ, to depose such Kings
and dispose their Kingdoms, as once from an Henry to a Rodulph Petradedit,
Petro petra, Diadema Rodulpho.
: did ever Calvin, Danaeus, Knox, Buchanan, Goodman, broach any such Doctrine
as this which is writ in the blood of Kings by Creswell, in his Philopater,
page 194. Molin in his unjust Tractate of Justice, Tract. 2. Disp. 39. p. 149.
Saunders in his visible Monarchy, lib. 2. cap. 4. page 70. Coster in his
Enchiridion, part 1. page 64. and Bellarmine their great Goliath, in his fifth
book of his Pope, cap. 6, 7.

Secondly, what Puritan called Catharist, and Novatian in S. Cyprians time, and
now Presbyterian or Parliamentary, yea where did any Synod of the whole
Presbytery, or Senate of Orthodox Patritians, ever absolve all Subjects from
all subjection and subordination, from all obedience sworn by solemn Oaths,
from such Princes as the pillars, Catterpillars and Proctors for Antichrist in
their senseless senses, in their Mints and Forges make Heteticall or
Tyrannical (that is to say just and zealous Protestants) Oaths, being the
only ties and Obligements which Princes have to secure their Crowns and
lives; when did ever any Puritan, (unless they will make such impure ones as
Munster and Familists in Belgia, and Straw, Cade, Tiler, and other Rebels in
England, the scum and froath of men, Puritans) when I say, did they ever unty
this Gordian knot, as both by their tongues and pens, (lavish, loose and
poisonous) many of them, and not of the meanest fools, have attempted, as
amongst the rest Azorius in his Institutions, cap. 15. sexto, and Massonius the
Lawyer in his Majesty of the Militant Church, part 2. lib. 4. page 676.
Simancha a Bishop in his Institutions, Tit 23. Sect. 11. Cardinal Tolet in his
Instructions (or Destructions) for his Priests, lib. 1. cap. 13. Creswell in
his Philopater page 194. with Gregory de Valentia, upon Aquinas his Sums, Disp.
1. q. 2. punct. 2. p. 463. and Bannes the Schoole-man on this Angelical
Doctor, 2. 2. q. 12. Art. 2. Conc. 2. the Decretalls of their Popes, especially
striking with the great Hammer, to the mauling of Monarchs, as of Gregory the
seventh in Gratian, Causa. 15.9.6. and of Gregory the ninth, lib. 5. tit. 7.
cap. 5. Glossa with all the bleating Calves of Babell, such as Allen, Parsons,
Saunders, after the roaring bulls of Pius (or Impius) the fifth, and Gregory the
9. against Queen Elizabeth, as they have been well baited by many a valorous
Papistomastix, chiefly by Michael Rhemigerus, Anno Dom. 1582. as also by him
that has writ the book called Brutum Fulmen, scoffing the Papal paper squibs
and Balaams curses in their Excommunications of the French Kings.

Thirdly, howsoever Puritans falsely nicknamed, that is zealous and Oxthodox
Protestants may teach, that Princes whether elective or successive,
subordinated to Laws divine and humane, may be bridled by State Ephorists in
their unlimited humors and tumors, and kept in as the Hollanders the feared
inundations of the Sea within banks, chiefly when their surging waves are
swelled by the winds of ill Counselors; and withal as wife men use Law and
Physic, tanquam ultimum refugium, as their last refuge, that Subjects se
defendendo, by that Law which nature dictates selfe-preservation to man, birds
and beasts, may take up defensive rather then offensive arms, as endangered
David did when he was hunted as a Partridge over the Mountains by sanguinolent
Saul, 1 Samuel 22.2. and as Mardocheus and the Jews stood upon their Guards,
when their lives were sought and plotted by Haman, Esther 9.16. as also in
defense of the Municipall Laws of a Kingdom, or for the prevention of the
ruination of a Kingdom, by the confederacy of homebred viperous Tyrants and
Foreign intestine enemies; yet nevertheless. when did any Presbyter or
Patriot excite Subjects, as our Jesuiticall Firebrands do, to take up arms
against a Protestant King, and to kill him who ever can, by sword, pistol or
poison, no more sparing him then a Bear or a Wolf in such cases of Treason,
in such cases of Injustice, Heresy, and Tyranny, as Satan hatcheth and coddles
in their Serpentine heads, that is, being not wholly leavened with their Romish
Leaven, worse then that of the Scribes and Pharisees, when did ever Edenborough
or Geneva send forth such a Trojan horse filled with the armed Greeks of
treasonable positions, such as are vented or vomited in this kind, extant Cum
Privilegio, by Gregory de Valentia, Tom. 3. Disp. 2. punct. 2. by Simancha, in
his Institutions, tit. 23. sect. 12.13. by their Rainaldus in his Rosaeus, page
157. by Bannes on Aquinas, 2.2.9.12. art. 2. which King-killing and
State-firing Tenets of theirs as they took effect in the Rebellions of Henry
the 4. in Germany, persecuting Henry the Emperor with fire and sword, as we
may see at large in the Chronicles of Cranzius and Vrspergensis, and in Oneale
the Irish Rebel against Queen Elizabeth, so also in the French, bearing Arms
against Henry the third, deprived of his Crown by Papal Instigation, as we
may see in the book Extant of his just abdication, page 262. with such like
bloody Pageants, as Paul or Saul the third played against our Henry the eighth,
and six Popes, namely Gregory the 13. Sixtus the 5. Verban the 7. Gregory the
14. Innocent the 9. and Clemens the 9. against Henry the 4. of France ere they
butchered him, and nine Popes even Paul the 4. Pius the 4. Pius the 5. Gregory
the 13. Sixtus the 5. Verban the 7. and the 9. Vnclement Clemens, and the 9.
Nocent, Innocent, against our Albions Eliza, all whose spleens she outlived.

Fourthly, what Scotch or Genevean Presbyter, ever approved or applauded the
base and bloody acts of any Traitor against his legal King, as Pope Xistus the
fifth in a solemn Oration amongst his Cardinals, Anno 1589. hiperbolically
extolled Jaques Clement assassinating the French Henry, as may be seen in the
printed pages, page 3. 5. 8. 9. 10. equalizing his fact with the acts of Ehud,
Judith, Harmolaus, Timoleon, Brutus, and other Patriots, who rid their
Countries of Tyrants, as King Edgar rid England of Wolves.

Fifthly, when did the whole Sanedrim of Protestant Patriots in any Country, or
all the united Classes of Presbyterians ever assume unto themselves these more
then humane Titles and prerogatives, which are given to the Pope and his
Hierarchy by Bertach in his Repertory, part 4. in dict. Papa, by Bozius in the
nature and rights of the Church, lib. 5. cap. 10. page 476. by Muscovius in his
Majesty of the Militant Church, lib. 1. cap. 1. page 26. and by the extant
Ceremonies of the Church, lib. 1. sect. 5. page 4. fol. 61. chiefly when did
they ever assume to themselves that power which the Canonists and Clawbacks
give even in temporalls, besides spiritualls, unto their Antichristian Popes,
as to be the heads over all the Kings of England, France, Ireland, Spain,
Denmark, Portugal, Scicily, Suevia, Arragon, Naples, Hungary, Russia, Croatia,
Dalmatia, yea over all Nations and Potentates, deposing whom and when they
please, and disposing their Crowns and Diadems spurning them off as with their
feet, as they dealt with Leo the third, Otho the first, Frederick the first,
Childerick of France and others.

Sixthly, when was ever any such Luciferian Doctrine broached that any Patriot
or a whole Senate of them, and a College of Presbyters in translating Empires,
as Zachary did the Empire of Greece to the Tutonicks, as though their Hierarchy
being but the first begotten of the Devil, as Polycarpus called Marcion,
should outvie the brag of their father in disposing the Kingdoms of the
earth, Mat. 4.9. to those that would worship the beast in a greater Papal
pride, then ever was read of in Alexander, Clitus, Domitian, Cosroes, Herod,
Sapho, Hanno, and others affecting Deities.

Seventhly, what pen from Patriot or Presbyter ever justified the bold and
bloody intrenchments and usurpations of any spiritual person above secular
powers, about which Parsons has drawn his steeled and rapier-like pricking
pen in his Dolman, part 2. page 62. Bellarmine de Pontifice l. 5. c. 6. and 7.
and Allen in his extant Letter to Sir William Stanley, with the rest of their
Proctors and Factors.

Eighthly, though the Patriots and Presbyters attribute very much to those whom
the people, as in a conglobed body, choose to be their Tribunes for them in
Parliaments, as I have noted from Civillians, as namely, to stand for their
Freedoms and legal Privileges; 2. For their Proprieties, not to be spunged
nor squeezed, nor ought reav'd from them, as once Elies sons by flesh-hookes,
1 Samuel ^. as also against Caterpillars, and Monopolizing Officers, and all that
should invade their civil Right, or exhaust ought from them, more then should
be given according to the Custom in Spain, in a Parliamentary way, as
Auxiliaries to their Customs and Crown-Revenues, as also to see that
State-vipers be not hugged in the bosoms of Kings, chiefly such as should so
far poison regal ears that Lawmakers may be so far Law-breakers to do
what they list, when and with whom they list, yet they teach not with
Bellarmine in his Roman Pompifex, lib. 2. cap. 7. and de Clericis, cap. 2.
that Kings have no authority from God, and from his Law, but from the Law of
nature, and that their power is so immediately in and from the multitude as in
the proper Subject, that the people may make a King, which otherways should be
no King, but as a private man, as he depresseth Regality under this maine and
many headed beast, in his books of Laics, lib. 4 cap. 6. and of Counsels,
lib. 2. cap. 19. yea so far does vassalize them under a Plebeian yoke, that
if such a King degenerate to be a Tyrant, that is, in his sense a Protestant, a
populo posse deponi and eligi alium, the people may depose him and choose
another, as though all the Hive should rise against the Master Be, and throw
him out of Platoes Commonwealth, yea says Gregory de Valentia, tom. 3. disp.
2.9.12. punct. 2. Si crimen Heresis ita sit notoria, if his Heresy (that is
still the profession of the Orthodox truth) be so palpable that it cannot be
concealed, that is to reject a Mass as a Mass of corruption, which was the
Heresy of Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Queen Elizabeth and King James, and hold
the Papal Hierarchy is (it is by so many learned pens) to be Antichrist, then
ante Judicis sententiam, before any public Judicature, subditi licite possunt
negare obsequium, his Subjects may lawfully deny their obedience, yea as
proceeding a malo ad pejus, from evil to worse, from Potentialls to
Injunctions, omne operam dare debent subditi, says Saunders in his visible
Monarchy, lib. 2. cap. 4. his Subjects must bestirre themselves like Bees to
peerk another presently into his place. Indeed Mariana de Rege, c. 6. p. 59.
and 60. though his book was burnt in Paris for his good Divinity, with more
cause then Pareus, pausing as it were, a little leisurely; he would have this
Heretical Prince first to be warned, a Comitiis Regni, of the Patriots of a
Kingdom, but if he be as Origin was once called Adamantinus, and as Luther of
a resolute and adamantine spirit, that he is grounded in his opinion, then in
ejus personam licet quicquam attentare, like a hunted Wolf or wild Boar, any
may knock him in the head, any sturdy Rogue like the Italian Bandetti, may be
his assassinate, yea and be renowned for the act as a second Codrus or Junior
Brutus, and be registered in red Letters as a Saint in the Roman Rubric, with
S. Faux, S. Ravillack, S. Garnet, as if S. Cain, S. Judas, S. Job, as many
spurs and encouragements are put to the speed of the zealous Amorettoes of the
Scarlet Whore to vindicate her in this kind, as many may ponder them with
amazement from the porcupined pens of Squarez in his Defense of the Faith, l.
6. c. 4. sect. 14. of Santarellus in his Tractate of Schism, of Mariana in his
book de Rege, l. 1. and 6. of Eudemon, or Cacodemon, ali-as Andra in his
Apology for Garnet, of Angerius in his Pedagogue of weapons, of Martin Becan
in his Theological Sins, and of Arturus in his Books of the Church, it being a
Scythian cruelty thinks the roaking Raven Mariana in his book alleged, l. 1.
c. 6. p. 58. for a private man not to right his Father and Mother grossly
wronged, much more to neglect his Conntrey and his common Mother the
Commonwealth in such a case as this, though non vox hominem sonat O Demon
certe, not the voice of a man, but of a Devil is roaring in his pen terribly
as in a Pump, in such noises as were never heard in the Colleges at
Edenborough, Glascow, and Aberden, nor in the Churches of Geneva, nor in that
Synod in Westminster, much less in the Senate, Thames and Twede were never so
poisoned and polluted with black ink, like the black scum which the fish
Scylapendra casts from her to trouble the waters, much less stained with red
ink from the Basilicall veins of Kings, who stood for the Arc of Religion,
or to throw down the Dagon of Idolatry, or Superstition; in such postures as
every regalized Gideon, Protestant Josias, and zealous Zerubbabel ought to be,
that aims at the glory of Christ Crown, and the splendour and safety of his
own Crown.

Ninthly, as reflexing a little further on what I have touched, when did ever
any Protestant, Patritian, or Presbyter, spur up any Traitors to ride from
Tiber to Tiburne by their encomiums and commendations, extolling old and new
Patricides as much as Cardan did his Nero, and Catiline or Carolus Scribanius
in his Amphitheater of Honors, John Guiner the French Traitor, cap. 12.
expostulating with his Popes why they will send forth no more such Timoleons,
Dions, and Philopoemens as he was to rid France of her Tarquins, Dionisians,
Machamdams, Aristotemists, and such like seculorum portentia, men Monsters, as
his Pope Rhetoric styles them: Campian also the Popes Champion, Brastow,
Saunders, and others as much extolling Penniman, Bishop Holtthrop, and other
such Catilnarians as ever Hercules was for quelling Cacus, Cerberus, Hidra,
Meleager for killing the Calidonian Boar, our S. George in Helyn, Warwicks
Guy, or Bevis of Hampton, for subdning Dragons, Lions, Giants, and Monsters.

Tenthly, when and where did any of our Senators and Synods disgorge such
King-quelling and Church and State-firing Positions rightly poized and
paralleled as Bellarmine in his fifth book of his Pope, and his third book
against Barklay, and in his Tractate of the office of a Prince, and Turrian in
his first book, and third Chapter of the Church, and Becan in his Theology,
part 2. cap. 3. tract. 1. chiefly Swarez most of Square in the Defense (or
rather Offense) of the Faith, lib. 3. cap. 17. sect. 18. cap. 23. sect. 18.20.
lib. 45. cap. 16. sect. 1. l. 16. c. 16. sect. 16. to whose perusalls I refer
my Intelligent Reader.

Eleventhly, to come from Lightning and Thunder to Bolts, from their Positions
bad and bloody enough to their worse practices, as they say of Cockatrices,
Foxes, Wolves, and all kind of Serpents, as of some Zelanders, that crescunt
nequitia simul acerescente senecta, that they grow a malo ad pejus, ever worse
and worse, pejores aves aetas tulit, they being now birds of a more bloody
feather then their predecessors, as we feel bleeding experiments by their
combustions in England and Ireland, being all of them now borne as it were,
with teeth, as was said of Cham or Zoroastes: And a little to grapple with them
as clasped ships, and spur with these spurred Cocks, when did ever any ancient
or modern Presbyters called Puritans, by their tongues, pates, pens,
agitations factious fractions, raise such wars amongst and against Princes,
kindle such jarres in Cities, States, Kingdoms and Countries, as Tibers
Jesuits have done in France, Italy, Germany of late, and the Palatinate, as
also Moravia, Bohemia, Lions, Paris, Merindoll, Calabria, in the times of John
de Roma and Minerius, as also in Poland, Anno, 1591. in Belgia, Anno, 2584.
1594. 1598. in Muscovy, Transylvania, the Duchess of Austria, the Marquisate
of Silesia, Anno, 1608. 1009. as appears by the Chronicles of these States, as
also of the Belgicks, tom. 1. 519. as also in Constantinople, Anno Dom. 1627.
1628. and of their like bloody and boisterous Pageants, let the judicious see
them Anatomized fully by Pelargus in his Preface to his Jesuitisme, by our
Omerod in his picture of a Papist, by Gregory. Hieromonachus de Fraud
Iesuitaram, of the frauds of the Jesuits by a book extant, de turbis
Iesuitarum in Orient, of the troubles of the Jesuits in the East, by Pope
Urban the 8. especially in his Bull printed against them, and by the Jesuits
Catechism, composed by their Priests, who best studied them, page 430. ad page
528. by Watson also in his Quodlibets, and diverse others so unripping their
Fardells, that all that will open their hood-winkt eyes may see, that non cum
Jesus itis, itis si cum Iesuitis, in faith, in fact, who with a Jesuit do run,
they cross way run from Jesus quite, answering their names no more then bloody
Antiochus called Epiphanes, or then Zacheus before his conversion, or Judas to
be the praise of God, or that Theophilus who was Origens great enemy, or that
Bencocas in the days of Adrian a great Impostor like them, described by
Eusebius, Hist. l. 2. c. 28. and l. 4. c. 7. proved Bencosba the son of lying,
yea no more answering their names, then that Pseudo-Mastapha in Lanclavins his
Annalls page 34. and that Pseudo-Alexander in Josephus his Wars, l. 2. c. 5.
and that counterfeit Nero in Tacitus, Hist. l. 18. p. 58. and that counterfeit
Wooldemar in Marchia, in Peucers Chronicles lib. 5. page 60. or that
counterfeit Agrippa in Cuspiman, in Tiberio, p. 13. or that artifizing Smerdis
in Persia in Justin, page 26. or that suborned Parkins and Lambert in Henry the
7. time, in our own Chronicles, and in Cambdens Remains, page 241. were real
Kings, whose parts they Histrionically acted on bloody Stages, like our
Jesuits, though they were but base Peasants, as far from Princes as our
pride-puft Plebeians from gifted and called Preachers; these being indeed (and
not our Presbyterian Puritans, or Patriots) as all just pens have branded them,
Cathedrae Pestilentiae, the Chaires of Pestilence, the Turrets of Heresies, the
Pandoraes Box of Church-diseases, the fatal Palladiun filled full of Treasons,
the chief Panders and Bawdes of the Scarlet Whore, the Academies of Impieties,
the Assassinates of Kings, poisoners of Kingdoms, overthrowers of Cities,
Incendiaries of States, Legates for Satan, Agents for Hell, Opposites to
Heaven, and the very Phaetons of the world; which to demonstrate more then
Mathematically, as we have traced the case with them abroad, so we might join
issues with them at home in nearer discussions, and so it will appear luce
clarius as evident as the light, that the firebrands of sedition, and the
greatest Antagonists to the safeties of our English Caesar's, have been ever
Jesuitized Romanists hugged in the breasts of some States, as vipers in their
bosoms, and growing up by them as Elder Trees in walls to their subversion,
and bringing down even by such a blind and bloody zeal, as by a Hotch-potch
Toleration, and by a Liberty, such Libertines as the late destructive Belgic
Familists would again plant amongst us, as legally as the Jews with their
Thalmud, and Turks with their Alcoran; such as these will appear to be those
that have been, are, and will be not only the disturbers, but destroyers of
our Israel, and not those that are as unjustly taxed and traduced for such
factious and seditious Incendiaries, as once Elias was branded by Ahab, 1 King.
18.17. and Paul by Tertullus to be a pestilent fellow, a mover and Ringleader
of sedition, Acts 24.5: I know well, that all these sanguinolent commotions
writ with bloody ink by Sleidan in his History, lib. 22, and 28. by Ostander
in his Epitomized Centuries, Cent. 16. p. 626. Cuspinian in his Gallican
Church, p. 625. Ferres in his History, p. 588. and by Chitraeus in his
Chronicles, p. 71. are laid upon Calvinists, on new Resormers, and new
Reformation, even as Satan's Masterpiece the Powder plot, had it taken effect,
had been malignantly fathered upon the Puritans, I know also that sanguinolent
rustic war in Germany for the time and manner exceeding in cruelty, and
destruction, any faction that I have read either in France, Anno, 1335. or
Venice, 1310. or in Austria, 1456. or in Vienna by the Plebeians against the
Senate, Anno, 1462. or in Padua, Florence, Millaine, Parma, Genoa, or
elsewhere, as it is tragically penned by Munster in his Cosmography, Sleidan la
Gast, and Hondorssius in his Theater, fol. 358. as it was more tragically acted
by John a Leiden, and his Familists: I say I know this is laid upon the ridged
Lutherians, as the fomenters of it, and Ringleaders in it, but they may as
well tax them, for all these commotions made by the Begards and Beguines in
Germany in Charles the 5. time, or by the naked Adamites in Bohemia, or by the
Fratricells in Bergomas his Chronicle, lib. 19. or by Dulcinus and Margeret,
Anno, 1308. and their Anabaptists in Platina, and in the Sums of Counsels, or
by the Crucigerians, with the Banner of their bloody Cross, so pathetically
bleeding yet, in Tholosanus his Commonwealth, l. 13. c. 8. from page 912. to
920. as also cap. 13. page 440. and cap. 19. page 974. yea as justly may all
these troubles and shakings of our Church and State now, by our new Seekers for
the man in the Moon, and Shakers, be taken from the right Davusses, and
heriticall blasphemous white Devils turned Angels, and be laid on our
Orthodox Divines which cast on the waters of the Sanctuaries on their
wildfires, from Styx and Avernus as to tax Protestants with the Belgic blood
shed by Anabaptists, against whom we know how solidly and vehemently Calvin and
Bullinger has writ, as also how Luther has zealously declaimed, has Munster
the Pseudo-Prophet of these sanguinolent Anabaptists, and declared himself
against these Enthusiasts, as freely as ever Augustine against the Donatists,
Cyprian against the Novatians, Epiphanius against our inspired Gnostics, and
our London Ministers, yea M. Edwards himself in his Gangraena and
Anti-Toleration, against our Mushrump Preachers, and in most points blasphemous
Heresiarkes, withal it is well known, that not only D. Baeson in his learned
Tract de Obedientia, of Obedience, and D. Hackwell in his Scutum Regale, his
Buckler for Kings, and D. Morton mauling Bellarmines Prince, Antichristianly if
not Machavilianly drawn, but many more both sound heads and honest hearts have
prescribed all legal obedience unto Kings, usque ad Aras, so far as Casar
does not entrench upon Gods part and prerogative, nor on the public good of
his people, for whom he is placed a Shepherd to protect them and feed them,
not a Wolf in sheeps clothing to pluck them nor feed on them; it is my hope
and desire that all may be satfsfied with these Parallels betwixt Twede and
Tyber, which our own experiments tell us spawned so many Traitors even in
Queen Elezabeths time, as York, Squire, Babington, Tichburn, Parry, Lopus that
Lupus, and more then a good many others, for Tiburne, as their marchings
thither in the rode and broad way of Treason were directed and encouraged by
Cardinal Allen, Cardinal Como, Parkins, Creswell, and other Incendiaries,
Factors for Hell, and actors for the Papal Hierarchy, compounded of lying
equivocation, forgery, humane policy, Machavilian plots, hell-hatched
stratagems, and all the powers of darkness to exalt it self above Christ his
Kingdom, his Ordinances, his Word, his Will, his Worship, and whoever is
called a Terrestrial God, in trampling upon all Scepters terrestrial to exalt
one Miter with a triple Crown, spiritual, temporal, and infernal; from all
which exorbitances how far all true Protestants differ, (once nicknamed
Puritans, as Christ was called a Galilaean, and Athanasius once Sathanasius)
let any judge, that are not drunk with Romish dregs, French philters, or half
poisoned with Iatalian Ficoes, and he shall with an unpartiall eye see as much
discrepance betwixt Protestants, Patriots, and Patricidians, as Sciboleth and
Shiboleth made betwixt Ephraimites and Giliadites, and as Civilians make
betwixt errors in Regality, and terrors in Tyranny.

FINIS.

