ONEALES ESCAPE OUT OF THE TOWER OF LONDON, ON Thursday last, being the 5. Day
of this present May, 1642. Together with the supposed manner and means of his
Escape.

Wherein is expressed all his treacherous Endeavors, Plots, and Conspiracies,
wherein he has expressed himself a Consanguinean to that Rebellious Family in
IRELAND.

Together with all the Articles exhibited against him, Likewise all his
Accusations, averred and approved by diverse Honorable Persons unto the House
of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed for J. Wemster, 1642.

Oneals Escape out of the Tower of London.
THese times, I believe are not unacquainted with the sinister disposition of
Oneal, who for his wicked intentions in the last expedition in the North was
committed by the House of Parliament to the Gate House, and afterward he was
by the same power committed to the Tower, where he has remained ever since.
And upon the 4 of this present May, as one guilty of the Allegations against
him, he made his escape both from his prison, and the present Justice of the
Law. The manner of his escape is after a very diverse manner supposed, and
judged; some suspecting his Escape to be made in the disguise of a Porters
Frock, whereby he did delude his Keepers apprehension; othets suspecting his
escape to be made over the walls, either by the help of a Roap, or else by some
other instrument, which the Assistance of his present Fears or friends, did
provide for him.

This Prisoner being for some space not seen as before in public, a great
Jealousy immediately possessed the Keepers breast; whereupon fearing that he
might be suddenly taken with some extreme melady, which might occasion his stay
in his chamber, the Lieutenant and other Officers immediately went to his
Chamber, suspecting, and fearing him to be dead; but upon their search, they
found neither their prisoner, nor almost any thing in his Chamber, for between
him and his boy, they had conveyed away from his bed one pair of sheets, one
Table-Cloath, and one long Towell, which did confirm their former feats of his
Escape. And now finding to be true, what they before but suspected, the
Lieutenant for his own security, gave present information of his escape unto
the Parliament, who no sooner received the News of his Escape, but wisely
considering the dangers that might ensue the liberty of such an ill and
disaffected Member, gave present Order for his apprehension, and gave Power and
Commission unto the said Lieutenant of the Tower, to issue forth Warrants for
his speedy Apprehensions.

The Allegations against him, which occasioned his imprisonment, I have briefly
and faithfully set down.

Falsities in Daniel Oneale his last Examination.
M. Oneals examination to the 2. interg.
THat he delivered to Sir Jacob Ashley in complement from the King to this
effect, That he knew him and Sir John Conniers to be so gallant men, that he
never intended to place above them any man that was then under their command,
and more this he said not to him of any thing that concerned the King.

Disproved by Sir Jacob Ashley, Int. 2. n.
Contrary to this see Sir Jacob Ashleys Examination, Interg. 2. that at M.
Oneales coming down, he told him, that things being not so well between the
King and the Parliament, he thought a Petition from the Army would do much
good, and asked him if a draft of such a Petition were brought to him whether
he would set his hand to it.

Mr. Oneale.
2. That he had no discourse with Sir Jacob Ashley for bringing up the Army to
London.

Disproved by sir Jacob Ashley, int. 7. a.
Contrary to this see Sir Jacoh Ashlys Examination, int. 7. a. That M. Oneale
telling him of the dislikes between the King and the Parliament, and of those
things which were done to he disadvantage of the King. I replied, I wondered
that Councels above should be so laid as had been spoken of, of marching of the
Army to the South, for they must fight with the Scots first, and beat them
before they could move Southward, and that done, they must spoil the Country
all along as they go, and when they come to London they would find resistance
by the Parliam. and the Scots might rally and follow them.

M. Oneale.
3. That he delivered the like Message to sir John Conniers as he had done to
Sir Jacob Ashley, with this addition, that the King had sent him word, that he
would have particular care of his fortunes, and other speech then this he had
not with him, of any thing that concerned the King, nor delivered him, nor Sir
Jacob Ashley any other Message or Lettet from the King.

Disproved by sir John Conniers 1. Examination, int. 4.
Contrary to this see Sir John Conniers 1. Examination, int. 4. That Master
Oneale used persuasions to this Examinant, that he would serve the King, and
that if he did not he should be left alone, and would but ruin himself, for
that all the Troopers under him, were that way inclined, that therefore he
should adhere to the King, and go those ways that the King would have him.

Sir John Conniers 2. Examination, int. 4.
See likewise Sir John Conniers in his 2. Examination, int. 4. That Mr. Oneale
said unto him, that if he this Examinant had been well known unto the King
would have written unto him, and that therefore he conceived that this
Examinant should should do well to write to the King. To which he replied,
that he could not serve the K. in that point, and therefore thought it would be
of no use to trouble the King with this Letter.

Mr. Oneale.
5. That he never heard of any motion or intention to bring up the Army to
London.

See this disproved before Sir Jacob Ashley, int. 7. a.

See Sir Fulk Hunks, int. 2. a. that Oneale dealt with him to have the troops
move.

Mr. Oneale.
That he never had Communication with any about the procuring a Neutrality from
the Scottish Army, nor ever heard of such a Proposition.

Disproved by Sir Jacob Ashley, int. 7.
7. Contrary to this, see Sir Jacob Ashleys Examination, int. 7. that Sir Jacob
saying that He wondered that Councels above should be so laid as had bin spoken
of, of the marching of the Army to the South, for they mvst fight with the
Scots first, and beat them, before they could move Southward, and the Scots
might ralley and follow them; to which Oneale replied, what if the Scots could
be made Neutrals. Sir Jacob said, that the Scots would lay Him by the heels if
he should come to move such a thing, for they would never break with the
Parliament.

FINIS.

