royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

CHARLES R.

WHEREAS the Commissioners for the Solemnity of Our Royal Coronation have
appointed Our Trusty and Well-beloved John Ogilby, Gent. for the Conduct of the
Poetical part thereof, consisting in Speeches, Emblemes, Mottoes, and
Inscriptions, which he intends to set forth in a large Treatise, and Represent
in Sculpture; Our will and pleasure is, That no Person, or Persons whatsoever,
do presume to Print, or publish the said Treatise, or any relation whatsoever,
of the said Solemnity, or Sculpture, in any size, or Book, or Pamphlet, in any
Volume whatsoever, concerning the same, without the Consent of the said John
Ogilby, as they will answer the contrary at their peril. Given at Our Court at
White Hall the 11 th. day of April in the 13 th. Year of Our Reign.

By His MAJESTY'S Command, EDWARD NICHOLAS.

THE RELATION OF His Majesty's ENTERTAINMENT Passing through the City of
LONDON, To His CORONATION: WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE Triumphal Arches, AND
SOLEMNITY;

By JOHN OGILBY.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, for Rich. Marriott, in St Dunstan's
Churchyard in Fleet Street, 1661.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, COURT of ALDERMEN, COMMITTEE for the
CORONATION, And the rest of the Worthy Members of this Honorable CITY.
THE RELATION of this Solemnity, and of what, in pursuit of their Commands, He
undertook, and has completed, is Humbly Dedicated, by

Their Most Obedient Servant, JOHN OGILBY.

HIS MAJESTY'S ENTERTAINMENT Passing through the City of LONDON TO HIS
CORONATION; WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE TRIUMPHAL ARCHES and CEREMONIES.
THE City of LONDON, participating the greatest share of that inexpressable
Happiness, which these Kingdoms have received by the glorious Restoration of
our Sovereign to his Throne, and of us His Subjects to our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, after a dismal Night of Usurpation, and Oppression, and
proportionably exceeding in their Loyalty, have taken the occasion of His
MAJESTY'S Coronation, to express their Joy with the greatest Magnificence
immaginable: imitating therein the ancient Romans, who at the Return of their
Emperors, erected Arches of Marble, which though They, by reason of the
Shortness of Time could not equal in Materials, yet do theirs far exceed the
others in Number and stupendous Proportions. They have not herein spared any
Cost to manifest their affectionate Duty to the KING, considering, that, if
ever excessive Profusions of this nature might be justified, the present should
be allowed, the occasion thereof being the most Miraculous, and Joyful of any,
that ever happened. And to the intent, that the Ingenuous may be instructed,
the Malevolent silenced, and Misinformations prevented, it is thought fit to
publish a perfect Description of the Solemnity.

MONDAY, April the two and twentieth, His MAJESTY goes from the Tower, through
the City, to Whitehall.

In his passage through Crouched Friars, He is entertained with Music, a Band
of eight Waits placed on a Stage.

Near Algate, another Band of six Waits entertain Him in like manner with
Music, from a Balcony, built to that Purpose.

In Leaden Hall-street, near Lime-street End, is erected the First Friumphal
Arch, after the Dorick Order. On the North-side, on a Pedestal before the Arch,
is a Woman personating REBELLION, mounted on a Hydra, in a Crimson Robe, torn,
Snakes crawling on her Habit, and begirt with Serpents, her Hair Snaky, a Crown
of Fire on her Head, a bloody Sword in one Hand, a charming Rod in the other.
Her Attendant CONFUSION, in a deformed Shape, a Garment of several ill-matched
Colors, and put on the wrong way; on her Head, Ruins of Castles, torn Crowns,
and broken Scepters in each Hand.

On the South Pedestal is a Representation of BRITTAIN'S MONARCHY, supported by
LOYALTY, both Women; Monarchy, in a large Purple Robe, adorned with Diadems,
and Scepters, over which a loose Mantle, edged with blue and silver Fringe,
resembling Water, the Map of Great Britain drawn on it, on her Head London, in
her right Hand, Edinburgh; in her left, Dublin: Loyalty all in White, three
Scepters in her right Hand, three Crowns in her left.

The first Painting on the South Side is a Prospect of His Majesty's Landing
at Dover-Castle, Ships at Sea, great Guns going off, one kneeling and kissing
the Kings Hand, Soldiers, Horse, and Foot, and many People gazing: Above,

ADVENTUS AUG. The whole Tablet representing His Majesty's blessed Arrival.

Beneath the Painting this Motto,

IN SOLIDO RURSUS FOR TUNA LOCAVIT. Alluding to that of Virgil,

Multa dies variusque labor, mutabilis aevi
Rettulit in melius, multos alterna revisens
Lusit, and in solido rursus Fortuna locavit.
Thus rendered,

"The various Works of Time, and many Days,
"Often Affairs from worse to better raise,
"Fortune reviewing those She tumbled down,
"Sporting restores again unto the Crown.
The Painting on the North-side, opposite to this, is a Trophy with decollated
Heads, having over it,

ULTOR A TERGO DEUS. Taken out of Horace,

-- sequitur Rebels
Ultor a tergo Deus --
"Gods Vengeance Rebels at the heels pursues.
This Tablet representing in a Trophy the late Example of Gods Justice upon the
Rebels, who committed that most horrid Murder upon his Majesty's Royal Father
of blessed Memory. To which Rebels the Motto beneath also refers.

AUSI IMMANE NEFAS AUSOQUE POTITI. Said by Virgil of those, who were, for the
like Crimes, condemned to the Pains of Erebus, as he closes the Description of
it in the Sixth of his Aeneis,

Ausi omnes immane nefas, ausoque potiti;
"All dared bold Crimes, and thrived in what they dared.
The Painting over the Middle Arch represents the King, mounted in calm Motion,
USURPATION flying before him, a Figure with many ill-favored Heads, some
bigger, some lesser, and one particularly shooting out of his Shoulder, like
CROMWELL'S; Another Head upon his Rump, or Tail; Two Harpies with a Crown
chased by an Angel; Hell's Jaws opening. Under the said Representation of the
King pursuing Usurpation, is this Motto,

VOLVENDA DIES EN ATTULIT ULTRO. Taken out of the Aeneis, lib. 9.

TURN, Quod optanti Divum promittere Nemo
Auderet, volvenda dies, en! attulit ultro.
"What none of all the Gods durst grant, implored,
"Successive Time does of its own accord.
Above the Arch on two Pedestals, Southward, and North-wards, stand the
Statues of King JAMES, and King CHARLES I. In the Middle somewhat higher, just
over the Arch, the Statue of His Sacred Majesty. Under that of King James;

DIVO JACOBO. Under that of King Charles I.

DIVO CAROLO. Under that of His Majesty this following Inscription;

D. N. Behind the said Figure of Charles II. in a large Table is deciphered the
ROYAL OAK bearing Crowns, and Scepters, instead of Acorns; amongst the Leaves,
in a Label,

MIRATURQUE NOVAS FRONDES ET NON SUA POMA. -- "Leaves unknown
"Admiring, and strange Apples not her Own.
As designing its Reward for the Shelter afforded His Majesty after the Fight
at Worcester: an expression of Virgil's, speaking of the Advancement of Fruits
by the Art of Graffing.

The upper Paintings on the East Side are Ruinous, representing the Disorder
the Kingdom was in, during His Majesty's Absence; with this Motto,

EN QUO DISCORDIA CIVESI But on the West Side they are finished, to represent
the Restoration of our Happiness by His Majesty's Arrival; the Motto,

FELIX TEMPORUM REPARATIO On the Royal Oak, in a Label,

ROBUR BRITANICUM. Over the Great Table,

REDEUNT SATURNIA REGNA. Under King Charles II.

RESTITUTOR URBIS. The Painting on the South-West-side represents the Lord
Mayor delivering to the King the Keys of the City.

In the Niches are four Figures. The first on the South Side, a Woman in
pleasant Colors; the Emblem on her Shield, a terrestrial Globe, the Sun
rising, Bats, and Owls flying to the Shadow; the Word,

EXCOECAT CANDOR. The Second has on her Escutcheon a Swarm of Bees, whetting
their Stings, the Word,

PRO REGE EXACUUNT. The Third, on the North-side, has on Her Shield a Mountain
burning, Cities, and Vine-yards destroyed, and ruined; the Word,

IMPIA FOEDERA. The Fourth has on Her Escutcheon an Arm, as it were out of the
Clouds; in the Hand a naked Sword: The Motto,

DISCITE JUSTITIAM MONITI. Eight Mutes above, on Pedestals; four in White, four
in Crimson.

The Music of this Fabric is ten Drummers, flanking Rebellion; twelve
Trumpets flanking Monarchy.

Aloft under the two Devastations, twelve Trumpets, four Drums.

Within the Arch, on two Balconies, six Trumpets, four Drums.

While the Train passes along, the Drums beat the Marches of several
Countries, and the Trumpets sound several Levets. At which time, His Majesty
drawing near, the Drums turn their March to a Battle, the Trumpets sound a
Charge, and on a sudden Rebellion rowseth up her Self, at which, Drums, and
Trumpets ceasing, Rebellion addresses to his Majesty the following Speech.

Stand! Stand! who'ere You are! this Stage is Ours.
The Names of Princes are inscribed on Flowers,
And Wither them! Stand! You must Me know,
To Kings, and Monarchy a deadly Fo;
Me, who dare bid You midst Your Triumphs Stand,
In the Great City of Your Native Land:
I am Hell's Daughter, Satan's Eldest Child,
When I first cried, the Powers of Darkness smiled,
And my Glad Father, Thundering at my Birth,
Unhinged the Poles, and shook the fixed Earth.
My dear Rebellion (that shall be thy Name,
Said He) Thou Emperors, and Kings shall tame,
No Right so good, Succession none so long,
But thou shall Vanquish by thy Popular Throng:
Those Legions, which ^enlarge our Power we send
Throughout the World, shall Thee (my Dear) attend.
Our mighty Champions, the Sev'n Deadly Sins,
By Malice, Profit, Pleasure, all their Gins,
Bring to Our Kingdom some few spotted Souls;
Thou shall by Treason hurry them in Shoals.
Would You now know what Interest I have here?
Hydra I ride: great Cities are my Sphere:
I Sorc'ry use, and hag Men in their Beds,
With Commonwealths, and Rotas fill their Heads,
Making the Vulgar in Fanatique Swarms
Court Civil War, and dote on Horrid Arms;
'Twas I, who, in the late unnatural Broils,
Engaged three Kingdoms, and two Wealthy Isles:
I hope, at last, to march with Flags unfurled,
And tread down Monarchy through all the World.
At which Words, Monarchy, and Loyalty, unveiling themselves, Rebellion starts
as affrighted, but recollecting her self, concludes her Speech thus.

Ah! Britain, Ah! stand'st thou Triumphant there,
Monarchick Isle? I shake with horrid Fear.
Are thy Wounds whole? Upon thy Cheek fresh Smiles?
Is Joy restored to these late mournful Isles?
Ah! must He enter, and a King be Crowned?
Then, as He rises, sink we under Ground.
Rebellion having ended her Speech, Monarchy entertains His Majesty with the
following.

To Hell, foul Fiend, shrink from this glorious Light,
And hide thy Head in Everlasting Night.
Enter in Safety, Royal Sir, this Arch,
And through Your joyful Streets in Triumph march;
Enter our Sun, our Comfort, and our Life;
No more these Walls shall breed Intestine Srife.
Henceforth Your People only shall contend
In Loyalty each other to transcend,
May Your Great Actions, and immortal Name,
Be the whole Business and Delight of Fame.
May You, and Yours, in a Perpetual Calm
Be Crowned with Laurel, and Triumphant Palm,
And All Confess, whilst they in You are Blessed,
I, MONARCHY, of Governments am Best,
Monarchy having ended her Speech, the Trumpets sound pleasant Levets, and the
Drums beat a lofty English March, whilst His Majesty, the Nobility, and the
Rear-Guard pass on,

Upon His Majesty's Advance to the East India House in Leaden-Hall-Street, the
East India Company take occasion to express their dutiful Affections to His
Majesty in manner following.

This Entertainment was designed, and the Speeches made by a Person of Quality.
First, a Youth in Indian Habit, attended by two Black-Moors, is sent out to
bespeak the Kings Expectation, kneeling before His Horse in these Words;

Stay, Royal Sir, here comes an Indian,
Who brings along a full fraught Caravan
Of perfect Loyalty, and Thanks, to pay,
As Your due Tribute, on this glorious Day.
In the mean while another Youth, in an Indian Vest, mounted upon a Camel, led
out by two Black-Moors, and other Attendants, the Camel having two Panniers
filled with Jewels, Spices, and Silks, to be scattered among the Spectatours,
addresseth himself to His Majesty, as follows.

Avaunt, you Glorious Trifles of the East,
Pearls, Diamonds, Rubies, Sapphires, and the Best
Of Aromaticks, and your Silken Toys,
We Are Rich enough in our Completed Joys.
Your Sacred Person, Royal Sir, has brought
Home all the Wealth, that can be found, or thought
The Riches of both Indies are but Poor,
Compared with our renewed Carolean Store.
We Will blame that Fire no more, that scorched our Nest
Of Spicy Trade, since we see You, the Best
Of Kings, Rise from the Ashes of that Flame,
That burnt our First Right Phoenix of Your Name.
For You have outdone Solomon, and made
Provision for a more then Ophir Trade;
Among Your first of unexpected Cares
Enlarged our Charter, and dispel'd our Fears
Of the incroaching Holland's Rival Force.
Nor can we doubt, but by the bounteous Source
Of Your Successful Right, not only We,
But all the Merchants of Your Realm shall see
This Empory the Magazine of All
That Is Rich, from Phoebus Rising to his Fall;
And Your Imperial Title be the same
In Deed, which Spain's proud Crown vaunts but in Name.
Which Heavens grant! And that we never see
The Sun set on Your Crown, or Dignity.
Long live King CHARLES the Second.

The two Youths, who speak to His Majesty, as above, are John, and Samuel Ford,
sons of Sir Richard Ford, one of the Committees of the East India Company.

The next Entertainment is a Band of ^ix Waits placed on a Balcony, erected in
the Middle of the North-West Angle of Leaden Hall.

The next Entertainment is at Corn-hill-Conduit, on the top of which stand
eight Nymphs clad in White, each having an Escutcheon in one Hand, and a
Pendent, or Banner in the other. On the Tower of the said Conduit, a Noise of
seven Trumpets.

NEAR the Exchange, in Cornhill, is erected the second Arch, which is Naval.

On the East Side are two Stages erected; on each side of the street, one. In
that on the South Side is a person representing the River Thames; his Garment
Loose and Flowing, Color Blew and White, waved like Water, a Mantle over, like
a Sail; his Head Crowned with London-Bridg, Flags, and Ozier, like long Hair,
falling over his Shoulders, his Beard long, Seagreen, and White, curled; an
Oar in his right Hand, the Model of a Ship in his left, an Urn beside him, out
of which issues Water; four Attendants in White, representing the four fresh
Streams, which fall into the River Thames, viz. Charwell, Lea, Colne, and
Medway.

In the other Stage on the North-side, which is made like the upper Deck of a
Ship, are three Seamen, whereof one habited like a Boat-swain.

A Shield, or Table, in the front of the Arch, bears this Inscription,

NEPTUNO BRITANNICO, The first Painting, on the North-side over the City-Arms,
represents NEPTUNE, with his Trident advanced; the Inscription,

NEPTUNO REDUCI. On the South Side, opposite, MARS, with his Spear inverted,
his Shield charged with a Gorgon; by his Knees the Motto,

MARTI PACIFERO. Over the Arch, the Marriage of Them, and Isis.

The Painting on the North-side, over Neptune, represents the EXCHANGE; the
Motto,

GENERIS LAPSI SARCIRE RUINAS. An Expression of Virgil's, Georg. 4. speaking of
the Industry of Bees, never discouraged by their Losses; his Description of it
running thus,

Quo magis exhaustae fuerint, hoc acrius omnes
Incumbent generis lapsi sarcire Ruinas,
Complebuntque Foros, and Floribus Horrea texent.
How much by Fortune they exhausted are,
So much they strive the Ruins to repair
Of their fallen Nation, and they fill the Exchange,
Adorning with the choicest Flowers their Grange.
The Painting on the South Side, over Mars, shows the Tower of London; the
Inscription,

CLAUDUNTUR BELLI PORTAE. The Pedestals, in the Upper Story are Adorned with
eight living Figures, representing EUROPE, ASIA, AFRICA, and AMERICA, with
Escutcheons, and Pendents, bearing the Arms of the Companies, Trading into
those Parts.

The uppermost great Table in the fore-ground represents King Charles the
First, with the Prince, now Charles the second, in His Hand, viewing the
Sovereign of the Sea, the Prince leaning on a Cannon; the Inscription,

O NIMIUM DILECTE DEO, CUI MILITAT AEQUOR,
ET CONJURATI VENIUNT AD CLASSICA VENTI.
For thee, O Jove's Delight, the Seas engage,
And Mustred Winds, drawn up in Battle, Rage.
Above, over the Cornich, between the two Celestial Hemi spheres, an Atlas,
bearing a Terrestrial Globe, and on it a Ship under Sail; the Word,

UNUS NON SUFFICIT. The great Painting on the West Side, represents the Duke of
YORK, habited a l'antique, like Neptune, standing on a Shell drawn by
Sea-Horses, in one Hand a Trident, the Reins in the other; his Motto,

SPES ALTERA. On the four Niches within the Arch are living Figures, with
Escutcheons, and Pendents, representing ARITHMETIC, GEOMETRY, ASTRONOMY, and
NAVIGATION.

Arithmetic, a Woman habited a l'antique; upon her Vestment Lines, with
Musick-Notes on them: In her Escutcheon a Book opened, with a Hand, pointing to
the Figures 1.2.3.4, etc. under,

PAR ET IMPAR. Geometry, a Woman in a pleasant Green, in her Shield a Compass,
and a Triangle; the Inscription,

DESCRIPSIT RADIO TOTUM QUAE GENTIBUS ORBEM. Astronomy, a Woman in a loose
Vestment, Azure, wrought with Stars of Gold, looking up to Heaven: in her
Shield a Table, wherein are diverse Astronomical Figures; the Inscription,

CIRCUMSPICIT ORIONA. Taken out of the third of the Aeneis, where the Poet
Introduces Palinurus, contemplating the Heavens.

Navigation, a Woman in Seagreen Habit, in her Escutcheon an Archer, with a
Cable about it; the Inscription,

TUTUM TE LITTORE SISTAM. While the Nobility pass the Triumphal Arch, the three
Seamen Entertain them with this Song from the Stage on the North-side of the
Arch.

From Neptune's VVat'ry Kingdonies, where
Storms, and Tempests rise so often,
As would the World in Pinces tear,
Should Providence their Rage not soften;
In that fluctuating Sphere,
Where stout Ships, and smaller Barks
Are tossed like Balls, or feathered Corks,
When Briny Waves to Mountains swell,
Which dimming often Heavens glittring Sparks,
Then deseending low as Hell;
Through this Crowd,
In a Cloud,
By a strange and unknown Spell,
We newly Landing,
Got this Standing,
All Merry Boys, and Loyal,
Our Pockets full of Pay
This Triumphal Day,
To make of our skill a Trial,
Of our little little skill.
Let none then take it ill,
We must have no Denial.
II.
We, who have raised, and laid the Poles,
Plough'd Frozen Seas, and fealding Billows,
Now stiff with Cold, then scorched on Coals,
Ships our Cradles, Decks our Pillows;
Amongst threatening Rocks, and treacherous Shoals,
Through Gibraltar's contracted Mouth,
And Realms condemned to Heat and Drowth,
Or Baltic Waves bound up in Ice,
Or Magellan as Cold, though South,
Our good Fortune, in a trice,
Through this Crowd,
In a Cloud,
Brings us where in Paradise
We newly Landing
Got this Standing,
All Merry Boys, and Loyal,
Our Pockets full of Pay
This Triumphal Day,
To make of our skill a Trial,
Of our little little skill:
Let none then take it ill,
We must have no Denial.
III.
We, who so often banged the Turk,
Our Broad-sides speaking Thunder,
Made Belgium strike, and proud Dunkirk,
Who lived by Prize, and Plunder,
And routed the Sebastian Shirk;
We paid their Poops, and painted Beaks,
Cleans'd before and eft their Decks,
Till their Scuppers ran with Gore,
Whilst in as fast Salt Water breaks;
But we are Friends of this no more:
Through this Crowd
In a Cloud,
We have found an happy Shore,
And newly landing
Got this standing;
All Merry Boys, and Loyal,
Our Pockets full of Pay
This Triumphal Day,
To make of our Skill a Trial
Of our little little Skill,
Let none then take it ill,
We must have no denial.
Besides the three beforenamed, who sing the precedent Song, there are in like
manner habited, like Seamen, six other Persons, who make a Wind-Musick.

The Music in the Stage consists of three Drums, and six Trumpets.

On the East Side, Winde-Musick, consisting of six Persons.

On two Balconies, within the Arch, Winde-Musick, consisting of twelve Persons.

On the West-Gallery are placed six Trumpets.

These, and all the other Music, belonging to this Triumph, perform their Duty
without Intermission, till such time as His Majesty fronts the Figure, which
represents Thames, and then cease; upon which, Thames makes the ensuing Speech.

TEn Moons, Great Sir, their silver Crescents filled,
Since, mounted on a Billow, I beheld
You on the Bridge; but Louder Joys there were,
That barred my Welcomes from Your Sacred Ear:
Now I above my highest bound have reared
My Head, to say what could not, then, be heard.
Hail, Mighty Monarch! whose Imperial Hand
Quiets the Ocean, and secures the Land;
This City, whom I serve with Neighboring Floods,
Exporting Yours, importing Foreign Goods,
With anxious Grief, did long Your Absence mourn;
Now with full Joy she Welcomes Your Return;
Your blessed Return! by which she is Restored
To all the Wealth Remotest Lands afford.
At your Approach, I hastened to the Downs,
To see your Moving Forts, Your Floating Towns,
Your Sovereigns, Big with Thunder, Plow the Main,
And swimming Armies in their Womb contain.
You are our Neptune, every Port and Bay
Your Chambers, the whole Sea is Your Highway.
Though several Nations Boast their Strength on Land,
Yet You Alone the watery World command.
Pardon, great Sir, fair Cynthia checks my stay;
But to Your Royal Palace, twice a day,
I will Repair; there my proud Waves shall wait,
To bear our Caesar, and His conquering Fate.
The River Thames having ended his Speech, the three Seamen, who entertained
the Nobility with the former Song, address the following to His Majesty.

I.
King CHARLES, King CHARLES, great Neptune of the Main!
Thy Royal Navy rig,
And We Will not care a fig
For France, for France, the Netherlands, nor Spain;
The Turk, who looks so big,
We'll whip him like a Gig
About the Mediterrane
His Galleys all sunk, or taken.
We Will seize on their Goods, and their Moneys,
Those Algier Sharks
That Plunder Ships, and Barks,
Algier, Sally, and Tunis,
We'll give them such Toasts
To the Barbary-Coasts,
Shall drive them to Harbor, like Conies.
Tan tara ran tan tan
Tan tara ran tan tara,
Not all the world we fear-a;
The great Fish Pond
Shall be thine-a
Both here, and beyond,
From Strand to Strand,
And underneath the Line-a.
II.
A Sail, a Sail, I to the Offin see,
She seems alusty Ship;
Hoise all your Sails a-trip:
We'll weather, weather her, what e're she be:
Your Helm then steady keep,
And Thunder up the Deep,
A Man of War, no Merchants She;
We'll set her on her Crupper;
Give Fire, Bounce, Bounce,
Pickeering Villains trounce
Till Blood run in Streams at the Scupper;
Such a Breakfast them we shall
Give with Powder, and Ball,
They shall need neither Dinner, nor Supper
Tan tara ran tan tan
Tan tara ran tan tara,
Pickeering Rogues never spare-a;
With Bullets pink
Their Quarters;
Until they stink,
They sink, they sink,
Farewell the Devil's Martyrs.
III.
They yield, they yield; shall we the poor Rogues spare?
Their ill-gotten Goods,
Preserved from the Floods,
That King CHARLES, and we may share?
With Wine then cheer our Bloods,
And, putting off our Hoods,
Drink to His MAJESTY bare,
The King of all Compassion:
On our Knees next fall
TO our Royal Admiral,
A Health for his Preservation,
Dear JAMES the Duke of YORK,
Till our Heels grow light as Cork,
The second Glory of our Nation.
Tan tara ran tan tan
Tan tara ran tan tara
To the Royal Pair-a,
Let every man
Full of Wine-a
Take off his Can,
Though wan, though wan,
To make his red Nose shine-a.
The Seamen having ended their Song, the several sorts of Music perform their
Duty, whilst His MAJESTY passes on toward Cheap Side.

At the Stocks, the Entertainment is a Body of Military Music, placed on a
Balcony consisting of six Trumpets, and three Drums, the Fountain there being
after the Thuscan Order, venting Wine, and Water.

In like manner, on the Top of the great Conduit, at the Entrance of
Cheap Side, there is another Fountain, out of which issue both Wine, and Water,
as in a representation of Temperance; and on the several Towers of that Conduit
are eight Figures, habited like Nymphs, with Escutcheons in one Hand, and
Pendents, or Banners in the other: And between each of them, Wind-Musick; the
number, eight.

On the Standard also in Cheap Side there is a Band of Wayts placed, consisting
of six Persons.

THE third Triumphal Arch stands near Wood-street end, not far from the Place,
where the Cross sometimes stood. It represents an Artificial Building of two
Stories, one after the Corinthian way of Architecture, the other after the
Composite, representing the Temple of Concord; with this Inscription on a
Shield,

AEDEM In the Spandrils of the Arch there are two Figures, in Female Habits,
leaning: One representing PEACE, the other TRUTH. That of Peace has her Shield
charged with an Helmet, and Bees issuing forth, and going into it; the Word,

PAX BELLO POTIOR. Truth on the other side, in a thin Habit, on her Shield
TIME, bringing Truth out of a Cave; the Word,

TANDEM EMERSIT. Over the great Painting upon the Arch of the Cupula,
represents a large GERYON with three Heads crowned, in his three right-Hands, a
Lance, a Sword, and a Scepter; in his three left-Hands the three Escutcheons of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; before him the Kings Arms with three Imperial
Crowns; beneath, in great Letters,

CONCORDIA INSUPERABILIS. On the top of the Cupula CONCORD, a Woman in her
Right Hand holding her Mantle; in her Left Hand a Caduceus; under her Feet, a
Serpent struggling, which she seems to tread down.

On the West Side, the third great Figure, a Woman, standing at the Prow of a
Ship; in her left Hand, a Cornucopia; the Word,

FOR TUNAE REDUCI. Above there are eight living Figures with Pennons, and
Shields, representing the four Cardinal Virtues, each with an Attendant.

PRUDENCE, on her Shield Bellerophon on a Pegasus, running his Javelin into the
Mouth of a Chymera; the word,

CONSILIO ET VIR TUTE. JUSTICE, on her Shield a Woman holding a Sword in one
Hand, a Balance in the other; the word,

QUOD DEXTERA LIBRAT. TEMPERANCE, a Viol in her left Hand, a Bridle in her
right; the word,

FAR LUPATA DOCET. FORTITUDE, a Lion having the Arms of England, in an
Escutcheon; the word,

CUSTOS FIDISSIMUS. The internal Part of this Triumph, or Temple, is Round, the
upper part Dark, only enlightened by Artificial Lights; the lower part divided
into ten Parts by Pilasters with Pedestals.

Within the TEMPLE are twelve living Figures, three placed above the Rest.

The First the Goddess of the TEMPLE in rich Habit, with a Caduceus in her
Hand, and a Serpent at her Feet. Behind the Goddess, a Man in a Purple Gown,
like a Citizen of London, presenting the KING with an Oaken Garland, Over the
King's head.

PATER PATRIAE. Over the Citizen's,

S. P. Q. L. The Second, TRUTH, standing next the Goddess CONCORD, in a thin,
but rich Habit, her Shield charged with a Book held open, with wings fastened
by a Chain to a Cloud; beneath, a Fury plucking at the End of the Chain; the
word,

VERITAS INVICTA. The Third, LOVE richly dressed, on the other side of the
Goddess; on her Shield a Cupid, Roses in his Right Hand, in his left a Fish.

Of the nine Lesser Figures; the first bears, on a Shield, the King of Bees
flying alone; a Swarm following at some distance: the Word,

REGE INCOLUMI MEN'S OMNIBUS UNA. The Second, on his Shield, a Testudo advancing
against a Wall; the Word,

CONCORDIAE CEDUNT. The third, a Shield charged with Hearts Gules; the Word,

HIC MURUS AHENEUS ESTO. The Fourth, like a Spread-Eagle with two Heads, one of
an Eagle, the other of an Estrich; in the Mouth of the Estrich a Horse-shoe, in
the Foot of the Eagle a Thunderbolt; the Word,

PRAESIDIA MAJESTATIS. The Fifth, a Bundle of Javelins; the Word,

UNITAS. The Sixth, two Hands joined athwart the Escutcheon, as from the
Clouds, holding a Caduceus with a Crown; the Word,

FID^ ET CONSILIO. The Seventh, Arms laid down, Guns, Pikes, Ensigns, Swords;
the Word,

CONDUNTUR, NON CONTUNDUNTUR. The Eighth, a Caduceus, with a winged Hat above,
and Wings beneath, two Cornucopias coming out at the middle, supported by a
Garland; the Word,

VIRTUTI FORTUNA COMES. The Ninth, a Bright Star striking a gleam through the
midst of the Escutcheon; the Word,

MONSTRANT REGIBUS ASTRA VIAM. With these Figures is intermingled a Band of
twenty four Violins.

The Bases, and Capitals within this Triumph, are Brass, and the Pillars Steel.

The Triumph thus adorned, and the several Music playing, all pass through,
till such time as His Majesty comes to the middle of the Temple, at which time
the three principal living Figures, viz. CONCORD, LOVE, and TRUTH, who till
then had not been seen; are by the drawing of a Curtain discovered, and
entertain His Majesty with the following Song.

I.
Comes not here the King of Peace,
Who the Stars so long foretold,
From all VVoes should us release
Converting Iron-times to Gold?
II.
Behold, Behold!
Our Prince confirmed by Heavenly signs
Brings heating Balm,
Brings healing Balm, and Anodines,
To close our Wounds, and Pain assuage.
He comes with conquering Bays, and Palm
Where sweling Billows used to rage,
Gsiding on a suver Calm;
Proud Interests now no more ^ngage.
Chorus.
Let these arched Roofs resound,
Joining Instruments, and Voice,
Fright pale Spirits under Ground;
But let Heaven and Earth rejoice,
We our Happiness have found.
He, thus marching to be Crowned,
Attended with this glorious Train,
From civil Broils
Shall free these Isles,
Whilst He, and His Posterity shall reign.
I.
Who follow Trade, or study Arts,
Improving Pasture, or the Plow,
Or furrow Waves to foreign Parts,
Use your whole Endeavors now.
II.
His Brow, his Brow
Bids you Hearts, as well as Hands,
Together join,
Together joining bless these Lands;
Peace, and Concord, never poor,
Will make with Wealth this City shine,
Ships freight with Spice, and Golden Ore,
Your Fields with Houey, Milk, and Wine,
To supply our Neighbors Store.
The First Song ended, Concord addresses her self to His Majesty, in these
Words,

Welcome, great Sir, to CONCORD's Fan',
Which Your Return built up again;
You have her Fabric reared so high,
That the proud Turrets kiss the Sky.
Tumult by You, and Civil War
In Janus Gates imprisoned are,
By You the King of Truth, and Peace;
O, may Divisions ever cease!
Your sacred Brow the blushing Rose,
And Virgin Lilly twined enclose!
The Caledonian Thistle-Down
Combine with these t'adorn Your Crown.
No Discord in the Hybernian Harp!
Naught in our Duty flat, or sharp;
But all conspire, that You, as best,
May 'bove all other Kings be Blessed.
The Speech ended, His Majesty, at his going off, is entertained with the
following Song:

With all our Wishes, Sir, go on,
Our Charles three Nations Glory;
That Worlds of Eyes may look upon,
Behind, Sir, and before Ye;
Go, great Exemplar of our British Story;
Paternal Crowns assume,
That then Your Royal Name
May, registered by Fame,
Swell like a sweet Perfume,
Not writ in Marble, Brass, nor Gold,
Nor sparkling Gems,
Such as shine in Diadems,
Where all Nations may behold
With brighter Characters enrolled,
On the Azure Vellam of configur'd Stars,
Who fixed with gentle Smiles
Two fluctuating Isles,
And built well-grounded Peace on Civil Wars.
On the little Conduit, at the lower End of Cheap Side are placed four Figures,
or Nymphs, each of them having an Escutcheon in the one Hand, and a Pendent in
the other.

In a Balcony, erected at the Entrance of Paternoster Row, are placed His
Majesty's Drums and Fife; the number of Persons, eight.

Between that and Ludgate there are two other Balconies erected: In one, is
placed a Band of six Waits; In the other, six Drums.

On the Top of Ludgate six Trumpets.

At Fleet-Bridge a Band of six Waits.

On Fleet-Conduit are six Figures, or Nymphs, clad in White, each with an
Escutcheon in one Hand, and a Pendent in the other; as also a Band of six
Waits. And on the Lanthorn of the Conduit is the Figure of Temperance, mixing
Water and Wine.

IN Fleetstreet, near White Friars, stands the fourth Irsumphal Arch
representing the Garden of PLENTY; it is of two Stories, one of the Dorick
Order, the other of the Ionick. The Capitals have not their just Measure, but
incline to the Modern Architecture.

Upon the great Shield over the Arch, in large Capitals, this Inscription,

UBERITATI Over the Postern, on the South Side of the Entrance is BACCHUS, in a
Chariot, drawn by Leopards, his Mantle a Panther's Skin; his Crown, of Grapes,
a Thyrsus with Ivy in his left Hand; a Cup in his right: underneath,

LIBER PATER. The Painting over this represents SILENUS on his Ass, Satyrs
dancing round about, in Drunken and Antic Postures; the Prospect, a Vineyard.

On the North-side opposite, Ceres, drawn in a Chariot by winged Dragons, and
crowned with Ears of Corn, in her left Hand, Poppy; in her right, a blazing
Torch. The Painting over her is a Description of Harvest; with

CERES AUG. On the VVest-side of the Arch, over the South-Postern, the Goddess
FLORA, in a various Colored Habit; in one Hand, Red and White Roses; in the
other, Lilies; on her Head, a Garland of several other Flowers.

The Painting over this, a Garden, with Walks, Statues, Fountains, Flowers, and
Figures of Men and Women walking.

Opposite to this, on the North-side, the Goddess POMONA, crowned with a
Garland of several Fruits; in her right Hand, the Sun; in her left Hand, a
Wand; At her Feet, all Sorts of Graffing, and Gardening Tools.

The Painting above, an Orchard.

On the Corners, four living Figures; above, the four Seasons of the Year.

In the Niches stand four Figures, representing the four Winds.

EURUS, a Black-Moor with Black wings! his Emblem, the Sun rising, and a fair
plain Country; his Motto,

AD AURORAM NABATHAEAQ. REGNA. BOREAS, instead of Feet, two Serpents Tails, his
Wings covered with Snow; his Emblem, a rocky Mountainous Country, and the
Pleiades rising over it; his Motto,

SCYTHIAM SEPTEMQ. TRIONES
HORRIFER INVADIT --
AUSTER, in a dark-colored Habit, with Wings like Clouds; his Emblem a Cloudy
Sky and Showers; his Motto,

NUBIBUS ASSIDUIS PLUVIAQ. MADESCIT. ZEPHYRUS, like an Adonis with Wings; the
Emblem, a Flowery Plain; the Word,

-- TEPENTIBUS AURIS
DEMULCET --
The great Figure on the top of all represents PLENTY, crowned, a Branch of
Palm in her right Hand, a Cornucopiae in her left.

The Music aloft on both sides, and on the two Balconies within, are twelve
Waits, six Trumpets, and three Drums.

At a convenient distance before this structure, are two Stages erected,
divided, planted, and adorned like Gardens, each of them eight Yards in length,
five in breadth. Upon that on the North-side sits a Woman representing PLENTY,
crowned with a Garland of diverse Flowers, clad in a Green Vestment embroidered
with Gold, holding a Cornucopiae: Her Attendants, two Virgins.

At His Majesty's approach to the Arch, this Person representing PLENTY rises
up, and makes address to Him in these Words;

Great Sir, the Star, which, at Your Happy Birth,
Joy'd with his Beams, at Noon, the wondering Earth
Did with auspictous luster, then presage
The glittering Plenty of this golden Age;
The Clouds blownore, which long our joys or'ecast,
And the sad Winter of Your absence past;
See! the three smiling Seasons of the Year
Agree at once to bid You Welcome here;
Her Homage Dutious Flora comes to pay;
With Her Enameled Treasure strows Your Way:
Ceres, and Pales, with a bounteous Hand,
Diffuse their Plenty over all Your Land;
And Bacchus is so Lavish of his Store,
That Wine flows now where Water ran before,
Thus Seasons, Men, and Gods their Joy express;
To see Your Triumph, and our Happiness.
His Majesty, having passed the four Triumphal Arches is, at Temple Bar,
entertained with the View of a delightful Boscage, full of several Beasts, both
Tame, and Savage, as also several living Figures, and Music of eight Waits.
But this being the Limit of the Citie's Liberty, must be so likewise of our
Description.

THE Parts of which this Entertainment consists, were carried on by several
Persons, who performed all to Admiration, and, considering the Shortness of the
Warning, much beyond what could have been imagined.

The Architectural Part by Mr. Peter Mills, Surveyor of the City, and another
Person, who desires to have his Name concealed.

The Carpentry, by Mr. John Scot, Mr. William Pope, Mr. Thomas Wratton, and Mr.
Roger Jerman.

The Painting, by Mr. William Lightfoot, and Mr. Andrew Dacres.

The Joyner's Work, by Mr. Thomas Whiting.

The Carver's Work, by Mr. Richard Clear,

The Principal Parts of the Music, by His Majesty's Servants; all Composed by
Matthew Lock Esquire Composer in Ordinary to his Majesty.

By reason of some fictitious Printed Papers of the Manner of His Majesty's
intended Proceeding through London, on Monday the two and twentieth of this
instant April, lately spread abroad; it is thought fit, for better
Satisfaction, to Publish this Copy of that, which is by Authority appointed.

THE CAVALCADE, OR His MAJESTY'S March through the City of London toward His
CORONATION, Monday, April 22th.
THE Duke of York's Horse-guard. Messengers of the Chamber. Esquires to the
Knights of the Bath. Knight Harbinger, Sergeant Porter. Sewers of the Chamber.
Quarter-Waiters. The Six Clerks of the Chancery. Clerks Of the Signet, Clerks
Privy Seal, Clerks Council, Clerks Parliament, Clerks Crown.
Chaplains having Dignities, ten in Number. The King's Advocare, and
Remembrancer. The King's Learned Council at Law. Masters of the Chancery.
King's puisne Sergeants. King's Attorney, and Solicitor. King's Eldest
Sergeants. Secretaries of the French, and Latin Tongues. Gentlemen Ushers
Daily Waiters. Sewers, Carvers, and Cup-bearers in Ordinary. Esquires of the
Body. Masters of standing Offices, being no Council ours, viz. Of the Teats,
Revels, Ceremonies, Armory, Wardrobe, Ordnance. Masters of the Requests.
Chamberlains of the Exchequer. Barons of the Exchequer, and Judges of the Law,
according to their Dignities. Lord Chief Baron, and Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas. Mr. of the Rolls, Chief Justice. Trumpets. Gentlemen of the
Privy-Chamber. Knights of the Bath. Knight Marshal, Treasurer of the the
Chamber, Master of the Jewel-house. Barons younger Sons. Viscounts younger
Sons. Knights of the Privy Council. Barons Eldest Sons. Earls youngest Sons.
Viscounts Eldest Sons. The Trumpets, and Sergeant Trumpets. Two Pursivants at
Arms. Barons. Marquesses younger Sons. Earls Eldest Sons. Two Pursivants at
Arms. Viscounts. Dukes younger Sons. Marquesses Eldest Sons. Two Heralds.
Earls. Earl Marshal: and Lord Chamberlain of the Household. Dukes Eldest Sons.
Two Heralds. Marquesses. Dukes. Ser. at Arms. Clarencieux and Norroy. Ser. at
Arms. Lord Treasurer, Lord Chancellor. Lord High Steward. Two Persons
Representing the Dukes of Normandy and Aquitain. Gent. Usher, Garter, L. Mayor.
The Duke of York alone. The Lord High Constable of England. The Lord great
Chamberlain of England. The Sword born by the Duke of Richmond. The King.
Equerries, and Footmen next His Majesty. Gentlemen, and Pensioners without
them. The Master of the Horse, leading a spare Horse. The Vice Chamberlain to
the King. Captain of the Penfioners. Captain of the Guard. The King's
Horse-guard. The Guard. The General's Horse-guard.

This is to advertise, that the Formality for making the Knights of the Bath,
and the Catalogue of them, which are lately Printed, are very Erroneous, and
False: They will come forth very shortly Exact, and by Authority.

FINIS.
BY the Common Council of London, these Entertainments of his Sacred MAJESTY,
were appointed to be managed by a Committee consisting of nine Aldermen, and
fifteen Commoners, and others, their Names, these;

Aldermen, Sir Tho. Adams Knight and Baronet. Sir Tho. Aleyn, Knight and
Baronet. Mr. Ald. Fowke. Sir William Thompson, Knight. Sir Jo. Frederick,
Knight. Sir Jo. Robinson, Knight and Baronet. Sir Antho. Bateman, Knight. Sir
Jo. Laurence, Knight. Sir Richard Ford, Knight.
Commoners, Sir Will. Bateman, Knight. Sir Lau. Bromfield, Knight. Sir Tho.
Bludworth, Knight. Sir Jo. Cutler, Knight and Baronet. Sir Theoph. Bidulph,
Knight. Sir Will. Vincent, Knight. Deputy Aylmer. Deputy Hickman. Mr. Saunders.
Colonel Trussel. Colonel Clagett. Mr. Penning. Colonel Nevil. Mr.
Osbaldston. Mr. Mascal.

These Worthy Members of this Honorable City, in Order to this Solemnity, have
raised Considerable Sums of Money, which by the several Companies were freely
Contributed, in expression of their Loyalty.

They have Ordered, that Signs be taken down, the Streets Railed on both sides,
the Houses, and Windows adorned with rich Carpers, and Tapistry.

The Aldermen have thought fit to place themselves in Cheapside, on the Front,
or East side of the Triumphal Arch. At his Majesty's coming thither, the
Recorder of London, Sir William Wild, salutes him with a Congratulatory
Oration, which done, He makes. Him an humble Present from the CITY, in
Testimony of their dutyful Affection.

Along the Streets on the North-side, stand the Companies with their several
Trophies, and other Ornaments: disposed nearer or farther from the Triumphal
Arches, according to their particular Dignities; opposite to whom (on the
South Side) are placed the Trained Bands.

In St. Paul's Churchyard upon a Scaffold, erected for that purpose, stand the
Children of Christ's Hospital in blew Coats, to which belong bleven hundred, a
numerous Testimony of the Charity of this Honorable City; as soon as His
Majesty is come within View, they begin to sing a Hymn, and at His approach,
one of them makes a Speech in Prose; which ended, and His Majesty passing on,
they sing another Hymn.

FINIS.

