ORDERS TO BE OBSERVED IN THE Marching, Imbattelling, Fighting, and Dismarching
of the City Forces. May 23. 1644.

LONDON: Printed 1644.

Orders to be observed, etc.
Six Regiments of the City Forces being then abroad upon the Public Service,
there is now left of the Forces within the line of Communication only twelve
Regiments.

The six Regiments of the London Trained Bands, containing 40 Companies.

Sir James Harringtons Regiment, being the Trained Band of Westminster and that
Liberty, containing 8 Compainies.

Colonel Hudsons Regiment, being that of Southwarke, containing 8 Companies.

4 Regiments of Auxiliaries, containing 20 Companies.

Colonel Willoubies Regiment being of the Hamblets, containing 8 Companies. In
all 84.

All the Companies of each several Regiment more then six Companies in a
Regiment, are to be taken off for the guard of the City and Parliament as by
order given, the rest being 12 Regiments, 6 Companies in a Regiment are to
march to Hide-Parke, where they are desired to be by 10 of the clock in the
Morning, observing such orders as are formerly given in drawing up 72 Companies
the other 12 are disposed of as follows:

Seven Companies to guard the Works and Forts upon the North side of the River.

Two Companies to guard the Forts upon the South River.

One Company for Westminster.

The other two are appointed for the guard of the City, viz. one Company at the
Exchange, the other Company half at the Tower Hill, the other half at Paul's.

The Order given out for the march, were sent the 21 day to the Lieutenant
Colonells of the Trained Bands for London, and the Colonells of the other
Regiments, and are as follows*

Lieutenant Colonel Hooker, May 21. 1644.
The March.
YOu are hereby required to order the Captains of your Regiment to cause the
Drummers to beat to morrow and by Proclamation warn all the Soldiers listed in
their several Bands to attend their Colors on Thursday morning next, being
the 23 of this instant May in their own persons by six of the clock at the
furthest at their ordinary meeting place in their Ward, and from thence to
march completely armed in single companies unto Tower Hill, or some other
convenient place and there drawing up into a Regiment in two divisions sending
for your Colonel, and placing your Field Officers and Captains as is
accustomed, you are to march directly to Hide-Parke, not staying for any other
Regiment: where you are to draw up into the ground that your Quartermaster
shall have set out for you, and you are to be there by ten of the clock, that
the rest of the work of the day may there be performed.

The Imbattelling.
Being come to Hide-Parke, the ground assigned, let each Regiment reduce their
two divisions into one in this manner: the Grand Reare-division standing in
eaven Front with the other Grand Division, command the Pikes to stand fast,
then face about all the Musketeers, and march them clear of their Pikes,
facing them again to the proper Front, then close all the Pikes of both
Divisions two, three foot, close also the Musketeers that march in the Van
Grand Division to six foot, and let them face to the right, and march till they
be clear of their Pikes, then face them to the Front proper, and Flank their
Pikes, close also the Musketeers of the Reere Grand Division in like manner,
and let them draw up, and flank the left wing of the Pikes, let this be done
near the ground where the Quartermaster for that Regiment has placed their
Banners, that they may immediately draw up to their gound, and so stand in
eaven Front, as in the figure following.

Lo. Major C. Harsnet C. Hudson C. Warner C. Pinder C. Adams 1 12 8 5 9 4

3 10 6 7 11 2 C. Pennington C. Willoughby C. Towes C. Harrington C. Shepherd
C. Atkins

diagram for regiment formation

This done, and the space of a 100 foot being left between Regiment and
regiment, whilst the Regiments stand thus in two eaven Fronts, let the
Ordnance, with a file of Musketeers from each Company be drawn off to the
Flanks, half to the right and half to the left, each guard of such
Musketeers to be commanded by a Captain a Lieutenant, and two Sergeants to be
sent from these Regiments.

After this when the Forces have stood a space thus to be viewed, let two
Regiments in each battle, to wi^, in the upper ground, the Regement next on
the left my Lord Majors, and the other on the right of Alderman Adams, and
their opposites which fall to be the four Auxiliaries face about, march 20
paces or more if there be ground below the reere of the standing Regiments,
then face about to your Front proper, and so both battles to stand as in the
figure following:

diagram for regiment formation

This done, the field being cleared of the spectators between the two Fronts,
let the Colonel next unto the Ordinance on the upper side of the Field, upon
both Flanks, give the Gunners order to fire their Ordnance once over: which the
opposites must answer in like manner.

The Fight.
After this, the Colonel of each Regiment of the Auxiliaries, send forth 5 or
six files of Musketeers in a Division, with a Sergeant before the Battles
of the Van, where their opposites are to meet them in like manner; and thus to
continue skirmishing in small parties betwixt battle and battle, till all
the Musketeers of the Reserves, which are the 4 Regiments placed in the Reere
have fired once over: and in all your firings, let order be given to present at
the knee, and not breast-high: And so soon as all these are returned, let a
signal be given to the Gunners to give fire again the second time.

Immediately after the firing of the Ordnance, and the field cleared betwixt
the Battles, let all the advanced Regiments give fire together as follows:

Having left intervailes betwixt every 4. and 5. Ranks to wheel off the
Musketeers, let the Sergeants of each Division lead forth two Ranks 10 paces
before the body altogether, and having fired, then fall in the rear of their
own men, the body moving slowly after.

The second time to fire even in the front, and so cease altogether, and
retreat to their first ground.

Then let the 4 Regiments the Reserves, march up to have their Rear clear of
them that fought, and observe the same Fight and Firings that the other did,
and so fall back and take their places in eaven Front as at first.

This done, and the people cleared, let all the Forces slowly moving forward,
give fire in eaven front thrice over, and no more; but not come within 6 pikes
lengths of their opposites; and so stand, making an eaven front, and display
their Colors.

Dismarching.
The Fight being ended, let the Colonels take their own Drakes and Carts of
Ammunition, placing them in the Van of the Regiment, as they marched forth: and
then it it is desired, that pales may be taken down toward Tybourn-road, that
the Regiments may march away as well through Holborne as the Strand. My Lord
Majors Regiment begins First in Tibourne road; and those that joined with
him, successively after: Colonel Atkins Regiment leading First forth at the
other gate by the Park corner; and the other Regiments that joined with him,
successively after him.

FINIS.

