The OFFICE of PUBLIC ADVICE, Newly set up in several places in and about
London and Westminster, BY AVTHORITY.
BEcause the life of all Intercourse is quickness of Return, and the same can
hardly be had, except the things, about which the said Intercourse is
practiced, come to the knowledge of Men concerned therein, which hitherto has
been, in a manner, altogether wanting, the several occasions of private Men,
being for the most part unknown to others. Therefore the Undertakers of the
Offices of Public Advice have found out a new way, which every one that shall
make a trial of not being biased, or any way interessed to the contrary, will
soon judge to be very advantageous to the Commonwealth, and to have fully
attained the true means of quickening the said intercourse. The design
therefore of the said Undertakers, and the way how they intend to manage the
same, is as follows.

The said Undertakers have erected several Offices or Places, to any of which
all persons whatsoever may repair, there to Enter into the Register Books of
the said Places respectively, the Occasions they have to dispose of any of the
Things hereafter mentioned; which being thus Entered, the Undertakers will
weekly put forth and publish a Book of Intelligence in Print, wherein all the
particular Occasions by them so Entered, as aforesaid, shall be methodically set
down, and so made known to all the Nation; which Book shall be publicly sold
every Tuesday morning at every Stationers Shop; and by such other hands, and at
such rates, as other Books of Intelligence are ordinarily sold: And by this way
great advantage will accrue to the Public, and che^fly to the Parties so
Entering their occasions; it being more likely, that the Things they are to
dispose of, being by this means generally made known to all, more Chapmen will
be found for the same, than if they should only take such blind ways of
Addresses heretofore made use of. Besides, in this new way, Fees are only
taken of one of the two Parties concurring to a Bargain, and both are as well
served, as can be desired of such an Office: Whereas in the ways formerly used
by others, both Parties are to pay Fees, and few, if any, come to be
effectually served in what they aimed at. The Undertakers will bind
themselves, after the Entering of such Occasions, to Print each Advice so Entered
for Four weeks together in the said Book, unless the Parties shall desire a
longer publishing; which, upon renewing of their Entering and Fees, shall be
continued as long as they please.

To give notice The several Occasions, about which the Undertakers intend to
give Intelligence in the said Book, and the Fees which they take for the same,
are chiefly these, Fees for Entering per Month.
Of all such Ships and Vessels as are to go out, either from the Port of
London, or any other Port in England, Scotland, or Ireland, with the time of
their going forth, the place they lie at, the Port they are bound to, their
Names, Burden, and Strength, the Names of the Masters, etc. As also of all such
Ships and Vessels as are to be Sold or Let to Freight For Ships above 100
Tuns, a penny per Tun; for Ships under 100 Tuns, Six shillings.
Of all such Tacklings, Riggings, and Ship Furnitures whatsoever, as are to be
sold. If under the value of Thirty pounds, Five shillings; if above the value
of Thirty pounds, the same Fee of Five shillings, and one penny per pound for
the overplus.
Of all such Masters or Captains, Pilots, Masters-Mates, Pursers, Boat-Swains,
Gunners, Carpenters, Shipwrights, Surgeons, etc: that want Employments Six
shillings.
Of any other Seamen, of what rank soever, that desire to be employed Three
shillings.
Of all Stage Coaches, Wagons, Carriers, or Horses, to be furnished at certain
places, at constant times, to go into any part of the Commonwealth: The days of
their going; the places they ^ye at; the rates they take, etc. Eight shillings.
Of all Hackney-Coaches, Wagons, Carriers, or Horses to be Let upon any
Journeys into any part of the Commonwealth; the places they lie at, and the
rates they take, etc. Six shillings.
Of Lands, Houses, Annuities, in City or Country, to be Sold, Morgaged or
Purchased: A penny per pound of the value.
Of Houses to be Let by Lease or Yearly Rent in the City, or Houses and Lands
in any other part of the Commonwealth, which shall be under the yearly Rent of
Thirty pounds, Five shillings. If above the Rent of Thirty pounds, the same Fee
of Five shillings, adding a penny per pound for the overplus of the said Rent.
Of all Lodgings to be Let in the City, or near the City, either furnished or
unfurnished; Persons to be Boarded, or not, by the Year, Month or Week;
Warehouses, Cellars, etc. to be Let Five shillings.
Of Money to be put or taken at Interest: Of Money to be lent or borrowed upon
Plate, Jewels, or other sufficient Pawn. Of any Household Stuff, Clothes, or
other moveable Goods, to be sold or bought at the second hand. Of Coaches, or
any Furniture belonging to the same. Horses or Cattle of all sorts to be sold.
If under the value of Thirty pounds, Five shillings; if above the value of
Thirty pounds, the same Fee of Five shillings and one penny per pound for the
overplus.
Of any Wares, Merchandises, or other Commodities whatsoever, to be sold or
bought, either by Wholesale or in Retail. If under the value of Thirty pounds,
Five shillings; if above the value of Thirty pounds, the same Fee of Five
shillings, and one penny per pound for the overplus.
Of any Goods, Horses, or any Beasts, or Cattle stolen or strayed Six shillings.
Of any that would be employed as Agents or Messengers about businesses, to any
part of the Commonwealth, or beyond Seas; or as Overseers and Surveyors of any
Lands or Estates in Ireland, or other parts of the Commonwealth; or as
Interpreters or Agents for Strangers, that are ignorant of the Language or
Affairs of this Nation Five shillings.
Of Professors of Sciences, Teachers of Hebrew, Greek Latin, English, French,
Italian, Dutch, or any other Languages. Of Tutors or Governors for Noblemen or
Gentlemen's Children: Of School-Misters, or School-Mastresses of the better
sort: Of Writing-Masters, Dancing-Masters, Singing-Masters, Lute or Guittare
Masters, etc. Of Stewards, Bailiffs of Manors, Secretaries, Gentlemen-Ushers,
etc. Of Book-keepers, Cash-keepers to Merchants, or others. Of Clerks of
Counselors, Justices of Peace, Attorneys, Solicitors, Scriveners, Brewers,
Woodmongers, etc. Ten shillings.
Of Petti-School-Masters and School Mistresses. Of Serving men or Serving-women
of all sorts and degrees; Journeymen, Workmen, etc. Of all Professions
whatsoever Four shillings.
Of Nurse-keepers and Nurses, dry and wet, in House or abroad, in City or
Country Four shillings.
Of Apprentices to be bound of any Profession or Calling. Six shillings.
Of Servants or Apprentices run from their Masters Eight shillings.
Of Physicians and others, that have any rare and approved Receipt or Medicine
for any Pain or Disease: Of such as having such Pains, look for any one to help
them: Of such as will make known any good and lawful Claim to any Real or
Personal Estate Ten shillings.
Of Books Printed or intended to be Printed Five shillings.
Of Wood and Timber to be Sold. If under the value of Thirty pounds, Five
shillings; if above the value of Thirty pounds, the same Fee of Five shillings,
and one penny per pound for the overplus.
And generally of all sorts of other Occasions: For which the Fees shall be
proportionable, either to the abovesaid Fees, or to the nature of the thing it
self; which considering the great Charges and Trouble the Undertakers are to be
at in publishing Four weeks together each Advice, ought not to be thought too
high.
For the better Ease and Accommodation of the People, the Undertakers have been
willing to be at the charge of Erecting and Maintaining several Offices, Eight
in number, in all the Parts and Quarters of the City and Suburbs, that so no
persons may be put to any trouble for the serving of their respective
Occasions, if they do but observe the times set down for each Office to be
open. The places are these following.

In East-Smithfield near St. Katherines, by the Waterside, at one Mr. Greens a
Surgeon, at the sign of the Hamburgh-Arms, over against the sign of the Red
Lione

In Sherburn-Lane's end, next to Lumbard-Street, at one Mr. Gasse's, over
against the White Heart.

In Barbican, at one Mr Peryam's, over against the sign of the George, next
door to the sign of the Pomegranate.

In Fuller's Rents in Holborn, at one Mr. Tho. Slaynets, at the three Arrows

In White-Friers, at the Entry, next to the Green Dragon Tavern, at one Mr.
Gee's, over against the sign of the Black Bull-head.

In the Strand, at one Mistress Salisburies, at the sign of the White Swan with
two Necks, over against the sign of the Cross Keys, by York House.

In Westminster, in Kings Street, at one Mr. Hudsons, at the sign of the
Half Moon, between the Rose and Crown, and the Black Bell.

In Southwark, at Mr. Newtons, at the sign of the Queen's-Head Inn, on St.
Margarets Hill.

Such as shall have Occasion, may repair to any of the said place; next to
their own Habitations upon the days following, viz.

To the Offices of East-Smithfield and Holborn, every Wednesday and Friday in
the Morning, from Eight to Eleven a Clock.

To the Offices of Sherburn-Lane and White Friars, upon the same days, viz.
From Twelve at Noon to Four in the Afternoon in Sherburn-Lane and from Two to
Five in the Afternoon in White-Friers.

To the Offices of Southwark and the Strand, upon every Thursday and Saturday
in the Morning from Eight to Eleven a Clock.

To the Offices of Barbican and Westminster, upon the same days in the
Afternoon, from Two to Five a Clock.

The Undertakers intend, God willing, to begin to put forth the said Printed
weekly Books upon Tuesday, the 26 day of May, 1657. And in the mean while, such
as will, may from this 14 day of May, and so forward, bring in their Notes to
the Offices to be Entered.

The Parties that shall repair to the said Offices for any purpose, are
desired, for better order sake, to bring their desires in writing, if possible,
and their Notes being Entered, they shall be subscribed and returned to them by
the Clerk of the Office, for the greater Security of those that bring the said
Notes. And withal they are desired. That in case the Commodities they have to
dispose of, shall be disposed of before the end of the Four weeks, they would be
pleased to give or send notice of it to the said Office, where their Notes have
been Entered. And for avoiding any abuse therein, they are desired to send back
the Notes so subscribed, as a token to the Clerk of the said Office. They are
further desired to specify in their several Notes, the price and value of
their several Occasions, with the other Particulars concerning them, according
to the Premises.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, dwelling in Thames Street over against
Bainards Castle. 1657.


