ORDERS Established in the Popish general Assembly, Held (under the specious
pretense of Supreme Authority, and being his Majesty's good Subjects) at the
City of KILKENNY IN IRELAND.

Wherein Both Root and Branches of the English Nation, as also the very Essence
of Protestant Religion are wholly struck at.

Impune quaelibet facere id est Regemesse. LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop,
for Lawrence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at the Sugar-loafe within Temple
Bar, 1643.

Orders made and established by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
rest of the General Assembly for the Kingdom of Ireland, met at the City of
Kilkenny the 24th day of October Anno Dom. 1642. and in the 18th year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES by the Grace of God King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
IMprimis, That the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland shall and may have and
enjoy the Privileges and Immunities, according to the great Charter made and
declared within the Realm of England in the ninth year of King Henry the
third, sometimes King of England, and Lord of Ireland, and afterward enacted
and confirmed in this Realm of Ireland; and that the Common Law of England, and
all the Statutes of force in this Kingdom which are not against the Catholic
Roman Religion, or the liberties of the Natives and other liberties of this
Kingdom, shall be observed throughout the whole Kingdom, and that all
proceedings in civil and criminal causes shall be according to the said laws.

2. Item, That all and every person and persons within this Realm shall bear
Faith and true Allegiance unto our Sovereign Lord King Charles by the Grace of
God King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, his Heirs, and lawful
Successors, and shall uphold and maintain his and their Rights, and lawful
Prerogatives with the utmost skill and power of such person or persons, against
all manner of persons whatsoever.

3. Item, That the common Laws of England and Ireland, and the said Statutes,
called the great Charter, and every Clause, Branch, and Article thereof, and
all other Statutes confirming, expounding, or declaring the same, shall be
punctually observed within this Kingdom, so far forth as the condition of
the present times, during these times, can by possibilities give way thereunto;
and after the war is ended, the same to be observed without any limitation or
restriction whatsoever.

4. In as much as the City of Dublin is the usual and principal seat of
Justice of this Kingdom, where the Parliament and ordinary Courts were held,
and some other places where principal Councels were sometimes kept, are as yet
possessed and commanded by the Malignant party, who are enemies to God and
their King, and his Majesty's well affected Subjects; this Assembly is
necessitated, during this war in some formallities and circumstances, to
deviate from the proceedings prescribed by the said Laws and Statutes,
nevertheless retains the substance and offense thereof, so far forth as
the endless malice and cruelty of their enemies, the said Malignant party does
permit; who shut up the said places, and other passages and ways to his
Majesty's Justice and Mercy, from his Majesty's well affected Subjects of this
Kingdom: For the exaltation therefore of the holy Roman Catholic Church, for
the advancement of his Majesty's service, and the preservation of the lives,
estates, and liberties of his Majesty's true Subjects of this Kingdom, against
the Injustice, Murders, Massacres, Rapes, Depredations, Robberies, Burning,
frequent breaches of Public Faith, and Quarter and Destruction daily
perpetrated and acted upon his Majesty's said Subjects, and advised contrived
and daily executed by the said Malignant party; some of them mannaging the
Government and Affairs of State in Dublin, and some other parts of this
Kingdom, to his Highness greatest disservice, and complying with their
Confederates, the Malignant party, in England and elsewhere; who (as it is
manifest to all the world) do complot and practice to dishonor and destroy
his Majesty, his Royal Consort the Queen, their Issue, and Monarchall
Government, which is of most dangerous Consequence to all the Monarchs and
Princes of Christendom.

The said Assembly does Order and establish a Council by name of a Supreme
Council, of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland, who are to consist of the
number of four and twenty, to be forthwith named by the Assembly; whereof
twelve at the least to be forthwith named, shall reside in this Kingdom, or
where else they shall think expedient; and the Members of the said Council
shall have equal Votes, and two parts of three or more concurring, present
Votes to conclude; and no fewer to sit in Council then nine, whereof seven at
least are to concur: and of the four and twenty a President shall be named
by the Assembly, who is to be one of the said twelve resident; and if in case
of his death, absence, or sickness, the rest of these who shall be resident,
may name a Vice President of the said four and twenty: and the said Council
shall have the Power and Pre-eminence following, viz.

The Lords Generals, and all other Commanders of Armies, and civil Magistrates
and Officers in the several Provinces shall observe their Orders and Decrees,
and shall do nothing contrary to their directions, and shall give them speedy
advertisement and account of their proceedings and actions, with as much
expedition as may be. That the said Council shall have power to order and
determine all such matters as by this Assembly shall be left undetermined, and
shall be recommended unto them, and their Orders therein to be of force until
the next Assembly, and after until the same be revoked.

That the said Council shall have power and authority to do and execute all
manner of Acts and things conducing to the advancement of the Catholic Cause,
and good of this Kingdom, and concerning this war, as if done by the
Assembly; and shall have power to hear and determine all matters capital,
criminal, or civil, excepting the right or title of Land.

That the Generals, or other Commanders of Armies, and all Governors or civil
Magistrates, and all other Persons within this Realm, shall obey the Orders
and Decrees of the said Council touching the present Service.

That the Council shall have for their Guard the number of five hundred Foot
and two hundred Horse, to be equally extracted out of the Armies of the four
Provinces.

5. Item, It is further ordered and established, that in every Province of this
Kingdom there shall be a Provincial Council, and in every County a County
Council: the Provincial Council to be composed of the number of two of each
County, and the said Provincial Council shall choose a President of themselves.

6. That the Provincial Council shall sit four times a year, and oftener if
there be cause for it; that they shall have power and authority to renew or
reverse the Judgment of the County Council, the party complaining entering
security, de adjudicat. solvend. and shall (during the trouble) have power to
hear and determine all matters of the Crown, as Judges of Oyer and Terminer,
and Goal delivery, were wont to do, so that no spiritual person be present
at the determining of matters of blood; and shall have power to hear and
determine all civil Causes, and to establish Rents and Possessions, so they
meddle not with the title of land other then in case of Dower or Jointure: and
the Sheriffs, Provincial Generals, and all Commanders of the Armies, in case
of disobedience, are respectively required to execute the Decrees and Orders;
and in case of Debts and Accounts, great consideration is to be had of the
disabilities of Creditors occasioned by the war.

7. Item, In every County there shall be a County Council, consisting of one
or two of each Barony, at the election of the County: and where there are not
Baronies, the Council of such County to consist of the number of twelve, and
the said County Council shall have power and authority in all points, as
Justices of the Peace, to hear and determine all matters concerning the
Offices of the Justices of Peace, and all matters of the Crown happening
within every such County; and the Delinquent, being a Freeholder, may if he
please have his trial in the Province, and hear and determine debts,
trespasses, and personal demands, and to do all things as Justices of the
Peace were accustomed to do, and to restore and establish Possessions taken by
force or fraud since these troubles; and likewise to take a special care, that
Tenants and Farmers be kept to their Farms where they were used, and to be
preserved from extortion and oppression; and that Trades, Tradesmen,
Manufactures, Agriculture, and Husbandry be maintained and duly kept.

8. Item, In every County there shall be Corronors, high Sheriffs, high
Constables, petty Constables, and Goalors, who are to do their respective
Offices as accustomed; the high Sheriff to be confirmed or nominated by the
Supreme Council out of three to be presented by the County Council, and the
high Sheriff is required to execute the Command, Orders, and Decrees of the
Provincial and County Council.

9. Item, In Cities and Towns Corporate Justice is to be done, and the Laws
executed as is accustomed.

10. Item, In every County the high Sheriff shall be Provost Marshiall, and
shall have power to execute a lay man not worth five pounds, and none other,
for murder, manslaughter, burglary, theft, robbery, or other capital offense,
provided the party to be executed may have four and twenty hours time to
prepare his soul; and that the Supreme or Provincial Council shall and may
name more Provost Marshialls, as they shall think expedient, quallified with
the like authority.

11. Item, It is further ordered, that no temporal Government or Jurisdiction
shall be assumed, kept, or exercised in this Kingdom, or within any County or
Province thereof, during these troubles, other then is before expressed, except
such Jurisdiction and Government as is, or shall be, approved by this General
Assembly, or the Supreme Council.

12. Item, It is further ordered, that whosoever has entered, since the first
day of October 1641. or shall hereafter, during the continuance of the war in
this Kingdom, enter into the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, at or
immediately before the first day of October, either by himself or his under
Tenants, or by receiving the Rents, Issues, or Profits thereof, shall
immediately restore, upon demand, the said Possession to the party or parties
so put out, with such reasonable damages, as the Council Provincial or
Supreme shall think fit; and if the party refuse to restore the said Possession
as aforesaid, upon demand of the party so put out, his heirs or assigns, made
to the said possessor, his servants, or adherents in the premises or
publication of this Order within the parish where such land lies, that upon
his or their denial thereof, or default therein, he, his heirs and assigns
shall be for ever after debarred and secluded from all and every right, title,
interest, and demand which he or they may make or pretend to all or any the
said lands, tenements, or hereditaments: and if after such denial or default
made, the said party, his heirs or assigns shall not immediately restore the
possession of the said lands, tenements, or hereditaments so gained to the
party grieved, his heirs or assigns, that he, they, and his or their
adherents in the premises, shall be declared and proceeded with as enemies.
Provided, and so it is meant, that if any of the parties so put out be declared
a Neuter or enemy by the Supreme or Provincial Council; then the party who
gained the possession, as aforesaid, shall give up the possession to such
Person or Persons as shall be named either by the said Council Provincial, or
Supreme Council, to be disposed of toward the maintenance of the general
Cause, upon the pain and penalty aforesaid.

And as for the Rents and mean Profits of the said lands, ^^^^menes, and
hereditaments, and all kind of Rents, and the goods or chattels taken or
detained from any Catholic, as aforesaid; due satisfaction is to be made for
the same to the parties from whom the Rents, Goods, or Chattels were or shall
be detained, since these troubles begun, as the Provincial Council, or County
Council shall respectively order.

13. Item, It is further ordered and established for the removeall of evil
disorder and enmity, and to the end that all men may bend their thoughts and
actions to the Common Cause, that all possessions of Lands, and Hereditaments
shall continue and remain unto such as have already joined in this union, as
they have been for three years past* next before the beginning of these
troubles, and that no title of Lands shall be drawn into any debate or
question, until the next Assembly, other then in case of Morgages, Leases, and
particular estates de facto determined, or determinable by effluction or other
determination thereof.

14. Item, For the avoiding of national distinction between the subjects of
his Majesty's Dominions; which this Assembly does utterly detest and abhor, and
which ought not to be endured in a well governed Common wealth: It is ordered
and established, that upon pain of the highest punishment which may be
inflicted by authority of this Assembly, that every Roman Catholic, as well
English, Welsh, and Scotch; who was of that Profession before the troubles, and
who will come and please to reside in this Kingdom, and join in the present
union, shall be preserved and cherished in his life, goods, and estate by the
power, authority, and force (if need require it) of all the Catholics of
Ireland, as full and freely as any Native borne therein, and shall be acquitted
and eased of one third part in three parts to be divided, of public charges
or leavies, raised or to be raised for the maintenance of this holy war.

15. Item, And it is further ordered and established, that there shall be no
distinction or comparison made betwixt old Irish and old or new English, or
betwixt septs and families, or betwixt Citizens and Townsmen and Countrymen
joining in this union, on pain of the highest punishment that can be inflicted
by any the Counsels aforesaid, according to the natureland quality of the
offenses and division like to spring thence.

16. Item, It is further ordered and established, that all new Converts borne
in any his Majesty's Dominions, or elsewhere, without manifest occasion given by
the persons converted, to the contrary, and joining in this Cause, shall be
accounted Catholics and Natives to all intents and purposes.

17. Item, It is further ordered and established, that all Artificers,
Artizans, Navigators, and Mariners, not being Denizens, who shall please to
reside in this Kingdom, shall during their residence in this Kingdom, after
such time as they and their familles shall be here settled, have and enjoy their
free liberties and privileges of Natives in all respects.

Item, It is further ordered and established; that in regard of the present
estate and condition of this kingdom, especially if he a Catholic, or any other
Catholic, is admitted of, or permitted to continue in the Ins of Court, and to
the end the laudable laws of Eng. and Ireland may not die amidst the disasters
of these times one In of Court shall be erected in such place of this kingdom
as to the supreme Council shall be thought fit for the training of the Gentry of
this kingdom to the knowledge of these laws.

19. Item, It is further ordered and established, that no Lord, Gentleman, or
other person, shall raise or keep any company of soldiers, but such as shall be
authorized by the supreme Council, Provincial Council, or County Council, or
Magistrate, with their own corporate Towns, and that the Statute against Sesse
and Coin or Livery be duly put in execution; and that no company or soldiers
whatsoever shall be paid or relieved by the Country, excepting such as are; or
shall be enrolled in the Marshals list, and none shall be billited but by the
Constable.

20. Item, It is further ordered and established for the advancement of
learning, that in every Province of this kingdom, Free schools shall be erected
and maintained, so many and in such places and in such manner and form as to
the Metropolitan of the Diocese in their respective Provinces shall be thought
sit.

21. Item, It is further ordered and established, that the Kings Customs,
Rents, Revenues, Arreares, and Dues, and the Rents, Estates, and Profits of the
Lands, Hereditaments, Goods, and Chattells of the enemies which are, or shall
be declared by the Provincial or Supreme Council, or by the General
Council, be received and collected, and be disposed for his Majesty's use and
service.

Item, It is further ordered and established, that Church Lands and Tithes
impropriate in the Catholic owners before these troubles, and joining in this
Cause, may be left to them according to their several Estates, until the same
be disposed of by Parliament, they in the interim answering the Rents as
accustomed.

23. Item, It is further ordered and established, that in every County there be
Collectors and Receivers to be approved by the County Council for the same,
and that they be accomptable to the County Council for the same; which County
Council shall be accomptable to the Provincial Council therein halfe-yearly,
and the Provincial Council to the Supreme Council yearly, to the end the
same may not be concealed or misapplied.

24. Item, It is ordered and agreed, where any Archbishop, Bishop, or other
dignitory, or any other person or persons whatsoever, has or enjoys any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, Tithes, or Church livings in one County or
Province, or does or shall keep his or their residence in another County or
Province, and has his or their creation or nomination in any other County or
Province, where the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Tithes, or Church
livings to the general use shall be employed within the said County and
Province where the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Tithes, or Church
livings do lie, as by the several County Counsels respectively shall be
thought fit for the Public Cause.

25. Item, It is ordered and established by the General Assembly, that any
woman being a Roman Catholic, and wife of any Protestant, or Catholic that
has forsaken his houses, estate, and wife, and adhere unto the enemy; that
every such wife may enter into her Jointure (if any be conveyed unto her) or
may recover her thirds of her said husbands estate, as if her said husband were
actually dead; and that every such wife shall be in such condition and capacity
to sue and be impleaded, as if her husband had been exiled or banished the
Realm by judgment of Law, except the Provincial or Supreme Council in
particular cases order the contrary.

26. Item, It is ordered and established, that the possession of Protestant
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Dignitories, and Parsons in right of their
respective Churches, or their Tenements in the beginning of these troubles,
shall be deemed taken, and construed as the then possessions of the Catholic
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Dignitories, Pastors, and their Tenements
respectively to all intents and purposes, and that those possessions are
intended within the precedent Order for settlement of possessions.

27. Item, It is ordered and established, that no man being prisoner by
authority of any the Councels aforesaid, shall be enlarged without the Order of
the said Councels respectively, and that no protection be given to servants, or
other men of the enemies party without the like Order, or the Order of the
chief Commander of the Army in the several Provinces of Counties.

28. Item, Whereas abuses have been committed in some parts of this Kingdom,
in taking of Arms, Ammunition, and other Merchandises from Merchants arived in
Creeks, or Harbors far from their intended Port, by reason of tempest, or the
dangers of enemies, to the great discouragement of the Merchants: It is
therefore ordered and established, that where any Ship or Ships, or other
Vessels, shall come, or arrive in any Harbor, Bay, or Creek within this
Kingdom laden with Arms, Ammunition, or other Merchandises; that in such
cases all those who are, or shall be in Command in the adjacent Counties
respectively, shall protect and defend the said Merchants, their goods, and
servants, and shall at the charge of the said Merchants, procure carriage for
the said goods, and safely conveigh the same to the said Merchants intended
Port, and not to suffer the same, or any of the same under color of paying for
the same or otherwise, to be disposed of, or taken, before the same come to the
intended Port, and be entered into the List of the Commissioners, or by the
express direction in writing of the said Commissioners; and any that shall
rob, steal, or violently take away any of the said Goods, contrary to this
Order, shall be deemed and punished as enemies to the public good of this
Kingdom, and suffer death therefore.

29. Item, That certain Commissioners shall be appointed in every Port Town
of the Freemen and Residents therein, by the Provincial or Supreme Council,
for the viewing of all the Arms and Ammunition that shall be hereafter
imported into this Realm from beyond the Seas, and to certify the same to the
Supreme Council with all speed, and to prevent abuses in the sale, or issuing,
or disposing of them.

30. Item, It is ordered and established, that where Soldiers do run from
their Garrisons or Commanders, unto other Counties and Provinces, that the
Commanders or chief Governors of the said County or Province, upon complaint
made thereof, shall send back the said fugitive Soldiers to their Commanders,
to be dealt withal according unto Justice.

31. Item, It is ordered and established, that the Debts, and other Duties
owing to Creditors of this union, being Neuters and Enemies, shall be paid out
of the Goods, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of the said Neuters and
Enemies respectively, before any other public Charge be answered thereout.

32. Item, It is ordered and established, that no Soldiers, or other Persons,
without command from the County Council, meddle with the lands, or goods of
Neuters or Enemies.

33. Item, It is ordered and established, that to prevent the springing up of
all National distinctions, the Oath of Association or Union be taken solemnly
after confession and receiving the Sacrament, in the Parish Churches throughout
the Kingdom; and the names of all the Persons of Rank and Quality in every
parish, that takes the same, be enrolled in Parchment, and be returned, signed
and sealed by the Parish Priest, to the Ordinary of every Diocese, who is to
keep the same in his Treasury, and to certify a Copy thereof, under Seal, to
the Metropolitan, who is to keep that, and to certify a true Copy thereof,
under his Metropoliticall Seal, to the Rols of the Kingdom, where the same is
to be enrolled.

FINIS.

