GENERAL Own Oneales LETTER TO Collonell Monck WITH The Propositions of Owen
Oneale, the Lords, Gentry, and Commons of the Confederate Catholics of
ULSTER: To the most Honorable, and Potent, the Parliament of ENGLAND.

TOGETHER With Coll. MONCK his Answer. AND Collonell MONCKS Propositions to
Owen Oneale, and the rest of the Confederate Catholics of ULSTER.

June 28

LONDON, Printed for A. H. and S. G. and are to be sold near the Royal
Exchange. 1649.

The Copy of General OWN ONEALES Letter to Collonell MONCK.
SIR,
YOurs of the 29th of March last I received lately, and could not answer the
same until now, in regard your articles of Cessation there enclosed are
something to brief, and could not well agree unto without enlargement, I have
employed Capt. Mac Mahon thither, quallified with power to treat, and conclude
with you about the same, according to instructions by him, as also to deliver
unto you certain Propositions (as far as I can remember) has been formerly
sent to Col. Jones: to which no answer has been given as yet, whereof I
wonder. What agreement shall be made by the said Capt. Hugh Mac Machon,
touching the premises shall be binding to me, and all those with me, whereof
you shall have true performance at the hands of

Sir, Your humble Servant Owen Oneale.

THE Propositions of General OWN ONEALE, the Lords, Gentry, and Commons of
the Confederate Catholics of ULSTER. To the most Honorable, and potent, the
Parliament of ENGLAND.
Imprimis, That all Laws, Statutes, Penalties, made, past, or concluded
against the Roman Catholics, its Ministers or professors, their liberties or
exercises of the said Religion, since the 21 year of Henry the 8th, to be
reclaimed and perpetually to be taken off. And to extend to that party, and
their successors for ever. 2 That the said General Owen Oneale desires that an
Act of oblivion be passed to extend to all and every of his party, for all
things done since the beginning of the year 1641: They desire that General
Owen Oneale be provided for a competent Command in the Army, befitting his
place, worth or quality. 4 They desire that all lands taken illegally from the
said party, and every of them, and their Ancestors since the first Jacobi, be
restored to them again. 5 That the said party be made capable and entrusted in
all Command, Martial and Civil, by Sea or Land. 6 That all incapacity,
inability and distrust hitherto by act of State, or otherwise against the said
party, be taken off. 7 That on both sides, all jealousies, hate and aversion;
be laid aside: unity, love, and amity be renewed, and proclaimed between both
parties. 8 That General Owen Oneale be restored, and put in possession of his
Ancestors Estates, until it be tried whether the said Estates was illegally
taken from them or not. 9 That that party be provided, and possessed with a
convenient Seaport in the Province of Ulster. 10 That the Army belonging to
General Oneale and his party, be provided for in all points as the rest of the
Army shall be.
OWEN ONEALE.

Col. Monck his answer to General Owen Oneal.
SIR,
I Have received yours of the 25. of April, and have seen your order to
Captain Hugh Macmahon to treat and conclude a peace with me, in behalf of
your self, and the Forces under your command: I have perused your
propositions, and conceiving there are some particulars, which at the first
view, the Parliament of England may scruple to grant: I have made a small
alteration in some of them, being well assured that by it you will not receive
the least disadvantage; but it will rather prove a means to beget an increase
of good opinion toward you, and your party, which I believe your reallity,
fidelity and action in their service will sufficiently merit: and in case you
approve of them as I have revised them and and altered them; I desire you to
send them to me signed and sealed by you, that I may present them to the
Parliament of England, to obtain their favorable answer in return of them;
and in the mean time, I desire according to the enclosed Paper three months
Cessation, be concluded and agreed unto between us, and inviolably kept between
our Forces during the said time.

Col. Monck his Propositions to General Owen Oneal.
IMprimis, That such as shall join with General Owen Oneal in the service of
the Parliament of England in this Kingdom, may have liberty of conscience for
themselves, and their issue. 2. The said General Oneal desires an act of
oblivion to be passed, and extend to all and every of his party for all things
done since the year 1641. 3. That they desire General Owen Oneal be provided
for a competent command in the Army, befitting his place, worth and dignity. 4.
They desire that they may enjoy all those lands that were in their possession
at the beginning of the wars, for themselves and others, during their fidelity
to the interest of England. 5. That al incapacity, inability and distrust
hitherto by act of State, or other ways against the said party, be taken off.
6. That on both sides all jealousies or aspersions be laid aside, unity, love,
and amity be renewed and practiced between both parties. 7. That General Oneal
may be restored and put in possession of his ancestors estates, or some other
estate equivalent to it, in regard of his merit, and the good service that he
shall perform in the Parliament of Englands service, in the preservation of
the interest in this Kingdom. 8. That the Army belonging to General Oneal and
his party be provided for in all points, as the rest of the Army shall be. 9.
That the said party be provided with, and possessed of, a convenient Sea port
in the Province of Ulster. 10. And then in receiving a Confirmation of these
desires; under taken and promised for my self, and in behalf of the Army under
my command, faithfully and firmly to adhere to the Parliament of Englands
service in this Kingdom, and to maintain their interest hereafter with the
hazard of our lives and estates against all opposers whatsoever.
Given under my hand and seal. Owen Oneal.

Col. Monck his Propositions to Genesis Owen Oneale
IMprimis, That there be a Cessation of Arms between the forces under
General Owen Oneales Command and the forces under my Command for the space of
3 Months, beginning the first of this instant May, before which time be ended,
I am certain to receive the Parliaments answer to your Propositions. 2 That
upon all occasions during the said time, we be ready to assist one another
until such time we receive a more absolute agreement made, and condesended
upon, by the Parliament of England. 3 For such Creets as pay me contribution, I
shall be contented that they likewise pay contribution to the forces under
General Oneals command, provided that I may have liberty to bring such Creets
of the Province of Ulster under Contribution to me, which have not paid any
to the Forces under my Command. 4 If any provision arrives into a harbor under
my Command for the use of General Oneale, or any under his Command, that
freedom be given to them to send and fetch those provisions with safety,
provided he continue an enemy to the enemies of the Parliament in England in
this Kingdom.
FINIS.

