SEVERAL PAPERS OF THE TREATY BETWEEN His Excellency JAMES Marquis of
ORMOND, Lord Lieutenant General of IRELAND for the KING, on the one part;

AND Sir Thomas Wharton, Sir Robert King, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir Robert
Meredith, Knights, and Richard Salwey Esquire, Commissioners authorized by the
Two Houses of PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND; on the other part.

With the Commissioners Instructions concerning the Lord of Ormond; the
Instructions concerning the Protestants of Ireland, and Compositions of
Delinquents: His Excellencies Propositions, and the Commissioners their Answer;
and the Lord Lieutenants Reply. With their Reply to all his Exceptions. And the
Kings Maj. Directions.

DVBLIN: Printed by William Blad^n, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1646.

At the Committee of Lords and Commons, at Darby house.
BY Virtue of an Ordinance of Parl. of the 15. of this instant October,
authorizing us, We do constitute and appoint you, Sir T. Whatton, Sir Rob.
King, Sir John Clatworthy, and Sir Robert Meredith. Knights, and Rich. Salwey
Esquire Commissioners to treat with the Lord of Ormond, for and concerning the
delivery of the Sword, the City of Dublin, and all other Garrisons and Holds in
his power. And you or any three of you have hereby power to treat with the said
L. of Ormond, concerning the premises, and to agree and conclude with him
concerning the same, acoording to such instructions as are delivered unto you.

Given this 23 of October. 1646. Northumberland. E. Manchester. P. Lisle. P.
Wharton. W. Peirrepoint. Denzel Hollis. P. Stapleton. W. Lewis. J. Temple. To.
Goodwyn.
Copia vera

Ex. W. Row, Secr.



Die Lunae. 12. October. 1646.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That it be
referred to the Members of both Houses, that are of the Committee of both
Kingdoms, to consider of these Letters, and to receive the Addresses of the
Commissioners from Ireland, and their Prop^sitions, and to view and consider of
their Instructions, and the Members of this House that are of the Committee of
both Kingdoms, or any four of them, have power to meet this Afternoon at two
of the clock in Darby-house for the purposes aforesaid, and have power to
report tomorrow, if they shall see occasion; And the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, Mr. Hollis, Sir John Clotworthy, and Sir John Temple, have power, and
are desired to be present at the meeting of this Committee.

Mr. Na. Fi^es, Sir W. Lewis, and Mr. Rob. Goodwyn are added to this Committee.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Jovis 15. Octobris, 1646.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, do declare, that they resolve
to proceed upon the second way of Overture, made by the Earl of Ormond, and
will appoint some way of treating with him for his Retirement, and will employ
such as they shall think fit in the Trust of that Kingdom.

John Brown Cler. Parliament.
Vera Copia,

Ex. W. Row, Secr.



Die Jovis 15. Octobris, 1646.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the whole
Affair concerning Ireland, in respect of the secrecy and expedition thereunto
necessary, be referred back to the former Committee, And the Committee has
power to give Instructions to such as they shall employ for the pursuance and
transaction of that Affair, and to Order the Forc^s that shall go thither, and
to dispose of the Ammunition, and other Provisions for the Service of Ireland,
as they shall judge best for the Public Service, and are to meet this
Afternoon, and so from time to time as they shall see cause.

John Brown Cler. Parliament.
Vera Copia,

Ex. W. Row, Secr.



Instructions for Sir Tho. Wharton, Sir Rob. King, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
Rob. Meredith, Knights, and Rich. Salwey, Esquire concerning the Lord of Ormond.
YOu are to declare to the L. of Ormond, the E. of Roscommon, and the rest of
those that signed the Instructions to Sir Gerrard Lowther, Sir Francis
Willoughby, and Sir Panl Davies, That the Parliament will take into their Care
and Protection the Protestants of Ireland. If the L. of Ormond do within four
days deliver up the Swo^d, render all the Garrisons, and other Commands to the
pleasure of the Parliament, Then you, or any three of you, are to give these
ensuing Conditions.

1. That the L. of Ormond shall enjoy his estate without molestation or
disturbance from the Parl. And shall have indemnity against all debts
contracted by reason of any Goods, Money, Debts, or Victuals taken up by virtue
of any Warrants signed by him and the Council, from any person, for the
maintenance and support of the Armies, or any of the Garrisons, now under his
Command.

2. That he shall be protected in his Person and Goods for the space of 12
months against all Suits, Arrests, Molestation, or Disturbance from any person
whatsoever, for any Debts owing by him to any person whatsoever before the
Rebellion there.

3. That the L. of Ormond, and all such Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Officers, as
shall be desirous to go with him, or by themselves, into any other place out of
that Kingdom, shall have free Passes for themselves, their Families, Goods, and
traveling Arms, and a competent number of servants suitable to their respective
Qualities.

4. That the L. of Ormond shall have 5000. l. paid him in England or Ireland,
in such manner as shall seem best to the Commissioners now sent: And shall
have also 2000. l. per annum for 5 years, And if the War shall longer
continue in such manner, as he cannot receive 2000. l. per annum, out of his
own Estate, That then he shall have the said Pension of 2000. l. per annum
still continued, until he can receive so much out of his own estate.

5. That the L. of Ormond shall have liberty to come and live here in England,
With the like liberty that others have, he submitting to all Ordinances of
Parliament. And for the time of 12 months shall not be pressed to any Oaths,
he engaging his honor to do nothing in the mean time, that shall be disservice
to the Parliament.

Darby-house 17 October. 1646. A. Northumberland. E. Manchester. P. Lisle. P.
Wharton. W. Pierrepoint. Denzel Hollis, W. Waller. W. Armyn. Ph. Stapleton.
John Temple. W. Lewis. To. Wallop.
Vera Copia

Ex. W. Row, Secr.



November. 15. 1646.
WE find in the Instructions delivered in by you unto us, That you are to
declare unto us, and the rest that signed the Instructions to Sir Gerard
Lowther, etc. That the Parl. will take into their Gare and Protection the
Protestants of Ireland. We desire to know, whether by these words. viz. [That
the Parl. will take into their Gare and Protection the Protestants of Ireland]
All the Protestants of Ireland are to enjoy their Laws, Liberties, Estates, and
Employments, without molestation or disturbance from the Parliament of England.

ORMOND.

Novem. 15. 1646.
WE find by the Instructions delivered in by you unto us, these words, viz.
If the Lord of Ormond do within 4 days deliver up the Sword, render all the
Garrisons and other Commands to the pleasure of the Parliament, then etc. We
desire to know when the said four days shall be understood to begin, and to
what Person or Persons, and to whose use the said Sword, Garrisons and other
Commands, are desired to be delivered up, or rendered.

ORMOND.

Novem. 15. 1646.
TO your Lordships first Paper of the 15 of Novem. we return this Answer; That
we are required by the Paper of Instructions delivered to your Lordship, to
declare to your Lordship, the E. of Roscomon, and the rest that signed the
Instructions to Sir Gerard Lowther, etc. That the Parliament will take into
their Care and Protection the Protestants of Ireland. But desire to be excused
from giving a particular explatation of those words in that Paper, being not
directed so to do, yet conceive there ought to be no doubt of a fair
interpretation thereof.

Rob. Meredith. Ths. Wharton. Rob. King. John Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey.

Novem. 15. 1646.
ALthough we question not a fair interpretation, yet in matters so highly
importing the safety and subsistence of the (...) stants of this Kingdom, we
may not leave them to the uncertainty of future interpretation: and therefore
we cannot re^ satisfied without clearer assurance in their behalf, then we
fi^de either in the Instruction delivered unto us by you this d^y (whereof we
desire an Explanation) or the Answer given y^^ you to our first Paper.

ORMOND.

15. Novem. 1646.
TO your Lordships second Paper of the 15. of November, we return this Answer:
That the four days appointed for the Treaty with your Lordship (within which
time we are to bring our Debates to a conclusion) we understand did begin this
15. of November. 1646. at 9 in the morning, And we who are appointed
Commissioners by Authority from the Parl. of England, are to receive from your
Lordship (if the Treaty succeed) the Sword, and Garrisons under your Command,
for the use of the Parliament of England, in order to the preservation of the
Protestants in the Kingdom of Ireland.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob King. John Clotworthy. Rich. Salwey.

15. Novem. 1646.
WE desire to know, whether your Lordship rests satisfied in all the
particulars of the Paper of Instructions delivered to you by us this day,
saving that which concerns the Protestants, as is expressed in your Lordships
third Paper.

Rob. Meredith. T. Wharton. Rob. King. John Clotworthy. Rich. Salwey

November 15. 1646.
WE hold it not fit to declare our sense concening the particulars of the
paper of Instruction, delivered by you to us which concern our self, until
assurance be first given for the safety and subsistence of the Protestants of
this Kingdom, which we desire may be hastened for the bringing of this Treaty
to a speedy and good conclusion.

ORMOND.

November 15. 1646.
FOrasmuch as your Lordship in your third paper of the fifteenth of this
instant does express; That you cannot rest satisfied without clearer assurance
on the behalf of the Protestants of Ireland then you find either in the
instructions delivered to you by us this day, or in our answers to your
Lordship touching the explanation thereof, as was in your first paper desired.
And whereas your Lordship in your fourth, in answer to our third, has
signified, that you hold it not fit to declare your sense concerning the
particulars of the paper of Instructions, which concern your self, until
assurance be first given for the safety and subsistence of the Protestants of
the kingdom of Ireland; to the end nothing may be wanting on our parts, to
bring this Treaty to a speedy and happy conclusion, we hold it fit to declare,
That by an additional Instruction (which we night not sooner impart) we are
enabled to give to such Protestants (not having been in the Irish rebellion) as
we condition withal, assurance of security to their persons, and to their
estates and goods, that they have in Ireland, and that they may live quietly
and securely under the protection of the Parliament, and their Forces, either
within England, Ireland, or Wales, and that they shall enjoy those their
estates and goods, without any molestation or question faom the Parliament, as
any others do, who have not offended the Parliament, they submitting to all
Ordinances of Parliament; and if any of them have any lands or estates in
England, they are to compound for the same at the rate of two years profit, as
they were before the beginning of these troubles, They submitting to all
ordinances of Parliament.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Jo. Clorworthy. Ri. Salwey.

15. November. 1646.
BEfore we make answer to your fourth paper of the fifteenth of November, we
hold it needful to have an authentic copy of the additionall Instruction
therein mentioned, being for the security of the Protestant-Subjects of this
Kingdom. And we desire authentic copies of such other additionall
Instructions as you have, in regard your commission is limited by, and has
relation to your instructions.

ORMOND

16. November. 1646.
TO your Lordships fifth paper of the fifteenth of November, we return this
answer, That to the end nothing may be wanting on our parts, conducing to the
security of the Protestants of Ireland, according to the Instructions given us
by authority of Parliament; and that we may accordingly put a speedy conclusion
to this Treaty, we do for your Lordships more ample satisfaction (though we
hold, not our selves obliged thereunto) herewith freely deliver your Lordship
an Authentic copy of the additionall Instructions: But we must desire to be
excused from giving any further answer to the said paper, until we receive
your Loadships positive answer upon the papers already given in, hoping it will
be believed, That as we have not hitherto, so we shall not for the future offer
any thing, unto which we are not warranted by our Instructions.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. John Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey.

The Additionall Instruction concerning the Protestants of Ireland.
YOu, or any three of you, may give to such Protestants, (not having been in
the Irish Rebellion) as you condition with all, assurance of security to their
persons, and to their estates and goods, that they have in Ireland; and that
they may live quietly, and securely under the protection of the Parliament, and
their Forces, either within England, Ireland, or Wales: And you may likewise
assure them, that they shall enjoy those their estates and goods without any
molestation, or question from the Parliament, as any others do, who have not
affended the Parliament: They submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament. And
if any of them have any Lands or Estates in England, they are to compound for
the same at the rate of two years profit, as they were before the beginning of
these troubles, They submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament.

Derby House October. 17. 1646. Northumberland. E. Manchester. P. Lisl^, P.
Wharton. W. Pierpoint. Denzil Hollis. W. Waller. P. Stapleton. W. Armyne. Will.
Lewis. I. Temple. R. Wallop.

Copia vera

exam. W. Row. Secret.



Dublin 16. November, 1646.
Whereas we have been info^med, that the Armies of the Rebels lie near this
^iti^, and may probably make some speedy attempt upon the same: we hold it our
duty for the preservation thereof, and of he Protestants therein, to declare,
that if your Lordship apprehend such danger to be, and that any Supplies of Men
and Ammunition which we have brought with us, may prevent the same: we are
rea^y to give all such assistance, as may be thought expedient, during the time
the p^es^nt Treaty c^n^i^u^s with you Lordship, and are willing to give such
Cantion as may be expected from us, That no other use shall be made of the
same, then is herein expressed, and shall expect the like from your Lordship.
As also, that such Men and Ammunition as we shall bring ashore for the
purposes aforesaid, be (if the Treaty succeed not) returned us back again.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Jo. Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey.

16. November, 1646.
UPon consideration had of your fourth. Paper of the fifteenth of this month,
and the first paper of the sixteenth of this in n^th and he Copy of the
Additionall Instruction sent unto us therewith, before we can deliver any
positive answer to your papers, we hold it necessary to be satisfied in the
following particulars.

First, whereas you express in that paper of the fifteenth, as follows, viz.
we are enabled to ^ive to such Protestants not having been in the Irish
rebellion, as we condition withal, assurance of security to their persons, and
the^estater and goods, that they have in Ireland: we desire you to declare
whether those words, viz. [such Protestants not having been in the Irish
rebellion] you intend to exempt those Protestants, or any of them, who have had
a hand in making the cessation, or the late peace, or who have done any thing
by occasion, or in Pursuance thereof.

Secondly, whether by these words, viz. we are enabled to give such Protestants
as we condition withal, assurance; you intend that every particular Protestant
shall come, and make his conditions with you; or whether all the Protestants of
this Kingdom, are not to be included within the present treaty, and to partake
of the agreement which shall be made.

Thirdly, whether by those words, Submitting to Ordinances of Parliamen, it be
intended that they shall submit to all, and every the Ordinances already made,
and which hereafter shall be made by the Parliament of England.

Fourthly, we find nothing in the Com^ission, nor in any of the Instructions
delivered by you to us for the continuance of the Judges and Ministers of the
Civil List, and O^ficers of the Martial List in their respective employments,
nor any answer given by you unto us in any of your pap^rs unto that particular
and herein we desire to be satisfied, as a matter wherein their being and
livelihood does depend.

Ormond.

16. November. 1646.
TO the first and second parcicular of your Lordships first paper of the 16.
November we answet, that we shall not exempt any Protestants of Ireland, though
they have of late consented or submitted either to the cessation of Arms, or
the peace concluded with the Irish rebels so as they submit to the Parliament
within twenty days after our sending to them.

To the third particular, your Lordship has an authentic copy of the
Instruction, wherein those words [submitting to al^ Ordinance of Parliament]
are expressed, of which we have no explanation.

To the fourth particular, concerning the continuation or displacing of the
Judges an* Ministers of the Civil List in their employments we are not
instructed therein; but for the Officers of the Martial List, we have power by
our Instructions, and do intend accordingly to employ such of them as shall be
found fit for the service.

Having thus endeavored to give your Lordship all possible satisfaction, we do
again desire your Lordships positive answer to our papers formeny given in, it
being too manifest, how grest mischief may befall the Protestants of this
Kingdom, and the service with which we are entrusted, should not our Debates be
brought to a speedy conclusion.

Rob. Meredith. T. Wharton, Rob. King, J. Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey.

16. November. 1646.
We are not satisfied with your answer to our first Paper, of the 16. of
November. to which we take these following exceptions for the present.

First, we desired by our said paper to know of you, whether you intended to
exempt the Protestants, or any of them, who have had a hand in making the
cessation, or late peace, etc. to which you make this answer,

That you will not exempt any Protestants of Ireland though they have of late
consented, or submitted, either to the cessation or the peace concluded with
the Irish rebels, so as they submit to the Parliament within twenty days after
your sending unto them; within which words, no provision is made either for
those who had a hand in the making thereof, or did upon the first making
thereof submit thereunto. And besides, no provision is made for any, but such
as you shall send unto, so that it will rest in your power, to whom you will
send, and when; wherein there is no certainty.

Secondly, we desired by our said paper, to know of you, whether you intended
that every particular Protestant shall come, and make his conditions with you;
or whether all the Protesta^^s of this kingdom are not to be included within
the present Treaty, and to partake of the agreement to be made, to which no
clear answer is given.

And whereas you desire our positive answer to your papers formerly given, ^it
being, as you say, too manifest how great mischief may befall the Protestants
of this kingdom, and the service with which you are entrusted, if your debates
should should not be brought to a speedy conclusion. We desire you for the same
reasons, to set down fully and clearly how far the propositions which we sent
to the Parliament by our Commissioners, are assented unto; and upon view and
consideration thereof, we shall speedily give our positive answer.

Ormond.

17. November. 1646.
IN answer to your Lordships second paper of the 16. of November, and for
clearing (so far as possibly lies in us) the Exceptions therein taken to our
answer unto your Lordships first paper of the same date. We herewith deliver
all the Instructions which we have received, that do (as we conceive) in any
kind whatsoever, relate thereunto; and if yet ^^^te shall remain with your
Lordship any doub^ concerning those particulars, we shall represent the same
(if the Tr^acy do succeed) to those that employed us, with the best advantage
for the Protestan^s of this Kingdom. Further satisfaction then this, we
suppose cannot be expected from us.

As to the other part of your Lordships paper, wherein you would have us set
down fully and clearly, ^ow far the propositions which you sent to the
Parliament by your Commissioners, are assen^ed unto, we cannot answer your
Lordships desire therein, neither those propositions, nor copies of them being
delivered unto us.

We therefore earnestly desire your Lordship to accept of the conditions
offered in our former papers, and to give us a speedy resolution therein.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Io Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey

Instructions for Sir Thomas Wharton, Sir Robert King, Sir John Clotworthy, and
Sir Rob. Meredith, Knights: and Richard Salwey Esquire, employed to the Lord of
Ormond, and others at Dublin*
You may receive any Protestant who has not been in the Irish rebellion,
though he has of late consented or submitted, either to the cessation of A
mes, or the peace concluded with the Irish reb^ls, so as they submit to the
Pa^liament within twenty days after your sending for them.

You, or any three of you, have power hereby to give protection to ^uch as will
come under contribution, and to give them the best safeguard you can, by the
countenan^e of the Forces serving under the Parliament.

You, or any three of you, may give to such Protestants (not having been in the
Irish ^ebellion) as you condition withal, assurance of security to their
persons, and to their estates and goods, that they have in Ireland, and that
they may live quietly and securely under the protection o^ the Parliament, and
their Forces, either within England, Ireland, or Wales; and you may likewise
assure them, that they shall enjoy those their Estates and Goods, without any
molestation, or question from the Parliament, as any others do, who have not
offended the Parliament, they submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament; ann
if any of them have any Lands or Estates in England, they are to compound for
the same at the rate of two years profit, as they were before the beginning of
these troubles, they submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament.

Darby-house, October. 17. 1646. Northumberland. W. P^erpoint. W. Waller.
Manchester. Denz. Hollis. P. Stapleton. P. Lisle. W. Lewis I. Temple. P.
Wharton. W. Armine. To. Wallop.


17. November. 1647.
IN your third paper of the 16. of November, are these words, viz. That for the
Officers of the Martial List, we have power by our Intructions, and ^o intend
accordingly to employ such of them as shall be found fit for the service. A
Copy of which Instruction, we desire, that we may the better judge how far
the security and future subsistence of the said Officers is thereby provided
for.

Ormond.

November 17. 1646.
In answer to your Lordships first paper of the 17. of this Month, we herein
deliver a Copy of the Instructions therein desired.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Io. Clotworthy. R. Salwey.
YOu, or any three of you, are to employ such of the Officers now under the
Lord of O^mond, as you shall think fit; and where you displace any, you are to
place other Officers, if they be necessary; or otherwise to see their Commands
sufficiently discharged, until the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland take further
order.

Signed as the rest of the Instruction.


Copia vera

exam. W. Row, Secr.



17. November. 1646.
BY our second paper of the 16. of November, we desired you for the bringing
of the present debates to a speedy die conclusion, to set down fully and
clearly, how far the propositions positions, which we sent to the Parliament
by our Commissioners, are assenced unto; and we did by our said paper declare,
that upon view and consideration thereof, we would speedily give our positive
answer; to which by our first paper of the 17. of November you say, that you
cannot answer our desire therein, neither those propositions nor copies of them
being delivered unto you. We think fit to declare unto you, that our
Commissioners delivered our Propositions and Instructions to the Committee of
both Houses, and that they took Copies thereof, and that our Commissioners do
by their letters of the 16. of October 1646, certify us by the command of the
said Committee, that with the succors, there would also arrive here certain
Commissioners to be sent from the Parliament to treat with us, upon the
particulars contained in the Propositions and Instructions sent to the
Parliament from us, Copies of which Propositions and Instructions we are ready
to send unto you, if that you shall desire the same. And we again desire you to
declare fully and clearly how far you have power, and will assent to our said
Propositions, or whether we shall give our positive answer to the papers
already delivered by you, taking it for granted, that you have no further, or
other Instructions, then what you have delivered us.

Ormond.

17. November, 1646.
TO your Lordships second paper of the 17. of November, (wherein you again
desire us to declare fully and clearly, how far we have power, and will
assent to the Propositions sent to the Parliament by your Commissioners) we can
return no other answer then we have already done in our two first papers of the
16. and 17. of November. in the later of which we declare, we have not those
propositions nor copies of them, nor we think it expedient upon this occasion
to receive the same from your Lordship, yet we desire the want of those
Propositions may not be conceived the only reason of our forbearance, of giving
further answer to your Lordships paper; but hold it our duty to insist upon
your Lordships positive answer to the papers already given in.

Rob Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Jo. Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey.

17. November, 1646.
If you shall positively declate, that you have no power or instructions to
enlarge your selves beyond what is expressed in your former papers, we will
then give a positive answer to those papers.

Ormond.

17 November. 1646.
We cannot more largely or positively express the power and extent of our
instructions, we have then already done, but do again in pursuance of our
instructions, desire your Lordsh^p^ answer to the papers given in.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob King. Jo Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey.

17 November, 1646.
We did not by our third paper o^ the 17. of November, desire to know whether
you could more largely or positively express the power and intent of your
instructions then you had formerly done: But we expressed, that if you would
positively declare you had no power or instructions to enlarge your selves
beyond what is express^d in your former papers, we would then give a positive
answer to those papers, which by your answer thereunto you have neither
affirmed nor denied; And therefore we forbear to give a positive answer to your
said papers, till we be satisfied in that particular.

Ormond.

18. November. 1646.
Having taken into consideration your Lordships last paper of the 17. of
November. we return you this answer, that wea hold not fit positively to declare,
whether we have any power or instruction to enlarge our selves beyond what is
expressed in our former paper, nor doewe conceive it ought to be expected from
us, for that (to omit other reasons) we have frequently declared, that we are
(according to our instructions to receive your Lordships positive answer upon
the papers already given in, which we now again desire from your Lordship.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Io. Clotworthy. Rich. Salwey.

18 November. 1646.
In the Copy of some of the Instructions delivered by you unto us, it is thus
expressed, That if the Lord of Ormond do within 4 days deliver up the sword,
render up all the Garcisons, and other Commands to the pleasure of the
Parliament, then you, or any three of you, are to give these ensuing
Conditions, etc.

And in your second paper of the 15. of November, 1646. you express your selves
amongst other things, as follows, viz. We, who are appointed Commissioners
by authority from the Parl. of England, are to receive from your Lordship (if
the treaty succeed) the Sword, and Garrisons under your Command, for the use of
the Parl. of England; To which, and your other papers, before we can make
answer, we desire to know whether you have his Majesty's Direction and Command
unto us, for our so doing.

Ormond.

18. November 1646.
To your Lordships first paper of the 18. of this month, we answer that we
have not his Maj. direction and command unto your Lordship, for delivering up
the Sword, rendering up all the Garrisons and Commands to the pleasure of the
Parliament.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. John Clotworthy. Rich. Salwey.

18. November. 1646.
The papers delivered by you unto us, whereunto you desire our positive answer,
gave occasion unto us to take into consideration, as well the Propositions and
Instructions signed by us alone, and sent by our Commissioners to be presented
to the Parliament of England, as also the Propositions and Instructions signed
by us, and the Council of this Kingdom, and other Propositions and
Instructions signed by the said Council apart, and sent by our said
Commissioners to be in like sort presented: all which Propositions and
Instructions they delivered to the Committee of both honses, appointed to
consider thereof, who took Copies of the said Propositions and Instructions,
Copies of which Propositions signed by us alone, we think fit to insert herein,
viz.

Propositions of the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, to be presented, etc.
THat the said Lord Lieutenant will prosecute the War against the Irish
Rebels, as vigorously as he shall be thereunto enabled by the Pari. of England,
and that he will faithfully serve the Crown of England therein. 2 That whilst
he has the Government of this Kingdom, and the Command of the Armies therein,
none of the Supplies of Men, Money, Arms, Munition, Victuals, or any other
provisions of what kind or nature soever, which shall by the PARLIAMENT of
ENGLAND be sent over, or joined with the Forces already under his Command, nor
any other Forces that shall be under his Command, shall in any wise be employed
either within this Kingdom, or out of it, but by the express direction of the
said Parliament of England. 3 That he will not upon any Command, or by virtue
of any power or authority whatsoever, enter into any Treaty with the said Irish
Rebels, or conclude any Peace or Cessation with them without the consent and
express Command of the King and Parliament of England. 4. He will engage
himself to the true performance of all these things by Oath, or by any other
means that can be proposed to a man of Honor and Conscience.
26 September. 1646.

Ormond.

Now forasmuch, as we do not find by our papers, that any one of the said
Propositions, which have been transmi^^ed from hence, is assented unto by the
Parl. of England, though we have pressed you by several papers, to know how
far they were assented unto; And for that it appears unto us by those
papers, that no Copies of the said Propositions or Instructions were delivered
unto you and that when we upon that signification did offer unto you copies of
both, you did not think it expedient upon this occasion to receive the same
from us, And for that by the papers and copies of Instructions delivered by you
unto us, We find ^o security offered to any of the Protestants, but to such as
you shall condition withal, and who shall submit to all Ordinances of
Parliament, whereas we expected that all should be included and provided for,
in and by the present Treaty, and what those conditions o^ Ordinances of
Parliament are, you do not ascertaine by any of your papers: And for that it
does not appear unto us by any the Instructions, whereof you have delivered
copies unto us, that you have power to secure any other of his Majesty's
Subjects, who have constantly adhered to the Government here since the 22 of
October, 1641. in their persons and estates. And for that the Officers of his
Majesty's Army here, and the Judges and Ministers of the Civil List, have no
assurance given them for their continuance in their respective employments,
your expression as unto them being as follo weth, viz. Concerning the
continuation and displacing of the Judges and Ministers of the civil List in
their employments, we are not instructed therein; but for the Officers of the
Martial List, we have power by our Instructions, and do intend accordingly to
employ such of them, as shall be found fit for the service, which gives no
assurance unto any one of the Martial List, and leaves the Civil List
without any security, and takes no notice of the poor distressed Clergy of
the Kingdom. In all which particulars (being contained in our Propositions and
Instructions) we did hopr that the Parl. of England would have given us
satisfaction, which being not yet done for any thing made known by you to us,
and for that you have by your paper of the 18. of November. 1646. declared unto
us, that you have not his Maj. direction and command unto us, for delivering up
the Sword, rendering up all the Garrisons and Commands to the pleasure of the
Parliament, which you by your second paper of the 15. of November. 1646. desire
to be rendered unto you, to the use of the Parliament; without any relation in
your said paper to the King, we hold it not consistent with our Duty to his
Majesty, to part with so great a Trust committed to our charge, in manner as by
your papers is desired, without his Maj. express and positive Directions, and
therefore may not assent thereunto.

Ormond.

18. November. 1646,
Whereas we did, together with our first paper of the 16. of November. deliver in
to your Lordship an authentic copy of the additionall instruction concerning
the Protestants of Ireland, unto which your Lordship has taken several
exceptions; we think good for your satisfaction therein, now to declare, that
we intend that all Protestants whatsoever of the Kingdom of Ireland (not
having been in the Irish Rebellion) shall be included in this treaty, and
receive the full benefit expres^n the said instruction: And that the conditions
employed in that instruction to be imposed on them, shall be understood, as
follows, viz. Whereas it is said, they shall enjoy those their Estates and
Goods without any molestation or question from the Parl. as nay others do, who
have not offended the Parl. they submitting to all Ordinances of Parl. By all
Ordinances of Parl. we only intend such Ordinances (whether already made, or to
be made) as all others do submit unto, who never offended the Parliament; And
whereas liberty is given to compound for such estates, as any of them shall
have in England they submitting to all Ordinances of Parl. By all Ordinances of
Parl. we intend, only such as all persons now compounding in England do submit
unto, provided that all those that are thus admitted ^o their composition do
effectually prosecute the same within 6 months after the publication of this
Articles.

And whereas in the fourth Article of the first paper delivered in to your
Lordship, offer is made of 5000. l. in money, and 2000. l. per annum, to be
paid your Lordship in manner, as is expressed in the said Article, we now hold
it fit to declare, that if it shall be more to your Lordships satisfaction and
content, we have power given us, and shall accordingly grant, what you desired
in the 6. Article of your Lordships additionall instructions sent to the Par.
according as is in the paper herewith delivered in, expressed.

And we lustly hold it fit to make known unto your Lordship, that power is also
given to us, to agree for allowances to be paid to other persons, by constam
pension during the War of Ireland, not exceeding the sum of 2000. l. per
annum, which pensions are to continue, till they can receive the like benefit
by their own estates.

We do now particularly declare to your Lordship (and sooner according to our
instructions we could not) that we have no power to enlage our elves, beyond
what we have expressed. And do therefore now again, entreat our Lordships
positive answer upon the whole, which we must the rather desire may be
expedited, for that we are (according to our instructions) to bring our debates
to a conclusion within 4 days at the furthest, after the beginning of the
treaty, which will end to morrow at 9 of the clock in the morning, and we have
no authority to prolong the same.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. John Clotworthy. Ric. Salwey.

A Copy of the Paper mentioned in the former.
Sixthly, in regard that my whole fortune is now in the possession, or within
the power of the Rebels, so as I can make no manner of use of i^; As also for
that I have not only at my own charge, in some sort, maintained the honor and
dignity of my place, since the 21. of Ian. 1643, which was the day whereon I
was sworn his Maj. Lieutenant, but likewise contributed in a considerable
portion to the maintenance of the Army and Garrisons now under my Command. And
lastly, for that by means thereof, I am utterly unable to discharge the debts
I have contracted for my own support, whilst I employed my own to feed the
Army, or to pay the wages due to the Servant, which I was necessitated to
entertain, in respect of the place I held; For these reasons, I desire it may
be humbly offered to the nobleness and honor of the Parl. That to free me
from the clamor of Creditors, to pay my servants their wages, and to transport
and maintain my self and my family, in some sort befitting the condition of a
Gentleman; The Parl. will be pleased to disburse the sum of 13000. l. 877. l.
14. s. 9. d. be paid to such as I shall appoint upon Bills of Exchange,
accepted by sufficient men in France, or Holland, to wit, the one half upon
sight, and at 6 months the oeher half thereof, which is less then the just
sum I have disbursed for the maintenance of the Garrisons of Dublin, Dundalke,
Newry, Narrow-water, Green-Castle, and Carlingford, not accompting my own
expense, nor the many other smaller disbursments spent merely for the good of
the said Garrisons; And that I may be secured against any molestation, by
reason of the engagements, I have at any time entered info, for the public
service since the beginning of this Rebellion.

19. November. 1646.
Upon consideration had of your 3. paper of the 18. of Novem. as also of your
former papers, and the copies of such instructions, as you delivered unto us,
we find no satisfaction given by you in these following particulars.

First, we do not find that you have power to secure any of his Maj. Roman
Catholic Subjects in their persons and estates, who have constantly adhered to
the Government here, since the 22. of October, 1641 of whom we conceive care
out to be had in the present treaty.

Secondly, you have declared unto us, that you have no instruction concerning
the continuation or displacing of the Judges, and Ministers of the Civil List
in their employment and your instruction as unto the Martial List (whereof you
gave us a Copy) is as follows, viz. You or any three of you are to employ
such of the Officers now under the L^of Ormond, as you shall think fit, and
where you displace any, you are to place other Officers, if they be necessary,
or otherwise to see their Commands sufficiently di^charged, until the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland takes further order; which may give more occasion of
fear unto the Officers of being displaced, then hope of continuance in their
respective employments, and there is not as much as mention made of the poor
distressed Clergy of the Kingdom in any the papers or instructions delivered
to you by us.

Thirdly, the Protestants of the Kingdom, who are to be included in the present
treaty, are, as you declare in the last paper delivered by you to us, to
submit themselves to all Ordinances of Parl. whether already made, or to be
made; Amongst which (as we are intormed) are some which require the Covenant to
be generally taken, and others which lay Mu^cts upon those, who shall use the
Book of Common Prayer, which form of Service, and no other, is by a Law of
force in this Kingdom, commanded upon a penalty to be used; And in our
instructions sent by our Commissioners, we desire that neither the one nor the
other might be pressed until settlement by Parliament.

And for us to agree upon this treaty to all future ordinances which shall be
made by the Parliament, before it be known what those ordinances are, we
conceive may be of dangerous consequence to the whole Kingdom, and not
agreeable with the rules of prudence in us.

Fourthly, whereas by a special instruction signed by us apart, we did direct
our said Commissioners, as follows, viz. If you find the Parl. ready and
willing forthwith effectually to take into their care and protection his Maj.
Protestant Subjects within the quarters under my command, and those that have
adhered to them from the 22. of October, 1641. according to the purport of the
instructions signed by me and the Council, and that my continuance in the
Government, shall be the only let thereunto, you are then in such case to let
them know, that I will surrender my place of Lieutenant and deliver all the
Holds in my power to such as the Parliament shall appoint upon these conditions.

First, that they procure his Maj. directions for the doing thereof, etc. which
was the first and fundamental condition of all that was propounded by us upon
this Overture, which was to be Precedent, and without which, nothing as unto
the delivery up of the Government was to be expected from us.

Upon consideration of all which, and of the Oath taken by us, upon our first
entrance into this great trust reposed in us, the tenor whereof does ensue in
these words, viz.

You shall swear, that you shall faithfully and truly to your power serve our
Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, in the room and authority of Lord
Lieutenant, and chief Governor of this his Realm of Ireland, you shall
maintain and defend the Laws of God and the Christian Faith, You shall to your
power, not only keep his Maj. peace amongst his People, but also maintain his
Officers and Ministers in the execution and administration of Justice, You
shall defend his Maj. Castles, Garrisons, Dominions People, and Subjects of
this Realm, and repress his Rebels and Enemies, You shall not consent to the
damage, and disher^zon of his Maj. his Heirs nor Successors neither shall you
suffer the right of the Crown to be destroyed by any way, but shall let it to
your power, and if you cannot let the same; You shall certify his Maj. clearly
and expressly thereof, You shall give your true and faithful for the Kings
Majesty's profit, and his Highness council? You shall conceal and keep, All
other things for the preservation of his Maj. Realm of Ireland, the peace
amongst his People, and execu^ion of his Justice, according to his Maj: Laws,
Usages and Customs of this his Highness Realm, you shall perform, and do to
your power: So God you help, and by the Contents of this Book.

And for that our Commissioners have by their Letters certified us, that they
were commanded by the Committee of both houses to forbear the delivering unto
the Scottish Commissioners the duplicate of the Letters, which we and the
Council had written to his Maj. and delivered to our Commissioners, advertising
his Maj. thereby of our address to the Parliament, with direction to deliver
them to the Scottish Commissioners, to be sent to the King* until the pleasure
of the two houses should be made known; which restraint, does as yet for any
thing made known unto us, lie still upon them.

And for that if we should deliver up the Sword in manner as is desired, the
present Parl. of this Kingdom (which is the hope of the remaining Protestants
here) would be at an end; for all which reasons, we may not part with the trust
committed to our charge, in manner as by your papers is desired, without his
Majesty's express and positive direction, and therefore may not assent
thereunto.

Ormord.

19. November. 1646.
If your Lordship continue unsatisfied concerning the papers already delivered
in, or any of them, as is employed by the Exceptions taken thereunto, and
expressed in your last paper of the 18 of November, we are ready to offer such
conside^a^ions to your Lordship by way of Answer thereunto, as we hope, may
give your Lordship satisfaction therein; and this we desire, may be done by
conference, if your Lordship shall think fit, for that the shortness of time
will not give opportunity to commit it to writing.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Jo. Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey.

19. November. 1646.
Although the Conference desired by you in your paper of this days date was
within half an hour of the expiration o^ the time limited for this treaty: And
although you have positively declared in your 3. paper of the 18. of November.
1646. That you have no power to ^nlarge your selves, ^r the tim^ beyond what
you have expressed, yet to manif^st to ^he world, h^w desirous we are to
receive satisfaction in those necessary exceptions by us taken to your papers
given in upon this Treaty, which may being the same to a happy conclusion, we
are ready to entertain the Conference desired by your said first paper of this
days date.

ORM^ND.

19. November. 1646.
Whereas we received a large paper from your Lordship of the 18. of November.
wherein you declared, you could not assent to deliver up the sword, render all
the Garrisons, and other Commands to the pleasure of the Pa^l, as was desired
by us in papers formerly given in ^o your Lordship, together with your
particular Exceptions to the same.

And whereas, we did immediately thereupon offer unto your Lorpship, such
further ^onditions of enlargement to the former, as we were instructed unto for
your more ample satisfaction in complying wi^h the desires of the Parliament,
in order to the preservation of the Protestants of the Kingdom of Ireland.

And whereas your Lordship signified to us, that it then being late, and the
paper given in by us of great importance, you would return answer thereunto the
next morning.

And whereas, we did this morning deliver to your Lordship a paper, declaring,
That if your Lordship continued unsatisfied concerning the Papers by us given
in, or any of them, as was expressed by the Exceptions taken thereunto, we were
ready to offer such consideraaions to your Lordship as we hoped might give
satisfaction, which we desired might be done by conference, for that the
shortness of time would not permit it in writing.

And having received another paper from your Lordship of the 19. of November.
containing your refusal to deliver up the Sword. etc. upon the Conditions
offered in our first and later papers, your Lordship did signify by your
second paper of the 19. That you were ready to hear, what we could further
offer by way of Conference, as was desired; which was by us performed
accordingly.

We do therefore now desire to know, if your Lordship do still insist upon your
refusal, on the grounds expressed in your papers. And if so, we make known to
your Lordship, that we shall for our own exoneration, commit to writing the
sum of what we delivered in Conference and give your Lordship a copy thereof;
to the end, the uprightness of our proceedings in the transaction of this
Treaty with your Lordship may in all things appear, although that happy
success, which we desired, be not attained thereby,

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Jo. Clotworthy. Ri. Salwey.

November. 16. 1646.
Forasmuch as, what was delivered upon the Conference, cannot be made use of by
us, as binding unto you, unless it be reduced to writing and signed by you,
which when you shall have reduced the same to writing, and given us a Copy
thereof, signed by you; We shall then declare unto you, whether or no, we will
rest satisfied therewith, or shall upon the whole matter insist upon our
refusal.

Ormond.

Dublin 20. November. 1647.
Whereas upon Thursday morning the 14 of November. in our Conference with your
Lordship, we did endeavor to offer such considerations, as might give
satisfaction to your Exceptions taken by our papers given in; And whereas, we
did at the same time also desire to know, whether or no your Lordship had
received satisfaction to all, or any of your said Exceptions, or whether you
would still insist upon your refusal, whereupon your Lordship by your third
Paper of he 19. of November. returned answer, That what was delivered upon the
Conference cannot be made use of by your Lordship, as binding unto us; unless
it be reduced to writing, and signed by us, and that when we shall have reduced
the same to writing, and given you a coyy thereof signed by us, your Lordship
will then declare unto us, whether or no, you will rest satisfied therewith, or
shall upon the whole matter insist upon your refusal. We have therefore
accordingly expressed in writing the sum of what was delivered in Conference,
which we offer to your Lordship, as follows.

You^ Lordships first Exception is.

Except. 1. That none of the Propositions (of the first way of Overture) which
were transmitted by your Lordship to the Parliament are assented unto.

To which we answer.

Answ. 1. That an Ordinance of Parliament of the 15. of October, 1646.
^ontaining the Declaration of both Houses to proceed upon the second way of
Overture made by your Lordship, was by us delivered to your Lordship.

2 That Declaration was made by the Parliament, before such time as Sir Francis
Willong^by returned from London, from whom your Lordship might be informed
thereof.

3 Your Lordship presuming (before your Commissioners came from London) that
the Parl. might not accept of those Propositions, did by Additionall
Instructions, declare, you would not insist thereupon, and accordingly gave
them liberty to recede from the same, and to propound a second way of Overture,
which the Parliament did proceed upon, and appointed a way of Treating with
you; of which, your Commissioners did advertise your Lordship by Direction of
the Committee of Parliament, appointed to consider of the said Propositions. And

4 If your Lordship observe, how far that second way of Overture is accepted
and granted by the Parliament in the Proposition by us given in; you may
happily find, not only full and positive satisfaction to the most of what your
Lordship asked, but in some particulars also, more ample offers made, then was
by your Lordship desired therein; which then the world shall consider, together
with the grounds and principles held forth by your Lordship (inviting the
Dispatch of Supplies ^o this Place) we are confident, the Parliament will be
abundantly justified therein: yet over and above all this, we continue to
declare that in every particular we will go to the utmost limits of ^ur
Instructions, and where any thing seems doubtful to your Lordship, or too
short; we shall (if the Treaty succeed) represent it to those that em; ploy
us, in the best manner we can for your Lordships full satisfaction.

And this we desire may be applied to every Exception taken by your Lordship.

Except. 2. That we have no power to secure any of his Majesty's Roman
Catholic Subjects in their persons and estates, who have constantly adhered to
the Government here since the 22. of October, 1641. Of whom, you conceive, care
ought to be had in the present Treaty.

Answ. 1, Those that by Authority of Parliament gave power to us to treat, did
not, for ought we can perceive, take cognizance of any of the Roman Catholics
of Ireland, that did adhere to the Government of this Kingdom against the
Irish Rebels.

2 If any such be, it is probable the number is not considerable; and if they
have done nothing against the Parliament, they need not any special security,
but may expect as much as others, that have in like manner demeaned themselves,
although they be of the Protestant Religion.

3 Power is given (as by an Instruction delivered in the 16. of Nov. is
expressed) to protect such as will come under Contribution, and to give them
safeguard by the countenance of the Forces serving under the Parliament;
According to which, they are to be protected in their persons and estates,
as well from the violence of the soldiers under the Parliament, as of the
Enemy; And this to be extended unto all, without distinction of Offense, or
Religion.

4 If any thing more can be reasonably offered, in the behalf of such Papists
as have adhered to the present Government, and not been in the Irish
Rebellion; it shall be also recommended back by us to those that employed us,
in the best manner we can for your Lordships satisfaction.

Except. 3. That no assurance is given, that the Judges and Ministers of the
Civil and Martial List shall be continuod in their places and employments,
etc.

Answ. 1. Nothing is given us in charge, nor has any thing been expressed by
us concerning the removal of the Judges, and Ministers of the Civil List, nor
any of them.

2 In cases of like nature, it has not been known, that persons so qualified,
have been continued and established by Treaty, nor was it (to ^ur knowledge)
ever heretofore insisted on by any whomsoever.

3. If it must be presumed that they have offended the Parliament, yet
assurance is given (and otherwise they can need none) for security to their
persons, with enjoyment of there goods and estates in the Kingdom of Ireland,
as if they had not offended, and have liberty to compound for their Estates, ^s
any of them have in England, and such Composition not to exceed two years value.

Concerning the Officers of the Martial List.

We answer.

Answ. 1. We have expressed, That we will continue and employ all such
Officers, whomsoever as shall be found fit for the Service: And as we have not
hitherro taken up a resolution (if the Treaty sh^o^ld succed) to displace any.
so we do declare. that it must be an extraordinary cause that should induce us
to it, and we understand the words of our Instruction ( viz. You are to employ
such of the Officers, etc.) does so direct us, and therefore connot give, as
your Lordship expresses. more occasion of fear unto the Officers of being
displaced, then hope of continuance in their respective employments.

2. As we believe, no president can be show; so it is obvious, the
inconvenience would be very great, to article for, and establish by Treaty, any
Officers of the Military List, though our resolution be to continue the same.

3. The same assurance and benefit, as is declared in our third answer to your
Lordships objections concerning the Civil List, is also to be extended in like
manner to the Officers of the Martial List, according to our Instructions.

In which also, the Clergy of this Kingdom mentioned by your Lordship, may
respectively receive advantage, concerning whom we are not instructed: Yet.

We desice it may be rememcred, that power is given us to agree for Pensions,
to such as we shhll think fit, to the value of two ^^o^stand pounds per annum,
which we are ready to assertain unto such of the Civil and Martial List, as
also of the distressed Clergy, as shall be thought meet to extend it to, in such
way as may give best satisfaction, according to our Instruction.

Except. 4. That great inconveniency may happen to all the Protestants of
Ireland, who are to be included in this Treaty, if they should thereby conclude
themselves to submit to all the Ordinances of Parliament.

Answ. 1. We have declared, etc. That their submitting to all Ordinances of
Parliament, is to be understood no otherwise then as all others do, who have
always adhered to, and never offended the Parliament.

2. We know of no Ordinance of Parliament, that requires the Covenant to be
taken in the Kingdom of Ireland.

3. We are no ways instructed to suppress the Book of Common Prayer, or
impose the Directory, though your Lordships represented in your own
Instructions, that the Directory might be used here.

4. It may also be considered, That your Lordship made Overture of submitting
to the Direction of both Houses of Parliament, (and that exclusively to any one
wha^soever) as to the ordering and disposing of the Army, etc. If they should
accept of your Overture, which could not be understood otherwise to be done,
but by Ordinances of Parliament, as to them from time to time should seem meet.

Exception. 5. Lastly, That the Kings direction for the Delivery up of the
Government is not obtained, and that your Commissioners were commanded to
forbear the delivering unto the S^^^ch Commissioner, the duplicate of the
Letters which your Lordship and the Council had written to His Majesty
concerning the same.

Answ. 1. We are very confident, what the Committee of both houses did
therein, was by direction of the Parliament.

2. Your Commissioners did declare, that if supplies were not instantly
dispatched, you would take it for granted none would be sent, and therefore
must be necessitated to think of some other course for your Preservation, as by
the Laws of God and Nature became you, and therefore it could not be imagined
(the necessity being so great, under which your Lordship then was, according to
the representation thereof made to the Parliament) that you would refuse such
Supplies from the Parliament, in manner as they directed till your Letter
should be from thence sent to Newcastle, and an answer thereof returned to your
Lordship, which would not undoubtedly have taken up much more time, then the
extremity of your Condition here, according to the foresaid representation,
could possibly admit of; And information was given that an address to the King
was also made by your Lordship anot^er way, and we have not yet understo^d by
your Lordship that he has inhibited you to proceed and conclude with us.

But more especially we desire it may be considered by your Lordship that in
your letter to the King (mentioned in your exceptions) your Lordships
expressions are full, to proceed with the Parliament upon the overture made to
them in the Propositions, not only without desiring answer, but without
expecting consent or direction from his Majesty before such time as you would
conclude the same, and your Lordship does only give an account of your
Resolutions, his Majesty unconsulted with, as already fixed with exp^ctation
only of a benign construction from his Majesty thereupon; And that not only
from the consideration of necessity, but (as we conceive of your Lordships du^y
also, as the case the^ stood, (no less then a Kingdom lying at the Stake) to
make your application in such manner to the Parliament.

3. May it not also be consid^red, what reason the Parliament had to conceive
your Lordship intended, not so to insist on the Kings direction as with u^ it
you would not conclude, when they observed that by those Propositions from your
Lordship, a Copy whereof you have delivered us, you offered (if they should
accept thereof (to put your present Army and Forces, called by your Lordship
his Majesty's Army, (Notwithstanding any interest you apprehended the King had
therein) under the sole direction of both Houses of Parliament. And yet in
those Propositions we find no mention made of consent or direction to be first
had from the King, which was believed your Lordship then, as at this time also,
might the better do, for that by act of Parliament, the mannaging of the Wa^ of
Ireland is established in both Houses of Parliament alone.

4. It may be considered, that however many eases of this nature in the late
troubles in England have happened, where Persons under great obligations to the
King, have frequently surrend^ed to the Parliament, Garrisons and Forces, which
they received by command from his Majesty, as in particular that of Oxford
(where remained not only the Duke of York and his Majesty's Council, but
also the Sword, the great and lesser Seals with other Ensigns of the Regal
Power, (and al^ these) without first having any explicit direction from the
King to deliver up the same.

5. When we also consider how passionately it was represented to the Parliament
by your Lordship, of how great importance the City and Castle of Dublin
(together with the Garrisons under your Command) were in order to the recovery
of the Kingdom of Ireland, the preservation of the Protestant Religion,
together with all the Protestants therein, as also how undoubtedly all must
miscarry, if Supplies did not timely come; We cannot but wonder that in case of
so high concernment, and so great necessity (the spilling of the blood of so
many thousand Protestants being unavoidable) according to the grounds and
representations offered by your Lordship to the Parliament, the danger whereof
remains the same, for ought has occurred to us, granted also by the loss of
many Garrisons since, and will be perfected by your rejecting the Supplies (with
so much expedition and Charge sent hither by the Parliament) that yet the Kings
consent should be so insisted on, as that neither the preservation of the said
Protestant Religion, nor the blood of thousands of Protestants, nor any of the
forementioned Considerations should pu^chase a Dispensation therein.

6. And whereas your Lordships Oath is objected: It appears to us to be penned
with special caution and relation to such a time of necessity as this; and is
rather (as we conceive) sullfilled by consent to, then refusal of the
conditions offered to your Lordship, unto which also, we believe that respect
was had, when those Resolutions were taken up expressed in the forementioned
Letter to the King.

We hold it our Duty to deal thus clearly and freely with your Lordship; that
(if it were possible) we might give satisfaction thereby, However our
consciences do acquit us, that we have done our utmost therein, and do^
conceive that those that employed us, will be abundantly acquitted in the sight
of God and Man, as having done what could be expected from them, and unto whom
(for any neglect in this affair) the guilt of Blood we are confident shall not
be imputed in that day wherein inquisition shall be made for the same.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Io. Clotworthy. Rion. Salwey.

November 1646.
VVE^ have considered the paper wherein you expressed the sum of what was
delivered by you in the Conference with us; to which we make return.

Our first exception was, Not that none of the Propositions of the first way of
Overture, which were transmitted by us to the Parliament, are assented unto, as
in that paper is expressed, but that none of the Propositions which were
transmited, whether you look to the first way of Overture (as you are pleased
to term it) or the second way of Overure, are assented unto. And to the end
that this may be the better understood, we hold it necessary to declare, that
some of the Propositions which were transmitted by us from hence, were signed
by us a part, wherein we did undertake the prosecution of the War, as
vigorously against the Rebels, as we should be thereunto enabled by the
Parliament; which Propositions are expressed at large in our second paper of
November 18. 1646. and these seem only to have relation to Our self.

There were other Propositions signed by Us and the Council, wherein not only
Our self, but all others of this Kingdom, as well of the Soldiery, as others
of his Majesty's Prote^^^^ subjects of this Kingdom, and their ad^e^ents are
respe^^^^^^ concerned, the said Propositions importing no ^e^^e then the
preservation of them in their persons, estates, and employments.

And there were Instructions signed by us, and delivered to our Commissioners,
authorizing them, that if they did find the Parl. willing and ready to take
into their care and protection his Maj. subjects, within the quarters now under
our Command, and those that have adhered to them since the 22 of October 1641.
according to the purport of the Instructions signed by us and the Council, and
that our continuance in the Government should be the only let thereunto, that
then our said Commissioners should let them know, that we would surrender our
place of Lieutenant, and deliver up all the Holds in our power, to such as the
Parl. should appoint upon certain conditions, whereof the first and principal
is, that they should procure his Maj. directions for our so doing which offer
made by us, is in the Ordinance of parl delivered by you to us, and by you in
your paper of the 19. of Novem. 1646. called our second way of Overture
whereupon you say the parl. did proceed, which you say, Sir Francis Willoughby
upon his return from London might have informed us: That sir F. Willoughby
might have told us we know not; we are sure he did never tell us of the
resolution said by you to be taken by the Parl. for proceeding in that, you
call, the second way of Overture, nor did he bring with him (for ought known
to us) any copy of the Order of the 15 of Obtob. declaring, that Resolution,
nor was it mentioned by our Commissioners in any of their Letters, though we
received several, as well by the said Sir Fran. Willoughby, as by others of
dates subsequent to the said Order.

But on the contrary, Sir Gerrard Lowther, and Sir Paul Davies, did by their
Letter of the 6. of November. after sir Fr. Willoughbies departure from London,
certify us, that Sir Robert King and the rest were sent hither to treat with
us (as they heard) for surrendering Duhlin, and other places under Command to
which they were not called, but were altogether strangers to their transactions
there concerning that Treaty, and that they did not know any thing of their
commission, authority, or instructions, or how far they extended.

But though the Parl. did lay hold of this called our second way of Overture,
yet the propositions which were signed by us and the Council, wherein all his
May. Protestant Subjects of this Kingdom as well of the Soldiery as others,
and such as have adhered unto them, were a like concerned with us, were not to
be passed over, for whether we did continue in the Government, according to the
first way of Overture, or part with it (termed by you the second way of
Overture, it was our main care and desire, that they should be secured in their
persons, estates, and employments, which is not yet done to our satisfaction.

And in that which concerns our self, the principal thing which in his Maj.
direction and allowance for the rendering up of the Government, which was to
precede and warrant all that we did propound to be done by us herein, is yet
wanting, which we desire you to represent to those who employed you in the best
manner you may.

Exception 2.

Our second Exception is, that you have no power to secure any of his Maj.
Roman Catholic Subjects in their persons and estates, who have constantly
adhered to the Government here, since the 22. of October. 1541. of whom we
conceive care ought to be had in this present Treaty. To this you give these
Answers.

First that those who by authority of Parl. gave power to you to treat, did not
take cognizance of any of the Roman Catholics in Ireland, that did adhere to
the Government of this Kingdom against the Irish Rebels; which answer does not
satisfy us, but does enforce the Exception, for their not taking cognizance of
them, is the ground and cause of the Exception.

Your second answer is, That (if any such be) it is probable the number is not
considerable; And if they have done nothing against the Pari^^ they need not
any special security, but may expect as much as others, that have in like
manner demeaned themselves, although they be of the Protestant Religion; which
answer does not satisfy, but gives us more cause to insist upon the
exception, because you say, it is probable that the number of them is not
considerable, whereas we who have been upon the place know it to be otherwise
both in number and quality of persons.

And since his Maj. Protestant Subjects, who have served against the Rebels
here, and done nothing against the Parl. are offered to be secured in their
persons and estates, they may by the same rule of Justice expect the like
assurance, and the greater regard ought to be of them, for that their Religion
being made the pretense of the Rebellion, they do notwithstanding adhere to his
Maj. protestant Subjects against the Rebels, who are of that Religion.

Your third answer, viz. Power is given (as by an instruction delivered in the
16* of November. is expressed) to protect such as will come under contribution, and
to give them safeguard by the countenance of the Forces serving under the Parl.
according to which they are to be protected in their persons and estates, as
well from the violence of the soldiers under the Parliament, as of the Enemy,
and this to be extended unto all, without distinction of Offense or Religion;
which Answer does not satisfy us, for the said instruction looks rather to
the Rebels who are to be brought under contribution, then to those who have
continued good Subjects, and there^n there is no assurance given unto them for
their e^state, as is in the same instruction to his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects for their Estates.

Your fourth answer is, If any thing can be reasonably offered in the behalf
of such Papists, as have adhered to the present Government, and not been in the
Irish Rebellion, it shall be also recommended back by you, to those, who
employed you, in the best manner you can to out satisfaction; The latter part
of which answer, being the best part thereof we desire may be pursued, for the
first part thereof does enforce the Exception, it being made a doubt whether
any thing can be reasonably offered for such Papists as have adhered to the
present Government, and not been in the Irish Rebellion, whereas nothing in
reason can be offered against such, but that they should be secured in their
persons and estates.

Our third Exception is, That no assurance is given, that the Judges and
Ministers of the Civil and Martial List, shall be continued in their places
and employments, which is answered by you, as follows:

First, nothing is given us in charge, nor has any thing been expressed by us
concerning the removal of the Judges and Ministers of the Civil List, nor of
any of them, which answer does not satisfy us: for we desire by our
Proposition, to have an assurance for the continuing them in their respective
employments, which is not yet assented unto.

Your second answer is, That in cases of like nature, it has not been known,
that persons so qualified have been continued and estiblished by Treaty, nor
was it to your knowledge, ever heretofore insisted upon by any whomsoever;
which answer does not satisfy us, for though you might show, that the contrary
has been done in like cases (as we believe you cannot) yet, even for that
cause, we have the more reason to insist upon it.

Your third answer is, If it must be presumed, that they have offended the
Parliament, yet assurance is given (and otherwise they can need none) for
security to their persons, with enjoyment of their goods and estates in the
Kingdom of Ireland, as if they had not offended, and have liberty to compound
for the estates any of them have in England, and such Composition not to exceed
two years value: We are not satisfied with this your answer, for there is
nothing here to assure them the continuance in their employments, and our
Proposition made in their behalf for their continuance in their employments,
cannot presume cannot presume a guilt; and it is no reason to say, that if they
be not guilty, they need desire this assurance, for the Judges do well
understand, that abundans cautela non nocet, and if it must be presumed that
they have offended the Parliament, there is the more reason to insist on the
Proposition for the continuing of them in their respective employments, they
having been dispoyled of all their estates.

To your expression whereby you would satisfy us concerning the continuing in
employment the Officers now under our Command, viz. That as you have not yet
taken up a resolution (if the Treaty should succeed) to displace any: so you
declare, it must be an extraordinary cause that must induce you to it, we
easily believe, that as it is too early for you to declare a resolution to
turn them out of their employments, (though such a resolution were taken up by
you) till you possessed of the power to do it; so you may judge such a
declaration, not to be the readiest way, to attain to that power by Treaty
from us, which We are confident, is the only way whereby you will at this time
attempt it, but when by that means you should be invested in that Power, the
questiou is, whether you would not then understand that the Concurrence of some
of the Marria^ll List with us in the conclusion of the Cessations and peace
here, the actual Service of some others in His Majesty's Armies in England,
and the obedience given by all to some Commands, that may have been displeasing
to the two Houses of Parliament in England, to be extraordinary and sufficient
causes for their removeall, wherein, if you shall declare negatively, we shall
rest satisfied as to that particular, not could our Demand of having them
secured in their respective employments, be understood to reach to a
forgiveness of such Crimes in future as may merit displacing; for which we
confess, we can no more allege a president, then we believe you can, that
ever the sword was demanded to be delivered by the Chief Governor of this
Kingdom, to Commissioners of the Parliament of England, without the Command of
the King.

Exception 4.

Our fourth exception being as follows, viz. That great inconvenience may
happen to all the Protestants of Ireland, who are to be included in this
treaty, if they should thereby conclude themselves to submit to all Ordinances
of Parliawent, is answered by you as follows;

Answer 1.

Your first Answer is, we have declared* that their submitting to all
Ordinances of Parliament is to be understood, no otherwise then as all others
do, who have always adhered to, and never offended the Parliament; with which
answer we are not satisfied, it being no more, then that we are to submit to
all the Ordinances of Parliament; to which, those who are of the Parliament
party submit, as the Covenant, the Directory, the abolishing of the Book of
Common Prayer, etc.

Answer 2.

Your second answer is, we know of no Ordinance of Parliament that requires
the Covenant to be taken in the Kingdom of Ireland, with which answer we are
not satified, for we know that it has been pressed in all parts of the Kingdom,
where the Parliament has prevailed, as in the Provinces of Munster, Vlster,
and Connaught, there being some Ministers not long since employed into Vlster,
who went from Town to Town, and from City to City, pressing the Covenant,
whereupon many Protestants did acquit their Commands and habitations in those
parts, rather then they would subject themselves to it, and if the same was
done without an Ordinance of Parliament, we have the more reason to insist,
that his Majesty's Subjects may be secured against so violent and unwaranted
pressures upon their Consciences.

And if you know no Ordinances of Parliament which requires the Covenant to be
taken in the Kingdom of Ireland, you may the better undertake that it shall
not be pressed; and if you be not instructed to suppress the Book of Common
prayer, or impose tho Directory, you may the better condescend to what is
desired concerning both, so far as is expressed in our instructions.

Answer 4.

Your fourth answer is, It may also be considered, that your Lordship made
Overture of submitting to the Direction of both houses of Parliament (and that
exclusively to any other whatsoever) as to to the ordering and disposing of the
Army, etc. if they should accept of your Overture, which could not be
understood otherwise to be done, but by Ordinances of Parl, as to them from
time to time should seem meet.

We are not satisfied with this your Answer, the strength of your reason being
thus;

That we did submit to the direction of both Houses of Parliament for the
ordering of the Army, etc. therefore no inconvenience can happen to the
Protestants in Ireland, who are to be included in this Treaty, if they should
thereby conclude themselves to submit to all Ordinances of the Parliament of
England, which sure is no good Consequence, from one particular to conclude a
general; And if you would declare that by submitting to all Ordinances of
Parliament, were only intended such Ordinances as concern the ordering and
disposing of the Army, though that offer of Ours was in case that way of
accommodation, which is waved by the Parliament, were laid hold of (of any
thing wherein we therefore conceive no use should be made in this Treaty, since
that way laid aside) yet such a declaration would, as that point give
satisfaction

The fifth exception is, That the Kings Direction for the delivery up of the
Government is not obtained and that our Commissioners were commanded to
forbear the delivering unto the Scottish Commissioners, the Duplicate of the
Letters, which We and the Council had written to his Majesty concerning the
same; To which you make these Answers, viz.

That our Commissioners did declare, That if Supplies were not instantly
dispatched, that We would take it for granted, that none would be sent, which
was the ground of hastening the said Supplies, whereas the words of our
Instructions wero, That if within a reasonable time after landing of our
Commissioners; they did not advertise us, that those things we desired were on
the way hither, or at least a considerable proportion of Money and Munition,
and probable hope of the rest speedily after, that then we would take it for
granted, not that no Supplies would come. but that our Propositions were
rejected there, which strongly employed, and so was intended, that if we
understood Supplies were on the way, we might then take it for granted, our
propositions were accepted, which also we had cause to believe, for that our
Commissioners by command of the Committee, before whom they were heard,
signified to us, their message was cheerfully accepted, whereof the sending of
Supplies was but a part; nor can it be reasonably objected to us, that we
refuse those Supplies, since none of the Conditions wherein we expressed our
willingness to receive them, is offered to us in manner as was desired,
especially that fundamental one, of procuring the Kings Command for delivering
up the Sword, and Garrisons, which being the way fixed on by the Parliament, we
much wonder, was not endeavored (as well it might have been, and an answer
had) before you came from London, and if it had been obtained, there had been
no need of sending it to us till your arrival, and if it had been refused, the
Parliament in their great wisdom and knowledge of the duty of one so highly
trusted, would have found some other expedient to extend their assistance and
protection to the Protestants, other then such as must blemish our honor and
fidelity to all Posterity, nor is it a sufficient discharge to us, that his
Majesty has not inhibited us to proceed and conclude with you, his express
command, being in this case absolutely necessary. And as for the suppositions
and inferences, which you make out of the Letters writ by us to his Majey, and
both houses of Parliament; as that it could not be imagined, the necessities
being so great, under which we then were; that we would refuse such supplies
from the Parliament in manner as they directed, till our letter should be from
hence sent to New castle, and answer thereof returned to us: And that the
Parliament had no reason to conceive, that we intended so to insist on the
Kings direction, as without it we would not conclude, etc. As also considering
how passionately we represented to the Parliament, the importance of the City
and Castle of Dublin, etc. and how undoubtedly all must miscarry, if Supplies
did not speedily come, that yet the Kings consent should be so insisted upon,
as none of the forementioned considerations should purchase a dispensation
therein: And to induce us thereunto, you propose unto us examples of the
delivering up of other Garrisons and Forces in England, as in particular, that
of Oxford, etc. without having any explicit direction from the King to deliver
up the same. We conceive the case of Oxford to be different from this; For Sir
Thomas Fairfax, to whom the City of Oxford was rendered, (after some time of
formal Singe, and the shedding of blood on both fides) was not invited thither
by those within to defend and relieve it against the expected attempts of
another enemy; as those Forces now here with you were (upon certain Conditions)
by us, but his coming before Oxford was unsent for, openly and declaredly to
take by force of Arms that City: In the case of Oxford also, we have seen his
Majesty's Command, directed to the Governor for the rendering thereof, which if
you can produce to us for the giving up of these Garrisons, with the E^sig^es
of Royalty belonging to the Crown of this Kingdom, we will in like sort
readily obey the same, notwithstanding some other disparity in the cases. And
if the instructions we gave our Commissioners be looked into, Copies whereof
were delivered by them to the Committee of both houses, all these suspicions,
inferences, and Arguments will vanish, it being a certain and true rule, that
no inference nor application is to be made contrary to that which is expressed,
as our instructions were in this particular; for our first and principal
instruction was, That we would surrender our place of Lieutenant. etc. to such
as the Parliament should appoint, upon these following conditions.

First, that they procure his Majesty's direction for the doing thereof, etc.
But further to clear it, in our seventh and last instruction delivered unto
our Commissioners, whereof the said Committee had likewise a Copy, it is
further given in charge unto them in this manner: viz. If in the mean time
whilst they take these Propositions and the rest into their considerations,
and till they have procured his M^j^sties direction as aforesaid, the
Parliament be pleased to send over such Supplies, as may relieve the Garrisons
from ruin, through want, or by the hostile attempts of the Rebels, the same
shall be well husbanded for them, and employed only to those ends, both which
instructions leave no place for inference or implication to be made contrary to
express instructions. If the Parliament has procured his Majesty's direction,
the condition is performed, but if that be not done, the Forces notwithstanding
may be received and employed in the present service, and ^o all those
inconveniences may be prevented, which are feared: But if nothing that we can
do can give satisfaction, but to deliver up the Sword, render all the
Garrisons, and other Commands to the pleasure of the Parliament, which we are
bound by Oath to preserve and keep for His Majesty, before we do receive His
direction therein, We doubt not but we shall be acquit herein, before God and
men, if we insist upon the refusal of that which we cannot do without the
violation of our Oath to God and the King.

To sum me up in brief those particulars wherein we are not satisfied by any
of your Papers, nor by any thing which was delivered in the Conference.

First, you have showed us no direction from his Majesty to deliver the Sword,
etc. which you say you have not procured.

Secondly, you have not offered assurance to the Papists of this Kingdom, who
have adhered to his Majesty's government since the 22. of October 1641. for
their estates, which is confessed by you.

Thirdly, you have not undertaken, that the Covenant shall not be pressed, nor
that the Book of Common Prayer shall not be suppressed.

Fourthly, you have given no assurance either for the continuance of the Judger
and Officers of the Civil List, or the Officers of the Martial in their
respective employments, or the Clergy in their respective Rights, and
incumbencies.

Fifthly, you have given us no satisfaction in that great and main Objection
touching the present Parliament, which would be dissolved, if that we should
deliver the Sword in manner as is desired, The Papers do clear none of these
particulars, and nothing was delivered positively in the Conference which does
any ways enlarge the former Papers. We know that in matters of so high and
great concernment, you will go to the utmost Limits of your instructions, and
that in these things which seem doubtful to us, you will (if any expedient can
be found for the continuing the Treaty) represent them to those who employed
you, in the best manner you can, for Our satisfaction; according to the promise
made by you in your last Paper, for which we do return you thanks in the
behalf of all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and those who have faithfully
adhered to them. And for that full satisfaction cannot be given to us without
your further Application to the Parliament, for enlarging your powers. We being
resolved to leave no means unattempted, that may conduce to the preservation
of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects in this Kingdom, and the Rights of the
Crown of England, and to the end the Forces brought hither by you, may be
employed to those good ends, whilst His Majesty's pleasure by us, and that of
the Parliament by you is sought, do offer these following Propositions.

First, that the Officers and Soldiers, sent hither by the Parliament of
England be put into one, or more convenient Garrisons, and be commanded by
their Respective Officers, who are to receive Orders from Us and the Governors
of the places where they shall be Garrisoned, and to be subject to the Laws
Martial now in force in this Kingdom. Secondly, We desire, toward the
keeping of the Army now under our Command for six weeks three thousand pounds,
whereof two parts in money, and a third part in victuals. Thirdly, That there
be an engagement from you to us on the behalf of the Parliament, that the
Officers and Soldiers which are to be Garrisoned, as in the first Proposition
is mentioned, shall do no Act prejudicial to the present Government here; And
that in case we shall not at or before the expiration of the said six weeks
agree, that they shall remove from those places out of our quarters, at such
time as we shall direct. Fourthly, We shall engage Our self unto you, that the
said Officers and Soldiers, shall quietly and peaceably be permitted by Us to
remove with their Arms, Provisions and other things belonging unto them to
Shipboard, or to such other places out of Our quarters, as you Sir Robert
Meredith, Sir Thomas Wharton. Sir Robert King, and Sir John Clotworthy,
Knights, and Richard Salwey Esquire, or any three of you shall direct: And to
these Our Propositions We desire your speedy Answer.
ORMONDE.

Dublin. 22. November. 1646.
HAving received your Lordships papers of the 21. of November, and in them your
return to what was first delivered in-conference, and afterward for your
Lordships satisfaction put in writing, and signed by us.

And whereas in those papers, your Lordship desires a copy of the Instruction,
whereby power is given us to agree for Pensions to the value of two thousand
pounds per annum We have the light fit (that nothing may be wanting on our
parts) herewith to deliver you a Copy of the said Instruction.

And however upon perusal of your Lordships paper of the 21. of November, we
find little cause to believe, satisfaction will be received by your Lordship,
as has been andeavoured to be given by Us. Yet foras^^^^eh at your third paper
of the 19. of November d^^d express, that when you should receive in writing
signed by us, what war delivered in Conference to your Lordship, you would then
declare unto us, whether or no you would rest satlsfied therewith, or upon the
whole matter insist upon your refusal, we desire your Lordship speedily to
give us your positive answer accordingly.

And withal, we hold it fit to declare, that as we conceive the grounds of
satisfaction offered by us, do remain unanswered by you Lordship, and
particularly touching the Kings consent and direction (which you call maine and
fundamental) we having made it appear that your Lordships Overture to the
Parliament, was, to put all your Forces and Garrisons under their sole Command
(the King unconsulted with at all therein) so we no ways think fit (though
our Instructions should therein anthorize us) to accept of the Propositions
mentioned in the latter end of your papers, as an expedient to continue any
longer.

It yet your Lordship continue to refuse what we have offered, we can only
give account thereof to those that employed us, and must leave it to the world
to judge, whether those Exceptions, taken and insisted on by your Lordship, be
consonant to those grounds and principles held forth in your Overture made to
the Parliament, by which they were induced to send Succors hither, or whether
all the particulars (so far insisted on by your Lordship, that it app^^ar^s
not to us, you will recede from any one thereof) be of equal concernment to
that hazard, yea (according to your Lordships own representation) that
Certainty of loss, not of a Kingdom only, but of Thousands of Protestants,
and together with them, the Protestant Relig^on also.

All which, by the great care and pious endeavors of the Parliament of
England, might have been (through the blessing of God) prevented, if what we
have oftered (and do yet offer) in their names he not by your Lordship refused.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Io. Clotworthy. R. Salwey.

A Copy of the Instruction mentioned in the former Paper.
YOu, or any Three of you, have also hereby power given you to agree for such
allowances to be paid to others by constans Pension, during the War of
Ireland. (for the better and more fir me carrying on of this Work) as shall
not exceed in the whole, the su^^me of Two Thousand Pounds per-annum, to all
other persons, beside the Two Thousand pounds per annum, to the Lord of
Ormonde: And those pensions to continue till they can receive the like benefit
by their own Estates.

Signed as the rest of the Instructions.

Vera Copia

Ex. W. Row.



22. November. 1646.
WHereas by your paper of the 22. of Nov. 1646. You affirm that you made it
appear that our Overture to the Parliament was to put our Forces and Garrisons
under their sole Command the King not consulted withal therein, we do
positively affirm, that you neither have nor can make it appear, that we made
Overture to the Parliament, to put all our Forces and Garrisons under their
sole Command, the King unconsulted; for whatsoever has been offered by us unto
the Parliament by our Prop sitions and Instructions, We are constant thereunto,
and still ready to perform.

ORMONDE.

22. November. 1646.
HAving received your Lordships paper of the 22. of November (which we conceive
needs no reply) we desire to know whether your Lordships will return any
further answer to our first paper of this days date.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Io. Clotworthy Rich. Salwey.

22. November 1646.
WE may not return other Answer, then We have done in Our former papers,
until We have Consulted His Majesty, and received His Direction therein.

ORMONDE.

22. November. 1646.
WE having heard nothing from you since We sent Our last paper, We desire to
know whether We shall understand this Treaty to be at an end for the present,
that if neither Our Propositions. sent by Us to the Parliament of England, nor
the Propositions We sent unto you for the stay of your men, be assented unto,
in manner as is Propounded, We may consider what further course to take for the
preservation of His Majesty's Subjects and the Rights of the Crown.

ORMONDE.

22. November. 1646.
IN Answer to your Lordships paper of the 23. of November We return; That We
continue assured there is no other way according to the representation made by
your Lordship to the Parliament, of preserving the Protestants of the Kingdom
of Ireland, nor of the Rights thereof relating to the Kingdom of England, but
by accepting the the Overtures made by us to your Lordship according to Our
Papers delivered in; Your Lordship insisting upon a positive refusal thereof,
we understand the Treaty to be at an end; And as for the offers lately made by
your Lordship to us, we refer our selves to our Answer already given thereunto,
and can in no wise accept of the same.

Rob. Meredith. Tho. Wharton. Rob. King. Jo. Clotworthy. Rich. Salwey.

FINIS.

