A TRVE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from DO Castle in Ireland, from an Irish Rebel,
to DVNKERKE.

And from thence sent to London, by a well-wisher to the advancement of the
Protestant Religion.

As also a Copy of the League which the Captains of Londonderry have entered
into, for the keeping thereof, and the County adjoining.

Jan: 12 LONDON, Printed for William Hope. 1643. 1642

To my loving Cousin Captain Donothy Ocane, in DVNKERKE.
Loving Cousin,
MY former Letter about four months since unto you informed you of the
passages in these parts, but doubting it came not to your hand in respect of
the times, I have here writ you the brief of the same: the Captains of
Londonderry are entered in a League for defense of the City and Country
adjoining, it is the truth as near as I could attain by my best intelligence
from thence, and I fear will prove the most material piece against our
design and cause in these parts, their Companies being as valiant as any I can
hear of in the Kingdom, and is still upon service with the Regiments, and
oftentimes abroad by themselves in the County of Londonderry, and has annoyed
my Cousin Collonell Shane Ocane very much, and does keep in Mishowne that they
cannot do as they would, Captain Lawson and his Company has been several
times in our Country, and has done us much harm: he has our Cousin Captain
To. Rout Ocane prisoner in Derry, he entered the Castle of Strabane, and killed
our good friend Captain Shane, Mac Chinee, the next morning after our Cousin
Sir Philemy O Neale, left it unto Captain Shane to ke^^e, and one hundred of
our men in it, and most of them all ^^^^^d by the Regiments that same day, and
the Derry (...) at wh^^h time our Cousin took the Lady of Strabane with him: I
wrote to you before that we might have stopped Captain Lawson his journey when
he came first from Lisnagarry, about the last of November through our Country,
and spoke then with our Cousin Collonell Shane Ocane, and was but three horse
and himself at Muffe upon the way, and now since, we hear he left behind him
a Foot company, and a troop of Horse, and was the first in those parts that
opposed our Cousin Sir Con Mac Ginis of entering Lisnagarry, when the Lord
Conoway his Troop of Horse, and all the towns people left it, and the Country
about, and but for him we had had Balfast, and most of those parts in
possession; we did little dream any such action had been in him, if we had,
we would have cut him short of his journey, but now no remedy: We have burnt
most of the Country about, only Tirconell does us much mischief, our Cousin
Owen Mac Cart is landed here at Do, and has taken a Puritan Bark with Arms,
we are glad of his Arrival.

As also of the troubles in England, I hope we shall see our desires upon our
Enemies if Englands troubles continue, and be possessed of all our own Lands, we
expect your assistance of Arms and Ammunition; and that all our Countrymen
will come and assist us. I pray you write me all the news from thence, by
Watterford, or any way you can, it will come to my hand, in respect we are
Masters of the Fields. Commend me to all our Friends. I rest

Your loving Cousin, DONELL OCANE.
From Do Castle this first of August, 1642.
THE League of the Captains of Londonderry, for the keeping thereof, and
Country adjoining.
FIRST, IT is concluded by us whose names are subscribed, that we will from
this time forward stand together for the safe keeping of this City, of
Londonderry, and Country adjoining, and be helpful in all things concerning
the same.

Secondly, It is agreed that on the morrow morning we will all join together
with a competent number of our men, to expel all such Irish out of the City,
as we shall conceive to be needful, for the safety of this City.

Thirdly, That after this is done, that a Proclamation be made that no man or
woman, so expelled the City, shall upon pain of death return unto this City,
or make their abode within two miles of the same.

Fourthly, That the morrow morning, we take the advice of Sir John Vaughan, and
Captain Henry Vaughan, we survey the Suburbs of this City, and conclude what
houses are to be pulled down and what Gardens and Orchards to be cut for
annoying the enemies approach, and that the same be speedily put in execution.

Fifthly, That forty men be spared every watch night to guard the Ordnance, and
the gates the next day, that is, twenty men of the maine guard, and twenty men
of the by guard, out of the two hundred watches every night.

Sixthly, It is thought fit all our Companies be drawn forth into the fields,
and that the Captains and Officers shall take a Voluntary oath to be true to
the King and State, and to keep the City to the expense of his life, and to
leave it to the rest of the companies to do the like if they please.

The division of the Walls for Each Captains quarter to make good.
Seventhly, Captain Pitts to make good the Kings Bulwark to the Ferrigate.

Eighthly, Captain Thornton from the Ferrigate to Master Wabions Bulwark, and
they two to make good the Ferrigate.

Ninthly, Captain Kilner from Master Wabions Bulwark to Chichesters Bulwark,
and make good the Shipkeygate.

Tenthly, Captain Finch, from the end of Chichester Bulwark to the
Butchersgate.

Eleventhly, Captain Osbourne from the end of Chichester Bulwark to the
Butchersgate.

Twelfthly, Captain Lawson to make good the Princes Bulwark, and the Bishops
gate, to the Kings Bulwark.

13. Who ever has the Town guard Captain Lawson is to make good his quarter,
and the Captain of the Towns guard, to make good Captain Lawsons quarter.

14. Sir John Vaughan, and Sir Robert Stewart, to make good the maine guard,
and all inhabitants, or residents within the said City, not under the
Captains, Commands to repair to the maine guard, for the better strengthening
thereof and issuing of supplies as occasion shall require.

15. All women and Children, to keep within doors, and hang out lights in
their several houses.

16. Every Captain to allow so many men to the Canoneeres as shall be
requisite, and to give them their names the morrow morning.

17. Every Captain to take the overfight of his own quarter, for the
repairing of the defects of their several quarters, or other fortifications,
with the Gabions for the Cannoneers, which is to be done at the general charge.

The Names of the Captains.
Robert Thornton, Simon Pits, Henry Finch. Henry Osburne, John Kilmer, Robert
Lawson, Hu. Finch.
Since the Honorable City of London has sent us fifteen pieces of Ordnance,
and four we had before, in all nineteen pieces, for which amongst other their
goodness toward us, we pray the Lord reward them, and preserve them, and
continue his mercy with them, and divert his judgments in these evil times
from them, that it may still continue a City flowing with plenty for ever.

FINIS.

