THE DECLARATION OF His Excellency the Lord Marquis of ORMOND Lord Deputy of
JRELAND, and General of all the Forces in that Kingdom for the KING.

Together with the Lord INCHEQVEENE, and all the rest of the Kingdom;
Concerning the Death of His Sacred MAJESTY, who was Murdered at White Hall, the
30. of January; By an usurped Power of the COMMONS of ENGLAND, as they call
themselves.

Likewise their Intentions to Crown Prince CHARLES King, and engage in His
Quarrel against ENGLAND.

To which is added the Reasons, which moved them to join with the Irish Rebels
as they Call them in England.

Published by special Command.

Printed at Cork in Ireland, and now reprinted, 1648.

THE DECLARATION, etc.
FOrasmuch as we know and are ascertained of the Tragic proceedings and
treasonable attempts put in practice by that rebellions Army of Sectaries now
in England, and the Command of Baron Fairfax, who by Martial power and
contrary to their once protended principles for which they did at first engage,
which were to seat their Lawful King upon his Throne, and make him a great
and glorious Prince, and not to injure His Royal Person, and likewise to
maintain and defend the Privileges of Parliament, and liberty of the Subject,
unto which engagement they were sworn, which Oath they have presidiously
broken by their excluding and making the Major part of the house of Commons
incapable of the trust reposed in them by the respective Counties for whom they
were chosen as Members, imprisoning some and denying others admittance also,
disabling the Lords for ever having any voice in Parliament, unless they
please to entertain them into their Conventicle of Sectaries, who are not
above forty or fifty at most which be now considerable with that perjured Army
of Rebbels, and presume to call themselves the Commons of England, and pretend
that the supreme power of the Kingdom is in herent in them (a thing before
never heard of) by which like aspiring (...), they assume the power Legislative
to make and (...) Laws. They have by this pretended and new found authority
(...) a Court of Judicature (as they (...) it) which indeed is no other but
Conventicle of injustice and wicked treasonable practices. By which pretended
Court they like imperious proud and barbarous regicids, have presumed to bring
their Le^ge Lord and gracious King to an illegal trial, and contrary to all
Law both of God and man, have condemned and tyranously laid violent hands on
His Sacred Person, perpetrating Murder upon him without all or any just cause.
O what a tyranicall cruelty was this! Acted upon their King and Father of the
Country is it possible they can think that God will let such a infinite sin slip
without revenging his blood upon such cruel murderers, who have made theselves
drunk with the innocent blood of their Sovereign and the best of Kings, whose
fervor and zeal to Peace and his Subjects good, was ever visible even to his
latest breath as may appear by his Declarations and several Messages sent to
his two Houses of Parliament, desiring a Treaty with them, that all differences
might be happily composed, and His three Kingdom, settled in Peace and Unity,
which he with much desiring at length procured to Treat with his two Houses of
Parliament, where his alacrity and integrity to Peace was made most plain and
manifest, for he was graciously pleased to yield to all that was desired,
although to bind up his own hands and throw himself into the laps of his own
Subjects and to do what they should think fit whereby to stop the bleeding o^
his people in all three Kingdoms, but when every man's eyes were fixed of a
conclusion of the Treaty and expected peace and his late Majesty's Concessions
voted satisfactory and sufficient to the grounds of peace and settlement and
his late Majesty thought he had been in safety, he was by some Arch traitors of
that treacherous Army taken away from the Isle of Wight, and His body hurryed
from place to place, and at last unhumanely murdered by them, who of right ought
to have been his Subjects, and to have protected his Royal Person from
violence.

And whereas they have since his late Majesty's death of famous memory, by
pretended Acts and Proclamations declared, that it shall be High Treason for
any one to Proclaim Prince Charles (who is now rightful heir to the Crown of
England) to be King of great Britain without their approbation, which they
have since manifested, shall not be granted by another Act of theirs, saying,
the Office of Kings is chargeable and withal useless amongst them, therefore
ought to be abolished; which wicked and illegal practice of theirs is
abominable and of right is to be shunned by all true Subjects and good
Christians, who are bound by Conscience and by their Oath of Allegiance to use
their best endeavors to circumvent their consultations and hellish design
which tends only to the subversion of Monarchy and setting up the rule and
government of Democracy, by wrongfully expelling their lawful King, and not
giving to Caesar those things which be Caesar's, but keeping him in exile and
banishment, and murder, rob and despoyle all his Loyal Subjects of their
inheritance, by that unjust sword which they have in their lawless hands. It
is not unknown to all the three Kingdoms our forwardness, loves and affections
to the Parliament of England, and what hazard we have diverse times sustained in
behalf of it, both indangering our lives and fortunes to maintain its
privileges, but now we can acknowledge it no Parliament at all, neither King
nor Lords being there, but only a few of the Commons house and whether those
rightly elected or no, we are uncertain, but this we know, that at the death of
the King, the Parliament is dissolved until the succeeding King have elected a
new one. But so soon as we found and did perceive that they took several
Oaths, Protestations, and the Covenant, merely to make a nose of wax of, and
cheat the vulgar and mean people, deviating from their once (as it seems)
only pretended principles, and that by backsliding clandestine plots and
treacherous designs, their sole aim was to take away our late Kings life, who
indeed we may boldly assirm, that for a virtuous liver, and Kingly parts, he
was unparalleled there not having been his Peer for acute wit and solid
judgment amongst all his Royal predecessors in former ages. But what may we
really say, he was too good to rule so sinful a people, therefore God in his
high displeasure has taken him away, however we have a young Phoenix his
Royal son Charles late Prince of Wales, whom we must acknowledge for our King,
as we are bound by our Allegiance, so to do, and his Royal Cause we shall with
our lives and fortunes prosecute, and with our swords endeavor to establish
him in despite of those proud Rebbels who did so traitorously murder his late
Father to satisfy their blood-thirsty appetites.

To satisfy all Christian people of the Truce and Association made between us
and the Catholic Irish, we do declare (to stop the mouths of some who
peradventure will endeavor to lay false scandals upon us, calling us Papists,
which is very well known, we were never of that Religion, but always
Protestants, as may an^^ere by our proceedings against them, which may be a
large testimony that we do not allow of their Profession, nor will ever enlarge
the Popes Dominions and Romish Hierarchy) the reason why we entered into League
and confedenacy with them is as follows, viz.

We finding their real intentions and often protested principles were to
submit and live under the ancient rule and Government of a King, and that it
was never their desire to live under any other, then our late deceased King
Charles and his lawful successor, and successors who is the noble and
illustrious Prince Charles now Charles the second, and is by birth right to
succeed his deceased Father. And that the only thing for which at first they
did promote the Irish Wars was for no oother and but to preserve the liberty of
their consciences which they were informed (by some cvill instruments) they
should be very suddenly deprived of, which made such an impression in them,
that they were resolved rather to hazard their lives, then prejudice their
Consciences, which they did believe all good Christians ought to do. But for
altering their Government, and rovolting from their and our King to make this
Nation Subjects to the Pope (as it has all along been supposed) was never
their intentions more then to allow him supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters,
which belong only to themselves as some of the principles of their Religion. We
having therefore found in them so much integrity to the Kings cause, and so
much willingness to hazard their lives and fortunes for him (as becomes) true
Subjects, we could not either in reason not conscience but accept their offer
injoyning with us to Crown and settle our lawful King Charles the second, who
is now in a low condition kept from his Right of Inheritance by the basest and
meanest Mechanics in all the English Nation, and also the worst and
desperatest Rebels that ever looked upon the Sun, who durst to act an open
murder upon their gracious Sovereign.

We hope what we have here expressed concerning our Confederacy and League with
our fellow Subjects of Ireland, (will give any true subject or honest man
satisfaction, and for Rebels we care not) by whose assistance as an immediate
means we doubt not to inthrowne our King and dissolve that Rebel nest fitting
at Westminster. who take so much authority upon them, affirming themselves to be the
highest Court of Indiceture upon earth, when it is well known there is no
Nobleman not scarce a Gent, amongst them, but low bred fellows and most of
them men of broken fortunes, laying aside what they have by injustice robbed the
Kingdom of and extorted from true and loyal Subjects.

Now to declare further what is our true and unfeigned Resolutions, and
wherefore we do engage to prevent misunderstanding, and stop the mouths of
those who would peradventure calumniate us with false aspersions, blemish our
integrity by lies and forgeries, and fained Chemera's of their own braine-sick
inventing) we say upon the says of Christians that we have no other ends, but
according to this Declaration to prosecure our allegiance, in furthering our
Sovereigns cause, and the establishing his Royal Person in the Dominious
which did of right belong to his late Father. viz.

1. We will to the utmost of our power (as becomes loyal Subjects) endeavor
to Crown and settle our gracious King CHARLES the II. in all his three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and to that end we have advanced
an Army for his said Majesty's service, and will hazard our lives and
fortunes, His Royal Person to defend and keep against all violence,
treasonable and treacherous attempts, which may be by the English Rebels or any
other at any time made against him, his Crown, dignity, and Regal authority,
or to the dimishing: of any of his Kingly titles by any pretended power of
Parliament whatsoever.

2ly, That we do not intend to introduce any Arbitrary Government which may
inslave our fellow Subjects of England, but only to bring such who be in
Rebellion to due Obedience according as their allegiancebinds them to their
natural liege Lord and King.

3ly, That we do not intend to violate the fundamental Laws, and
Constitutions of any the 3. Kingdoms, but shall be careful to keep and
preserve them as the greatest good belonging to all our fellow Subjects.

4ly. We do declare, that we will ever stand and be firmly and Really for the
true Protestant Religion, and shall not admit of any other Church government;
likewise for the just Rights, Freedoms and Privileges of Parliaments, when
lawfully called and elected by His said Majesty's Writ, as of right it ought to
be, and to consist of King, Lords, and Commons, as all precedent Ages has
done, and until then we hold all Authority of the English protended
Parliament, to be usurpation, illegal, and not Parliamentall authority, but a
Committee of Adjutators to plot and contrive treasonable practices against
their lawful King, and his loyal Subjects.

5. And lastly, If there be any one amongst them, who will (as by duty and
allegiance bound) desert those wicked Robels, and timely repair to serve their
King, they shall not only have pardon for their former acts, but shall be
accommodated according to their degrees and several qualities.

God save King CHARLES the II.
Finis.
Ormond. Inchiqueene.


