The Real VICTORY OF PORTVGALL, Against The Powers of Spain AND Her verity,
confronting the Castilian Lies.

Coppied out of the relations that came from Lisboa by Baltazar Oliveras.

Printed at LONDON in the year. 1644.

The real Victory of Portugal, Against the Powers of Spain. And her verity,
Confronting the Castilian lies.
IT is so fatal to the Spaniard to be beaten by the Portuguesses, that not
content to be overcome b^ force of Arms, they invent new ways to aug^ meant
their own overthrowes: and this appears evident by their late publishing a
mighty victory which they (forsooth) had newly obtained over the Portuguesses
in the skirts of Spain; whereas within very few days after this loud lies
publication, there arrived here most certain news of the selfsame defeat
given in the same time and place, unto the Spaniards, by the Portuguesses,
which they had vapoured to have bin given by them unto the Portuguesses, so
that by this we see the Spaniards are not content to be quelled by the sword of
the Portugal, but they must needs also be confounded by their own lies, to
make their shame the greater.

Whence it may be hoped the world in time will be disabused to see this si^king
Nation endeavor to subsist by couching all her weak affairs, under the
masque of impudent lies: For to what other end could she else (knowing her self
actually beaten) vaunt of a victory at the same instant over her greatest
Enemy? so to redouble her own overthrow, and make suspected the reality of the
Victors glory, if yet we may call that a victory which was obtained over a
Nation that has even annihilated her self, by laying her best foundations upon
the empty nothing of mere chymeraes and lies.

Behold the true State of this affair: Matthias de Alberquerque General of
the Principal Army which the King of Portugal (...) now on foot against the
King of Castile, whilst he was recrewting his forces, to put in execution
some notable design (in continuation of his Conquest of all the Extremadura
joining upon the borders of Portugal, where in his last years Expeditions, his
Excellence had wrested from the Spaniards 9. Towns of importance, besides many
other places of consequence) made an advance into Castilia, with the forces he
had then together, so to keep both his own, and his Enemies forces from being
idle, whilst his greater powers were assembling to a body. And as he was
retreating from some place in the said Province of Castile, after he had there
burned the Town of Montigo. Lo, the Count de Montigo, General of the
Castilian powers, finding his Enemy at an advantage, upon the 26. of May stilo
novo bids him battle, the Spanish Army then consisting of 2600. horse, and of
12000. foot; what with those their said General had himself in pay, and what
with some others that were joined unto him, under the conduct of the Marquis de
Teracuza, General of the Spanish Forces in Badayoz, which were drawn then out
of the Province of Andalusia, to make a reinforcement, thereby to prevent the
daily losses they sustained by the Portugals. In which said Army the Castilians
had 12. pieces of Artillery, each carrying bullet of 15. pound weigth: whilst
yet the Army of the Portuguesses at that instant consisted only of 1100,
horse, and little more then 11000. foot, not having any Cannon of consequence
at all, because they went out of Portugal with a light flying Army purposely
to burn the said Town and so to retreat again.

Nevertheless the Portuguesses being accustomed to overcome greater odds than
these, accepted cheerfully of the battle bidden by the Spaniards, and
instantly drew themselves into a brave squadron with two wings thereupon
attending, placing in the right wing their General of the Horse, Francisco de
Mello, Master of the Game unto his Majesty of Portugal, with 600. of their
horse. And in the left wing the Commissary of the horse ( Don Rodrigo de Castro
their Lieutenant General being at that time absent and sick in Portugal)
with 500. Horse of the Hollanders and other Forrainers, which were all the
troops of Forrainers that are actually in the King of Portugals service.

The Castilians also squadraning themselves in like Battalia putting in one of
their wings 1000. and in the other 1600. Horse.

Which done, the 1000. Spanish horse did instantly inviron the 500. horse of
the Forrainers, on the adverse partee, who giving ground to the greater number
of their Enemies, after a very short skirmish, retired so impetuously to their
Portugal Infantery, as they put them into much disorder, so as the 1000.
Castilian horse rushed in amongst them with a mighty fury, which being
perceived by the two Masters of the Camp, Don Nunio Mascharenhas and Airs de
Saldanha, who led up the vangard of the Portuguesses, they instantly set upon
the Castilian vangard, with such dexterity and valor together, as it was hard
to say, whethers valor at that time was the greater, the resisting Portugals,
or the assailing Spaniards, puffed up with his pride of having broken the
ranks of his Enemy, and placed himself in the midst of their Squadrons.

This irruption of the Spanish horse, into the squadrons of the Portuguesses,
did somewhat affright their Right wing of Horse, and made them retreat to the
body of their own army, yet so, as still in their retreating, to make a brave
resistance unto the Spanish horse, pursuing them with that great odds above
mentioned of 1600. against 600. only.

In this disasterous circumstance the General of the Portuguesses Army (whose
horse was slain as his Excellence was mounting on him) drew his sword, and with
an undaunted resolution marches up on foot to the face of his Enemy, crying
out with a loud voice unto his own soldiers, Eae, Come on my sons, for your
Country, for your King, and for the reputation of the Portuguesses; whose
brave example, joined to the natural fervor of the Portugals, put new mettle
into them all, in so much that instantly Don John de Costa, Master General of
the Cam^e seconded by Lewis de Silva, Francisco de Mello de Castro, and Pedro
de Albuquerque all Masters of the Camp (who amidst this confusion never lost
the lively and sensible presence to themselves of Military Discipline) come up
so bravely that they did not only inviron the said 1000. Spanish horse, but in
short time also cut them all in pieces with their swords, not leaving a man of
the Enemy alive, who indeed fought it out so gallantly, as they rather chose
to dye fighting, than to live by flying. But above all, the vangard did most
press the Enemy, and after a long encounter with the single sword, put the
Spaniards van to flight, yet this was not done, till all the Spanish Officers
were slain before their faces. Mean while the General of the Portugal horse
so charged the standing wing of the Enemy, that finally he made them run to
the rest of their van, that before had fled away.

This battle lasted from ten a clock in the morning until three a clock in
the afternoon, at which time the Spanyard betook himself to the upon the
speed, being pursued by the Portuguesses about a league.

There remained dead in the place of the said battle, the said 1000 Spanish
horse, and above 100 of their other horse in the right wing, as also 2500
Spanish foot, amongst whom one was their own General, the Count de Montigo,
and their Master of the Camp General, and the Marquis de Barca Rota, with
above 150 Knights of the holy habit and military orders, as also all the
chief Officers of their whole Army. In fine, many more were slain, of whom we
know not as yet the just number though it be esteemed to be above 500; besides
many others that were drowned in their flight over a river, the number whereof
is yet unknown; as also it is uncertain what number of the Spaniards were
wounded. Besides, there were taken prisoners 2000 Castilians, amongst whom were
many persons of very great quality: and that which makes this victory yet
more accomplished, was, that the Spaniards left behind them all their
Artillery, and their baggage, many of their horse, and a great quantity of
Arms, whereof their muskets only amount to the number of 4000.

There were only slain of the Portuguesses 300 foot, or thereabouts, amongst
whom were the two said Masters of the Camp in their Vangards, Don Nunio
Mascarenhas, and Aires de Saldanha, who had both the greatest shares in this
victory before they lost their lives; besides one Captain of foot, one
Sargeant Major, and about 200 that were hurt, but not dangerously. Of their
horse they lost above 100, and one Captain of horse was flaine, besides 150
horse-men-wounded, though none of them mortally.

In further remonstrance of this victory the Portuguesses kept the field
until the next day, in which they sent their prisoners into Portugal,
together with the spoils taken from their enemies, and with their own dead
bodies to be buried with honor. And at the same instant that this news went
to Portugal, the conquering Army continued their happy progress into the
enemies country without finding so much as one Spanyard to appear, more than
those that were retired into their Garrisons: and it is conceived, that while
the rest of the intended forces of Portugal were gathering together, (who had
not then reached their advancing General) the Portuguesses had laid a siege to
some town of consequence in the enemies country.

This was one of the best fought battles that ever was fought in Spain, as
having lasted five hours in a continual fight at single sword; wherein the
glory of the Portuguesses was the greater, because they fought upon great
disadvantage against the Spaniards, and yet made so great a slaughter on their
enemy with so little loss of their own blood, how ever the loss of the two
renowned Masters of the field beforementioned is much lamented by them; by
reason they were both young men, of very great expectation.

In Lisboa upon news of this victory, were made fires of joy, the King at the
same time accompanied with the Prince, and all his Nobility then in Court
going to the Cathedral Church to give thanks with all due solemnity unto A
mighty God for this victory: and creating the General of this victorious
Army Matthias de Alberqucrque Count of Alegre^^, gave him a revenue of 4000
Ducats a year: as also his Majesty gave many royal rewards unto the heirs
of those Portuguesses who lost their lives in this said battle.

There are also news of other victories which the powers of Portugal have
obtained against the Castilians upon the diverse frontiers of the two Kingdoms:
as that of Don Sancho Manual Master of the Camp, General of another Army of
Portuguesses in the province of Beira having taken the town of Yava, which
consists of 3000 houses, where he found about the value of 200000 Ducats in
spoils, and where 600 Spaniards retyring themselves into a certain Church
(where they had all their powder,) were all blown up by a casual fire that
lighted on their powder.

In like manner the Count of Castello Melior, General of another Army of
Portuguesses, in the town of Salvatierra in Gallicia, which he took the last
summer from the Spaniards, continues his conquest in that Kingdom.

Other incursions upon the Spaniards are also made by Don John de Sousa
General of the Portugal Forces beyond the Mountains, whereof here is made no
particular mention, because they are not matters so remarkable as these above
rehearsed.

And this said battle is the more punctually here related because the
Spaniards in this City had given it out last week the clean contrary way, as
if the victory had been theirs. Whence the world may understand that from this
time forward, there shall never need any other relation of what passes between
the Spaniard and his Enemies but only to take the self same story, which the
Spaniard tells of his proceedings, and relate it quite contrary, for that will
ever prove to be the truth of the business, as it does in this battle above,
between the two said Nations.

FINIS.

