THE ORDER of choosing Church Officers: WITH A Declaration of the Calling of
the MINISTERS.

ALSO The Elders, and their Office. The Deacons, and their Office.
Church Assemblies in general. Particular Elderships in Parishes. The Order of
Excommunication. And the greater Presbyteries, or Classes.


According to the Form of the Presbyterian Government.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for R. A. 1646.

Of the Calling of Church Officers.
AS no man ought to presume to enter into any office Ecclesiastical without an
inward calling from God, who only discerns the intentions, and desires of
the heart, whether they be earthly or heavenly, whether they be set upon the
glory of God, and edifying of the Church, or upon the means of this life; So
none are to be admitted without the approbation and judgment of men, according
to the rules of the Word, and the received order of the Church.

This outward calling of the Officers of the Church does consist in Election
and Ordination, after due trial and examination of their soundness in
religion, and godliness of life: For the better understanding of the order of
the calling of Ministers, it is to be considered,

That in every one almost of the Classes, or great Presbyteries, there be
Studnets of Divinity; wherefore some, if they have opportunity of their
Studies, make their abode within the bounds of the Presbytery, and attend the
meetings thereof: Others, who are the greater part, stay at the Universities,
and in the time of vocation come home and wait upon the Presbytery.

The abilities of both the one sort and the other, are to be tried in private,
before the Presbytery, and how soon they are found fit to come in public, to
enter upon the exercise or prophecy with the Ministers of the Presbytery, and
at sometimes employed and allowed to preach before the people: By which means,
their gifts and abilities are known to the people, as their manners are
manifest by their conuersing amongst them.

Out of the number of these Proposants, or (as you may call them) Expectants,
the Pastor is to be nominated to the vacant place by the Eldership, and by the
Minister, if any be, with the consent and good liking of the people, and if
they can pitch upon none within the bounds of their own Presbytery, to have
their liberty to make their choice of an Expectant of good esteem and report in
some other Presbytery.

The person thus known and nominated, is by the particular Eldership, to be
named to the greater Presbytery, and there examined of his skill in the
Languages, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, in his interpreting of Scripture, in the
controversies of Religion, in his gift of exhortation, in the holy and
Ecclesiastical History and Chronology; And first of all, Of his life and
manner of conversation; wherein if he be found vicious or scandalous, he is not
to be admitted to any other examination.

After the people have heard him, some Minister of the Presbytery is to be
appointed to preach to that people of the necessity of the Ministry, of the
excellency of a faithful Minister, of the qualities of a Minister, and of the
obedience due to the Gospel, or of some such Theme: And at the same time a
public Edict must be served, That if any person or persons, have any thing to
object against the literature, doctrine, or life of such a man, why he may not
be a profitable Minister of such a Congregation, They shall appear before the
Presbytery in such a place, and at such a time, that their objections may be
tried and discussed.

Upon the time appointed, the Doore-keeper of the Presbyterian meeting is to
call three several times, if there be any thing to object against the person
nominated, and if any thing be alleged against him by any of that particular
flock, or any other to whom he is known, it is duly and equally to be
pondered by the Presbytery, and if it be found to have any weight, or the case
be doubtful, the Ordination is suspended to a more perfect trial; otherwise,
if there be nothing but silence, to proceed.

So that by this means no man is obtruded upon the people, against their open
or tacit consent and approbation, or without the voices of the particular
Eldership, with whom he is to serve in the Ministry. But if the person
nominated be a Pastor of some other flock, and his faithfulness known in his
former charge, this Process is spared, and his Translation more speedily
expedited, if there be no impediments of another kind.

Upon the day appointed for accomplishing his election, and for his Ordination,
which is in due time to be made known to the Congregation, and agreed upon by
them, a Fast ought to be ordained to be kept, with more then ordinary
supplication, for the assistance and blessing of God, in a work of so great
concernment: and one of the Pastors of the Presbytery is appointed to preach
to that People of the mutual duties of Pastor and People: all which being
done, the party (during the time of the exercise of public Worship sitting in
some conspicuous place before the Pulpit with the Elders, and some Ministers of
the Presbytery) is to be called and demanded concerning his willingness and
desire to serve the Lord Jesus, for the good of that people; with other
questions of that kind: and the people also are to be demanded, whether they
will receive him for their Pastor, and submit themselves unto his Ministry in
the Lord. Both having declared their readiness and mutual consent, the
Minister coming from the Pulpit with so many Ministers present as may
conveniently come near, lay their hands upon his head, and in the name of
Jesus appoint him to be Pastor of that people, praying that from Jesus Christ,
who is at the right hand of the Father, and gives gifts unto men, he may find
the demonstration of the Spirit, and the power and blessing of God in his
Ministry, to the comfort of that People: after which, the whole Eldership
give unto him the right hand of Fellowship. Last of all, the Minister going to
the Pulpit, is to conclude with pertinent Thanksgiving and Prayers; and (a
Psalm being sung) the Assembly dismissed with a Blessing.

The Congregation, where he who is presented to serve, is called, if they have
ought to object against his Doctrine or life, after they have heard him, or
that their consent may be had: and if he be found Reus ambitus, or to have gone
about to procure a presentation, he is to be repelled, and declared incapable
of that place. No Pastor may thrust himself upon a flock, nor after his entry,
desert his charge, or remove himself to another Congregation at his own
pleasure. The deserters, if any be, are appointed to be admonished, and in case
of obstinacy, to be excommunicated. If a Minister, upon lawful and urgent
causes, desire to remove from one Congregation to another, for which he is more
fit, or be called forth upon grave considerations, for some public employment,
tending to the common benefit of the Church; this is not done by private
transaction, and particular agreement, of Ministers and Congregations, but by
the wisdom and authority of the Presbyteries or Assemblies of the Church; not
is it done by them, but upon such reasons as should move that Church wherein
for the present he administreth, to give her consent: for whose supply also,
either a convenient course is presently taken, or the way of supply is seen to
be easy.

The Ministers thus removed from one Church to another, receives no new
Ordination, but by virtue of his first Ordination serves in the place, unto
which he is called and elected: Only at his admission one of the Presbytery,
who is appointed to preach of the duty of Pastors and people, and to pray for a
blessing recommendeth him to the Congregation, who have before declared their
willingness and desire to receive him, and the Congregation to his care and
fidelity; and the Pastor, if any be, together with the Elders, with whom he is
to sit before the Pulpit, take him by the hand. Pastors and Ministers of the
Word, through old age, sickness or other infirmity being disabled to bear the
weight, and discharge the duty of their Pastoral charge, do notwithstanding
still retain the honor of their office, and comfort of maintenance during
their life time: And they performing what they are able, in teaching,
government, visitation and catechizing, others are joined with them by the
Presbytery, with the consent of the people, to be their fellowlabourers, and to
undergo charge.

The same course of election and admission for substance, and in form
according to the nature of their office, is observed in the calling other
Officers, as Ruling Elders and Deacons: at the beginning, and where there be
none, the Pastor, with the gravest, holiest, and those of the soundest
judgment, and best affection to Religion, do choose them with the consent of
the rest of the people. And where particular Elderships are already constitute,
the Pastor and Elders who are in office, do choose such as are to succeed
those who are removed by death, or any other way, or by vicissitude are to
relieve such as are in place; and that the election of one or more at first, or
afterward may proceed with the consent of the people, their names are to be
published and made known to the Congregation by the Pastors, that if ought may
be objected against any of them, why they may not be received to the office of
an Elder or Deacon, it may be examined; and if it be found important, others
may be chosen. When the day of their admission comes, the Pastor having framed
his Doctrine to the purpose, calls them up, and remembering both them of their
duty in their charge, and the people of their submitting themselves unto them,
they are to be solemnly received, with lifted up hands, giving their promises
to be faithful.

Of Elders and their Office.
THe Calling, Election, and admission of Elders is before spoken of. The number
of Elders in every Parish is not definite, but does vary, according to the
number and necessity of the people; In some parishes six, in some ten or
twelve, etc.

Such are to be chosen for Elders as come nearest to the gifts, and qualities,
required by the Apostle; and after they are chosen, are (at all occasions) to
be exhorted by the Pastor to be ensamples to the flock, and to watch over them
fa^thfully, against all corruptions, in Religion and life. And as the Pastor
should be diligent in teaching and sowing the seed, so are the Elders desired
to be careful in seeing and seeking the fruits of the people.

The Elders are to attend with the Pastor in Catechizing the people, to assist
him in visiting the sick, in admonishing all men of their duty, and if any
will not hear them, they must bring the disobedient before the E^dership; But
a principal part of their duty is to join always, with the Pastor in the
particular Eldership, and in other assemblies of the Church, as they shall be
called, for exercising of discipline, and governing the whole Congregation.

Of the Deacons and their Office.
What manner of persons the Deacons ought to be, the Scripture is plain, and
such they make choice of as are so qualified, so far as may be; The form of
their election is before expressed. Their number must be considered of,
according to the number of the poor, and the proportion of the Congregation,
as we spoke before of the Elders.

Their maine duty is, to collect, receive, and distribute, not only the alms
for the poor, but the whole Ecclesiastical goods, which are not assigned and
appointed, for the maintenance of particular persons.

These duties they must perform; at the discretion, and by the appointment of
the Pastor, and Elders; for which cause, and not for government, they are to be
present at the ordinary meetings of the Eldership.

The means (for the maintenance of the poor) are collected by the Deacons,
the first day of the week, and other days of the public ass^mbling the
people to the worship of God, at the entry of the Church. And if this prove not
a competency, then do the people either bring in their Charity, on such days
as are appointed by the Eldership, or are willing to be taxed, according as
they shall be judged to be able In Cities and Parishes, where this order shall
be carefully observed, none will be suffered to beg, and none lack.

Of Church Assemblies in general.
NO man, were he never so eminent above others, for piety wisdom or learning,
or does he never so much arrogate authority to himself, has the rains of
Church Government in his hands to determine, or to do what seems good in his
own eyes; But all matters are to be advised, determined, and judged with
common consent, in the meetings and assemblies of the Church, which for this
end are of four sorts and degrees, which are commonly called by the names of
Church-Sessions, or particular Elderships, or Consistories; Presbyteries or
Classes; Provincial Synods, and National, or General Assemblies.

Each of these assemblies has a President or Moderator, who begins and
ends with Prayer; propounds matters to be treated; procures them to be
debated if need be, and in orderly way, that all may be heard, and none
interrupted, unless he speak too much; gathers the voices, which are noted
by the Clerk, and pronunceth the sentence, or if there be an equality,
remitteth it to the greater Presbytery; each of them has a Clerk, or a Notary;
and a Register of all things debated and done by them, especially of such
matters as may be of future use.

None of these Assemblies, from the least to the greatest, are to treat of
matters pertaining to the civil Jurisdiction and Magistrate, but only of
matters Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical, that the doctrine and worship may be
kept in purity, all things be done decently, and in order, in the particular
Churches, and that all the Members of the Churches may walk worthily of the
Gospel.

The lesser and inferior Assembly is subordinate to the superior and greater,
so that if any person shall think himself wronged or distressed, by the unjust
proceedings of the inferior Assembly, it is lawful for him to seek relief of
the greater, providing, it be done in an humble and peaceable way, and in the
right order, by proceeding to the greater Assembly, and so of the rest, if need
be, taking them in their subordination, until either he be satisfied, or which
rarely comes to pass, he ascend unto the highest of all.

In matters difficult or such as belong to superior Assemblies, references
from the lesser are ordinary, but nothing belonging to an inferior Assembly is
brought before a greater, till either it cannot be settled, or be disorderly
done by them, or some complaint arise. And in that case, so far as may stand
with truth and peace, the greater Assembly is careful to preserve the power
and authority of the lesser, and therefore matters belonging to the inferior
Assemblies are commonly remitted unto them by the greater.

No one Church, be it never so great, is to have authority over another, nor is
it governed by any extrinsecall power; but all the particular Churches are of
equal power and authority, and are ruled and judged by themselves, and their
own intrinsecall power in Assemblies composed, and consisting of their Officers
and Commissi^ners from them.

Of particular Elderships in Parishes.
THe particular Eldership or Church-Session consists of one or more Ministers,
and of Elders, so many in number as the proportion of the Congregation does
require, who ordinarily do meet once in the week.

The Deacons are always to be present with the Elders, not for government, but
that they may make known the case and necessities of the poor, and may consult
and receive direction for their supply.

The Minister of the Parish is always to be Moderator of this Meeting, and if
there be more Ministers then one, the Moderator is either chosen, or they do
moderate by course, providing that none be Moderator while any matter is
treated which concerns his own particular.

The matters treated by this Eldership, are such particulars as concern the
worship of God in that Church; as what days of the week are meetest for
assembling to the public Worship, if it may be had, and be thought necessary,
what hours on the Lords day, before and after noon, which are variable,
according to the length, or shortness of the day in Summer and Winter; what
times are fittest for public Catechizing, and for visiting of particular
Families; how often and at what times the Lords Supper is most seasonably to be
administered: all which are fitting for keeping of order in the Church, and
cannot be so fitly determined by a superior Assembly; the Elders also do here
delate scandalous persons, and bring them to public repentance, according to
the Form prescribed in the greater Assemblies: but if there be any doubt or
difficulty, or if the delinquents and obstinacy and impenitency to their fault,
then are they warned to appear before the greater Presbytery, there to receive
order for their censure, or to be sent home again to give satisfaction, or to
make their repentance in their own Church where they have given offense, and
where the fault was committed: For example, a man behaving himself scandalously
with a woman, both unmarried and single persons, is first admonished and
rebuked; if fornication appear, he is called before the Eldership, brought to
the sense and confession of his fault, and ordained to make his public
repentance, according to the order of the Church, and to abstain from all
scandalous behavior afterward. But if he prove obstinate, he is conveened
before the greater Presbytery, the matter is examined, and either promises to
give obedience to his own Eldership, or in case of continued obstinacy, the
censures of the Church proceed against him. But if there be a scandal of
adultery or murder, the noise and scandal whereof is far spread, and fills
all men's ears round about, the parties are brought before the greater
Presbytery, and the particular Eldership does before prepare the parties for
their appearance before the Presbytery.

The same faults which are brought before the particular or greater Presbytery
in an Ecclesiastical way, are also published by the civil Magistrate, and the
pecuniall mulct or penalty is given to the Deacons to be kept in the Church
treasure for the benefit of the poor, or other pious uses.

Nothing uses to be done by the lesser or greater Presbytery in ordering the
public Worship, in censuring of delinquents or bringing them to public
repentance, but according to the settled order of the Church and with express
or tacit consent of the Congregation, and if there be any new emergents that
cause doubting or haesitation, the matter is remitted to the great Assemb^ies
of the Church.

The order of Excommunicating.
ALL baptized persons, when they come to age and discretion, are not admitted
to the Lords Table; but such only as either upon examination are found to have
a competent measure of knowledge in the principles of Religion, do profess
that they are believers and do live unblamedly, or coming from another
Congregation bring with them sufficient testimony that they are such, or are
otherwise well known and approved.

The Ministers and Elders are to use all the means in public and private to
bring all others within the Parish to knowledge, faith, and holiness of life,
that they may be fitted for the Lords Table.

But this not admission to the Communion is one thing and excommunication of
heinous or obstinate offenders, is another thing very different. In case of
obstinacy and wilful impenitency, even when the offenses are not so great and
scandalous they proceed to excommunication, but with great meekness, long
suffering, and by many degrees the censure being so weighty and they desire to
gain the sinner to repentance. If any person walk unworthy of the Gospel, or
commit any trespass he is (unless the scandal be public and notorious)
admonished first secretly by one, next by two or three more; and thirdly, if he
contemn both, then according to the order prescribed by our Savior, Mat. 18.
The matter is brought before the Minister and Elders, where he is accused both
of the trespass and of the contempt. If he cannot yet be brought to
repentance, then is the matter in some measure to be made known unto the
Congregation, and he called before the greater Presbytery; where if he give
signs of his repentance, he is remitted to satisfy his own session. But if he
persist in his obstinacy, then by the Ordinance of the Presbytery, the
particular Eldership is to proceed against him, with the censure of the Church,
even to Excommunication.

The matter being thus heard known and judged, and the whole process revised
by the greater Presbytery, the next Sabbath without delay, the trespass and
order of admonitions are to be declared to the Congregation, and the person
without specification of his name, admonished yet to satisfy; which if he
still refuse to do, the next Sabbath his name, with his offense and contempt,
are published; if he yet continue obstinate, then the next, which is the third
Sabbath, is he charged publicly to satisfy for his offense and contempt under
the pain of excommunication. If now he offer himself to the particular
Presbytery, then do they at the appointment of the Presbytery, give order for
his public repentance, the removing of the scandal, and his reconcilement to
the Church, otherwise the Minister proceeds in this order.

The Sabbath after the third public admonition, the Minister, with consent of
the Eldership, is to make known to the Congregation that such a person is to be
excommunicated, warning all that have any thing to object against it, that they
appear the next Session day: and for the present, that the whole Congregation
power forth their supplications, that God would grant him repentance, and to
come out of the snare of the Devil. If nothing be objected, or if none for him
witness any appearance of repentance, then is the danger of the person, and
the weight of the sentence laid open the next Sabbath* and he the second time
prayed for publicly. If at last, upon the next Sabbath, there be no sign of
repentance, then is he prayed for the third time; and there being no means
unassayed, nor remedy left to reclaim him, he is stricken with the terrible
sentence of excommunicating* with calling upon the Name of God to ratify the
sentence in Heaven, and the people warned to hold him as an Heathen, or an
Publican and to shun all communion with him, except in natural and civil
duties, to be still performed by such as are bound. It is to be understood,
that where the crimes are such* that they cry to the Heavens for revenge, waste
the conscience, and by the law of God deserve death, and the transgressour
certainly known, the Process may be more summary, and Excommunication more
hastened; as on the other part of Absolution, the time would be longer, and the
trial of repentance more exact.

After excommunication, he is permitted to come to the preaching of the Word,
yet so as it may appear that he comes as one not having communion with the
Church. Neither is he debarred from private counsel, instruction, admonition,
and prayer, that in the end his spirit may be saved. If after excommunication
the Eldership find the signs of repentance, as the good life and behavior of
the excommunicate, declaration of the grief of his heart, and his humble
submission to the order of the Church, in all things that may reconcile him to
God and his people they shall with joy of heart make it known to the
Congregation by the Minister, that they also may have joy over their brother
repenting: or if they have ought to object against the truth of his repentance,
they may give notice thereof at the next meeting of the Eldership, where if
nothing be alleged against him, after he has obeyed the injunction of the
Eldership for his further humiliation and the better trial of his repentance,
he is either brought before the greater Presbytery, as all other penitents for
great crimes, or by relation from his own Eldership, is to give them
satisfaction in the signs of his repentance that he may be absolved.

As all public penitents are received, so is the excommunicate absolved in the
face of the Congregation, before whom being brought by the Elders at the time
appointed, he makes free confession of his sin and mourns for it, cries
to God formercy, seeks to be reconciled to the Church, and promises new
obedience; with which all being satisfied, and willing to receive him into
their common and mutual consolation, the Minister who preaches for that time
pronounces him upon his repentance to be absolved in the Name of Christ from
his sin and free of the censures of the Church, and have right through faith to
Christ and all his benefits and ordinances, praising God for his grace and
praying that he may be fully accepted to his favor, loosed in Heaven and hear
the voice of joy and gladness.

After the sentence of absolution* the Minister speaks to him as a brother,
exhorting him to watch and pray or comforting him if he have need, the Elders
embrace him, and the whole Congregation keeps communion with him as if he had
never offended.

As the Presbytery excommunicateth profane professors, so does it also depose
Preachers, if they be teachers of corrupt Doctrine, if their lives continue
scandalous after admonition, if they be busy in renting the Church asunder by
schism and division; if they be given to blasphemy, profanation of the Lords
day, simony, perjury, drunkenness, sighting, or any other sin, for which,
whether in respect of the greatness of the sin, or by reason of the contempt
and obstinacy when the sin is not so great, private persons are
excommunicated; and although they be upon their repentance absolved from the
sentence of excommunication, yet in some cases especially, where the crime
infers a perpetual infamy, are they never readmitted to the Ministry,
except upon the most unanimous and most earnest desire of the whole Church
where they served before.

Of greater Presbyteries or Class^es.
THe Presbytery or Classical meeting does consist of particular neighboring
Churches in such a circuit as many conveniently meet together, to the number of
10, 16, 20, or so many as the vicinity of the places and Parishes may well
accommodate.

It is supposed that the whole particular Elderships cannot well assemble in
one place ordinarily, neither is it necessary. There must be therefore, beside
the Minister or Ministers of the Congregation, who are suposed to be perpetual
members of the Presbytery, some of special note cho^en out of the Elders, and
by them, who receiving from them Commission, may represent the whole; from each
particular Eldership, one of the Elders with the Minister or Ministers
repaireth to the place of meeting: so that the members of this Presbyteriall
meeting are all Ministers within the Circuit, and one Elder delegated from each
particular Eldership. None of the Ministers are permitted to be absent unless
they be detained by necessary impediment or extraordinary employments. And
therefore the day of the meeting of the Presbytery may not be destinate to
ordinary preaching? Nor are they to wait that day upon solemnizing of
marriages. The names are called by the Clerk, and the absents are noted and
examined the next day upon the reasons of their absence; and if any happen to
absent themselves many days without reasonable causes, they are set apart and
censured as guilty of the contempt or neglect of the Order of the Church. But
the Elders are not so strictly tied to ordinary attendance; but if there be
any matter of great weight to be handled they are all to be warned to be
present and if he who was formerly Commissioner may not assist, another
Commissioner in his place may be chosen by the Eldership.

It is permitted to the expectants having entered before upon the public
exercise or prophecy, to sit by the Ministers and Elders in the meeting of the
Presbytery, and to give their judgment of the Doctrine, but they have no voice
when matters of doctrine or discipline are debated. And in the handling of some
matters which are thought fit to be concealed and kept secret, till they be by
common consent published they are to be removed.

Because the whole discipline in a manner is in the hands of the Presbytery,
they are to meet once a week or fortnight upon a certain day, and in a certain
place, but in some places through the length and deepnesse of the way in Winter
they do not meet so often

The subject and matters treated by the Presbytery are all Ecclesiastical
matters of weight, which concern the particular Churches there represented as
the examination, ordination, suspension, axd depositions of Ministers; scandals
of Ministers in Doctrine, life or any part of their calling; the discerning of
excommunication, references, and appellations from particular Elderships, and
the amending of any thing that has been negligently or weakly done by them;
the answering also of questions and requests from other Presbyteries, Churches,
or persons, or sending of Commissioners in some cases to other Churches or
Presbyteries, whether to admonish them, or to seek counsel from them but so
that they have no authority without the limits of their own consociation.

The Ministers and Elders who are Commissioners, together with the expectants
and others who are pleased to be present, meeting in the place, and at the day
and hour appointed, which uses to be one half hour after nine a clock in the
forenoon* where of warning is given by the sound of a bell, that so all the
affairs of that day (unless there be somewhat extraordinary to hold them
longer) may be expedited against midday, do begin with prayer, and proceed to
the textuall interpretation of Scripture, which is done by the Ministers, each
one in his own place by course, or by the expectants, whose names are set forth
in a Table, or written in the Register of the Presbytery for that end; after
the first speaker, some other who follows in order and is also appointed by
the Presbytery the day before, speaks in the second place, collecting some
doctrine sone or more upon the text expounded and showing the use thereof. The
second speaker having ended about eleven a clock, the exercise is closed with
thanksgiving by him who spoke first. The matter of each days exercise is some
portion of that particular book of the old or new Testament agreed upon in the
Presbytery: once every month some common place or controversy is handled,
unto which the exercise gives place for that day. The ground is read in
Scripture, the state of the question propounded, the arguments for the truth
pressed and vindicated from the sophistication of the adversaries; but the
arguments contra are left to be proponed in the Presbyteriall meeting by such
Ministers as are by the Moderator called to dispute upon the propositions, or
Theses exhibit, the day of the meeting next before, by the controversar, and
are propugned by him, the Moderator being prases of the disputation. That that
the Presbytery may go through all the controversies, they have also a table
wherein they are all digested in order, so that each minister or expectant
knows a month before what is next to be treated.

The exercise or common head of controversy ended in public, the people
depart, and the Ministers and Elders with others, who are permitted to be
present go to the private place of their meeting, where all being set in order,
and the Moderator having begun with prayer, the doctrine delivered in public
is examined, and each one of the Presbytery and Expectants, either approves,
or in charity and soberness of spirit, propounds his doubt against any point
spoken of, which being done, the speakers for that day are called upon (they
being apart at this time) their interpretation and doctrine approved, and they
encouraged or (if there be cause) they are in a brotherly manner admonished.
The doctrine censured (for this is called the censure of the doctrine.) The
matters before mentioned to be the subject of the Presbyteriall jurisdiction,
are propounded, modestly debated, and either concluded, or taken to further
deliberation, or remitted to the Synod and so the meeting concluded with
prayer. The Moderator either continues in his place between one Provintiall
Synod and another, or for a shorter time, but they think it not fit to change
the Moderator at every meeting.

The Presbyteries also do visit the several Churches within their bounds
either by holding their full meeting at the Churches, or by sending their
Commissioners thither, that they may see how the Ordinances of Christ are used
and obeyed, by the Minister, Eldership, and all the Congregation, and that if
any thing be amiss, it may be rectified.

FINIS.

