THE Marquess of Ormonds PROCLAMATION Concerning the Peace concluded with the
Irish Rebels, By the KINGS Command, At the General Assembly at KILKENNEY;
WITH A Speech delivered by Sir Richard Blake, Speaker of the Assembly at
Kilkenney.

Also a Speech by the Marquess of Ormond in answer to the same.

Together with a perfect List of their several Numbers of Horse and Foot by
them raised, amounting to 20000. Foot, and 3500. Horse.

Imprimatur. Gilbert Mabbott.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, and John Playford. Febr. 27. 1649.

Carolus Rex.
By the Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of Ireland.
Ormond.
WHereas Articles of Peace are made, concluded, accorded and agreed upon by and
between Us JAMES Lord Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lievtenant-Generall, and
General Governor of his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, by virtue of the
authority wherewith We are entrusted, for, and in the behalf of his most
excellent Majesty of the one part, and the general Assembly of the Roman
Catholics of the said Kingdom, for and on the behalf of his Majesty's Roman
Catholic Subjects of the same on the other part, a true copy of which
Articles of Peace is hereunto annexed.

We the Lord Lieutenant; do by this Proclamation in his Majesty's Name publish
the same, and do in his Majesty's Name strictly charge and command all his
Majesty's Subjects, and all other inhabiting or residing within his Majesty's
said Kingdom of Ireland to take notice thereof, and to render due obedience to
the same in all parts thereof.

And as his Majesty has been induced to this peace out of a deep sense of the
miseries and calamities brought upon this his Kingdom and people, and out of a
hope conceived by his Majesty, that it may prevent the further effusion of his
^ubiects blood, redeem them out of all the miseries and calamities under which
they now suffer, and restore them to all quietness and happiness under his
Majesty's most gracious government, deliver the Kingdom in general from those
slaughters, depredations, rapines and spoils which always accompany a war,
encourage the Subjects and others with comfort to betake themselves to trade,
traffic, commerce, manufacture, and all other things; which uninterrupted,
may increase the wealth and strength of the Kingdom, beget in all his
Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom a perfect unity amongst themselves, after
the too long continued division amongst them; so his Majesty assures himself
that all his Subjects of this his Kingdom (duly considering the great and
inestimable benefits which they may find in this peace) will with all duty
render due obedience thereunto. And we in his Majesty's Name do hereby
declare, that all persons rendering due obedience to the said peace, shall be
protected, cherished, countenanced and supported by his Majesty and his royal
Authority, according to the true intent and meaning of the said Articles of
Peace.

Given at our Castle of Kilkenny the 17. of January 1648.
God save the King.
The Speech of Sir Richard Blake, Speaker of the Assembly at Kilkenny, TO THE
Marquess of ORMOND.
May it please your Excellency,
I Am commanded by the Prelacy, Nobility, and Gentry, of the Roman Catholics
of Ireland, now assembled in the City of Kilkenny to represent unto your
Excellency their ardent zeal naturally ingrafted in their hearts to their
sacred Sovereign King CHARLES his service, unto whom they ever have been, and
will be most faithful and loyal Subjects; and in the next place their great
affection to your Excellency, and the never dying memory they entertain, and
will retain of your most noble and successful endeavors in the ioynting and
setting together of the much disordered frame of this Kingdom.

Former Cessations, accommodations, and capitulations did but skin over the
deep and wide wounds that were and are in the body of it; they received no life
or perfection, they abortively perished in the Embrion, and vanished into the
air, but the peace that by the great mercy of God, by the influences of his
Majesty's graces, and by the ministry and cooperation of your Excellency is
now to be established, will prove (as with joy and confidence we expect) a
firm, stable, and lasting peace, a peace that will cure these bleeding wounds,
search to the very core, and pluck out all the splinters that remain of them;
a peace that will (as we hope, and is the height of our desires, as it shall be
of our endeavors) reinvest his sacred Majesty in his most due and royal Rights
and Prerogatives, and will restore this Nation in its former luster and plenty
and tranquillity, such a Peace as already ends all our doubts, fears and
jealousies, in a mutual confidence, and rejoicing, and will make all the
Members of this general Assembly, an Assembly unto which the present and future
ages will justly give the glorious name of the peacemaking Assembly after
their many distractions and long continued sufferings to return to their
several respective Countries and dwellings, with olive branches, the Emblems of
Peace in their hands, and the Word in their mouths, that were said of our
Savior, when upon the entrance into the City of Nani, he meets with a Funeral
of a dead young man, the only son of his following weeping mother, whom
graciously compassionating her tears, he restored from death to life, the words
were, and not unaptly to be applied to our present condi- Ecce propheta magnus
surrexit in nobis and quiea deus recitavit plebem suam, Most excellent Lord,
whom God Almighty has preserved, and led, as it were, by the hand through a
sea of troubles and dangers, to be the happy and essential instrument to
mediate, actuate and consumate this great work, and to make Ireland like the
heavenly Jerusalem to be a City of Unity within it self.

I cannot sufficiently express the sense and joyous exultancy of these most
venerable Prelates, most honorable Lords, most judicious and gallant Gentry,
the Representative body of the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, nor with what
fervor and ardor they expect to reap the blessed fruits, which they have so
long sighed for, and did sow in their blood and tears of this Peace, and of
your Excellencies Government of this Kingdom, unto which being derived from his
Majesty, who is the Spring from which these graces flow upon them.

They will humbly pay all due obedience to your Excellencies fast and tried
fidelity to his Majesty, your own great interest in the Kingdom, and the many
great parts and talents that God and Nature has endowed you with, giving them
assurance that your government will produce effects suitable to their
expectations, that will answer their design: it much transcends my weak
abilities-to represent them, their affections, apprehensions and hopes, in
their right and lively colors: And therefore I humbly beg, that your
Excellency will vouchsafe to give as benign and favorable interpretations of
what by their command I have endeavored humbly to offer to your grave Judgment
and Consideration; and that your Excellency will be pleased to sign this
instrument the everlasting Record and Monument of this blessed Peace, as by
their commands, it having been solemnly and unimously by so valued; I have the
honor (a greater honor then my low and humble thoughts ever aspired to) in
their Chair to sign this counterpart, and in all their names most humbly to
present it unto your Excellency.

The L. Marquis of Ormonds Speech in Answer to the Speech of Sir Richard Blake
at the Assembly in Kilkenney.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Shall not speak to those Epressions of duty and loyalty, so eloquently
digested into a discourse by the Gentleman appointed by you to deliver your
Sense: you will have in your hands presently greater and more solid Arguments
of his Majesty's gracious acceptance, then I can enumerate, or then perhaps you
your selves discern: for besides the provision made against the remotest fears
of the severity of certain Laws, and besides many other Freedoms and bounties
conveyed to you and your posterity by these Articles, there is a door, and
that a large one, not left, but expressly set open, to give you entrance by your
future merits to whatsoever of honor, or other advantages you can reasonably
wish; so that you have in present fruition what may abundantly satisfy, and
yet there are no bounds set to your hopes, but you are rathr invited, or
according to the new phrase, but to an old and better purpose; you seem to have
a Call from heaven to exercise your Arms, and your utmost in the noblest and
justest Cause the world has known; for let all the circumstances, incident to
a great and good cause of War, be examined, and they will be found in that
which you are now warrantably called to defend. Religion, not in that narrow
circumscribed definition of it, by this or that late found out names, but
christian Religion is our Quarrel, which certainly is more fatally struck at by
the blasphemous license of this age, then ever it was by the rudest incursions
of the most barbarous and avowed Enemies to Christianity. The venerable Laws
and Fundamental Constitutions of our Ancestors are trodden under impious and
(for the most part) mechanic feet. The sacred person of our King, the life of
those Laws and head of those Constitutions, is under an ignominious
imprisonment, and his life threatened to be taken away by the sacrilegious
hands of the basest of the people that owe hsm obedience, and to endear the
Quarrel to you, the fountain of all the benefits you have but now acknowledged,
and of what you may further hope for by this Peace, and your own merits, is in
danger to be obstructed by the execrable murder of the worthiest Prince that
ever ruled these Islands. In short, Hell can add nothing to that desperate
mischief, now openly projected. And now judge if a greater, a more glorious
field, was ever set open to action, and then prepare your selves to enter into
it, and receive these few advices from one thoroughly embarked with you in the
adventure.

First, Let me recommend unto you, that to this, as to all other holy actions,
you would prepare your selves with perfect charity, a charity that may
obliterate whatever of rancor a long continued civil War may have contracted in
you, against any that shall now cooperate with you to so blessed a work, and
let his engagements with you in this, whosoever he be, be as it ought to be, a
bond of unity, of concord, of love, stronger then the nearest ties of nature.

In the next place, mark and beware of those that shall go about to renew or
create jealousies in you, under what petence soever, and account such as
infernal Ministers, employed to promote the black design on foot, to subvert
Monarchy, and to make us all slaves to those that are so to their own
avaratious lusts. Away as soon, and as much as possible may be, with those
distinctions of Nations, and of parties, which are the fields wherein the seeds
of those rank weeds are sown by the great enemies of our Peace.

In the last place let us all divest our selves of that preposterous, that
ridiculous ambition, and self-interest, which rather leads to our threatened
ruin, then to the enjoyment of advantages unseasonably desired: And if at any
time you shall think your selves pincht too near the bone, by those Taxes and
Levies that may be imposed for your defense; consider then how vain, how
foolish a thing it will be, to starve a righteous Cause for want of necessary
support, to preserve your selves fat, and gilded sacrifices to the rapine of a
merciless enemy: And if we come thus prepared to a contention so just on our
part, God will bless our endeavors with success and victory, or will crown our
sufferings with honor and patience; for what honor will it not be (if God have
so determined of us) to perish with a long glorious Monarchy? Or who can want
patience to suffer with an oppressed Prince? But as our endeavors, so let our
prayers be vigorous, that they may be delivered from a more unnatural rebellion
then is mentioned by any story, now raised to the highest pitch of success
against them.

I should say something to you for my self, in retribution to the advantageous
mention made of me, and my endeavors to bring this Settlement to pass, but I
confess my thoughts were wholly taken up with these much greater concernments;
let it suffice, that as I wish to be continued in your good esteem and
affection, so I shall freely adventure upon any hazard, and esteem no trouble
or difficulty too great to encounter, if I may manifest my zeal to this cause,
and discharge some part of the obligations that are upon me to serve this
Kingdom.

The Engagement of the several Parties in Ireland included in the late Peace
made betwixt the Marquess of Ormond and the Rebels.
. Foot. Horse. ORmond, Taffe, and that party engaged to raise for Munster 4000.
800 The Supreme Council, and Preston, for Lemster 4000. 800 Inchequeen 3000.
600 The Lord Clanrickard for Connaght has engaged not to be behind with the
best of them, at least 4000. 800 15000. 3000 Owen Roe is certainly upon a
design of conjunction with them, the Marquess of Antrim being (about the 17 of
this instant) up on his journey to Kilkenny to work a Reconciliation betwixt
the Kilkenney party, and the said Owen Roes party, whose number by general
computation cannot be less then, 5000. Foot, and 500. Horse. 5000. 500 In all
20000. 2500

FINIS.

