ORDERS AND RVLES Appointed by the Last Will and Testament Of Sir THOMAS HOLT,
Knight and Baronet, To be Observed in the Electing, and after the Election, of
the Ten Poor Persons Inhabiting in his ALMSHOUSE at Aston Juxta Birmingham in
the County of WARWICK. With the Assent and Assistance of Dame ANNE HOLT, The
Relict of the said Sir THOMAS HOLT, And of Sir ROBERT HOLT Baronet, his
Grandson, and his Heirs Males.

PSALM. 112.9. He has dispersed, he has given to the Poor, his Righteousness
endures for ever.

London, Printed in the Year, 1656.

THE ORDERS AND RULES Appointed to be Observed in the Electing, and after the
Election of the Ten Poor Persons inhabiting in this Almshouse at ASTON.
FIRST THe Number of the Persons that are to be Relieved there, shall be Ten,
viz. Five Men, and five Women.

SECONDLY, The Places from which they shall be chosen, are out of the two
Hydes, within the Parish of Aston, viz. Aston Hyde, and Nechells or Duddeston
Hyde. In the Election, The Inhabitants of the Lordship of Aston shall be
admitted in the first place, of Nechels in the second, of Duddeston in the
third, of Witton in the fourth, of Saltley in the fifth, of Erdington in the
sixth, of Little Bromwich in the seventh, of Bordsley in the eighth, of
Derritend in the ninth, and last, all lying within the Parish of Aston.

THIRDLY, The Conditions of the Persons shall be such, They shall be all single
Persons, and shall continue single, They shall be Pious, Sober, well reported
of, or such as shall promise and endeavor so to be. They shall be such as are
become Old, Decrepit, Lame, Blind, Impotent, or likely to be a burden to the
Parish of Aston.

And no Witch Wizzard, Sorcerer, or one that is acquainted with any Familiar
Spirit, No Blasphemer of Gods Name, or Common Swearer, no Fornicator, No Felon,
No Common Drunkard shall be chosen or admitted.

FOURTHLY, After Election, these shall all duly and orderly repair to the
Church every Morning and Evening, to hear Divine Service and Sermons, as well on
Working-dayes, as on the Lords Day, and Holy Days, whenever Holy Exercises
shall be performed there. And in their Repair to the Church, as also in their
return from it, they shall go all in Decent and Comely manner, that is to say,
First, Two Men, Secondly, Two Men, Thirdly, One Man, and one Woman, Fourthly,
two Women, Fifthly, two Women together. In the same Manner and Form, to wit,
Two and Two, shall accompany every Corpse to be buried in the Church or
Churchyard of Aston (except the Person deceased be thought to have died of the
Plague, or some such contagious disease. They shall every day, Morning and
Evening meet together at some convenient Hour, in some one Room of the
Almeshouse, Then and there to confess their sins to God, to pray for a
blessing upon themselves and others, and to give thanks for Gods mercies, and
more particularly for the liberal Maintenance allowed them in that Place.

If no one of the Alms People can read, the Parish Clerk, or some other shall
be procured to perform Prayers for them.

FIFTHLY, They shall be Helping, Aiding, and Assisting one to another in time
of Sickness, and in all Needs and Necessities. They shall avoid all those
Enormities aforesaid which made them incapable of Election, viz. Witchcraft, or
Sorcery, Blaspheming of Gods Name, or common Swearing, Fornication, Felony, and
common Drunkenness. None of them shall Marry, None of them shall Beg after
they be chosen into the Place.

SIXTHLY, The causes for which any of them shall be expelled, shall be the same
for which at first they should not be admitted, viz. For Witchcraft, or
Sorcery, for Blaspheming, or incorrigible Swearing, for Fornication, for
Felony, for common Drunkenness. Or, If any of them shall Marry or Beg:
Lesser punishments to be inflicted upon them, For every neglect of going to
Church, For every disorderly going, For every times absence from Private
Prayers, Morning, or Evening: for every Oath or notorious Lie: For every the
least distemper by Drink. When they are in health, and able to perform these
Duties aforesaid, they shall be lovingly admonished for the first time. For the
second time, they shall lose four pence out of their weeks allowance. For the
third and fourth time, and so forwards, if they shall double and treble their
fault, the Penalty shall likewise be doubled and trebled upon them, by the
discretion of those that are designed for that purpose, according as the
quality of the Fault, and the disposition of the Party Delinquent shall
require. And in case no amendment appear, upon so Moderate a course held, but
the Parties offending show themselves desperately incorrigible, then shall they
be expelled out of the Society. All the Penalties which shall be inflicted or
imposed upon any of the said Ten Poor Alms people, for neglecting any of the
duties aforesaid, or for committing any of the faults aforesaid, shall (by that
Person which has, or by those Persons which have power to punish them for the
same) be given or distributed to the rest of the ten poor Alms-people, which
shall be no Delinquents, if they shall deserve it, or else, shall be bestowed
upon, or to some other Charitable Use, or Uses, as the said Person, or Persons,
who shall impose the said Penalties upon them, shall in his, or their
discretion appoint or think fitting.

The Morning Prayer.
It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing Praises unto thy
Name, O most High. To show forth thy loving kindness in the Morning, and thy
faithfulness, every Night. Our voice shall thou therefore hear in the Morning,
O Lord, in the Morning will we direct our Prayers unto Thee and will look up.
ALmighty and most merciful Lord God, who Createdst all things by thy Great
Power, and who sustainest all Creatures by thy Gracious providence: without
whom we have nothing, and from whom we have all things which we do enjoy, or
the Hopes whereof we can Joy in, because thou give unto All liberally, and
upbraidest none. We acknowledge Lord, that Thou might most justly upbraid
us, for our unworthiness of the least, and our unthankfulness for the
greatest of thy Mercies: and that for both, Thou might lay upon us the
forest and heaviest of thy judgments. Even by the offense of One, Judgment
came upon All to Condemnation: and yet besides that, we have added Rebellion
unto Sin, and aggravated out Guiltiness by our long continued Wickedness:
so that our Sins are become exceeding sinful. We have sinned, O Lord,
against the light of Reason, as we are Men, often doing that, which even Nature
teaches us, that it is a shame to do: and against the Light of Religion, as we
are Christians, holding the Truth in unrighteousness, and sinning wilfully,
even after we had received the Knowledge of the Truth. We have not only loved
Evil more then Good, but have too long been unto every good Work Reprobate, or
too apt to say, or think of every commanded Duty, What a weariness it is?
Even to Will well, has not been present with us, and how then to perform that
which is good, O Lord, we know not: being only wise to do evil, and doing that
with both hands earnestly. Thus have we provoked Thee to anger most bitterly,
therefore may thou justly leave our blood upon us; for who may stand in thy
sight when thou art angry? though we know not the Power of thy Wrath, Thou
may justly make us feel it.

But remember, O Lord, thy tender Mercies, and thy Loving kindnesses, for they
have been ever of Did: and has the Lord forgotten to be Gracious? has He in
anger shut up his tender Mercies? For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon our
iniquities though they are great! Is any thing too hard for the Lord, and the
Power of his Goodness? Oh let thy Mercy then so rejoice against Judgment,
that our Souls may ever rejoice in thy Mercy. Have thou not said, O Lord, that
where Sin abounds, Grace may much more abound? Magnify then Thine own
abounding Grace, in being Gracious to us, of Sinners chief, as we know more in
Our selves, then we do or can know of Others: And if our own Hearts condemn
us, Thou art greater then our hearts, and know all things; Yea thou have set
our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in the light of Thy
Countenance. But remember thy words unto thy Servants, wherein thou have made
us to hope, that Thou will forgive our Iniquity, and remember our Sin no
more! And has the Lord said, and shall he not do it? or has he spoken, and
shall He not make it good? Remember Him also, and His precious Merits, in whom
thou say thou art well pleased, that for this End was he born, and for this
cause came He into the World, that He might bear our Griefs, and carry our
Sorrows, that He might make his Soul an offering for Sin: and did not thy
Wisdom provide satisfaction to thy Justice therein: did not Thou lay help
upon One that was Mighty, and able to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by Him? Yea, was not he made unto us, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Sanctification, as well as Redemption? Oh then, as thou made Him to be Sin
for us, who knew no Sin, so let us be made the Righteousness of God in Him.

And as thou sparedst not thine own Son, but deliverest Him up for us all,
how shall thou not with Him also freely give us all things? How shall not our
God also supply all our Needs according to his Riches? We were cast upon thee
from the Womb, and have ever since lived only on thy Goodness, and thy good
things, as the Earth is full of thy Riches. Now therefore when we are Old, and
Gray Headed, O God forsake us not; but as thou art good, and do good, so be
not thou thy self weary in well-doing: remember thou have said, the goodness
of God endures continually.

And do Good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: our Hearts desire and Prayer to
God for Israel is, that they might be saved: But be more peculiarly gracious
unto this Nation, this Land of our Nativitie: And for his sake, whom thou
gave to be a healing of the Nations, heal our breaches: let all those that
rule over Men be just, ruling in the fear of God. And be so with thine own
immediate servants that do thy work in thy House, that it may prosper in their
hands. And show, Lord, that thou art a God of the Valleys, as well as of the
Mountains: that though the Lord be high, yet He has respect unto the Lowly,
and Lowest in Condition. Right the Wronged, comfort the Sadded, supply the
Impoverished, support the Weakened, heal the Diseased: Thus, Lord, be thou All
to All, that thou may be faithfully owned, and thankful acknowledged to be
All in All.

And being thou, Lord, condemnest all unthankfulness, placing the unthankful
amongst the most unholy: We give thee thanks for the Founder of this Place, the
nourisher of our persons, Sir Thomas Holt Knt. and Baronet. Blessed be the Lord
God who did put such a thing as this into his noble Heart, and did turn it as a
river of water to refresh us. Blessed be the Lord who remembered us in our low
estate: who as thou workest in all both to will and to do, of thy good
pleasure, did work in him to Will so Charitably, and to Do so bountifully.
And bless we pray thee all his surviving and succeeding Relations: those
especially, whose Piety has so employed his Charity, and improved his good
Intentions into great Actions for our good: As thy Mercy is from everlasting to
everlasting, and thy Righteousness unto Childrens Children: so Lord, whilst
the name of the Wicked does rott, let His name live in Them, and let their
Names stand written in the Book of life for ever after him.

And now we praise thy Name, O Lord, for the refreshment and ensafement of us
the night past, and for the enlargement of thy goodness toward us so far of
this present day: Remember still thine own good word, that the Lord will
command his loving kindness in the day time: as thou art graciously pleased to
add another day unto our lives, so add other mercies unto our days,
especially putting such Grace into our hearts, that we may seek first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, that so all other things may be added
unto us: And then put thy fear in our hearts that we may never depart from from
thee, but rather be so in the fear of the Lord all the day long, that by it we
may depart from all evil. And that we may not fall from thee by any impatience
under thy just Hand, by any unbelief in thy Mercy, or by any temptation from
the enemy of our souls, to any evil, or from any Duty, uphold us Lord with
thy free Spirit. And being we know not what to pray for as we ought, let the
same Holy Spirit help our infirmities in praying for all, as thy deer Son our
Savior, in whom thou art a God that hear Prayer, has himself taught us to
pray, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, Thy
kingdom come, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven, Give us this day
our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from all
evil, for Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever,
Amen.

The Evening Prayer.
Give ear unto our Prayers, O God, and hide not thy Self from our
Supplications. Hear thou in Heaven thy Dwelling Place, and when Thou hear,
forgive. Let our Prayers be set before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of
our hands as the Evening Sacrifice.
MOst Holy, and most Dreadful Lord God: with whom is terrible Majesty, so that
even the purest of the Heavenly Angels tremble before it, and cover their
faces, as even them thou have charged with folly. With what Countenances, with
what confidences, can we then sinful and impure Creatures, lift up so much as
our eyes unto Heaven; having so much and so long sinned against Heaven, and in
thy sight: to provoke the eyes of thy Glory. Rather therefore, standing a far
off, may we smite upon our breasts, and the joints of our Loins being loosed,
and our Knees also smiting one against another, may we here trembling and
sorrowing say, God be merciful unto us sinners; who have not been only
alienated, but even enemies in our minds by wicked works, as it were to
augment yet more the fierce Anger of the Lord against us. And yet seeing it
has pleased Thee, O Father, by thine own Son to reconcile all things unto
thy self, we have holdnesse and access with confidence by the faith of Him,
unto thy Throne of Grace. Hoping and believing that in and by Him, we shall
obtain mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need. And such, O Lord, is
all our time; even as to temporal things, when could we truly say, that we had
need of nothing? but as to Spiritual things, when could we not truly say, that
we have need of every thing, being by nature All of us, wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. And yet, O Lord, there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing: even such have looked unto thee, and were
lightened, and their faces were not ashamed: the poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him. And thou art the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning: And Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to day,
and for ever more. Why then should we be cast down, poor souls, or why should
we be disquieted within us: We hope still in God, that we shall yet praise Him,
for the help of His Countenance; Though thou art the High and Lofty One, that
inhabitest Eternity, yet have thou regard of poor Mortals; yea, thou have
promised, saying, to this man will I look, even to him that is Poor, and of a
contrite spirit, that trembles at thy Word, to revive the spirit of the
Humble, and to revive the hearts of the Contrite ones: to remember the
Congregation of thy poor for ever. But alas, O Lord, we find and feel too
much security and impenitencie in our hard hearts, opposing, weakening, or
depraving our Believing; because thou gave Christ to give repentance unto
Israel, as well as remission of sins: And we have too long made our hearts as an
Adamant stone, least we should hear thy Law, and so be humbled and penitent.
But thou, Lord, smotest the rock it self, that the waters gushed out, and the
streams overflowed, and ran in dry places like a River: touch our hearts, and
we shall relent to tears; move our eyes, and we shall then look up unto him
whom we have pierced, and so mourn and be in bitterness for our sins, for
which he so suffered: So let us be before thee here, that when we come unto
Thee hereafter, thou may wipe away all tears from our eyes: that there may
then be no more sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain for us, as for the
Impenitent and Unholy, the smoke of whose Torment ascends up for ever, where
there is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. In the mean time, O Lord,
because none can understand his errors (as who knows how often he offends?) O
cleanse thou us from our secret sins; but especially keep back us thy
servants from presumptuous sins, let not them have dominion over us. Yea,
wash us thoroughly from all iniquities, with the blood of Jesus Christ, which
cleanses from all sins. For if our Transgressions and our sins be upon us,
and we pute away in them already, how should we then live for ever, if our
sins lie down with us in the Dust: and how Justly might thou cut us off
here now with pining sickness, and from day even to night make an end of us?
or make us to possess only months of vanity, and wearisome nights to be
appointed to us. But as thou have said, that by Christ all that believe are
justified from all things: even so, most Gracious Lord, be it unto us thy
servants according to thy word: enabling us to look up unto Jesus, who is the
Author and Finisher of our Faith: yea, Lord, we believe, help thou our
unbelief. And seal we pray Thee, our pardons here: and thy justifying of our
persons, by thy sanctifying of our Natures: for have Thou but one blessing, O
our Father? will thou forgive only, and not give also? O give unto us those
Sanctifying, those saving Graces of thy Spirit, whereby thou make thine meet
to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light. That we may be first
partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the corruption that is in this
world, and then partakers of the Divine Glory, in that which is to come:
Perform O Lord, thine own promise, according to thy own Method in promising,
that, the Lord will give Grace and Glory: guide us with thy Counsel, and
afterward receive us unto Glory.

And now, Lord, as we prase Thee for thy multiplied mercy all this day past,
so we pray thee for thy continued mercy all this night coming: when the shadows
of the Evening are stretched out, keep us, O Lord, under the shadow of thy
wings, until all callamities are overpast: for thou, Lord, only can make us
dwell in safety. We stand in Ieopardy every hour, but most exposed unto
dangers, and with least helps in the night: oh then let the Angels of the Lord
encamp round about us, and preserve us: So show that they are all Ministering
Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation.

But because as unto much longer life, our Bones are dried, our hope is lost,
and we are already almost cut off for some of our parts, Lord make us so wise
as to consider our latter ends; that as death is the end of all, and after
death judgment, so whilst living we may lay it unto heart: till death works
in us, so to live in thy fear, that we may dye in thy love, and in that thy
loving kindness which is better then life, Thou may say, O Lord, to any, or
all of us, ye fools, this night your Souls shall be required of you: work in
us therefore (as thou also have wrought all our works in us) to remember thee
on our beds, and to meditate on Thee in the night watches, because thou know
our down-sitting, and our up-rising, and understandest our thoughts afar off:
when therefore we awake, let us be still with Thee. And as with long life, thou
have in some measure satisfied us, so now show us thy Salvation; Givens, O
Lord, such a prospect of the Heavenly Canaan, as may make us more willing to
leave this wilderness; more desirous to be dissolved and to be with Christ, in
whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose Right Hand there are
pleasures for evermore. To sweeten our reposes, say unto our souls, I am your
Salvation: say, Lord, your God has not appointed you to wrath, but to obtain
Salvation, by your Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that whether we wake or
sleep, we should live together with him: so shall we ever be with the Lord. In
whose Name, and with whose words we ask all, saying, Our Father which art in
Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done in earth, as
it is in Heaven, Give us this day our daily bread, And forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from all evil, For Thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

For the Sick.
WIthout the Law you cannot know sin, sin being the Transgression of the Law,
and without knowledge of sin, you cannot have either Contrition for sin, or
reformation from sin, or any manner or measure of repentance unto life. First,
therefore let us hear the voice of the Law: God spoke all these words, saying,
I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of
the house of Bondage.

I. Thou shall have no other gods before Me.

II. Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any
thing, that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in
the Water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me: and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all thy work. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in
it thou shall not do any work, Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
Manservant, nor thy Maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor thy Stranger that is
within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, and rested the seveth day: wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath Day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother: that thy days may be long upon the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor
his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors.

Now what man is he that lives and sins not? Yea, who knows how often he
offends against this Law? And so this truly is, as it is called a fiery Law,
both as given with fire at first, and as to its effect signified thereby, the
consuming of Transgressors at the last. Only by Christ Jesus comes life, and
by Faith in him, all our help and hope of life.

John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: that
whosoever believes in Him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Now
therefore let us hear a summary of necessary Belief.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth: and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and
buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty:
from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, the
forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.
Amen.

Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that He shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this
body yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another, though my Reins be consumed within me.

Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.

1 Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills, and makes alive, he brings down to the grave,
and brings up.


The Prayer for the Sick.
O LORD our GOD, with whom is the Fountain of Life, and to whom belong the
issues of Death. We confess our selves to be by nature sinful, and by sin
abominable, and therefore unworthy to speak unto Thee, or to bespeak a mercy
from Thee, even for our selves. Yet in obedience to thine own command, that
Supplications, and Prayers, and Intercessions be made for all, we here desire
to intercede unto Thee in the behalf of this our Languishing and Pained ( or
Sister
Brother) we know, O Lord, that it was for sin only that thou at first
threatnedst great plagues and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of
long Continuance. And we acknowledge our demerits by sin, even of all thy
threatened judgments: but we know too, that thine own Son, our Savior
himself, took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses, and that thou have
said, concerning my servants, command ye Me: and that many a time, turnedst
thou thine anger away from them, and did not stir up all thy Wrath, For
that thou remembrest they were but flesh. For thy Well-beloved Sons sake
therefore, let us beg of thee for this thy Servant, that thou would remove
Thy heavy hand from him or Her
, and extend thy pity to or Her
him: for thou know or She
his Frame; Remember that or Her
he is but dust,: and therefore plead not against him with thy great power. Can
it, O Lord, magnify thy Might to break a Bubble, or crush a Moth? or to kill a
Worm? oh then magnify thy mercy rather! remembering thine own promise also,
that thou will not contend for ever, neither be always wroth, because otherwise
the Spirit would fail before thee, and the Souls which thou haft made. And
therefore unto or Her
his days amongst us on earth, that (He) or She
may be the better fitted for Thee and Heaven. That by this neernesse unto
death, or She
he may the better learn to live, and by that addition to his life, or She
he may the better learn to dye. or She
Or if in thy secret wisdom, thou have determined this to be or Her
his last visitation, send down thy holy Spirit to strengthen, guide, and
comfort or Her
him before, and in the hour of death, to strengthen her
his Faith, that her
he may without any detracting, or distempering fears or doubts, believe and
rest upon thy Love, to guide or sher
his affections, that or she
he may without any worldly sorrows, or snares, freely resign Her self
himself unto thy Fatherly disposing: and to comfort * his soul in the anguish
of or Her
his body, with a gracious tender of the joys of Heaven both unto Body and
Soul; That so the enemy, who daily waits for every advantage (for we are not
ignorant of his devices) may not gain by this or Her
his weakness. Say Lord to or Her
him therefore, now thy sins are forgiven thee; that so or Her
he may with all assurance of thy love, or She
throw Her self
himself into thine Arms of mercy, and into thy hands commend or Her
his spirit. Thus Lord, hear our Prayers for him, and hear or Her
his groanings for * himself, and hear our us all; The Lord has said, that
whatsoever we ask the Father in his Name, He will do it: In his only Name
therefore, and with his own words, we thus farther ask all, saying, Our Father
which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done
in earth, as it is in Heaven Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, And lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from all evil For Thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The All-sufficient Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the all-satisfying Love of
God the Father, and the all sanctifying fellowship of God the Holy Ghost, be
with this our or Sister
(Brother) and with us all, now and evermore. Amen.


