The Marquess of Ormonds DECLARATION, PROCLAIMING Charles the Second, King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc.

With his Summons to Colonel JONES for the Surrender of Dublin, And the Answer
of Colonel lones thereunto.

Also a perfect Relation of their Forces, and the present Affairs of that
Kingdom.

Together with a true copy of the Articles of Agreement between the said
Marquess, and the Irish.

Also a Representation of the Province of Vlster concerning the Evils and
Dangers to Religion, Laws and Liberties, arising from the present practices of
the Sectarian Army in ENGLAND, etc.

Imprimatur. G. Mabbot.

London: Printed for Francis Tyton, and John Playford, and are to be sold at
their shops near the Inner Temple in Fleet Street. 1649.

By the Lord Lieutenant General of Ireland.
Ormond.
WHereas our late Sovereign King Charles of happy memory, has been lately by
a party of his rebellious Subjects of England most traitorously, maliciously,
and inhumanely put to death and murdered: And forasmuch as His Majesty that
now is, Charles by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, is Son and Heir of his said late Majesty; and therefore by the Laws
of the Land in force, and practiced in all Ages, is to inherit: We therefore in
the discharge of the duty we owe unto God, our Allegiance and Loyalty to our
Sovereign, holding it fit so to proclaim in and through this His Majesty's
Kingdom, do by this our present Proclamation declare, and manifest to the
world, That Charles the Second, Son and Heir of our said late Sovereign King
Charles the First of happy memory, is by the Grace of God the undoubted King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the the Faith, etc.

Given at Carrick this 16. day of February, 1648.
The Marquess of Ormonds Letter to Colonel Jones.
SIR,
I Have not thus long forborne to invite you, with those under your command, to
a submission to his Majesty's authority in me, and a conjunction with me in the
ways of his service, out of any the least aversion I had to you, or any of
them, or out of any disesteem of your power, to advance or impede the same, but
out of my fear that (whilst those that have of late usurped power over the
Subjects of England, held forth the least tolerable shadow of moderation in
their intentions toward the settlement of the Church and State, and that in
some tolerable way, with relation to Religion, the interest of the King and
Crown, the freedom of Parliaments, and the Liberty of the. Subjects) any
address from me proposing the withdrawing of that party from those; this
professing (from whom they had received some, and expected further support)
would have been but coldly received, and any determination thereupon deferred
in hope and expectation of the forementioned settlement: or that if your self
(who certainly have not wanted a foresight of the sad confusion now covering
the face of England) would have declared with me, the Lord Inchiquin, and the
Protestant Army in Munster, in prevention thereof: yet my fear was it would
have been as difficult for you to have carried with you the main body of the
Army under your Command, not so clear-fighted as your self, as it would have
been dangerous to you, and those with you well inclined to have attempted it
without them: But now that the mask of Hypocrisy (by which the Independent
Army has ensnared and enslaved all estates and degrees of men) is laid aside,
now that barefaced they evidently appear to be the subverters of true
Religion, and the protectors and invitors of all false ones, but even of
Irreligion and Atheism: Now that they have barbarously and inhumanoly laid
violent sacrilegious hands upon, and murdered Gods anointed and our King, not
as heretofore some patricides have done, to make room for some usurper, but in
a way plainly manifesting their intention is to change the Monarchy of England
into Anarchy, unless their aim be first to constitute an elective Kingdom,
and Crumwell or some such John of Leydon being elected, then by the same force
by which they have thus far compassed their end to establish a perfect Turkish
tyranny. Now that of the three Estates of King, Lords and Commons, whereof in
all ages Parliaments have consisted, there remains only a small number, and
they the dregs and scum of the house of Commons, packt and awed by the Army, a
wicked remnant left for no other end then yet further (if it be possible) to
delude the people with the name of Parliament. The King being murdered, and
the Lords and the rest of the Commons being by unheard of violence at several
times forced from the Houses, and some imprisoned; and now that there remains
no liberty in the Subject, but to profess blasphemous opinions, to revile and
tread under foot Magistracy, to murder Magistrates, and to oppress and undo
all that are not like minded with them; now (I say) I cannot doubt but that
you, and all that are with or under you, will take this opoitunity to declare
and act against so monstrous and unparalleled Rebellion, and that you and they
will cheerfully acknowledge, and faithfully serve and obey our gracious King
Charles the second, undoubted Heir of his Fathers Crowns and Virtues, under
whose Right and Conduct we may by Gods blessing restore Protestant Religion to
purity, and therein settle it; Parliaments to freedom, good Laws to their
force, and our Fellow Subjects to their just Liberty; wherein how blessed and
glorious a thing it will be to be so considerably instrumencall, as you may now
make your self, I leave to you to consider. And though I conceive there are not
any motives relating to particular interest to be mentioned after these so
weighty considerations (which are such as the world has not been at any time
furnished with) yet I hold it my part to assure you, that as there is nothing
you can reasonably propose for the safety, satisfaction or advantage of your
self, or of any that shall adhere to you, in what I desire, that I shall not to
the uttermost of my power provide for, so there is nothing I would or shall
more industriously avoid, then those necessities arising from my duty to God
and Man, that may (by your rejecting this offer) force me to be a sad
instrument of shedding English blood, which in such case must on both sides
happen. If this ovorture find place with you, as I earnestly wish it may, let
me know with what possible speed you can; and if you please by the Bearer, in
what way you desire it should be driven-on to a conclusion; for in that as well
as in substance you shall find all ready compliance from me that desire to be

Carrick March 9. 1608. Your affectionate friend to serve you, ORMOND.
For Colonel Michael Jones Governor of Dublin, these.



Colonel Jones his Answer to the Marquess of Ormonds Summons.
My Lord;
YOur Lordships of the ninth I received the twelfth instant, and therein have I
your Lordships invitation to a conjunction with your self (I suppose) as Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, and with others now united with the Irish, and with the
Irish themselves.

As I understand not how your Lordship should be invested with that power
pretended, so am I very well assured, that it is not in the power of any,
without the Parliament of England, to give and assure pardon to those bloody
Rebels, as by the Act to that end passed may appear more fully: I am also
assured the Parliament of England would never assent to such a Peace (such as
is that your Lordships with the Rebels) wherein is little or no provision made
either for the Protestants, or the Protestant Religion; nor can I understand
how the Protestant Religion should be settled and restored to its purity by an
Army of Papists, or the Protestants interests maintained by those very Enemies
by whom they have been spoiled, and theirs slaughtered: and very evident it is,
that both the Protestant, and Protestant Religion are in that your Lordships
Treaty left as in the power of the Rebels, to be by them borne down and rooted
out at pleasure.

As for that consideration by Your Lordship offered of the prosent and late
proceedings in England, I see not how that may be a sufficient motive to me (or
to any other in like trust for the Parliament of England in the service of this
Kingdom) to join with those Rebels upon any the pretenses in that Your
Lordships Letter mentioned.

For therein were there a manifest betraying that Trust reposed in me, in
deserting the service and work committed to me, and in joining with those I
should oppose, and in opposing whom I am obliged to serve.

Neither conceive I it any part of my work and care to take notice of any
whatsoever proceedings of State foreign to my charge and trust here,
especially they being found hereunto apparently destructive.

Most certain it is, (and former ages have approved it) That intermedling of
Governors and parties in this Kingdom with sidings and parties in England, has
been the very betraying of this Kingdom to the Irish, whilst the British
Forces here had bin thereupon called off, and the place therein laid open (as it
were) given up to the common Enemy.

It is what Your Lordship might have observed in Your former Treaty with the
Rebels, that upon Your Lordships there-up withdrawing, and sending hence into
England the most considerable part of the English Army, then commanded by You,
thereby was the remaining British party not long after overpowered and Your
Quarters by the Irish overrun, to the Gates of Dublin; Your self also reduced
to that low condition as to be besieged in this very City, the Metropolis and
principal Citadel of this Kingdom, and that by those very Rebels, who till then
never could stand before You; and what the end has been of that party also, so
sent by Your Lordship into England (although the flower and strength of the
English Army here both for Officers and Soldiers) has been very observable.

And how much the dangers are at present, more then in former ages, of
hazarding the English interest in this Kingdom, by sending any parties hence
into any other Kingdom, upon any pretenses whatsoever, is very apparent, as in
the generality of the Rebellion now, more then formerly; so considering Your
Lordships present Conclusions with, and Concessions to the Rebels, wherein
they are allowed the continued possession of all the Cities, Fores, and places
of strength, whereof they stood possessed at the time of their Treaty with Your
Lordship; and that they are to have a standing force (if I well remember) of
15000 Foot, and 2500 Horse, all of their own party, Officers and Soldiers; and
they, with the whole Kingdom, to be regulated by a Major party of Irish
Trustees, chosen by the Rebels themselves, as persons for their interests and
ends, to be by them confided in, without whom nothing is to be acted. And here
I cannot but mind Your Lordship of what has been sometime by Your self
delivered as Your sense in this particular, That the English interest in
Ireland must be preserved by the English and not by the Irish, and upon that
ground (if I be not deceived) did Your Lordship capitulate with the Parliament
of England, from which clear principle I am sorry to see Your Lordship now
receding.

As to that by Your Lordships menacing us here, of blood and force, if
dissenting from those Your Lordships ways and desigues.

For my particular, I shall (my Lord) much rather choose to suffer in so doing
(for therein shall I do what is becoming and answerable to my Trust) then to
purchase to my self, in the contrary, the ignominious brand of perfidie by any
allurements of whatsoever advantages offered me.

But very confident I am of the same Divine power which has still followed me
in this work, and will still follow me, and in that trust doubt I nothing of
giving Your Lordship plainly this my resolution in that particular. So I remain,

Dublin, Mar. 4. 1648. Your Lordships humble Servant. Signed, Mic: Jones.

Sir,
ORmond is now at Waterford attended by the Commissioners of Trust, (which is
the title given theseof the Irish named in the Articles of Agreement,) He has
there been preparing for his Armies, and out of that place (whether by loan or
otherwise) has raised 9000 l. toward their setting forth, and has taken up
1500 Barrels of Rye, and 1000 of Wheat; He expects the like proportion from the
other Cities and Towns, according to their respective abilities, and to that
end is now upon his journey to Limbrick, and thence intends toward Galway.

Ruperts Fleet, being sixteen sale, (now victualled) is set to sea; We expect
to hear of them suddenly on this coast, as being a matter of greatest moment
and advantage to their present undertakings.

The Ulster Scots have now declared, and that whole Province (as to your
interest) is lost in a moment. They have declined Col. Monk, and chosen the
Lord of Ards for their Commander. Eniskillin is still as it was, holding for
Ormond, Sir Pheelim Oneill with about 700 men, is marched Northward for
assisting them of Eniskillin, if it be requisite. Ormonds Rendezvous is set to
be this month toward Catherlagh, and Inchequin, with Clanrichards Forces have
their Rendezvous this day at Burb. We shall have work enough on all hands; and
(without a Miracle) shall not be able to subsist long without Relief of Men,
Money, and Provision from England. We are to conflict not only with the danger
of Enemies without, but also within, upon discovery of a design against Lexlip
a strong Castle within five miles of this City: We have blown up the place,
which if it had fallen into the Enemies power, had been to us of great
annoyance. We are now driven to the last refuge for maintenance of our poor
Army; 360 l. a week is assessed upon this City, who are no more able to bear
it, then the Soldiers can be without it.

The Enemy begin to make some attempts upon our Fronter Garrisons, and have
surprised the Castle of Drumcree, a place of great advantage to them; the Lord
put it into the hearts of those in power to think upon themselves and us
speedily; for no less are they, then our selves (their servants) concerned in
this business; for I am confident the Enemy eye not so much the ruin of us,
and the subversion of the English interest in this Kingdom, as the invasion of
England it self, which they may full easily do if We be lost. I am,

SIR, Your very humble Servant.

Articles of Agreement made and concluded betwixt the Lord of Ormend, and the
Roman Catholics of Ireland. With a Denotation of such additional Articles as
was not included in the last Agreement betwixt them.
Art. 1. THat the Roman Catholics of Ireland be^ freed of all Laws, imposing
mulcts, penalties or restraints on them, as to their Religion: The said Laws to
be repealed in the next Parliament to be held in this Kingdom of Ireland.

That the said Roman Catholics shall not be obliged to the Oath of Supremacy.

Addition. In this Article the granting of Churches or Church Livings, or the
exercise of Jurisdiction excepted from the said Roman Catholics, yet the said
Roman Catholics not be molested in the possession which they have at present
of the Churches, or Church Livings, or of the exercise of Jurisdictions, until
his Majesty's pleasure be declared concerning a free Parliament in this Kingdom.

Art. 2. A free Parliament to be held in Ireland within six months after the
date of these Articles, or as soon as the Lord Viscount Dillon of Costillogh,
Lord President of Conaught, Viscount Muskovy, Lo. Baron of Alheurs, Alex: mac
Donnel Esquire, Sir lucas Dilson Knight, Sir Nicholas Plunket Knight, Sir
Richard Barnwel Baronet, Jeffery Brown, Donough o Kallagban, Tirlagh o Neil,
Miles Reils, and Gerald Fennel, Esquires, or the major part of them will desire
the same. And till such Parliament, these Articles to be held inviolably as if
enacted in Parliament.

Addition. And if no Parliament be called within two years after the date of
the said Articles, then at the request of the said Lord Viscount Dillon, etc.
or the major part of them, an Assembly to be called of the Lords and Commons,
etc.

Art. 3. All Acts, Ordinances, and Orders, made by both or either Houses of
Parliament, to the blemish, etc. of the said Roman Catholics, since the 7. of
August, 1641. to be vacated, etc.

Art. 4. All Indictments, etc. against the said Roman Catholics to be vacated.

Art. 5. Addit. All impediments to the said Roman Catholics fitting in the
next Parliament, to be removed before the said Parliament.

Art. 6. All debts to remain as on the 23. October. 1641. notwithstanding any
attainder, etc.

Art. 7. The Estates of Conaught, Lo: of Clare, Limbrick, etc. to be secured.
Addit. Plantations of Kilkenny, and Vicklow left to the King to consider of in
the next Parliament: And will pass an Act of Limitation, as was enacted in
England in the 21. year of King James.

Artic. 8. All Incapacities on the Natives of the Kingdom to be taken away.

That they may erect one or more Inns of Court and free Schools, etc.

Art. 9. The Roman Catholics to be employed and entrusted in all places in
the Army, or Commonweal, indifferently with others,

Addition. That until the next Parliament, an Army of 15000 Foot, and 2500
Horse, of the Roman Catholics to be the standing Army; the said Lord Dillon,
etc. or the major part of them, having power to diminish or add to the said
number as they shall see cause from time to time.

Art. 10. That his Majesty be secured of 12000 l. per annum, and in liew of the
Court of Wards, etc.

Art. 11. No Nobleman to have more proxies then two in Parliament. No Nobleman
to sit in Parliament, which has not an estate in the Kingdom: and that they
who have none at present shall purchase within five years after the date of
these Articles: A Baron 200 l. per annum: A Viscount 400 l. an Earl 600 l. a
Marquess 800 l. a Duke 1000. per annum. otherwise to lose their Votes, etc.
None to be of the Commons house but such as are estated and resident in the
Kingdom.

Art. 12. Both Houses of Parliament here to declare, according to the Laws of
the Kingdom, concerning the Independency of the Parliament of Ireland, of the
Parliament of England.

Art. 13. That the Council Table, and Courts of Presidency be confined, etc.

Art. 14. Some Statutes concerning Wool, etc. be repealed, etc.

Art. 15. Addit. All offices, etc. since 1. Jan. to be upon Petition examined,
and all in them injured be repaired according to Justice and Honor.

Art. 16. Addit. Certain named persons may Petition in the next Parliament, and
to be righted as shall be fitting.

Art. 17. Addit. The Inhabitants of Cork, Youghal, and Dungarvan to be restored
to their possession, so far as shall stand with the security of the said
Garrisons.

Art. XVIII. An Act of oblivion to passed the next Parliament, etc. for all
things since October. 23. 1641. and to discharge the Kings Rent, etc. before or
since October. 23. 1641. till the date of these Articles, excepting the Kings
Debts and Subsidies due before the 23. of October. 1641. before Levied and not
accounted for.

That such barbarous and inhumane crimes as shall be particularized and agreed
upon by the Lord Lieutenant, and the said Lord Dillon, etc. or any seven or
more of them, as to the Actors and Procurers thereof, shall be left to be tried
and adjudged by such indifferent Commissioners as shall be agreed on by the
said Lord Lieutenant, and the said Lord Dillon, etc. or any seven or more of
them, the power of the said Commissioners to continue only for two years,
beginning within six months after the date of these Articles.

Art. XIX. That the chief Governor, Lord Chancellor, Lord High Treasurer, Vice
Chancellor, etc. farm not his Majesty's Customs.

Art. XX. For recalling Monopolies.

Art. XXI. For regulating the Court of Castle-Chamber.

Art. XXII. For repealing two Acts concerning ploughing by the tail, and for
burning oats in the straw.

Art. XXIII. For redressing those grievances presented to his Majesty by the
Agents of the Kingdom, and Committees of the Houses.

Art. XXIV. Maritine causes to be heard in the Kingdom. Maritine causes until
the next Parliament, to be Ordered by the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Dillon, etc. or
any seven or more of them.

Art. XXV. All increase of Rents on the Commission for defective Titles to
cease.

Art. XXVI. Interest of Money since October. 23. 1641. till these Articles, to be
forgiven, and but five pounds per cent. for three years, after the date of
these Articles, etc.

Art. XXVII. The said Lord Dillon, etc. to have power as follows, and any of
them dying, or miscarrying themselves, etc. the Lord Lieutenant to put in
another who shall be allowed by seven or all of the Survivors.

They to have power to raise and Levy money on the Persons or Estates of any in
the Kingdom, with consent of the Lord Lieutenant.

To call in all Arrears of Excize, etc. imposed by the Roman Catholics.

Addition. To dispose of the Estates of all adhering to the adverse Party, the
profits thereof to be for the Army, etc.

To levy Arrears for buying Arms, etc. and for entertaining Frigots', etc.

To lay up such Arms and Ammunition in such Magazines, and under such persons
as they shall think fit, with consent of the Lord Lieutenant.

To raise money of the Estates of the Roman Catholics, for disengaging the
Roman Catholics, before the conclusion of these Articles.

To call the Council, Congregation, and respective, supreme Councels, and
Commissioners General, before appointed by the Roman Catholics, to an
account, etc.

Art. XXVIII. The said Lord Lieutenant, and Lord Dillon, etc. to agree who to
be Justices of the Peace, etc. during pleasure.

Art. XXIX. Until the settling of all in these Articles by Act of Parliament,
the Possession of his Majesty's Cities, Garrisons, Towns, Forts, and Castles,
now in the Quarters of the Roman Catholics, to continue in the said Roman
Catholics, the same to be commanded by such as shall be approved by the said
Lord Dillon, etc. and authorized by the Lord Lieutenant, etc.

Art. XXX. That all Customs and Tenths of Prizes belonging to his Majesty, to
be for public uses until the settlement by Parliament.

Art. XXXI. The Kings Rent from Easter next, not to be levied till a settlement
in Parliament, etc.

Art. XXXII. The power of Commissioners of Oyer, etc.

Art. XXXIII. For appointing Judicatures, the persons to be named by the Lord
Dillon, etc. Addit. and authorized by the Lord Lieutenant, etc.

Art. XXXIV. The Roman Regular Clergy to hold the style of Monasteries
belonging to Roman Catholics. Addit. And that until the next Parliament,
provided that the said Regulars be conformable to these Articles.

Art. XXXV. All other demands of the said Roman Catholics not assented to in
these Articles to be referred to his Majesty.

In witness whereof,

The Lord Lieutenant Signed and Sealed for his Majesty, this remaining with the
said Roman Catholics.

And Sir Richard Blake, Knight, in the Chair of the general Assembly of the
said Roman Catholics, by Order of the said Assembly, to that part remaining
with the Lord Lieutenant has put his hand, and the public Seal hitherto used
by the said Roman Catholics, 17. January, 1648.

A necessary Representation of the present evils and imminent dangers, to
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, arising from the late and present practices of
the Sectarian Party in England; together with an Exhortation to duties relating
to the Covenant unto all within our charge, and to all the well-affected within
this Kingdom, by the Presbytery at Belfast, Feb. 15. 1649.
When we do seriously consider the great and many duties which we owe unto
God, and his people, over whom he has made us overseers, and for whom we must
give an account; and when we behold the laudable examples of the worthy
Ministers of the Province of London, and of the Commissioners of the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, in their free and faithful Testimonies
against the insolences of the Sectarian Party in England. Considering also the
dependency of this Kingdom upon the Kingdom of England, and remembering how
against strong opposition we were assisted by the Lord the last year in
discharge of the like duty, and how he punished the contempt of our warning
upon the despisers thereof, we find our selves as necessitated, so the more
encouraged to cast in our Mite in the Treasury, least our silence should
involve us in the guilt of unfaithfulness, and our people in security and
neglect of duties.

In this discharge of the Trust put upon us by God, we would not be looked upon
as sowers of Sedition or Troubles of National and devisive motions; our record
is in Heaven, that nothing is more hateful unto us, or less intended by us, and
therefore we shall not fear the malicious and wicked aspersions, which we know
Satan by his instruments, is ready to cast not only upon us, but upon all who
sincerely endeavor the advancement of reformation: what of late have been, and
now are the insolent and presumptuous practices of the Sectaries in England, is
not unknown unto the world, for not withstanding their specious pretenses for
Religion and Liberties, yet their late and preseat actions being therewith
compared, do clearly evidence, that they love to wear a rough Garment, to
deceive, since they with a high hand despised the Oath in breaking the
Covenant, which is so strong a foundation to both, whilst they load it with
slightive reproaches, calling it a bundle of particulars, and a contrary
interest and a snare to the people, and likewise labor to establish by Laws an
universal Toleration of all Religions, which is an avowed overturning of unity
in Religion, and so directly repugnant to the Word of God; The two first
Articles of the Solemn Covenant, which is the greater wickedness in them to
violate, since many of the chiefest of themselves, have with their hands lifted
up to the most high God Sworn and Sealed it.

Moreover, the great disaffection to the settlement of Religion, and to their
further breach of Covenant, does more fully appear by their strong oppositions
to Presbyterial Government (the hedge and Bulwark of Religion) whilst they
express their hatred to it more then to the worst of Errors, by excluding it
under the name of compulsion, when they embrace even Paganisim and Judaism in
the Arms of Toleration, not to speak of their aspersions upon it, and the
asserters thereof, as Antichristian and Popish, though they have deeply sworn
to maintain the same Government in the first Article of the Covenant, as it is
established in the Church of Scotland, which they now so despitefully blaspheme.

Again, It is more then manifest that they speak not the vindication, but the
extirpation of Laws and Liberties, as appears by their seizing on the person of
the King, and at their pleasure removing him from place to place, not only
without the consent, but if we mistake not, against a direct Ordinance of
Parliament; their violent surprising, imprisoning and secluding many of the
most worthy Members of the Honorable House of Commons, directly against a
declared privilege of Parliament (an action certainly without parallel in any
age) and their proposal of abolishing of all Parliamentary Power for the
future, and establishing a Representative (as they call it) instead thereof;
neither has their fury stayed here, but without all rule or example, being but
private men, they have proceeded to the trial of the King, against both the
Interest and Protestations of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the former public
Declarations of both kingdoms (besides their violent haste, rejecting the
hearing of any defenses) with cruel hands have put him to death, an act so
horrible, as no History Divine or Humane has laid any president of the like.

These and many other detestable insolences, may abundantly convince any
unbyased judgment, that the present practice of the Sectaries and their
Abettors, do directly overturn the Laws and Liberties of the kingdoms, root out
lawful and Supreme Magistracy (the just privileges whereof we have sworn to
maintain) and introduce a fearful confusion, and Lawless Anarchy.

The Spirit of God by Solomon tells us, Prove. 30.21. That a Servant to reign it
one of the four things for which the Earth is disquieted, and which it cannot
bear; we wonder nothing that the Earth is disquieted for these things, but we
wonder greatly if the Earth can bear them, and albeit, the Lord so permit that
folly be set in great dignity, and the rich set in low places; that Servants
ride upon Horses, and Princes walk as Servants upon the Earth, Eccles. 10* 6,
7. yet the same wise man says, Prove. 19.10. Delight is not seemly for a fool,
much less for a Servant to have rule over Princes.

When we consider these things, we cannot but declare and manifest our utter
dislike and detestations of such unwarrantable practices, directly subverting
our Covenant, Laws, Religion, and Liberties: And as watchmen in Slon, warn all
the lovers of truth, and well-affected to the Covenant, carefully to avoid
compliance with, or not bearing witness against such horrid insolences, least
partaking with them in their sins, they also be partakers of their Plagues.
Therefore in the Spirit of meekness we earnestly entreat, and in the authority
of Jesus Christ (whose Servants we are) charge and obtest all who resolve to
adhere unto Truth and the Covenant, diligently to observe, and conscientiously
to perform these following duties.

First, that according to our Solemn Covenant, every one study more to the
power of godliness and personal reformation of themselves and Families, because
for the great breach of this part of the Covenant, God is highly offended with
these Lands, and justly provoked to permit men to be the instruments of our
misery and afflictions.

Secondly, That every one in their station and calling, earnestly contend for
the Faith which once was delivered to the Saints, Jude v. 3. and seek to have
their hearts established with grace, that they be not unstable and wavering,
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, but that they receive the Truth in
love, avoiding the company of such as withdraw from, and vilify the public
Ordinances, speak evil of Church Government, vent damnable Errors, under the
specious pretense of a Gospel-way, and New-light, and honor highly the persons
and courses of notorious Sectaries, least God give them over to strong
delusions (the plague of these times) that they may believe lies and be damned.

Thirdly, that they would not be drawn by Council, Command or Example, to shake
off the ancient and Fundamental Government of these Kingdoms by King and
Parliament, which we are so deeply engaged to preserve by our Solemn Covenant,
as they would not be found guilty of the great evils of these times (condemned
by the Holy Ghost) the despising of Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities.

Fourthly, That they do cordially endeavor the preservation of the Union among
the well-affected in the Kingdoms, not being swayed by any National respect,
remembering that part of the Covenant, That we shall not suffer our selves
directly nor indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror, to be
divided or withdrawn from this blessed Union and Conjunction.

And finally, Albeit there be more present hazards from the power of Sectaries
(as there was from Malignants the last year) yet we are not ignorant of the
evil purposes of Malignants, even at this time in all the Kingdoms, and
particularly in this; and for this cause, we exhort every one with equal
watchfulness, to keep themselves free from associating with such, or from
swerving in their judgments to Malignant principles, and to avoid all such
persons as have been from the beginning known opposers of the Covenant,
combining themselves with Papists and other notorious Malignants, especially
such who have been chief Promoters of the late Engagement against England,
calumniators of the work of Reformation, imputing the misery of the present
times unto the advancers thereof, and that their just hatred to Sectaries
incline not their minds to favor Malignants, or to think, that because of the
power of Sectaries, the Cause of God needs the more to fear the Enemy, or to
stand in need of the help of Malignants.

FINIS.

