AN OLD SHIP CALLED AN EXHORTATION To continue all Subjects in their due
Obedience, or the reward of a faithful Subject to his Prince.

To the Bishops and Clergy. To the true Nobility. To the Civi^l Magist^a^e. To
the true and faithful Subject. What a faithful Subject is? The description of
Loyalty.
New Riged by a Well-wisher, to his Prince and Country, never more need to be
set forth to Sea* then in these distracted times.

Behold your King

THE I WILL OF WAIT



Printed in the Year 1648

To the Reverend Bishops, and Clergy,
FOr as much as your Eclesiasticall office is given you from God, as the next
Principal members (under the head) to govern the Common wealth of this
mystical body: And that their is required at your hands an Extraordinary
duty touching the Function of the soul. Let me entreat you to be as vigilant
as the five wise Virgins, having oil always in your lamps, against the
Bridegroom comes forth of his Chamber, your office is the soul of the Laity,
the heart of Government, and the very Epitome of all obedience, from you as the
Moon boroweth her light of the Sun, all inf^riour ministers take their Order
of perfection, let then your doctrine be pure, and steadfast like Moses Bush,
that always burned but never Consumed: your preaching in Season, and out of
Season, and your Conversation as spotless as the sacrifice of ^urtles.

You best know what plenty of Manna has rained in Israel, and how many omer
full every man ought to gather: be not any of you the first that gather more
then is commanded, and in mistrust of Gods benefits in f^ct the whole Land with
the vice of Avarice.

You ought rather to be like Pelicans in the wilderness, who in tender love
peck the blood from their Breast to feed their young one: you see with your
visible eye; how wonderful Almighty God, has always preserved the Kings
Majesty, from the snares of his manifould Enemies.

And in you principally lies the sacrifice of thanks giving, it is you that
ought to dance before the tabernacle, Number 17. 8. v.
and to go with the people to the Arc of the Covenant: that your
righteousness may bud like Arons ro^, it is you that ought to fly forth from
this tossed Arc, and like the dove, bring the olive branch Genesis 8. 11.
of peace in your mouths, and tell the people, that if they return God will be
their God; and send a truce to their distressed souls by you his Ambassadors:

Fly not to Tharsis, when you are sent to Niniveth, least devouring destraction
attend you, nor with the man of God go not out of the way, Least a Lion tare
you in pieces, but still be conversent with the Lord, that Exodus 34. 30.
your faces may shine with Moses, when he came from the mount, and bring the
Image of Gods glory to the People in your foreheads: you must bear, with Aron
Exodus 38. 3.
the breast plate of Judgment upon your hearts, there must be graven upon your
forefronts, holiness to the E^^d. 35. 39
Lord, and your sounds must be heard when you go into the Holy places before
him: So shall ye stand like Mount Sina, never to be removed, and your Golden
candle stick shine in the Temple of the Lord remember the charge your Mr.
Christ gave to his servant Peter, binding him three times, above all things by
his fervent love and the dear affection he bare to his Mr. to feed his sheep;
to be with Paul, the faithful Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, as though God did
beseech you through us; we pray you in Christs-stead, 2 Cor. 5. 2.
that ye be reconciled to God, with Paul, likewise to Phil. 3. 14.
be an example of life and doctrine as in these words and follow hard toward
the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, let us
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, if ye be otherwise, God shall
reveal, even the same unto you. Ye are Mat. 15. 13.
most Reverent, the salt of the earth, which wanting savor is to be trodden
under foot; ye are the light of the world a Ci^y that is set on a hill cannot
be hid, let your light therefore shine that they that see your good works, may
glorify your father which is in Heaven.

This unworthy to council so grave advisements, as if the body should instruct
the soul, I only like a traviler in his pilgrimage, seeing a King go out of
his way, tell him there is a better, a more perfect and a straighter: so
referring you to your masters reward who hates a hidden tallent, I beseech that
God, who Exodus 13. 21.
guides Israel by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night in pillar of fire, to
direct your earthly bodies and spiritual souls to his service,

Amen.
To the true Nobility of this Realm.
TO ye Right honorable, that are the props and supporters of a Kingdom, that
like Atlas should bear the weight of heaven one your shouldiers, give me leave
to stretch forth the atires of my heart, and as in these tempestious times,
unite yourselves together in peace like one body, obedient to one principal
head, in the worthy member the heart, the Monarch seat of our Microcosmos,
should be your residence, within whose center as in a Princes Court, are
diverse receptailes for you to inhabit in, then as branches extending from the
lofty Cedar* being sed by one root, do notwithstanding cherish one another
wi^h their natural sap: so like the true stock of Nobility* descended from
your worthy ancestors, be you combined in a conjunction of unseperable aid,
that the body of the tree may be comforted in so happy an Issue, and in the
proudest blast of conspiracy, keep you still unremovable, be you like
faithful Mardocheus, spotles in your ways, when traitors like proud Haman
shall perish in their own complo^s* For if you please to peruse our Histories,
both Eclesiasticall and profane, ye shall find that never traitor to his
native Prince, but had his reward threefold returned into his wicked bosom,
and though it has pleased God sometimes to suffer them, (the cause best known
to his sacred pleasure) to bring to pass their hateful purposes: yet as a woe
pronounced to them by whom such evils come, their mischief has not past
without great mischief reguerdond, their is none of your honorable society,
but knows that treason is the devider and seperater of all good things, and a
fatal disjoyner of perfection, bringing with it ruin, and the merciless
substitutes of war, where one the contrary, obedience is the finewes of the
State, and glewes the hearts of Nobility together, like one indivisible
substance, and as the seven lean ^ine in Pharaohs dream, devoured the seven
far, yet themselves not the fatter: so stands it with treason, like a
cormerant, it devours all: yet is it self the better by nothing. What greater
pattern of misery can there be, then a Kingdom divided in it self, it is like
the dangerous Eclipse of the Sun: nay like the unnatural separation of
heaven, that brings all danger and destruction, no plague of Egypt comparable
to that misery, for Civil discention is the gate to let in ruin, and foraine
invasion, it is like a wedge of Iron, that entering into an oak, dissevers both
sides in several pieces, and makes them both fit for the fire.

The flourishing State of Rome was devoured by that Monster, and all
tranquillity swallowed up at a bit by that hidious Leviathan, it is like the
blind Mole, that loves still to be mischievously laboring, tosseth up her own
destruction.

Let then, Right honorable, that acceptable sacrifice of your hearts be
offered to our gracious Sovereign:, which far exceeds the external offices of
fained affections, who with an eye of vigilance will, no doubt, regard your
virtues, and like the cheerful comfort of the Sun with his blessed
countinance, make your young blosoms come to pleasant fruit, and bring the
fruit by comfortable warmth to full maturity.

By this means, shall your Phoenix live still, and you be made most happy in
his fresh renewing, God so direct your hearts to work in you unfeigned loyalty
to his sacred Majesty, and deadly hatred to self devouring treason,

Amen.
To the Civil Majestrates, the Lord Majors, Mr. Majors, and their Sheriffs of
London, York, Newcastle, Carlisle, and other inferior Officers.
THe natural care and loyalty, your Ancestors have ever borne to their
Sovereigns, since their first flourishing time, both in peace and war, has
in ages past, (as deeds worth Registring) been Recorded: for it is manifest
when Princes, that heretofore have governed, have held their Reigns with a
more severe hand, then in our times (God be thanked) yet they have without
repining willingly sustained, as giving place to time, to fortune, or both. And
as in all dangerous commotions, they have made apparent their forward loves and
loyalties, to their Prince and native Country, so it were to be wished, that
you that are their successor, would follow their examples, and with aperfect
resolution, and vigilant care, unite your selvesin love together, and lend your
helping hand, when occasion shall serve, to restore our to much wronged
Sovereign to his Rights again; for their is no other Balsom, will heal the
wounds of our long languishing and bleeding Country, if so you do, you shall
find your Sovereign like a careful mother, with Hester, be ready to offer
himself for his people, and with Iudeth to dread no danger to preserve his own
Nation.

The Titants Dioclesian Nero, and Phalaris, who most blodily dived into the
bowels of their friends and subjects, were obeyed both in love and fear:
though their Tyrany extended to all licentious and uncivil proceedings, how
much more ought ye, having a most Christian Prince ^o govern ye, that tenders
the Pricking of yourfinger, more then a wound from his own heart to prosecu^e
his P^incely thoughts and pure integrety, I am constrained to urge this as a
thing which cannot be two often mentioned; considering the crafty and many
subtle of the disloyiall Saduccs in these times, and strive as much as in them
lies, to bribe and turn the hearts of his highness loving subjects, against
him, (as the Devil which shewe^h darnell amongst the best wheat) with
counterfit shows and deceitful practices, or like the craccoldaile in Niclus,
which weeps like a Child till she allure some passenger, and then returning in
the nature of her ugly shape, her hunger bitten Paunch, and presently devours
of such pestiferous sstuffe are all glozing siccophants that guild their
pretenses (to keep the counterfit unspied) with such false suggestions*
carrying neither honesty, reason, or truth, but like the devils that entered
into the heard of Swine, when they cannot have liberty or license to do one
mischief, covet to enter into another; so their malice may be set on work,
but to withstand such I know your civil Judgments are able if your minds were
willing:

Herein you ought the rather to be thoroughly confirmed, seeing how God has from
the beginning of his Majesty's reign, defended him against all manner of
envious assaults, and laid their own evil, upon the wickedness of their own
heads.

This should make you (methinks) chary to discover to your dread Sovereign,
any mischeife lurking like Poison of* Aspes under their lips, call to mind his
Majesty's gracious Proclamation; wherein he has declared himself, and now
shows it to the world to be more careful of your wellfaire then his own (I
should think) you seeing the abuse and slavish servilitie that your native
Country is brought unto by your disobedience should stir you up to gain what
is lost, and England, nay O English men where have you lost your hearts of
loyalty? or what is become of your eyes, that you see not, your selves
oppressed with such tedious burdens and clogges, as to be constrained to pay
tribu^e both for your appetile and sustinance, your King imprisoned in the Isle
of Wight, your Prince forced to live in annother Kingdom, nay more what can be
worse, all these things are by our fellow subjects, which in all righr should
be our servants, but now they are become our Lords, and taskemasters, for they
which will trample their head under their feet, will not use the body other
ways, all these things and many more well wayed, we cannot say otherwise, but
it is a through Deformation both in Church and State.

This as one servant in affection, advising even as you would have your souls
l^ft upon high, and your coffers inricht on earth: as you look to have your
War-houses filled full of Godsblessing, to have your wine good, and your ale fat;
once again I stir you up, like a flame that is quickened with blowing, to have
God obey your Prince, and do good for your Country so shall his proudest
enemies dye at his feet, and ye be made worthy Instruments like (a Tower of
Marble) to defend his sacred Majesty, whom God continue with long health and
prosperous life.

Amen.
To the true and faithful privet subject both in the North and South parts of
this Kingdom; my dear Countrymen, whose loyalties to their Prince and
Country will never be forgotten.
AND now beloved Countrymen to you in general, that carry with you the full
Current of affection, the swiftest stream of deep guiding love, not to be
revented or turned back by the vehement opposition of my resisting wind, to you
as to the open mark; whereto my heart leavile her pretended aim, being the
upshot of my exhortation, I send this my friendly Council, like as a City
well fensed about with impregnable walls: so ought ye to be in time of
domisticall rebellion or foreign invasion; ye are the maine Battle, the
strength and trust of this Kingdom, and to you belong a chief trust in the
required renovation, as his highness may well be compared to the apple of our
eye, which naturally (by reason it is tender unto us) we have most care: so
ought ye to join your whole bodies, goods, Arms, Legs, Feet, and heart, to
protect his Royal person, without secret grudging, private muttering, or
uncivi^l controversy.

Ye ought to be like steadfast Rocks in the sea, to affront every storm, and to
withstand (without muttering) the most bitter blasts, that either winter or
foul weather can afford.

To conclude, I beseech God in his infinite mercy stir up your dear affecting
love to His Majesty; mercy has always sitten at his Right hand, and honored
about him like a continual Handmaid, mercy is the wedding King, that like
unspotted Virgin, has (married him to our Savior) and has settled his
highness the faithful president of his true Church, wherein may his Maj.
continue many happy days, to the glory of God, and the comfort of his
faithful loving subjects.

Amen.
What a faithful Subject is:
A Good subject, next to the diadem that a dornes a Princes head, is the
chiefest Ornament that decores his dignity; he is the precious balm that
annoints his brows, and is never to the heart, then his Scepter to his Right
hand, as sweet in his nostrills as the groves of Gillead, and more precious in
his ^ight then Solomon's yourythorne covered with purest Gold.

His heart is clothed with peace, like mount Olivet, and his eyes as harmless
as the sight of a Dove: his tongue sounds like the Harp of David: and his lips
deliver the happiness of loyalty: his ears are the p^rtalls that receive
understanding and all perfection from thence is conducted to the heart: his
hands are ready to fight the batailes of the Lord, and his feet shining the
steps of blood, are bent always to walk in the paths of innocence, thus
excellent in the sight of the Prince shines a faithful Subject, more gorgeous
then the Ephod of Aron: and more sumtuous then Solomon in all his Royalty, who
so is this to this his Prince and Country, the Lord will prosper him, and he
shall be blessed in everlasting generation: and for one of these benefits he
receives in earth, he shall have a million in Heaven, for one of these
perfections he partakes of in this world, numbers above number, shall attend
him in the world to come: And his Prince shall thus pray for him, and bless
him: As Solomon did his Subjects.

And the King turned his face and blessed all the Congregation of Israel, and
said blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my
Father, and has with his hand fulfilled it.

And though my self may say with Isaiah, I am a worm, and no man; yet (I
spoke it in despite of vain glory) I would with all my heart as an Isaac in
the hands of Abraham, serve as a Sacrifice, to do my Prince, and Country
good: for sure he cannot be a true servitur of God, that is not a faithful
(subject to his Prince, neither would I Judge my filicity i^ this world
Answerable to that, if once my soul might be Employed to please my Prince, and
benefit my Country.

For all the offices, of Humanity depend only upon these Principal
performances, for I know by that means there comes a Blessing from a far, a
reward full of joy, which none else are worthy to obtain, which reward I
heartily pray the great Rewarder of all to send to the true, loyal, and
Faithful Subjects: of England and so wi^h one voice proceeding from one unity
of heart, let us all say Faithfully, (GOD SAVE KING CHARLES:)

AMEN.
The Description of Loyalty.
ABove the Clouds where sprangled troops of Stars,
Adorn the precious bosom of the Sky:
Where heavenly peace abandons breaking Jars,
And all the Consort that is tun^* on high:
Send forth their delicat melodious sounds,
That makes those Crystal vaults with joy abound.
With in the bright, Imperial orb of rest,
Where souls of Saints one Goulden alters set:
And in the Lambs sweet breath are only blessed,
Where thousand Graces millions more beget:
His Loyalty in thr^^nd in blessed Chair:
Most gorgeous in attire, most heavenly fair.
About her head, the Swift wing Cherubines,
hover their silver Pinions in her eyes:
And the sweet spheres with glorious seraphins,
Upon her shining brow with bliss arise:
No stormy Cloud can vail her beauteous face,
Because their burns the holy lamp of Grace.
Truth richly clothed in whight ornament,
stand at the right hand of this happy Saint.
from whom the words of Righteousness are sent,
whose cheerful hopes by envy cannot faint.
But as the Daughter to the Highest power;
She sits defended in a strong built Tower:
Upon her left hand hope her anchor ways,
One whom her dear success does still attend.
Nor does she feed her servants with delays,
But they that one her sacred state depend.
with bountious hand she gives such rich reward,
as vading fame has neither seen nor heard:
And as great Michaell with the Dragon fought
About the chosen Moses sacred bo^es:
So she contends with tray^ors that have sought,
To touch the hearts of Gods anointed ones.
And like the Archangell gives them all the foil.
That lift their hands a Princes life to spoil.
POSTSCRIPT*
To his Noble Colonel the Right Honorable Sir. Thomas Gl^m^^^^ Colonel
General Governor of York Commander in chief, of Westmerland, Comberland,
Northumberland* and the City of Carlisle, and lastly, Major General to his
Majesty and Governor of Oxford, the true pattern of Loyalty.
Sir,
I Have ever accounted in gratitude, to be not only the greatest, but the
ugliest monster in nature, according to that Ingratum Si dixeris omnio dixeris,
wondering at the most sort of men, which in this our age do live, that they
take so little regard of it, and not rather, altogether shame and abhor it, but
when I perticularly muse of some, as of my self I find that either oppertunity
will not always serve, or abillitie in most do want, to those that carry
willing minds or answerable in deeds, and concerning my self; of which is now
my drift dispare, I have often feared least of diverse hereof I would as guilty
be noted, and of many to whom I have been grea^ly beholden* justly condemned,
but of note more then of your Honor: which to me for some years together, you
have been pleased to bestow upon me many noble favors, the whilst I was under
your command, wherefore having gotten some fit occation, I thought not to
pretermit the same, but therein to view my mind and poor ability, wherein I
may do your honor any service, I do here present, small I say in respect of
answering any benefit received, but great and precious in regard of the matter
therein contained; I having been an eye witness of your Honors actions for
his Majesty's cause, and knowing what great pains and adventures you have
undertaken for the defense of it, being always a good account to your Master,
as a just steward ought to do, your loyal action which England is not
ignorant of, has imbolden me to present this small work to the eyes of the
world under good protection, (not to gain A populer applause) but to hinder as
far as in me lies; the trampling so precious a Jewel, under the feet of such
swine which wallows in the mire of th^se our times. I take leave of your Honor,
wishing you all happiness in this life, and in the world to come Eternal
Felicities.

This is the prayers of one of your Honors Captains, who will be always
ready to observe your command
vale.
FINIS.

