Advice to a Son; or Directions For your better Conduct Through the various and
most important Encounters of this Life.

Under these General Heads I. Studies etc. II. Love and Marriage. III.
Travel. IV. Government. V. Religion. Conclusion.


OXFORD. Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the University, for Thomas Robinson
165^.

To the Reader.
SUch as make it their business, with the Spider, to suck out the Crudities
and Corruptions in Books, are unlikely to fail of Matter here: yet may come
far short of the Credit and Good might accrue to themselves and others, did
they pore less on what is really amiss, and more on that which is not yet
brought under a perfect Knowledge (unpossible to be taken up pure by those that
begin but now to scramble for it:) NewOpinions, though perhaps untrue, rather
gaining, then loosing Repute by Opposition; This breeds matter of wonder, why
so maney should hazard their Fame, by running and yelping after those
prodigious Wits of this last Age, B. D. H. etc. Who are not unable, with Abner,
to silence these swifter writers with the Butt-end of of their Quils; and so
richly endowed from Nature, as they are able to trafick upon their single
stock, without obliging the credit of ancient Authors, who for ought I know,
were of poorer Parts, and might learn of them, were they in being. This is
said to honor those that can take their pastime in the Depths of Reason; and
not to shroud my poor Interest under theirs, whose Books deserve better
Coverings, then can be picked out of the choicest of my Papers, or theirs that
have the impudence to traduce them. To conclude, Many that can buy Books, want
Wit to use them.

To his Son.
Son,
I Have forborne to set your Name on the Forehead of these Animadversions, not
that I am ashamed either of Them or You, but for such like Reasons.

First, because some Truths, I here endeavor to make legible, the tyranny of
Custom and Policy labors to conceal, as destructive to the Project of
Government; and therefore unlikely to pass by wise men, without a formal
reproof; who have been long since taught by unerring Experience, That
Ignorance draws with the least reluctance, in the Yoke of Obedience; being of
so sheepish a Nature, as she is no bodies foe but her own.

Next to spare you the trouble of arming your Reason, in way of defense, upon
every Alarm, They may receive, from the Censures of wiser or weaker Judgments:
For not carrying the marks of your particular Interest, you may stand, as it
were unseen, behind the Curtine of indifferency, and hear without blushing the
Opinions of others, if chance or your will should please to make Them the
object of their Discourse. Amongst whom, if any accuse Them, as too cheap and
obvious, They are unadvised Questioners of their own Charter, in case they
should be Fathers: who were never denied yet the fredome to teach their
Children to manage an Hobbyhorse, without offering violence to Gravity or
Discretion.

Neither do we so ordinarily fall through the unevenness or difficulty of the
way, as carelessness and ignorance in the Journals of former Experience: This
makes it the greatest demonstration of Paternall Affection, like the Pelican,
to dissect my self before you, and by ripping up mine own Bowels, to let you
see where the defects of humanity reside, which are not only the occasions of
many corporeal Diseases, but of most of the Misfortunes accompanying Life.

And though, in passing through so much weakness, They are rendered more
deficient, then, considered in their own Nature, in truth they are; Yet, being
the best I am able to afford you, They cannot but be looked upon by You for as
lively a Monument of my Love, as if they bare the Magisteriall Impresse of a
work of Solomon's.

And in regard of Time, none can be more opportune then this, in which men
carry breasts of steel against those of their own Profession (some niceties
excepted) under the imperious pretense of Religion.

If any blinded with Ignorance, or misled by a more candid Nature, should
engage for the sufficiency of These, or any thing else, I have writ: I am
conscious of too many flawes in my self, to be swelled beyond my natural
proportion.

Your sake alone produced Them, that during the little time I have to live, you
might turn to my Judgment, upon all occasions, without trouble; and converse
with me being dead, without fear.

There is no great difference between good days, and evil, when past; yet if
thus fortified by the Advice of a Father, no less then the Prayers of an
incomparable indulgent Mother, you should break out into Extravagancies,
presuming on the Opinion of your own Judgment, and the mediation of our Love,
(Though it would be the severest curse remaining in the custody of Fortune, yet
unlayed upon me:) I doubt not, but to receive more comfort, from a Patience
able to bear it, then you shall from a Repentance sufficient to blot it out.

But it is neither Delight in me, nor Charity unto you, by Iealousy to antedate
Crimes never yet committed; I desire you therefore to take these Admonitions, as
marks to sail by, not for presages of Shipwreck.

For any faults escaped here, through have, or other infirmity, I hope your
Love will be large enough to cover them, not exposing, out of Ostentation or
Idleness, your Fathers Shame: whereby, not only what is perfect may prove
useful, but the very mistakes and blots obtain as great a design, by
exercising your wit and industry in their Emendation; which I expect you should
faithfully perform in relation to These, or any thing else you find, may
traduce the Credit or stain the Memory of

Your loving Father, etc.

READER.
These Faults you may mend thus. Page 18. lin. 1. change it and if. p. 41. l.
15. r. jealousy. p. 75. l. 15. r. Streets. p. 82. l. 26. their r. there p. 86.
l. 5: r. of the. l. 25. r. those p. 99. l. 4. r. ^id. p. 116. l. 10. r. 40.
Tithes. p. 118. l. penult. r. at a Gna^. p. 119. l. 7. r. through. l. 14. r.
prejudice. p. 139. l. 23. r. or Stupidity.

What other Faults you find, or make, you may also mend how you please.

ADVICE TO A SON.
I. STUDIES. etc.
1. Free Schools. 2. Universities. 3. Collegiate Discipline. 4. Mere
Scholars. 5. Physic. ^6. Volumes. 7, 8. History. 9. Choice Books,
Negotiations, Ambassadors. 10. Converse. 11. Pedants. 12. Strong-lines. 13.
Exercise -- of 14. Style. 15. Letters. 16. Sordid Phrases. 17. Courtesies. 18.
Counsel. 19, 20. Secretaries. 21. Serving wicked Masters. 22, 23.
Intelligencers. 24. Observance. 25. Dependency. 26. Writing things dangerous.
27. Poetry. 28. Music. 29. Clothes -- 30. Buying. 31. Horses. 32. Riding. 33.
Wrestling, Vaulting, Fencing, 34. Swimming. 35, 36. Suretyship, Trusting. 37.
Public Faith. 38. Contracts. 39. Implicit judging. 40, 41. Pride, Baseness. 42.
Gesture in Speaking. 43. Boldness. 44. Covetousness 45, 46, 47. Thrift. 48.
Rising out of Bed. 49. Eating. 50. Drinking, Tobacco. 51, 52, 53. Drunkenesse.
54. Diet, Plots. 55. 56. Company. 57. Jeering. 58, 59. Proverbs, Injuries,
Fighting -- Duels. 60. Insulting. 61. Ordinaries. 62. Dogs, Boys, Whores. 63,
64, 65. Secrecy and Boasting -- of -- the Favors of women -- 66. Married --
67. Great Ladies -- 68. Masks, Plays. etc.

1. THough I can never pay enough to your Grandfathers Memory for his tender
care in my Education, yet I must observe in it this mistake; That by keeping me
at home, where I was one of my young Masters, I lost the advantage of my most
docible Time: For not undergoing the same discipline, I must needs come short
of their experience, that are bred up in Free-schooles, who by plotting to rob
an Orchard etc, run through all the subtilties required in taking of a Town;
being made by use familiar to secrecy, and compliance with opportunity;
Qualities never after to be attained at cheaper rates then the hazard of all;
whereas these see the danger of Trusting others, and the rocks they fall upon
by a too obstinate adhering to their own imprudent resolutions; and all this
under no higher penalty then a whipping: And it is possible, this indulgence of
my father might be the cause I afforded him so poor a return for all his cost.

2. As your Education has been befriended by a Foundation, so you may
endeavor the requital, if God makes you able: However let not the contrary
aflict you, since it is observed by some, That his name who burnt the Temple of
Diana, out-lasted theirs that built it; A fortune God grant may never fall upon
our Universities. Nevertheless if Zeal overheated in the narrow hearts of men
ignorant and covetous should dry up these fountains of learning, by
appropriating their Revenues, and demolishing their Monuments (to the fame of
which foreign Nations resort in Pilgrimages, for to offer up honor and
admiration to these shrines, and return more laden with satisfaction then
they could possibly bring prejudice) yet she should pull down no more, the^
she had formerly raised, when incited by a contrary affection to charity and
knowledge; therefore a provocation not strong enough to distemper a wise man's
patience, who may easily observe, in his own or precedent books of
experience, as great mapps of devastation. For if one age did not level, what
another had erected, variety were lost, and no means left to render the present
or future Generations famous or infamous.

3. I have observed in Collegiate discipline, that all the Reverence to
Superiors, learned in the Hall or Chapel, is lost in the irreverent
discourse you have of them in your Chambers: By this you leave the principal
business of Youth neglected, which is to be perfect in Patience and Obedience,
Habits no where so exactly learned, as in the Foundations of the Jesuits, could
they be fetched thence without prejudice to Religion and Freedom.

4. Let not an over-passionate prosecution of Learning draw you from making an
honest improvement of what is already yours, or may be made so by your future
endeavors; as such do, who are better read in the bigness of the whole
earth, then that little spot, left them for their support.

5. If a more profitable employment pull you not too soon from the University,
make some inspection into Physic; which will add to your welcome where ever
you come; it being usual, especially for Ladies, to yield no less reverence
to their Physicians, then their Confessors: Neither does the refusal of Fees
abate your profit proportionably to the advancement it brings to your Credit:
The intricacy of the study is not great, after an exact knowledge in Anatomy,
and Drugs is attained; not hard, by reason of the late helps. Yet I advise you
this under such Caution, as not to imagine the Diseases you read of, inherent
in your self, as many melancholicke young men do, that make their first
Experiments upon their own bodies, to their perpetual detriment: Therefore
you may live by, not upon Physic.

6. Huge Volumnes, like the ox roasted whole at Bartholmew Fair, may
proclaim plenty of labor and invention, but afford less of what is delicate,
savory and well concocted, then smaller pieces: This makes me think, that
though upon occasion you may come to the Table and examine the bill of Fare,
set down by such Authors; yet it cannot but lessen ingenuity, still to fall
aboard with them; Humane sufficiency being too narrow, to inform with the pure
Soul of Reason, such vast bodies.

7. Be conversant in the Speeches, Declarations and Transactions occasioned by
the last wars; out of which more natural and useful knowledge may be sucked,
then is ordinarily to be found in the moldy Records of Antiquity.

8. When I consider with what contradiction Reports arrived at us, during our
civil wars; I can give the less encouragement to the reading of History:
Romances never acted being borne purer from Sophistication, then Actions
reported to be done; by which Posterity hereafter, (no less then Antiquity
heretofore) is likely to be led into a false or at best but a contingent
belief. Caesar, though in this happy, that he had a pen able to grave into
neat language, what his sword had first more roughly cut out, may in my
judgment, abuse the Reader; For he, that for the honor of his own wit, does
make people speak better, than can be supposed men so barbarously bred were
able, maypossibly report they fought worse, then really they did. Of a like
value are the Orations of Livy, Tacitus and most other Historians; which does
not a little prejudice the truth of all the rest.

9. A Few books well studied, and thoroughly digested, nourish the
understanding more, then hundreds but gargled in the mouth, as ordinary
students use: And of these, choice must be had, answerable to the Profession
you intend: For a Statesman, French Authors are best, as most fruitful in
Negotiations and Memoires, left by public Ministers, and by their Secretaries
published after their deaths. Out of which you may be able to unfold the
Riddles of all States: None making more faithful reports of things done in all
nations, then Ambassadors; who cannot want the best Intelligence, because their
Princes Pensioners unload in their bosoms, all they can discover. And here by
way of prevention, let me inform you, that some of our late Ambassadors (which
I could name) impaired our affairs, by treating with foreign Princes in the
language of the place; by which they did not only descend below their Masters
dignity, but their own discretion, betraying for want of words or gravity, the
intrinsic part of their Employment; and going beyond their Commission oftener
by concession, than confining themselves within it, or to it; the true Rule for
a Minister of State, not hard to be gained by a resolute contest, which if made
by an Interpreter, he, like a medium, may intercept the shame of any
impertinent speech, which eagerness or indiscretion may emit: Neither is it a
small advantage to gain so much time for deliberation, what is fit farther to
urge: It being besides too much an honoring of their tongue and undervaluing
your own, to profess your self a Master therein, especially since they
scorn to learn yours. And to show this is not grounded on my single Judgment,
I have often been informed, that the first and wisest Earl of Pembroke did
return and Answer to the Spanish Ambassador, in Welsh, for which I have heard
him highly commended.

10. It is an Aphorism in Physic, That unwholesome Aires, because perpetually
sucked into the lungs, do distemper health more then courser Diet, used but at
set times: The like may be said of Company, which if good, is a better Refiner
of the spirits, then ordinary Books.

11. Propose not them for patterns, who make all places rattle, where they
come, with Latin and Greek; For the more you seem to have borrowed from
books, the poorer you proclaim your natural Parts, which only can properly
be called your own.

12. Spend no time in reading, much less writing strong-lines; which like tough
meat, ask more pains and time in chewing, then can be recompensed by all the
nourishment they bring.

13. Books flatly writ debase your style; the like may be truly objected to
weak Preachers, and ignorant Company. Penns improving, like childrens legs,
proportionally to their Exercise; so as I have seen some stand amazed at the
Length of their own reach, when they came to be extended by employment; As
appeared in the late King Charles; who, after his more imperious destiny had
placed him under the Tutorage of an unavoidable necessity, attained a Pen more
Majesticall, then the Crown he lost.

14. The way to Elegancy of style, is to employ your pen upon every Errand, and
the more trivial and dry it is, the more brains must be employed for sauce.
Thus by checking all ordinary Invention, your Reason will attain to such an
habit, as not to dare to present you but with what is excellent: And if void of
affectation, it matters not how mean the subject is; There being the same
exactness observed, by good Architects, in the structure of the Kitchen, as
the Parlour.

15. When business or Complement calls you to write Letters, Consider what is
fit to be said, were the Party present, and set down that.

16. Avoid words and Phrases likely to be learned in base Company; least you
fall into the Error, the late Archbishop Laud did, who though no ill speaker,
yet blunted his repute by saying in the Starchamber, Men entered the Church, as
a Tinker and his Bitch do an Alehouse. But this may easily be declined by
those who read for their imitation the incomparable lines of the late King,
written in a style as free from affectation as levity.

17. Grant, if ever, a Curtesy at first asking; for, as expedition doubles a
Benefit, so delay converts it into little less then an Injury, and robs you of
the thanks; the fate of churlish natures: whereas some I have known able to
apparel their Refusalls in such soft robes of Courtship, that it was not
easily to be discerned, whether the Request or Denial were most decent.

18. Be not nice in assisting, with the advantages, Nature may have given you,
such as want them; who do not seldom part, in exchange, with those of Fortune,
to such as can manage their Advice well; As they only do, that never give
counsel, til called, nor continue it longer then they find it acceptable.

19. It is not safe for a Secretary to mend the copy his Master has set him,
unless owned as from his former inspirations; Least he should grow jealous,
that you valued your conceptions before his; who measures his sufficiency by
the length of his Employment, not the breadth of his natural Parts: This made
the Lord Chancelour Egerton the willinger to exchange incomparable Dr. D. for
the less sufficient, though in this more modest Mr. T. B.

20. But in case his affairs be wholly left to your management, you must not
only look to correspond for his miscarriages, but as obstinately to renounce
any honor may be given you to his prejudice: imputing all to his single
sufficiency; your self owning no higher place than that of the Executioner of
his commands: For though many great men, like Properties or Puppets, are
managed by their servants, yet such are most dear to them, as can so carry
their hands in their actings, that they make them appear less Fools then in
truth they are; easily done by giving them the honor to concede or deny in
public, without interposing any other arguments against it, then may become
the mouth of a servant, however you may order him in private.

21. That it is not unlawful to serve, bear Office or Arms under such as
ascend the throne or other high places, by stepps washed in blood, you may be
abundantly satisfied in Conscience, by the Church in Nero's house, the good
Centurion, and many others mentioned in Scripture.

22. Write not the faults of any persons near the throne, in any Nation you
reside in, least your Letters should be intercepted, and you sent out of the
world before your time, but reserve such discourse for the single ear of your
master; into which you must power it with more caution, then malice, least it
should come to be discovered, as it is odds but it will, And then the next
endeavor is revenge; it being less danger to traduce a King, then his
Minions, The first still looked upon as above blame, because incapable of
punishment, but the latter are not only subject to accusations, but the
aggravation of their Enemies, which fills them full of caution, and prejudice
to all they fear are able or but willing to detect them: I could produce sad
effects, that have followed the want of care in this; but that I intend Advice,
not a History.

23. It is an office unbecoming a gentleman to be an Intelligencer, which in
real truth is no better then a Spy; who are often brought to the torture and
die miserably, though no words are made of it, being a use connived at by all
Princes: To whom I give this Caution, That they do not stay after their patrons
are called home, which do not seldom (in emulation to their Successor, or to
gratify the Prince they have treated withal, and it may be from whom they have
received presents, and high Commendations to their own King) discover all that
are employed to do him hurt.

24. Court him always, you hope one day to make use of, but at the least
expense you can; observing it the condition of men in power to esteem better
of such, as they have done courtesies for, then those they have received greater
from; looking upon this as a shame, upon the other as an honor.

25. Mingle not your Interest with a Great man's, made desparate by Debts or
Court-injuries; Whose breakings out prove fatal to their wisest Followers and
Friends; averred in the last Earl of Essex but one, where Merrick his Steward
and Cuff his Secretary, though of excellent parts, were both hanged: For such
unconcocted Rebellions turn seldom to the hurt of any but the parties that
promote them, being commonly guided by the directions of their Enemies, as this
was by Cecil, whose creatures persuaded Essex to this inconsiderate Attempt.

26. Let nothing unjustifiable or subject to danger appear under your hand;
which many years aftermay rise up in judgment against you; when things spoken
may be forgot: As happened to the Duke of Norfolk, Sr. Jervis Ellowayes and a
great Earl I knew led by the nose all King James his reign, out of fear of
being questioned for Letters writ to so high a person as it is treason by the
Law to solicit etc. Therefore I charge you, as you tender the blessing of
your own safety, not to write in an ill sense, what ever your Character be;
For, if not tedious examination, sharp torture will force you to produce a key.

27. Be not frequent in Poetry, how excellent soever your vein is, but make it
rather your exercise then business: Because, though it swells you in your own
opinion, it may render you less in that of wiser men, who are not ignorant how
great a mass of Vanity for the most part coucheth under this Quality;
Proclaiming their heads like ships of war, richer in Triming then Lading.

28. The Art of Music is so unable to refund for the time and cost required to
be perfect therein, as I cannot think it worth any serious endeavor: The
owner of that Quality being still obliged to the trouble of calculating the
difference between the morose humor of a rigid Refuser, and the cheap and
prostituted levity and forwardness of a mercenary Fiddler: Denial being as
often taken for pride, as a too ready compliance falls under the notion of
ostentation: Those so qualified seldom knowing when it is time to begin, or
give over; especially Women, who do not rarely decline in modesty,
proportionably to the progress they make in Music; such (if hansome) being
Traps baited at both ends, and catch strangers as often as their Husbands, no
less tired with the one then the other.

29. Wear your Clothes neat, exceeding rather then coming short of others of
like fortune; a charge borne out by acceptance where ever you come: Therefore
spare all other ways, rather then prove defective in this.

30. Never buy but with ready money; and be drawn rather to fix where you find
things cheap and good, then for friendship or acquaintance; who are apt to
take if unkindly it you will not be cozened: For if you get nothing else, by
going from one shop to another, you shall gain experience.

31. Next to clothes, a good Horse becomes a Gentleman; in whom can be no great
loss, after you have got the skill to choose him; which once attained, you may
keep your self from being cozened, and pleasure your friend: The greatest
danger is have; I never loved to fix on one fat, for then I saw him at the
best, without hope of improvement: If you have fallen on a bargain not for your
turn, make the Market your Chapman, rather then a friend.

32. Gallop not through a Town, for fear of hurting your self or others:
Besides the undecency of it, which may give cause to such as see you, to think
your Horse, or your Brains none of your own.

33. Wrestling and Vaulting have ever been looked upon by me as more useful
then Fencing; being often outdared by resolution, because of the vast
difference between a Foyn and a sword, an house, and a field.

34. Swimming may save a man in case of necessity, though it loses many, when
practiced in wantonness, by increasing their confidence: Therefore for pleasure
exceed not your depth; and in seeking to save another, beware of drowning your
self.

35. Such as are betrayed by their easy nature to be Security for other men,
though their friends, leave so little to themselves, as their liberty remains
ever after arbitrary at the will of others. Experience having recorded many
(whom their fathers had left elbow-roome enough) that have by Suretyship
expired in a Dungeon. But if you cannot avoid this Labyrinth, enter no farther
then the thread of your own stock will reach; the observation of which will at
worst enable you to bail your self.

36. Let not the titles of Consanguinity betray you into a prejudicial Trust:
No blood being apter to raise a Fever, or cause a Consumtion sooner in your
poor Estate, then that which is nearest your own; as I have most unhappily
found, and your good Grandfather presaged, though God was pleased to leave it
in none of our powers to prevent: nothing being truer in all Solomon's
Observations, then that A good Friend is nearer then a natural Brother*

37. He that lends upon Public Faith, is Security for his own money, and can
blame none more then himself, if never paid: Common debts, like common lands,
lying ever most neglected.

38. Honesty treats with the world upon such vast disadvantage, that a pen is
often as useful to defend you, as a sword, by making writing the witness of
your Contracts: For where Profit appears, it does commonly cancel the bonds of
Freindship, Religion, and the memory of any thing that can produce no other
Register, then what is verbal.

39. In a case of importance, hear the reasons of others pleaded, but be sure
not to be so implicitly led by their judgments, as to neglect a greater of
your own: As Ch: of England did, to the loss of his Crown. For as the
ordinary Saying is, Count money after your Father; So the same Prudence
advises, to measure the ends of all counsels, though uttered by never so
intimate a friend.

40. Beware nevertheless of thinking your self wiser or greater then you are:
Pride brake the Angels in Heaven, and spoils all Heads we find cracked here;
for such as observe those in Bedlam, shall perceive their Fancies to beat most
upon mistakes in Honor, or Love. The way to avoid it, is, duly to consider,
how many are above you in Parts, yet below you in Condition; And that all men
are ignorant in so many things as may justly humble them, though sufficiently
knowing to bar out despair.

41. Shun Pride and Baseness, as Tutors to contempt, the first of others, the
latter of your self: A haughty carriage putting as well a mean esteem on
what is praise worthy in you, as an high Excise on that appears amiss; every
one being more inquisitive after the blemishes, then beauties of a proud
person; whereas the humble Soul passes the strictest Guards, with more
faults, like the faire-mouthd Traveller, without scorn, or so much as
searching.

42. When you speak to any (especially of Quality) look them full in the
face; other gestures bewraying want of breeding, confidence, or honesty;
Dejected eyes confessing to most judgments, guilt, or folly.

43. Impudence is no Virtue, yet able to beggar them all; being for the most
part in good plight, when the rest starve; and capable of carrying her
followers up to the highest preferments: found as useful in a Court, as Armor
in a Camp (And if I am not mistaken in your temper, you may suffer in the world
for want of so competent a proportion of boldness, as is necessary to the
conduct of humane affairs.) Scotchmen have ever justified the truth of this,
who will go farther with a shilling, then an Englishman can ordinarily pass
for a crown.

44. I do not find you guilty of Covetousness, neither can I say more of it,
but that like a Candle ill-made, it smothers the splendour of an happy fortune
in its own grease.

45. Yet live so frugally if possible, as to reserve something, may enable you
to grapple with any future contingency.

46. Provide in youth; since Fortune has this proper with other common
Mistresses, that she deserts Age, especially in the company of want.

47. But I need not use other persuasions unto you concerning Thrift, then what
the straitness of your own Fortune points you to; more contracted by others
Covetousness then my Prodigality.

48. Leave your Bed upon the first desertion of Sleep. It being ill for the
eyes to read lying, and worse for the mind to be idle; since the Head during
that laziness is commonly a cage for unclean thoughts.

49. It is no where wholesome, to Eat so long as you are able, especialy in
England, where meat, aptest to inveagle the stomach to an over-repletion, comes
last: But in case you transgress at one meal, let no persuasion tempt you to
a second repast, till by a fierce hunger you find your self quite discharged
of the former Excess: An exact observance of this, has, under God, made me
reach these Times, and may through his mercy preserve you for better. I have
heard that the Indians by the great moderation they use, are well able to
digest raw flesh, thought by some of more natural if not easy concoction, then
what is dry roasted. All compositions with milk are dangerous in a Heat, and not
seldom deadly.

50. Drink not, being Hot, unless Sack etc. such droughts residing rather in
the palate and throat, then Stomach, and so safer quenched by Gargles,
Liquorish, a Cherry, or Tobacco; the use of which I neither persuade, nor
prohibit, having taken it my self, since sixteen, without any extraordinary
marks of good or ill; but cannot approve of nosing, or swallowing it down; as
many to my knowledge have done, not long-lived.

51. Nothing really acceptable to the gusto of Humanity, but Prudence may
experiment without Detection, or waking the clamorous Multitude (gratified in
all opportunities they have to accuse others, though far more guilty
themselves) a temper not possible to be attained by the lovers of Drink, which
will not only render my Reasons, but your own useless.

52. Were Drink capable of Council, I should advise, if unfortunately
overtaken by such a Distemper, not to remove from the place you received it in;
by which some part of the Shame may be avoided, and more of the Danger,
attending the irregular motions of this giddy Spirit.

53. Drink, during the operation of the Distemper, will act all the Humors
habitual in Madmen: Amongst both which I have seen some very zealous and
devout, who, the fit once over, remained no less profane. This proves,
Godliness capable of being fained, and may raise an use of Circumspection, in
relation to such as profess more then is suitable to humane frailty.

54. He that always regulates his Diet by the strict Rules of Physic, makes
his life no less uncomfortable to himself, then unsociable unto others: The
like does he that uses palpable Plots in trivial things; who is made by this
so suspected in Commerce, as none will approach him unarmed with the like
weapons: For though Wisdom may purchase reverence, and attention; Subtilty
(distinguished from it only by a fly Carriage) raises always suspicion:
Wherefore the Closeness of the Heart in matters of consequence, is best
concealed by an Openesse in things of less moment.

55. Experience has found it no less shame then danger, in being the Chief
at a merry Assignation. Since what is of evil savor falls most to their Mess
at the upper end of the Table; but good, to the meanest; who have the impudence
to scramble up any thing that suits to their advantage, as readily as they can
find Oaths to decline what may redound to their loss.

56. Beware what Company you keep, since Example prevails more then Precept;
though by the Erudition dropping from these Tutors, we imbibe all the tinctures
of virtue and vice: This renders it little less then impossible for Nature to
hold out any long Siege against the batteries of Custom and Opportunity.

57. Let your Wit rather serve you for a Buckler to defend your self by a
handsome Reply, then a sword to wound others, though with never so facetious a
Reproach; Remembering that a word cutts deeper then a sharper weapon, and the
wound it makes is longer in curing: A Blow proceeding but from a light motion
of the Hand agitated by Passion, whereas a disgraceful Speech is the result of
a low and base esteem settled of the Party in your Heart.

58. Much wisdom resides in the Proverbs of all Nations, and therefore fit to
be taken notice of; of which number this is common amongst us, Play with me,
but hurt me not: It being past peradventure, that more Duells arise from Jest
then Earnest, and between Friends, then Enemies; serious injuries seldom
happening but upon premeditation; which affords Reason some, though perhaps no
full Audience; whereas this extemporary Spirit, conjured up by shame and smart,
hearkens to nothing but the rash advice of a present Revenge.

59. If an Injury be of so rank a Nature, as to extort (in point of Honor) an
unsavory Word (never suitable to the mouth of a Gentleman) Swordmen advise to
second it with a Blow, by way of prevention, least he striking you (which
cannot but be expected) you should be cast behind-hand. But this their Decree
not being confirmed by Act of Parliament, I cannot find it suitable with
prudence or religion, to make the Sword Umpire of your own life and another,
no less then the Law, upon no more serious an occasion, then the vindication
of your Fame, lost or gained, by this brutish valor, in the opinion of none
that are either wise or pious: It being out of the reach of question, that a
quarrel is not to be scrued up to such a height of indiscretion without
arraigning one or both parties of Madness: Especially since formal Duells are
but a late invention of the Devill's, never heard of, in relation to private
Injuries; among the Romans the Gladiators fighting for their Pleasure, as the
Horatii and Curatii for the Safety of the People. It cannot be denied, but that
Story lays before us many killed for private revenge, but never accompanied
with so ridiculous a Formality, as the sending of Chalenges; which renders the
Dead a greater Murderer, then he is that kills him, as being without doubt the
Author of his own Death. This makes me altogether believe, that such wild
manhood had its Original from Romances; in which the Giant is designed for
death, and the Knight to marry the Lady, whose Honor he has preserved; not so
gently treated by the English law, where if his legs or friends be not the
better, he is hanged, and his Estate confiscated, to the perpetual detriment
of his Family: besides the sting of Conscience, and a natural fear, like that
of Cain's, attending Blood, by which the remainder of life is made tedious and
miserable to such unfortunate men, who seem in all honest Company to smell too
strong of Blood, to be taken into any intimate Relation.

60. Prosecute not a Coward too far, least you make him turn valiant to your
disadvantage: it being impossible for any standing even in the worlds opinion,
to gain glory by the most he can have of those that lie under such a repute:
besides, Valor is rather the product of Custom, then Nature, and often found
where least expected; do not therefore waken it to you prejudice, as I have
known many, that would still be insulting, and could not see when they were
well.

61. Speak disgracefully of none at Ordinaries, or public Meetings: least
some Kinsman of Friend being there should force you to a base Recantation, or
engage you in a more indiscreet Quarrel: This renders all free discourse
dangerous at Meetings of mixed Companies.

62. Carry no Dogs to Court, or any public place, to avoid contests with such
as may spurn, or endeavor to take them up. The same may be said of Boys, not
wise or strong enough to decline or revenge affronts; whose complaints do not
seldom engage their Masters, as I knew one of Quality killed in the defense of
his Page. The like danger attends such as are so indiscreet, as to man Whores
in the street, in which every one pretends to have an interest for his money,
and therefore unwilling to see them Monopolized, especially when they have got
a pot in their pate.

63. Reveal not the pranks of another Love, how serious or ridiculous soever
you find them; it being unlikely the mirth should compense the danger: By this
you shall purchase your self a retentive faculty, and sell your friend a
stronger confidence of your secrecy, hanging on him the lock of a perpetual
obligation, of which you may ever be keeper of the Key, either out of love or
fear: yet many other faults are not more dangerous to commit, then know
without detecting.

64. Be not Trumpet of your own Charity, or Vices; for by the one you
disoblige the receiver, as well as loose your reward; and by the other, you
alarm the censures of men; most being condemned through the evidence they give
against themselves by their words and gestures.

65. If it be Levity and Ostentation, to boast when you do well, in what
Class of Folly must they be ranked, that bragg of the Favors of Women?
rendering themselves, by this, no less frail, then they; It being more shame
for a man to be leakey and incontinent at the mouth, then for a woman to
scatter her favors.

66. To make love to married women does not only multiply the sin, but the
danger; neither can you, if questioned by her Husband, use, with hope of
victory, any sharper weapon, then Repentance sheathed in a modest excuse.

67. Fly, with Joseph, the Embraces of great Ladies; least you loose your
liberty, and see your legs rott in the stocks of the Physician; they being
often unwholesome, ever so unreasonable, as to exact a constancy from you,
themselves intend not to observe; perverting so far the curse of God, as to
make your desires subject to theirs.

68. Usher not women to Maskes, Plays, or other such public Spectacles into
which you have not an easy access for money or favor: such places being apter
to create injury, then afford an handsome opportunity for revenge: Besides, if
those you carry be old and deformed, they disparage you; if young and handsome,
themselves.

To the Reader, concerning the following Discourse of Love, and Marriage.
THis had not appeared, being a result of more juvenile years, but that I
feared, if let alone, it might hereafter creep abroad from under a false
Impression, and one more scandalous to that sex, then becomes my complexion or
Obligation. Therefore to vindicate me from the no less inhumane then
unnatural imputation of a Woman-hater, I do here protest, with a reference to
their charity and my own most serious affections, That if the Party advised
had been a Daughter, my ink must have cast blacker than the rich grain of
their Angelical Beauty is capable to be aspersed by. It being observable, That
such Idolaters as made She-Deities the object of their worship; were by all
celebrated for most Learning Wisdom and Civility. Nevertheless though women
be Cordials when desire is past, and Juleps while the heat continues, yet since
it is ordinary for Dablers in Beauty to mistake Poison for Physic (such
feminine Boxes not always bearing Inscriptions suitable to their Drugs, but
often painted with more Perfections, then they carry in them) I hope this
Discourse may the better be excused; having the Example of Solomon to justify
the harshnesse of my Expressions, no less then his Follies to warrant the
necessity of the Caution; least my Son should mire himself and his hopes in
the pursuit of such foolish flames, as have tempted the strongest, wisest and
most religious out of the ways of Peace. I shall forestall the Reader with no
farther Complement, then That he would forbear to condemn or praise beyond
Reason; least he should appear too severe toward my Levitie, or indulgent to
his own Morositie, in relation to beauty.

ADVICE TO A SON.
II. Love and Marriage.
1. The Nature and Effects of Love. 2. It Is influence upon Youth; tempting it
-- 3. to Marry; -- 4. unhappily, for Beauty -- 5. without Money, and -- 6,7. to
swallow the fatal Bait, -- 8. Not answering Expectation. 9, 10. Marry not a
famed Beauty. 11. Laws concerning Marriage -- 12 somewhat strange: Polygamy;
Priests -- 13 Marriage, the result of Policy. 14. Fruition tedious. 15. Wives
Lust, Iealousy. 16. Discomforts from Children and -- 17 other wedlock
inconveniences -- 18 best palliated by an Estate -- 19. Portion, Jointure. 20,
21, 22, 23. The unhappiness of poor Marriages -- 24. Travel, a means to
avoid the danger, from -- 25, 26. A handsome woman. 27. Fond Love an ill
Counselor. 28. Children how much to be desired. 29, 30. Conclusion.

1. LOve, like a Burningglasse, contracts the dilated lines of Lust, and fixes
them upon one object: bestowed by our Fellow Creatures, (the exacter Observers
of the Dictates of Nature) promiscuously, without partiality in affection, on
every distinct Female of their repective species; whereas Man being restrained
to a particular choice, by the severity of Law, Custom, and his own more
stupendous folly, out of a jealousy to be robbed of a present desire, is so
hurried away with the first apparition of an imaginary Beauty, (supposed by his
Fancy, grossly abused by her servants the Senses, corrupted and suborned through
an implacable appetite, which Nature for her own end of continuance, stirs up
in all to this fleshly Conjunction) That no reason can for the present be
audible, but what pleads in favor of this soft passion, which makes a deeper
or lesser impresse, proportionable to the temper of the Heart it meets with;
causing Madness in some, Folly in all: placing like stupid Idolaters, Divinity
in a silly creature, set by the Institutes of Nature in a far inferior
Class of perfection to that which makes it his business to worship and adore
it; Imagining as false felicities in the fruition, as they apprehend miseries
in the loss; when all they desire is but the fruit of that Tree, the kernel
of that Apple, which first destroyed us all; fair to sight, but of fatal and
dreadful consequence to the taster; rendering Him subject to slavery, that was
borne free, and Her to command, who ought in righter reason to serve and obey.

2. To cure Youth wholly of this desire, were as uneasy a task, as to divest
it of humanity; Therefore I expect you should be tossed in this Storm, but
would not have you shipwrack't by contracting your self to the Ocean, unless
with the Duke of Venice you might yearly repeat the Ceremony to as great an
advantage.

3. For if ever Marriages were on all sides happy (which is no Schism to doubt
of) experience never found them among such as had no other nealing but what
they received from the flames of Love; which cannot hold without jealousy, nor
break without repentance, and must needs render their sleep unquiet, that
have one of these Cadds or Familiars still knocking over their pillow.

4. Those Virtues, Graces and reciprocal Desires, bewiched affection supposed
to be there, fruition and experience will find absent, and nothing left but a
painted Box, which Children and Time will empty of delight, leaving Diseases
behind, and at best, incurable Antiquity.

5. Therefore I charge you, as you will answer the contrary another day to your
Discretion, and upon the penalty of a bitter, though vain Repentance, not to
truck for, or entertain commerce upon the credit of Marriage, with a solitary,
that is, an un-endowed Beauty; (which if really intended, you question your
own Judgment, if otherwise, the Honesty of you both:) From whence I have
known such sad consequents to result, as have made some (wise enough to presage
the mischief of the event) so far concede to the tears and misery of the
Party, as they have cast themselves out of mere pity and conscience into the
precipice of Marriage; burying their own fortunes and future felicity, only to
satisfy the affection of another.

6. Marriage, like a Trap set for flies, may possibly be ointed at the Entrance
with a little voluptuousness, under which is contained a draught of deadly
wine, more pricking and tedious then the passions it pretends to cure; leaving
the Patient in little quieter condition in the morning, then him that has
overnight killed a man to gratify his revenge.

7. Eve, by stumbling at the Serpents solicitations, cast her Husband out of
Paradise; nor are her Daughters surer of foot, being foundered by the heat of
Lust and Pride: and unable to bear the weight of so much of our Reputation, as
religion and custom has loaded them withal, that an unballasted behavior,
without other Leakage, is sufficient to cast away an husbands esteem: Neither
does the penalty of a light report laid on the Mother, conclude there, but
diffuseth it self, like a Leprosy, over Posterity, being incapable of any
other cure, then length of time can deduce out of forgetfulness.

8. It were something yet if Marriage could answer the expectation of all she
boasts the Cure of, in the large Bill out Mountebanck-Teachers proclaim in
every street; which upon trial she often comes so far short of, as to satisfy
none; But rather aggravates the sins of Solitude, making simple Fornication to
sprout into Adultery. And if it happen that your wife be impotent or infected
(as not a few are) with one or more of those loathsome diseases incident to
weak feminine nature, which render her unsociable, you are posted off, both by
Lawyers and Divines, to the same patience I do here more opportunely propose,
before you are fallen under so mischievous and expensive a conjunction.

9. If none of my persuasions, nor others woeful Experience daily met with in
the world, can deter you from Yoaking your self to another desires, make
not a celebrated Beauty the object of your Choice; unless you are ambitious of
rendering your house as populous as a Confectioners Shop; to which the gaudy
Waspes, no less than the liquorish Flies make it their business to resort, in
hope of obteining a lick at your honey-pot, which though bound up with the
strongest obligations or resolutions, and sealed by never so many
protestations, yet feminine vessels are obnoxious to so many frailties, as
they can hardly bear without breaking the pride and content they naturally
take in seeing themselves adored; Neither can you, according to the loose
custom of England, decently restrain her from this concourse, without making
demonstration of jealousy toward her (by which you confess your self a
Cuccold in your own imagination already) or incivility to such as come to
visit you, though it may be strongly presumed, your sake has the least share
in this Ceremony; however tied in manners to attend with patience, till his
Worship, perhaps his Lordship, has pumped his wit dry, having no more
Complements left but to take his leave; Thus with his invention rebated, but
not his Lust, he returns home, where the old preserver of baudery, his
Kinswoman, Perceiving by his dejected countenance that he came short of his
desires, and wanting a new gown, imbarks herself for the employment; and to
put the honester face upon so ugly a design, she contracts a strait alliance
with your (yet-possibly-unconquered) Bedfellow, and under pretense of a
Gossiping, or perhaps a voyage to some religious exercise, hurries her away in
his Honor's Coach to a Meetinghouse, where though she be taken by storm, is
fairly sent home with bag and baggage, being only plundered of what you are
not likely to miss; And finding it unsafe to complain, returns again upon
her parole, or so often as her new Governor pleases to summon her; sheltering
the fault under custom, your unavoidable fate, or perhaps Providence (which
for their excuse, some are wicked enough to plead) till her forehead be as
much hardened with impudence, as yours is by reproaches etc. And yet he is the
happier owner, who has a wife wife enough to conceal the real Horns of her
husband, than she, that being innocent, does by her light carriage make the
base symptoms appear in the world's opinion. Oh remember this when you are
about to forget the pleasure and safety only to be found in a single life.

10. If you consider Beauty alone, quite discharged from such Debentur's as she
owes to the Arts of Tire women, Tailors, Shooemakers, and perhaps Painters; you
will find the Remains so inconsiderable, as scarce to deserve your present
thoughts, much less to be made the price of your perpetual Slavery. Be not
then led, like a child, by these gaudy Butter-flyes amongst the briars and
nettles of the world; since obtained, a little time and use will wear off
their fading colors, leaving nothing in your possession but a bald drowsy
moth; which if good, will by accident; if bad, make it her business to
discontent you.

11. The English Laws are composed so far in favor of Wives, as if our
Ancestors had sent Women to their Parliaments, whilst their Heads were a
wool-gathering at home; allowing no abusing of husbands Capital, nor marriage
dissolvable, but in case of Adultery, not subject to proof but under the
attests of two witnesses at one and the same time: Nor is non-co-habitation a
sufficient discharge from his keeping all such children, as her lust shall
produce during his abode between the four English Seas; so as if his wife be a
Strumpet, he must bannish himself, or deal his bread and clothes to the
Spurious issue of a stranger; a thraldom, no wise man would sell himself to
for the fairest inheritance, much less for trouble, vexation and want during
life. Whence it may be strongly presumed, that the hand of Policy first hung
this Padlock upon the liberty of men; and after Custom had lost the Key, the
Church, according to her wonted Subtilty, took upon her to protect it;
delivering in her Charge to the people, that single wedlock was by divine
Right, making the contrary, in diverse places, Death; and where she proceeded
with the greatest moderation, Excommunication: condemning thereby (besides four
fifth parts of the world) the holy Patriarchs, who among their so frequent
Dialogues held with their Maker, were never reproved for multiplying Wives and
Concubines, reckoned to David as a Blessing, and to Solomon for a mark of
magnificence. Nevertheless the wily Priests are so tender of their own
Conveniencyes, as to for bid all Marriage to themselves upon as heavy a
punishment as they do Polygamy unto others: Now if nothing capable of the name
of Felicity was ever, by men or Angels, found to be denied to the Priesthood,
may not Marriage be strongly suspected to be by them thought out of that list?
though to render it more glibb to the widet swallow of the long abused Laity,
they have gilt it with the glorious Epithet of a Sacrament, which yet they
loath to clog their own stomachs withal.

12. However the patient submission to the Institution of Marriage is the more
to be wondered at, since Man and Woman not being allowed of equal strength, are
yet so far prevailed upon by Policy, as quietly to submit themselves to one
Yoke.

13. For there is not any other constraint to this Conjunction, but what
results from understandings so mufled for the present, that they cannot
discern that Marriage is a Clogge fastened to the neck of Liberty, by the
juggling hand of Policy, that provides only for the general necessities of all
in gross, not the particular conveniences of single persons; who, by this,
give stronger security to the Commonwealth, then suits with prudence or
liberty. And to such as ask, How should the world subsist, did all observe the
like caution? It may be answered, As well as without Unthrifts, who by spending
their estates profusely, make way for wiser men to be the more happy: and as it
is impossible to find a dearth of the latter, though not compelled thereunto by
any other Law, then the instigation of their own folly; so doubt not but there
will be enough found of the former, to stock the world, without putting so
chargeable an experiment on your own convenience.

14. Ask your self, What desire you ever attained, that a long and
oftenrepeated fruition did not render tedious, if not loathsome, though the
thing wished for remained in the perfection it was before enjoyment? And can
your Reason promise you to continue the same unto Beauty, so transitory, as it
is in a manner lost, before you can truly consider, whether it belongs to
Nature, or the Dress? therefore when discontented with your present condition,
tumble toward any change, rather then into that bottomless pit, out of which
no repentance can bail you.

15. After that Age, Weariness, Wisdom or Business has dipossessed you of
this dumb and deaf amorous Spirit, and concluded all desires to uxorious
vanities; it is possible, your Wives appetite may increase, and that Disease of
Lust, which your youth cured before she had leisure to discover it, may then
unseasonably interrupt your sleep, calling for that, there shall be nothing in
her, but importunity, to provoke you to; not in you, but the desire of quiet,
and to conjure down the fierce Devil of Jealousy, which hants the houses of
married folks, rendering them no less unhappy, dismal, and clamorous, then
the Temple of Molech, where such children and servants, as you most delight in,
shall pass through the fire of a daily contention.

16. Were it possible to assign to your choice the virtues of your Mother,
which I confess are inferior to none; and fancy a Son with as rich parts as
imagination is able to endow a creature withal; yet a Daughter may come, that
for want of good behavior, or care in Marriage, shall infuse so much gall into
your cup, as will be able to imbitter all the pleasure taken in the rest: Or if
you should escape this in regard of one, the least deformity happening to any
of the others, will cause more grief, then all the towardliness of the most
perfect can outtalke.

17. Our Beldame Eve, to save her longing sold us all for an Apple; and still
as we fall into the same desires, apprehending felicities in things we never
tried, we are carried away by her peevish daughters, the true Sirens wise
Ulisses stopped his ears against; who under pretense of pleasure and love, lead
us into Dens and obscure Holes of the rocks, where we consume our precious time
and bury our parts, (which might enable us to despise or honor this world, as
best suited our complexions) feeding all our lives upon the dry bones of want
and affliction; and like Actaeon, torn by our Families; Nothing being more
certain, then that Married man changes the shape of a natural freedom, and
inrols himself among such as are rendered beasts of burden under Reason of
State: whereas those unclog'd with this Yoke, if they like not the service and
discipline of their own, may the easier exchange it for that of any other
Commonwealth.

18. Though nothing can wholly disengage Marriage from such inconveniences as
may obstruct felitity, yet they are best palliated under a great estate; all
other Arguments for it receiving commonly confutation from time and experience,
or are evaporated by Fruition: Birth imposing a necessity of charge, as Beauty
does of jealousy, if not of a bad report; innocence being often found too weak
to guard it self from the poison of tongues.

19. The true extent of her estate therefore is first to be surveyed, before
you entaile your self upon the Owner; And, in this, common fame is not to be
trusted, which for the most part dilates a Portion or Jointure beyond its
natural bounds; proving also not seldom litigious; and that found given by
Will, questionable; by which Husbands are tied to a black Box, more miserable
then that of Pandora; there being in the Law hope of nothing but trouble and
injustice. Neither do Widows seldom put their Estates out of their own
reach, the better to cheat their Husbands; perverting so far the course of
Nature, as to make him thrash for a Pension, who ought to command all. This
requires, Love to be ushered, into this undissolveable noose, by Discretion:
since it has rarely fallen within the compass of Example, that both parties
(if wise) should be cordially pleased with their bargain: Therefore the Yoke of
Marriage had need be lined with the richest stuff, and softest outward
conveniences, else it will gall your neck and heart, so, as you shall take
little comfort in the Virtue, Beauty, Birth, etc, of her to whom you are
coupled.

20. As the fertility of the ensuing year is guessed at, by the height of the
river Nilus; so by the greatness of a Wives Portion may much of the future
conjugall happiness be calculated: For, to say truth, a poor Marriage, like a
Fathers Theft or Treason, entailes shame and misery upon Posterity, who receive
little warmth from the Virtue, much less from the Beauty of their Mother.

21. The best of Husbands are Servants, but he that takes a Wife wanting Money,
is a Slave to his affection, doing the basest of Drudgeries without wages.

22. Experience cries in the Streets, that he who takes his Maid into the
Marriage Bed, finds her no less imperious a Mistress, then he that is coupled
in the highest link: for such as bring nothing, esteem themselves slighted,
if they command not all; whereas better educations are apter to confess an
Obligation, then those basely borne.

23. Vast Estates are not so sensible of the inconveniences of poor Marriages,
as having, besides greater diversions, the staff of power to keep the lean
wolf from the door: Want being no less the original of most sins, then the
Mother of all plagues; so as the depth of Poverty calling upon the bottomless
pit of Despair, tempts the ill-bred Son, for want of better education (to
change a life, he thinks cannot be made more wretched) to marry the
Chambermaid; by which the no less unadvised Daughter learnes to runn away
with the Groom. Do not the careful looks of all Fathers give evidence to
the truth of that Saying, Children are uncertain Comforts, but certain
Troubles?

24. Therefore (dear Son) if you find your self smitten with this poisoned
dart, imitate his prudence, who chose rather to cast himself into the arms of
the Sea and Travel, the to let his hopes and parts wither in those of a poor
whining Dido; who is no more able to give you caution, for the continuance of
her own affection, then you are of yours, or of her Beauty.

25. I have heard a well-built-woman compared in her motion to a Ship under
Sail; yet I would advise no wise man to be her owner, if her Fraught be
nothing but what she carries between wind and water.

26. A neat wench, like a fair picture, may adorn a Room for a general
Commerce; or like a painted Innpost, may tempt you, as a Stranger, to while
away some scorching hours; but to hang her in your Heart, and turn Host to a
bare Holly-bush, is so high a Blasphemy against Discretion, that it would not
only exceed repentance, but pity and forgiveness, especially in relation to
you, who have had these rocks marked out on all sides, by the Advice or
Splinters of an indulgent Father.

27. But if once you render your self a Pupil to whining Love, he will read
you such contrary Politics, as shall persuade you to make a League with
Misery, and embrace Beggary for a Friend; and after this you are capable of no
higher honor, than to be registered in one of his Martyrologicall Ballads, and
sung by dairy-maids to a pityfull Tune.

28. To conclude, if you will needs be a Familist and marry, muster not the
want of Issue among your greatest afflictions, as those do, that Cry, Give me
children, or else my Name dies: The poorest way of immortalizing that can be,
and as natural to a Cobbler as a Prince, and not seldom out-reached by a
Gravestone. This proves them no fools, that made their own choice, by
adoption, out of the mass of Humanity, not confining themselves to such as the
doubtful chance of marriage obliged them to; since wives do worse then
miscarry, that go their full time with a Fool or a Bossive birth; yet less
ugliness resides in the greatest personal deformity, than in an ordinary
Mulct of the Mind: nor can there be a greater dissemblance between one wise man
and another, though Strangers in blood, then daily falls out betwixt them and
their own Issue; so as it is rarely observed, that a prudent Father begets a
like Son; in which, Nature proclaims, Things of moment not made for Stallions,
and to bury their rich Talents in the tedious commerce and loathsome sheets of
a silly woman. And if we consult right Reason, not Opinion, More of our Blood
runns in a Brother then a Child, the surer-side being always a stranger to the
Family: The truth is, they are really no more ours, than the curles of our
hair, or parings of our nails, carrying often such thoughts toward us, as we
should detest any for, but them: Made ours rather by use, then Nature, as
appears in the rest of Gods Creatures, who look no longer after their young,
then whilst they are unable to shift for themselves. This also speaks an
immoderate sorrow for their loss, as impertinent, as the like desire to
procure them: none being truly capable of Felicity, that situat it out of the
extent of their own reach, or are over passionatly affected with other
foreign misery, then what does purely belong to themselves.

29. But if this savours too much of the Stoic, You may qualify it as you
please; For I doubt not but the zeal your youth does yet retain toward the
Creed and Practice of others (possibly not so well taught) may at present make
much of This look like Blasphemy; But when so many winters have snowed on your
Head, as on your Father's, you will think it Canonical, and fit to be read to
Posterity

30. It may appear possibly too early in relation to your years; but I had
rather it should arrive so, then too late; not knowing the extent of my own
time, which cannot be long, and made me hasten these Instructions, least I
should seem less chari table to a Son, then Dives did in Hell to his Brethren.

ADVICE TO ASON.
III. Travel.
1, 2, 3. It Is Consequents Good and Bad considered. 3, 4, 5. Travel -- with an
Ambassador, -- As a Merchant. -- 6. In case of war. -- whither. 7. Directions
about -- 8 Performing divine Duties, 9, 10, 11. Declining Disputes -- of
Religion; 12 Regulating Zeal, 13. 14. Vindicating Customs, 15. Comparisons,
16. The Inquisition, Prohibited Books, 17. The Eucharist, 18. Crucifix. 19,
20. Foreign Churches. 21. Scoffers at their own Religion. 22. English in
Orders -- 23. or otherwise, the worst Companions. 24. Injuries. 25. Gaming. 26.
women's Favors. 27, 28. Wenches. 29. Impatient desires; Charms of women -- 30
Pretending Love. 31, 32. Italian Lust. 33. Gifts. 34. Money, Removes. 35. Inns,
New Acquaintance, Servants. 36. Experience, Languages. 37. Turkish incivility.
38. Plantations.

1. Some, to starch a more serious face upon wanton impertinent and
deare-bought vanities, cry-up Travel, as the best accomplisher of Youth and
Gentry; Though detected by Experience in the generality, for the greatest
debaucher, adding Affectation to Folly, and Atheism to the Curiosity of many
not well principled by Education; Such wanderers imitating those Factors of
Solomon, that together with Gold, returned Apes and Peacocks.

2. They and only they Advantage themselves by Travel, who well fraught with
the experience of what their own County affords, carry over with them large
and thriving Talents, as those Servants did, commended by our Savior. For he
that has nothing to venture but poor despicable and solitary Parts, may be so
far from Improvement, as he hazards quite to loose and bury them in the
external Levity of France, Pride of Spain, and Treachery of Italy: Because
not being able to take Acquaintance abroad of more Prudence, then he meets with
in the Streets and other public places, the Activity of his Legs and Arms
may possibly be augmented, and he by tedious Complements become more acceptable
in the eyes of silly women, but useless, if not pernicious, to the Government
of his own Country, in creating doubts and dislikes by way of a partial
Comparison.

3. Yet since it advances Opinion in the world, without which Desert is
useful to none but it self (Scholars and Travelers being cried up for the
highest Graduats in the most universal judgments;) I am not much unwilling to
give way to a peregrine motion for a time; Provided it be in the Company of an
Ambassador or Person of Quality, by whose power the danger may be rebated, no
less then your charge of diet defrayed, inconsiderable in such a Retinue, as
Persons of their Magnitude are forced to entertain.

4. Or if your Genius (tempted by profit) incline to the life of a Merchant,
you have the Law of Nations, and Articles of a reciprocal Amity to protect
you from other inconveniences, then such as Indiscretion draws upon rash and
unadvised strangers.

5. And thus manned out, Your experience may receive Lading at the first hand,
when others, failing of the like advantages, must take up that little they
make, at the common Beam; yet pay more Custom, and run greater hazards,
then the whole Return, when cast up, is able to compense.

6. Or in case this Nation should again break out into Partialities, it may
not be ill prudence to go where you may have the prospect of the war with
safety, who ever prevailed: And for the place, I say France, if you have a
purse; else some Town in the Netherlands or Flanders that is wholesome and
safe; where French may be attained with little more difficulty then at Paris,
neither are the humors of the people very remote from your own.

7. Now if it be your fortune on any such like Accounts to leave your Native
Country, Take these Directions from a Father, wearied (and there fore possibly
made wiser) by experience.

8. Let not the Irreligion of any Place breed in you a neglect of Divine
Duties; remembering, God heard the prayers of Daniel in Babylon, with the same
Attention he gave to David's in Sion.

9. Shun all Disputes, but concerning Religion especially; Because that which
commands in chief, though false and erroneous, will, like a Cock on his own
dunghill, line her arguments with force and drive the Stranger out of the Pit
with insignificant clamours; All Opinions, not made natural by Complexion, or
imperious Education, being equally ridiculous to those of contrary Tenants.

10. But where you find such discourse unavoidably obtruded, mould your
Arguments rather into Queries then dogmaticall Assertions; professing it more
the business of Travelers, to Learn, then Teach: This, besides the removal
of Jealousies, will proclaim you Civil, and not bury the hope of a future
compliance: Muzling the mouths of the rigid Zelots (who think none worthy of
Life, are found out of the Train of their Opinions) no less then engaging the
more Moderate rather to pity you, as one misled, then accuse you for wilful
and contumacious: Observing herein the prudence of our Savior, who prohihibits
the casting of Pearls before such, as are more likely to employ them to your
damage, then their own edification: And therefore Silence ought not in reason
to be reckoned for a desertion of Truth, where it cannot be maintained, but to
the prejudice of what the Imperative Power has declared so to be.

11. A Skeptic humor, as it is most suitable to any man out of power, so
especialy if he travels; less offense being taken at Doubters, then such as
boldly undertake to determine: There not always remaining a necessity either
in Religion or Discretion to give a positive Answer, as appears by Christ, who
did not seldom oppose one ambiguous Question, against another no less
dangerous to resolve: Therefore you may be as well a Murderer, as a Martyr, if
you run too unadvisedly into ruin.

12. Keep your Zeal chained for a Guard to your conscience, not letting it
fly upon such things as Custom has not made it familiar withal; (Remembering
that the Saduces, who denied Angels and Spirits, are not registered for such
implacable enemies to our Savior, as the Pharisees, who confessed both) The
fury of which Passion has transported some so far, as to strike the
Eucharist out of the Priest's hands thar carried it; Choosing, like giddy
Phaetons, to burn, rather then not manifest themselves unseasonably the
Children of God.

13. Do not imitate their follyes, who conceit themselves bound in honor to
assert all Customs used in the places they come from; which, besides
contraction of Quarrels, brands such Sophisters with the imputation of a
partial Incivility: Custom being of that insinuating nature, as it can
convert into the shape of comeliness, Diet, Apparel, Gestures and Sins, that,
to a Stranger, may appear most distasteful, ugly and unnatural: This renders
a defense of the errors of your own Country as undecent, as the too loud
proclaiming of them is shameful and unworthy.

14. As it is neither mannerly nor safe to discommend any thing used abroad, so
likewise is it disadvantageous; for by commendation you shall the better scrue
out the true Opinion themselves have of it; which upon your dislike will be
concealed, or heightened out of shame, or ostentation.

15. Fall not into Comparisons; For what does it concern the Advancement of
wisdom, whether London, or Paris, St Marks Church or Paul's be the fairest?
the like modesty must be observed at your return home, least you should seem
to have lost, in your travel through other Nations, the natural affection due
to your own; which may raise suspicion of a change, either in your Religion or
Allegiance.

16. If the wisdom of the States of Holland were warily observed (who give no
other answer for the present, to any new Proposition, but Peut-estre, in
English, it may be so; (by which they civilly evade a peremptory asserting or
denying the validity of any Argument) The Hell of the Inquisition would not be
so replenished with the Souls of poor unadvised Christians; who, made giddy
with an impertinent Zeal, and confident in the Promises of the treacherous
Jesuits, their Countrymen that have ways enough to betray you, without
discovering themselves) communicate to them prohibited books in hope to
convert them, which I advise you by no means to carry with you; This Mr Mole
found true in a tedious and sharp Captivity; reported to be betrayed by Sr T:
M. at the instigation of the Lord R. to whom he was assigned Tutor, by the
Earl of Ex.

17. To the Eucharist, met in the Sreets, through which it is often borne to
the houses of the Sick, Custom, no less then the Injunction of the
Magistrate, obliges all to kneel, or bow. The which if a Stranger neglects,
he is liable to the Inquisitors: Now if it be an Idol, St Paul says an Jdoll
is nothing: And if it renders the meat offered unto it no ways distasteful to
a sound conscience, how should it deprave me to be uncovered, as the rest are?
It being palliated, if not absolutely decided this way, in the case of Naman,
and the Duke of Saxony, whom Luther permitted to assist the Emperor Charles the
fifth at a Mass, only to preserve a temporal Dignity; covering it with the
title of a civil respect.

18. Pity, rather then spurn at those you see prostrate before a Crucifix;
Considering we find it enjoined, by the Penner of the Practice of Piety (too
often printed, to carry the marks of any thing contrary to the genuine mind of
the then Protestant Church) that all communicants at the article of their
receiving, should imagine the postures of Christ upon the Cross. And if so,
does it not leave room for a Query, who is the most mistaken, he that makes to
himself a Representation in his heart, or on the wall? Yet this, with the
rest, is laid before you only as an Adviso, not a stumbling block, and
occasion of offense.

19. Enter no farther into Foreign Churches, then the hand of your own
Religion and Conscience leads you; for though the Body of their worship do not
take you, the higher expressions of zeal and austerity (in the preciser sort
of Churchmen and people, taken for the soul of all Professions) may seem to
discover some defects in your own: And so displeased on all sides, you dash
upon the rock of Atheism, as such do, that value the merits and sanctity of
Christ by His, who pretends to be his Vicar; and all Moral virtue by the scant
Standard, they find it measured by at Rome; where they put out the eyes of the
less advised with the dust of Antiquity; which we seeming to want, are not so
catching to those, not wise enough to look behind the Curtain of Formalities.

20. Yet where Conscience and Reason give you leave to comply (as possibly they
may in many things) do it ingenuously, without compulsion or dint of Argument;
least opposing a Truth upon the By, you give them cause, to think you guilty
of falsehood in the Maine.

21. Consort with none who Scoff at their own Religion, but shun them as
spies or Atheists: For Strangers honor them most, next to those of their
respective Tenants, that are modestly zealous in the observation of their Own.

22. Eschew the Company of all English, you find in Orders, for as they have
imitated the lapsed Angels, in falling from their first Station; so they bear
the like malevolence to all they despair of bringing into the same
condemnation, being for the most part despicable, poor, and Melancholy: The
Prorestants eying them as Apostates, and the Catholics as fugitives and
unprofitable devourers of the Natives bread: Thus young Scholars, because not
able to reach all they desire at home, like Prodigals abandon the bosom of
their Mother, unadvisedly casting themselves into that of want and reproach:
Viscount Mont's Brother being but a Porter to a Religious house, and many of
the the rest exposed to such hard and desperate Missions into the Indies and
other reremote Climats, as their lives are rendered no less tedious then
uncertain.

23. Besides, he that beyond Sea frequents his own Contrymen, forgets the
principal part of his errand, Language, and possibly the opportutunity to get
experience how to manage his expense; Frugality being of none so perfectly
learned, as of the Italian and Scot; natural to the first, and as necessary to
the latter. The English also are observed abroad more quarrelsome with their
own Nation, then strangers, and therefore marked out as the most dangerous
companions.

24. An Injury in foreign air is cheaper pas'd over then revenged: the
endeavor of which has not seldom drawn on a greater: Besides, if patience
and evasion be not learned by your Travel, the Bills you have taken up may
perhaps be discharged as to the Merchant, but quite lost in regard of any
return of profit to such inconsiderate men as suffer themselves to be
transported with their Passions; since he that is Master of them, shall act and
speak reason, when others, destitute of that Moderation, appear mad, uttering
nothing but noise.

25. Play is destructive to Estates every where, But to the Persons of
Gamesters abroad: rendering them the Objects of Cheating and Quarrels: all
bystanders being apt to attest to the prejudice of a Stranger.

26. He that desires quiet and to decline Quarrels (undertaken by Strangers
upon irreparable disadvantages) must, above all, avoid giving or receiving
favors from women: There being none, out of the List of common whores, any
ways acceptable, to which some Ruffin (in Italy called Braves, who will murder
a man for a Crown) does not pretend an Interest, either as a Husband, a
Kinsman, or a Servant: Neither are they safely conversed withal, in relation
to health; Participating so far of the nature of Devils, that they are not
only isntrumental in the Sin, but many times also in the Punishment.

27. Make not the promise of Marriage a Baud to your lust, nor think her fruit
worth owning, shall yield possession upon no more formal obligation: Presuming
that if she can dispense with the Ceremony, by which Law only makes her yours,
it is as possible that time and the wearisome repetition of the same embraces,
may, upon as handsome a provocation tempt her to change the Substance.

28. He that ownes a Whore in a more peculiar sense, then a common Jakes,
descends from the dignity of Reason; And yet I have known some so far
transported as to marry such an one, to the infamy of their Familyes, no less
then their own future discontent: making a mercenary woman, Arbitrator and
Guardian of their Issue; contrary to the wiser practice of Spain, where none
are admitted Judges of another Interest, that have taken fees, as Pleaders
themselves, least former use should convert them into Bribes; It being hard to
forgo a profitable custom, and as impossible to impropriate such cattle, as
to monopolize the Air For the bar of honor being once leaped over by that
Sex, there remains nothing certain to the owner, but the open fields of Shame
and Repentance.

29. If tempted by an impatient Affection to any thing not without danger or
difficulty attained, Catechize your self with this Question; What wish,
fortune or labor ever presented you with, that, after a full fruition, did not
soon grow tedious, or, at best came not far short of what, creaking
expectation had undertaken it should perform? And let this contemplation
moderate your desires, that all worldly profit or pleasure is correspondent to
a like measure of anxiety and wearisomnesse. Therefore let no importunity warp
you contrary to right reason and convenience; ever arming your constancy
against Flattery and Impudence, strong assailants, especially marching under
the tears and caresses of a handsome and seeming innocent woman; from whom it
is no dishonor to fly, and with whom their is no safety to treat, for fear,
like blind Sampson, you grind out the remainder of your days, between want and
Repentance, and be led in Triumph by her friends, and those suborned to seduce
you, more ready to sacrifice the thanks to their own Nets, then to the
easiness of your Nature, to which it is only due.

30. If any then be furiously enamored on you, whose fortune cannot correspond
for the Troubles incident to Marriage (which God knows are not a few) venture
the loss of her, rather then your self; it being one of the highest pieces of
madness, to hang an indissolvable padlock upon your future hopes, only to save
a wenches longing; with whose soft humor, miscarriage is more suitable, then a
man's, armed with so much Advice: Therefore fly from such as incurable Plagues;
nothing being more catching to unbiased nature, then a seeming violent
Affection, which if not built upon a former promise, you may leave her justly
to the melancholy Society of her own folly, out of which it is all odds, but
she may happily recover, or imitate the voluptuous death of that Tailor,
reported to have whin'd away himself for the love of Queen Elizabeth.

31. Who travells Italy, handsome, young and beardlesse, may need as much
caution and circumspection, to protect him from the Lust of men, as the
affections of women; an impiety not to be credited by an honest heart, did not
the ruins of Sodom, calcined by this unnatural heat, remain still to witness
it.

32. And as I have heard, they continue so enamored this uncouth way of Lust,
led by what imaginary delight I know not, that such as Age and weakness have
set beyond the power of Acting, suffer themselves to be patients in that
noisome bestiality, maintaining to this end Emissaries abroad, to entice men of
delicate complexions, to the houses of these decrepit Lechers, under pretense
of an assignation made by some feminine beauty; And thus ensnared, the poor
uncircumspect young man cannot with conscience do, or safety refuse this base
Office.

33. Where you never mean to return, extend your Liberality at first coming,
or as you see convenient during your abode; For what you give at parting is
quite lost.

34. Make no ostentation of carrying any considerable Sum of Money about you,
least you turn that to your destruction, which under God is a Strangers best
preservation: And remove not from place to place, but with company you know:
The not observing whereof is the cause, so many of our Countrymens graves were
never known, having been buried in as much obscurity as killed.

35. Inns are dangerous, and so are all fresh Acquaintance, especially where
you find their offer of friendship to out-bid a Strangers desert; The same may
be said of Servants, not to be entertained upon ordinary commendations.

36. Next to Experience, Languages are the richest lading of a Traveller, among
which French is most useful; Italian and Spanish not being so fruitful in
Learning: (except for the Mathematics and Romances) Their other Books being
gelt by the Fathers of Inquisition.

37. He that is carried by his curiosity under the Jurisdiction of the Turk,
or other Mahumetan Princes, shall be used (as they esteem him) like a dog;
and so to be armed with a more invincible Patience, then commonly accompanies a
man free borne; insomuch as I heard a Kinsman say, who had been at Jerusalem,
that the richest experience he brought from thence, could not in the least
proportion recompense the trouble he met with; bringing home certain marks of
the incivility of the people, for an uncertain discovery of the places famed
for Christ's Death and Burial. And though he thought he merited by it (a
conceit I know incapable of place in your head) yet no reward could hire him to
repeat again these weary steps: Therefore I advise you to believe rather what
you may read in your Study, then go thither to disprove it.

38. I can say little of Plantations, having had no experience of them; But
that he, which changes his own Country, shall not, in my mind, do well, to go
farther from the Sun, or where he may not at least share in the Government.

ADVICE TO A SON.
IV. Government.
1, 2. Change. 3. Commotions. 4. Tumults, Incendiaries. 5. A War -- for
Religion, -- Oppression. 6. Submission to wicked Governors, -- 7. Not approving
them. 8. Wariness and Fidelity. 9. Submission to Powers in being. 10.
Ambition. 11. Recognition of the present Powers. 12, 13. The Original of
Dominion. 14. Fresh Families: State-Martyrs -- for 15, 16 Fame. 17. High Birth;
Titles of Honor. 18. Mean Birth. 19. Obligation to Governors, what -- 20,
21. To a Monarch; -- To a Free State: Siding. 22. Enemies reconciled -- 23.
Trust not. 24. Ingratitude. 25. Foreign Interests. 26. Preferments under
Monarchies, and Republics, compared. 27. Oratory -- 28. To speak last; -- Mr
Hamden. 29. Insurrections, Conspiracies. 30. Perfection, Change. 31. Directions
to a Magistrate about -- Preferments -- 32. Punishments -- 33 The Soldiery --
34 The Clergy.

1. COntract not the common distemper, incident to vulgar brains, who still
imagine more ease from some untried Government, then that, they lie under: not
having passed the first Form of experience, where we may learn, that Tyranny
is no less natural to Power, then lust to Youth.

2. If happy for the present, it is no better then madness to endeavor a
change; if but indifferently well, folly: For though a vessel may yield the
more, for tilting or stirring, it renders all in it unpleasant to present use:
The Die of war, seldom turning to their advantage, that first cast it: such
therefore as cannot make all well, discharge their conscience, in wishing it
so; Government being the care of Providence, not mine.

3. But if it be your Fortune to fall under such commotions, imitate not the
wild Irish or Welsh, who during Eclipses, run about beating kettles and panns,
thinking their clamor and vexations available to the assistance of the higher
Orbs; though they advance nothing but their own miseries, being often maimed,
but at best laid by without respect or reward, so soon as the state is
returned to its former splendour: Common Soldiers resembling Cocks, that fight
for the benefit and ambition of others, more then their own: This proves it
the wholsomer counsel, to stay within doors, and avoid such malignant effects,
as people attribute to the supposed distempers of the superior Planets. But if
forced to take a stream, let it be that which leads to the desires of the
Metropolis; the chief city being for the most part preserved, who ever
prevails, in a civil commotion, abounding in money and friends, the readiest
way to purchase quiet.

4. Be not the pen or mouth of a multitude congregated by the gingling of
their Fetters: least a Pardon or Compliance knock them off, and leave you, as
the Soul of that wicked and deformed Body, hanging in the Hell of the Law, or
to the vengeance of an exasperated Power: But rather have patience, and see the
Tree sufficiently shaken, before you run to scramble for the fruit, least
instead of profit and honor, you meet a cudgel or a stone: And then (if
possible) seem to fall in rather out of compulsion, then design: Since the
Zeal of the Rabble is not so soon heated by the real oppressions of their
Rulers, but may be as easily cooled by the specious promises and breath of
Authority.

5. A Multitude inflamed under a religious pretense, are at first as unsafely
opposed, as joined with; resembling Bears exasperated by the cry of their
whelps; and do not seldom, if unextinguished by hope or delays, consume all
before them, to the very thing they intend to preserve: Zeal, like the Rod of
Moses, devouring all for Diabolical, that dares but appear before it in the
same shape: The inconsiderate Rabble, with the Swine in the Gospel, being more
furiously agitated by the discontented Spirits of others, then their own; who
cannot be so happy in a Sea of blood and devastation, the dire effects of war,
as in peace, though invaded with some Oppression, a Scab that breaks out
oftentimes in the most wholesome constituted Bodies of States, and may with
less smart be continued on, then picked off. And because the Generality are
incapable, in regard of number, either of reward, or punishment, therefore not
of use to the Ambition or safety of others, but for the present, like
Gunpowder, during the flash of their discontent, and as a Lock in a River, are
only of force upon the first opening, to drive on the designs of Innovation;
loosing themselves afterward in a more universal dilatation, either out of
weariness, or doubt of the consequence.

6. The Example of Brutus, rather then Cato, is to be followed in bad times; it
being safer to be patient, then active; or appear a fool, then a malecontent.
An Evasion not only justified in the person of David, and by the eloquence of
Paul before his Heathen Judges; but our Savior himself is not heard to
inveigh against the present Power, though it had made the Head of the Baptist
the Frolic to a Feast.

7. Own the Power, but not the Faults of the Magistrate; nor make Law,
assigned for a buckler to defend your self, a sword to hurt others: least
partiality should allure you to pass the sentence of Approbation upon any
thing unwarrantable in its own nature. Neither let any Formalities used at a
mimicall Tribunal (as that was set up in the case of Naboth) persuade you to
more then a passive compliance: since such may seem to make greater, rather
then diminish the wages of their iniquity, that seek to cover Rapine with a
Gown; which the sword might patronize with more decency: And this observed,
the people might cheaper receive all their injury at the first hand, which
these Retailers of wickedness utter at more intolerable rates. The result of
all is, Ahab might better have committed murder single, then rendered so many
accessory, under the formal pretense of a Religious Fast. etc.

8. Before you fix, consult all the Objections, Discretion is able to make; But
once resolved, desert not your Party upon every Access of a Fever, as many
melancholy spirits did, these wars; who, by their often and unseasonable
flittings, wore themselves so out on both sides, as they were not worth owning,
when success undertook for them that they did turn in earnest: Irresolution,
rendering pardon more difficult from either Faction, than it could have proved,
had they remained constant to any; Devesting themselves of the ensigns of
Fidelity, looked upon by all with the eyes of pity, and do often meet with
Honor, seldom fail of Forgiveness, from a Noble enemy, who cannot but
befriend virtue, though he has found it in arms against him. Yet if you
perceive the Post you have contracted, to totter through undermining Treachery
or weakness, you may purchase your preservation by all honest endeavors: For
he that prolongs his life by the for, feiture of a Trust he has undertaken,
husbands it worse, then if he buried it in the field of Honor; Traitors in all
ages being equally detested on both sids.

9. Submit quietly to any power Providence shall please to mount into the
saddle of Sovereignty, without enquiring into their Right for Conscience sake,
or their Births, in relation to Honor: Remembering, that not only David, but
the most famous for success, did not only cut off others Lines, but were
natural shepherds under the Cope of Heaven, before they attained to be
metaphorically so under the Canopy of the Chair of State; which once
possessed, clarifies the present Incumbent's Title from the greatest
imputations incident to Birth or Proceeding. And the many-headed Beast, the
Multitude, is seldom more, sometimes less galled and vexed by the new, then
the old Saddle or Riders; who, out of their greater experience of her brutish
patience, are more apt to load her with the trappings of power, and the
furniture suitable to a throne; whose Inventory Pride increases proportionable
to continuance, and the presumption they have of their own ability to keep the
people from attempting their Remove. This may render it indifferent to a
wiseman, what card is Trump; whose game may possibly prove as fair under
Clubs, as Diamonds; neither ought he to be troubled, whither his Fetters
consist of Many linkes, or but One.

10. Nurse not Ambition with thine own blood; nor think the wind of Honor
strong enough to blow away the reproachful sense of a shameful, if possibly
that of a violent Death: For if Solomon's Rule be true, that A living Dog is
better then a dead Lion, a Quick evasion cannot but be deemed more manlike,
then a Buried valor.

11. If Authority exacts an Acknowledgment from you, give it with all
readiness: It being the highest Frenzy, to dispute your Innocence with those
who are able to convert the greatest into a fault: For, if it be no dishonor
to submit to Thieves, if fallen into their Hands, Let not the example of a few
fools (who, like Lice, thrive no where so well as in a prison) tempt you to
oppose your felicity against the Imperative Power, under which the disposure of
your person does wholly remain, and therefore madness to deny it words.

12. I abhor the the Idolatry of the Heathen, yet cannot but mind you of
their Humility, in adoring any thing the people set up, though but hewed out of
the body of an Oak, most auspicious unto swine, and principally after shaking
by such storms as Devils are reported to have raised: Therefore if you may
enjoy the liberty of your own conscience and estate, question not the desert
or right of those, under whom you do it.

13. He that suffers his conscience to mislead him in civil Obedience, makes
his Guide a stumbling block; and does not consider that All States and
Kingdoms now extant, had their foundations laided in the dirt, though time may
have dried it up by oblivion, or flattering Historians lick't it off.

14. Think it no disparagement to your birth or discretion, to give honor to
Fresh Families; who cannot be denied to have ascended by the same steps, those
did, we style Ancient; New being a term only respecting us, not the world: For
what is, was before us, and will be, when we are no more: War follows peace,
and peace war, as summer does winter, and foul weather fair; neither are
any ground more in this Mill of vicissitudes, then such obstinate fools as
glory in the repute of State-Martyrs after they are dead; which concerns them
less then what was said 100 years before they were born: It being the
greatest odds, Their names shall not be registered, or if they be, after death
they are no more sensible of the honor, then Alexanders great horse, or any
beast else, his Masters Indulgence, or the writers, are pleased to record:
Neither, in a strict sense, do they deserve such honor, for being able to
date their possessions from before the Conquest, since if any be due, it wholly
belongs to them that were buried in the ruins of their Countries Liberty, and
not to such as helped to make their graves, as in likelihood most did, whom the
Normans suffered to remain. Therefore it is madness to place our felicity out of
our own reach, or to measure honor or repute by any other standerd then the
opinion we conceive of it our selves; it being unpossible to find a general
agreement in any good or evil report; The Reign of Queen Elizabeth being no
less traduced, then that of Richard the Third is justified.

15. Be not therefore licorish after Fame, found by experience to carry a
trumpet, that does for the most part congregate more enemies then friends.

16. And if you duly consider the inconstancy of common Applause, and how many
have had their Fame broken upon the same wheel that raised it, and puffed out
by their breath that kindled the first report of it, you would be as little
elevated with the smiles, as dejected by the frowns of this gaudy Goddess;
formed, like Venus, out of no more solid matter, then the foame of the people,
found by experience to have poisoned more then ever she cured; Being so
volatle, as she is incapable of fixation in the richest jewels of nature,
virtue, or grace; The composition of that body wholly consisting of
contradictions; no readier to set up this day, then she may be to pull dull
down the next: This renders it the lowest pu^rility to be pleased or angry at
reports: Good being inflamed, and Evil quenched, by nothing sooner then a
constant neglect.

17. Ostentation of Birth, at no time decent, cannot in this be safe, wherein
the very foundations of honor, are not only shaken, but laid bare: Besides
many are so abused, in the sound of their own, or their fathers titles, that
by bustling for the upper end, they often render that a shame, which in it
self is no crime: as for example, if the son of the Common Hunt, (in english,
the Lord Mayors Dog-keeper) by reason of the title of Esquire annexed to his
place, should consider himself as a man of worship, etc. Were it not
ridiculous, when God knows, the appellation is used for the honor of the
city, not the person that wears it? The same might be said of all Mechanic
Places at Court, which to render them the more vendible, were blazoned with the
false Alchymy of a like Title; so far from advancing repute, that it sets it
back, in the opinion of all judicious men. Observe how ridiculous such animals
are, to pride themselves in the shadow and tail of Honor, when the substance
is vanished, and the Head, etc.

18. Despise none for meanness of Blood, yet do not ordinarily make them your
companions, for debasing your own; unless you find them clarified by
excellent Parts, or gilded by fortune or power; Solomon having sent the
sluggard to the Pismire, to learn industry; and to the living Dog, rather then
the dead Lion, for protection.

19. It cannot be looked upon as an act of prudence, to do more for another,
then in reason may be expected from him again upon a like occasion; unless so
far as I am obliged to it out of gratitude; and no farther can my Prince or any
one else expect assistance from me; For if I have not my livelihood by him, I
cannot apprehend any cause, why I should expose it for him, especially if I
may, with any probability, be happy and keep it without him. And because most
of the first Propriators of Government, in our days, and long before, have
ascended the Throne at the cost and trouble, if not contrary to the mind of the
people they command, why should any loose that for their preservation, which
was never gained by their Benevolence? Therefore if those at the Helm have
lost their power, and I not able to find a particular Engagement or Interest
strong enough to make their good success inseparably necessary to my present
or future well-being, I am not bound to go farther on with them, then suits
with my safety, and the security my judgment gives, that they are able to bring
me off: All we owe to Governors, is Obedience, which depends wholly on Power,
and therefore subject to follow the same Fate and perish with it. For
Friendship can be contracted between none that stand so far remote from the
Line of Paritie; Therefore all superlative Powers are excepted out of this
commerce, because situated, in truth or pretense, under a divine right, which
no Interrest of mine can reach, much less procure: Then, being so far above
us, they can be nothing to us, longer then able to support themselves: For if
they have an extraordinary and particular establishment in heaven, it were
blasphemy to think they can be pulled down by any but God; in the opposition of
whose Vengeance, I am no more able then willing to stand, as those must, that
appear unseasonably for them. Besides, Powers are established to protect us,
who are to live happy under them, not miserably for them, if possibly to be
prevented; since all sorts of Governments may be reckoned among the rest God's
plagues, powered down upon men for their oppression and disobedience, in the
primitive Parity; which makes our Wills, like Eve's, subject to others.

20. No Government can be safely engaged by a single person beyond requital:
Kings thinking it a diminution of Honor; and Republics a dangerous step to
Popularity: Here you may see the continual use of of circumspection; since
it is possible for Virtue to form a weapon against it self.

21. If it be dangerous to over-oblige a King, it is mortal in relation to a
Free State; whose Ingratitude, no less then requital, is divided among so
many, as they are scarce capable of shame or thanks: Every Particular
disavowing what is generally thought amiss, And all faults buried in his
grave, that has the fortune to die next. Therefore if possible avoid siding;
yet if compelled, remember it may be deducible, both from the History of the
great Earl of Warwick, and Stanly, That a King may be as safely destroyed, as
preserved: And for Commonwealths, they are in nothing more perfect then
Ingratitude; either Government finding it better husbandry, to pardon enemies,
then reward Friends.

22. A reconciled enemy is not safely to be trusted; yet if any, a Great one;
it bring easier for such to execute their malice, then conceal it.

23. To conclude this part, imagine few the more capable of Trust, because you
have formerly obliged them; nothing being more ordinary, then natures that quit
such scores with hatred and treachery: And if you consider, whose hearts have
been most empty of pity toward unfortunate Princes, Experience may present you
with millions of such, whose hands formerly were filled with their bounty.

24. Ignorance reports of Witches, That they are unable to hurt, till they have
received an Alms; which though ridiculous in it self, yet in this sense
verified, That Charity seldom goes to the Gate, but it meets with Ingratitude;
They proving, for the most part, the greatest enemies, that have been bought at
the dearest rates of friendship; which proceeds from the high pride of
Humanity: Therefore be as little flattered to do good out of hope of
requital, as I would have you terrified out of fear of the contrary.

25. Providence, or a severer Destiny, has housed under all our roofes a
sufficient proportion of Calamities; Therefore it is folly to send to market for
troubles, As those do that contract foreign infelicities, vexing themselves
for the loss of the Prince of Conde in France, the death of the King of Sweden
in Germany, or the progress of the Turks in Candy, etc; Tophets prepared of
old, as well to torment the ambitious and unquiet spirits of busy Subjects, as
Kings.

26. One may attain to a higher degree of Honor and Power, under a Monarch,
then can be found room for in a Republic; as is apparent in some Favorites,
that have had the administration of all affairs: Yet in my opinion this is
abundantly recompensed, in the multitude, which the latter imployes; who are
securer in what they enjoy, in not being subject to the passions of a single
judgment.

27. Though Law perish, a thing unlikely, being the guard of all Peace, yet
Oratory will still keep in repute, as having more affections to work upon in
a Republic, then a Monarchy: one judgment being easier forestalled, then many;
So as I may safely presage, If a golden Tongue fall under a subtle head, it
may have a great influence upon the whole Senate.

28. At a Conference to speak last, is no small advantage, as Mr John Hampden
wisely observed, who made himself still the Goal-keeper of his party, giving
his opposites leisure to loose their reasons in the loud and less significant
tempest, commonly arising upon a first Debate; in which is he found his side
worsted, he had the dexterous sagacity to mount the Argument above the Heads of
the major part: Whose single Reason did not seldom make the whole Parliament
so far suspicious of their own, as to approve his, or at least give time for
another debate; by which he had the opportunity to muster up more forces; thus
by confounding the weaker, and tiring out the acuter judgments, he seldom
failed to attain his ends.

29. Republics lie most obnoxious to popular commotions, Monarchies to
clandestine attempts: In the first it is not safe to be found, unless they be
so epidemicall, as may more then probably assure success; in the latter not
decent for a person of honor, though warranted by never so much security; no
hands being more loathsome, then those that smell of blood, and treachery.

30. He that seeks perfection on earth, leaves nothing new for the Saints to
find in heaven: For whilst Men teach, there will be mistakes in Divinity; And
as long as no other govern, Errors in the State: Therefore be not licorish
after Change, least you muddy your present felicity with a future greater, and
more sharp inconvenience.

31. As I would have you primarily to intend the stopping of the leakes in your
own Bottom, if called to the Helm (from which in Free states none are
exempt;) so you must by no means neglect the repairing the broken fortunes of
others found to be of excellent parts; who if not made friends by preferment,
may prove dangerous to a new-founded state: Neither are preferments so scarce,
or these so numerous, but that there is provision enough for them in these
three Nations: I confess Queen Elizabeth most happy in this, which preserved
her from Civil Wars, whose foundations are Commonly laid by such as are too
subtle to be discovered: Flames, as in Hay or straw, may be kindled in the
more combustible People by such as shall appear rather to bring water then
fire; Nothing in experience being found more mortal, then an unseasonable
Commendation from an eloquent tongue, or a forced compliance from a
discontented Politician. The Consistory and Jesuits maintain throughout the
world the trafick of sedition and privy conspiracy; yet have had so much wit,
as to land it in Presbyterian bottomes, and to cover their disobedience to
Governors under the attempts of the Anabaptists, that naturally acknowledge
none. The truth is, if wise men will make it their business, they may be
easily able, where the people are unsettled, to obstruct all good, and promote
much evil, under the specious pretenses of Religion and safety: Therefore far
cheaper pleased, then discontented; being otherwise, in true policy, capable of
no slighter security, then shall be able to cut off all hope or desire of
future revenge: The consideration of which though it cannot make me altogether
approve, yet it abates my severity in the condemnation of that Legislator, said
to have write his Laws in blood, which might be more suitable to the complexion
of some times, then may possibly hitherto have been thought.

32. The like may be imagined of men proscribed, who between thirst of revenge,
and a desire of returning, do not seldom promote their Countries ruin. This
also may authorize their Tenants that hold punishing Children with the loss of
Good's, for their Fathers Crimes, as dangerous as unjust. And under this head
may be reduced all Penal Laws, laid upon faults not really prejudicial to
the state: Nor can a too rigid scrutiny, either after personal lapses in
manners, or uncouth Tenants in Religion, produce any good effects to a
Commonweal, where no Inquisition is, which under the Papacy draws the envy
wholly upon the Church, made incapable, not only by custom, but an aufull
Reverence, of all revenge.

33. Another error may happen (especially where a Free State is founded in
Arms) by Conceding too great a power to the Soldiury, who like the spirits of
Conjurers, do oftentimes tear their Masters, and Raisers in pieces, for want
of other employment: Therefore since it is beyond the plenty of any Nation, to
proportion a reward suitable to the opinion they have of their one merit, it
behooves the supreme Power to bury their Covetousness and Ambition in the
fields of others, by a foreign war; yet as little to their discontent as may
be; always giving them the honor of good servants, though bad Masters;
remembering, that the cause, you raised them for, is not so deep buried but it
may rise again to the terror of all that withstand it.

34. Neither can the Clergy be rendered, with less danger, Despicable, then
Great; both these extremes equaly crossing the ways of peace: yet more safety
possibly may accrue from estating them in so comfortable a competency as the
loosing of it may create fear, then such a Power, as they have in other
Nations, found by experience to produce pride and ambition, besides an
incroachment on the Peoples Liberty; whose natures they are used to warpe
toward any side, by the hope and terror they raise in their consciences in
relation to another world; the exploding of which beliefe-would be no less
diminution to the reverence of the civil Magistrate, then the profit of the
Priesthood.

ADVICE TO A SON.
V. Religion.
1. 2. The Bible, The Church, Expositors. 3. Brightman. 4. Universal Consent.
5. Profession. 6. Hypocrisy, Scandal. 7. Criticismes, Schoole-Divinity, 8.
Controversies. 9. Socinians, 10. Popery. 11. Purgatory etc. 12. Schismatics.
13. Millenaries. 14. Levellers. 15. The Reformation. 16. Works, Profession,
Faith. 17. The present wild Errors -- 18. tend to Anarchy: Moses, Mahumet;
Discretion. 19. Zeal in excess. 20. Conscience, Reason, Superstition. 21.
Obstinacy of Heretics. 22. Courtiers and Common-people's Religion. 23.
Seekers, Reason, The Scripture, Belief, Tender Consciences. 24, Antiquity. 25.
Reason, Revelation, Prophecy, Miracles and Faith. Honesty of the Indians. 27,
28. Difference of Religions; Conscience. 29. Fortune Tellers. 30. Hope and
Fear. 31. Divine Vengeance. 32. Witchcraft. 33. Rash Judgment. 34. Charity.
35. Impiety, Improbity. 36. Injustice. 37. Purchase of Church Lands. 38. Enmity
to the Clergy, or Religion Established. 39. New-lights. 40. Titles. 41. Wisdom
of Moses. 42. Card. Woolseyes Folly.

1. REad the Book of God with reverence; and in things doubtful take fixation
from the authority of the Church, which cannot be arrained of a damnable error,
without questio^ing that truth, which has proclaimed her impregnable against
the gates of Hell. This makes me wish that our Samsons in success (who have
stripped her of her Ornaments, Riches, Power, and Honors, which the ancient piety
left her to cover her Nakedness with all) and given them to vain expounders
of Riddles, may not one day have cause to repent, when they find themselves
anoyed no less then the eyes of Truth weakened by the dust and rubbidge, the
fall of so great and antique a frame is likely to make.

2. Therefore be content to see your Judgment wade, rather then swim, in the
sense of the Scriptures, because our deep plungers have been often observed to
bring up sandy Assertions, and their heads wrapped about with the venomous weeds
of Error and Schisms, which, may for the present discountenance the endeavors
of modester Learning; yet will, no doubt, sink and vanish, after some time and
experience had of their frequent mistakes, as those of our bold Expositers of
the Revelation, have most shamefully done.

3. For if Brightman, known by my self pious and learned, could be so out in
his Calculations for the Pope's fall, as to the time; What encouragement
remains for you to perplex your studies or expectation, when those
hieroglyphicall Obscurityes shall be performed?

4. He may be less prudent, if not religious, who strains at Gna^, contrary
to the stomach of the Church he lives in, then such as swallow greater things,
owned by her universal consent: For he that herds with the Congregation,
though in an Error, has Obedience to stand by him; whereas a Truth in the
other may be rendered more peccant, though a solitary obstinacy: since it is
ordinary with the holy Spirit to register such Kings for Good, as had not quite
expunged all marks of Idolatry, though possibly in their power to have done
it, which a private person cannot but want, having nothing but Arguments to
oppose, blunted through perjudice arising from a contrary practice.

5. Despise not a profession of Holiness, because it may be true; But have a
care how you trust it, for fear it should be false; the Coat of Christ being
more in fashion than his practice; Many Pulpit men, like Physicians, forbidding
their Patients that, you may ordinarily find on their own trenchers.

6. Hypocrisy, though looked upon by the Church, the spouse of Christ, as a
gaudy and painted Adulteress, yet if she passes undiscovered, the result is
not so dangerous, as that of open Profaneness: Therefore shun all occasions of
scandal, which commonly arises from drink, whose followers have their lapses
scored on every wall.

7. Criticismes and curious Questions in School Divinity may whet the wit, but
are detected for dulling the edge of Faith, and were never famous for
edification; and though looked upon, in these last Centuries, as the right hand
of Learning, yet better cut off, then used, as they have long served, for
weapons of contention: Devised to puzzle the Layity and render the Clergy no
less necessary then honorable; Who have work enough cut out for them till
doomes day, to resolve, which is least suitable to the Divine Essence, To have
bound the hands of men, or left them at liberty, By which, a constraint must
needs be put upon us, or our Maker, etc.

8. I can approve of none for Magisteriall Divinity, but that which is found
floting in the unquestioned sense of the Scriptures: Therefore when cast upon a
place that seems equaly inclined to different Opinions, I would advise, to
count it, as Bowlers do, for dead, to the present understanding, and not to
torture the Text by measuring of every nicity, but rather turn to one more
plain, referring to that all disputes, without knocking one hard place against
another, as they have done since this iron age, till an unquencheable fire of
Contention is kindled, And so many jarring and uncertain sounds of Religion
heard, as men stand amazed, not knowing which to follow, all pretending to be
in the right, as if it were possible, for Truth to contradict her self.

9. I Confess the Socinians are not at this time unworthily looked upon, as
the most Chymicall and Rational part of our many Divisions; Yet going contrary
to the ancient Canons of the Church, esteemed in the School of the Fathers,
the best Grammar of a Christians Creed, and wanting the principal Buttresses
of Prescription, Uniniversality and Consent, to uphold the convenience, and
justify the Truth of their Doctrine, I cannot award them so much approbation as
they seem in reason to plead for: Yet are so far confident, that if just
proof can be made of their adulterating the faith of Antiquity, few
Professions extant can justly take up the first stone against them, who upon a
conscientious scrutinie, may possibly appear equally culpable: (However such
as call them Arians, do not think they honot them with a former universal
Consent, Athanasius only excepted:) And other less probable Opinions may
learn this candor and Charity from them, not to bar Heaven Gates against all
Professions but there own; or, like our Retailers of new Lights, pull
Passengers into their Preaching-houses by the sleeves, as if all wanted
Religion but themselves.

10. And as the Socinian Doctrine appears too aerie, high and Mercuriall for
ordinary Capacities, whose understandings, are usually consumed, like Jupiters
Mistress, in the splendid commerce of such sublime speculations; So the Roman
is too earthy and Saturnine, participating of the dross of Merit, Images,
Indulgences, etc. Which convinces Her of so much wordly respect, as she stands
condemned by all, but such as are betrayed to her devotion through Ignorance,
Profit, or Honor on the one hand, or chained to her Obedience, by the iron
Inquisition on the other.

11. Yet were not Purgatory with the rest of the Romish Goblins, obtruded as
Articles of Faith, I should be the less scandalized at them; in hope, by
accident, they might occasion good: Finding humane Nature so childish, as to be
sooner scared, then persuaded, out of the dark Enteries of Sin: the real
Rod not being so terrible, in the hand of the Magistrate, as these Phantasmes,
which Tradition and the Priests subtilty has formed in the peoples Brains.

12. Now for the vagabond Scismatick. he is so fiery as he cannot last long
unconsumed, being ready upon the least advantage to melt all into Sedition, not
sparing to burn the fingers of Government, longer then they shower down
Offices and preferments upon him; whining for a Sanctity here, God never yet
trusted out of Heaven: Therefore incapable of quiet, but under a severe
Restraint, or an absolute Liberty.

13. I confess the Millenaries are of so joviall a Creed, as I could be
content, it stood with the will of God, I might heard with them; whoif not
approoved, I do not find condemned by any Council, at least for the first
three hundred years.

14. But our new Levelling Opinions, though they seem to transcribe their
Authority, from the no less inimitable then miraculous practice of the
primitive times, stand (if taken at the farthest extent) in so diametricall an
Opposition to all humane felicity, as not likely to proceed from the Lord of
Order; Being, if lights, in such dark Lanthornes, as rob humane Society of all
reward, and consequently, endeavor of desert: Yet the Owners, though
unconstant in their new ways, pronounce it damnable to keep the old.

15. In conclusion, you will find the Reformation most conformable to the duty
we owe to God, and the Magistrate: if not too phlegmatic, in passing by decent
Ceremonies; or too choleric and rigid, in obtruding upon weak and tender
Consciences.

16. And yet it was no unhappy rancounter in him that said, A good Religion
might be composed out of the Papists Charity, the Puritan's words and the
Protestants Faith: For where works are thought too chargeable, outward
profession too cumbersome, the third renders it self suspected; The two first,
being only palpable to sense and reason, stand firm like a rock, whereas the
other shakes under the weight of every Phantasy, as Peter did when he walked
upon the Sea. To speak English, In good works none can be deceived, but the
doer, in valuing them too high; in the two latter all but God, who only knows
the heart.

17. It is observable in the present humor, that those who carry an Impresse
of the wildest errors have a safer Pasport to travel by, and a nearer step to
preferment, then such as retain the Tenants, our Fathers kept in gross during
the flames of the ancient Persecutions, and by retaile under the modern; making
the honor of that Doctrine scandalous, for which our Ancestors were not ashamed
to die, who are by this rendered the worst of Murderers, as having through
Obstinacy been guilty of their own Death.

18. Will not such proceedings incline to Anarchy, and that prooving loathsome
to all, make room for the old or some more acceptable Family, if not for
Conquest by a foreign Nation? Because people lying uneasily, are apt to such
tumblings and changes, as cannot but at last bring them under a Power, strong
enough to constrain, or cunning enough to persuade them, with a pretense of
holiness and righteousness, to a mutual compliance, in relation to a change
of Government: Of the first there are multitudes of Examples, throughout all
profane Histories; of the latter few but sacred, where the Jews under Moses
being led by the miraculous hand of God, are not capable to be comprised under
the erring Axioms of humane Policy. As for Mahumet he tolled on his untutored
rabble, by mixing profit and rapine with his religion, which he left uncertain;
grounding his precepts upon success, ever owned as dropped upon them out of
Heaven; making himself still confident of the event, which I cannot undertake:
Therefore unable in these aporetick times, to give you better Counsel then to
keep your compliance so loose, as if possible, you may fix it to the best
advantage of your profit and honor.

19. Nevertheless though a high, palpable and external Zeal is taken by the
present Age as a mark of Confidence, yet I cannot look upon it with such
affection; because scru'd up to these altitudes in many by the wooden pinnes of
wordly respects, Not likely to hold longer in tune, then a harmony can be made
amongst all Parties, now possibly at odds, or under a jealous Aspect. Theresore
I advise you, to put no more of it on, then with decency you may divest in case
the fashion should alter, and the rich die the wars have dipped it in, be rubbed
off; Since all customs rise or fall proportionable, to the excha^ge they make
for the preferments in the state, to which in discretion you are bound to suit
your Obedience, though not your Conscience: For my Persuasions reach only to
what is consonant to Religion, which does not bind you to choke your fortunes
with the Criticismes of such Postillers of the Age, as value their
Interpretations of Scripture above liberty or Life, And by this overweening,
one Century makes Martyrs of those the precedent thought Heretics, and such
Liberators of their Country, as were formerly held Traitors.

20. Keep then your Conscience tender, but not so raw as to winch and kick at
all you understand not; Nor let it baffle your wit out of the bounds of
Discretion, as such do that suffer themselves to be moped by it: To prevent
which, keep Reason always in your eye, whose light ought never to be lost in
any worldly action, and but eclipsed in what relates to Heaven: The Tribunal
of conscience being erected in our Souls, to detect our miscarriages, not to
betray our welbeing; and therefore subordinate not only to a superlative
Authority, but also to our own honest, safe and wholesome conveniences. Neither
is Conscience seldom misled by Education, Custom and the false representations
of Teachers, who benighted in the dark Interests of Covetousness and
Ambition, seek to lodge others under the roof of such Institutes as they
believe not themselves, yet employ all their Art, sufficiency and endeavor, to
make them pass for authentic and the pure mind of God; Like Juglers, that
beguile our senses, with what is not, to have the better opportunity to pick
our pockets of what is realy useful to themselves: For as the more subtle
wind, got into the narrow and delicate parts of our body, is able to act the
Stone, Gout, and other most acute diseases, not really present; So does
Superstition represent in this changeable and concave glass, of a suborned
Conscience, things for sinful, that are indeed but natural and indifferent;
and other pious, are really vain and destructive; The prosecution of which
leads readily to Atheism, or an over-biassed holiness, which persecutes all
that carry the impress of any contrary Tenants.

21. Fly that selfe-murdering Tyrant Obstinacy, who, like our Witches, is not
seldom found to pamper the Impes of Heresy with her own blood: being not only
now, but from all Antiquity, able to bring clouds of witnesses to the stake for
the proof of the wildest Opinions: And if I am not foully mistaken, from the
reverberation of her heat, the flames of the ancient persecutions, as well as
those that followed, were at least increased, if not kindled.

22. As it is manifest that most Princes and men in power (the not unlikeliest
to know truth, because it is suspected they did at first disguise it) make no
more account of Religion, then the profit and convenience it brings is able to
compense; So the unbiased Rabble if once emancipated out of the fetters, their
former Creed confined them to, value the Church as they do the old Coins they
dig up, which they take for Counters, because they find them subject to rust;
and are not able, by reason of their Roman Inscriptions (the Character of the
Beast, which opinion rather then judgment imagines them branded with all) to
make them pass in the strict commerce of these intoxicated times; whereby they
exchange that for baser metal, which in it self perhaps is pure Gold, only
attached unhappily by the Cankers and Corruption of Age, easier scoured off,
then melted.

23. But if St Peter's pretended successor, the Pope, be found guilty of such
erroneous mistakes, it cannot be so much a Soloecisme in Reason, with our
Seekers to place St Thomas in the Chair; believing, like him, no more, then
lies patent to humane understanding, which is as much as can decently be
imposed upon a new believer without a Miracle; Reason being all the Touchstone
besides left in our hands, to distinguish this Gold from the dross, they
pretend our Religion has contracted. The Scripture alone seeming unable, by
reason of her diverse Readings, and the several sounds, variety of Expositions
have put upon it, to decide all differences: Besides the long abode she has
made at Rome (where who knows whether or no, or how far that Bishop has put
in his foot?) may render her, in some opinions, suspected, as participating of
the like Corruptions, we see manifested in some Translations: So as it may
possibly be wished, Learning had never taken her out of the hands of Tradition;
where for many years she remained with more quiet, then ever she enjoyed since
she grew domestical with all sorts of understandings, who have been connived
at by the state (how prudently I dare not determine) whilst they cut her short,
or extend her longer, as best fitted their ends and occasions. Now if Faith be
not allowed to be taken implicitly from the Authority of any Church, A freedom
of choice, by consequence, will result to all, by which Salvation must be
wrought out; And in this wilderness of contention, we have no better guide to
follow then Reason, found the same for many thousands of years, though Belief
has been observed to vary every Age: And since so considerable a falsehood is
discovered by our Governors, in the Clergy's Tenet, For the impunity of
Kings; why may not their poor Subjects, be unsatisfied, about the place, they
shall receive their own reward or punishment in, after this Life? or what else
may befall these dusty Bodies of our's. Yet I say not this to diminish your
Faith, but to increase your Charity toward tender Consciences who may pretend
cause enough to doubt; Though my single Judgment is still ready to determine
for Antiquity.

24. Reverence Antiquity, but conclude it not infallible; yet I should take her
word sooner in Divinity, then any other Learning; because that is clearest at
the beginning; all Studies else more muddy, receiving clarification, from
experience.

25. All Truth familiar unto mortals is only legible by the eye of Reason;
Revelation and Prophecy being strangers now to flesh, and ever too high
elevated for the perpetual commerce of such weak Creatures, who may sometimes
enjoy a glimmering of them, as the Northern inhabitants do of the Sun in
winter; not permanent longer then they are able to fan away the dark Clouds of
infidelity, which dims their Light upon the absence of the Extacy: Whereas
Reason passes in an universal commerce, being of an unquestioned allay, and
therefore likeliest to be the Oracle of the everliving God, said by Solomon, to
have squared the bars of the Earth by her Rule, and so not improbably
supposed to have measured out the way to heaven by her Line. St Paul allows
the notice of Gods universal goodness, for a sufficient evidence to convince
the disobedient Heathen; and may not the same as well save the faithful
observers of the purer Law of Nature? shall the righteous Judge of all things
be found with two weights, one to save, another to damn by? Reason only
commands belief, all things else beg it; so far as the most stupendous
Miracles that ever were, cannot confute, though it is possible they may silence
it for a time: But Belief changes; and impairing or mending imply's a wearing
out, imperfections Reason is incapable of, remaining the same for ever, as the
most faithful guide to our Maker.

26. It is no less worth your observance then admiration, that the wilder
Indians and other people by us styled Barbarous, are yet more strangers to the
unsociable sins of improbity, covetousness etc. then such as pretend to
advance their Conversion: Of which this may be a reason, that whilst they
remain constant to the pure Dictates of Nature, they imagine no Mediation to
secure their hopes, or screen their fears conceived to depend on another life,
but their own endeavors; which might give Paul an occasion, to pronounce them
a Law to themselves, and therefore possibly within the compass of Gods secret
grace; it being our Saviors own Confession to him that had kept the
Commandments, that nothing wanted but the sale of his Propriety, a term these
understand not, having all in Common; and if the last part be looked upon as
omitted, I would feign know, who follows his master best, He that comes laden
with what he is able, and goes as far as he can with him; or else he that
has lost it all, or is lazy and lies down by the way: Acceptance being a
fatre easier grant, then pardon?

27. Religions do not naturally differ so much in themselves, as fiery and
uncharitable men pretend; who do not seldom persecute those of their own
Creed, because they profess it in other terms; Then do not only ask thy
conscience, what is Truth, but give her full leisure to resolve thee: For he
that goes out of the way with her consent, is likelier to find rest, then he
that plods on without taking her Directions.

28. Therefore do nothing against the counsel of this guide; though she is
observed in the world to render her owners obnoxious to the injury and deceit
of all that converse without her: Nothing being more hard and chargeable to
keep, then a good conscience.

29. Let no seeming opportunity prevail so far upon your curiosity, as to
entice you to an inspection into your future Fortune; since such
Inquisitivenesse, was never answered with good success. The world like a
Lottery, affording multitudes of Crosses, for one Prize; which reduced all into
a total sum, must, by a necessary consequence, render the remainder of life
tedious, in removing present felicities, to make room for the contemplation of
future miseries.

30. Do not preengage Hope or Fear, by a tedious expectation; which may lessen
the pleasure of the first, yet cannot but aggravate the weight of the latter,
whose arrival is commonly with a less train of inconveniences, then this
her harbinger strives to take up room for; evil fortune being no less
inconstant, then good. Therefore render not thy self giddy by poring on
despair, nor wanton with the contemplation of Hope.

31. Stamp not the Impresse of a divine vengeance upon the death or misfortunes
of others, though never so prodigious, for fear of penning a Satyr against
your self, in case you should fall under the same Chance: Many things being
taken up for dropped out of an immediate celestial hand, that fell from no
higher pitch, then where God in his providence has placed such events as wait
upon all times and occasions; which prayers and prudence are not able always
to shroud you from; Since upon a strict inquiry it may appear, that, in
relation to this world, the godly have as little cause to brag, as the wicked
to complain.

32. Be not easily drawn to lay the foul imputation of witchcraft upon any,
much less to assist at their condemnation, too common among us: For who is
sufficient for these things, since we are as ignorant in the Benevolences, as
Malignities of Nature; Mad men presenting in their melancholy Extacies, as
prodigious confessions and gestures, as are objected to these no less
infatuated People? And if this humor has so far prevailed with some, as to
take themselves for Urinals, Wolves, and what not, Can it seem impossible for
those invaded by all the causes of discontent, to imagine themselves Authors of
what they never did? Most of these strange Miraracles they suppose, being
hatched by the heat of Imagination, or snatched out of the huge mass of
contingences, such a multitude of Individuals as the world produces, cannot
choose but stumble upon: Neither may it be admitted with due reverence to the
divine Nature, that Prophecy should cease, and witches so abound, as seem by
their frequent executions; which makes me think the strongest Fascination is
incircled within the ignorance of the Judges, malice of the witnesses, of
stupidity of the poor parties accused.

33. Be not therefore hasty to register all you understand not in the black
Calender of Hell, as some have done the Weapon-salve, passing by the cure of
the Kings evil, altogether as improbable to sense; Neither rashly condemn all
you meet with that contradicts the common received opinion; least you should
remain a fool upon record, as the Pope does, that Anathematized the Bishop of
Saltzburg, for maintaining Antipodes; and the Consistory, that may possibly
attain the same honor, for decreeing against the probable opinion of the
Earths Motion: Since the branding of one Truth imports more disrepute, then the
broaching ten Errors: These being only lapses, in the search of new reason,
without which there can be no addition to knowledge; That, a murdering of it,
when by others greater wit and industry it is begotten, not to be accounted
less then an unpardonable sin against the Spirit of Learning; Therefore mingle
Charity with Judgment, and temper your Zeal with Discretion; so may your own
fame be preserved, without intrenching upon that of others.

34. Fall not out with Charity, though you find, for the most part, Ingratitude
lying at her Gate; which God has contrived, the better to reserve requital to
himself.

35. As he offers an high indignity to the Divine Nature, that robs God of his
honor, by owning thoughts of him unsuitable to the dictates of Reason, the the
exactest Engine we have to measure him by, out of the volume of his Word; So
does he offend no less against Probity, that detaines another's due, contrary
to Justice and the clamors of his own Conscience: whereby he makes himself
and his posterity heirs to the curse which the wheel of Providence, moved by
the breath of Gods first Fiat, does usually stamp upon those, that endeavor to
deface the impresse of goodness and equity, which appeared in all things at
the beginning. Therefore be not forward to promote any destructive Tenants; or
licorish after such ill-gotten estates, as the Law of Power may for a small
sum be woed to possess you of; out of an hope to engage you, or a fear they
might revert, in case they were not diffused amongst a multitude of owners.

36. Make not Law, or the Power you may possibly exercise in the Commonwealth,
isntrumental to your private Malice? No murders being so bloody, as those
committed by the sword of Justice.

37. Let not the cheapnesse or convenience of Church Lands tempt you to their
purchase; For though I have not observed vengeance so nimble in this world, as
Divines pretend, yet what prudence is there, to submit all your future success
to be measured out, by so severe Expositions, as Churchmen usually make of
Sacrilegious Persons, which all are registered to be, that meddle with their
Revenues? besides the danger and shame of refunding, in case a contrary zeal
should repossesse the people, whose clamours and warrant cannot be thought
less sufficient to obliterate your Title then the former, written, as may be
supposed, with more Authentic Ink.

38. Denounce no enmity against the Clergy; for, supported by Prayers or
Policy, they cannot long want an opportunity to revenge themselves. Oppose no
Religion you find established, how ridiculous soever you apprehend it: For
though like David, you may bring unavoidable Arguments, to stagger a popular
error, None but the Monsters own sword, can cut off the head of one
universally received.

39. Run not hooting after every new Light you may observe to wander about, nor
endeavor by a tumultuous dispute to puff it out: for he that will not quench
the smoking flax may possibly accept of a Lamp composed of no richer stuff
then Rushes.

40. Grudge not Tithes to the Teachers of the Gospel, assigned for their wages
by the divine Legislator; Of whose Institutes this was none of the least
profound, That the tribe of Levi were prohibited all other revenue, then what
was deducible out of the tenth part of the other Elevens increase: setting
bounds thereby to all the improvement, their wisdoms, and the tie the
Priesthood had over the peoples consciences, might in the future possibly
make, In causing their Maintenance to rise and fall, proportionable to the
general standard of the Nations felicity; which this limitation obliged them
to promote, and for their own sakes, to oppose all encroachments likely to
interrupt their brethrens utility. This prompts me to believe, that if the like
salary were assigned here, we might promise to our selves the same success;
Provided the sovereign Power reserved in their own hands the collation of
Benefices, without giving leave to any Stipendiaries or Lecturers, that signify
little less then an Anti-clergy: And to persuade this, there may be more
Reason, then the narrow project of this Discourse is able to find room for.

41. Yet I cannot but by the way mind you of the superlative Wisdom of Moses,
who, least one sacrilegious injury should have proved a precedent for a
greater, (had the people made a benefit by the spoil) employed the Censers of
Corah and his accomplices to make plates for the Altar: But finding the Gold of
Idol^ too rank, decently to be used in the service os God, filed them to dust,
and threw them into the River; least the Multitude having been fleshed on a
Calfe, a false Diety, should after assume the boldness, to rob the true One,
and those, his Institutes appointed to live by his service.

42. And here it may not improperly be said, that Cardinal Wolsey was ignorant
of, or had forgot this Aphorism of Policy, when he pulled down Monasteries to
build Colleges, by which he instructed that docile Tyrant, Henry the eighth to
improve the same; there being nothing forwarder to demolish the results of
zeal and Ignorance, then Learning and knowledge: Neither did he discover
himself a more accomplished Courtier, when he laid the foundation of Grave for
a living King, who could not be delighted with the sight of a Tomb, though
never so magnificent, having lived in so high a Sensuality, as I may doubt,
whether he would then have exchanged it for the joye^ of Heaven it self. I
instance in this, as ^ fit example, to diswade you from thinking it discretion
ormanners, to use funereous discourses before Princes or men in power, who hate
nothing so much, as the thought of their own Mortality, and therefore unlikely
to be pleased with the Messengers of it.

VI. Conclusion.
Carriage toward Your -- 1. Mother -- 2. Sister. 3. Last will. 4, 5. Burial.
6. Death. 7. Judgment. 8. Close of all.

1. Bear always a filial reverence to your dear Mother; and let not her
old age, if she attain it, seem tedious unto you; Since that little, she may
keep from you, will be abundantly recompensed, not only by her prayers, but by
the tender care, she has, and ever will have of you: Therefore in case of my
death, (which, weariness of the world will not suffer me to adjourn so much as
by a wish) do not proportion your respect by the mode of other Sons, but to
the greatness of her desert, beyond requital in relation to us both.

2. Continue in love and amity with your Sister, and in case of need help her,
what you are able; Remembering, you are of a piece, and Here Is and Yours differ
but in name; which I presume (upon want of issue) will not be denied to be
imposed on any child of here is, you shall desire to take for your own.

3. What you leave at your death, let it be without controversy; else the
Lawyers will be your heirs.

4. Be not sollicitous after Pomp at my Burial, nor use any expensive
funeral Ceremony; by which, Mourners, like Crows, devour the Living, under
pretense of honoring a dead Carcass: Neither can I apprehend a Tombe-stone to
add so great a weight of glory to the dead, as it does of charge and trouble
to the Living, None being so impertinent wasters, in my opinion, as those that
build Houses for the Dead: He that that lies under the Hearse of Heaven is
convertible into sweet herbs and flowers that may rest in such bosoms, as
would shreek at the ugly buggs, may possibly be found crawling in the
magnificent Tomb of Henry the Seventh; which also hinders the variety of such
contingent Resurrections, as unarched Bodies enjoy, without giving interruption
to That, which He, that will not again die, has promised to such as love him
and expect his appearing: Besides, that man were better forgotten, who has
nothing of greater moment to register his Name by, then a Grave.

5. Contest not with such frantic people, as deny men the Burial formerly
called Christian: since unquietness importunes a living Body more, then a
Ceremony can advantage one that is dead. This and an hundred other changes
ought not to perplex our Rest, who are less interested in what can happen
after our death, then in that was extant before our birth; No books being
legible in the Grave.

6. Neither can I apprehend such horror in Death, as some do, that render their
lives miserable to avoid it; meeting it oftentimes by the same way they take to
shun it. Death, if he may be ghest at by his elder brother Sleep, (borne before
he was thought on, and fell upon Adam, ere he fell from his Maker) cannot be so
terrible a Messenger, being not without much ease, if not some voluptuousness:
Besides, nothing in this world is worth coming from the housetop to fetch it,
much less from the deep Grave; furnished with all things, because empty of
desires.

7. And concerning a future account, I find the Bill to swell, rather then
shrink, by continuance; Or if a stronger propensity to Religion, resides in
Age, then Youth (which I wish I had no cause to doubt of) it relates more to
the temperature of the Body, then any improvement of the Mind; and so unworthy
of any other reward, then what is due to the effects of humane infirmities.

8. To conclude, Let us serve God with what reverence we are able; and do all
the good we can; making as little unnecessary work for repentance, as is
possible: And the mercy of our Heavenly Father supply all our Defects in the
Son of his Love. AMEN.

Thus I have left you finished (Dear Son) a Picture of the World; in this at
least like it, that it is frail and confused; being an Original, not a
Coppie; No more foreign help having been employed in it, then what my own
miserable Experience had imprinted in my Memory. And as you have by Trial
already found the Truth of some of these; So I most earnestly beg of you, to
trust the rest, without thrusting your fingers, like a Child, into those
flames, in which your Father has formerly been burnt; and so, add by your
own purchase, to the multitude of inconveniences, he is forced to leave you by
inheritance.

Now You are Taught to Live, there is nothing I
Esteem worth Learning, but the way to Die,
The End.

