ORDERS CONCEIVED and approved by the Committee for the Militia of the County
of Middlesex, as expedient for the present to be published, and practiced in
the said County without the lines of Communication.
1. THat Lists of Resiants within all Parishes be duly conserved from Month to
Month, of all persons between the ages of 16. and 60. carefully registered
according to their Names, Qualities, and Professions, not only of men, but also
of Widows and Maids, living at their own hands; this to be performed by the
Churchwardens, Overseers for the poor, Constables and Headboroughs, and to be
attested by the next Justice of the Peace, High-Constable, or two of the
Committee Men of the parish, or nearest adjoining.

2. That from out of the said Lists, the Watches for the said parishes shall be
raised (as occasion requires for day or night) and so numbered and appointed all
along the year, as every Resiant as aforesaid, may watch, or find a sufficient
Watchman in his turn, and not further, but as the turn comes sooner or later
round, by occasion of the more often or more numerous watches through the year.

3. That the names be so ordered upon the appointment of the Watches, as that a
part of them may be armed with Muskets and half Pikes, when any Justice of
the Peace, or Constable shall Command the same.

4. That from out of the said Resiants, a particular selection be made of their
names, who have showed their affections to conserve their Country, their
neighbors and themselves, by subscription to find Arms for horse or foot
soldiers, with the numbers and kinds of the said Arms.

5. That every able bodyed man between the Ages aforesaid be listed again
together, to serve as they shall be commanded with Arms of their own, or
appointed for them.

6. That no man be left out of this last directed list, or exempted in the
case, but by suspension for, or in regard of some peculiar employment of
greater consequence to the public, allowed by the Colonel of the Regiment in
that part of the County, or otherwise by two Deputy-Lievtenants.

7. That all not able of body, with Widows and Maids at their own hand, as
aforesaid, be considered to furnish somewhat the more in any Assessement, or
charge toward the soldiery, or Magazine of ammunition for the County.

8. That the Commanders in the Militia shall observe diligence and care in
their several charges, and in their several degrees. As the
Deputy-Lievtenants over the Colonels, they over their Field officers and
Captains, and those over inferior officers and soldiers, so upwards in all
obedience according to discipline of War.

9. That if any soldier shall not appear upon summons, or shall absent
themselves from this service without leave of his Officer, or shall wilfully
spoil or imbeazill his Arms, or be disorderly, or if any shall receive such
his Arms, such offenders to be punished by fine or imprisonment, such
imprisonment not exceeding ten days, or fine xx. shillings for any such
offense to be levied by distress, and sale of such offenders goods according
to the Ordinance.

10. That appeal to the Higher power shall always be accepted, but the more
distant appeal, as from the inferior soldier to the Deputy-Lievtenants or
Colonel, shall be the more blamed or punished, in case he or they prove, and
be judged more troublesome then wronged.

11. That the Captains, under Officers and soldiers of each Regiment, shall
enter into half pay for their days of Exercise of every Company, as soon as
each Regiment shall be completed with their Lists of Officers and Soldiers;
Provided that the said days of Exercise, exceed not the number of 26. days
through the whole year.

Touching the Extention of half pay to the Listed Trayned-Band soldiers,
as well as to the Captains and Officers; it is agreed fitting.
1. That the Companies shall be so far reduced into a selection of the better
or more orderly conditioned, as that 120. in number shall be the reserved Band
under every Captain. 140. for the Sergeant Major. 160. for the Lieutenant
Colonel, and 200. for the Colonels Company, who shall have their half pay,
together with their Officers for 26. days Exercise within the year. The
Captains and Committees within each Lymit with approbation of the Colonel to
affix the several pay from time to time; That the supernumeraries that shall
arise within the limits of each Company, being received, or appointed to find,
or wear Arms, shall be in protection, and under the same Command.

2. That where the said Captains and Committees think fit to List any number
of youth that may be willing to exercise, they shall be received into
Consideration, as they appear to deserve for their numbers and industry.

Lastly, Touching the Certificats for Soldiers and Officers without
Commissions to show their Condition. It is agreed, That every soldier and
officer-shall have Certificats from his Colonel (such as were showed to the
Committee) with impression of his Escutchion of Arms, and under the hand of
his Captain, and Secretary of the Regiment, for which the soldier shall pay
vj-pence out of his next following pay allowed, and xij-pence for every Officer
or Gentleman of each Company; Two parts of which fees shall be to the Secretary
of the Regiment, and one third part to the Clerk of the Band, in which such
soldier or Officer is.

Dated at the Duchy Court at Westminster, 16. September, 1644. W. Greenhill,
Cler. to the said Committee.


