THE OBSERVATOR DEFENDED IN A modest Reply to the late Animadversions upon
those Notes the Observator published upon the seven Doctrines and Positions
which the King by way of Recapitulation lays open so offensive.
THe Animadversor has attacht the Observator, just like a weak and degenerous
enemy, that durst not encounter his adversary in open field, but lodges
himself in some obscure and ignoble passage, to attempt at least upon his
Arriere-guard, not being able to pierce into his main body. The ingenious
peruser of both, I doubt not, may discern that the Observator in the conclusion
of his Treatise only recapitulated seven Results out of His Majesty's papers,
in contradiction to his Antecedent disquisition, and the Parliaments
proceedings, that so one might compendiously view the subject of his discourse,
and as it were by an Index find out the confutation of His Majesty's positions,
by the foregoing Arguments of the book, which the Animadversor very
cautelously is pleased never to take notice of in the whole Discourse.

1. In the first position, the Animadversor grants the Observators Arguments
for the declarative power of Parliament in respect of the safe residence of
that power in the bosom of the Jutelary Assembly; But with this restriction,
That he should have allowed the King his place in Parliament, and not have
named a Parliament without him. But how could the Observator without affronting
impudence speak otherwise? seeing His Majesty in present is pleased actually
to have his residence out of Parliament, and will not allow himself a place in
it; but in stead of concurrence with it, seeks the remotest distances from it.
The better therefore to see how the King and Parliament are in parts, we will
first negatively and then positively open the present Controversy betwixt
them, which is the cause of their disjunction. Which in the first place is not
this which most men conceive, That when His Majesty shall agree, and the
Parliament likewise agree, for establishing some new Law, or interpreting some
old, which may be for the particular commodity of some conditions of men
only, in the Commonwealth; Whether then the King ought to declare this or that
to be Law exclusively of the Parliament, or the Parliament do the same
exclusively of the King: But positively it is this* When there is visibly a
danger ready to confound the whole commonwealth, and consequently all
particular commodities and persons, Whether the State if then convened, may not
lawfully of it self provide for its preservation, especially if the King either
see not the danger, or seeing it, will not provide for it in such manner as may
give best security to Himself and Commonwealth: When therefore such a Question
shall justly arise betwixt King and commonwealth (which collectively is that
we call a Parliament) it being of public interest of State, and so De jure
publico, it cannot fall under the examination of any inferior judicature (with
which those so known voted Laws, the Animadversor speaks of, are to be
found.) For that is furnished only with rules of particular (not universal)
justice, for the decision of particular differences betwixt this or that man,
for this or that thing. Which rules being too narrow for so capacious a
subject, we must recurre to those that the original Laws of Nature and policy
hold out to us, which must needs be superior to the other. The chiefest rule
of that is, Ne quovis modo periclitetur respublica, That by all means public
safety be secured: And every State must principally endeavor to hold fast and
sure our public sociable Incorporations one with another from public
distresses, calamities and destructions, which may arise from our selves or
other foreign Kingdoms: And whilst that is done according as Natures Laws
and policy prescribes in Universal justice, they may well in the mean time
proceed to make or revile Laws of particular justice, which is of particular
things, whereby we may commutatively increase our fortunes and estates one by
another, or by foreign commerce. But if those that fit at the head of the
commonwealth shall let loose the helm of it, and so let it float at all
hazards, or else unadvisedly steer it directly toward rocks and shelves, it
self is bound by those original Laws (which surely may be some means) to
save it self from a wrack: And how the King is not invaded or wronged by having
himself and his Kingdom preserved from imminent danger, and how it is
possible a King may ruin his Kingdom, follow in its just place. In the mean
time from these premises we prove that the Parliaments method is most
excellent; For in the first place it endeavors to secure the being of the
commonwealth now floating at hazard; And afterward to apply its self to
quicken particular Laws for our wel-being. Now therefore the fundamental Law
which the Animadversor so hotly calls for, and the Parliament squares by is not
such a one as (some say) was never known before it was broken; Nor (as he
says) lies mentally or parliamentally in the walls of the Parliament House to
be produced upon any emergent occasion: But is such a one as is coucht
radically in Nature it self (and so becomes the very pin of law and society)
and is written and enacted irrepealably in her Magna charta, which we are not
beholden to any sublunary power for, but belongs to us as we are living and
sociable creatures. And no known act of particular Justice or right to this or
that petty thing, can clash with this, but must in equity vail to it, as to
its superintendent. For what can those particular Acts of Law, which are to
increase our private and domestic profit advantage us? when its doubtful in
so great dangers whether we may enjoy our lives at all, or no. It is therefore
notoriously calumnious and inconsequent which the Animadversor from hence
affirms, That the Parliament affects an arbitrary power, or the particular
rights in ordinary course of Justice, as also the safety of King and people
must at all times totally depend on their Votes exclusively of the King: Which
in the following Position comes to be more fully disproved: Which power we
confess with him can never be safe either for King or people, nor is
presidentable.

2. Posit. Parliaments are not bound to presidents (says the Observator)
because not to Statutes, viz. Absolutely; For the cause both of the one and the
other is not permanent: And it is true therefore which the Animadversor says,
that they are durable, till they be repealed, which had been to good purpose
had he ever denied it, For he rightly attributes no more power to Statutes then
to other particular Laws, which (as is proved in the first Position, and
further shall be in this) cannot in his case stand in equity, nor act beyond
their power, and that contrary to the Legislative intent, viz. to be a
violation of some more sovereign good introduceable, or some extreme and
general evil avoidable; which evil otherwise might swallow not only Statutes,
but all other sanctions what ever. And thus in respect of the effect, they may
be said in some sort to Repeal themselves. For really in such a case they
become mortified, and can do no more for us. For the Parliaments case and
controversy (which the Animadversor still forgets to be of preserving the
whole Kingdom, and so, De jure publico) is of so transcendent a nature, " de
facto, it may not, and de jure it ought not to be restrained by petty and
mortified Statutes or Laws, in acting so much good for us. But how should
Presidents (as the Animadverso says) be best warrants? or how should they be
in the like degree limiting or binding that Oaths are? Consider the
consequence, Such or such a Parliament did not or durst not do this or that,
therefore may no Parliament do it? Some Parliaments, not comparable to the
Worthies of this) have omitted some good out of supinenesse, difficulty, or to
avoid a greater evil, which might be valuable with the good desired; some
perhaps has done ill which the integrity and worth of this abhors to think
of; so that neither King nor Parliament have reason to plead so strongly for
coherents to Presidents. But both have better rules if they will not deceive
them, which are, To direct all by the interest of State (which is never
accusable of Injustice) And by Equity, which we may call a general Law: and
though it be variable according to the subject matter and circummstances, yet
it is that only, which will not let summum jus be summa injuria, which is the
supremest right that can be done us. And it remains to be wished that the
Animadversor would have shown us in this main business, wherein the Parliament
has gone cross, either to public Interest of State or Equity. To say (as
the Animadversor does) that this single and extraordinary case excludes the
King from Supremacy (even above particulars) and divests him to the naked
priority only of Place and Title, is that which blasts it self, unless the
Animadversor, be able to prove the Kings exercise of his former power totally
intercepted, and the more now then in other Parliaments of the like
circumstances, or that he is ruined by having his Kingdom preserved. But
Sergeant Major Skippon (who is a particular) was not permitted to obey the
Kings summons of him, therefore the King (says the Animadversor) is denied a
power even above particulars. But we answer that his case reports to that of
the Parliaments, and must stand or fall with the equity of that. In the mean
time he is so employed, that he could not have been in any more redounding to
His Majesty's solid happiness, which (rightly understood) would have prodnced
rather an excuse than an accusation. For the Parliaments discharging of their
trust (which the Animadversor fears so much) It is so notorious to all
uncorrupted and unbiast judgments, that we have reason to pray, that those who
so advisedly elected them in a time of less danger to the Kingdom, than this
present is, be not more disloyal to them, than they are to their chusers. What
they have actually effected with the Kings concurrence, the Animadversor I hope
will not except against; and what they desire further to effect (wherein they
so humbly and pariently have attended his Majesty's concurrence) is only for
the happier continuation of that other to us, and is to be reputed good or ill,
in order to that. Where then is the evil for which the Parliament must be so
scourged by all sort of hands? why did we engage them so studiously to wipe off
that Rust, which began to eat so deep into the letter of our laws, and all
our possessions? and to make new purchases for us of all our estates? if now
being assembled they cannot discern what and where those laws are to be
found, by the luster and power of which they they should act all this for us.
We have blessings plentifully in store for his Majesty, but desire he would not
reduce the ultimate resolution and reserch of the Law (our blessing) to be in
his own bosom, more than in that of the Parliament, lest when God in his anger
shall deprive us of so great a blessing as is his life and government, that dye
with him. I shall not multiply on the Animadversors Arguments; Of the
possibility of the Parliaments erring, and not rightly discharging their
trusts: all which might be more powerfully urged on one man confiding in his
own singularity. He might have known them to have been unanswerably refuted
and killed before their birth. But since he will have the Parliament so great
practitioners of Popish policy, in respect of some infallibility, which he
says, and they never arrogated; save only a probability of less erring in
that question betwixt his Majesty and themselves; let me, I say, nakedly recite
what the learned, and yet unanswered Divine in this matter (which the
Animadversor so triumphs in) has urged against the Papists, Chil^ c. 2. p^^
whom it most concerns, so to leave the Reader to assume what shall seem most
deduceable to himself; His words are these. * He that would usnrp an absolute
tyranny and lordship over any people, need not put himself to the trouble and
difficulty of abrogating his Laws, made to maintain the common liberty, for he
may frustrate their intent and compass his design as well, if he can get the
power and authority to interpret them as he pleases, and have his
interpretarions stand for Laws. I shall not need to recapitulate the condition
of our Laws before the Parliament, nor yet what interpretations they received;
Which interpretation were held so Authentic, that they made the Law but a
nose of wax, to wring sometimes this way for Ship money, and for the
lawfulness of it, as to make the King likewise the sole Judge and redresser of
all public dangers, sometimes another way for legal monopolies, etc. Let the
world then judge who arrogate most infallibility, or have more made use of
Papists or Popish policy.

3. The Observator says that the Parliament deserted by the King in the whole
Kingdoms distress may relieve it and the King. Here is asserted the public
Interest of State, which can fall under no notion of any inferior Court to
examine. But the Animadversor draws this consequence from thence; That then
every man's estate may be wrested from his propriety and possession: Quam urceus
exit. Here he does most palpably discover the looseness of his Logic and
cause, and how little he holds to his premises, and state of the Controversy
betwixt King and Parliament, which I so often noted before, and showed the case
to be De Iure publico, and so political.

Commutative therefore and Distributive Justice being of inferior matters have
their inferior Courts, and the apparent letter of the Law to decide, and power
to actuate what is rightly decided. But this Controversy being De iure
publico, of a public right, it falls under the notion of another sort of
Justice, whereas particular proprieties and possessions fall under those two
inferior sorts of Justice, as has been proved in the conclusion of the first
Position, which together with this show the sandinesse and incoherence of the
Animadversors consequence. Here therefore we will only note, that even in a
common distress (which is less then a public) without a Vote of Parliament,
or expecting any other dispensation of Right, a particular propriety may be
destroyed by a Community to preserve it self: as when the Sea breaks in upon a
County, a bank may be made of and on this or that man's ground whether he please
or no; And when our Neighbor Vcalygons house blazes, frequently we see some
houses plucked down (where the fire actually broke not out) lest it should
consume the whole street. And 'twas equity (before Poesy) that in reof the
propinquitie of the danger, we are supposed to be even in the danger it spect
self; and that the house so plucked down, is not supposed so much to be
dilapidated as burnt. Tum tuares agitur paries cum proximus ardet.

But I wonder by what Act or Declaration the Parliament has denied a
compensation to the sufferer in that kind, as the Question now stands? If all
men did not know that the Parliament has so provided for the indemnity of
those at Hull, perhaps the Animadversor might have gained the credit of some
modesty in averring, That the Parliament upholds public good with private
misery. With the like grace also, and with sufficient confidence does he tell
us, That if there be a great distress in the Kingdom, it is caused by the
Parliament claiming that power which cannot consist with the Royal estate of
his Majesty. It Is prodigious to all honest understandings, that the near
engagements of war the Scots twice merely upon misunderstanding; That the
design of strangling the Parliament as soon as born (for proof of which the
Parliament presumes to have had too much sufficiency) having the bloudiest and
true Papisticall war in Ireland raised against our Nation, and that against the
Parliament especially (in the walls of whose house they haac already endangered
a breach, J am perlucente ruina) That even now among our selves we see some,
who with more alacrity are ready to employ themselves against that sacred
Assembly, than against those unchristian Rebels, and yet that all this should
be too little to evince the Realitie (as the Animadvertor says) of a
distressed kingdom; and who is yet more transcendent, That all this should be
caused by the Parliament, which aims at nothing but the extirpation of the
Parliament root and branch, and of which some part of it ( viz. the Scots
troubles) had being long before the Parliament had any; and then I pray, how
could it be the cause of it? How the King is head and we the body, and how the
King cannot be insulted over by having his Kingdom and Self preserved from
ruin, is proved at large by the Observer, beyond the capacity of any his
animadversions. Whether the people may revoke all they actually have transacted
to their King, is a Question very impertinently inserted by the Animadsor, in
respect of any thing that the Observator has in the Parliaments case; which is
such, That when the King shall have endeavored his utmost, he will find, that
he shall not be able to preserve the Kingdom in extremity of distress,
without the assistance of the Kingdom it self. However this the Observator
denies, that the people could make such a conveyance of power to their Kings,
as might prove destructive of humanity: So that much of the Animadvertors
Divinity might have been husbanded for an apter occasion. Nevertheless St Paul
in the 13. of the Romans, tells us not what power is the highest, but that
that power which is the highest ought to be obeyed. Again as St Paul speaks
first of a few particular dispersed men, and those again in a primitive
condition; who had no means to provide for their preservation. Moreover it is
very observable that Sn Paul in the 3. verse speaks of a Ruler, as our Law
speaks of our King, viz. That he is not a terror to good but to evil works:
The Law likewise says, The King can do no injustice. The interpretation of
the one must square with the other, and that must be according to the
distinction of Fact and Right. For according to Fact, St Paul's Ruler may be a
terror to good, and a cherishing to evil works; but by Right he ought not to
be so. Our Law says, Our King rather ought noi in Right, than that de facto he
cannot do injustice; For we know there have been both unjust Kings and ill
Rulers. But least there should be such, Scripture it self as well as our
Parliament does endeavor to bind them from exercising ill. As Deuteronomy. 17. ver.
18 19. 20. The King shall have a book to learn to keep the Law, and do
according to it, lest his heart be lifted up above his Brethren. And Ezekiel. 46.
18. The Prince may not take of the peoples inheritance by oppression, and
thrust them out of it, but shall be content with his own possession, lest other
men be scattered from their possessions. Wherein then has the Parliament
denied the King that due which St Paul allows his Ruler? Who he says, (as is
very observable through the whole Chapter) that he may be a Minister to us
only for good: And to keep the Parliament even with St Paul, What else does it
hazard it self for, but for refusing to favor the King in an uncircumscribed
power of doing ill? Which faculty he vindicates to himself irrestrainably, And
that by virtue of some Right and enlargement of Law and Religion, even to do
all manner of ill, if so be he shall ever be pleased so to do. Moreover S.
Paul has not, nor could any where repeal the laws of nature, so that if the
Parliament in its case has neither declined them, nor our own Original
Contracts, nor the present interest of State, nor S. Paul, Then I hope, it has
kept it self consonantly to Law and Religion.

Out of all this (with what follows in the sixth Position) we may easily
answer to the Anymadversors Objection of Resistance. For out of those premises
it appears. That in the King there are two things only; first, His Person;
Secondly, His Office, Authority, or as St. Paul calls it, his Power: for his
Person we hold it always inviolable: For his Power or Office, because St. Paul
says, it respects us only for good, its very reasonable that we apply our
selves in obedience to that for our own sakes as well as for his. But the
Court Parasites they are not content with this distribution, but add to the
person and power, or office of a Prince, that which they call, The will or
pleasure of a Prince; or rather they marry the power or office of a Prince to
his Will: and so by that subtle conjunction they proving them all one ( Quia
omnis potestas est voluntatis) then they ask us the Question, Whether we are
not equally bound to obey the one in all latitudes as well as the other? As if
we had contracted for the evil as well as the good, and that, as it should
seem best to the Prince we contracted with. But to that we clearelier answer,
That because the will lies under an indifferency of commanding the ill, as
well as the good, we may lawfully embrace that part and power only of his
good, (as St. Paul says) which indeed is the very essence of his power, and
makes him a King: and we may reject the other, which makes him a bloody Tyrant:
Yet not so as to violate his person in any case (no more than David would King
Saul) but preservatively to thrust as far from us as we are able all other
blood-suckers, who are forward to execute on us his ruining commands; because
in such a case he contracts his own ruin as well as ours, and is supposed to
be in a distemper, and in stead of a wholesome potion to call for poison, which
I think no good or honest Physician would obey, but rather resist those that
would obey him. Wherefore in these considerations, it is not here as the
Animadversor says of the Parliament; Nolumus hunc regnare super nos; but
Nolumus hos destruere no^. But of this in the sixth Position. And for this has
been asserted, I know I quote our own Gracious Prince, who has been pleased
thus to indoctrinate us in his several Protestations, of ventring his own
life to preserve us in the fruition of our due liberties of Subjects; which we
are sure we cannot enjoy from him, if by that Protestation he intended to force
upon us, a duty and allegiance of embracing all those tormentors whom he should
send to us at any time, on any occasion (lawful or not lawful) to spoil us
either of our lives or subsistence; If so be so much evil should possibly
hereafter enter into his Majesty's secret thoughts and will, Of which therefore
seeing there is never a known Law of the land, and that it has no analogy
with the true Protestant Religion, and our own just liberties of Subjects, we
will presume that his Majesty abhorrs the thought of chaining us to such a
slavery for his own part, both in Fact and Right; though alas he cannot
promise us that all his Successors shall do the like. Wherefore the
Animadversor does plainly abuse his Majesty in this Argument, and does
desperately corrupt his present cause. Thus we see what evils we may thrust
from us, and how we are bound to preserve the Kings power or office, together
with his person as much as our own. But the Animadversor, together with his
Tribe, preach another kind of doctrine, from whence they know how to raise
better uses for their ends, than the King can do any; and that is, That in
stead of opposing the worst of those evils which by a Kings bare pleasure may
be that we should suffer by the hands of other persons, that we should, I say,
simply betake our selves to flight, leaving all that we have in this world, but
our lives, to the Kings disposal, and to be transferred to those whom he shall
think better worthy of them than our selves, But in the Parliaments case it
has been observed, that as it is impossible (in a manner) for a whole
Kingdom to fly, so surely cannot that be required of it: This case is not as
David's (a particular man's) was, who being in the right, yet in danger, fled
indeed, but it was from one place to stand better on his guard in another.

4. No Member of Parliament ought to be troubled for Treason upon suspicion
only; especially I say, in such a case, whereof not only the whole House, but
the whole Kingdom knows it self to be alike culpable. And that the accused
were in safe custody, is not to be doubted of by the Animadversor, if the
engagement of a whole Kingdom can give security: which is sufficient enough
for five men, for ought the Animadversor has to the contrary.

5. Because the Parliament to save a whole Kingdom once from ruin, has used
some power which is communicable to a whole Kingdom in such an extraordinary
case; Therefore it may (says the Animadversor) usurp it in ordinary cases;
because it may declare the danger what it will at pleasure, and it is not
infallible. As this consequence of the Animadversor is the same with that of
the third Position, so may the answer of that be applied to this, to which I
shall refer the Reader. This only will I add, That there is no need to create
an Infallibility in the Parliament to discern matters of Fact within every
man's cognizance; but to afford it only a probability of less erring, or being
less deceived rather than a particular Individual; And that its common
interest joined with its indirectnesse and integrity (of which the
extraordinary exact choosing of the Members at the beginning, it is an
extraordinary proof) may be a forcible Improbability of its ever usurping
such a power in ordinary cases, which as it cannot be serviceable any way to us
(because ordinary cases have their most convenient courses certainly regulated)
so can it not be but extremely dangerous to themselves alone, and no ways
advantageous; Because in such cases we participate all of us of the like
conveniences. This Position the Animadversor is pleased to conclude with a
Riddle; That the ruins which the Parliament intends to save the Kingdom from,
is to save it from Monarchy. -- Risum teneatis amici? Are we so overgrowne with
that government, which our Laws are locked and cabenetted in, in such manner,
that the wounding of the one is the bleeding of the other? Or is it true which
the Bishops have so long pulpited at Court, that the razesing of their power
must be the Eclipse of the other? although we know, and all the world with us,
That Monarchy was of a more extended latitude and absoluteness before
Christianity was professed by any Monarch, then ever it was since: Or more
coherently to the Animadversors own words; Can there be no abuses or Cobwebs in
Church or Commonwealth, but they must needs be spun out of the bowels of
Monarchy? so that the reforming and sweeping away of the one, must needs be the
sweeping away of the other? For our own part^, we will not make them so much
Son and Father, although the Animadversor be pleased to do his Majesty this
good service. What then, the too too true ruin of the Kingdom is conceived to
be, is set down in the third Position; And what Connection there is in making
Monarchy the same with that, let the refinedst and the rudest Logic collect.

6 7. Whether levying of Forces against the personal Commands of the King,
though accompanied with his presence, be to war against the King, is largely
discoursed by the Observator beyond any force of reason which the Animadversor
has used to enforce the contrary. His Majesty acknowledged much of this to the
Scots, whose preparations were in all respects like ours, and which his Majesty
found to be Non tam contra quam praeter authoritatem Regis, after he had pressed
the Animadversors arguments as warmly, as now he does against other of his good
Subjects, though yet suffering under the great calamity of his Royal
displeasure. But to say little of that which is so notorious to us all of this
Kingdom; Let us look over to France, and there we may see those who were as
much Protestants as we, that levied arms against their Kings commands,
accompanied with his presence, and yet our King never thought them the worse
Christi^ns or Subjects for that, and therefore made himself a partizan with
them in their very cause; so clearly was the piety and lawfulness of such an
act at that time reconciled to his Majesty's conscience and understanding. All
which the Animadversor must needs confess, unless he will own the present
Declarations of the Rochelers, who with execrations of us say (upon the event
of their war) that the Duke of Buckinghams design was to destroy and eat them
up; and that they had preserved their liberties and Religion from any
adulterate mixture of Popery, had they never seen him.

But according to the Animadversor, It is impossible a King should ruin his
Kingdom, because he shall always have the Major part with him. But modern
miseries show us the contrary, witness the near depopulated Principalities of
Germany. But to answer the Argument with like reason, I say, that after a King
shall have destroyed the Minor part of his Kingdom with his Major, why may he
not then, by some differences in the Major part, be a cause even to bring that
to destruction too? But without supposing such a Fate, why may he not, Nero
like, for pleasure sake, desire that all the heads of the Major part stood but
upon one neck, that so he might chop them off at a blow? Seeing then such a
King may ruin his Kingdom, (by lamentable distresses and depopulations) and
if a Parliament has the power to hinder it, it does that which it is bound to
do, and which is neither against the person, or genuine authority of the King,
unless we can apprehend a Kings authority without a Kingdom (which is the
object it extends to, and acts in, and which we have proved he may destroy)
and without which the Animadversor must needs reduce such a King to a barer
Title, then he said our Parliament would reduce our King to.

FINIS.

