VOX PLEBIS, OR, The Peoples Outcry Against Oppression, Injustice, and
Tyranny.

Wherein the Liberty of the Subject is asserted, Magna Charta briefly but
pithily expounded.

Lieutenant Colonel LILBURNES Sentence published and refuted.

Committees arraigned, Goalers condemned, and remedies provided..

ISAI. 10. 1. 2. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous Decrees, and that write
grievousnesse which they have prescribed:

To turn away the needy from judgoment, and to take away the right from the
poor of my people, that Widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the
Fatherless.

JER. 22. 15. 16. 17. Shall thou reign, because thou closest thy self in
Cedar? Did not thy Father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and
then it was well with him?

He judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him: was not
this to know me, says the Lord?

But thine eyes and thine heart are not, but for thy covetousness, and for to
shed innocent blood, and for oppression and violence to do it.

London printed 1646. in the sitting of Parliament; during which time the
Press ought to be free and open, as the Parliament declared to the Bishops at
the beginning thereof.

ALL States in the beginning are venerable: That Republique which would ke^p it
self from ruin, is above all other things to keep their Religion uncorrupted,
and their Laws from violation (...) or as true Religion is the tie of the
Conscience to obedience and observation of just Laws (especially such as have
their foundation in Divine Authority;) So are good Laws the civil sanctions
or sinews of a Commonwealth, that bind the members thereof together by the
execution of justice and piety, in a perpetual bond of peace and tranquillity.
So that if either Religion be neglected, or the Laws violated; the ruin of
that Commonwealth must needs be near, where such defects are found. But where
Religion is held in due reverenee, and the ancient Laws of that Commonwealth
are inviolably kept; the Governors of such a State, shall easily keep their
Commonwealth religious; and consequently, virtuous, and united. Now there is
no better way to make the Subjects of a State good, and to incline them to
virtue; then that those that sit at the Helm of that State, and have the
government thereof, should hold forth clear examples of piety and justice, in
their own lives and actions, to the people under their government; especially
in the administration of Laws. For as hunger and poverty make men laborious;
so Laws duly administered, make them good: and good examples proceed from good
education; and good education, from the due, observance of settled Laws. Of all
humane Laws, there is none more fit to be observed, then those that concern
our Lives and Liberties. For those that concern our Lives, they are most
carefully, and with the greatest piety and circumspection, to be executed:
since if our lives be taken away by injustice, death being ultimum supplicium,
the last punishment in this world; our injuries are remediless and
irrecoverable. Therefore we may irrefragably conclude, That Governors of a
State ought to be very wary in judging of matters of life, and not in one
tittle to deviate or depart from the known Laws of the Land, lest by
committing of irrepairable wrongs upon the persons of their innocent subjects;
they draw Gods irreco^cileable vengeance upon themselves, in that day when he
shall visit the Judges of the earth, and make inquisition for the blood of his
people, spilt by injustice, violence, and oppression: which he will surely
do, according to his own everlasting promise, and eternal decree, to be
executed upon all States to the end of the world: And as he did execute it upon
Ahab, and his posterity, and upon Jezebel his wife, for the unjust taking laway
of the blood of Naboth, as you may read, 1 Kings 21. chap. 2 Kings 9. chap.
concerning Jehoram and Iezebel: and in diverse other instances evidenced unto us
by the holy Scriptures. That which Samuel said unto Agag, King of the
Amalekites, As thy sword has made other women childlesse; so shall thy mother
be childlesse among other women; has a perpetual moral use in Gods justice.
For we may find a thousand examples where those Princes, or States, which have
sold the blood of their people at a low rate; have made but the market for
their enemies to buy of theirs at the same price. For it was never yet seen,
that those that dipped their hands in innocent blood, went dry to their graves;
the blood that is unjustly spilt being not again gathered up from the ground by
repetance. These medicines ministered to the dead, have but dead rewards. Now as
the Laws concerning life, or proceedings therein, ought not to be Arbitrary;
much more concerning liberty. For that the laws that concern the liberty of the
subject, in respect of their object, which is the whole body of the people, are
far more large then those which concern life: which laws are only relative to
offenders, and guilty persons, and not directly to the whole people; and
therefore with the more tender regard to the subject, to be executed. Wherefore
all manner of proceedings whatsoever, which are Arbitrary, and that tend to the
taking away of our liberty, are most dangerous and destructive to the State
where such are put in execution. For Governors of Co^mon-wealths ought to know
this, That at the same instant they begin to break the Laws, and to execute an
Arbitrary power upon the peoples liberties; at that very instant they begin to
lose their State. For by so doing, the Governors draw the Odium of the people
upon them: and incite the people to find out and invent ways unusual, and of
innovation, to free themselves from their oppressors, and the execution of such
tyrannical power. It is a most sure Rule in State policy, That all the Laws
that are made infavour of liberty, spring first from the disagreement of the
people with their Governors. Whosoever therefore sits at the Helm of a State,
be it either a Commonwealth, or Principality; should consider before they
execute any Arbitrary power upon the peoples liberties, what contrary times, by
the ill effects of it, may come upon them; and what men in their troubles they
may stand in need of: and therefore should live with them always in such
manner, that upon any accident chancing; they may find them ready and willing
to serve their occasions. For in a Commonwealth well governed, it is to be
desired, That nothing should chance, which may call in the use of extraordinary
courses. For though an extraordinary way, in some particular case, do good;
yet the example proves of ill consequence, and will stir the peoples minds to
Jealousy and Commotions; especially when it concerns the public liberty,
and with that deep impression, that having once freed themselves from the
oppression of their Governors; it commonly falls out, that the State
determines with the lives of the Governors. For the people bite more fiercely
after they have recovered their liberty, then whlle they have continually
maintained it: And having once gotten possession of their ancient rights, they
will watch them so carefully, and with such strength and vigor, as that they
will hardly be surprised again, or their rights any more wrested from them. As
it fell out in the case of the Roman State, when the Romans having freed
themselves of the government of the Tarquins, their hertditary Kings; the
Nobility began to take upon the the rule of the people: and by the exercise of
the like or greater tyrany the the Tarquins had done; the people being enforced
by a necessity of their preservations; created Tribunes, as Guardians of the
public liberty, whereby the insolence and Arbitrary power of the Nobilty, was
restrained, and the people re-estated in their ancient liberty: which continued
inviolable to them for the space of 800. years (after 300. years oppression
of the Nobility,) to the great honor and renown of their Nation, and exceeding
enlargement of their Commonwealth. Now as concerning the liberty which the
people of this Commonwealth, do, and of right both divine and humane, ought
to challenge; it consists of these particulars following, Liberty of conscience
in matters of Faith, and Divine worship; Liberty of the Person, and liberty of
Estate: which consists properly in the propriety of their goods, and a
disposing power of their possessions. As touching liberty of Conscience, it is
due of Divine right to the people of God; since that the conscience is a Divine
impression, or illumination, in the soul of man, which God instills into the
heart by faith, whereby man is instructed to worship him in Spirit and Truth:
and it is (as it were) the engraven Character of the mind and will of God in the
soul of man; not passive, nor consisting of bodily substance: therefore it is
not to be constrained, or enforced to submit to any other rule, then what the
Creator, by his revealed will, according to the Scriptures, has imprinted in
it: And for that cause is only to be accountable to him, whose image it is;
as being the only competent Judge of his own will. As touching the liberty of
our persons: That is founded not only in Divine Law, but in Nature ulso; and
as protected by the municipicall and known Laws of this Kingdom. For as God
created every man free in Adam: so by nature are all alike freemen born; and
are since made free in grace by Christ: no guilt of the parent being of
sufficiency to deprive the child of this freedom. And although there was that
wicked and unchristian-like custom of villainy introduced by the Norman
Conqueror; yet was it but a violent usurpation upon the Law of our Creation,
Nature, and the ancient Laws of this Kingdom: and is now, since the clearer
light of the Gospel has shined forth, by a necessary harmony of humane
society; quite abolished, as a thing odious both to God and man in this our
Christian Commonwealth. Now that the liberty of men's persons has ever been a
thing most precious in the eyes of our Ancestors and right dear and of most
tender regard in the consideration and protection of the Law, if we do but
consider the original Laws of this Realm, the proceedings of our Ancestors,
in the Acquisition and defense of their just liberties, and the continual
vigilance of them in making and ordaining good Laws for their necessary
preservation; we shall easily find that there has not been any earthly thing
or more weighty and important care to them, then the preservation of their
Liberties. To prove this, Andrew Horn, a learned man in the ancient Laws of
this Kingdom, in his Book called, The Marrow of Justice, written in the
reign of King Edward the first, fol. 1. says, That after God had abated the
Nobility of the Brittons, he did deliver the Realm to men more humble and
simple, of the Countries adjoining, to wit, the Saxons, which came from the
parts of Almaigne, to conquer this Land: of which men, there were forty
Sovereigns, which did rule as Companions; and those Princes did call this
Realm England, which before was named, The Greater Britain. These, after
great wars, tribulations, and pains, by long time suffered; did choose
amongst them, a King to reign over them, to govern the people of God, and to
maintain and defend their persons, and their goods in quiet, by the Rules of
Right, and at the beginning they did cause him to swear to maintain the holy
Christian Faith, and to guide his people by right, with all his power, without
respect of persons, and to observe the Laws. And after, when the Kingdom was
turned into an Heritage; King Alfred, that governed this Kingdom about 174.
years before the Conquest, did cause the great men of the Kingdom to assemble
at London, and there did ordain for a perpetual usage, That twice in the
year, or oftener, if need should be, in time of peace; they should assemble at
London in Parliament, for the government of Gods people, that men might live in
quiet, and receive right, by certain usages, and holy judgments. In which
Parliament (faith our Author) the rights and prerogatives of the Kings, and of
the Subjects, are distinguished, and set apart, and particularly by him
expressed, too tedious here to insert. Amongst which Ordinances, we find, That
no man should be imprisoned but for a capital offense. And if a man should
detain another in prison by color of right, (where there was none) till the
party imprisoned died; he that kept him in prison should be held guilty of
murder, as you may read page 33. And page 36. he is declared guilty of
homicide, by whom a man shall die in prison, whether it be the Judges that
shall too long delay to do a man right, or by cruelty of Goalers, or suffering
him to die of Famine: Or when a man that is adjudged to do penance, shall be
surcharged by his Jailer, with Irons, or other pain, whereby he is deprived of
his life. And page 140. That by the ancient Law of England, it was Felony to
detain a man in prison after sufficient Bail offered, where the party was
plevisable. Every person was plevisable, but he that was appealed of Treason,
Murder, Robbery, or Burglary, page 35. None ought to be put in the common
prison, but only such at were ATTAINTED, or principally APPEALED, or INDICTED
of some capital offense, or ATTAINTED of false and wrongful imprisonment. So
tender has the ancient Laws and Constitutions of this Realm been of the
liberty of their Subjects persons; That no man ought to be imprisoned but for a
Capital offense, as Treason, Murder, Robbery, or Burglary. And, if for these
offenses; yet ought he to be let to Bail: which to deny, were felony, in case
the prisoner were plevisable, which is, if he were not appealed, indicted, or
attainted. Nay, you see it was Felony to detain a man in prison by color of
right, when there was none. Neitherwas the law tender of the persons of
Innocents, and bailable persons only; but also of the persons of men not
plevisable and indicted: insomuch that they ought not to be oppressed by their
Judges or Goalers, upon pain of Felony. This caused our Author to complain in
the time of King Edward the first, that those good Laws were (...): in these
words, It is an abuse that Goalers are suffered to spoil and oppress their
prisoners, or to take ought from them, save their Armor and Weapons. Nu. 52.
It is an abusion that prisoners are put in Irons, or to other pain, before they
are attainted of Felony. Nu. 5. It is an abusion to imprison any other man then
he that is indicted or appealed of Felony, in case he want not pledges, or
mainpernours, page 289 And that this was the Law; is very clear: for that King
Alfred did cause Forty four Justices in one year to be hanged for breach of
these Laws. And more particularly the Suitors of Cirencester, for that they
did detain a man so long in prison (that offered to acquit himself) that he
died there, as you may find, page 301. whereby you may clearly perceive, that
the Liberties of the Subjects of England, as touching their persons, are not
grounded merely upon Magna Charta, but are of a more ancient foundation, even
in the original Laws of the Nation: the Statute of Magna Charta being only a
Declaration, or Confirmation of those former Laws which by Divine right, and
Nature, we inherit. As Sir Edward Cook in his Proeme to the second part of his
Institutes, observes, These Laws were gathered and observed amongst others in
an entire volume by King EDWARD the Confessor. And though that William the
Conqueror came in by the Sword; yet at the petition of the Lords and Commons
of this Realm, he confirmed these Laws unto us for the sake of King Edward,
that devised unto him the Kingdom; as witness Matthew. Paris, and William of
Malmesbury, which were afterward confirmed by King Henry the first, and
enlarged by Henry the second in his Constitutions, made at Clarendon: and after
much blood spent between King John and his Barons, concerning them;
re-established at Running Mead, near Stanes: and lastly, brought to a full
growth, and made public by King Henry the third, in the ninth year of his
reign, though he sought afterward to avoid both that of his father King John,
upon pretense of dures of imprisonment, and his own by nonage; Yet
nevertheless, God so ordaining, in the 20. year of his reign he did confirm
and complete the said Charter for a perpetual establishment of liberty to all
freeborn Englishmen, and their heirs for ever: ordaining, Quod contravenientes
per Dominuns Regem, cum convicti fuerint, graviter puniantur. Which is, that
those that went against these laws, when they were convicted; should be
grievously punished by our Lord the King. And in the 52. year of his reign by
the Stat. of Marleb. c. 5. this Charter was confirmed by Act of Parliament: and
has since been not less then 33. times confirmed and established, and
commanded to be put in execution, by several Parliaments since held.

This Charter of our Liberties, or Freemans Birthright, that cost so much
blood of our Ancestors, and was so long in the Forge before it could be
fashioned: being no less then 200. years under persecution, before it was
brought to perfection; is that brazen wall, and impregnable Bulwark that
defends the Common liberty of England from all illegal and destructive
Arbitrary Power whatsoever, be it either by Prince or State endeavored. And
because it imports us so much; we shall recite the words of this Charter, as to
our present purpose of the vindication of our liberties both of persons and
estates. And first, chapter 14. it runs thus, A Freeman shall not be amerced for a
small fault; but after the manner of the fault: and for a great fault, after
the greatness thereof; saving to him his contentment: and a Merchant; saving
to him likewise, his Merehandise. And none of the said amercements shall be
assessed but by oath of honest and lawful men of the vicinage. This part of the
charter was made in affirmance of the Common Law; as appears by Glanvil, l. 9.
c. 11. where he uses these words, Est autem miserico dia domini Regis qua quio
per juramentum legalium hominum de vicineto, eatenus amerciandus est, ne quis
de suo honorabili contenemento amittet. In English thus, The amercements, or
mercy of the King, ought to be such, whereby a man is to be amerced by the oath
of lawful men of the neighborhood, or County, in such manner, that he may not
lose any thing of that countenance or subsistence, together with and by reason
of his Freehold: For so is the sense of the word taken in the Statute of 1.
Edw. 3. cap. 4. and vet. n. Br. fol. 11. The Armor and weapons, and profession
of a Soldier, is his countenance: And the books; of a Scholar. So Sir Edward
Cook. 2. part of Instit. page 28. Amercements ought to be assessed by the
equals of him that is amerced. So is the express Book of 7. H. 6. fo. 12. in
Dett. Fitz. Herbert, Not. Brev. fol. 73. And in case where a man is amerced; he
ought not to be imprisoned: as appears 11. H. 4. fol. 55. The intent of which
clause of the Great Charter, is, That no man should be tried but by his Equals;
as more fully appears, cap. 29. where it is thus enacted, No Freeman shall be
taken or imprisoned, or disseised of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free
Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise destroyed: nor we will
not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his PEERS,
or by the law of the land.

In these few words lies conched the liberty of the whole English Nation. This
word, liber Homo, or free Man, extends to all manner of English people; as
appears Stamf. Pl. Coron. page 152. In these words of this Charter before
recited, there are these 6. particulars:

First, That no man shall be taken, or imprisoned, but by the law of the land.
Secondly, That no man shall be disseised, dispossessed, (sequestered) or put out
of his Freehold: that is, lands or livelihood, liberties, or free Customs;
but by the Law of the Land. Thirdly, No man shall be Outlawed, but by the Law
of the Land. Fourthly, No man shall be exiled, but according to the Law of the
Land. Fifthly, That no man shall be in any sort destroyed, unless it be by
the law of the land. Sixthly, No man shall be condemned, but by a lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the law of the land.
Where first it is to be noted, that these words, By lawful judgment of his
Peers, or By the law of the land; are Synonyma's, or words of equal
signification: and that the law of the land, and lawful judgment of Peers;
are the proprium quarto modo, or essential qualities of this Chapter of our
great Charter, being communicable omni soli and semper, to all and every clause
thereof alike. Therefore we are to examine, declare, and publish to the world,
what this Legale judicium, or Lexterrae, this lawful judgment, or law of the
land, is, and has always been taken to be: That the Freeborn subjects of
this Kingdom, may not dwell in the shade; but that they may be able to
understand them with clearness and perspicuity, and to demand them with force
and vigor, as our Ancestors in times of old, have in like case done; To make a
clear demonstration whereof, we will follow the order of the six Particulars
before mentioned, to be emergent out of this Charter of our liberties. And
first touching our caption and imprisonment, Nullus liber homo capiatur aut
imprisonetur, nisi per legale judicium Parium suorum, vel per legem terrae. Let
no freeman of England (which is every man born in the Realm) be taken or
imprisoned, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or the law of the land.
This is the context of this clause: Every Arrest, or Attachment, is comprised
within it. See Cook. 2. part. Instit. page 46. What the Law was before the
making of this Law; we have in part declared already: we shall only add this,
That imprisonment without lawful cause, was so odious, that among the laws of
King Alfred, cap. 31. we find this, Qui immerentem Pagaum vinculis
constrinxerit december solidis noxam sarcito: If a man should unjustly imprison a
Pagan, or a Heathen man; he should redeem his offense with the payment of ten
shillings (no small sum in those days.) This is a perfect badge of liberty
by our laws. Let us now examine what it has been since, by the Stat. of 25.
E. 3. cap. 4. It is ordained, That none from henceforth shall be taken by
petition or suggestion made to our Lord the King, or to his Counsel: unless
it be by Indictment, or Presentment of his good and lawful people of the same
neighborhood, where such deeds, be done; in due manmanner: By the Stat. of 25.
E. 3. cap. 3. No man shall be imprisoned, without being brought to answer by
due process of law. By the Stat. of 4^. E. 3. c. 3. It is accorded for the
good Governance of the Commons, That no man be put to answer, without
presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by due Process, or Writ
Original, according to the old law of the land. And if any thing from
henceforth be done contrary; it shall be void in law, and holden for error.

We need not cite the Petition of Right, or other Acts of Parliament mentioned
in our former Treatise for vindication of Liberty, against Slavery: Let us now
examine the Responsa prudentu^ upon these Statutes, and the Judgments given by
those Sages, 45. Ass. Plea. 5. Fitzherbert Title Assise, nu. 346. we find that
the Bayliffe of Chensford in Essex, was indicted before Knevet and Thorp, by
virtue of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for imprisoning a man, and taking
his goods by virtue of a Commission out of Chauncery, which he pleaded in his
justification: The resolution was, That the Commission and imprisonment were
against law, to take a man and his goods, without indictment, or suit of the
party, or other due process of law. 33. E. 3. Fitzh. title Trespass, 253. It
is declared for Law, That the Command of the Lord is not a sufficient warrant
to one to take his villeine without due process of law. May 16. H. 6. Fitz.
Monstrans de faites, nu. 182. It is declared for Law, That if the King command
a man to arrest one, and the party does it in his presence; the arrest is
unlawful, and the party arested may have his action of false imprisonment. 24.
E. 3. fo. 9. Be. faux Imprisonment. 9. You may find that a Commission was
directed to men to take diverse notorious Felons before they were indicted, and
this Commission was adjudged void in Law.

We need not mention the resolution of the Judges in this point of Liberty, you
may find it reported by Sir E. Cook in his Reports, 9. Ja. f. 66. There are a
thousand cases more cited in our books of law, to prove this undeniable truth:
out of which we only cited these, to inform the free Subjects of England, That
neither the King by his command or commission, nor his Council, nor the Lord
of a Villayne, can or could imprison, arrest, or attach any man without due
process of law, or by legal judgment, and law of the land, against the form
of our defensive Charter of Liberty, no not a Pagan or Heathen could be
unjustly imprisoned or arrested without due process of Law. But to discourse
here the manifold imprisonments of the freeborn people of this Kingdom,
contrary to their Birthright, this Free Charter, and contrary to the known
laws of this Realm: or to show forth all the illegal process, whereby men
are now adays arrested, attached, or imprisoned, contrary to this Charter, and
the laws before recited: as Latitats, Capiats pro debito, Attachments, and
Messengers; would be infinite, and require a volume Which is worth the making.
by it self. Only thus far we may be bold to demand, by what Law, Statute, or
other legal power, the Committee of Examinations, Committees of Excise and
Sequestrations,; nay, all Committees: nay more, their Sub Committees take upon
them to commit to prison: nay, without Bail or Mainprise, the freeborn
Subjects of this Kingdom, without lawful process, trial, or conviction, and
most manifestly against the law of the land? For if those whom we have elected
to sit at the Helm of the government for us, as our Trustees, for preservation
of our Liberties, be (by right of their places) Judges; we are sure they cannot
depute their Authorities. For a Judge cannot delegate his power to another, nor
make a Deputy to judge for him; And this appears by the Books of 2. H. 6. f.
37. 9. E. 4. f. 31. 41. 10. E. 4. f. 15. 11. E. 4. f. 1. I am sure we have not
sent them thither, and given them the places of their trust to Them and their
Assigns: therefore their Committees, or Assignees, cannot execute their
Judicial power: which as to the matter of imprisonment, is one and the
chiefest of their Judicial powers, so it be according to due process of Law.
But we will not wrong these Noble Patriots, the Commons of England, whom we
have chosen to be the Guardians of our Liberties; either to suspect them not to
be our competent Judges, and Judges of Record too, or that they intend to
commit our liberties to their committing Commities; since that by deputing such
Committes, and investing them with their own powers; it argues the givers
rather to be Ministerial then Judicial Officers.

We come now to the second particular, which is, That no man shall be desseised
of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free customs, but by lawful judgment of
his Peers, or by the law of the land.

We need not insist long upon this particular, it being so plain and clear in
it self; Only we will remember that which that learned Father in the Law,
Sir Edward Cook. 2. part. Instit. page 46. says upon this clause, viz. Hereby
is intended, that Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, shell not be seized
contrary to this great Charter, and the Law of the Land. Nor any man shall be
disseised of his Lands or Tenements, or dispossessed of his goods or chattels,
contrary to to the law of the land. We may safely add, That neither King nor
State ought to seize, sequester, plunder, or take away any man's goods,
chattels, trade, lawful calling or office; before the party be lawfully
indicted or convicted of an offense by due process of Law, trial of Jury, and
lawful Judgment, by the law of the land. Neither ought any man to be
disseised, or put out of his Lands, Tenements, or Freehold, by suggestion, or
petition to the King, or his Council, unless it be by presentment or
indictment of his good and lawful people of the neighborhood. That thisis as
clear as the Sun at noonday; Read these three Statutes of 5. E. 3. cap. 9. 25.
E. 3. c. 4. 28. E. 3. c. 3. And the books of 43. Ass. Pl. 21. These refer to
sequestring, seizing, or desseising rather, of Lands, Tenements, and Freehold
of the free subjects of England. For the defense of our goods, not only this
great Charter, but also the Book of 43. E. 3. fo. 24. 32. 44. Ass. Pl. 14. 26.
Ass. Pl. 32. 7. H. 4. fol. 47. Cook. 1. Reports. fol. 171. 8. Reports. fol.
125. Case of London: Where the case was, K. H. 6. granted to the Corporation of
Dyers within London, power to search, etc. And if they found any cloth died
with Logwood; that the cloth should be forfeit. And it was adjudged in Trin.
41. Eliz. in this case, That this Charter for seizing of such cloth, was
against the Law of the land, and this great Charter; because no man ought to
have his goods taken away from him, before conviction. Nay, if he were accused
or indicted of Felony or Treason; yet his goods ought not to be seized upon,
or taken away from him, before he be attainted or convicted, according to the
Law of England, upon pain to forfeit the double value; as appears by the
Statute of 1. R. 3. And although Treason is not mentioned within that Statute,
but Felony only; yet Sir Edward Cook. Instit. part. 3. fol. 228. says, that
Regularly the goods of any Delinquent cannot be taken and seized, before the
same be forfeited. Neither is this a new opinion; but, the law ever was, and
still is so, as Bracton l. 3. fol. 136. witnesses in these words, Qui pro
crimine, vel felonia magna, sicut pro morte hominis captus fuerit, and
imprisonatus, vel sub custodia detentus; non debet spoliari bonis suis, nec de
terris suis disseisiri: sed debet inde sustentari donec de crimine sibi
imposito se defenderit, vel convictus fuerit, quia ante convictionem nihil
forisfacit. Et si quis contra hoc secerit, fiat Vic. tale brev. Rex Vic.
salute, Scias quod provisum est in Curia nostra coram nobis, quod nullus homo
captus pro morte hominis, vel alia felonia pro qua debeat imprisonari,
disseiseatur de terris, tenementis, vel catallis suis, quousque convictus
fuerit de felonia de qua indictus est, etc. In English thus, Where any man for
a crime, or great felony, as, for murder; shall be taken and imprisoned, or
detained under custody, he ought not to be spoiled of his goods, nor disseised
of his lands; but ought to be maintained of the same, until he shall acquit
himself of the crime charged upon him, or shall be convicted thereof, because,
Before conviction he shall forfeit nothing. And if any man shall do contrary
to this course; let there be made out to the Sheriff, such a Writ following,
THE KING to the Sheriff, greeting, Know thou, that it is provided in our Court
before us, that no man taken for the death of a man, or other felony, for which
he ought to be imprisoned; ought to be disseised of his Lands, Tenements, or
Chattels, until he shall be convicted of the Felony, whereof he is indicted,
etc. In which words, Qui pro crimine, Sir Edw. Cook is of opinion, that Treason
is included, as also, Quia ante convictionem. And that the Act of Magna Charta,
c. 29. extends to treason as well as to Felony, or other Delinquency. The Writ
aforementioned, you may find in the Register among the Original Writs. By all
which Statutes and Book-Cases, and a thousand more testimonies to be produced;
it is more then clear, That neither, Sequestration, Seizure, nor taking or
spoiling a man of his lands, or goods; ought to be: till he be lawfully
indicted and convicted by trial of his equals, according to the law of the
land.

But we have done with this particular: we come now to the next, which is the
third, and that is, No man ought to be outlawed, by the Law of the Land.

This word Outlary signifies, The putting of a man out of the protection of
the Law, either in Criminal or Civil causes; and it is of two kinds, Legal
and Illegal. A legal outlary is, when the party is duly indicted, or summoned
to appear and makes default at the return of the Writ of Summons, and then by
due process of Law is pronounced an Outlaw in the County Court, by the
Coroners of the County where he does inhabit. Which proceeding is according to
the law of the land, because it is done by his Equals. And if he be duly
outlawed of Treason, Murder, or Felony; it is a conviction in law till he
appear, and plead to the indictment, and pray his Writ of error, to reverse the
outlary: which ought to be allowed him upon his appearance. Illegal Outlaries
in Civil Causes, are, where men are not duly summoned, and a false Return made
by the Sheriff: whereby process of Law is unduly awarded against him, till he
be outlawed. In both which cases he forfeits his goods and chattels, and the
profits of his lands, till the outlary be reversed. There are other sorts of
illegal outlaries in effect; which are, putting men out of protection of the
law: which are unlawful prohibitions and injunctions: whereby men are enjoined
and stayed from prosecuting their rights, suits, or actions in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Justice: Or, when men under any pretense of incapacity by
delinquency, are not permitted to sue, or have right denied them by any Judges
or Justices; these are in effect outlaries: For every Outlary carries with it
an incapacity to sue for a man's right or for wrong done in any personal or mixed
action. As Littleton in his chapter of Villenage, affirms; and as you may find
2. and 3 Ph. and Mar. Dier. 114. 115. Now it is all one to be put out of
protection of the law, and not to be permitted to sue for a man's right, or to
be stayed by injunction or pronibition, so that a man cannot proceed. All
which causes are illegal, and contrary to this clause of the great Charter:
For every man ought to be permitted to go to trial, judgment, and execution
in his cause, according to the course of the law of the land. And if he fail
in his suit, he shall pay costs, and be amerced, pro falso clamore. Which
amencement ought to be reasonable, and salvo contenemento, that he be not
destroyed, as is before declared. Which payment of destruction, is the fourth
particular, and now comes to be handled. The words of the great Charter, are,

That no man shall be any way destroyed, but by judgment of his equals, or
according to the law of the land.

This word destruere amongst the Grammarians, est idem quod penitus evertere
and diruere, to destroy is all one, as utterly to overthrow and demolish: To
destroy a man is to forejudge a man of life, limb, or liberty, to dis-herit, to
put to torture or death, any man without lawful trial, due preparation to his
defense, or by SURREPTITIOUS JUDGMENT. All which are contrary to the law of
the land. It is the Genus of all the former particulars, it is the most
pernicious extent of all arbitrary power, there have been to many examples of
it, Thomas Earl of Lancaster in the 14. E. 2. was destroyed; that is, adjudged
to dye as a Traitor without lawful try all of his Peers. And afterward, Henry
Earl of Lancaster his brother was restored:

First, because that he was not arraigned and put to answer.

Secondly, because, that contrary to this Charter of Liberties, the said Thomas
being one of the Peers of the Realm; without answer, or lawful judgment of his
Peers he was put to death: Such like proceedings were had in the case of John
of Gaunt, as appears P. 39. Coram Rege, and in the E. of Aruudels case Rot.
Par. 4. E. 3. Nu. 13. and in Sir John Alees case, 4. E. 3. Nu. 2. Such was the
destruction committed upon the Lord Hastings in the Tower of London, by K.
Richard the 3. who swear he would not dye, before he saw his head off; and
thereupon caused him to be executed without trial, answer, or lawful
conviction: such was the destruction of the Lord Rivers, and many other of sad
remembrance: but above all that Attainder of Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essen, who
was attainted of high Treason, as appears, Rot. Part. 32. H. 8. being committed
to the Tower of London, and forthcoming to be heard, and yet never called to
answer in any of the Houses of Parliament, they sitting: which we hope shall
never be more drawn into president, but wish with a clearned sage in the Law,
Quod auferat oblivio si potest, si non, utcunque silentium tegat, which is; let
oblivion take away the memory of so foul a fact, if it can: if it cannot, let
silence cover it: For, the more high and honorable the Court is, the more just
and honorable it ought to be in the proceeding, and to give example of Justice
to inferior Courts; for these destructores subditorum dom. Regis, the
destroyers of the freeborn people of the Kingdom, were ever-odious and hateful
to the subject, and severe pains appointed for them, as appears by the Statute
of Kenelworth, Par. 16. and by the old Statute of Rag-man; and that this kind
of destroying the Kings people, is utterly against the Law of the Land, is most
evident; not only by the great Charter, but also by the Statute of 5. c. 3. c.
9. and 28. E. 3. c. 3. aforementioned, and by the ancient Laws of the Land;
as appears by Horn, in his Mirror of Justice, c, 2. sect. 3.

We proceed now to Exile, which is the fifth particular: The great Charter runs
thus; No man shall be exiled, but by the Law of the Land. Exile or banishment
is of two sorts: The one, a voluntary, which is at the Common Law; and that is,
when a man would abjure the Realm for a Felony committed by him, having taken
sanctuary to avoid the punishment of death, choosing rather perpetual
banishment then to put himself to the hazard of his life, by a legal trial
for his offense, as Stamf. Pl. Cor. p. 117.

The other is, when a man is enforced to banishment, which is only legally done
by Act of Parliament; as appears by the Statute of Westrn. 1. cap. 20, 35. El.
c. 1. and 39. El. c. 4. and by that Judgment or Statute of banishment made of
the two Spencers, 15. E. 2. called Exilium Hugonis le-Despencer, patris and
filii: for, though there was an Order or Ordinance made in the Lords house,
Anno 6. E. 3. Nu. 6. That such learned men in the Law, as should be sent as
Justices, or otherwise, to serve in Ireland, should have no excuse: yet says
Sir Edw. Cook, 2. part. Instit. p. 48. That Order or Ordinance being no Act of
Parliament, it did not bind the subject; so that we that are the freeborn
subjects of England, cannot at this day be enforced or compelled to depart the
Realm, or be exiled or banished from our native Country, but by Act of
Parliament;

And from this, we pass to examine what is to be esteemed a lawful Judgment
of our Peers, and what is here in this Charter, meant by the Law of the Land.

This Great Charter was penned in Latin; the words are thus: Nec super eum
ibimus, nec super eummittemus, nisi per legale judicium Parium suorum, which
are more emphatically in the Latin, then in our English Translations of this
Charter: for the Translations render it, We will not pass upon, nor condemn
any man, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land:
whereas the words in the Latin import, That the King shall not in his own
person, when he is personally present in his high Court of Parliament, or any
other of his Courts of Justice; cause any man to be otherwise tried or
condemned, then by lawful judgment of his Peers, or the law of the Land, nec
super eum mittemus, that is, That no Judges, Commissioners, or Justices of the
King, shall by force of any Writ, or Commission from the King, under the Great
Seal, in his absence, arraign, try, or condemn any man, but by the lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the law of the Land.

Now this legale judicium parium suorum, or lawful judgment of a man's Peers,
is, and has always had a twofold construction in law; the one is, When a
Lord of the Parliament has committed treason or felony, or other capital
offense, whereby he is indictable at the Kings Suite; there he by virtue of
this Charter ought to be tried by his Peers, that is, such as are Lords of
Parliament, that sit there, by reason of their Nobility: for no Nobleman that
is not a Lord of the Parliament, or any other that sits in the Lords house by
Writ, Et non ratione nobiliatis; can be a tryer of a Lord of the Parliament, or
challenge this privilege of trial in case of Treason, Felony, or other
capital offense: But a Nobleman of the Parliament shall not have this
privilege, either upon an Indictment of Praemunire, or upon an Appeal of
Felony, at the suit of the party, or in any Civill-Action, either concerning
the right of Lands, or of other Possessions, or in any personal Action,
brought by a Common-person, against a Lord of the Parliament, as appears unto
us by the Books of 1. H. 4. f. 1 13. H. 8. f. 12. 10. E. 4. fol. 6.

This trial of Noblemen by their Peers at the Kings Suit; is not upon Oath as
in the case of common persons: for the Peers are not sworn before the Lord
Steward, before whom this trial must be had: but they are to be charged by
the Lord Steward, super fidelitatibus and ligeantiis Dom. Regi debitis; that
is, upon their faith and allegiance due to the King; and if they acquit the
Peer or Nobleman, upon whom they pass; the Entry is, Willelmus Comes E. and
cateri Antedicti pares inst^nter super fidelitatibus and ligeantiis dicto D^m.
Regi debitis per praefaru^ Senescallu^ ab inferiori usque ad supremum separatim
examinati; dicunt, quod Will. Dom. Dacre nox est Culp. and so was the Entry in
the case of the Lord Dacres 26. H. 8. Spilmans Reports, and Cooks Instit. 3.
part. p. 30. If a Nobleman be indicted of Treason, Felony, or Murder, and
cannot be found; he shall be outlawed by the Coroners of the County: and in
case of Clergy, no Nobleman shall have more privilege then a common-person,
where it is not specially provided for them by Act of Parliament; as by
Stamford pl. Cor. p. 130. is made manifest: out of all which, we gather, that a
Nobleman has this privilege of trial, as well per lege terra, as by this
Charter: and that anciently, legale judicium parium, or lawful trial of
Peers, for all manner of persons, as well Noblemen as Commons: was, vere-dictum
duodecim proborum and legalium hominum de vicineto, a verdict of 12. good and
lawful men of the Neighborhood; that is, of the Commons of England, and so
still remains saving only in this excepted case, by the Great Charter, which
shows, that there can be no legale judicium, or lawful judgment; but it must
be per legem terrae, or according to the Law of the Land, which is the other
branch of this judgment, as to the Commons of England.

Now to prove that legale judicium parium, or lawful judgment of a man's Peers
or Equals, is by verdict of 12. men, and not otherwise: for the word Peers
vinvocally signifies both. Let us consult both the judgment of Parliaments in
this point, and the fundamental laws of the Land:

And first, for the opinions of Parliaments in this point, we find, that by
the statute of 25. E. 3. c. 4. None shall be taken by petition or suggestion,
made to our Lord the King, or to his Council; unless it be by indictment or
presentment, of his good and lawful people of the same neighborhood 42. E.
3. c. 3. It is assented, and accorded, for the good governance of the Commons,
that no man be put to answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of
Record, or by due process and Writ, original, according to the old law of the
Land; and if any thing be done from henceforth contrary, it shall be void in
law, and holden for error; and to say one word for all: there are above 50
statutes now in print, and in force, that warrant this trial, or legale
judicium parium suorum, or trial by a man's Equals or Peers, made since the
Great Charter in several cases: the citing of which statutes; for prolixity we
avoid: And that this manner of trial was the old law of the Land, we are here
to make it appear; that this manner of trial, is according to the law of the
Land, and that there is none other: wherein we are to observe this distinction,
that this legale judicium, or lawful judgment, is twofold: The one is of the
matter of Fact: The other is of matter of Law; That which is of matter of Fact,
is to be tried, per legale indicium parium, or a lawful trial of a man's
Peers: That which is of matter of Law, is to be tried by the Judges, or
Justices of the Land, authorized thereunto by the Kings lawful Commissions: To
prove, that there is no other lawful Judgment of our Peers or Equals,

As touchiug the matter of Fact, we are to examine the foundation of this
Commonwealth, and the original constitutions thereof: We find that King
Alfred having reduced this Kingdom of England into an Entire-Monarchy divided
it into 38. Counties, and each County into several Hundred and Manors: The
Counties were put under the government of Earls, who substituted under them
Viscounts or Sheriffs, for the quiet government of the people, the Hundreds
and Manors subordinately under the several Lords of them.

The Sheriffs had two Courts; to wit, the Sheriffes-Tourn, and the
County Court: The first, for offenses against the peace of the Land: The
latter, for entry and determination of civill-causes, between party and party.

In the first indictment, or presentment of offenses was made per-Enquest; that
is, by Juries.

In the second, the Free-suiters; that is, men of the neighbor-hood. The like
was done in the leets or viewes of Frankepledge, and Hundred-Courts in the
Hundreds. The like proceedings was in the Leets, and Court-Barons of Manors in
those Courts. There was no condemnation or judgment given, but by the Inquiry
of good and lawful men of the neighbor-hood.

This every book of the Law tells us; for more particular satisfaction, read
Horn, f. 8. and fore-ward. These Courts were formed after the model of the
greater Courts of the Realm, the King's Bench, and Common Pleas, where greater
jurisdiction was, as to the matter to be enquired of; but no variation
originally in the manner of proceeding; only the jurisdiction of the Court of
King's Bench, and Common Pleas, in trials of actions, ad dampnum 40. s. flowed
over the whole Kingdom. The other Courts were confined to their several
limits, and might not exceed 40. s. damages: these were the original Courts of
the Kingdom: and the legale judicium parium, or lawful judgment of Peers, was
only trial by Jury of Equals, before this great Charter: From which trials,
this clause is inserted into it, and by an inviolable right of law continues in
force, even to this day, as every free subject of England by experience knows;
and as every book of our law proves into us, the verdict of the Jury in
criminal causes, being the judgment of Attainder, and in civil causes a
condemnation as Stamford, pl. Cor. p 44. and ali other books prove; And to
leave every man without scruple in this particular; we find by the statute of
Westminster. the 1. c. 12. That in case of Felony, those that refuse upon their
arraignment, to put themselves upon the Enquest, shall be put to penance fort,
and dure, which is, stoned or pressed to death, because they refuse as the
statute says, to stand to the Law of the Land, And yet if the party accused
stand mute, and will not put himself upon the Enquest; the Judge ought to
examine the evidence, and to enquire by the Jury, whether he were mute of
malice, or by the Act of God, before he shall give judgment against the
Prisoner: so tender is the Law of the Land of the life of every man, that if an
Offender would wilfully cast away his life by contumacy; yet he ought not to be
condemned; but per legale judicium parium suorum, or lawful verdict of a Jury,
which is according to the Law of the Land: this appears by Stamf. pl. Cor. p.
150. a, b, c, d. Cooks Instit. p. 2. part. page 178. and so from this legale
judicium parium, or lawful judgment of Peers or Equals; we come to declare to
the freeborn subjects of England, what this lex-terrae, or Law of the Land is.

And first, we say, that this lex terrae, or law of the Land is the absolute
perfection of reason; as Sir Edw. Cook. 2. part, Instit. page 179. says.

Secondly, it is the law of England; and therefore all Commissions made to the
Judges of the Land, run thus; That they in all cases that come before them,
facturi sunt inde quod adjustitiam pertinet secundum legem and consuetudinem
Angliae, the Judges by their Commissions are to judge and act only that which
to justice belongs, according to the law of the land, and custom of England,
as. 2, part of Cooks Instit. p. 51. and daily experience tells us.

Thirdly, it consists of the lawful and reasonable usages and customs
received, and time-out-of-mind observed and approved by the people of this
Kingdom: for if a custom or usage be not lawful, it ought not to bind; Quod
ab initio vitiosum est; non potest tractu tempor is convalescere, says Vlpian,
l. 29. Course of time amends not that which was naught from the first
beginning, and in Jur. Reg. v. 2. q. 117 art. 1. non firmatur tractu tempora,
quod de jure ab initio non subsistat, That which was not grounded upon good
right, is not made good by continuance of time, and they must be reasonable
too: so is Augustines opinion, in his Book de vera Religione, cap. 31. mihilex
essenon videtur que Justa nonest; It seems (says he to me) to be no law at
all, which is not just: It must likewise be received, and approved by the
people.

Therefore, Ulpian F. de leg. 32. Leges nulla alia causa nos tenent quam quod
judicio populi receptae sunt; the laws do therefore bind the Subject, because
they are received by the judgment of the Subject, and Gratian in Dec. distinct.
4. Thum demum humane leges habent vim suam cum fuerint non modo institutae, sed
etiam firmatae approbatione Comunitatis; It is then, that humane Laws have
their strength when they shall not only be devised, but by the approbation of
the people; confirmed.

Fourthly, this law of the land consists of the ancient Constitutions, and
modern Acts of Parliament, made by the Estates of the Realm; but of these
only, such as are agreeable to the Word of God, and law of Nature: for, as
Gregory de valentia, Ex Tho. q. 93. art. 3. and q. 94. art. 34. well observes,
Humane law is a righteous Decree, agreeing with the Law natural and eternal;
and Augustine de libero Arbitrio, cap. 36. nihil justum est atque legitimum,
quod non ab aeterna lege sibi homines derivaverint: there is nothing just and
lawful, which men have not derived unto themselves from the law eternal; And
Horn, cap. 5. sect. 1. says, That torvous usages, and unjust decrees not
warrantable by Law, nor sufferable by holy Scripture; are not to be used or
obeyed: Out of all which premises, we conclude, that the Law of the Land, is
the Law of England; the perfection of reason consisting of lawful and
reasonable Customs, received and approved by the people, and of the old
Constitutions and modern Acts of Parliament, made by the Estates of the Realm,
and such only as are agreeable both to the law eternal and natural; and not
contrary, but warrantable by the Word of God, whatsoever laws usages, or
customs, are not thus quallified, are not the law of the land, nor are to be
observed or obeyed by the people, as being contrary to their Birthright, and
the freedom and liberty which by the law of God, the laws of the Land, and
this great Charter they ought to enjoy. The sum of all is, that according to
this Charter, the statute and laws aforementioned, no man ought to be taken
or imprisoned or disseized of his freehold, liberties, or free-customes: or
outlawed, or banished, or my manner of way destroyed, nor condemned, but by
lawful trial of his Peers or Equals, or by the law of the Land; that is, by
due process of Law, by presentment or indictment of good and lawful men, where
such deeds he done in due manner, or by Writ original at the Common Law,
according to the old law of the Land. Here we will answer an objection, that we
hear is made, which is, that this is an old Law, and many laws have been made
against it since it was granted, which weaken the strength of this Charter.

To this we answer, That by the Statutes of 28. E. 1. called Articuli. super
Cartas. and 25. E. 1. vet Magna Charta, fol. 137. and 37. called confirmatio
Chartarum; It is provided, That if any judgment be given against any points of
this great Charter, or the Charter of the Forest by any Justices of the King,
or other his Ministers, it shall be undone and holden for naught, and by the
statute of 42. E. 3. cap. 1. all Statutes made against Magna Charta are
repealed. True it is, we find that 11. H. 7. c. 3. by the practices of Empson,
and Dudley; there was a statute made in the face of this great Charter, whereby
many exactions and oppressions were put in practice upon the free subjects of
England, to their great trouble and vexation: but Oh! for the like justice now,
and if it were not? what would become of all our Ship Money, Judges,
monopolizing Pattentee, Merchants, and arbitrary Committeemen.
we find withal, that they were hanged that put it in execution, and in the 1.
H. 8. c. 6. That illegal Statute of 11. H. 7. was repealed, and made void, and
the cause specified to be, because it was against this Great Charter, and the
law of the Land, but to put all out of doubt. These clauses of the Great
Charter, which we have discoursed upon hitherto, are all confirmed by the
Petition of Right, in the 3. year of this King.

Now for remedy against any man that will infringe this Charter to the injury
of any freeman that ought to have benefit of it; the party grieved may have an
Action upon the great Charter against the party offending, as was brought
against the Prior of Oswin, P. 2. H. 8. Rot. 538. in Banco Regis; and we find
in the Register-Book of witnesses, fol. 64. a Writ directed to the Sheriff,
Adcapiend: impugnatores Juris Regis and ad ducendum cos, ad Gaolam de Newgate,
to apprehend the opposers of the Kings Charter, and to bring them to the Goal
of Newgate: or the party grieved may indict the Offender at the Kings Suit, for
going contra formam Magnae Chartae, whereof we find a President in Sheffields
case, Pasch. 3. H. 8. B. R. Or the party grieved may bring his Writ, de Odio
and Astutia, de homine Replegiando, or Habeas Corpus, as appears by the
Register, f. 77. and by the Statute of Wesim. 2. c. 29. and by the Statute of
Glouc. c. 9. as his case shall require.

Having thus dissected the several branches of this Great Charter, which most
eminently concern our public liberty, the birthright of the free born subjects
of England, and stated the question thereof. We will now with all due regard to
the house of Peers, examine that judgment or sentece pronounced against that
impregnable Bulwark of the common-liberty, Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn, and
the proceedings leading thereunto, by the Rules of this lawful judgment or law
of the land, mentioned in the great Charter (professing, that as we will be
tender, not willing to derogate at all from any lawful power, jurisdiction, or
privilege of that honorable house; so we will be as careful in preserving and
maintaining our liberties) swerving neither on the one side, nor on the other,
from the true narrative of the fact, nor the literal declaration of the order,
and sentence, as it has been represented unto us.

And first we shall show, out of what fountain; all the troubles of this worthy
Gentleman have sprung, (which is no other then from his fidelity, and love to
his Country) they have been all occasioned by his prosecution of Col. Edw.
King, upon certain Articles exhibited against this Colonel, to the honorable
house of Commons, in Aug. 1644. which yet hang there undetermined, and which
charge the said Colonel with disloyalty infidelity, treachery, and breach of
trust to the Parliament, to whom he was a sworn servant, and entertained in
their pay. To prevent this Gentleman's prosecution; Col. King did by undue
means cause him to be imprisoned, July 19. 1645. where being removed to
Newgate, he remained till the 14. of March 1645. upon which day, upon Mr.
Recorders motion in the house of Commons, he was enlarged, there, being
nothing objected against him, and was by Col. King afterward caused to be
arrested, April 14. 1646. as he was going to prosecute and pursue this Colonel
for the Public good, and for matters contained in those Articles, and to
follow his other business, depending in Parliament: For, Interest Reipublice,
ut puniantur rei, ne per omissionem unius, multi atrociora perpetrent slagitia,
as Cicero says.

It is profitable for the Commonwealth, that guilty persons be punished,
least by omission of the punishment of one; many men by that ill example may be
encouraged to commit more heinous offenses.

This Arrest was illegal, and a breach of privilege of Parliament to the house
of Commons, who were originally possessed, of the Cause: for, all suitors in
any Court of Justice at Westrn. ought to have the protection and privilege of
that Court, where they sue against any that shall arrest them in any other
Court for the same matters, Eundo, morando, and rediendo, which is, going
thither, staying there, and returning homeward from their prosecution; as by
27. H 6. Fitzh. pr. 4. and diverse other Books appears; and being put to plead
by this unjust provocation to that action, he wrote that letter or book to Mr.
Justice Reeve, the 6. of June, 1646. whereat the great offense is taken, and
upon which his grand charge was grounded, the proceeding was very quick; for
the 10. of June there was a Warrant directed to the Gentleman Usher attending
the Lords house, or his Deputy, from the Lords, to summon him to appear before
their Lordships: the next day being the 11. he was summoned, and the same day
he appeared before the Lords Bar; and being brought to the Bar, was asked,
whether he wrote that letter or book to Justice Reeve: (here is an
examination, ore tenus, not usual in Parliament, but frequent in Star Chamber,)
and being earnestly pressed in it; the same 11. day of June; he delivered in a
paper, containing his plea and defense; whereupon the same day he was committed
by their Lordships prisoner to Newgate, for delivering in his plea and defense,
which they in their Warrant call a scandalous and contemptuous paper, being in
truth but a recital and declaration of the Laws and Statutes of England that
made for his defense, and a declaratory of the liberties of all the Commons of
England, which by law they ought to enjoy, and by nature is their proper and
free birthright; and the 16. of the same month he presented his Petition to
the honorable house of Commons, against their Lordships proceedings, being in
the nature of an Appeal to the Commons; as his proper and only Judges.

The 22. of June, the Lords sent an Order to the Keeper of Newgate, to bring
Mr. Lilburn again to their Bar the next day; and because he refused to kneel
at their Bar, was the next day being the 23. of June committed close prisoner
to Newgate, and not permitted to have Pen, Ink, or Paper, and none to have
access to him in any kind but only his Keeper, until that Court should take
further order.

Where he remained in this condition till the Tenth day of July, 1646. which
day, Sergeant Nathaniel Finch delivered into the said house of Lords, certain
Articles, with certain Books and Papers annexed against the said
Lieutenant Colonel JOHN LILBVRN: which you have word for word here printed.
July the tenth, 1646. The Charge against Lieutenant Colonel JOHN LILBVRN, as
follows:

ARTICLES, Exhibited before the Lords in Parlia-ment assembled, by Nathanael
Finch, Knight, and one of his Majesty's Ser-geants at Law, against Lieu.
Colonel John Lilburne, for high Crimes and Misdemeanors done and committed by
him.
I.
Whereas the Right Honorable, Edward, Earl of Manchester, by the space of
diverse years last past, has been, and yet is, one of the Peers of this
Realm: And where as the said Earl was, by Ordinance of Parliament, appointed
General of diverse Forces raised by the Parliament; the said John Lilburne,
intending to scandalize and dishonor the said Earl, and to raise discord
between the said Earl, and other the subjects of this Realm: He, the said John
Lilburne, in a certain Book hereunto annexed, and by him contrived, and caused
to be printed and published, entitled, The just Man's justification: Or, A
Lettnr by way of Plea in Bar; has falsely and scandalously, in certain Passages
of the said Book, affirmed and published, concerning the said Earl of
Manchester, and his demeanor in his said Office and Employment: And touching
the complaint by the said Lilburn alleged to be made by him, and others, to
the said Earl, relating to the said Earl, as follows, Pa. 2. I complained
to the Earl of Manchester thereof, being both his General and mine. And at
the same time diverse Gentlemen of the Committee of Lincoln, as Mr, Archer, etc.
having Articles of a very high nature against him; pressed my Lord (meaning the
said Earl) to a trial of him at a Council of war: And at the very same
time, the Major, Aldermen, and Town Clerk of Boston, came to Lincoln to my Lord
(meaning the said Earl) with Articles of a superlative nature against King
their Governor; but could not get my Lord (meaning the said Earl) to let us
enjoy justice at a Council of War, according to all our expectations, and as of
right we ought to have had; which at present saved his head upon his shoulders.
And page 8. and 9. of that Book did affirm these words, viz, We could not at
all prevail: the reason of which I am not able to render; unless it were,
that his two Chaplains, Lee and Garter, prevailed with the Earl, (meaning the
said Earl of Manchesters two Chaplains, Ash and Good, to cast a Clergie-mist
over their Lords (meaning the said Earls) eyes, that he should not be able to
see any deformity in Colonel King.

II.
THe said John Lilbure within three months last past, in a certain book by
him contrived, and caused to be printed and published hereunto annexed,
entitled, The Free-mans Freedom vindicated: or, A true Relation of the cause
and manner of Lieu. Colonel John Lilburns present imprisonment in Newgate,
being thereunto arbitrarily and illegally committed by the House of Peers,
June 11. 1646. for his delivering in at their open Bar under his hand and
seal, his Protestation against their incroaching upon the common liberties of
all the Commons of England, in endeavoring to try him, a Commoner of England,
in a criminal cause, contrary to the express tenor and form of the 29 chapter
of the great Charter of England. And for making his legal and just appeal to
his competent, proper, and legal Tryers, and Judges, the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled; did falsely and scandalously, in the eighth page of that
Book, publish and affirm concerning the said Earl of Manchester, these false
and scandalous words: I clearly perceive the hand of Ioab to be in this,
namely, my old back-friend the Earl of Manchester; the fountain (as I
conceive) of all my present troubles; who would have hanged me for taking a
Castle from the Cavaliers in Yorkshire; but is so closely glu'd in in interest
to that party, that he protected from justice, Colonel King, one of his own
Officers, for his good service in treacherously delivering or betraying
Crowland to the Cavaliers, and never called, nor (that I could hear) desired
to call to account his Officer, or Officers, that basely, cowardly, and
treacherously betrayed and delivered Lincoln last up to the enemy, without
striking one stroke, or staying till so much as a Troop of Horse, or a
Trumpetter came to demand it: His Lordships head has stood, it seems, too long
upon his shoulders, that makes him he cannot be quiet, till Lieu. General
Cromwels charge against him, fully proved in the House of Commons, be revived:
which is of as high a nature, I believe, as ever any charge given in there: The
Epitomy of which I have by me; and his Lordship may live shortly to see it in
print, by my means. And the said John Lilburne in the Book and page last
mentioned, in scandal and dishonor to Henry, Earl of Stamford, a Peer of
this Kingdom, and late a Commander of Forces of the Parliament, makes this
scandalous expression concerning the said Earl of Stamford, viz. And for my
Lord of Stamford at present; I desire him to remember but one Article made at
the delivery of Exceter; which, it may be, may in time cool his furious
endeavor to inflame the free people of England.

III.
Whereas the said John Lilburne, upon the 10. day of June last past, by virtue
of the Order of the Peers assembled in this present Parliament; was brought to
the Bar of the House of Peers, then sitting in Parliament; to answer
concerning the said Book, in the said first Article mentioned: the said John
Lilburne falsely and maliciously intending to scandalize and dishonor the
Peers assembled in Parliament, and their just rights and authorities; did then
and there in contempt of the said House of Peers, at the open Bar of the
said House, the Peers then sitting in the said House in Parliament; openly
deliver a certain paper hereunto annexed under his hand and seal, entitled,
The Protestation, Plea, and Defense of Lieu. Colonel John Lilburne, given to
the Lords at their Bar, the 11. of June 1646. with his appeal to his
competent, proper and legal Tryers and Judges, the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament: (which paper is hereunto annexed,) and since caused
the same to be printed and published. In which paper, among other scandals
therein contained, he published and affirmed, concerning the Lords in
Parliament, these words following, Viz. Therefore, my Lords, you being (as you
are) called Peers, merely made by prerogative, and never entrusted of improved
by the Commons of England. And in another place thereof concerning their
Lordships, and their proceedings in Parliament; did protest and publish these
words following: I do here at your open Bar, protest against all your
present proceedings with me in this pretended criminal cause; as unjust, and
against the tenor and form of the great Charter: which all you have sworn
inviolably to observe, and caused the Commons of England to do the same: And
therefore, my Lords, I do hereby declare, and am resolved, as in duty bound to
God, my self, country, and posterity; to maintain my legal liberties to the
last drop of my blood, against all opposers whatsoever; having so often in the
field, etc. adventured my life there-for: and do from you and your Bar, as
incroachers, and usurping Judges, appeal to the Bar and Tribunal of my
competent, proper, and legal Tryers and Judges, the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament. And in pursuance of his said malicious and illegal
practice; did afterward contrive and publish a scandalous and libellous letter
hereunto likewise annexed, directed to Mr. Wollaston, Keeper of Newgate, or his
Deputy: wherein (among other things) he has caused to be inserted and
published these words concerning the Peers in Parliament, viz. Their Lordships
sitting by virtue of Prerogative-patents, and not by election or consent of the
people; have (as Magna Charta, and other good laws of the Land tell me)
nothing to do to try me, or any Commoner whatsoever, in any criminal cause,
either for life, limb, liberty, or estate: But contrary hereunto as incroachers
and usurpers upon my freedoms and liberties; they lately and illegally
endeavored to try me (a Commoner) at their Bar. For which I under my hand
and seal, protested to their faces against them as violent and illegal
incroachers upon the Rights and Liberties of me, and all the Commons of
England, (a copy of which, etc. I herewith in print send you. And at their
Bar I openly appealed to my competent, proper, legal Tryers, and Judges, the
Commons of England assembled in Parliament. For which, their Lordships did
illegally, arbitrarily, and tyrannically commit me to prison into your custody,
Which Protestation, and Papers, and matters therein contained, do falsely, and
scandalously, and maliciously, charge the Peers in Parliament, with tyranny,
usurpation, perjury, injustice, and breach of the great trust in them reposed;
and are a high breach of the Privileges of Parliament. And are high offenses
against the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, and do tend to the great
scandal of the said Peers, and the authority with which they are entrusted,
and to stir up differences between the said Peers, and other the Subjects of
this Realm.

Natha. Finch.

Upon which Articles, he refusing to hear them read, as concerning their
proceedings against him to be illegal, and that as a Commoner of England, they
had no jurisdiction over him, they proceeded to sentence him, as follows:

July 10. 1646.
IT is to be remembered, that the 10. day of July, in the 22. Year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, Sir Nath. Finch Knight, His Majesty's
Sergeant at Law, did deliver in before the Lords assembled in Parliament at
Westminster, certain Articles against Lieutenant-Colonell John Lilburn, for
high Crimes and Misdemeanors, done, and committed by him; together with
certain Books and Papers thereunto annexed: Which Articles, aad the said
Books and Papers thereunto annexed, are filed among the Records of Parliament;
The tenor of which Articles follows in these words.

Which Articles being by the command of the Lords, then, and there assembled in
Parliament, read; It was then, and there, that is to say, the said 10. day of
July, by their Lordships ordered, That the said John Lilburn be brought to the
Bar of this House, the 11. day of the said July, to answer the said Articles;
That thereupon their Lordships might proceed therein, according as to Justice
should appertain.

At which day aforesaid, the 11. day of July, Anno Dom. 1646. the said John
Lilburn according to the said Order, was brought before the Peers then
assembled, and sitting in Parliament; to answer the said Articles; And the said
John Lilburn being thereupon required by the said Peers in Parliament, to kneel
at the Bar of the said house, as is used in such Cases, and to hear his said
Charge read; to the end, that he might be enabled to make defense thereunto;

The said John Lilburn in contempt and scorn of the said high Court, did not
only refuse to kneel at the said Bar; but did also, in a contemptuous manner,
then, and there, at the open Bar of the said House, openly and
contemptuously, refuse to hear the said Articles read, and used diverse
contemptuous words in high derogation of the Justice, Dignity, and Power of the
said Court: And the said Charge being nevertheless, then, and there read, the
said John Lilburn was then and there by the said Lords assembled in Parliament,
demanded what Answer or Defense he would make thereunto; the said John Lilburn
persisting in his obstinate and contemptuous behavior, did peremptorily, and
absolutely refuse to make any Defense or Answer to the said Articles, and did
then, and there, in high contempt of the said Court, and of the Peers there
assembled, at the open Bar of the said House of Peers, affirm, that they were
Usurpers, and unrighteous Judges; and that he would not answer the said
Articles, and used diverse other insolent and contemptuous speeches against
their Lordships, and that high Court.

Whereupon the Lords assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious
consideration the said contemptuous carriage and words of the said John
Lilburn, to the great affront, and contempt of this high and honorable Court,
and the Justice, Authority, and Dignity thereof;

It is therefore this present 11. day of July, ordered and adjudged by the
Lords assembled in Parliament;

That the said John Lilburn be Fined; And the said John Lilburn by the Lords
assembled in PARLIAMENT, for his said contempt, is Fined to the Kings Majesty,
in the sum of two thousand pounds.

And it is further ordered and adjudged by the said Lords assembled in
Parliament,

That the said John Lilburn for his said contempts be, and stand committed to
the Tower of London, during the pleasure of the said House.

And further, the said Lords assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration
the said contemptuous refusal of the said John Lilburn, to make any Defense or
Answer to the said Articles; did declare,

That the said John Lilburn ought not thereby to escape the Justice of the
House; But the said Articles, and the Offenses thereby charged to have been
committed by the said John Lilburn, ought thereupon to be taken as consessed.

Wherefore the Lords assembled in Parliament, taking the premises into
consideration; and for that it appears by the said Articles,

That the said John Lilburn has not only maliciously published several
scandalous, and libellous passages of a very high nature, against the Peers of
Parliament, therein particularly named, and against the Peerage of this Realm
in general, But contrived, and contemptuously published, and openly, at the
Bar of the House delivered certain scandalous Papers, to the high contempt
and scandal, of the Dignity, Power, and Authority of this House.

All which offenses, by the peremptory refusal of the said John Lilburn, to
answer, or make any Defense to the said Articles, stands confessed by the said
Lilburn, as they are in the said Articles charged;

It is therefore, the said Day and Year last abovementioned, further ordered
and adjudged by the Lords assembled in Parliament, upon the whole matter in the
said Articles contained;

I. That the said John Lilburn be Fined to the Kings Majesty in the sum of
two thousand pounds.

II. And that he stand, and be imprisoned in the Tower of London by the space
of 7. years, now next ensuing.

III. And further, that he the said John Lilburn from henceforth stand and be
incapable to bear any Office or Place, in Military, or in Civill-Government, in
Church or Commonwealth, during his life.

Die Sabbathi 11. Julii 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament; That John Lilburn being sentenced by this
House, (shall for his high Contempt and Misdemenors done to this High Court)
according to the said Sentence stand committed to the Tower of London, for the
space of 7. Years, next after the date hereof; And that the Lieutenant of the
said Tower of London, his Deputy, or Deputies, are to keep him in safe custody
accordingly. And that he does take care, that the said Lilburn do neither
contriue, publish, or spread any seditious or libellous Pamphlets, against
both, or either of the Houses of Parliament.

To the Lieutenant of the Tower of London, his Deputy, or Deputies.
And because this Sentence was conceived not to be severe enough by the
Lieutenant of the Tower, he did procure an Order, dated Die Mercurii 15.
Julii, 1646. which follows in these words.

Die Mercurii 15. Iulii, 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That none shall speak with John
Lilburn, now a prisoner in the Tower of London, but in the presence and hearing
of his Keeper, And that when he shall desire to take the Air within the Tower,
his Keeper shall constantly go with him, forth, and back, and stay with him,
till he return to his Lodging; and that if his wife desire to come to him, she
shall reside with him, and not go in, and out, during his imprisonment in the
said Tower. And lastly, it is Ordered, That this restraint of speaking with the
said Lilburn shall be taken off, when he shall give good Bail to this House
not to contrive, write, or publish any scandalous, or libellous Pamphlets, or
Papers, against both, or either of the Houses of Parliament.

Die Mercurii 16. Septem. 1646.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That the
Lieutenaut of the Tower of London, his Deputy, and all others employed him,
shall permit and suffer the wife of Lieutenant-Colonell John Lilburn, to come
to him, and reside with him, when, and as often, as he shall desire, any former
Order of this House notwithstanding.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

We will not say their Lordships are unjust in this Sentence; yet we hope it
shall not be accounted scandal to them, if we say, and make it appear, that
they have erred therein, both in manner of proceeding, and in substance of
matter, or point of jurisdiction, both of the person and cause; for we do
presume, that their Lordships will not presume an infallibility of Judgment, it
being a quality incompatible to, or with any sublunary creatures; and we find
by our books of 21. E. 3. f 46. that a Parliament may, and has erred.

And first, we shall declare their Lordships error, in their manner of
proceeding against this worthy Patriot; wherein we shall observe, That the 10.
of June, he was summoned to attend their Lordships in their house: The 11. of
June he appeared, and was then committed by their Lordships to Newgate. The 16.
of the same month he appealed to the Right Honorable House of Commons. The
22. their Lordships sent to the Keeper of Newgate, to bring him to their Bar;
And thereupon the 43 day, he was committed close prisoner to Newgate, being
brought by the Keeper of Newgate, where he remained close prisoner till the 16,
of July: At which time, his Charge was brought into the Lords House, and not
before. Wherein, we are first to note, that he was summoned and committed a
month before his Charge brought in, and after his appeal, and for that cause,
made close prisoner 18. days before any Charge recorded against him;

All which proceedings, are erroneous, and principally in these two points.

First, because he was summoned, before his Charge was recorded: for,
regularly, both in Law and Equity, the Declaration or Bill ought to be filed or
recorded, before any Writ or Process ought to issue against the Defendant or
Party accused, either in civil or criminal causes; and the Writor Process
ought to contain the matter of the Declaration or Bill, as in a Writ of Right.
These words, Quid clamat tenere, import a Count, or Declaration recorded; so a
Writ of Warrantia Diei, contains the substance of the Count, in a
Monstraverunt, the Plaintiffs title is set forth by the Writ: Nay, in every
Writ at Common Law, the Writ does by these words, ut dicitur, or by some other
Emphaticall word contained in the body of the Writ import, that a Declaration
or Count is filed, registered, or recorded, before the Writ does issue; and this
appears clearly in every Writ, set forth by the Register, and Fitzherberts
Natura brevium; Nay, every English Bill either in Chancery, Exchequer, or
Star Chamber, does pray, that Process of Sub-paena, be awarded against the
Defendant, which proves, that process ought not to be awarded against any man
out of any Court till his charge be recorded against him in the same Court.

If this was so in the Justice of the Star Chamber in criminal causes, we hope
their Lordships will not condemn it, as an Injustice in themselves, to follow
the same Rules of Right, Reason, Law, and Equity.

Secondly, their Lordships proceedings against him, after his Appeal made to
the honorable house of Commons, were void in Law; for by the Appeal to the
proper jurisdiction, the Lords were outed of their jurisdiction, or Connusans
of the Plea, (sublata causa tollitur effectus) the Cause being removed by the
Appeal, their judgment thereby was determined, or at least suspended, being
but the effect of the cause before them, till such time as the Appeal is
determined, the Appeal being a supersedas to their Lordships further legal
proceedings in the same cause, and wherein they ought not to have proceeded
without the privity, license, and direction of the house of Commons; and
therefore all their proceedings since Mr. Lilburns Ap. peal presented to, and
accepted by the house of Commons, are Coram non judice, and therefore void and
erroneous.

We shall not deny the Lords house to be a Court of Justice, and that of Record
too, and of the highest degree in the Kingdom, cooperating with the honourablt
House of Commons: but when they are distinct, and apart in their several
operations and judgments; we do conceive, that they neither have a legislative
nor unlimitted power of judicature in themselves; neither can they proceed to
determine any thing out of the way of the known Laws, by any arbitrary, or
discretionary Rules, where there is a known Law in the case.

Sir Edw Cook does well set forth the distinct powers of Judicatures of both
houses, in his 4. part of Institutes, p. 23.

It is to be known, says he, that the Lords in their house, have power of
Judicature, and both Houses together have power of Judicature, which is thus to
be understood, That the Lords have power of Judicature over their Members
alone, viz. their Peers, the Nobility of England that sit in the Lords House.

The Commons have power of Judicature over all the Commons of England, by
themselves alone; and the Lords and Commons joining have power of Judicature
over both Peers Lords, and Commons.

That this is true, is manifest by the Lord Dacres case, p. 26, H. 8. reported
by Justice Spilman, where it was resolved, that a Nobleman of Parliament,
cannot wave his trial by his Peers, and put himself upon the trial of the
Country: for by the Statute of Magna Charta, c. 29 every man is to be tried,
per legale judicium parium suorum, by the lawful judgment of his Peers; which
Statute, gives the Lords of Parliament a jurisdiction over their Peers, which
cannot be taken from them; and as the Lords have a jurisdiction over their
Peers; so have the Commons over their Peers, viz. all the Commons of England:
for, as Sir Edw Cook 2. part. of his Institutes, page 29. in his Coment upon
Magna Charta c. 14. observes, that the general division of persons, by the Law
of England, is either into the Nobility of the Peerage, (or Lords, house) or
the Commons of the Realm: for as every of the Nobles is a Peer to each other,
though they have several Names of Dignity, as Dukes, Marquisses, Earls,
Viscounts, and Barons; so of the Commons of the Realm, each Commoner is a Peer
or Equal to another, though they be of several Degrees, as Knights, Esquites,
Citizens, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and Rurgesses: and this distinction we find
likewise in Bracton, c. 2. sol. 36. and both these Jurisdictions do belong to
both Houses, naturali equitate, by a natural right or equity, as hereafter
more plainly will be demonstrated: and according to this Jurisdiction, have the
Commons themselves given judgment upon a Commoner, as in the case of Thomas
Long, cited by Sir Edward Cook, vbi supra, p. 23. and recorded in the
Journall Book of the House of Commons, 8. Eliz. Onslow Speaker, f. 19. and in
the case of Arthur Hall, 23 Eliz. f. 14. Popham, Attorney General, Speaker, and
diverse others.

Now, that the Lords and Commons have a joint Jurisdiction, or power of
Judicature over both Lords and Commons, is manifest by the Judgments given
against the Lord Audley, at the Parliament held at York, Anno 12. 22
Consideratum est per Praelatos, Comites Barons and communitatem Angliae, and
in 15. E. 2. the Judgment given against the Spencers, both Earls, Hugh the
Father, and Hugh the Son, who were adjudged to exile, by the Lords and Commons,
and Sir John Alees adjudged by the Lords and Commons, as appears 42. E. 3. Nu.
20. Rot, Parl. and of late time in the cases of Sir Giles Mompesson, the Lord
Viscount of St. Alban, and the Earl of Middlesex, in 18. and 21. Jacob. Regis:
In all which Judgments the Kings consent was concurrent, which gave those
Judgments life and efficacy.

Having thus distinguished, the several and joint Jurisdiction of both Houses;
it will be necessary to show whence these have sprung, and how they are grown.
It appears by the old Treatise, de modo tenendi Parliamentum, which was made
before the Conquest, and presented to the Conqueror, who held a Parliament in
that form, as appears by the book of 21. E. 3. f. 60. That both Houses of
Parliament sat together, and were but in effect one House, and so continued
long after the Conquest, till 5. and 6. E. 3. as appears by the Parliament
Rolls of 5. E. 3. Nu. 3. and 6. E. 3. and by the 4. part of Sir Edward Cooks
Instit. p. 2. and as may be gathered by the Preamble to the Statute of
Marlebridge, made 52. H. 3. Westminster. the first, 3. E. 1. Westminster. 2. 13, E. 1, the
Statute of York, made 12. E. 2. and others, which mention, that the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of the Realm were called together (whereby we
may infer, that they sat as one House) to consult of the weighty affairs of
this Kingdom; from whence, we collect, that the Lords had whilst they sat as
one House, no particular jurisdiction, nor the Commons any to themselves alone,
but their jurisdiction was joint, being mixed of both their powers, and
communicative to all alike of both Kingdoms; and this appears clearly, by the
case of the Lord Audley, 12. E. 2. and the cause of the Spencers, 15. E. 2.
before cited, and by the case of Nicholas Segrave, adjudged in Parliament, as
appears Placit: Parliament, 33. E. 1. Rot. 33. per Praelatos, Comites, Barons,
and alios de consilio, by the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and others of the
Council, that is, the Parliament; and more plainly by that: spoken by Sir
Edward Cook 2 part of his Instit. p. 50. And though of ancient time (says he)
the Lords and Peers of the Realm used in Parliament to give judgment, in case
of Treason and Felony, against those that were no Lords of Parliament;

Yet at the suit of the Lords, it was enacted; that albeit the Lords and Peers
of the Realm, as Judges of the Parliament, in the presence of the King, had
taken upon them to give judgment in case of Treason and Felony, of such as
were not Peers of the Realm, that hereafter no Peers shall be driven to give
judgment on any others, then on their Peers according to the Law.

And he cites Rot. Parl. 4. E. 3. Nu. 6. to maintain this assertion of his.

But to conclude more strongly, we find it recorded in 4. E. 3. Rot. 2. and
enrolled in Chancery, in the cause of Sir Simon de Berisford, who was adjudged
as an accessory to Roger Mortimer of the murder of King Ed: 2. in these very
words, viz.

And it is assented, and agreed by our Lord the King, and all the Grandees in
full Parliament; that albeit the said Peers, as Judges of Parliament took upon
them in the presence of our Lord the King, to make and give the said judgment,
by the assent of the King, upon some of them which were not their Peers, and
that by reason of the murder of their liege Lord, and the destruction of him
which was so near of the Blood-Royall, and Son of a King; that therefore the
said Peers which now are, or the Peers which shall be for the time to come;
be not bound or charged to give judgment upon others, then upon their Peers,
nor shall do it: (But let the Peers of the land have power) but of that forever
they be discharged and acquitted, and that the aforesaid judgment now given be
not drawn into example, or consequence for the time to come; by which the said
Peers may be charged hereafter to judge others then their Peers against the
Law of the Land, if any such case happen (which God defend.)

All which aforementioned presidents and judgments were made and given before
the separation of the two Houses and whilst they sat together.

Out of which, we collect and gather, that the Lords had no particular
jurisdiction to themselves, or of themselves, before the division and
separation of the Pouses; and that it was against the Law of the Land, for the
Peers before this separation, to judge a Commoner in any case whatsoever: Nay,
that their hands are bound by their assent, never to judge any in future, which
Sir Ed: Cork says, was enacted:

So that joining the one consideration with the other, it is most clear, that
the Peers at this day cannot judge a Commoner; no, not if the King join with
them; especially, in case of life, or freehold, for in the book of 4 H. 7. f.
10. Be tit. Parl. 42. We find that in Parliament, the King would that I. S.
shouldbe attainted, and lose his Land, and the Lords did agree, and nothing was
spoken of the Commons; and this by all the Judges was held no good attainder or
judgment, and therefore he was restored to his Lands: for there can be no
attainder by Parliament, but by Act of Parliament, that is, by judgment of both
Houses, and consent of the King: for the King, as Sir Edward Cook says, is of
the Parliament, caput principium, and finis, the head, the beginning, and the
end.

But some will say, that the Lords have a Judicature apart from the Commons,
which they have long used: It is true, they have, and it is only in some
particular cases, and their power is given them by Act of Parliament, by the
stature of 14. E. 3. c. 5. in case of delay of Justice, difficulty of judgment,
or cases of errors, and is confirmed unto them by the stature of 25. El. c. 8.
and 31. El. c. 1.

But we cannot find by any of our books in Law, and we are confident, no man
can show us, that the Lords by themselves apart or without the assistance, and
without judgment of the Commons, did hold plea in any of those cases; before
that statute of 14. E. 3. For the first cases that we find of any proceedings
in those cases before the Lords, were in 16. E. 3. Fitzh. tit. brief, 561. and
in 24. E. 3. f. 46. 22. E. 3. Fitz. error 8. and other books; out of which
good notes may be drawn to fortify our assertions withal, if need in so plain
a case did require: By all which cases and presidents, we may assuredly
conclude. That the Lords in their House have no jurisdiction over the Commons
in any other cases, then delay of Justice, difficulty of Judgment, or matter of
Error, as aforesaid.

And this is agreeable to the statute of 25. E. 3. c. 4. Where it is accorded,
assented, and established, that from henceforth, none shall be taken by
petition, or suggestion, made to our Lord the King, or to his Council; unless
it be by indictment, or presentment of his good and lawful people of the same
neighborhood, or by process made by Writ original at the common law, and to
the other statutes aforementioned, and binds the House of Peers, as well as
any other Court of Judicature at Westminster, as they are of the Kings
Council, and sit by virtue of the Kings writ and Commission, as they have
often by their own Declarations manifested.

If it be objected, that their Lordships being a Court of Judicature, are only
to proceed, secundum legem and consuetudinem Parliamenti, according to the Law
and Custom of the Parliament.

We answer, that we grant that it must be secundum legem, according to law,
which is, according to the Great Charter, and the laws before cited; and as
touching the custom of Parliament; we say that the Lords house cannot have any
pretense by custom to judge a Commoner of England, since that it appears by
the presidents aforementioned: namely, Sir Simon de Berisfords case which was
4. E. 3. and by that of the same date, cited out of Sir Edward Cook, that
before the division of the Houses, it was enacted, and assented, that the Peers
for the time to come, should not judge a Commoner; as being against Law, as
aforesaid: And therefore, that Custom being against Law, and prohibited by Act
of Parliament, must needs be void in Law: For no Custom that is against Law or
an Act of Parliament, is valid in Law: Neither can they have any good Custom by
usage of such power, since the division of th, Houses, though they have
actually judged Commoners, it being within time of memory since the Houses were
divided: that is to say, since the time of King Richard the first, which is the
limitation of prescriptions; and since which time, no good custom can be
grounded, the contrary appearing by matter of Record, as aforesaid.

And albeit, they have judged Commoners; it makes not for them; for, a facto ad
jus non valor argumentum, because they have done it in fact; therefore, they
may now do it of right, follows not: For, if those Commoners that were judged
by them, did not stand upon their privilege, nor demand an exemption from the
judgment of the Lords, they did only lose to themselves the particular benefit
of Appeal: for, vigilantibus, and non dormientibus jura subveniunt: the laws
only assist those that claim the benefit of them, and not those that pray not
in aid of them: and such presidents ought not to be cited, in prejudice of
others that are more watchful over their liberties.

But we have another objestion made, that there is matter of scandal against
a Peer of that House, contained in Mr. Lilburres Charge, and therefore fit to
be examined there,

We acknowledge the Earl of Manchester to be a person of great honor, and will
not blemish him, as he stands unheard, with a supposition of his being guilty:
But nevertheless, we conceive that it would not have lessened his honor, to
have preferred some Information in the Kings Bench, or brought some Action at
Common Law upon some of the statutes, de scandalis magnatum, for the supposed
slander contained in the books, written by Mr. Lilburn, whereunto Mr. Lilburn
might have pleaded his lawful plea, either by may of justification, or
denial, as his case would require him: In both which cases Mr. Lilburn should
have been tried by a Jury of 12 honest men, Commoners, his equals: and my Lord
have avoided any suspicion of being partial in his own cause, as it is said in
the book of 8. H. 6. f. 14. Br. Co^^sans, 27. of the Chancellor of Oxford, or
that he went about by this so sudden and summary proceeding to hinder or
fore-stall the evidence that might be against him in his own cause, and Mr.
Lilburn had had a legal way for his defense: for if he had justified the
supposed scandal, and proved it, it had bin no scandal, and the Jury must have
acquitted him, if he had pleaded not guilty: and for the words proved against
him, he must have paid damage to the Earl, as the Jury should have assessed.
And this had been, and is the only way of trial in such a case, and is
according to the statute of Magna Charta, and the Law of the Land; and it is a
Maxim in Law, That where remedy may be had by an ordinary course in Law, the
party grieved shall never have his recourse to extraordinaries.

Therefore, if a man should say of the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, that he was a corrupt Judge, and that he gave a corrupt judgment in
such a Cause depending before him, upon an English Bill in Chancery; The Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keepers remedy against that person for this scandal; is
upon these statutes, and not by an English Bill in Chancery before himself, to
be proved only by witnesses, or (the Parliament sitting) by the Parliament, and
not by a Jury, being matter of Fact, tryable by the course of the common law:
Neither do we conceive, that this scandal reflects upon that noble Earl (^f
it be so) as he is a Member of the Lords house but as a General of an Army,
which employment, he had as well from the Commons, as the Lords, and the
rather, since one of the Commons is as capable, as a Peer of the Lords house,
of such a Command.

Therefore, we conclude, as to the matter and manner of proceeding this
sentence upon the Lieutenant-Colonell, may be taken to be erroneous, both
concerning the nature of the cause, and the jurisdiction of the Court; in
respect of the Defnedants privilege; not to be judged by the Lords House,
being a Commoner of England; unless the Commons had first enquired of the
offense, and had transmitted it to the Lords House, upon a vote made in their
House, by information or impeachment; together, with the proofs taken by them
in the Cause; but especially, after an Appeal made to the House of Commons, as
his proper Judges:

But we meet with another objection, which is; that part of this sentence, is
for words and contempts acted after his summons to the Lords House, and at his
appearing there: one of which was, for not kneeling at the Lords Bar; for
that we conceive, that if he through the tenderness of Conscience, not to
offend God, by kneeling to any other power, did refuse to kneel at their Bar,
(though it be a custom for those that are brought thither as Delinquents so to
do: We cannot conceive that to be a contempt, but rather an obedience to him,
(...) he ought to obey rather then men. As touching the no hearing of his
Charge read, it was after his Appeal, Plea, and Defense, delivered in: which if
that were just, and now rest; to be determined by the honorable House of
Commons, and by them so adjudged; there could be no contempt in that: And
therefore, till his Appeal be determined, we conceive, that part of his
Sentence might well have been spared: As touching the contemptuous words by him
uttered, against the proceedings of that honorable Court, though we cannot
excuse it, a toto, yet a tanto, we may, in that they were rather words of heat
proceeding from him, upon denial of his Plea and Defense, which was his
appeal to the honorable House of Commons, as his proper Judges, and rather
issuing from him, out of a sense of his conceived injury, then a spirit of
calumny toward their Lordships: We are of opinion, that in that sense they
might have produced a more mild sentence, then to have been his utter ruin;
since by that sentence he is to have 7. years imprisonment (the age of a man
in the eye of the Law) and be made incapable of bearing any Office, Military or
Civil, in the Army or Commonwealth, and to be fined 4000. l. which we think,
is more then he is able to pay: whereas by the statute of Magna Charta, liber
homo non amercietur, pro parvo delicto, nisi secundum modum illius delicti and
pro magno delicto, secundum magnitudinem illius delicti, salvo sibi
contenemento suo; If his offense were great; yet he ought to be amerced, so as
his freehold and contenement, or countenance may be saved to him, and not to
be disabled in his Calling, or lodged in the Tower, during his life, where he
now remains.

Having brought this indomitable Champion for our liberties, to the Tower of
London, we will show you his entertainment there;

He was brought by the Warders to the Lieutenant, alias dictus Col. Francis
West, the Jailer, or chief Keeper of the Prison of the Tower of London; for so
his title is, in the capacity of receiving and keeping of the Prisoners
committed to his charge; This Lieutenant or Jailer after some pause upon
reading of the Warrant of Commitment, sent him to lodge at a Warders house for
his further punishment, where he is to pay near 20. s. a week for his
lodgeing, providing himself diet; The Lieutenant forbad his Keeper to let any
body at first to come to speak with him, and forgetting the rule of Gods word,
whom God has joined together let no man separate or keep asunder, upon this
pretense that by the Lords sentence and his Warrant, he could not keep that
worthy Patriot, from informing the people of their liberties, which the said
Jailer or Lieutenant called writing of scandalous books against the Lords,
unless he kept his wife and his friends from him, notwithstanding that
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne offered to engage his word to the said Jailer not
to write any word-book, or letter, either of or concerning both, or either
House of Parliament, or any thing else of public concernment, so he might have
his wife and Children, and friends admitted to him, according to law and right,
answer was thereupon made by the same Jailer. That unless his wife would stay
with him and remain with him as a close prisoner to be kept within the Tower,
he cold not permit her to come to him, to stay with him, or speak with him,
but in the presence of his keeper, (the first time that ever we heard that the
innocent wife was to be imprisoned and punished for the Husbands offense)
having at that time no warrant to restrain either his wives or friends coming
to him; but to color such his illegal, uncharitable, and unchristianlike
dealings, he goes to the Lords, and procutes order from them as a
superstructure upon the former sentence, to keep this worthy Gentleman's wife
from him, and not to permit her to stay with him, or to speak with him but in
the presence of his Keeper: O horrible and unheard of Cruelty, and barbarism,
did not God make woman of man, that she might be an helper unto him meet for
him, Genesis 1. 18. did not God ordain them to be one flesh, did not our blessed
Savior say, that God from the beginning had made them male, and female, and
that after their marriage they are no more twain, but one flesh: does he not
command, and is it not an ordinance indispensable, That what God has joined
together, let no man put asunder, Matthew. 19, 4, 5, 6. By what power or
authority does this Jailer take upon him to dispense with, nay, to change the
immutable laws of God our maker, and of our Savior and Redeemer? If ye have
faith in him, does not our blessed Savior tell the wicked Jews, when they
tempted him with this questistion, Is it lawful for a man to put away his
wife? THAT IT WAS NOT LAWFVLL: And that Moses suffered the Jews through the
hardness of their h^arts, to put away their wives; But from the beginning it
was not so? If this were hardness of heart for a man to put away his wife,
though with her consent; how much more, and how much greater hardness of heart
is it, that a woman, innocent and not charged at all with the offenses of her
husband that was created to be an helper to him, should, in the time of his
imprisonment and affliction when he needs most help, either be kept from him
in a conjugall way, or if she will abide with him, must be made partaker of his
punishments, if they were justly imposed? which kind of condition was never
imposed upon the wife of any man attainted or convicted of treason, felony, or
murder. For, though a man is attainted of treason that has a wife; their
marriage is not thereby dissolved: neither can they be kept asunder. Therefore
we may conclude, that this usage of this suffering Gentleman for the public
liberty, is both against the Laws of God, Nature, and Man: Against the laws
of God and Nature, as against the end of our creation: Against the Laws of
Christ, as against his ordinances: Against the law of man, as it is against the
law of God, Nature, and the law of the Land.

And here we shall leave this worthy Gentleman suffering under this tyrany, and
extreme oppression of this Jailer, (who has chosen rather to obey men then
God;) who, if he be offended that we call him Jailer; we are able to inform
him, that a predecessor of his own, Sir Gervase Elvish, who was Lieutenant of
the Tower, (tam amlpis modo and formae) as he now is, was indicted by the name
of Jailer of the Tower of London, and hanged upon Tower Hill, for consenting to
the poisoning of his prisoner Sir Thomas Overbury. Taking occasion upon this
usage of this Gentleman, to declare unto you, as we have been credibly informed
from persons of good quality; the politic government of the Guardian of this
prison, and his Warders, for exacting money out of their prisoners.

First then, when a prisoner comes new in, or that is committed thither, and
not yet come; an Enquest is made by the Warders, what that prisoner is, what
estate he has, and whether he be like to pay well; and if he be, each man is a
suitor to the Lieutenant, that he may have the keeping of him: Perhaps if he be
a good Fat one indeed, a Bribe is given, or some Reward promised at least, to
the Gentleman Jailer, (a new erected Office, and an intruded Officer, as we
shall show hereafter) to procure the custody of that prisoner. If a Bribe or a
Reward be not given; then the Lieutenant bestows the prisoner upon his
Warders, as they are in favor with him: as the great Turk does his Concubines
upon his Bashawes. And then the Warder is obliged to serve his prisoner for the
Lieutenants advantage; which he commonly does by these courses: First, he is
kept close prisoner for ten or twelve days, or more, not suffered by their
good wills, to speak with any body but themselves, for fear lest they should
be informed how to evade their snares. In which time, the Lieutenant tells the
prisoner, that he has placed him with an honest Keeper in his favor: And the
Keeper tells him, that the Lieutenant is a very noble Gentleman, that he will
desire nothing but what is due to him by the custom of the place: and brings
him to a contract of five shillings a week, which he claims for his own fee
for attendance upon him; and 20 shillings a week, or thereabouts, for his
lodging, if he lodge in the Warders house; and of some, more; and some, less.
When that is done, the Warders tell him, That there are fees due to the
Lieutenant: and desire them to think of it to prepare their way to a further
liberty. (being all this while kept in their Chambers.) Which, when they have
contracted for, with their Warders, if they are lodged in their Warders or
Keepers Houses; then they fall to work for the Lieutenants fees: and the
Lieutenant avowes theirs; and so Mulus mulum scabit. This being done, the
Lieutenant sends out his Beagles, of which, this Gentleman Jailer is always
one, being his chief Eare-wigge, and of the Quorum too; he comes and tells the
prisoner, There are fees due to the Lieutenant. If the prisoner asks, what is
due; he will tell you, that there is 100. l. due for the admittance of an
Earl, 80. l. for a Baron, 70. l. for a Knight and Baronet, 60. l. for a
Baronet, 50. l. for a Knight, and 40. l. for an Esquire: and that there is 30.
s. a week to be paid by every prisoner for liberty to buy and dress his own
meat. Where you may observe, that here is not only an excise put upon the
honor of persons of quality; but upon their mouths too, besides that which the
States have put upon their meat: and that, it seems a preposterous course, that
a m^n should be brought perforce to a prison, and against his will, and be
enforced to pay for his admittance to a Goal, as to a Copyhold, or some other
matter of benefit. If you will ask him how it appears these fees are due: his
answer is, That Mr. Lieutenant is not so earnest of money, but that if the
prisoner be not provided, he will stay for those fees till you can procure
money. And by this means wring a promise out of the prisoner if he can: and if
the prisoner give but the least hope of payment, though it looks not toward
any undertaking to pay any of those fees; This Gentleman Jailer i^ to affirm
(and swear if need be) the prisoners promise. Shortly after the Lieutenant will
(peradventure) send his Clerk to demand your fees and weekly payment of 30. s.
which he calls by the name of Composition money. And if the prisoner stand upon
it* that nothing is due: then he will tell you, You promised to pay, and
therefore are bound to pay, if there were none due. But if you ask him, how
long those Fees have been paid? He will tell you, Twenty one years; and that
makes a prescription: whereby we learn, that 21. years make a Goalers
Prescription. Quodnota been. If you return him empty-handed, then he brings you
a thundering message, or perhaps, letters from his Master; wherein he tells you,
If you will not pay the fees demanded, you must keep your chamber. And after
that, if you walk but abroad out of you^ chamber, hea'l threaten to set a
Sentinel at your door (the first time that ever we read of (...) Sentinel in
the office of a Jailer.) And afterward (peradventure) if you pay him not; he
comes in person to you, and tells you, He cannot live without money. If you ask
him, how he proves it to be due, he will tell you, that he finds it by his
Predecessors books, Sir John Conyers, and Sir Allen Apsleys: and this is Title
enough to an extortion.

These passages put us in mind of a Story that we have read in Rhamusio, of a
great Desert in Tartary, called Lop, where are store of wild Beasts; amongst
the rest, there is one that is like a Lion, but is not, and he has always two
small beasts, which are called Jackals, and are like Foxes, but are not Foxes.
These Jackals, they follow the prey close at the heels, and hunt it till it be
weary: The greater beast follows after grunting at a distance. When these
Jackals have wearied the prey, this counterfeit Lion comes, and seises upon it,
and fills his panc, and leaves the rest to be devoured by the lesser Whippets;
and between the one and the other, there is no harmless beast that is not
wholly eaten up, being once seized on. Just so is the poor prisoners case. And
we shall observe this further, that as the Devil, when he tempted our blessed
Savior, as you may read, Matthew. 4. 6. could cite this part of the Scripture,
Cast thy self down, for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge over
thee: But concealed another part of the Scripture which made against his ends,
to wit, It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God: So deals this
Lieutenant, or Grand Jailer, West, with his prisoners: for, all that makes
against his title to his fees, he leaves out in his allegation to his
prisoners: of which, that he may not plead ignorance hereafter; we shall tell
him his pretended title to these fees. In the time of Sir Allen Apsley, much
about 21. years since, when he was. Lieutenant of the Tower, there were diverse
prisoners in the Tower that were poor, and lay upon his hands for maintenance,
of which he informed the then Lords of the privy Council, and petitioned
that he might be allowed competency for their maintenance out of the Kings
Exchequer. The Lords (according to law) ordered that he should have 3. l. a
week, with increase according to their qualities, allowed for each prisoner, to
maintain them in diet, (for they being the Kings prisoners, were by law to be
maintained by the King.) Sir Allen Apsley having procured this order, and some
of his Successors after him, did contract with some of the Warders, or
Victuallers in the Tower, to diet those, sometimes at 30. s. per week,
sometimes at 20. s. per week, sometimes at 35* s. a week, as they could agree;
whereby Sir Allen Apsley put up into his purse 30. s. a week, or more or less,
upon allowance of every prisoner, and had his full pay out of the Kings
Exchequer. This was entered into their Books, as a gain to them. And being
grounded upon a Cheat, is now become a president of future extortion, being
confirmed by a Goalers Prescription of 21. years. But we would have them
know, that if every thing that has been practiced 21. years be lawful; they
may as well go to Suiters-hill, and there take purses as to demand those fees.
Besides, we desire them to take notice, that by this Parliament, the foundation
of this pretended duty is taken away by that Act of Parliament which takes away
the power of the Councell-boord.

But we have done with the pretense of their fees: we now come to show, that
this Office of Gentleman Jailer, is a new erected office, and a grievance to
the subject, being created within time of memory: and consequently, no fees due
to him, though he pretend to a fee of 50. s. at the prisoners going away, For
this Officer, (one Yates) to tell the truth, is but the Lieutenants man; and if
he be a Gentleman Jailer, it is to be doubted he is a better man then his
Master: for we make a scruple, Whether a PORTER of a College in
Bishopsgate-street can beget a Gentleman. But whatsoever he be, being of an old
Yeoman of the Guard, become a young Gentleman Jailer, he knows how to lick his
fingers, and make profit out of the plague it self. For we could tell you,
that when a Gentleman the last year a prisoner, was closely locked up, and the
plague round about him, and in danger to be infected, desired him to speak to
the Lieutenant, that he might be removed; he brought him word, that unless he
would give him ten pound, he could not be removed. The Gentleman made answer,
that he had not so much money; but all that he had, he would give him, if he
would procure him to be removed. The sum agreed, was 20. s. which this
Gentleman Jailer took and put in his pocket, and never came at him more in ten
weeks space, let the plague take his course with the poor prisoner: And that
albeit the Gentleman complained to the Lieutenant of this unjust and fraudulent
dealing, and did desire that either he might be compelled to make restitution,
or otherwise to give it to the poor, or into the Warders Box at Christmas; yet
the Gentleman could obtain neither. Here is Mulus mulum scabit again. We could
tell you, that the prison lodgings have been, and are let out to prisoners at
20. l. some more, some less, per annum. We could tell you of 10. l. taken of a
Gentleman that was sick, and made a close prisoner, for to have liberty to walk
in fresh air out of his chamber some 4. or 5. times the length of a Cannon. We
could tell you another, that by no Rule of Instruction, or Warrant, was to be
kept close prisoner, and yet was so almost a year because he would not give
10. l. to walk the length of a Malt-pole. We could tell you of a Gentleman of
quality, of above 70 years of age, after he had his enlargement from the
Honorable House of Commons, was detained in close prison 20. weeks, because he
would not pay such fees as were demanded; and a demand of above 330. l. made of
him for these pretended extortions and unjust fees: Nay, a board nailed up
before his window, to prevent him for taking any fresh air, and a Sentinel
set at his door to keep him in his chamber. A new way of these monstrous
Tyrants, to excise the Air.

We could name a prisoner that for six months together in the Tower, had a
Sentinel kept at his door to keep him in his lodging; yea, when he was sick,
and had contracted that sickness and infirmity by a tedious close
imprisonment. We could tell of the prisoners Beer and Wood stopped, and their
servants kept from them, because they would not pay such fees as were demanded:
And when the prisoners sent to the Lieutenant to have their Beer and Firing;
his answer was, That he wanted money. HERE ARE THE FOUR ELEMENTS EXCISED TO
THE POOR PRISONERS. Nay, we could tell you of some that were shut up for
eating of Venison, and to make their peace, must drop something, a parcel of
20 l or something else: For we must keep our fingers in use. Nay, there is but
few of these ravening creatures, but he has all the inventions his wit can
reach to excoriate their prisoners. We could tell you how prisoners are valued:
Some have been valued at 5. s. a week and diet: Another at diet only; a third
has been offered to be exchanged with 20. s. boot. Nay, we could tell yon of a
prisoner that was made in joincture to a Warders wife, who contracted by
Articles upon their marriage, that his wife should have the profits proceeding
of his prisoner. Which proceedings puts us in mind of that story we read in
Lucian, who says, that Homer upon a time had drunk too much of the sweet wine
of Chios, his native Country, and fell a spewing; and there came Pindarus, and
Virgil, and Homer, and a great many more, and lickt up his spewings, and
thereby became inspired with Poetry, every one according to the quantity of the
spewings that he lickt up. So these Goalers, upon the dissolution of Regal
Authority, each of them has lickt up a part of the spewings of it, and are
become exercisers of this illegal arbitrary power, so far as their Wits will
give them way, to the extreme vexation and oppression of their prisoners:
Insomuch* that the poor prisoners do wish with holy Job, That they had been as
an hidden untimely Birth, or as Infants that never saw light, who are in that
place, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary be arrest, where
the prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the oppressor:
wherefore is light given unto him that is in misery, and life unto the bitter
in soul? Job. 3. 16, 17, 18, 20. Yet, tell Mr. White one of the best of the
bunch (though there are some honest men amongst them) and one that would
deserve to be esteemed a moderate man, (if he would give over his railing and
scribbling of foolish Books against the dissenting-brethren, and men in
affliction) of any of these practices; his answer will be; why, sure it cannot
be? my Lieutenant is a Saint, a godly man, and one that never did any man any
wrong, no, nor would do it, to gain a world: He is a man that is very diligent
in taking Notes at Sermons, and goes to repetitions often, and does nothing,
but what he does by the Order of the Committee for the safety of the Tower; and
surely, he is wronged, Which puts us in mind of a merry story we read in the
History of Reynard the Fox.

Upon a time, the Lion proclaimed a great Feast, and invited all the Beasts of
the Court; amongst diverse beasts that came thither, the Panther came, and made
a great complaint against Rynard the Fox; which was, that he had (feyning
great devotion) promised unto Kyward the Hare, to teach him his Creed, and to
make him a fit Chaplain for the King, and did sing Credo, Credo, to him: the
silly Hare believing, the Fox would have kept his promise, and have ^aught him
to sing Credo, and become a good Chaplain for his preferment, came between his
legs, but he was no sooner there, but in stead of teaching him his Credo, the
Fox snapt at his throat: and if the Panther had not come in, and rescued him,
the Fox had there devoured the Hare. When this complaint was made, Grymbard the
Brock, that was Reynards sisters Son, answered for his Uncle,

My Uncle is a Gentleman, and a true-man, he cannot endure falsehood, he does
nothing without the Council of his Priest, he eats but once a day, he
lives as a recluse, he chastises his body, and lives only by Alms, and good
men's charities, doing infinite penance for his sins; so that he is become pale
and lean with praying and fasting, for he would fain be in Heaven.

But whilst Grymbard was making this defense, in comes Chanticleer the Cock,
clapping his wings with doleful cry, and accused Reynard for murdering his
fair Daughter Coppel, and that he had eaten her, and that Grymbard had eaten
the bones which Reynard left.

We promise you, Mr. White, a shrewd evidence against Reynard: neither, though
that Reynard pleaded, this was done by advise of his priest, and was paler and
leaner with fasting and praying, then your Lieutenant is; yet it did not excuse
him.

And you may remember, Mr. White, that there is an outcry against the
Lieutenant, that albeit the honorable Houses of Parliament, have made an
Ordinance, that prisoners in the Tower of London should be brought to the Bar
of the Kings Bench by Habeas Corpus, to the end, they might be charged by their
Creditors for their just debts, and removed to the Kings Bench; Yet the
Lieutenant did refuse to obey an Habeas Corpus in that case, upon pretense that
there were fees due unto him from the prisoner which was to be removed: and for
the same, he is ordered, upon a pain, to bring in the prisoner the first day of
the next Term, the Judges not allowing that a good plea.

And as we remember, Mr. White, when your wife distrained your prisoners Trunk,
your Lieutenant awarded the prisoner to pay 4. l. for the redemption to you
before he could have it: So that, Mr. White, you played Grymbard here: nor can
the Lieutenant free himself, by saying he did these things by order of the
Committee; for we are confident, that the Committee are persons of that piety,
honor, integrity, and justice, that they would not stain their names with
command of such barbarous tyranny as has been practiced against the poor
prisoners, their Wives, Ladies, and Children in that prison.

Therefore, we do assoyle them, and leave it at Mr. Lieutenants door, till he
plainly and evidently remove it further; And because Mr. Lieutenant, or any
that he employes for the guard of his prisoners, may know their duties of their
places the more clearly, and may not pretend ignorance for usage of their
prisoners; we have thought fit to publish the Laws that have reference to
Gaolers and Keepers of Prisons: which Laws, they upon their several penalties
are to observe, and the people to preserve as a main badge of their Liberties,
least by the neglect of them; an insensible slavery be drawn upon them.

Now, concerning the laws of prisoners, and the usage of prisoners; we find by
the common law, Quod Carcer ad cominendos non ad puniendos haberi debet, as
Bracton l. 3. f. 105. Gaoles are ordained to hold prisoners, not to punish
them: For, imprisonment by the law, is (neither ought to be) no more then a
bare restraint of liberty, without those illegal and unjust distinctions, of
close and open prisoner, as appears by Stamf. pl. Cor. f. 30.

Yet we know some kept close prisoners in the Tower almost 3, years, committed
only by Warrant of a single Peer, (a most horrible oppression.)

And therefore Bracton f. 18. says, That if a Jailer keep his prisoner more
close then of right he ought, whereof the prisoner dies; this is Felony in
the Jailer.

And Horn in the Mirror of Justice, p. 288. says, That it is an abusion of
the law that prisoners are put into Irons, or other pain, before they are
attainted.

And p 34. 36. he reckons the sterving of prisoners by famine, to be among the
crimes of homicide in a Jailer.

And we find 3. E. 3. Fitzh. Tit. pl. Cor. 295. That it was Felony at common
law in Gaolers to compel their prisoners by hard imprisonment to become
Approvers, whereby to get their goods: which law is since confirmed by the
statute of 14. E. 3. c. 9. with some enlargement, as to under-keepers of
prisons, and the penalty of the law: and that Gaolers having done this, have
been hanged for it; you may read 3. E. 3. 8. Northampton. Fitzh. pl. Cor. 295.
and elsewhere: but this for a taste to them. We now come to show what fees
are due to them.

The Mirror of Justice, p. 288. tells us, that it is an abusion of the law,
that prisoners or others for the, to pay any thing for their Entries into the
Goal, or for their going out: this is the commonlaw; there is no fee due to
them by the common law. See what the statutes say.

The State of Westminster. 1. c. 26. says, that no Sheriff, or other Minister of
the King, shall take reward for doing their Offices, but what; they take of the
King, if they do: they shall forfeit double to the party grieved, and be
punished at the will of the King. Under this word Minister of the King, are
encluded all Escheators, Coroners, Gaolers, and the like; so Sir Edward Cook
2. part of his Instistitutes, p. 209. affirms, and agreeable is Stamf. pl.
Coron. 49. a. Nay, by the statute of 4. E. 3. c. 10. Gaolers are to receive
thieves and felons, taking nothing by way of fees for the receipt of them: so
odious is this extortion of Gaolers, that very thieves and felons are exempt
from payment of fees.

And we find in our Law-bookes, that no fees are due to any Officer, Jailer, or
minister of Justice, but only those which are given by Act of Parliament: for
if a Jailer will prescribe for any fees, the prescription is void; because
against this Act of Parliament, made 3. E. 1. being an Act made within time of
memory, and takes away all manner of pretended fees, before; and we are sure,
none can be raised by color of prescription, since: and therefore we find by
the books of 8. E. 4. f. 18. That a Marshall or Jailer cannot detain any
prisoner after his discharge from Court, but only for the fees of the Court,
the Court being not barred by this statute of Westminster. 1. aforementioned; and if
he do, he may be indicted of extortion; and agrecable to this, is the book of
21. H. 7. f. 16. where amongst other things, it is held for law, that if a
Jailer or Guardian of a prison, takes his prisoners upper garment, Cloak, or
money from him; it is a trespass, and the Jailer shall be answerable for it:
(this is a note for the Gentleman-Porter of the Tower) so that we may
undeniably conclude, that there is no fee at all due to any Jailer or Guardian
of a prison, from the prisoner (but what is due unto him by special Act of
Parliament.) And if a Jailer or Guardian of a Prison shall take any thing as a
fee of his prisoner, he may, and ought to be indicted of extortion, and upon
conviction, to be removed from his office; And if his prisoner by constraint,
menasse, or dures, be enforced to give him money, he may recover that money
against the Jailer again, in an Action of the case, to be brought against him
as his Bayliffe per account render.

And it is fit to be remembered also, that whilst prisoners are in custody,
having nothing of their own to maintain them, being either despoyled of their
estates or goods by plunder, sequestration, long lying in prison, or otherwise;
That the prisoners in all the Kings prisons should be maintained at the Kings
charge, and out of the Kings Revenues, according to the old law of the Land.
Bracton said thus, Prisones imprisonati; antequam convicti fuerint, de terris
suis desseisiri non debent; nes de rebus suis quibuscunque spoliari: sed, dum
fuerint in prison^; debent de proprio in omnibus sustentari, doneo per judicium
deliberati vel condemnati fuerint; which we English thus, Prisoners detained in
prison, ought not to be disseised, or put out of their lands and free-holds,
nor spoiled of their goods before they be convicted: but, they ought to be
maintained of their own goods and estates in all things they want, until by
judgment they are either acquitted or convicted. Nay, we say further, that if
prisoners have not whereof, of their own to live; theyought to be maintained,
according to their qualities, out of the Kings revenue, and at his charge,
whose prisoners they are; and this is according to the fundamental laws of
the Land, and is a liberty inheritable, belonging to the freeborn subjects of
England: but if we look into the prisons of these said times; Oh! what
horrible oppressions, extortions, cruelties, and most unchristian-like
tyrannies are exercised and practiced upon the freeborn subjects of, England
in all prisons within the kingdom, by these sons of Belial, these ravening
Harpies, and tormenting Gaolers, whom we may properly call the Devils Deputies,
that rack even the very bowels, and feed upon the very livers of their
prisoners, sucking away the very blood that should give life to their bodies,
from them; what lamentable cries, sighs, and groans, do we hear from every
corner of this kingdom; especially of this City, from the poor, starved,
oppressed, life-wearied prisoners, shut up and enclosed in the Dungeons and
Prisons in all places? What horrible lamentations, imprecations, and curses are
uttered, and sent up to God Almighty, in anguish of mind, and bitterness of
spirit, by these poor prisoners, their wives and children not only against
their tormenting Gaolers, but also against those Priests of the body politic,
those Country-Committees, who have turned the wives and children of poor
prisoners a begging, and sent them up to sterve in Prisons and Dungeons, under
the hands of merciless Gaolers, with their distressed Husbands and Parents,
having not only their goods and free-holds taken away from them; which by law
should be their support in prison: but what also they beg or borrow, is
extorted from them by these ravening, merciless, and oppressing Gaolers, and
their Ministers.

We therefore, the freeborn people of England, having seriously weighed and
considered with our selves; that by these lordly powers and sentences executed
upon us by that sentence of the house of Peers upon Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, a
freeborn Englishman, and one that has so often with his sword in his hand
for the redemption and reviving of our declining liberties, adventured his lite
in the field against the Royal intruders, and out of hatred and detestation to
the execrable and odious oppressions of Co^mitteemen, Gaolers and other
inferior Ministers of this present State, having an earnest desire and
resolution to enjoyour liberties, which with our dearest bloods, and with the
loss of so many lives of our dear brethren, and vast expense of treasure we
have purchased; and being of nothing so much affected and enamoured, as to live
under the happy and flourishing estate of this ever renowned Parliament, the
most honorable Commons, whom we have chosen and entrusted for us to sit at
Westminster. as Guardians of our Birthrights, and most powerful Tribunes of the
peoples liberties, and who have made so many pious and feeling Declarations of
their minds now in print, concerning our bypast thraldom, with most solemn
Protestations, and execrations upon themselves, of their serious intentions, to
maintain the laws and liberties of the freeborn Subjects of England, and that
SALVS POPVLI shall be to them, their SVPREMA LEX,

Yet out of our daily feeling of our ensuing miseries, and a clear foresight
of a future and speedy ruin of this present State (which above all thingsunder
heaven we desire to advance) if it be not by the wisdom of these our most
honored Patriots prevented; do most humbly address our informations of the
grievances and present evils, and advices for reformation of the same, to our
most renowned Trustees; not doubting, but they in their profound wisdom, will
both receive them benignely, prudently ponder them, and seriously and timely
endeavor to prevent the growing mischief, by their indulgent and serious care
and circumspection: To you then, Oh! you most honorable Tribunes of the
People, preservators of the Commonwealth, and chief Guardians of our Laws and
Liberties) we apply our selves as next under God, the surest Instruments of our
earthly felicity; And, we do most humbly implore and beseech you to free us
from all lordly, illegal sentences, and tyrannical powers and executions
whatsoever: we entreat and exhort you to hear and determine Lieut. Col. John
Lilburns appeal to you the Commons representative of England from the Lords
house; we will not presume to direct you, wha^ is fit to be determined in it,
for we neither can nor will dist^ust, either your Judgment or Justice: but this
we humbly bes^ech you to consider, that in your judgment upon him shall be
involved the liberty of the whole Commons of England: and think it not a
Trouble to your selves to be importunedin this particular, but give speedy
dispatch therein to your Petitioners, since that a Republique that is well
ordered, ought to give easy access to those that seek Justice by public
means.

In the next place, our desires are, that since this great inrode upon our
liberty, is occasioned by an Impeachment or Accusation made in your house
against Col. King, which yet there depends undetermined; that you would hear
and determine that Impeachment, and bring the Offender to condign punishment,
and not only Col. King, but all others whom you have trusted in this late War,
and have failed in their trust: What though the war seem to be at an end, and
you have effected your desires, and these men have at some time stood you
instead, and at first proved faithful and were strongly assistant to you; yet,
if afterward they proved corrupt or negligent, or falsified there trust,
should they therefore be pardoned? put the case, a new war should break out,
and you should have need of men: think you, that those you shall hereafter
employ, will not take courage by the impunity of these that are now accused, to
deceive and betray you when they find opportunity? Or, do you imagine, that
these men can ever be faithful to you? We give you these Reasons, that they
cannot.

First, because they are at least under a suspicion; and if they are innocent;
why have they been so long kept from clearing themselves? If they be acquitted,
and innocent persons, it is an injury they will never forgive you; and if they
be found guilty; you will never trust them: But some will say, that they have
been good members, and done good service; therefore they ought to be pardoned.
To which we answer, Let them be first tried, and if they are found guilty, use
your discretions in mercy toward them: but withal, remember, that the wisest
and best governed States in the world, never yet pardoned any man for a
notorious crime committed against the Commonwealth, for any good services
before done to it:

This is manifest by many examples; especially in the Roman State: The first
we will present you with, is that of Horatius, where the case is thus: Tullus
the Roman King, and Metius the Alban King, made an agreement between them, that
three of the Horatii, Romans, and three of the Curatii, Albans, should fight
for the Dominion of their Countries; and that, that people whose three
Champions vanquished the others, should be Lords of the vanquished Nation; The
three Horatii got the victory, and but one of them survived in it; all the
Curatii were slain. Horatius that survived, and was Victor, returning to Rome,
met his sister, the Widow of one of the Curatii, lamenting the death of her
husband, and killed her: This fact was adjudged so heinous, that
notwithstanding the victory he obtained for the Romans, they brought him to
judgment. Manlius Capitolinus, notwithstanding that he had valiantly defended
the Capitol of Rome against the invading Gauls, and by his virtue delivered
the City of Rome from imminent danger; was, notwithstanding his good deserts,
for a sedition he endeavored to raise in Rome through envy to Furius
Camillus, thrown headlong down from that Capitol, which he to his great renown
had formerly defended. So we in Machiavel his discourses upon Live. l. 1. cap.
23. 24. 26. More examples we might find in the Roman State, as those of
Coriolanus, Martius Livius, Aemilius, and Scipio Africanus; of whose Stories
you may read at large in Livies Decades. We read likewise of Themistocles the
Athenian General, and who was a chief meants to augment the glory of that
State by the great defeat he gave to the Persians at Salamis, and elsewhere;
having committed offenses against that Government, had the punishment of
Ostracisme, which was banishment for ten years inflicted upon him. Alcibiades
likewise, after many notable victories obtained for that State, was
notwithstanding for insolences, as they conceived, committed toward it, twice
banished: the last time, into perpetual banishment. These two examples we find
in the State of Athens. We might produce many more, of ancient time, of all the
States of Greece; which, for Brevity sake. we omit. Only mentioning some, of
latter times, in our own neighbourhoods: As, that of Charles the Emperor, who
for offense given, ruined Ferdinandus Cortes that subdued to his obedience and
use, the mighty rich kingdoms of Mexico, Jucatan, and other parts of the West
Indies: Neither did Marshal Byron, for all his service done to King Hen. 4. of
France, find at his death any merits in those services done to his offended
Prince: Nor, Barnevelt in his conspiracy against the Prince of Orange, and
State of Holland, though he had been eminent for former services done them
against the Kingof Spain: Nor, in our own Kingdom, could Sir John Hotham and
his sons former deserts, save their lives, which they lost for being false to
the trust.

By which examples we conclude, That never any Republic well ordered,
cancelled the faults of their subject, swith their good deserts. Therefore as
Clemens Edmunds observes upon Caesar's Commentaries, p. 174. It more imports a
commonwealth, to punish an ill member, then to reward a good act. We also
affirm, that a State, or a Commonwealth, that will keep it self in good
order, and free from ruin; Must cherish impeachments and accusations of the
people against those that through ambition, avarice, pride, cruelty, or
oppression, seek to destroy the liberty or property of the people: So shall
they keep their Estate free from envy, and secure from supplantation: for it
is an efficacious means to continue the people in a fair obsequency, to
parlie often with them upon their grievances and to provide speedy and proper
remedies. We therefore humbly desire you to take into your serious
considerations, the great oppressions committed by these Countrey-Committees,
who think there is no better way to govern the kingdom, then by lying with
those Concubines of Sovereignty, Tyranny and Arbitrary government, as Absalom
did with his fathers. These Horse-leeches of the Commonwealth, who hang upon
the limbs of it, and will continue sucking out the blood of the poor
Countries, till their bellies are full: and then like (...) and unprofitable
vermin, will fall off your service, to their own ruse. If you think to bind
those people to you by the oppressive profits of their places; you are
deceived: For, benefits bind not the covetous, but the honest: and those that
are but greedy of themselves, do in all changes of fortune, only consult the
preservation of their own greatness. Besides, this inconveniency will attend
their actions; that by making a few rich, you undo multitudes, and lose the
hearts of many, that by clemency may be gained, to enrich a few by rapine, that
when they are grown wealthy, will think of nothing more then to preserve their
ill-gotten treasure, and will never venture (when necessity challenges it) one
drop of blood in your cause. We speak not this out of any affection to the
Royal party; but out of our hatred and detestation to oppression and rapine,
it being the only means to overthrow this State: For it is most certain, that
these people are easily drawn into Commontion, who by their poverty are assured
to lose nothing; being by nature always desirous of innovation. Wherefore we
heartily wish the suppression of those ravenous Committees, as utterly
destructive to the peace and assurance of the present State and Government. But
if they shall say in defense of their actions, that they only poll the Royal
parley, and such as have been in Arms against the Parl we wish they were so
innocent as they pretend rhemselves, and that they would pay the Soldiers
better, and clear their accounts to their masters that have employed them:
which, when they shall effect, they shall receive our better opinion, and till
that time, they must be content to labor under their crying accusations. But
admitting their objection to be true; yet we are of opinion, that courteous and
charitable acts, work much more in men's minds that are subdued, then those that
are full of violence, cruelty and hostility. For Seneca says, Mitius imperanti
melius paretur, they are best obeyed, that govern most mildly. And Machiavel
ubi supra, p. 542. observes, that one act of humanity was of more force with
the conquered Falisci, then many violent acts of hostility. Therefore we wish
these eager Committe-men to consider for the good of the State they pretend to
serve, that it is commodious for those that lay the foundation of a new State,
or Sovereignty, to have the fame of being just and merciful: For as Justice
and Clemency in good Princes or Sovereigns, are the best means to keep the
subject fast bound unto them in obedience and duties; so are cruelty,
oppression and rage, bridles wherewith tyrants keep their subjects in awe and
subjection unto them, and themselves in their estates. And let these
Committee Men so order their actions in screwing the Countries, that they sow
not a jealousy among the freeborn people of England, that they intend to hold
up that common Maxim of all oppressing States, which is, That their interest
is to maintain the public, wealthy, and the particular poor; which if once
the common people apprehend, they are not long to be held in obedience: For
where a State holds their subjects under the condition of slaves, the conquest
thereof is easy, and soon assured. And when a forced Government shall decay in
strength, it will suffer as did the old Lion for the opprssion done in his
youth, being pinched by the Wolf, goared by the Bull, and kicked also by the
Ass, as Sir Walter Raleigh l. 5. fol. 501. wittily observes. And then when it
is too late, they complain of their hard fortune; for sorrow can give remedy to
mischiefs past, and anger is vain where there wants forces to revenge.
Correct those merciless sons of Cerberus, those greedy Goalers excessive
demands, and extortions of fees from their distressed prisoners. Suffer not
that vengeance which the complaints and groans of those miserable and
oppressed souls will draw down from the most just God for this kind of
oppression; to fell upon your heads, by your connivence at, and tolleration of,
their exactions. And if that cannot move you, yet let us advise you, not to
permit them to create Presidents of oppression to enslave your posterity in
future times. For who knows what a day may bring forth? There is no new thing
under the Sun. Therefore there is no confidence to be had in our present
condition; since, as the Preacher tells us, Eccles. 1. 4. One generation
passes, and another comes, but the earth endures for ever. Be just and
merciful therefore, O ye Rulers and Judges of the earth, and remember that
for all these things you shall one day be brought to judgment. And this
consideration prompts us further to entreat and implore you to keep and observe
the known, written, and promulged laws of this land: if you keep them, they
will keep you. Abolish and abandon, as an infectious disease to your State, all
arbitrary power, and discretionary government, in prerogative times falsely
called, the Prudentiall way. There is nothing of worse example in a Republic,
then to have good laws, and not to observe them. Good government procures love
from the Subject: and it is only their love that supports a State in time of
adversity. The Nations that endure the worst under their own Governors, are
not greatly fearful of a foreign yoke: whereas men when they are well
governed, never seek after other liberty. That government is of all most sure,
where the people take joy in their obedience, The Samnits rebelled against the
Romans, because Peace was more grievous to them in subjection, then War to
those that enjoy their liberty; And on the contrary, Petillia a City of the
Brutians in Italy, chose rather to endure all extremity of War from Hanniball,
then upon any condition to forsake the Romans, who had governed them
moderately, and by that good government procured their love: yea, even at the
time when the Romans sent them word, they were not able to relieve them,
wishing them to provide for their own safety, as we read, Livy Decad. 1. l. 3.

Therefore, it never turns to a States advantage; to gain the peoples hatred:
the way to avoid it, is to lay no hands on the Subjects estates.

How many flourishing States have been ruined by the Avarice, Pride, Cruelty,
and non-observance of the laws by the Governors?

The people of Athens being sore urged with a War by Darius from Persia; in
their great distress, chose Critias Theramenes,, and 28. others, to be their
Governors. They were elected first to compile a body of their Law, and put in
practice such ancient Statutes, as were fit to be put in practice: to this
charge was annexed the supreme Authority, either as a recompense of their
labors, or because the necessity of time required it.

These Governors, in stead of making or observing the laws, fell to spoil the
people of their lives and goods, by new laws and arbitrary proceedings; this
was hateful to the people: the end was, Thrasibulus and 70. others conspired
against them, and cut them off, and restored the people to their former
liberty. The Governor of the Eleans held a strict hand over their Subjects,
and oppressed them: The Subjects being in despair, called in the Spartans to
their relief, who had no just cause of quarrel, but only an old grudge; and
by their help freed all their Cities from the sharp bondage of their natural
Lords.

The Estate of Sparta was grown powerful, and oppressed the Thebans: The
Thebans, though but a weak State, yet desperate of their suffering; by the help
of the Athenians, found means to free themselves of their cruel yoke.

These examples, and diverse others, we find of the fall of the free Estates of
Greece, recorded by Sir Walter Rawleigh, in his 3. book of the History of the
world. The forceable causes of the ruin of the State of Carthage in Africa
(which once contended with Rome for the Dominion and Sovereignty of the World)
were Avarice and Cruelty. Their Avarice (says Regius) was showed, both in
exacting from their Subjects, (besides ordinary Tributes) the one half of the
profits of the earth, and in conferring of Offices not upon Gentlemen, and
merciful persons; but upon those who could best tyrannize over the people to
augment their treasures. Their cruelty appeared, in putting men to death
without mercy or justice, contrary to their Laws. We read in Guicciardine,
that Pisa revolted from, and maintained 10. years sharp Wars against, the State
of Florence, and would not submit to her yoke, by reason of the hard
impositions laid upon her by the Florentines, but chose rather to put her self
under protection of Lewis the 12. of France, a foreign and an hard master. We
know that an imposition of the tenth penny upon the Inhabitants of Holland, and
the execution of arbitrary government by the Duke of Alva, lost the Dominion of
the Netherlands to Philip the second, King of Spain. We could tell of the
often revolts of Genoa from the Kings of France, of Siena, Lacquis, Modena,
Regia, Vincensa, Padua, Crimona, Millain, and other Towns, and Provinces of
Italy, from the States whereon they have depended, even from Venice (that only
free State well governed in the world) by reason of the avarice, cruelty,
pride, and injustice of their Governors.

We could tell you, how the Duke Valentinois, or Caesar Borgia lost his new
Conquests in Italy, by his pride and cruelty over the vanquished people.

We could remember, how Alphonso and Ferdinand, Kings of Naples, lost their
dominions and lives, by their extreme tyranny over the Nobility, Gentry, and
Subjects of their Realm.

We could tell you, how the Syracusians, Leontines, and Messenians, and other
States of Sicillie were stripped of their Dominions, and fell into the hands of
their neighbors the Romans, by their great cruelty to their own Subjects. We
could find particular instances and examples, in all Empires, Kingdoms, and
free States that have been since the Creation of the World; that the Princes
and Governors, for their tyranny, and not due observing the Laws of their
Countries, have been banished, expelled, and put to death by their Subjects.

Ye know well enough, that Rehoboam lost 10. Tribes for an harsh answer to a
petioning people, 1 King. 12. 9.

We could give you some Scriptual-examples of free-States; but that we find
none mentioned there; but conclude, that there was never any State, more
glorious, more free, more careful of preserving it self, then that of Rome;
and yet she fell too, and never recovered her former liberty.

The Romans, out of a foresight that her ruin would come upon her by the
oppression and avarice of her Governors, made a Law, de repetundis, or of
recovery against extorting Magistrates; yet it served not to restrain their
Provincial Governors, though it relieved the Citizens at home, which was one
of the two causes of Romes ruin: for, as Machiavel in his Discourses upon
Livy, l. 3. c. 34. observes, that these two things were the causes of that
Republiques dissolution; the one was, Contentions, which grew upon the Agearian
Law, or partition of conquered Land among the Citizens: the other was, the
prolonging of Governments, viz. Dictatorships, Consulships, Generalships,
Tribuneships of the people, and such like great Offices: for, by these means,
those great Officers had means and power to raise arms against the liberty of
the people: Sylla and Marius by this means could find Soldiers to take their
part against the Public; and Julius Caesar could find means hereby to make
himself Lord of his native Country and Countrymen.

These things we allege not, as if we suspected any of you, (O ye noble
Patriots) to be guilty of any of these crimes, that may either hazard the
continuing of the present Government, or destroy the public liberty; but to
awake you, and put you in mind to provide fit remedies against these growing
evils, whereby you may procure safety and peace to the Commonwealth, and
everlasting honor to your own Names and Posterities; for they are to be
thought worthy of honor, not which begin, but well end honorable Actions.

And we beseech you, not to take it in ill part from us, (...) we offer our
humble advices to you in these particulars; ^^nce we the people, conceive it
our duty, to show unto our Governors, that good, which by reason of the
malignity of the times and of fortune, we have not been able to do our selves;
to the end, that you our Senators, being given to understand thereof, some of
you whom God shall more favor, may put it in practice for the public good.

Neither is our opinion to be despised: For it is a sure Maxim, that the
people are of as clear judgment in all things that conceive the Public, as
any, and is wise, and circumspect concerning their liberties, and are as
capable of the truth they hear. We know that Commonwealths have never been
much amplified, neither in dominion nor riches, unless only during their
Liberties; for it is no man's particular good that amplifies the Kingdom. We
know that those that have in their hands the Government of a State, ought to
increase the number of their free Subjects, and make them as their Associates,
and not Vassals. We know that it is more honorable and profitable unto a
State, moderately to use their Subjects means, thereby to keep their State in
perpetuity, then through covetousness to devour them in one day, and in their
loss to undo themselves for ever. We know that Tyranny is a violent form of
Government, not respecting the good of the Subjects, but only the pleasure of
the Commanders. We know that it is better to live under an hard and harsh known
written law, where every man may read his duty, and know his offense, and
punishment; then under the mildest arbitrary government, where the Subject is
condemned at the will of their Judges, without any certain or known Rules, how
specious or just soever the pretense of this kind of proceeding may be. We
know that the pretense of necessity in a Prince or State, is but the Bawd to
Tyranny; And, that Tyranny is more odious in a State we desire to maintain by
love, then in a Prince that seeks to bring it upon his Subjects by force. We
know, that those States, that call all the endeavors of their subjects, only
duty and debt, and are more apt to oppress their people, then to do them
Justice, shall find themselves upon the first change of fortune, not only the
most friendl^sse, but even the most contemptible and despised of all other.

And we fear, that notwithstanding all our desires of the preservation of this
State; there will be little amended, till by sad experience, the truth of our
conjectures in the hazard of this Commonwealth, are made manifest.

For we know, that all men are better taught by their own errors, then by the
examples of their fore-goers: but if our earnest desires and humble
supplications, shall either with scorn be rejected, or with negligence
disregarded, to the apparent hazard of the public liberty, and most desirable
State we wish to support; we hope that God will raise up some noble English
Roman Spirit, such a one as Caius Flaminius, who as Sir Walter Rawleigh l. 5.
p. 357. observes, for the preservation and maintenance of that Commonwealth,
understanding the Majesty of Rome to be wholly in the people, and no otherwise
in the Senate, then by way of delegacy, or grand Commission, did not stand
highly upon his birth and degree, but assisted the Multitude, and taught them
to know and use their power over himself, and his fellow-Senators, in reforming
their disorders; and vindicating the public liberty of his Country: In, and
for which, we are resolved to dye: and which we wish may always flourish, and
continue for the perpetual benefit, utility, and renown of all the freeborn
Subjects of England.

FJNJS.
The Publisher to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, in regard Lieu. Colonel Lilburns Charge and Sentence in the
Lords House, and their Orders thereupon, are not as yet in any Book printed,
but in this Vox Plebis; although there is, in several Books, much of his cruel
usage, by virtue thereof; published: I shall desire thee to read his own two
Books, called, Londons Liberty in Chains discovered, printed October. 1646. And
his Anatomy of the Lords Tyranny and Injustice exercised upon him; printed
November. 9. 1646. which two compared with this, do fully and amply declare and
prove all the Lords proceedings with him to be most illegal and unjust. And as
thou read the foregoing Discourse; with thy Pen amend these following
Presse-faults.

Page 2. line first, (for irepairable, read irreparable.) p. 4. l. 15 (for as
protected, read is protected. and l. 37. for Marrow of Justice read Mirror of
Justice.) p. 6. l. 5. for their subjects, read the subjects.) p. 9. l. 32. for
contentment read contenement. page 12. l. 19. for May 16. H. 6. read Mich. 16.
H. 6. p. 15. l. 28. read outlawed but by. p. 16. l. 20. for aed read and p. 17.
l. 14. for dye read dine. p. 18. which should be p. 20. l. 9. for vinvocally
read universally. p. 21. l. 18. for torvous read torcious. p. ^2. l. 27. for
witnesses read Writs. l. 34. for Astutia read Atia. p. 24. l. 4. for rediendo
read redeundo. p. 28. l. 4. and 5. read in interest for in in interest. l. 25.
for inflame read inslave. p. 29. l. 10. for improved read empowered. p. 30. l.
1. read conceiving for concerning. p. 37. l. 17. read quod for quid. p. 47. l.
7. read question for questistion. p. 57. l. 35. read pests for Priests. p. 62.
l. 12. read the people for these people, l. 13. read commotion for commontion.
p. 63. l. 14. for can give remedy read can give no remedy. p. 66. l. 21. for
the Agearian law read Agrarian law. p. 67. l. 11: for conceive the public;
read concern the public.

FINIS.

