A DISCOURSE IN VINDICATION OF Martin Luther.



LONDON, Printed by J. G. 1656.

A DISCOURSE IN VINDICATION OF Martin Luther.
HE may be suspected of Hypocrisy, if not Atheism, that too suddenly leapes
out of one Opinion into another; It being impossible for mere flesh and blood,
to pull up all at once a Religion rooted by Custom and Education in the
Understanding; which must be convinced, before it can let in another with any
cordial welcome. I speak not of the ancient and extraordinary Callings of God,
but those experimented in our times; in which over much have does oftentimes
bewray Deceit; As appeared in the Bishop of Spalatto, who, in my days, left
Italy for fear of Paul the fifth, his enemy, and reconciled himself to the
Church of England; but the old Pope being dead, and his Kinsman in the Chair,
he resumes his former Errors, and goes to Rome, in hope of Preferment, where,
contrary to promise, he dies miserably. When Falsh^od is fallen-out-with, for
any other respect, than Love of Truth, it inclines to Atheism, and is so far
from mending the Condition of the Convert, that it renders it worse.

None ever showed greater signs of Gods Spirit, than Luther did; who observed
such Gradations, as it may appear he found fault with nothing, he was not first
led to by the dictates of Conscience: Falling first upon the abuse of
Indulgences, too apparent an Impiety, to pass by so acute a Judgment
undiscovered; From this he ascended to higher Contemplations, which afforded
him the opportunity to take notice of remoter and deeper Errors His Wit and
Learning having that vast advantage over the stupid Ignoranre of those times,
that he bare down all before him, without any other Opposition, than the
contrary Faction was able to raise out of power; much weakened by the desire
all Princes had, to set limits to the Pope's daily Usurpations. And as for the
Books, then writ against him, they did rather sharpen, than blunt the desire of
Change: For the Friars had so l^ng enjoyed a free current of their Doctrine,
without interruption, that they were more intent on the reaping of such Fruit,
as grew from the Errors sown by their Predecessors, than upon Arguments to
desend them. So as if Princes, that were weary of the Yoke of Rome, had wanted
the guidance of Luther, it is not easy to say, whither they might have
wandered. And though Charles the fifth, then Emperor, to keep his Subjects in
obedience, did seem to discountenance the Schism (as they called it) yet he was
content to shut up the Pope in the Castle of S^ Angelo. Which proves his small
affection, and the truth of this Tenet, That if ever Christendom falls under
one Monarch, or turns into popular States, the power of the Pope will be lost,
or confined to Rome; being at this day only kept up, like a Shittle cock, by
the bandying of Princes.

It Is objected against Luther, That he was too passionate, using irreverent
speeches toward some in Authority: Yet so much of this fault, as Zeal leaves
unexcused, may be imputed to his Education: All can be said, is, He was but a
Man, and subject to common Infirmities; And because his enemies do so often
object this, it is strongly to be presumed, his worst fault. I could have
wished, he had not married a Nun: but I believe he did it to show the People,
The Quarrel was irreconcilable, as Absalom projected, when he polluted his
Fathers bed: And in this sense, the benefit takes away much of the blame; which
lay not in the unlawfulness, but the inexpediency of the fact. And to show,
God did not curse his Match (though he might participate of the fate of other
learned men, who seldom find their abilities, represented in their Issue; yet)
he left three such Sons, as did not give his enemies occasion to upbraid his
memory with them.

For the Real Presence, maintained by him in the Sacrament, it does not so
much condemn his Judgment in this, as it justifies his Integrity in all the
rest: He being as resolute to vindicate what he thought true, against the
persuasions of his Friends, as he was against the threats and promises of his
Enemies: For if any by-respect could have warped him, it would have been a
desire to appease the hot Dispute, the retention of this error raised in his
Own Party, wholly of his judgment but in this particular, in which Zwinglius,
and the Helvetian Church did oppose him. And if this be not enough to wash him
clean from the imputation of Self Ends and Covetousness, the Proverb used in
Germany may, That Poor Luther made many rich.

As he was protected from a number of apparent mischiefs, so the same hand
freed him from many hidden, in respect of the eyes of the world; it being
impossible, that he, who had galled so many Grandees, should not have Revenge
laid in wait for him, in every corner: Experience proving, that Kings
themselves can scarce whisper against the Court of Rome, but the Knife is ready
to give them a final Answer. His Death was with as little Molestation, as his
Life was full: For being called to the County of Mansfield, the place of his
Birth, to determine a Case in Controversy between two Princes of that Family, he
died there in the sixtyeth year of his Age.

Had the Apostles, nay our Savior himself been alive, and maintained what
Luther did, they had been persecuted by the Clergy: Therefore the Crucifying
of Christ is no prodigy in Nature, but daily practiced among men: For he that
can find the heart to stigmatize and whip his Brother, for an Error merely in
Judgment, would never have spared Peter or Paul, coming with no more visible
Authority than they had. But this is not the way to suppress an Heresy, since
most are jealous of that opinion, which uses the Sword for her Defense: Truth
having been long since determined to be most strong: And where Oppression is,
there, for the most part, she is supposed to be. This shows as little
Discretion as Charity in such as persecute those, that may be in the Right; or,
if not, shall by this means, be kept the longer in the Wrong. If a Horse
starts, the more he is beaten, the harder he is kept in the way; but let him
stand, and have leisure to consider what he blanched at; and he will perceive
it is a Block, and so go on. Yet it is neither cruelty nor imprudence, to
restrain such furious Spirits (as they do Dogs) that will bawl and fly at all
they do not know: But I should be utterly against burning of their Books in
public, if they have once gained the light; which only adds to their price,
and saves them a labor; because, if the State did not put them in credit, by
their notice, they would perhaps, after a while, for shame, burn them
themselves. The Whip reforms, not so much as him that endures it; but is taken
as a triumph by the Faction, increasing their animosity, if not their number;
So that in effect it proves a punishment to none but the honest and
tenderhearted of the people, who cannot choose but be scandalized, to see the
Image of God defaced, by cutting Ears and slitting Noses, etc. And this
raises a strong suspicion, that the Hand of Justice would not lie so heavy
only on the preciser side, but that something inclines it that may at last
turn to the subversion of the most moderate part.

The Dutch, though they tolerate all Religions and Tenants, yet none increased
to their prejudice, till they strove to suppress the Arminians, who are in taste
as like the Papists, as Scallions are to Onions; all the difference is, that
the latter is the stronger: Yet since they have let them alone, this Opinion is
observed to be lesse-numerously attended.

Had the Pope seasonably reformed the Error Luther discovered so apparently, in
the publication of Indulgences, and rewarded him with a Bishopric, for his
Learning and Zeal, let him afterward have said what he pleased, it would have
been looked upon by the people as of no credit: who like nothing so well, as
what goes cross to the grain of Authority.

The Lord Treasurer Cecil, having been unsufferably abused by Libels, sent for
the Poet, and, after he had ratled him soundly, began to take notice of the
poor fellows good parts, saying, It might be, vexatious poverty compelled him
to make use of false, though common Rumors, given out by such as hated all in
Authority; To ease which he gave him 20 pieces, promising to take the first
opportunity to advance him. This favor (most contrary to his expectation, who
would willingly have given one ear to have saved the other) did so work with
him, and the rest of the Pasquillers of the time, that, till the Treasurers
death, none used the like Invectives. Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, used
the like demeanor toward some Gentlemen that had laid the imputation of
Sodomy to his Charge, etc.

Clemency seldom causes repentance in an established Kingdom, or if it
proves a fault, it is easily mended; Whereas Cruelty can never be recalled,
raising a far greater Party out of a thirst of Revenge, than ever yet could be
mustred up from the hope of Impunity.

Therefore, to conclude, since Luther alone had the power to do so much, let
us not be thus severe against others, that having the zeal kindled (though
perhaps at the wrong end) run madding through the world; but rather pity them,
if they be in an error; Because they something resemble the first Messengers
of Truth.

FINIS.

