A VISION OF Unchangeable free mercy, in sending the means of grace to
undeserved sinners: WHEREIN Gods uncontrollable eternal purpose, in sending,
and continuing the Gospel unto this Nation, in the midst of oppositions and
contingencies, is discovered: his distinguishing mercy, in this great work,
exalted, asserted, against opposers, repiners: IN A SERMON PREACHED before the
Honorable House of COMMONS, April. 29. being the day of Public Humiliation.

Whereunto is annexed, A short defensative about Church Government, (with a
Country Essay for the practice of Church Government there) Toleration and
Petitions about these things.

By John Owen, Minister of the Gospel at Coggeshall in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Philemon Stephens at the Sign of the Gilded Lion
in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

Die Mercurii 29. April, 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That M. Ienner and Sir Peter
Wentworth do from this House give thanks to M. Nalton and M. Owen for the great
pains they took in the Sermons they preached this day, at the entreaty of this
House, (it being a day of public Humiliation) at Margarets Westminster. And to
desire them to Print their Sermons: And it is Ordered that none shall presume
to Print their Sermons, without license under their handwriting.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint Philemon Stephens, and none else, to Print my Sermon.

John Owen.

AMPLISSIMO ob) jura

Toto orb jure meritissimo Celeberrimo,

Concionem hanc sacram, humilem illam quidem, ipsorum

Joannes Owen.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of COMMONS, on the day of their
public Fast, April 29, 1646.
ACTS, chap. 16. ver. 11. And a vision appeared to Paul in the night, there
stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and
help us.


THE Kingdom of Jesus Christ is frequently in the Scripture compared to growing
things; Ecclesia sicut lun^ defectu^ habet, and ortus frequentes; sed
defectibus suis crevit, etc. haec est ver^ lun^, quae de fratris fui luce
perpetua, lur^^en sibi immortalitatis and gratiae mutuatur Amb. Hex. lib 4. cap
8.
small in the beginning and first appearance, but increasing by degrees unto
glory and perfection. The shapelesse stone cut out without hands, having
neither form, nor desirable beauty given unto it, becomes a great mountain,
filling the whole earth, Dan. 2. 35. The small vine brought out of Egypt,
quickly covers the hills with her shadow, her boughs reach unto the sea, and
her branches unto the rivers, Psalm. 80 8. The tender plant becomes as the
Cedars of God; and the grain of mustard seed to be a tree for the fowls of the
air, Psalm. ^8. 13.
to make their nests in the branches thereof: Isa 54. 11.
Mountains are made plains before it, Zach. 4 7.
every valley is filled, and the crooked paths made straight, Isa. 53. 3, 4, 5.
that it may have a passage to its appointed period; 1 John 3 13.
and all this, not only, not supported by outward advantages, Rev. 2. 10.
but in direct opposition to the combined power of this whole creation, 2 Cor.
4. 4.
as fallen, and in subjection to the god of this world, Isa. 53. 2.
the head thereof. As Christ was a tender plant, seemingly easy to be broken,
Heb. 7. 25.
and a root out of a dry ground, not easily flourishing, yet lives for ever:
so his people and Kingdom, Cant. 2. 2.
though as a lily among thorns, as sheep among wolves, Mat. 10. 16.
as a turtle dove among a multitude of devourers, yet stands unshaken, Psalm 74.
19.
at least unshivered.

The main ground and foundation of all this, is laid out, ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, of
this Chapter, containing a rich discovery, how all things here below,
especially such as concern the Gospel and Church of Christ, are carried along,
through innumerable varieties, and a world of contingencies, according to the
regular motions and goings forth of a free, eternal, unchangeable decree: as
all inferior orbs, notwithstanding the excentricks and irregularities of their
own inhabitants, are orderly carried about by the first mover.

In the 6. Eo ipso tempore quo ad omnes gentes praedicatio evangelij
mittebatur, quaedam loca Apostolis adire prohibebatur ab eo, qui vult omnes
homines salvos fieri. Prosp. Ep ad Rufin (...) Hom.
verse. the planters of the Gospel are forbid to preach the word in Asia, (that
part of it peculiarly so called,) and ver. 7. assaying to go with the same
message into Bithynia, they are crossed by the spirit, in their attempts: but
in my text, are called to a place, on which their thoughts were not at all
fixed: which calling, and which forbidding, were both subservient to his free
determination, who works all things according to the counsel of his own
will, Ephesians. 1. 11.

And no doubt but in the dispensation of the Gospel, thorowout the world, unto
this day, there is the like conformity to be found, to the pattern of Gods
eternal decrees: though to the messengers not made known aforehand by
revelation, but discovered in the effects, by the mighty working of providence.

Amongst other Nations, this is the day of Englands visitation, the dayspring
from on high, having visited this people, Mal. 4. 2.
and the Sun of righteousness arising upon us, with healing in his wings, a
man of England has prevailed for assistance, and the free grace of God, has
wrought us help by the Gospel.

Now in this day three things are to be done, to keep up our spirits unto this
duty, of bringing down our souls by humiliation.

1. To take us off the pride of our own performances, endeavors, or any
adherent worth of our own, not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord; be it
known unto you, be ye ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of
Israel, ( O house of England,) Ezekiel. 36. 32.

2. To root out that atheistical corruption, which depresses the thoughts of
men, not permitting them in the highest products of providence, to look above
contingencies, and secundary causes, though God has wrought all our works for
us, Isa. 26. 12. and known unto him are all his works from the beginning of the
world, Acts 15. 18.

3. To show that the bulk of this people are as yet in the wilderness, far
from their resting place, like sheep upon the mountains, as once Israel, Jer.
50. 6. as yet wanting help by the Gospel.

The two first of these will be cleared, by discovering, how that all
revolutions here below, especially every thing that concerns the dispensation
of the Gospel and Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, are carried along, according to
the eternally-fixed purpose of God, free in it self, taking neither rise,
growth, cause nor occasion, from any thing amongst the sons of men.

The third, by laying open the helpelesse condition of Gospel-wanting souls,
with some particular application, to all which my text directly leads me.

The words in general, 1. A quo.
are the relation of a message from Heaven, 2. Ad quem.
unto Paul, to direct him in the publishing of the Gospel, as to the place, and
persons wherein, and to whom he was to preach: and in them you have these four
things:

1. Mod^^.
The manner of it, it was by vision, a vision appeared. 2. Temp^^.
The time of it, in the night. 3. Instrumentum.
The bringer of it, a man of Macedonia. 4. Materia.
The matter of it, help for the Macedonians, interpreted, ver. 10. to be by
preaching of the Gospel.
A little clearing of the words will make way for observations.

1. For the manner of the delivery of this message, it was by vision: of all
the ways that God used of old, to reveal himself unto any in extraordinary
manner, which were sundry and various, Heb. 1. 1. there was no one so frequent,
as this of vision: wherein this did properly consist, and whereby distinguished
from other ways, of the discovery of the secrets of the Lord, I shall not now
discuss: in general, visions are revelations of the mind of the Lord,
concerning some hidden things present or future, and not otherwise to be known:
and they were of two sorts;

1. Isa. 1. 1.
Revelations merely by word, or some other more internal species, Amos 1. 1.
without any outward sensible appearance, which, (...). 1. 1.
for the most part, was the Lords way of proceeding with the Prophets; Obad. 1.
which transient light or discovery of things before unknown, they called a
vision.

2. Revelations, accompanied with some sensible apparitions, and that either:

1. Jer. 1. 11.
Of things, as usually among the Prophets, rods and pots, wheels and trees, Jer
1. 13.
lamps, axes, vessels, rams, goats and the like, Ezekiel. 1. 5, 6, 7.
were presented unto them.

2. Zech. 1. 8. and 3. 9, 10, etc.
Of persons, and those according to the variety of them, of three sorts;

First, Dan. 7. 8, 9.
Of the second person of the Trinity; and this either

1. In respect of some glorious beams of his deity, as to Isaiah, chap. 6. 1.
with Joh. 12. 41. to Daniel, chap. 10. ver. 5, 6. as afterward to John, Rev.
1. 13, 14, 15. to which you may add the apparitions of the glory of God, not
immediately designing the second person, as Ezekiel. 1.

2. With reference to his humanity to be assumed, as to Abraham, Genesis 18. 1, 2.
to Joshua, chap. 5. 13, 14, 15, etc.

Second, Of Angels, as unto Peter, Acts 12. 7. to the woman, Mat. Zech. 2. 1.
28. 2. to John, Rev. 22. 8, etc.

Third, Of Men, as in my text.

Now the several advancements of all these ways in dignity and preeminence,
according as they clearly make out, intellectual verity, or according to the
honor and exaltation of that whereof apparition is made, Vid. Aquin. 2. 2 q.
174. Art. 3, 4 Scot. in did. tert.
is too fruitless a speculation for this days exercise.

Our vision is of the later sort, accompanied with a sensible appearance, and
is called (...); there be two words in the new Testament signifying vision,
(...) and (...), coming from different verbes, but both signifying to see: some
distinguish them, and say, that (...) is a vision, (...), an appearance to a
man awake; (...), an appearance to a man asleep: called sometimes a dream, Job
33. 15. like that which was made to Joseph, Mat. 2. 19. but this distinction
will not hold: our Savior calling that vision, which his Disciples had at his
transfiguration, when doubtless they were waking, (...), Mat. 17. 9. so that I
conceive Paul had this vision waking; and the night, is specified, as the time
thereof, not to intimate his being asleep, but rather his watchfullnes, seeking
counsel of God in the night which way he should apply himself, in the
preaching, of the Gospel: and such I conceive was that of later days, whereby
God revealed to Zuinglius a strong confirmation of the doctrine of the Lords
Supper, from Exodus 12. 11. against the factours for that monstrous figment of
Transubstantiation.

2. A Lapide, Sanctius in locum, etc.
For the second or time of this vision, I need say no more, then what before I
intimated.

3. The bringer of the message, (...), he was a man of Macedonia in a vision:
the Lord made an appearance unto him, Me^^. Apost. of later times. ^lut^rch. in
vit. Bru^i.
as of a man of Macedonia; discovering even to his bodily eyes a man, and to
his mind, that he was to be conceived as a man of Macedonia: this was, say
some, Calvin. in locum, Dicebat se discernere, (nescio quo s^pore, quem verbis
explicare non poterat) quid interesset inter Deum revelantem, etc. Aug. confess.
an Angel, the Tutelar Angel of the place, say the Popish expositors, or the
genius of the place, according to the phrase of the Heathens, of whom they
learned their daemonologie, perhaps him, or his Antagonist, that not long
before appeared to Brutus all Philippi: but these are pleasing dreams: us it
may suffice, that it was the appearance of a man, the mind of Paul being
enlightened to apprehend him as a man of Macedonia: and that with infallible
assurance, such as usually accompanies divine revelations, in them to whom
they are made, as Jer. 23. 28. for upon it, Luke affirms, ver. 10. they
assuredly concluded, that the Lord called them into Macedonia.

4. The message it self is a discovery of the want of the Macedonians, and the
assistance they required, which the Lord was willing should be imparted unto
them: their want is not expressed, but included in the assistance desired, and
the person unto whom for it they were directed. Had it been to help them in
their estates, they should scarcely have been sent to Paul, Acts 3. 6.
who I believe, might for the most-part say with Peter, Silver and Gold have I
none. Or had it been with a complaint, that they, who from a province of
Greece, in a corner of Europe, had on a sudden been exalted into the Empire of
the Eastern World, were now enslaved to the Roman power and oppression, they
might better have gone to the Parthians, then the only state in the world,
formidable to the Romans: Paul, though a military man, yet fought not with
Neroe's Legions, the then visible Devil of the upper world, ^ lutarch, de
defect. or^^u. (...). Respons. Apoll. apud Eusebius. Niceph.
but with Legions of Hell, of whom the earth was now to be cleared; It must be
a soulwant, if he be entrusted with the supplying of it. And such this was,
help from death, hell, Satan, from the jaws of that devouring Lion: of this the
Lord makes them here to speak, what every one in that condition ought to speak,
help for the Lords sake, it was a call to preach the Gospel.

The words being opened, we must remember what was said before of their
connection with the verses foregoing; wherein the Preachers of the Gospel, are
expressly hindered from above, from going to other places, and called hither.
Whereof no reason is assigned, but only the will of him that did employ them:
and that no other can be rendered, I am further convinced, -- a nullo duro cord
resistitur, quid cor ipsum emollit. Aug. Ezekiel 36 26. Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
by considering the empty conjectures of attempters.

God foresaw that they would oppose the Gospel, says our Beda: so say I might
he of all nations in the world, had not he determined to send his effectual
grace for the removal of that opposition: besides, he grants the means of
grace to despisers, Matthew. 11. 21.

They were not prepared for the Gospel, Lapide. Sanctius. in loc. Rom Script.
Synd ar. 1. (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Ep. Irae lib. 3. cap. 3. Qui causam quae
sit voluntatis divinae, aliquid majus ^o quaerit, Aug. Voluntas Dei nullo modo
causam habet. Aquin. p. q. (...). a 5.
says Oecumenius: as well say I as the Corinthians, whose preparations you may
see, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. or any other nation, as we shall afterward declare;
yet to this foolish conjecture adhere the Papists and Arminians. God would have
those places left for to be converted by John, says Sedulius, yet the Church
at Ephesus the chief City of those parts was planted by Paul, says Ignatius,
and Irenaeus.

He foresaw a famine to come upon those places, says Origin; from which he
would deliver his own, and therefore it seems, left them to the power of the
Devil.

More such fancies might we recount, of men, unwilling to submit to the will of
God; but upon that as the sole discriminating cause of these things we rest,
and draw these three observations.

1. The rule whereby all things are dispensed here below, especially in the
making out of the means of grace, is the determinate will and counsel of God:
stay not in Asia, go not into Bithynia, but come to Macedonia, even so, O
Father, for so, etc.

2. The sending of the Gospel to any nation, place or persons rather then
others, as the means of life and salvation, is of the mere free grace and good
pleasure of God. Stay not in Asia, etc.

3. No men in the world want help, like them that want the Gospel. Come and
help us.

Begin we with the first of these, (...). Theophrast. apud Picum, de prove.
Providentia est ratio ordinis rerum ad finem. Th. p. q. 22. a 1. c.
the rule whereby, etc. or all events and effects, especially concerning the
propagation of the Gospel, and the Church of Christ, are in their greatest
variety, regulated by the eternal purpose and counsel of God: all things
below in their events, are but the wax, whereon the eternal seal of his
purpose, has left its own impression, and they every way answer unto it. It is
not my mind to extend this to the generality of things in the world, nor to
show how the creature, can by no means deviate from that eternal rule of
providence whereby it is guided, no more then an arrow can avoid the mark,
after it has received the impression of an unerring hand, or well-ordered
wheels not turn, according to the motion given them by the master spring,
Ezekiel. 1.
or the wheels in Ezekiels vision move irregularly to the spirit of life that
was in them.

Nor yet secondly, how that, on the other side, does no way prejudice the
liberty of second causes, in their actions agreeable to the natures they are
endued withal. He who made and preserves the fire, yet hinders not, but that
it should burn, or act necessarily agreeable to its nature; by his making,
preserving and guiding of men, hinders not, yea effectually causes, Non
tantum res, sed rerum modos.
that they work freely, agreeable to their nature.

Nor yet thirdly, V^^etur ergo quod non s^t aliqua d^ordenatio, deformitas aut
peccatum simpliciter in toto u^^verso, sed tantummodo respectu interiorum
causarum, ordinationem superioris causa volentium, licet non vale^^ium
pert^rbare. ^rad. de cause. Dei l^b. 1. cap. 34. (...).
to clear up what a straight line runs through all the darkness, confusion and
disorder in the world, how absolutely, in respect of the first fountain, and
last tendance of things, there is neither deformity, fault, nor deviation,
every thing that is amiss, consisting in the transgression of a moral rule,
which is the sin of the creature, the first cause being free: as he that
causes a lame man to go, is the cause of his going, but not of his going
lame: or the sun exhaling a smell from the kennell, is the cause of the smell,
but not of its noisomnesse, for from a garden his beams raise a sweet savor:
nothing is amiss but what goes off from its own rule, which he cannot do, who
will do all his pleasure, and knows no other rule. But omitting these things, I
shall tie my discourse to that which I chiefly aimed at in my proposition, viz.
to discover how the great variety which we see in the dispensation of the means
of grace, A^eo summa justitiae regula est Dei volun ^as, ut quicquid vult,
co^^so quo^ vult justum ^abendum sit, Aug. de genesis con man. l^b 1. Isa. 46. 10.
proceeds from, and is regulated by some eternal purpose of God, unfolded in
his Word. To make out this, we must lay down three things.

1. The wonderful variety in dispensing of the outward means of salvation, in
respect of them, unto whom they were granted, used by the Lord since the fall:
I say, since the fall, for the grace of preserving from sin, and conti^^ing
with God, had been general, universally extended to every creature, but for
the grace of rising from sin, and coming again unto God, that is made exceeding
various, by some distinguishing purpose.

2. That this outward dispensation being presupposed, yet in effectual working
upon particular persons, there is no less variety, for he has mercy on whom
he will have mercy.

3. Discover the rules of this whole administration.

1. Genesis 3 15.
For the first, The promise was at first made unto Adam, Chap 4. 26.
and by him doubtless conveied to his issue; and preached to the several
generations, Genesis 6. 5.
which his eyes beheld, proceeding from his own loins: but yet by the wickedness
of the old world, all flesh corrupting their ways, we may easily collect, that
the knowledge of it quickly departed from the most: sin banishing the love of
God from their hearts, Genesis 5. ^5. and 6. 18.
hindered the knowledge of God from continuing in their minds. Genesis 12. 1. and
18. 1, 2.
2. After many revivings, by visions, revelations, and covenants, it was at
length called in from the wide world, Psalm. 76 1, 2.
and wholly restrained to the house, family and seed of Abraham: Joh. 4. 22.
with whom alone, all the means of grace continued, Gal 4 4.
for thrice fourteen generations; they alone were in Goshen, Joh. 12. 31.
and all the world besides in thick darkness: Acts 17. 30.
the dew of Heaven was on them as the fleece, when else all the earth was dry.
Mark. 16 15.
God showed his word unto Jacob, Mal. 3. 4.
his statutes and judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any Nation,
Prove 8. 31.
Psalm. 141. 19, 20. The prerogative of the Jews was chiefly in this, See
Tertullian, lib. ad Iudae. reckoning almost all the known Nations of the world,
and affirming that they all, that is, some in them, in his days, submitted to
the scepter of Christ: he lived in the end of the second Century.
that to them were committed the oracles of God, Romans 3. to them pertained the
adoption, and the glory, the Covenants and the giving of the Law, the service
of God and the promises, Romans 9. 4. 3. But when the fulness of time came, the
Son of God being sent in the likeness of sinful flesh, he drew all men unto
him: and God, who had before winked at the time of their ignorance, then called
them every where to repent: commanding the Gospel to be preached, to the
universality of reasonable creatures, and the way of salvation to be proclaimed
unto all; upon which, in few years the sound of the Gospel went out into all
Nations, and the sun of Righteousness displayed his beams upon the habitable
parts of the earth. 4. But yet once more this light, by Satan and his agents,
persecutours and seducers, is almost extinguished, as was foretold, 2 These. 2.
remaining but in few places, and burning dim where it was, the Kingdom of the
beast being full of darkness, Revel. 16. 10. yet God again raises up reformers,
and by them kindles a light, we hope, never to be put out. But alas, what a
spot of ground does this shine on, in comparison of the former vast extents and
bounds of the Christian world. Now is all this variety, think you, to be
ascribed unto chance, as the Philosopher thought the world was made by a
casual concurrence of atoms? or has the Idol free will, with the new
goddess contingency, ruled in these dispensations? truly neither the one nor
the other, no more then the fly raised the dust, by sitting on the chariot
wheel; but all these things have come to pass, according to a certain unerring
rule, given them by Gods determinate purpose and counsel. Secondly,
presupposing this variety in the outward means, how is it that thereupon, one
is taken, another left? the promise is made known to Cain and Abel; one the
first murderer, the other the first Martyr; Jacob and Esau, had the same
outward advantages, but the one becomes Israel, the other Edom, the one
inherits the promises, the other sels his right for a mess of pottage: at the
preaching of our Savior, some believed, some blasphemed; Ioh. 7. 12.
some said he was a good man, others said, nay, but he deceives the people:
have we not the word in its power this day, and do we not see the like various
effects, some continuing in impenitency, others in sincerity closing with Jesus
Christ? Now what shall we say to these things? What guides these wheels? Who
thus stears his word for the good of souls? Why this also, as I said before, is
from some peculiarly distinguishing purpose of the will of God.

To open the third thing proposed, I shall show, first, that all this variety
is according to Gods determinate purpose, and answers thereunto; Secondly,
the particular purposes from whence this variety proceeds.

1. Ephesians. 1. 11. He works all things according to the Counsel of his own
will: Piscat. in loc. (...) Damascin satis imp^e.
as man may be said to erect a fabric, according to the counsel of his will,
when he frames it before in his mind, and makes all things in event, answer
his preconceived platform; all things, (especially (...), all those things, of
which the Apostle there treats, Gospel-things) have their futurition, and
manner of being, from his eternal purpose: whence also is the idea in the
mind of God, Mat. 10. 29.
of all things with their circumstances, that shall be: Job 14. 5*
that is the first mover, continuing it self immovable: giving to every thing
a regular motion, Prove. 16. 33.
according to the impression which from that it does receive: Prove. 11. 1. ^0.
and 19 21.
for known unto him are all his works from the beginning of the World, Nihil
fit, nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel ipse faciendo, vel si^endo ut fiat. Aug.
Act. 15. 18.

If any attendants of actions, might free and exempt them, from the regular
dependence we insist upon, they must be either contingency or sin; but yet for
both these, we have, Genesis chap 4, 5. 4, 5, 6, 7.
besides general rules, clear particular instances: what seems more contingent
and casual, then the unadvised slaying of a man, 1 King. 22. 19, 20, 21.
with the fall of the head of an axe from the helve, as a man was cutting wood
by the way side? Deuteronomy. 2 Kin. 5. 18, 19.
19. 5. yet God assumes this as his own work, Exodus 23. Psalm. 76. 10.
13. the same may be said of free agents, and their actions: and for the other,
Eccles. 7. 26.
see Act. 4. 27, 28. in the crucifying of the Son of Gods love, Isa. 6. 9,
10, 11, etc.
all things came to pass according as his counsel had before determined that
it should be done. Deus no^ operatur in malis, quod ei displicet, sed operatur
per eos quod ei placet; recipientur vero, non pro eo quod Deus been usus est
ipsorum operibus malis, sed pro eo, quod ipsi mal^ abusi sunt Dei operibus
bonis: Fulgent. ad Monim.
Now how in the one of these liberty is not abridged, the nature of things not
changed in the other, sin is not countenanced, belongs not to this discourse:
the counsel of the Lord then stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart
are unto all generations, Psalm. 33. 12. his counsel stands, and he will do
all his pleasure, Isa. 46. 10. for he is the Lord, and he changes not, Mal. 3.
6. with him is neither variablenes nor shadow of turning, James 1. 17. all
things that are, come to pass in that unchangeable method, which he has laid
them down from all eternity.

2. Let us look peculiarly upon the purposes according to which the
dispensations of the Gospel, both in sending, and withholding it do proceed.

1. For the not sending of the means of grace unto any people, whereby they
hear not the joyful sound of the Gospel, but have in all ages followed dumb
Idols, as many do unto this day. In this chapter of which we treat, the Gospel
is forbidden to be preached in Asia and Bithynia, which restraint the Lord by
his providence, as yet continues to many parts of the world: now the purpose
from whence this proceeds, and whereby it is regulated, you have Romans 9. 22.
What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much long suffering the vessels of his wrath fitted to destruction,
compared with Matthew. 11. 25, 26. thou have hid these things from the prudent
and wise, even so, O Father, for so it seemed good before thee: and with Acts
14. 16. he suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways: 2 These 2.
now Gods not sending the truth, has the same design and aim with his
sending, Acts 4.
the efficacy of error, Liberatur pars hominum, part pereunte; sed ^ur horum
misertus sit Deus, i^orum non misertus, quae scientia comprehendere potest?
later discretionis ratio, sed non late^ ipsa discretio. Prosp. de Vocat. Genesis
viz. that they all may be damned, who have it not: there being no other name
under Heaven, whereby they may be saved, but only that which is not revealed
unto them: God in the mean time, being no more the cause of their sins, for
which they incur damnation, then the sun is the cause of cold and darkness,
which follow the absence thereof: or he is the cause of a man's imprisonment for
debt, who will not pay his debt for him, though he be no-way obliged so to do:
so then the not sending of the Gospel to any people, is an act regulated by
that eternal purpose of God, whereby he determines to advance the glory of
his justice, by permitting some men to sin, to continue in their sin, and for
sin to send them to their own place; as a Kings not sending a pardon to
condemned malefactors, is an issue of his purpose, that they shall die for
their faults. When you see the Gospel strangely, and through wonderful
varieties, and unexpected providence, carried away from a people, know, that
the spirit which moves in those wheels, is that purpose of God which we have
recounted.

2. To some people, to some Nations, the Gospel is sent, God calls them to
repentance and acknowledgement of the truth, as in my text, Macedonia: and
England the day wherein we breath. Now there is in this a twofold aim: 1.
Peculiar toward some in their conversion; 2. General toward all for
conviction, and therefore it is acted according to a twofold purpose, which
carries it along, and is fulfilled thereby.

First, Romans 8. 28, 29.
His purpose of saving some in and by Jesus Christ, effectually to bring them
unto himself, Ephesians. 1. 4.
for the praise of his glorious grace: 2 Timothy 2. 1^.
upon whomsoever the seal of the Lord is stamped, that God knows them and ownes
them as his, to them he will cause his Gospel to be revealed. Ephesians. 2. 2, 12.
Acts 18. 10. Paul is commanded to abide at Corinth, and to preach there, Non
ob aliud dicit, non vos me elegistis, sed ego vos elegi, nisi quia non
elegerunt eum, ut eligeret eos; sed ut eligerent eum, elegit eos. Non quia
praescivit eos credituros, fed quia facturus ipse fuerit credentes. Electi sunt
itaque ante mundi constitutionem, ea praedestinatione, qua Deus ipse sua futura
facta praevidit: electi sunt autem de mundo e^ vocatione, qua Deus id quod
praedestinavit implevit. August. de bon. persev.
because God had much people in that City: though the devil had them in present
possession, yet they were Gods in his eternal counsel. And such as these they
were, for whose sake the man of Macedonia is sent on his message. Have you
never seen the Gospel hover about a Nation, now and then about to settle, and
anon scared and upon wing again, yet working through difficulties, making plains
of mountains, and filling valleys, overthrowing armies, putting aliens to
flight, and at length taking firm root like the Cedars of God? truly if you
have not, you are strangers to the place wherein you live. Now what is all
this, but the working of the purpose of God to attain its proposed end, of
gathering his Saints to himself. In effectual working of grace also, for
conversion and salvation, whence do you think it takes its rule and
determination, in respect of particular objects, that it should be directed to
John, not Judas; Simon Peter, not Simon Magus? Why only from this
discriminating counsel of God from eternity, to bring the one, and not the
other to himself by Christ, Acts 2. 47. the Lord added to the Church such as
should be saved. The purpose of saving, is the rule of adding to the Church of
believers. And Acts 13. 48. as many believed as were ordained to eternal life.
Their fore-ordaining to life eternal, gives them right to faith and belief.
The purpose of Gods election is the rule of dispensing saving grace.

Secondly, cap. 16, 17.
His purpose of leaving some inexcusable in their sins, Mat. 11 21.
for the further manifestation of his glorious justice, Acts 13. 46.
is the rule of dispensing the word unto them: Luke 2. 34.
Did you never see the Gospel sent or continued to an unthankefull people, 1
Pet. ^. 7.
bringing forth no fruits meet for it? Ezekiel. 2. 5.
wherefore it is so sent, see Isa. Matthew. 2^. 15.
6. 9, 10. which prophecy you have fulfilled, Ioh. 12. 41, Romans ^. 23.
42. in men described, Jude 4. and 1 Pet. 2. 8. But here we must strike sail,
the waves swell, and it is no easy task to sail in this gulf, the
righteousness of God is a great mountain, ( easy to be seen) but his
judgments like the great deep, ( who can search into the bottom thereof?)
Psalm. 36. 6. And so I hope* I have discovered, how all things here below,
concerning the promulgation of the Gospel, are, in their greatest variety,
straightly regulated by the eternal purposes and counsel of God. The Uses of
it follow.

To discover whence it is, Use 1.
that the work of reforming the worship of God, and settling the almost
departing Gospel, has so powerfully been carried along in this Nation: that a
beautiful fabric is seen to arise in the midst of all oppositions, with the
confusion of axes and hammers sounding about it: N^h. 4. 17.
though the builders have been forced ofttimes, not only with one hand, but
with both to hold the weapons of war: that although the wheels of our
chariots have been knocked off, and they driven heavily, yet the regular
motions of the superior wheels of providence, have carried on the design,
toward the resting place aimed at; that the ship has been directed to the
port, though the storm had quite pusled the pilots and mariners; even from
hence, that all this great variety, was but to work out one certain
fore-appointed end, proceeding in the tracts and paths, which were traced out
for it from eternity; which though they have seemed to us a maze or labyrinth,
such a world of contingencies and various chances has the work passed through;
yet indeed all the passages thereof have been regular and straight, answering
the platform laid down for the whole in the counsel of God. Daniel, chap. 9.
makes his supplication for the restoration of Jerusalem, ver. 23. an Angel is
sent to tell him, that at the beginning of his supplication the commandment
came forth, viz. that it should be accomplished; it was before determined, and
is now set on work: but yet what mountains of opposition, Zech. 4. 7.
what hindrances lay in the way? S^^l. de Emend. Temp.
Cyrus must come to the crown, by the death or slaughter of Darius; his heart
be moved to send some to the work; in a short time Cyrus is cut off; now
difficulties arise from the following Kings: what their flattering
counselors, what the malignant Nations about them conspired, the books of
Nehemiah and Ezra sufficiently declare. Whence, ver. 25. the Angel tells
Daniel, that from the commandment, to restore and build Jerusalem, unto Messia
the Prince, shall be 7 weeks, and 62 weeks, the street shall be built again,
and the wall in troublesome times: that is, it shall be 7 weeks to the
finishing of Jerusalem, and thence to Messia the Prince, 62 weeks; 7 weeks,
that is, 49 years, for so much it was I follow in this the vulgar or common
account, otherwise there is no part of Scripture chronology so contended
about, as these weeks of Daniel: most concluding, that they are terminated in
the death of Christ, happening about the midst of the last week: but about
their original or rise there is no small debate, of the four decrees made by
the Persian Kings about the building of Jerusalem, viz. 1. By Cyrus, 2 Chronicles.
3. 6. 2. By Darius Ezekiel. 6. 3. 3. By Arta^erxes, Ezekiel. 7. of the same to
Nehemiah, chap. 2. following the account of their reign set down in profane
stories, the last only holds exactly. Tertullian ad Iudae. begins it from
Darius, when this vision appeared to Daniel, whom it seems he conceived to be
Darius Hyslaspes, that followed the Magi, and not Medus, that was before Cyrus:
and so with a singular kind of Chronology makes up his account. Vid: Eusebius.
demon. Evan lib. 8. cap. 2. Fun^c. Com. in Chron. Beroald. chron. lib. 3. cap.
7, 8 Mon^acu. Apparat.
, from the decree of Cyrus, to the finishing of the wall by Nehemiah: of which
time the Temple, as the Jews affirmed, was all but 3 years in building, Ioh. 2.
20. during which space, how often did the hearts of the people of God faint in
their troubles, as though they should never have seen an end, and therefore
ever and anon were ready to give over, as Hag. 1. 2. but yet ye see the decree
was fixed, and all those varieties, did but orderly work in an exact method,
for the glorious accomplishment of it. Englands troubles, have not yet endured
above half the odd years of those reformers task, yet, good God, how short
breathed are men! what fainting is there? what repining, what grudging against
the ways of the Lord? But, let me tell you, that as the water in the stream
will not go higher then the head of the fountain, no more will the work^ in
hand, be carried one step higher, or beyond the aim of its fountain, the
counsel of God, from whence it has its rise: and yet as a river will break
through all oppositions, and swell to the height of mountains, to go to the sea,
from whence it came; so will the stream of the Gospel, when it comes out from
God, break down all mountains of opposition, and not be hindered from resting in
its appointed place. It were an easy thing to recall their minds, to some
trembling periods of time, when there was trembling in our Armies, and
trembling in our Counsels, trembling to be ashamed, to be repented of,
trembling in the City and in the Country, and men were almost at their wits
end for the sorrows and fears of those days: and yet we see how the
unchangeable purpose of God, has wrought strongly through all these straits,
from one end to another, that nothing might fall to the ground, of what he had
determined. If a man in those days had gone about to persuade us, that all our
pressures were good omens, that they all wrought together for our good, we
could have been ready to cry with the woman, who when she had recount^d her
griefs ^o the Physicians and he still replied, they were good signs, (...),
good signs have undone me, these good signs will be our ruin; yet behold (we
hope) the contrary. Our day has been like that mentioned, Zech. 14. 6, 7. a
day whose light is neither clear nor dark, a day known only to the Lord,
seeming to us to be neither day nor night: but God knew all this while that it
was a day, he saw how it all wrought for the appointed end: and in the evening,
in the close, it will be light, so light as to be to us discernable. In the
mean time, we are like unskilful men, going to the house of some curious
Artist, so long as he is about his work, despise it as confused; but when it
is finished, admire it as excellent: Whilst the passages of providence are on
us, all is confusion, but when the fabric is reared, glorious.

Learn to look upon the wisdom of God, Use 2.
in carrying all things, through this wonderful variety, exact^y to answer his
own eternal purpose: ^uffering so many mountains to lie in the way of
reforming his Churches, and settling the Gospel, that his spirit may have the
glory, and his people the comfort in their removal. It is an high and Noble
contemplation, to consider the purposes of God, so far as by the event
revealed, and to see what impressions his wisdom and power do leave upon
things accomplished here below, to read in them a temporary history of his
eternal counsels. Some men may deem it strange, that his determinate will,
which gives rule to these things, and could in a word have reached its own
appointment, should carry his people so many journies in the wilderness, and
keep u^ thus long in so low estate* I say, not to speak of his own glory, which
has sparkled forth of this flinty opposition, there be diverse things, things
of light, for our good, which he has brought forth out of all that darkness,
wherewith we have been overclouded: take a few instances.

1. If there had been no difficulties, there had been no deliverances: and did
we never find our hearts so enlarged toward God upon such advantages, as to
say, Well, this days temper of spirit, was cheaply purchased by yesterdaies
anguish and fear? that was but a being sick at sea.

2. Had there been no tempests and storms, we had not made out for shelter: did
ye never run to a tree for shelter in a storm, Prove. 18. ^0.
and find fruit which ye expected not? did ye never go to God for safeguard in
these times, driven by outward storms, Heb. 12. 11.
and there find unexpected fruit, the peaceable fruit of righteousness, that
made you say, Happy tempest, which cast me into such an harbor? Pet* Mart. de
Relig. Jud* decad. 1 l^b. 1.
It was a storm that occasioned the discovery of the golden mines of India:
has not a storm driven some to the discovery of the richer mines of the love
of God in Christ?

3. Had not Esau come against him, with 400 men, Jacob had not been called
Israel; he had not been put to it, to try his strength with God, and so to
prevail. Who would not purchase with the greatest distress that heavenly
comfort, which is in the return of prayers? the strength of Gods Jacobs in this
Kingdom, had not been known, if the Esaus had not come against them. Some say,
this war has made a discovery of Englands strength, what it is able to do. I
think so also, not what Armies it can raise against men, but with what Armies
of prayers and tears it is able to deal with God. Had not the brethren strove
in the womb, Rebekah had not asked, Why am I thus? nor received that answer,
The elder shall serve the younger: had not two sorts of people strugled in the
womb of this Kingdom, we had not sought, nor received such gracious answers.
Thus do all the various motions of the lower wheels, serve for our good, and
exactly answer the impression they receive from the master spring, the eternal
purpose of God. Of this hitherto.

The sending of the Gospel to any one Nation, Observe. 2.
rather then another, Q^i liber^t^r, gra^iam diligat* qui non liberatur,
debitu^a a^roscar. Aug. de bon* persev. cap. 8.
as the means of life and salvation, is of the mere free grace and good
pleasure of God.

Now before I come to make out the absolute independency and freedom of this
distinguishing mercy, I shall premise three things.

First, 1. Ex nequissimis in ipso vitae exitu gratia invenit quos aaoplet* cum
multi, qui minus ^ocertes videantur, doni hujus alieni sunt.
That the not sending of the Gospel to any person or people, is of Gods mere
good pleasure, and not of any peculiar distinguishing demerit in that person or
people. No man or Nation does majorem ponere obicem, lay more or greater
obsta^les against the Gospel then another. There is nothing imaginable to lay a
block in the passage thereof, but only sin: Now these sins, are, or may be, of
two sorts; either first, against the Gospel it self, which may possibly hinder
the receiving of the Gospel, but not the sending of it, which it presupposes.
Secondly, against the Covenant they are under, and the light they are guided
by, Pros. de voc. Genesis lib. 1. cap. 17.
before the beams of the Gospel shine upon them: now in these, generally all
are equal, all having sinned and come short of the glory of God: 1 Cor, 1. 25,
26.
And in particular sins against the Law and light of nature, no Nation have
gone farther then they which were soonest enlightened with the word, as
afterward will appear: so that the sole cause of this, is the good pleasure of
God, as our Savior affirms, Mat. 11. 25, 26.

Secondly, 2.
That sins against the Covenant of works, which men are under, Act. 14. 16, ^7.
^h. ^7. ^0, 3^.
before the Gospel comes unto them, cannot have any general demerit, that the
means of life and salvation by free grace should not be imparted to them. It is
true, all Nations have deserved to be turned into hell, and a people that have
had the truth, and detained it in ungodliness, deserve to be deprived of it.
The first, by virtue of the sanction of the first broken Covenant: the other,
by sinning against that, which they had of the second; but that men in a fallen
condition, and not able to rise, should hereby deserve not to be helped up,
needs some distinction to clear it.

There is then a two-foold demerit and indignity: one merely negative, or a not
deserving to have good done unto us: The other positive, deserving that good
should not be done unto us. The first of these, is found in all the world, in
respect of the dispensation of the Gospel: If the Lord should bestow it only on
those who do not, not deserve it, he must for ever keep^ it closed up in the
eternal treasure of his his own bosom. The second is found directly in none,
in respect of that peculiar way which is discovered in the Gospel, because they
had not sinned against it: which rightly considered, gives no small luster to
the freedom of grace.

Thirdly, 3.
That there is a right in the Gospel, and a fitness in that gracious
dispensation, to be made known to all people in the world; that no singular
portion of the earth should be any longer an holy land, or any mountain of the
world lift up its head above its fellows. And this right has a double
foundation.

First, The infinite value and worth of the blood of Christ, giving fullness
and fitness to the promises founded thereon, Romans ^. 22.
to be propounded to all mankind, Joel 2. 28.
for through his blood, remission of sins is preached to whosoever believes on
him, Joh. 17. 32.
Acts 10. Romans 1 5
43. to every creature, Mat. 16. 15. God would have a price of that infinite
value for sin, Rom* 10. 26.
laid down, as might justly give advantage, to proclaim a pardon indifinitely
to all that will come in, and accept of it, there being in it no defect at all,
(though intentionally only a ransom for some) but that by it, the world might
know that he had done whatsoever the father commanded him, Jo. 14. 31.

Secondly, 2.
In that ^^conomy and dispensation of the grace of the new Covenant, breaking
forth in these later days, whereby all external distinction, Romans ^. 13.
of places and ^ersons, people and Nations being removed, Ephs* 14, 15.
Jesus Christ takes all Nations to be his inheritance, Mat. ^8 19.
dispensing to all men the grace of the Gospel, bringing salvation, as seems
best to him: Tit. 2. 11, 12. for being lifted up, he drew all unto him, having
redeemed us with his blood, out of every kindred and tongue, people and Nation,
Apoc. 5. 9. And on these two grounds it is, that the Gospel has in it self a
right and fitness, to be preached to all, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call.

These things being premised, I come to the proof of the assertion.

Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. Moses is very careful in sundry places to get this to take an
impression upon their spirits, that it was mere free grace that exalted them
into that condition and dignity wherein they stood, by their approach unto God,
in the enjoyment of his Ordinances: in this most clearly rendering the cause of
Gods love in choosing them, mentioned, ver. 7. to be only his love, ver. 8. his
love toward them is the cause of his love, his free love eternally
determining, of his free love actually conferring those distinguishing mercies
upon them: it was not for their righteousness, for they were a stiffnecked
people, D^ut. 6 6.

Mat. 11. 25* 26. Our Savior laying both these things together, the hiding of
the mysteries of salvation from some, and revealing them to others, renders the
same reason and supreme cause of both, of which no account can be rendered, only
the good pleasure of God. I thank thee, father: and if any will proceed
higher, and say, Where is the justice of this, that men equally obnoxious,
should be thus unequally accepted? we say with Paul, that he will have mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth, and who art thou, O man,
that disputest against God? si tu es homo, and ego homo, August.
audtamus dicentem, O homo, Tu quis: to send a pardon to some that are
condemned, Si hoc voluntatum meritis voluerimus ascribere, ut malos negl^xisse
gratia bon^s etegisse ^ideatu^.
suffering the rest to suffer, has no injustice. If this will not satisfy,
let us say with the same Apostle, (...), Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the, etc.

Yea so far is it from truth, that God should dispense, and grant his word and
means of grace, by any other rule, or upon any other motive then his own will
and good pleasure, resistet vobis innumerabilium causa populorum, quibus per
tot secula, coelest is doctrinae a^nu^tiatio non corruscavit, nec meltores
ju^sse ^oru^ posteros possumus ^icere, quibus scriptum est, Gentium populus qui
sedebat in ^encoris lucem vidit magnam, Prosp de voc. genesis lib. ^. cap. 15.
that we find in the Scripture the direct contrary to what we would suppose,
even, mercy showed to the more unworthy, and the more worthy passed by,
reckoning worthiness and unworthiness by less or greater sin, with less or
more endeavors. Christ preaches to Chorazin and Bethsaida which would not
repent, and at the same time denies the word to Tire and Zidon, which would
have gotten on sackcloth and ashes, when the other continued delicate
despisers, Mat. 11. 21. Ezekiel is sent to them that would not hear him,
passing by them that would have hearkened, chap. 3. 5. which is most clear,
Romans 9. 30, 31. the Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have
attained to righteousness, even the righteousness, of faith; but Israel which
followed after the Law of righteousness, have not attained to it. If in the
dispensation of the Gospel, the Lord had had any respect to the desert of
people, Corinth that famous place of sinning, had not so soon enjoyed it, the
people whereof, for worship, were led away with dumb Idols, 2 Cor. 12. 2. and
for their lives, ye have them drawn to the life, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.
Fornicatours, idolaters, adulterers, effeminate, abusers of themselves with
mankind, thieves, covetous, drunkards, revilers, extortioners, (...), which
is to be repeated, (...), some of you were fornicatours, some Idolaters, but ye
are sanctified: seem not these to the eye of flesh goodly qualifications -- for
the Gospel of Jesus Christ? had these men been dealt withal, according as they
had disposed themselves, not fitter fuel for hell could the justice of God
require: but yet ye see, to these the Gospel comes, which the first, a light
shines to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death.

If God send or grant the Gospel, Reason ^.
which is the means of grace, Si de d^bito quaeratur respectu creaturae, in
Deum cadere non pote^t, nisi ex a^i ^ua suppositione ipsi.
upon any other ground, but his mere good pleasure; then it must be an act of
remunerative justice: Now there is no such justice in God toward the creature,
but what is founded upon some preceding Covenant, or with promise of God to the
creature, which is the only foundation of all relation between God and man, but
only those that attend creation and sovereignty. Deo volunt^ria, quae non
potest esse nisi promissio aut pactio a^iqua, ex quibus fideli^at^s aut
justitiae debitum ^^^risolet, Zuat^z. de libert. divi. vol. disp. 1. Sect. 2.
number. 5.
Now what promise do you find made to, or Covenant with a people, as yet
without the Gospel: I mean conditional promises, inferring any good to be
bestowed on any required performance on their part? free, absolute promises
there are, innumerable, that light should shine to them that were in
darkness, and those to be called Gods people which were not his people; but
such as depend on any condition on their part to be fulfilled, we find none.
God bargains not with the creature about the Gospel knowing how unable he is to
be merchant for such pearls. If a man had all that goodness which may be found
in man, without Jesus Christ, Deus nulla ob ligatione tenetur* antequam i^se
fi^em suam astringat, ergo ante promissionem nulla justitia distributiva in Deo
reperitur.
they would not in the least measure procure a discovery of him.

I deny not but God may, and perhaps sometimes does reveal himself to some in a
peculiar and extraordinary manner. Whereunto tends that story in Aquinas, of a
Corpse taken up in the days of Constantine and Irene, with a plate of gold, and
this inscription in it, Christus nascetur ex virgin, ego credo in illum, O sol
sub Irenae and Constantini temporibus iterum me videbis. V^sq. in q. 21. ^1.
d^sp. ^6. Aqui^ 2, 2. q ^ art. 7. (...) Justin. Apo^, 2
But that this should be regular unto men living, (...), in Justin Martyrs
phrase, or using their naturals aright, (which is impossible they should, the
right use of naturals depending on supernaturals) is wide from the word.

If there be any outward motive of granting the Gospel unto any, it is some
acceptable performances of theirs, holding up to the rule and will of God: 2.
now this will and rule having no saving revelation but by the Gospel, which
should thus be procured by acts agreeable unto it, makes up a flat
contradiction, supposing the revelation of the Gospel, before it be revealed;
doubtless according to all rules of justice to us made known, it is an easier
thing, to d^serve Heaven by obedience, now under the Covenant of works, then
being under that Covenant, to do any thing that might cause a new way of
salvation, such as the Gospel is, to be revealed. With some observations I
descend to application.

First, Obs. 1.
there is the same reason of continuing the Gospel unto a people, as of sending
it; especially if oppositions rise high, Hos. 11. 8, 9.
apt and able in themselves for its removal: never Nation as yet enjoyed the
word, that deserved the continuance of the word. God has always something
against a people, to make the continuing of his grace, to be of grace, the not
removing of his love, to be merely of love, and the preaching of the Gospel, to
be a mercy of the Gospel, free and undeserved. Though there be work, and
labor, and patience for Christ's sake at Ephesus, yet there is somewhat against
Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4, 5. for which he might justly remove his candlestick; and if
he does it not, it is of the same mercy that first set it there. As God lays
out goodness and grace in the entrance, so patience, long-suffering and
firebearance in the continuance; He bears with our manners, whilst we grieve
his Spirit. Look upon the face of this Kingdom, and view the body of the
people, think of the profanenes, vill^ny, trampleing upon the blood of Jesus,
ignorance, contempt of God and his ways, despising his Ordinances, reviling
his servants, branding and defaming the power of godliness, persecuting and
tearing one another, and yet hear the joifull sound of the word in every
corner; and you will quickly conclude, that you see a great fight of Gods love
against our sins, and not of our goodness for his love.

Secondly, There is the same reason of the Reformation and the doctrine of the
Gospel corrupted with error, and of the worship of God, collapsed with
superstition, as of the first implantation of the Gospel: God in his just
judgment of late ages, had sent upon the western world the effi^acy of error,
that they should believe lies, because they received not the love of the truth,
as he foretold, 2 These. 2. now whence is it, that we see some of the Nations
thereof as yet suffered to walk in their own ways, others called to
repentance, some wildernesses turned into green pastures for the flock of God,
and some places made barren wildernesses for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein? how comes it, that this Island glories in a Reformation, and Spain sits
still in darkness? is it because we were better then they? or less engaged in
Antichristian delusions? doubtless no: no Nation in the world drank deeper of
that cup of abomination; it was a proverbiall speech amongst all, England was
our good Ass (a beast of burden) for (Antichrist whom they called) the Pope:
Nothing but the good pleasure of God and Christ freely coming to refine us,
Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. caused this distinction.

Though men can do nothing toward the procuring of the Gospel, Obser. 3.
yet men may do much for the expulsion of the Gospel: if the husbandmen prove
idle or self-seekers, the vineyard will be let to others; and if the people
love darkness more then light, the candlestick will be removed; let England
beware. Now this men may do, either upon the first entrance of the Gospel, or
after some continuance of it: the Gospel spreading it self over the earth,
finds entertainment, like that of men's seeking plantations amongst barbarous
Nations, sometimes kept out with hideous outcries, at the shore, sometimes
suffered to enter with admiration, and a little after violently assaulted.

In the first way, how do we find the Jews, putting far from them the word of
life, and rejecting the counsel of God at its first entrance, calling for night
at the rising of the Sun? hence, Acts 13. 41. Paul concludes his Sermon to
them, with, Hear, ye despisers, wonder and perish: and ver. 46. it was
necessary the word should be preached to them, but seeing they judged
themselves unworthy, they were forsaken: and ver. 51. they shake off the dust
of their feet against them, a common symbol in those days, of the highest
indignation and deepest curse: The like stubbornes we find in them, Acts 28.
whereupon the Apostle wholly turned himself to the Gentiles, ver. 28. How many
Nations of Europe, at the beginning of the reformation, rejected the Gospel of
God, and procured Christ, with the Gadarens, to depart as soon as he was
extred, will be found at the last day, written with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus, that suffered amongst them?

Secondly, 2.
After some continuance; so the Church of Laodicea, having for a while enjoyed
the word, fell into such a tepid condition, so little moved with that fire that
Christ came to send upon the earth, Rev. 3. 15, 16. that the Lord was even sick
and weary with bearing them. (...). ^^yrillus Herol, (...).
The Church of Rome, famous at the first, yet quickly, by the advantage of
outward supportments and glorious phansies, became head of that fatal
rebellion against Jesus Christ, which spread it self over most of the Churches
in the world; God hereupon. sending upon them the efficacy of error to believe
a lie, that they all might be damned that believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. suffering them to det^in the empty
names of Church and Gospel, which because they usurp, only for their advant^ge
here, to appear glorious, the Lord will use for the advancing of his justice
hereafter, to show them inexcusable. O Lord, how was England of late by thy
mercy delivered from this snare? a Captain being chosen for the return of this
people into Egypt: on how has thy grace fought against our backsliding? And
let none seek to extenuate this mercy, by Catalogues of errors still amongst
us, there is more danger of an apostasy against Christ, and rebellion against
the truth, in one Babylonish Error, owned by men, pretending to power and
jurisdiction over others, then in five hundred, scattered amongst
inconsiderable disunited Individuals: I would to God, we could all speak, and
think the some things, that we were all of one mind, even in the most
minutulous differences that are now amongst us; But yet the truth is, the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ never shakes amongst a people, until men pretending to
act, with a combined mixed power, of Heaven and Earth, unto which all sheaves
must bow or be threshed, Revel. 13. 17.
do by virtue of this trust, set up and impose things or opinions deviating
from the rule, as it was in the papacy, errors owned by mixed associations.

Civil and Ecclesiastical are for the most part incurable, be they never so
absurd and foolish: of which the Lutheran ubiquities and consubstantiation are
a tremendous example: these things being presupposed.

Let no flesh glory in themselves, Use 1.
but let every mouth be stopped, for we have all sinned, and come short of the
glory of God. Who has made the possessors of the Gospel to diff^r from others?
Or what have they that they have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. why are these
things hidden from the great and wise of the world, and revealed to babes and
children, but because, O Father, so it pleased thee? Mat. 11. 26. He has mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. Ah Lord, if
the glory and pomp of the world might prevail with thee to send thy Gospel, it
would supply the room of the cursed Alchoran, and spread it self in the Palaces
of that strong Lion of the East, who sets his Throne upon the necks of Kings;
But alas, Jesus Christ is not there. If wisdom, learning, pretended gravity,
counterfeit holiness, real policy were of any value in thine eyes, to
procure the word of life, it would be as free and glorious at Rome as ever; But
alas, Antichrist has his Throne there, Jesus Christ is not there. If
will worship and humilities, neglect of the body, macerations, superstitions,
beads, and vainly repeated prayers, had any efficacy before the Lord, the
Gospel perhaps might be in the cells of some Recluses and Monks; But alas,
Jesus Christ is not there. If moral virtues, to an amazement, exact civil
honesty and justice, that soul of humane society, could have prevailed ought,
the heathen worthies in the days of old, had had the promises; But alas, Jesus
Christ was far away. Now if all these be passed by, Britanoram inaccessa
Romany locd, Christo vero subdita.
to whom is the report of the Lord made known? to whom is his arm revealed?
Why! to an handful of poor sinners amongst the Nations formerly counted feirce
and barbarous. And what shall we say to these things? O (...), Tertul.
O the depth, etc.

Let England consider with fear and trembling the dispensation that it is now
under, Use 2.
I say, with fear and trembling: for this Day is the Lords day, wherein he will
purge us or burn us, according as we shall be found silver or dross: it is
our Day, wherein we must mend or end: let us look to the rock from whence we
were hewed, and the hole of the pit from whence we were dug; Britannian in
Christianam consentire religionem, O^^gen. Hom. 4. in Ezekiel.
was not our Father an Amorite, and our Mother an Hittite? are we not the
posterity of Idolatrous Progenitors? of those who worshipped them who by nature
were no god^? How often also has this Land forfeited the Gospel? God having
taken it twice away, Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 40.
who is not forward to seize upon the forfeiture. In the very morning of the
Gospel, the Sun of righteousness shone upon this Land, Epist. Eleuth. ad Lucium,
an, 16^. apud Bar. Anno 469. the Saxons entered.
and they say the first Potentate on the Earth, that owned it, was in Britain:
but as it was here soon professed, so it was here soon abused. That part of
this Isle which is called England, being the first place, I read of, which was
totally bereaved of the Gospel; the sword of the then Pagan Saxons fattening
the land with the blood of the Christian inhabitants; and in the close wholly
subverting the worship of God. Long it was not ere this cloud was blown over,
and those men who had been instruments to root out others, submitted their own
necks to the yoke of the Lord, and under exceeding variety in civil affairs,
enjoyed the word of grace: until by insensible degrees, like summer unto
winter, or light unto darkness, it gave place to Antichristian superstition, and
left the land in little less then a Paganish darkness, drinking deep of the cup
of abominations, mingled for it by the Roman harlot; And is there mercy yet in
God to recover a Twice-lost over backsliding people? might not the Lord have
said unto us, What shall I do unto thee, oh Island? How shall I make thee as
Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? but his heart is turned within him, his
repentings are kindled together: the dry bones shall live, and the fleece shall
be wet, though all the earth be dry. God will again water his garden, once more
purge his vineyard, once more of his own accord he will take England upon
liking, though he had twice deservedly turned it out of his service; So that
coming as a refiners fire, and as fullers soap to purify the sons of Levi, to
purge them as Gold and Silver, to offer to the Lord an offering in
righteousness, to reform his Churches, England, as soon as any, has the benefit
and comfort thereof: Nay, the Reformation of England shall be more glorious
then of any Nation in the world, being carried on, neither by might nor power,
but only by the spirit of the Lord of Hosts. But is this the utmost period of
Englands sinning, and Gods showing mercy, in continuing and restoring of the
Gospel? No truly: we again in our days have made forfeiture of the purity of
his worship, by an almost universal treacherous apostasy: from which the free
grace, and good pleasure of God has made a great progress again toward a
recovery.

There are two sorts of men, that I find exceedingly ready to extenuate and
lessen the superstition and popish tyranny of the former days, into which we
were falling.

First, Such as were industriously isntrumental in it, whose suffrages had
been loud, for the choice of a Captain to return into Egypt: Men tainted with
the errors, and loaded with the preferments of the times: with all those who
blindly adhere to that faction of men, who as yet covertly drive on that
design. To such as these, all was nothing, and to them it is no mercy to be
delivered. And the truth is, It is a favor to the lamb and not the wolf, to
have him taken out of his mouth: but these men have interest by those things
which have no ears, against which there is no contending.

Secondly, Such as are disturbed in their optics, or have gotten false
glasses, representing all things unto them in dubious colors: Nunc igitur si
^* ominis edium ^st* quis romirum reatus? quae a^cu^atio vocabulo^^m? nisi av^
barbarum sonat aliqu^ vox nominis, aut maledicum aut impudi^um.
which way soever they look. they can see nothing but errors, errors of all
sizes, sorts, ^ects, and sexes.

Errors and Heresies, from the beginning to the end, which has deceived some
men not of the worst, and made them think. that all before was nothing, in
comparison of the present confusion. A great sign they felt it not, or were
not troubled at it; as if men should come into a field, and seeing some red
weeds and cockle among the corn, should instantly affirm, there is no corn
there, but all weeds, and that it were much better the hedges were down,
Tertul. Apol. ^d Genesis cap. 3.
and the whole field laid open to the boar of the forest; but the Harvest will
one day show the truth of these things. But that these apprehensions may not
too much prevail, to the vilifying and extenuating of Gods mercy, in restoring
to us the purity and liberty of the Gospel: give me leave in a few words, to
set out the danger of that Apostasy, from which the good pleasure of God has
given us a deliveranc^. I shall ^^stance only in a few things: observe then
that.

First, The Darling errors of late years, were all of them stones of the old
Babel, closing and coupling with that tremendous (...): which the man of sin
had erected to dethrone Jesus Christ: came out of the belly of that Trojan
horse, that fatal engine, which was framed to betray the City of God. They
were popish errors, such as whereof that Apostasy did consist, which only is
to be looked upon, as the great adverse state to the Kingdom of the Lord
Christ. For a man to be disorderly in a Civil state, yea often times through
turbulency to break the peace, is nothing to an underhand combination with some
formidable enemy, for the utter subversion of it. Heedles and headles errors
may breed disturbance enough, in scattered individualls, unto the people of
God: but such as tend to a peace and association, cum Ecclesia malignantium,
tending to a total subversion of the sacred state, are far more dangerous. Now
such were the Innovations of the late Hierarchists; See Canterburian
self-conviction, See Ld dee. Cell. etc.
In worship, their paintings, crossings, crucifixes, bowings, cringings,
Altars, Tapers, Wafers, Organs, Anthems, Letany, Rails, Images, Copes,
vestments; what were they, but Roman vernish, an Italian dress for our
devotion, to draw on conformity with that enemy of the Lord Jesus; In doctrine,
the Divinity of Episcopacy, auricular confession, free will, predestination on
faith, yea works foreseen, limbus patrum, justification by works falling from
grace, authority of a Church, which none knew what it was, Canonical
obedience, holiness of Churches, and the like innumerable, what were they but
helps to sancta Clara, to make all our articles of Religion speak good
Roman-Catholike? how did their old father of Rome refresh his spirit, to see
such Chariots as those provided, to bring England again unto him? this closing
with Popery, was the sting in the errors of those days, which caused pining
if not death in the Episcopal pot.

Secondly, 2.
They were such as raked up the ashes of the ancient worthies, whose spirits
God stirred up to reform his Church, and rendered them contemptible before all,
especially those of England, Coal from the Altar.
the most whereof died in giving their witness against the blind figment of
the real presence, and that abominable blasphemy of the cursed mass; Altar
Christianum.
in especial, how did England, heretofore termed Ass, turn Ape to the Pope,
Antedotum Linco^n. Case of Greg.
and furnished it with all things necessary for an unbloody sacrifice, ready to
set up the abomination of desolation, and close with the god Maozim, who has
all their peculiar devotion at Rome?

Thirdly, 3.
They were in the management of men which had diverse dangerous and pernicious
qualifications; as

First, A false repute of learning, I say, a false repute for the greater part,
especially of the greatest: and yet taking advantages of vulgar esteem, they
bare out as though they had engrossed a monopoly of it: though I presume the
world was never deceived by more empty pretenders; especially in respect of any
solid knowledge in Divinity or antiquity: but yet their great preferments, had
got them a great repute of great deservings, enough to blind the eyes of poor
mortals adoring them at a distance, and to persuade them, that all was not only
Law, but Gospel too, which they broached: and this rendered the infection
dangerous.

Secondly, 2.
A great hatred of godliness in the power thereof, or any thing beyond a form,
Sapieatior sis Socr^te; doctior Augustino, etc.
in whomsoever it was found; yea how many odious appellations were invented for
bare profession, to render it contemptible?

Especially in the exercise of their jurisdiction, Clavinianus si modo dicare
clam vel propalam, mox Tartaris, moscis, Afrus, Turcisque saevientibus and
jacc^is excaecratior, etc.
thundering their censures against all appearance of zeal, and closing with all
profane, impieties; for were a man a drunkard, a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, an
unclean person, so he were no Puritan, and had money, patet atri janua Ditis,
the Episcopal heaven was open for them all. Now this was a dangerous and
destructive qualification, which I believe is not professedly found in any
party amongst us.

Thirdly, Which was worst of all, they had centred in their bosoms an
unfathomable depth of power Civil and Ecclesiastical, 3.
to stamp their apostaticall errors with authority, giving them not only the
countenance of greatness, but the strength of power, violently urging
obedience; and to me, the sword of error, never cuts dangerously, but when it
is managed with such an hand. This I am sure, that errors in such, Romes
Masterpiece.
are not recoverable without the utmost danger of the Civil state. Royal
favorite.


Let now, I beseech you, these and the like things be considered, especially
the strong combination that was thorowout the Papal world for the seducing of
this poor Nation: that I say nothing, how this vial was poured out upon the
very throne, and then, let us all be ashamed and confounded in our selves, that
we should so undervalue and slight the free mercy of God, in breaking such a
snare, and setting the Gospel at liberty in England. My intent was, having
before asserted this restoration of Jerusalem, to the good pleasure of God, to
have stirred you up to thankefullnesse unto him, and self-humiliation in
consideration of our great undeserving of such mercy; but alas; as far as I can
see, it will scarce pass for a mercy: and unless every man's persuasion may be
a Joseph's sheaf, the goodness of God shall scarce be acknowledged; but yet let
all the world know, and let the house of England know this day, that we lie
unthankefully under as full a dispensation of mercy and grace, as ever Nation
in the world enjoyed, and that without a lively acknowledgement thereof, with
our own unworthiness of it, we shall one day know what it is (being taught
with briars and thorns) to undervalue the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus.
Good Lord! what would helpless Macedonians give for one enjoiment? O that
Wales, O that Ireland, O that France, Where shall I stop? I would offend none,
but give me leave to say, O that every, I had almost said, O that any part of
the world, had such helps and means of grace, as these parts of England have,
which will scarce acknowledge any mercy in it: the Lord break the pride of our
spirits, before it break the staff of our bread, and the help of our
salvation. O that the bread of Heaven, and the blood of Christ might be
accounted good nourishment, though every one has not the sauce he desires. I
am persuaded, that if every Absalom in the Land, that would be a judge for the
ending of our differences, were enthroned (he spoke the peoples good, though he
intended his own power) the case would not be much better then it is. Well, the
Lord make England, make this honorable audience, make us all to know these
three things.

blessing, in setting at liberty the truths of the Gospel, as is the crown of
all others mercies, yea, without which they were not valuable, yea were to be
despised: for success without the Gospel, is nothing but a prosperous
conspiracy against Jesus Christ.

mercy is of mercy, this love of free love, and the grace that appears, of
the eternal hidden free grace of God. He has showed his love unto us because
he loved us, and for no other reason in the world, this people being guilty of
blood and murder, of soul and body, adultery, and idolatry, and oppression,
with a long catalogue of sins and iniquities.

height of rebellion against God, is the despifing of spiritual
Gospel-mercies; should Mordecai have trodden the robes under his feet, that were
brought him from the King, would it not have been severely revenged? Does the
King of Heaven lay open the treasures of his wisdom, knowledge and goodness
for us, and we despise them? What shall I say, I had almost said, hell punishes
no greater sin: the Lord say it not our charge: O that we might be solemnly
humbled for it this day, before it be too late.

To discover unto us the freedom of that effectual grace, Use. 2
which is dispensed toward the elect, under the with the preaching of the
word: for if the sending of the outward means be of free underserved love,
surely the working of the spirit under that dispensatior, for the saving of
souls, is no less free: for, who has made us differ from others, and what
have we that we have not received? Non liberate gratiam, sed gratia libertatem
consequimur. Aug. de Correp. and
O that God should say unto us in our blood, live; that he should say unto us
in our blood, live; that he should breath upon us when we were as dry bones,
dead in trespasses and sins; let us remember, I beseech you, the frame of our
hearts, and the temper of our spirits, G^l. cap. 8.
in the da^es wherein we know not God, and his goodness, but went on in a
swift course of rebellion; Ezekiel 36. 26.
Can none of you look back upon any particular days or nights, Acts 16. 14.
and say, P^il. 1. 39. and 2, 13.
Ah Lord, that thou should be so patient and so full of forbearance, as not
to sent me to hell at such an instant; but oh Lord, that thou should go
further, and blot out mine iniquities for thine own sake, when I made thee
serve with my sins; Lord, what shall I say it is? It is the free grace of my
God: what expression transcendeth that, I know not.

Of Caution: Use ^
England received the Gospel of mere mercy, let it take heed, lest it lose it
by justice; the placer of the candlestick, can remove it; the truth is, it will
not be removed unless it be abused, and woe to them, from whom mercies are
taken for being abused; from whom the Gospel is removed for being despised; it
had been better for the husbandman never to have had the vineyard, then to be
slain for their ill using of it; there is nothing left to do them good, who are
forsaken for for saking the Gospel.

The glory of God was of late by many degrees departing from the Temple in our
Land. That was gone to the threshold, yea to the mount: if now at the return,
thereof, it find again cause to depart, Gildas de Excid. Britanniae, Omnia
quae Deo placebant and displiceba^t aequali lance, pendebantur, non igitur
admirandum est degeneres tales patria^illam am^ttere, quam praedicto modo
maculabant. Hist. M. S. apud Foxum.
it will not go by steps, but all at once; This Island, or at least the
greatest part thereof, as I formerly intimated, has twice lost the Gospel;
Once, when the Saxons wrested it from the Britains, when, if we may believe
their own doleful moaning Historian, they were given over to all wickedness,
oppression, and villainy of life: which doubtless was accompanied with contempt
of the word, though for faith and persuasion we do not find that they were
corrupted, and do find that they were tenacious enough of antique discipline,
as appeared in their following oppositions to the Roman Tyranny, as in Beda.

Secondly, It was lost in regard of the purity and power thereof, by blind
superstition and Antichristian impiety, accompanied also with abominable
lewdnes, oppression, and all manner of sin, in the face of the sun, so that
first prophanenes, working a despising of the Gospel, then superstion ushering
in prophanenes, have in this Land showed their power for the extirpation of the
Gospel; Oh, that we could remember the days of old, that we could consider the
goodness and severity of God, on them which fell severity, but toward us
goodness, if we continue in that goodness, for otherwise even we also shall be
cut off: yet here we may observe, that though both these times there was a
forsaking in the midst of the Land, yet there was in it a tenth for to return
as a Teyle-tree, and as an Oak whose substance is in them when they cast their
leaves, so was the holy seed and the substance thereof, Isa 6. 13. at in the
dereliction of the Jews, so of this Nation, there was a remnant that quickly
took root, and brought forth fruit, both in the one devastation, and the other,
though the watcher and the holy one from heaven, had called to cut down the
tree of this Nation, and to scatter its branches from flourishing before him,
yet the stump and root was to be left in the earth with a band of iron, that it
might spring again; Thus twice did the Lord come seeking fruit of this vine,
doing little more then pruning and dressing it, although it brought forth wild
grapes: but if he come the third time and find no fruit, the sentence will be,
Cut it down, why cumbreth it the gronnd? Now to prevent this I shall not follow
all those Gospel-supplanting sins we find in holy writ, only I desire to
cautionate you and us all in three things.

holding out the Gospel for a covert or shadow for other things. God will not
have this Gospel made a stalking horse for carnal designs: put not in that
glorious name, where the thing it self is not clearly intended; if in any thing
it be, let it have no compeer; if not, let it not be named; if that you aim at
be just, it needs no varnish; if it be not, it is the worse for it. Gilded
pills lose not their bitterness, and painted faces are thought to have no native
beauty; all things in the world should serve the Gospel; and if that be made to
serve other things, God will quickly vindicate it into liberty.

From the beginning of these troubles, right honorable, you have held forth
Religion and the Gospel, as whose preservation and restoration was principally
in the aims, and I presume malice it self is not able to discover any
insincerity in this, the fruits we behold proclaim to all the conformity of
your words and hearts. Now the God of Heaven grant that the same mind be in
you still, in every particular member of this Honorable Assembly, in the whole
Nation, especially in the Magistracy and Ministry of it, that we be not like
the boatmen, look one way, and row another; cry Gospel, and mean the other
thing; Lord Lord, and advance our own ends, that the Lord may not stir up the
staff of his anger, and the rod of his indignation against us as an
hypocritical people.

Secondly, Take heed of resting upon, and trusting to the outward enjoyment of
the Gospel. When the Jews cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, the time was at hand that they should be destroyed. Look only upon the
grace that did bestow, and the mercy that does continue it; God will have none
of his blessings rob him of his glory, and if we will rest at the Cisterne, he
will stop at the fountain.

Thirdly, Let us all take heed of Barrennes under it, for Heb. 6. 7, 8. Now
what fruits does it require? even those reckoned, Gal. 5. 22, 23. the fruit of
the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meeknes, temperance; Oh that we had not cause to grieve for a scarcity of these
fruits, and the abundant plenty of these works of the flesh recounted, ver. 19,
20, 21. Oh that that wisdom which is an eminent fruit of the Gospel might
flourish amongst us, Jam. 3. 17. it is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, that we might have less writing and more praying, less envy
and more charity; that all evil surmisings, which are works of the flesh, might
have no toleration in our hearts, but be banished for nonconformity to the
golden rule of love and peace, but (...): Come we now to the last proposition:

No men in the world want help, Obs. 3.
like them that want the Gospel. Or, Of all distresses want of the Gospel cries
loudest for relief.

Rachel wanted children, Ge^ 30 1.
and she cries, Give me children, or I die; Genesis 35. 18.
But that was but her impatience, she might have lived, and have had no
children, yea, see the justice of God, she dies so soon as ever she has
children: Genesis 21. 16.
Hagar wants water for Ishmael, and she will go far from him, that she may
not see him die; an heavy distress, and yet if he had died, it had been but an
early paying of that debt, which in a few years was to be satisfied. But they
that want the Gospel may truly cry, Give us the Gospel or we die, and that not
temporally with Ishmael, for want of water, but eternally in flames of fire.

A man may want liberty, and yet be happy, as Joseph was: a man may want peace,
and yet be happy, as David was: a man may want children, and yet be blessed, as
Job was: a man may want plenty, and yet be full of comfort, as Micaiah was: but
he that wants the Gospel, wants every thing that should do him good. A Throne
without the Gospel, is but the Devils dungeon. Wealth without the Gospel, is
fuel for hell. Advancement without the Gospel, is but a going high, to have
the greater fall.

Abraham wanting a child, Genesis 15. 2.
complains, What will the Lord do for me, seeing I go childelesse, and this
Eliezer of Damascus must be my heir? much more may a man without the means of
grace complain, What shall be done unto me, seeing I go Gospellesse? and all
that I have, is but a short inheritance for this lump of clay my body.

When Elisha was minded to do something for the Shunammite who had so kindly
entertained him, 2 King. 4. 13, 14.
he asks her, whether he should speak for her to the King, or the Captain of
the host? she replies, she dwelt in the midst of her own people, she needs
not those things: but when he finds her to want a child, and tells her of
that, she is almost transported. Ah how many poor souls are there, who need not
our word to the King or the Captain of the host; but yet being Gospellesse, if
you could tell them of that, would be even ravished with joy?

Think of Adam after his fall, Genesis 3. 8.
before the promise, hiding himself from God: and you have a perfect
pourtraicture of a poor creature without the Gospel: now this appears,

1. From the description we have of the people that are in this state and
condition without the Gospel; Matthew. 6. 23. Luke 1. 79. Act. 26. 18. Romans 2.
19. Ephesians. 5. 8. Col 1. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 9.
they are a people that sit in darkness, yea in the region and shadow of death,
Matthew. 4 16, 17. they are even darkness it self, Joh. 1. 7. within the dominion
and dreadful darkness of death; darkness was one of Egypts plagues, but yet that
was a darkness of the body, a darkness wherein men lived: but this is a darkness
of the soul, a darkness of death, for these men though they live, yet are they
dead; they are fully described, Ephesians. 2. 12. without Christ, aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. Christles men, and godles men, and hopeles
men, and what greater distress in the world? yea, they are called dogs, and
unclean beasts, the wrath of God is upon them, they are the people of his curse
and indignation. In the extreme North, one day and one night divide the year;
but with a people without the Gospel, it is all night, the sun of righteousness
shines not upon them, it is night whilst they are here, and they go to
eternal night hereafter. What the men of China concerning themselves and
others, that they have two eyes, the men of Europe one, and all the world
besides is blind, may be inverted too, the Jews had one eye, sufficient to
guide them, they who enjoy the Gospel have two eyes, but the men of China, with
the rest of the Nations that want it, are stark blind, and reserved for the
chains of everlasting darkness.

2. By laying forth what the men that want the Gospel, do want with it.

1. Nome^ Jesus non erat ibi.
They want Jesus Christ: for he is revealed only by the Gospel. Austine
refused to delight in Cicero's Hortensius, because there was not in it the Name
of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ is all and in all, and where he is wanting, there
can be no good. Joh. 6. 50. Revel. 2. 17. Joh. 4. 14. Cant. 4. 1^.
Hunger cannot truly be satisfied without manna, the bread of life, which is
Jesus Christ: and what shall a hungry man do that has no bread? Thirst cannot
be quenched, without that water or living spring, which is Jesus Christ: and
what shall a thirsty soul do without water? A captive as we are all, Joh. 7.
37, 38. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
cannot be delivered without redemption, which is Jesus Christ: and what shall
the prisoner do without his ransom? Fools as we are, all cannot be instructed
without wisdom, which is Jesus Christ, without him we perish in our folly. All
building without him, is on the sand, which will surely fall: All working
without him, is in the fire, where it will be consumed: All riches without him,
have wings, and will away: mallem ruere cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare,
Paura igitur de Christo. Tertul.
said Luther, a dungeon with Christ is a Throne, and a Throne without Christ a
hell. Nothing so ill, but Christ will compensate: the greatest evil in the
world is sin, and the greatest sin was the first; and yet Gregory feared not to
cry, O felix culpa quae talem meruit redemptorem, oh happy fault which found
such a Redeemer; All mercies without Christ are bitter, and every cup is sweet
that is seasoned but with a drop of his blood, he truly is amor and delitiae
humani generis, the love and delight of the sons of men, without whom they
must perish eternally: for there is no other name given unto them, whereby they
may be saved, Act. 4. He is the way, men without him, Joh. 14. 5.
are Cains, wanderers, vagabonds: He is the truth, men without him are liars,
devils, who was so of old: Joh. 1 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 4. 18.
He is the life, without him men are dead, dead in trespasses and sins: He is
the light, without him men are in darkness, and go they know not whither: He is
the vine, those that are not graffed in him, Mat. 7. 26, 27. Matthew. 16 18.
are withered branches, prepared for the fire: He is the rock, men not built on
him, are carried away with a flood: He is (...) and (...), the first and the
last, the Author and the ender, the founder and the finisher of our salvation;
he that has not him, has neither beginning of good, nor shall have end of
misery. O blessed Jesus, how much better were it, not to be, then to be without
thee? Never to be borne, then not to die in thee? A thousand hels come short of
this, eternally to want Jesus Christ, as men do, that want the Gospel.

2. They want all holy Communion with God, wherein the only happiness of the
soul does consist; He is the life, light, joy, and blessedness of the soul:
without him, the soul in the body is but a dead soul, Psalm. 4. 6.
in a living Sepulcher. It is true, there be many that say, who will show us
any good? but unles the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon us, we
perish for evermore. Thou have made us for thy self, o Lord, and our heart is
unquiet, until it come to thee. You who have tasted how gracious the Lord is,
who have had any converse and communion with him, in the issues and goings
forth of his grace, those delights of his soul with the children of men, would
you live? would not life it self, with a confluence of all earthly
endearements, be a very hell without him? Is it not the daily language of your
hearts, Whom have we in heaven but thee? and in earth there is nothing in
comparison of thee? The soul of man is of a vast boundles comprehension, so
that if all created good were centred into one enjoyment, and that bestowed
upon one soul, because it must needs be finite and limited, as created, it
would give no solid contentment to his affections, nor satisfaction to his
desires. In the presence and fruition of God alone there is joy for evermore:
at his right hand are rivers of pleasure, the welsprings of life and
blessedness. Now if to be without communion with God in this life, wherein the
soul has so many avocations from the contemplation of its own misery, (for
earthly things are nothing else) is so unsupportable a calamity, ah what shall
that poor soul do, that must want him for eternity? as all they must do, who
want the Gospel.

3. Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Psalm. 84. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
They want all the Ordinances of God, the joy of our hearts, and comfort of our
souls. Oh the sweetness of a Sabbath! The heavenly raptures of prayer! Oh the
glorious communion of Saints, which such men are deprived of! if they knew the
value of the hidden pearl, and these things were to be purchased, what would
such poor souls not part with for them?

4. They will at last want Heaven and salvation; they shall never come to the
presence of God in glory: never inhabit a glorious mansion: they shall never
behold Jesus Christ, Revel. 6. 16.
but when they shall call for rocks and mountains to fall upon them, to hide
them from his presence: they shall want light, in utter darkness, want life,
under the second death, want refreshment, in the midst of flames, want
healing, Matthew. 22. 13. Luke 16. 24. Mark. 9. 43, 44. Isa. 66. 24.
under gnawing of conscience, want grace, continuing to blaspheme, want glory,
in full misery: and which is the sum of all this, they shall want an end of all
this, for their worm dies not, neither is their fire quenched.

Thirdly, Because being in all this want, they know not that they want any
thing, and so never make out for any supply. Revel. 3. 17.
Laodicea knew much, but yet because she knew not her wants, she had almost as
good have known nothing: Gospellesse men know not that they are blind, and
seek not for eye salve: they know not that they are dead, and seek not for
life; What ever they call for, not knowing their wants, is but like a man's
crying for more weight to press him to death: and therefore when the Lord
comes to any with the Gospel, he is found of them that sought him not, and made
manifest to them that asked not after him, Romans 10. 20. This is a seal upon
their misery, without Gods free-mercy, like the stone laid upon the mouth of
the cave by Joshua, to keep in the five Kings, Josh. 10. 18.
until they might be brought out to be hanged. All that men do in the world,
is but seeking to supply their wants; either their natural wants, that nature
may be supplied, or their sinful wants, that their lusts may be satisfied, or
their spiritual wants, that their souls may be saved. For the two first, men
without the Gospel, lay out all their strength; Ego propero ad inferot, nec est
ut aliquid pro me agas: advocatus quidam moriens apud Bell. de art mor lib. 2.
cap. 10. (...)
but of the last, there is amongst them a deep silence. Now this is all one, as
for men to cry out that their finger bleeds, whilst a sword is run through
their hearts, and they perceive it not: to desire a wart to be cured, whilst
they have a plague sore upon them; And hence perhaps it is, that they are said
to go to hell like sheep, Psalm. 49. 14. very quietly, without dread, as a bird
hasting to the snare, and not knowing that it is for his life, Prove. 7. 23. and
there ly down in utter disappointment and sorrow for evermore.

4. Because all mercies are bitter judgments to men that want the Gospel; all
fuel for hell; Aggravations of condemnation; all cold drink to a man in a
fever: pleasant at the entrance, but increasing his torments in the close:
like the book in the Revelation, sweet in the mouth, but bitter in the belly.
When God shall come to require his bread and wine, his flax and oil, peace and
prosperity, liberty and victories, of Gospellesse men, they will curse the day
that ever they enjoyed them; so unspirituall are many men's minds, and so
unsavory their judgments, that they reckon men's happiness, by their
possessions, and suppose the catalogue of their titles, to be a roll of their
felicities: calling the proud happy, and advancing in our conceits them that
work wickedness, Mal. 3. 15. but God will one day come in with another
reckoning, and make them know, that all things without Christ, are but as
ciphers without a figure, of no value. In all their banquets where Christ is
not a guest, their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the field of Gomorrah,
their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter, Deuteronomy. 32. 32, 33.
their palaces, where Christ is not, are but habitations of Zim and Ochim,
Dragons and unclean beasts. Their prosperity is but putting them into full
pasture, that they may be fatted for the day of slaughter, the day of
consumption decreed for all the Bulls of Bashan: the Gospel bringing Christ, is
the salt that makes all other things savoury.

To show us the great privilege and preeminence, Use 1.
which, by the free grace of God, many parts of this Island do enjoy. To us
that sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, a great light is risen, to
guide us into the ways of peace. Let others recount, the glories, benefits,
profits, outward blessings of this Nation, let us look only upon that which
alone is valuable in it self, and makes other things so to be, the Gospel of
Christ. It is reported of the Heralds of our neighbor Monarchs, that when one
of them had repeated the numerous titles of his Master of Spain, the other
often repeated France, France, France; intimating that the dominion which came
under that one denomination, would counterpoise the long catalogue of Kingdoms
and Dukedoms, wherewith the other flourisht. Were we to contend with the grand
signieur of the East, about our enjoyments, we might easily bear down his windy
pompous train of titles, with this one, which millies repetitum placebit, the
Gospel, the Gospel: upon all other things you may put the inscription in
Daniel, mean, mean, Tekel, they are weighed in the balance, and found wanting,
but proclaim before those that enjoy the Gospel, as Haman before Mordecai, Lo,
thus shall it be done to them whom the Lord will honor. The fox in the fable
had a thousand wiles to save himself from the hunters: but the cat knew unum
magnum, one great thing that would surely do it. Earthly supports and
contentments, are but a thousand failing wiles, which will all vanish in the
time of need: the Gospel and Christ in the Gospel, is that unnm magnum, that
unum necessarium, which alone will stand us in any stead. In this, this Island
is as the mountain of the Lord, exalted above the Mountains of the earth, it is
true, many other Nations partake with us in the same blessing: not to advance
our own enjoyments, in some particulars wherein perhaps we might justly do it:
but take all these Nations with us, and what a molehill are we to the whole
earth, overspread with Paganism, Mahumetanisme, Antichristianisme, which
innumerable foolish Haeresies? And what is England, that it should be amongst
the choice branches of the vineyard, the top boughs of the Cedars of God?

Shows that such great mercies, Use 2.
if not esteemed, if not improved, if abused, will end in great judgments; Woe
be to that Nation, that City, that person, that shall be called to an account
for despising the Gospel, Amos 2. 2. you only have I known of all the families
of the earth, what then? Surely some great blessing is coming to that people,
whom God thus knows, and so ownes, as to make himself known unto them. No:
but, therefore will I visit upon you all your iniquities. How ever others may
have some ease or mitigation in their punishments, do you expect the utmost of
my wrath. Luther said, he thought hell was paved with the bald sculls of
Friars; I know nothing of that; yet of this sure I am, that none shall have
their portion so low in the ^^thermost hell, none shall drink so deep of the
cup of Gods indignation, as they, who have refused Christ in the Gospel. Men
will curse the day to all eternity, wherein the blessed name of Jesus Christ
was made known unto them, if they continue to despise it. He that abuses the
choicest of mercies, shall have judgment without mercy; What can help them,
who reject the counsel of God for their good? If now England have received
more culture from God then other Nations, there is more fruit expected of
England, then other nations. A barren tree in the Lords Vineyard, must be cut
down for cumbring the ground, the sheep of God must every one bear twins, and
none be barren amongst them, Cant. 4. 2. If after all Gods care and husbandry,
his vineyard brings forth wilde-grapes, he will take away the hedge, break down
the wall, and lay it waste. For the present the Vineyard of the Lord of hosts
is the house of England, and if it be as earth, which when the rain falls upon
it, brings forth nothing but thorns and briers, it is nigh unto cursings, and
the end thereof is to be burned, Heb. 6. Men utterly and for ever neglect that
ground, which they have tried their skill about, and laid out much cost upon
it, if it bring not forth answerable fruits. Now here give me leave to say,
(and the Lord avert the evil deserved by it) That England, (I mean these
Cities, and those other places, which since the beginning of our troubles, have
enjoied the Gospel, in a more free and plentiful manner then heretofore) has
showed it self not much to value it.

1. In the time of Straits, though the sound of the Gospel passed through all
our streets, our villages enjoying them who preached peace, and brought glad
tidings of good things, so that neither we, nor our fathers, nor our fathers
fathers, ever saw the like before us; Though manna fell round about our tents
every day: yet as though all were lost and we had nothing, Manna was loathed as
light bread, the presence of Christ made not recompense for the loss of our
swine: men had rather be again in Egypt, then hazard a pilgrimage in the
wilderness. If there be any here, that ever entertained thoughts, to give up the
worship of God to superstition, his Churches to tyranny, and the doctrine of
the Gospel to Episcopal corruptions, in the pressing of any troubles, let them
now give God the glory, and be ashamed of their own hearts, lest it be
bitterness in the end.

2. In the time of prosperity, by our fierce contentions about mint and cummin,
whilst the weightier things of the Gospel have been undervalued, languishing
about unprofitable questions, etc. but I shall not touch this wound lest it
bleed.

For exhortation, Use 3.
that every one of us, in whose hand there is any thing, would set in, for the
help of those parts of this Island, that as yet sit in darkness, yea in the
shadow of death, and have none to hold out the bread of life to their fainting
souls. Does not Wales cry, and the North cry, yea and the West cry, Come and
help us? We are yet in a worse bondage, then any by your means we have been
delivered from: if you leave us thus, all your protection will but yield us a
more free and joviall passage to the chambers of death. Ah, little do the
inhabitants of Goshen know, whilst they are contending about the bounds of
their pasture, what darkness there is in other places of the Land; How their
poor starved souls would be glad of the crumbs that fall from our tables: o that
God would stir up the hearts,

1. Of Ministers to cast off all by-respects, and to flee to those places,
where in all probability, the harvest would be great, and the laborers are few
or none at all. I have read of an Heretic that swom over a great river in a
frost, to scatter his errors: the old Jewish, and now Popish Pharisees,
compass Sea and Land, to make proselytes; The Merchants trade not into more
Countries, then the Factours of Rome do, to gain souls to his holiness: East
and West, far and wide, do these Locusts spread themselves, not without
hazard of their lives, as well as loss of their souls, to scatter their
superstitions: only the Preachers of the everlasting Gospel seem to have lost
their zeal. O that there were the same mind in us that was in Jesus Christ,
who counted it his meat and drink, to do his fathers will, in gaining souls.

2. Of the Magistrates, I mean of this Honorable Assembly, to turn themselves
every lawful way, for the help of poor Macedonians: the truth is, in this, I
could speak more then I intend, for perhaps my zeal, and some men's judgments,
would scarce make good harmony. This only I shall say, that if Jesus Christ
might be preached, though with some defects in some circumstances, I should
rejoice therein. O that you would labor, to let all the parts of the Kingdom,
taste of the sweetness of your successes, in carrying to them the Gospel of the
Lord Jesus: that the doctrine of Gospel might make way for the Discipline of
the Gospel, without which, it will be a very skeleton. When Manna fell in the
wilderness from the hand of the Lord, every one had an equal share: I would
there were not now too great an inequality in the scattering of Manna, when
secondarily in the hand of men; whereby some have all, and others none, some
sheep daily picking the choice flowers of every pasture, others wandering upon
the barren mountains, without guide or food: I make no doubt, but the best
ways for the furtherance of this, are known full well unto you, and therefore
have as little need to be petitioned in this, as other things. What then
remains? but that for this, and all other necessary blessings, we all set our
hearts and hands to petition the Throne of grace.

Soli Deogloria.
A short defensative about CHVRCH GOVERNMENT, Toleration and Petitions about
these things.
Reader,
THis, Laudatur ab his, culpatur ab illis.
be it what it will, thou have no cause to thank or blame me for. Had I been
mine own, it had not been thine. My submission unto others judgments, being
the only cause of submitting this unto thy censure. The substance of it, is
concerning things now adoing: in some whereof, I heretofore thought it my
wisdom, modestly haesitare, (or at least, not with the most, peremptorily to
dictate to others my apprehensions,) See August. Ep. 7. 28. 157. de orig. anim.
as wiser men have done in weightier things: And yet this, not so much for want
of persuasion in my own mind, as out of opinion that we have already had too
many needless and fruitless discourses about these matters. Would we could
agree to spare perishing paper, -- Deferri in vicun vendentem thus and odores,
and piper, and quicquid chartis amicitur ineptis. Occidit miseros crambe
repetita magistros. Semper ego auditor tantum?
and for my own part had not the opportunity of a few lines in the close of
this sermon, and the importunity of not a few friends urged, I could have
slighted all occasions, and accusations, provoking to publish those thoughts
which I shall now impart: the truth is, in things concerning the Church, (I
mean things purely external, of form, order and the like,) so many ways have
I been spoken, that I often resolved to speak my self, desiring rather to
appear (though conscious to my self of innumerable failings) what indeed I am,
then what others incuriously suppose. But yet the many, I ever thought unworthy
of an Apology, and some of satisfaction; Especially those, who would make their
own judgments a rule for themselves and others: impatient that any should
know, what they do not, or conceive otherwise then they, of what they do; in
the mean time, placing almost all religion in that, which may be perhaps a
hinderance of it, Immortale odiu^ and nunquam sanabiic beliu^, ardet adhuc,
Combos and Tentyra, summas utrinque inde sucor culgo, quo^ numina vicinorum
odit uterque locus. Juven. Graece scire out polite loqui apud illos haeresis
est: Eras. de Sc^olast.
and being so valued, or rather overvalued, is certainly the greatest. Nay,
would they would make their judgments, only so far as they are convinced,
and are able to make out their conceptions to others, and not also their
impotent desires, to be the rule: that so they might condemn only that, which
complies not with their minds, and not all that also, which they find to
thwart their aims and designs. But so it must be. Once more conformity is
grown the touchstone, (and that not in practice, but opinion,) amongst the
greatest part of men, however otherwise of different persuasions. Dissent is
the only crime, and where that is all, that is culpable, it shall be made, all
that is so. From such as these, who almost has not suffered? But toward such,
the best defense is silence. Besides, My judgment commands me, to make no
known quarrel my own. But rather if it be possible, and as much as in me
lies, live peaceably with all men, (...), I proclaim to none, but men whose
bowels are full of gall: in this spring of humors, lenitives for our own
spirits, may perhaps be as necessary, Noli irritare crabrones, Si lapidet teras
nonne ignis erumpit? Ambros. lib. 1. cap. 21. Prove. 30. 33. J^b 3^. 21. Prove.
25. 18. Vide Remed. contra ^ravam, ratio (...) Germani^ae Luth praesat. al lib.
de council. Protest. 34. (...).
as purges for others brains. Further, I desire to provoke none; more stings
then combs are got at (...) wasps: even cold stones, smitten together, sparkle
(...) the wringing of the nose, brings forth blood. Neither do I conceive it
wisdom in these quarrelsome days, to entrust more of a man's self with others,
then is very necessary. The heart of man is deceitful; some that have smooth
tongues, have sharp teeth: such can give titles on the one side, and wounds on
the other. Any of these considerations, would easily have prevailed with me,
stul^i^ia hac caruisse, had not mine ears been filled, presently after the
preaching of the precedent sermon, which sad complaints of some, and false
reports of others, neither of the lowest rank of men, as though I had helped
to open a gate, for that which is now called a Trojan horse, though heretofore
counted an engine likelier to batter the walls of Babylon, then to betray the
towers of Sion. 4. Conclus. That generally all writers at the beginning of the
Reformation. Si accusasse suffic^et, quis erit innocens?
This urged some, to be urgent with me, for a word or two, about Church
Government, according to the former suggestions undermined, and a toleration of
different persuasions, as they said asserted. Now truly to put the accusers to
prove the crimination, (for so it was, and held forth a grievous crime in their
apprehensions) (what is really so, God will judge) had been sufficient. But I
could not so evade: and therefore, after my Sermon was printed to the last
sheet, I was forced, to set apart a few hours, to give an account, of what
has passed from me in both these things, which have been so variously
reported; Nec nos obniti contra, nec ten dear tantum sufficimus.
Hoping that the reading may not be unusefull to some, as the writing was very
necessary to me. And here at the entrance, I shall desire at the hands of men,
that shall cast an eye, on this heap of good meaning, these few, as I suppose,
equitable demands.

1. Not to prosecute men into odious appellations; and then themselves, who
feigned the crime, pronounce the sentence. Like him, who said of one brought
before him, if he be not guilty, it is fit he should be: involving themselves
in a double guilt, of falsehood and malice, and the aspersed parties, in a
double misery, of being belied, in what they are, and hated for what they are
not: if a man be not, what such men would have him, it is ods, but they will
make him what he is not: if what he really is, do not please, and that be not
enough to render him odious, he shall sure enough be more. Ithacius will make
all Priscillianists who are any thing more devout then himself: Sulo Sever.
Epist. Hist. Eccles.
if men do but desire to see with their own eyes, presently they are enrolled
of this, or that Sect: every misperswasion, being beforehand, in Petitions,
Sermons, etc. rendered odious and intolerable: in such a course, innocence it
self cannot long go free. Christians deal with one another in earnest, as
children in their plays, clap another coat upon their fellows shoulder, and
pretending to beat that, cudgel him they have clothed with it. What shall be
given unto thee, oh thou false tongue? If we cannot be more charitable, let us
be more ingenuous; Many a man has been brought to a more favorable opinion of
such as are called by dreadful names, then formerly, by the experience of
false impositions on himself.

2. Not to cloth our differences with expressions, fitting them no better then
Saul's armor did David; Nor make them like a little man in a bumbast coat upon
stilts, walking about like a giant: our little differences may be met at every
stall, and in too many pulpits, swelled by unbefitting expressions, into such a
formidable bulk, as poor creatures are even startled at their horrid looks and
appearance: whilst our own persuasions are set out, Plut. Apoth.
(...), with silken words, and gorg^ous apparel, as if we sent them into the
world a wooing. Hence, whatever it is, it must be temple building, Gods
Government, Christ's scepter, throne, Kingdom, the only way, that, for want of
which, errors, haeresies, sins, spring among us, plagues, judgments,
punishments come upon us. To such things as these, all pretend, who are very
confident they have found out the only way. Such big words as these, have
made us believe, that we are mortal adversaries; (I speak of the parties at
variance about Government) that one Kingdom, Communion, Heaven, cannot hold us.
Now truly if this course be followed, so to heighten our differences, by
adorning the truth we own, with such titles as it does not merit, and branding
the errors we oppose, with such marks, as in cold blood we cannot think they
themselves, but only in their (by us supposed) tendance do deserve, I doubt
not, but that it will be bitterness unto us all in the end. And Quaere whether
by this means, many have not been brought to conceive the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, which himself affirms to be within us, to consist in forms, outward
order, positive rules, and external Government. I design none, but earnestly
desire, that the two great parties, at this day litigant in this Kingdom, would
seriously consider, what is like to be the issue of such proceedings; and
whether the mystery of godliness in the power thereof, be like to be propagated
by it. Let not truth be weighed in the balance of our interest; Will not a dram
of that, turn the scale with some against many arguments? Power is powerful to
persuade.

3. Not to measure men's judgments, by their subscribing, or refusing to
subscribe petitions in these days about Church Government; for subscribers,
would every one could not see, with what a zealous nescience, and implicit
judgment many are lead. And for refusers, though perhaps they could close with
the general words, wherewith usually they are expressed, yet there are so many
known circumstances, restraining those words to particular significations,
directing them to by, and secundary tendences, as must needs make some abstain:
for mine own part, from subscribing late Petitions, about Church Government, I
have been withheld by such reasons as these.

1. I dare not absolutely assert, maintain, and abide by it, (as rational men
ought to do every clause, in any thing owned by their subscription) that the
cause of all the evils, usually annumerated in such Petitions, is, the want of
Church-Govenrment, taking it for any government, that ever yet was established
amongst men, or in notion otherwise made known unto me. Yea, I am confident
that more probable causes in this juncture of time might be assigned of them;
Vid catal. baeret. aput Tertul. de praescript. Epiphan. Aug. Vincent.
Neither can any be ignorant, how plentifully such evils abounded, when
Church Discipline was most severely executed; And lastly, I am confident, that
who ever lives to see them suppressed by any outward means (when spiritual
weapons shall be judged insufficient) will find it to be, not any thing,
either included in, or necessarily annexed unto Church Discipline, that must do
it, but some other thing, not unlike that, which in days of yore when all the
world wondered after the beast, suppressed all truth and error, but only what
the Arch enemy of Jesus Christ, was pleased to hold out to be believed; but of
this afterward. ^go Ancillae tuae fidem ^a bui, nonne tu imp^den^, qui nec mihi
ipsi credis? Philos. apud plut. apoth.


2. I dare not affirm that the Parliament has not established a Government
already, for the essentialls of it, themselves affirming that they have, and
their Ordinances about rulers, rules, and persons to be ruled, (the requisita
and materials of Government) being long since extant. Now to require a thing
to be done, by them, who affirm that they have already done it, argues, either
much weakness or supine negligence in our selves, not to ^nderstand what is
ef^ected, or a strong imputation, on those that have done it, either
fraudulently, to pretend that which is false, or foolishly to averse, what they
do not understand; yet though I have learned to obey as far as lawfully ^
may, my judgment is exceedingly far from being enslaved, and according to
that, by Gods assistance, shall be my practice; which if it run cross to the
prescriptions of authority, it shall cheerfully submit to the censure thereof;
In the mean time, all Petitioning of any party about this business, seems to
thwart some Declarations of the House of Commons, whereunto I doubt not, but
they intend for the main, inviolably and unalterably to adhere. Add hereunto,
that petitioning in this kind, was not long since voted breach in privilege,
in them, who might justly expect, as much favor and liberty in petitioning, as
any of their brethren in the Kingdom, and I have more then one reason to
suppose, that the purpose and design of theirs and others, was one, and the
same.

3. There are no small grounds of supposall, that some petitions have not their
rise from amongst them by whom they are subscribed, but that the spring and
master wheels giving the first motion to them, are distant and unseen; My self
having been lately urged to subscription, upon this ground, that directions
were had for it from above, (as we use to speak in the Country) yea in this, I
could say more then I intend, aiming at nothing but the quieting of men's
spirits, needlessly exasperated, only I cannot but say, that honest men ought to
be very cautious, how they put themselves upon any engagement, that might make
any party or faction in the Kingdom; suppose that their interest in the least
measure, does run cross to that of the great Council thereof, thereby to
strengthen the hands or designs of any, by occasioning an opinion that upon
fresh or new divisions, (which God of his mercy prevent) we would not adhere
constantly to our old principles, walking according to which, we have hitherto
found protection and safety. And I cannot not but be jealous for the honor of
our noble Parliament, whose authority is every day undermined, and their regard
in the affections of the people shaken, by such dangerous insinuations, as
though they could in an hour put an end to all our disturbances, but refuse
it. This season also for such petitions, seems to me very unseasonable, the
greatest appearing danger impendent to this Kingdom, being from the contest
about Church Government, which by such means as this, is exceedingly heightened,
and animosity added to the parties at variance.

4. A particular form of Church Discipline is usually in such petitions, either
directly expressed, or evidently pointed at, and directed unto, as that alone
which our Covenant engages us to embrace; Yea, as though it had long since
designed that particular way, and distinguished it from all others; the
embracing of it, is pressed under the pain of breach of Covenant, a crime
abhorred of God and man. Now truly to suppose that our Covenant did ty us up
absolutely to any one formerly known way of Church Discipline, the words
formally engaging us into a disquisition out of the word, of that which is
agreeable to the mind and will of God, is to me, such a childish, ridiculous,
selfish conceit, as I believe no knowing men will once entertain, unless
prejudice begotten by their peculiar interest, has disturbed their
intellectualls: for my part I know no Church Government in the world already
established amongst any sort of men of the truth, and necessity whereof, I am
convinced in all particulars, Nunc vero ^i nominis odium ^st, quis nominum
reatus? quae accusatio vocabulorum? nisi aut Barbarum sonat aliqua vox ^ominis*
aut maledicum, aut impud cum? Tertul Apol.
especially if I may take their practice to be the best interpreter of their
maxims.

Fourthly, Another postulatum is, that men would not use an over-zealous speed,
upon every small difference, to characterise men (otherwise godly and
peaceable) as Sectaries, knowing the odiousness of the name, among the vulgar,
deservedly or otherwise imposed, and the evil of the thing it self, rightly
apprehended, whereunto lighter differences do not amount; Such names as this, I
know are arbitrary, and generally serve the wills of the greater number. They
are commonly Sectaries, who ( jure aut injuria) are oppressed. Nothing was ever
persecuted under an esteemed name. Names are in the power of the many things,
and their causes are known to few. there is none in the world can give an ill
title to others, which from some he does not receive: the same right which in
this kind I have toward another, he has toward me: unless I affirm my self
to be infallible, not so he: those names which men are known by, when they are
oppressed, they commonly use against others whom they seek to oppress. I would
therefore that all horrid appellations, as increasers of strife, kindlers of
wrath, enemies of charity, food for animasity, were for ever banished from
amongst us. Let a spade be called a spade, so we take heed Christ be not called
Beelzebub. I know my profession to the greatest part of the world is
Sectarisme, Act. 24. 14. and 28. 22. Haeresis christi. anorum. Tertul secta
Christ. id. ^aeresit catholice, and haeresi^ sancti^^ma, Constant. Epist. Chr.
syrac. mislenta systema: quo probare conatur Calvinianos esse ^aeretices. Hu^.
Calv. Tur Andrews Epist ad Moli^ae.
as Christianity: amongst those who profess the name of Christ, to the
greatest number, I am a sectary, because a Protestant: amongst Protestants, at
least the one half, account all men of my persuasion, Calvinisticall
Sacramentarian Sectaries: amongst these again, to some I have been a
Puritanicall sectary, an Aerian Haeretick, because Anti-prelaticall: yea and
amongst these last, not a few account me a Sectary, because I plead for
Presbyteriall Government in Churches: and to all these am I thus esteemed, as I
am fully convinced, causelessly and erroneously, what they call sectarisme, I am
persuaded is ipsissima veritas, the very truth it self, to which they also
ought to submit, that others also though upon false grounds, are convinced of
the truth of their own persuasion, I cannot but believe; and therefore as I
find by experience, that the horrid names of Haeretick, Schismatic, sectary,
and the like, have never had any influence or force upon my judgment, nor
otherwise moved me, unless it were unto retaliation; so I am persuaded it is
also with others, for homines sumus; forcing them abroad in such liveries, does
not at all convince them, that they are servants to the master of sects indeed,
but only, makes them wait an opportunity, to cast the like mantle on their
traducers. And this usually is the beginning of arming the more against the
few, with violence: impatient of bearing the burdens, which they impose on
others shoulders: by means whereof, Christendom has been made a theater of
blood: and one amongst all, after that by cruelty and villainy, he had prevailed
above the rest, took upon him to be the only dictator in Christian Religion:
but of this afterward.

Now by the concession of these, as I hope not unequitable demands, thus much
at least I conceive will be attained, viz. that a peaceable dissent in some
smaller things, disputable questions, not-absolutely-necessary assertions,
deserves not any rigid censure, distance off affections, or breach of Christian
Communion and amity: in such things as these, veniam petimusque damusque
vicissim: If otherwise, I profess I can hardly bring my mind to comply and
close in with them, amongst whom almost any thing is lawful but to dissent.

These things being premised, I shall now set down and make public, that
proposal, which heretofore I have tendered, as a means to give some light into
a way for the profitable and comfortable practice of Church Government; drawing
out of general notions what is practically applicable, so circumstantiated, as
of necessity it must be: and herein I shall not alter any thing, or in the
least expression go off from that which long since I drew up at the request of
a worthy friend, after a discourse about it: and this, not only because it has
already been in the hands of many, but also because my intent is not, either to
assert, dispute, or make out any thing further of my judgment in these things,
then I have already done, (hoping for more leisure so to do, then the few
hours assigned to the product of this short appendix will permit) but only by
way of a defensative, to evince, that the rumors which have been spread by
some, and entertained by others, too greedily about this matter, have been
exceeding causeless and groundless; So that though my second thoughts have,
if I mistake not, much improved some particulars in this Essay, yet I cannot be
induced, because of the reason before recounted (the only cause of the
publication thereof) to make any alteration in it, only I shall present the
reader with some few things, which gave occasion and rise to this proposal. As

1. A fervent desire to prevent all further division and separation, disunion
of minds amongst godly men, suspisions and jealousies in the people toward
their ministers, as aiming at power and unjust domination over them, fruitles
disputes, languishings about unprofitable questions, breaches of charity for
trifles, exasperating the minds of men one against another: all which growing
evils, tending to the subversion of Christian love, and the power of
godliness, with the disturbance of the state, are too much fomented by that
sad breach and division, which is here attempted to be made up.

2. A desire to work and draw the minds of all my brethren (the most I hope
need it not) to set in, for a through Reformation, and for the obtaining of holy
Communion, to keep off indifferently the unworthy from Church privileges, and
profaning of holy things. Whereunto, I presumed the discovery of a way whereby
this might be effected, without their disturbance in their former station,
would be a considerable motive.

3. A consideration of the paucity of positive rules in the Scripture for
Church Government with the great difficulty of reducing them to practice in
these present times, (both sufficiently evidenced by the endless disputes, and
irreconcilable differences of godly, precious and learned men about them, made
me conceive, that the practice of the Apostolical Churches, (doubtless for a
time observed in those immediately succeeding) would be the best external help
for the right interpretation of those rules we have, and pattern to draw out a
Church way by. Now truly after my best search, and inquiry, into the first
Churches and their constitution, framing an Idea and exemplar of them, this
poor heap following, seems to me, as like one of them, as any thing that yet I
have seen: nothing at all doubting, but that if a more skillful hand had the
limning of it, (...) Pind, od. 10. Oli^a.
the proportions, features and lines, would be very exact, equal and parallel:
yea, did not extreme haste, now call it from me, so that I have no leisure, so
much as to transcribe the first draught, (...)
I doubt not but, by Gods assistance, it might be so set forth, as not to be
thought altogether undesirable; if men would but a little lay aside beloved
preconceptions: but the Printer stays for every line: only I must entreat
every one that shall cast a candid eye, on this unwillingly exposed Embryo, and
rude abortion, that he would assume in his mind, any particular Church
mentioned in the Scripture, as of H^erusalem, Corinth, Ephesus, or the like,
consider the way and state they were th^n, and some ages after, in respect of
outward immunities and enjoyments, and tell me, whether any rational man can
suppose, that either there were in those places, sundry particular Churches,
with their distinct peculiar officers, acting in most pastoral duties
severally in them, as distinguished and divided into entire societies, but
ruling them in respect of some particulars loyally in combination, considered
as distinct bodies; or else, that they were such single Congregations, as that
all that power and authority which was in them, may seem fitly and conveniently
to be entrusted, with a small handful of men, combined under one single
Pastor, with one, two, or perhaps no associated Elders. More then this, I
shall only ask, whether all ordinary power, may not without danger, be asserted
to reside in such a Church as is here described, reserving all due right and
authority, to Councels and Magistrates. Now for the fountain, seat, and rise of
this power, for the just distribution of it, between Pastors and people, this
is no place to dispute; these following lines were intended merely to sedate
and bury such contests, and to be what they are entitled, viz.


