TWO LETTERS SENT By Mr. Richard Osburn (late Attendant on his Majesty in
Carisbrook Castle, touching a Design to poison or make away his Majesty.

Which Letters were read in the House of Peers and communicated to the House of
Commons, June 20. 1648.

With an ANSWER to the said Letters, and a Narrative of the whole DESIGN.

a king sits enthroned, crowned and scepter in hand, surrounded by courtiers.
Two children look on.

London, Printed for A. H. near Pye-corner, 1648.

My Lord,
THough I cannot but imagine I stand so highly condemned in your Lordships and
many persons thoughts, that any thing of vindication from me must come with all
the disadvantage and prejudice that may be; yet (my Lord) being conscious of my
own integrity, and confident that I shall be judged by your Lordship by no
other Rules but those of justice and reason, I cannot doubt but when I have
discovered the grounds and reasons of my Actions, that it will appear to your
Lordship, that what I have done has been agreeable to the several duties I
stand engaged in, as I am supposed to have acted contrary before I am heard.

Not to detain your Lordship in circumstances, I shall make this Protestation,
that as no other thing but the danger of the Kings life, could in reason excuse
such attempt: So I do protest that no inferior considerations did or could
have moved to such an action: But my Lord having had such particular and well
grounded information, that so horrid a design was intended and moved from those
that could when they pleased have had the power to put it in execution; I hope
I shall not be censured for having post posed all other considerations to that
Loyalty which cannot be questioned but I owe to the King.

But not to leave your Lordship unsatisfied with the general account, the
intelligence I speak of, concerning this design, I received from Captain
Rolfe, a person very intimate with the Governor, privy to all Conncells, and
one that is very high in the esteem of the Army; he my Lord informed me, that
to his knowledge the Governor had received severrll Letters from the Army,
intimating they desired the King might by any means be removed out of the way,
either by poison or otherwise, And that another time the same person persuaded
me to join with him in a design to remove the King out of that Castle to a
place of more secrefie, proffering to take an Oath with me, and to do it
without the Governors privity, who he said would not consent for losing the
allowance of the House, his pretense to this attempt was, that the King was in
too public a place, from whence he might be rescued, but if he might be
conveyed into some place of secresy, he said we might dispose of his person
upon all occasions as we thought fit; and this he was confident we could
effect without the Governors privity. My Lord considering all these pregnant
circumstances, I think it will appear that there were, if there are no such
intentions concerning his Majesty's person, as may well justify my endeavors
that have been made for his remove from so much danger: and for my own part,
my Lord, I must be so plain as to declare concerning my own actings in
relation to this business, that had I done this (having such grounds) I must
believe I had then verified all those aspersions of disloyalty and breach of
Trust, which I am contented to suffer from those whose interest is perchance
opposed to my endeavors to prevent such damnable designs.

My Lord, I have spoken nothing here but what I shall be ready to testify upon
Oath In his Letter to the House of Commons, he desires time for 40 days.
when ever I shall be called to it, with promise of Freedom and security, till
then I must be content to support all censures and satisfy my self with the
vindication I receive from my own conscience.

I am your Lordships humble Servant, Rich. Osburne.

Right Honorable,
I Did by a Letter of the first of June acquaint my Lord Wharton with what I
send here enclosed, expecting it would before this have been communicated to
both Houses: what should be the reason of concealing a business of this nature
I know not, except it be to give those time that are concerned in it, better
to think of some stratagem to evade this discovery,

I humbly desire your Lordship upon sight of this relation, to communicate it
to the House of Peers; which I shall be ready to attest upon Oath in every
particular, when ever your Lordship shall please to allow me that freedom and
security which ought to be afforded to any Gentleman and Christian, in
witnessing a truth.

My Lord I am, Your Lordships most humble Servant, Rich. Osburne.
June 16, 1648.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Manchester Speaker of etc.
An Answer to Mr. Richard Osburns Letter.
HEre is two things which Mr. Osburne aims at in this Letter, (as is very
clear and manifest) concerning himself, rather then any intention of good to
the King.

1 His own vindication, concerning that foul perfidious fact of betraying the
trust reposed in him by the Parliament, the Lord General and the Governor, in
joining with their enemies (secretly) to carry away his Majesty, to the great
danger of his person, God knows whither.

2. To gain freedom and security (to serve him as a protection, who is now
fled from the face of Justice.)

Should there be such a defigne in any, as to murder or poison the King, it
were Treason in the highest degree, even to (know it, and) conceal it.

But this information of Mr. Osburnes, alleged to daub up those breaches which
he has made in his reputation, by perfideousnesse to the Parliament, is so
improbable; that instead of clearing him, it makes him appear full of levity
(if not treachery) both to the King and Parliament.

The Intelligence of this design (against the King) he says he received from
Captain Rolfs: And it seems he had not a sudden, but several informations of
if, (as himself says) whereas, according to the Laws of the Kingdom, he ought
to have, the first time, made it known and for not so doing, if that be true
which he says, he is guilty of Treason, for concealing it so long.

And in all his Charge he personates none in Capt. Rolfs intelligence, but
himself, and what he says of himself, gives just grounds of suspicion, that
his design to have carried away the King, was very dangerous to his Majesty's
person, and the peace of the Kingdom.

He confesses himself to be guilty of a confederasie, and to have had several
Treaties to remove his Majesty, he demonstrateth these several designs
against the King.

1. That the King might be removed out of the Castle where he is, to a place of
more strength. [That Mr. Osburn went on in this design, it is clear, and by
himself confessed; but neither the Army, the Governor, nor Mr. Rolfs privy to
it, but active to prevent it.]

2 That an Oath might be taken, of secrecy, to each other [He says that
Captain Rolf proffered to take it; but it seems he did not, and was therefore,
not thought fit to be further trusted in this design,] But the Soldiers which
they drew in, discovered the Plot, for all the Oath, which they could not bear,
and so the Design was prevented by the care of the Governor.

3. That by any means the King might be removed out of the way, either by
poison, or other ways. [Had this been true, Osburn is a Traitor in high
degree, for concealing it, though he had had no hand at all in it, more then to
know of the design.

But if such a design was (by all reason) Osburn was himself, the chiefest
Actor for accomplishing of this cruel and horrid murdering of the King,
prevented by the care of Collonell Hammond. As may appear, by these
circumstances, from his own confession.

1 Though he knew that Collonell Hammond, the Governor, would not consent to
this horrid design, yet (during the time of all these Treaties; the managing of
the design, the bringing of Mercury water, and eating the Iron bar of the
Window. The providing of boats and horses) Osburn would not let it be
discovered, either to the Governor, or to the Parliament, but all kept secret
till now, that he is fled from the presence of Justice.

2 Osburne (without the privity of the Army, the Governor, or Captain Rolph,
with other confederates did thus far act what he charge Captain Rolph with,
in a treaty with him, that the King had like to have been conveyed into some
place of secrefie: And what was the intent herein:

Why probably it was to have rescued His Majesty from the power of the
Parliament, and to have done with him what the Cavaliers had pleased.

The Design by Osburns own words was intended thus, to the end, They might
dispose of His Majesty's person, upon all occasions as they thought fit.

Now let any rational man (that reads this Letter of Mr. Osburns) deal clearly
with his own heart; and he cannot but confess, that the design to have
carried away the King from the Isle of Wight by Osburn, and his confederates,
was dangerous not only to the Parliament and Kingdom, but to the hazard of
his Majesty's person, And by the wonderful providence of God prevented. And
that his Majesty's person, as well as the Kingdom, is more secure by the
protection of the Parliament then by the Cavaliers. The Parliament will hear
either Mr. Osburne or any other that will come and bring in any particular
Charge against any persons whatsoever, guilty of any such Design against the
King.

Westminister the 21th of June 1648.
FINIS.

