THE BAITING OF THE Great BULL of BASHAN UNFOLDED AND Presented to the
Affecters and approvers of the PETITION of the 11 Sept. 1648.

Especially, to the Citizens of London usually meeting at the Whale-bone in
LOTHBURY behind the Royal Exchange, Commonly (though unjustly) styled LEVELLERS.

By Richard Overton Close-prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.

Psalm. 22. 12. 13. Psalm. 68. 28. 30. Many Bulls have compassed me: strong Bulls
of Bashan have beset me round.
They opened their mouths against me, as a ravening and a roaring Lion.
-- Strengthen O God that which thou have wrought for us. Rebuke the Company of
Spearmen, the multitude of the Bulls, with the Calves of the people, til every
one submit -- Scatter thou the people that delight in war.

Imprinted at London, 1649.

Gentlemen,
BEing necessitated (by some over-sudden misdeemings from amongst you) some few
days since to assert and avow the continuance of my integrity to those sure
foundations of Peace and Freedom, offered to the people of this Nation under
the form or draught of an Agreement of the People, May 1. 1649.

It has happened with me, as with other adventurers into the public: All
pallates are not pleased with that Sheet entitled Overtons Defiance, etc. yet
falls it out no other wise then I expected; It seems many are weak and as
many are offended, and chiefly with that figurative passage of the Bull;
especially at the word Pox; but they need not much, did they but also take into
their thoughts, the adulterous and wicked generation, on whom that Metaphor is
made good, a people whose heart is waxed gross, and their ears dull of
hearing, having closed their eyes, least at any time they should see, hear,
understand and be converted.

To such a people Christ spoke not but in Parables: why then to such might not
I use the Figure of the Bull of Basin, or rather of the Bull-baiting, with all
the circumstances Emphasis Gratia thereunto appeartaining? But there is uncivil
language, such as becomes not the Gospel of Christ. I answer (my Brethren)
he or she (how pure or nice soever to the eye) that is not guilty of real
gross incivilities both in word and deed, let him or her throw the first stone
at that seeming incivillity, for at most you can make it but so in appearance,
and no like is the same. The figure is but the shell; will you not crack the
shell to take out the kernel? pass through the Parable to the Moral thereof?
I, but it jears and that's not the language of Canaan; and be it so: Is it not
recorded that Eliah mocked the Priests of Baal, and said, Cry aloud for he is
god, either he is talking or he is pursuing his Enemy, or he is in a journey,
or peradventure he sleeps, and must be waked.

Sure this was a jear to some purpose; here Eliah bid them cry aloud, etc. and
it is justified; then why now may not I cry ha -- looe -- ha -- looe -- etc. and
not be condemned? What if I had turned Fiddler in that Paper, Christ himself
uses the simile of a Piper, saying, we have Piped unto you and ye have not
danced (Mat. 11. 17.) And truly I think we (the four poor Sea green Fiddlers in
the Tower) may take up the same saying, We have Piped unto you ever since the
first of May, the most pleasant tune of the AGREEMENT of the PEOPLE, but yet
have not danced up so roundly as so sprightly a tune deserves. But you will say
(it may be) I am still in the language of Ashdod (as perchance you may take it)
or that this Dialect is of Consanguinity with the other: It Is true; things
(however in themselves) are to others as they are taken. He that should take
the Parable of Dives and Lazarus in the here letter (how known Cannonical
soever in its own genuine sense) he must explode it the Scriptures, and at best
give it but a place in the Apocrypha, for the Letter or character thereof (if
that must be the sense) is contradictory to the body of divinity, except you
will say, to believe that the rich Clutton and the Beggar left not their eyes,
tongues, fingers, etc. in the grave is Orthodox. And so of my Metaphor of the
Bull, the use of the word Genitals, Pox, etc. you may say is uncivil in the
Letter, but how uncivil I pray in the Moral? Know ye not that whosoever
shall but fasten on the Genitors or Parents of the peoples ruin, so, as to
pinch the grand Imposters and deluders of the times, he burns his Fingers, is
smit with the Morbus Gallicus of the exslaving Sword; For, what is he, that is
precisely honest to the Commonwealth, that can escape persecution? As it has
been of old and is still in things spiritual, He that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; so he now, that will but faithfully
discharge his duty to the public, shall be sure to be cast upon the Fiery
Trial, that Dogs mouth (as after the Metaphor) shall be sure to be burnt, and
it is well he scapes hanging as the time goes.

Now I pray, to how much incivility does this amount? Is it so worthy your
second condemnings as it may not be indulged with a favorable eye? Love
envyeth not, it judges the best; I had thought with two or three merry Jiggs
to attempt an uproar in all the laughters in England, but I see you are a
company of dull souls, mirth with you is like a Shoulder of Mutton to a sick
Horse, or worst, you strait convert into malancholy, trample it under your
feet, turn again, and are (some of you) ready to rent me; He that had cast
Pearls before Swine could have expected no less.

Indeed, you looked (many of you) upon me as in a Sownd at my close
Imprisonment; but truly, when I came abroad with that ignorant Sheet, it found
you in a deed sleep, as men in a Trans, portending, as if the Champions of the
Eleventh of September had been Sparrow-blasted with the business of Burford:
And I essayed, to put you out of your dumps, and mind you of the Agreement of
the People as the center, or ne plus ultra of all our Engagements; but it seems
it proved but as music to the house of Mourning: yet however, it has so far
gained its end; if by it you will not be provoked to your duties equally with
us, it has awaked you into a little discourse pro and con, though it be but to
point at my weaker parts, and that is better then nothing, if rightly applied,
for ex nihila nil fit: by this you may take notice of your own infirmities in
so wire-drawing of mine: Certainly, it may provoke you to consider of what
spirits you are, not unlike such as strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel, that
usually in any discourse pass over what concerns themselves, though of never
so serious and weighty consideration in point of their duties, and betake
themselves wholly to spy out the spots and infirmities thereof, and of the
Author, and fall foul thereupon, and so slight their duties, stifle and
smother the thing that is good: And now (my tender friends) I pray tell me what
Spirit is this? it is a foul spirit, away with it for shame; go purge; go purge;
one penniworth of the Agreement of the people, with a little good resolution
taken morning and evening, will work out this corruption, cleanse and purify
the blood, and put a period to this distinction of parties, allay the feude and
division of the people, and state us in firm Freedom, Safety and Peace; and
then there will be none of this catching and carping, this lying in wait to
snap at infirmities; and till the Agreement be settled, this is not to be
expected.

I have known, when things as unserious as my last sheet, dressed out in the
youthful attire of mirth, has found a very large acceptance not only with
you, but even with this generation of men, that are now the Enemies of the
People; and I think if I have not forgot the Arraignment of Persecution, and
some other things of that nature, that I my self have been one of those who
have had the honor of such acceptances: But O tempora I O Mores I how few are
the same yesterday and to day? success changes men's minds as the wind does
the weathercock.

But (my friends) your gravity (which I am afraid has too much of Melancholy
in it) cannot more move me to a more serious Dialect, then my own affections
incline me, I prize both in their places; as I affect the one, I respect the
other: for sure, modest mirth tempeted with due gravity makes the best
composition, most natural and harmonious: God in the temper of our natures as
he has made us Earth, so has he enlivened that dull lump with the Element of
Fire, which is the forma formans, the giver and preserver of being and motion,
and the Original of that habit of laughter: Therefore Mirth sure is of Divine
instinct, and I think I may boldly say, more natural then Melancholy, and
less savours of the Curse. Nature in its Creation was pure and good, void of
corruption, or any thing obnoxious or destructive: all misery and mischief
came in with the fall, as a Curse upon the Creature, as Death, sorrow, tears,
pains, etc, in which number you may reckon Melancholy, for it is both unnatural
and destructive to nature, and so fitly reputed a branch of the Curse, and it is
the root of the root of all wickedness, Coveteousnesse; for where have you
seen a Melancholy man that is not covetous? and a covetous man seldom proves a
good Commonwealths man: yet this ill Weed is gotten into so religious an
esteem that all our Religion is turned into Melancholy; that, he that cannot
whine, pipe, weep and hang down his head like a Bulrush and seem sad unto men,
is profane, light, has not any thing of God in him, is a Reprobate, is
condemned and censured of all, as neither fit for Church nor Common wealth; And
thus comes it to pass; my mirth is heightened to such a transgression, even to
cast me under the present Anathama of the now godly party.

But my Brethren of the Sea green Order, take a little wine with your water,
and i will take a little water with my wine, and it will temper us to the best
constitution. I wonder what means your late dullness of motion, appearing as
men in a dream, or as if you were another sort of people then the Authors,
promotors, approvers and presenters of the Petition of the 11 of Sept. that
people use to be the most active and vigorous People in England for public
Freedom and safety, they use to fear no colors, the more they were pressed down
the more they pressed forward, and the more they enereased; few months have
passed that they have not in point of Common-Right produced some eminent piece:
but your heads have drooped of late, nothing has appeared, not one punctilio
in supportation and promotion of the Agreement; deep silence has covered you;
fie, fie; be not cowed out of your abilities and principles by the present rage
of the wicked: compare but the strength of your principles and the strength of
an Army, and tell me which is stronger: How many persecuting powers have fallen
before your principles as Dagon before the Ark? and who has been able to stand
before them, even from Episcopacy to this whited and Jesabel like painted
Independency? Think you, that this unparalleled tyranny, under this new name,
more fierce and cruel then his fellows, trampling the residue under its feet,
that it shall escape the vengeance of Gods wrath more then its Predecessors? no,
no; Gods Motto is semper Idem. Be not therefore dismayed or daunted at the
height and magnificence of this insolent faction, the now sons of Perdition,
that are set up to deceive if it were possible the very Elect.

It is your own evil and weakness, and of those that are Professors and
pretenders to the same principles with you, that our Cause is thus under a
Cloud: would you all act together, all suffer together, all be as one; and not
thus (as some amongst you Commonally use) hang back in the adversity, and be
seen in the Van of Prosperity not daring when the storm rages, to peep into
the tempest for fear of being blown away) we should not be at this pass with
out Cause.

When there is any thing of venture or hazard, while it is in the Embrie, who is
not then busy and forward? but when it is put upon the personal test for
execution, O then one has bought a piece of ground, and must be excused;
another a yoke of Oxen, and he must go see them; and a third has married a
wife and therefore must please her.

Friends, be not offended, this is a crime deserves your repentance; I condemn
you not all, it is but some few; A little Leaven you know leaveneth the whole
Lump; therefore do ye beware of the Leaven of the pharisees; it much retardeth
your motions and blasteth their fruits; the public is a loser thereby, and
your Cause receives damage: let those whom this pincheth, be thereby provoked
to amendment, it is worthy their care: For know you not, that it is many hands
make light work? If the stresse or weight of the work be laid upon one, or some
3 or 4, it must needs go on slowly: Why, is not he that is most backward as
forward as the best? it is his Cause as much as it is any man's, and thereto in
duty as much obliged as any. We are no more concerned then your selves, it is
but upon the point of common duty (which binds all) to our Country, that we
suffer, and we count it our Joy, for that we know we suffer for well-doing, and
though we perish in the Work, our Reward shall go with us, for our Redeemer
lives, and that is our stay. Therefore why stand you still, and are not
provoked to this good Emulation; be as active and vigilant, and you shall share
in the rejoicing, and it is such (I must tell you my Friends) is worth your
having; Dulce est pro patria pati.

Fear not those Hills and Mountains that are in your way; it is but your want of
faith that they are not removed, and cast into the bottom of the sea: While
you lift up your heads, are vigorous and active, your principles present you as
Steeples above the rest of the people; every man is a strong Barricado in the
way of the Enemy, and your principles flourish and get ground, but when you are
fearful, are slat or remiss, then they retire and fade; for they are said to
increase or diminish, as they get or lose ground in the understanding or
acceptance of others: And this ever take as a sure Rule, That the most virtuous
and saving principles in a person most undaunted and faithful, the more they
are suppressed, and the more he is persecuted, the more they prosper and spread;
of so mighty an efficacy are his sufferings and testimony; as, in the case of
Paul is witnessed, Now I would (says he) ye should understand, Brethren, that
the things that happened unto me, have fallen out rather to the furtherance of the
Gospel; so that my bonds in Christ are manifest in all the Palace, and in all
other places, and many of the Brethren in the Lord waxed confident by my Bonds,
are muchmore bold to speak the Word without fear: And this is all the
persecutor gains upon the undaunted Asserters of righteousness; his own sword
is turned into his own bowels: persecution, as the Viper, devoureth its own
parent. Then faint ye not (my friends) rouse up your heads and be valiant; lift
up your Agreement of the people again, and put it upon the public stage for
promotion and subscription, and doubt not: What man that there is amongst you,
that is fearful and faint-hearted, let him depart your Meetings, and return to
his house: the more the Enemy stormeth, the more resolute and vigorous be ye;
give them enough of persecution; the more they persecute, the more do ye
appear, that your Bands may be famous; for with setters, Irons, and
prifon-walls you may shake them to pieces; it is their tyrannies cruelties, and
oppressions must be their Fall, through which you must eat your way for the
Agreement.

I highly honor the fidelity and valor of Mr. Chrestopher Chisman, who
notwithstanding his Imprisonment, his abuses and sufferings, has not wrapped up
his talent in a napkin, but like a good and faithful servant has improved his
imprisonment to the public advantage; see his Book, entitled, The Lamb
contending with the Lion, it is worthy your imitation, Let your light (as his)
so shine before men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your
Cause; fear no dangers; the high and mighty Cedars are never able to overtop
your principles; what though Ambition has mounted to the title of Lord
Governor (forsooth) has not your vigorous principles slain both the Lion and
the Bear, and shall not this uncirumcised P^ilistne be as one of them?

But (my friends) I am informed those painted Sepulchers of Independency desire
your compliance and treaty with them: But touch pitch, and you shall be
defiled, have nothing to do with them; touch not, taste not, handle not, which
all are to perish with the using; Remember the fidelity of Uriah to David: The
Ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Joab, and the servants
of my Lord are encamped in the open fields, shall I then go into my house, to
eat and to drink and to lie with my wife? As thou live and as thy soul
lives, I will not do this thing. Your Agreement lies half dead in the streets,
your friends and its assertors are in prison, with sentinels at their doors,
denied the access and visitation of friends, have the catch-poles of the
Counsel of State enter their chambers when they are in bed) with Musketteers at
their heels, search, rifly catch and take away any thing that any way they may
wrest unto their bloody ends against them, as formerly, and now, the other day
(July 4.) they have done, and all the land mourns and groaneth at the
calamity and miseries upon it for want of the settlement of a just constitution
of Government; and shall you go unto them (those pests and vipers of the
Nation) to treat or comply? As you live and as your soul lives you must not do
this thing:

While your agreement is trod under their feet, your friends under their cruel
captivity, etc. let him that treats with them amongst you, or with any of
their creatures, or keeps any correspondency with them, be to you as a
Reprobate, let the Mark of Cain be set upon him, that every finger may point
at him for a Traitor, and a Judas to the people that meets him.

If a wife or a child be like to be destroyed by fire, water, or thieves, he
accounts himself base that dare not venture his own life to save theirs: our
cause is of a more transcendent valu^, and we suffer for it; and can you see it
destroyed in us, and we for it, and not be as natural as in a private
relation? the lives, liberties, and freedoms of all is contained in it? If
your neighbors Ox or his Ass were in a ditch, it is a shame to pass by and
not to help; and behold, here is all in the ditch, then, why venture you not
your time, your labors, your moneys, etc. to redeem out all, our Cause, the
nation, and us in it, and with it.

I confess no people in England have been more vigorous, more active and
diligent, and more adventurous for the Cause of the Nation, and for nor
Liberties then most of you: we have been as precious to you as the apple of
your eye; you have spared no huzard, no toil or time to get us at freedom,
and I hope we shall never be so ungrateful as not thankfully to remember that
service of Love: To you we are obliged in the deepest obligations of any others
in England.

But now considering the extreme necessity of your still constant unwearied
prosecution. I have emboldened my self to press you forward to the good work
of the people, that at this time you may be as vigilant and industrious as at
any other, that public life and spirit, may still be preserved and increased
in our cause, even in these worst of times.

And if I have been a little too sharp in my advice, and admonishment, impute
it I pray you to the heat of my zeal and ardent affections to the promotion of
that Cause; for truly to me it is as the life of my life; without it I Am
nothing, with it I live, and therein am

From my close imprisonment in the tower of London July the ninth, 1649. Yours
and every man's as my own RICHARD OVERTON.

FINIS.

