AN ARROW AGAINST ALL TYRANTS And Tyrany, shot from the Prison of Newgate into
the Prerogative Bowels of the Arbitrary House of Lords* and all other Usurpers
and Tyrants Whatsoever.

Wherein the original rise, extent, and end of Magisteriall power, the
natural and National rights, freedoms and properties of Mankind are
discovered, and undeniably maintained; the late oppressions and encroachments
of the Lords over the Commons legally (by the fundamental Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, as also by a memorable Extract out of the Records of the Tower
of London) condemned; The late Presbyterian Ordinance (invented and contrived
by the Divaners, and by the motion of Mr. Bacon and Mr. Taet read in the House
of Commons) examined, refuted, and exploaded, as most inhumaine, tyranicall and
Barbarous.

By RICHARD OVERTON Prerogative Archer to the Arbitrary House of Lords, Their
Prisoner in New gate, for the just and legal properties, rights and freedoms
of the Commons of England: Sent by way of a Letter from him, to Mr. Henry
Martin, a Member of the House of Commons.

IMPRIMATUR Rectat Justitia.



Printed at the backside of the Cyclopian Mountains, by Martin Claw-Clergy,
Printer to the reverend Assembly of Divines, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Subjects Liberty, right opposite to persecuting Court. 1646.

AN ARROW AGAINST ALL TYRANTS And Tyrany, shot from the prison of Newgate
into the Prerogative bowels of the Atbitrary House of Lords, and all other
Usurpers and Tyrants whatsoever.
Sir,
TO every Individual in nature, is given an individual property by nature,
not to be invaded or usurped by any: for every one as he is himself, so he
has a self propriety, else could he not be himself, and on this no second
may presume to deprive any of, without manifest violation and affront to the
very principles of nature, and of the Rules of equity and justice between man
and man; mine and thine cannot be, except this be: No man has power over my
rights and liberties, and I over no man's; I may be but an Individual, enjoy my
self and my self propriety, and may write my self no more then my self, or
presume any further; if I do, I am an encroacher and an invader upon an other
man's Right, to which I have no Right. For by natural birth, all men are
equally and alike borne to like propriety, liberty and freedom, and as we are
delivered of God by the hand of nature into this world, every one with a
natural, innate freedom and propriety (as it were writ in the table of every
man's heart, never to be obliterated) even so are we to live, every one equally
and alike to enjoy his Birthright and privilege; even all whereof God by
nature has made him free.

And this by nature every one desires aims at, and requires, for no man
naturally would be befooled of his liberty by his neighbors craft, or inslaved
by his neighbors might, for it is natures instinct to preserve it self, from
all things hurtful and obnoctious, and this in nature is granted of all to be
most reasonable, equal and just, not to be rooted out of the kind, even of
equal duration with the creature: And from this fountain or root, all just
humain powers take their original; not immediately from God (as Kings usually
plead their prerogative) but mediatly by the hand of nature, as from the
represented to the representors; for originally, God has implanted them in the
creature, and from the creature those powers immediately proceed; and no
further: and no more may be communicated then stands for the better being,
weal, or safety thereof: and this is man's prerogative and no further, so much
and no more may be given or received thereof: even so much as is conducent to a
better being, more safety and freedom, and no more; he that gives more, sins
against his own flesh; and he that takes more, is a Theife and Robber to his
kind: Every man by nature being a King, Priest and Prophet in his own natural
circuit and compass, whereof no second may partake, but by deputation,
commission, and free consent from him, whose natural right and freedom it is.

And thus Sir, and no otherwise are you instated into your sovereign capacity,
for the free people of this Nation, for their better being, discipline,
government, propriety and safety, have each of them communicated so much unto
you (their Chosen Ones) of their natural rights and powers, that you might
thereby become their absolute Commissioners, and lawful Deputies, but no more;
and that by contraction of those their several Individual Communications
conferred upon, and united in you, you alone might become their own natural
proper, sovereign power, therewith singly and only empowered for their several
weals, safeties and freedoms, and no otherwise: for as by nature, no man may
abuse, beat, torment, or afflict himself; so by nature, no man may give that
power to an other, seeing he may not do it himself, for no more can be
communicated from the general then is included in the particulars, whereof the
general is compounded.

So that such so deputed, are to the General no otherwise, then as a
Schoolmasters to a particular, to this or that man's family, for as such an
ones Mastership, ordering and regulating power is but by deputation, and that
ad been placitum, and may be removed at the parents or Head masters pleasure,
upon neglect or abuse thereof, and be conser'd upon another (no parents ever
giving such an absolute unlimited power to such over their children, as to do
to them as they list, and not to be retracted, controuled, or restrained in
their exorbitances) Even so and no otherwise is it, with you our Deputies in
respect of the General, it is in vain for you to think you have power over
us, to save us or destroy us at your pleasure, to do with us as you list, be
it for our weal, or be it for our woe, and not to be enjoined in mercy to the
one, or questioned in justice for the other, for the edge of your own arguments
against the King in this kind, may be turned upon your selves, for if for the
safety of the people, he might in equity be opposed by you in his tyranies
oppressions and cruelties, even so may you by the same rule of right reason, be
opposed by the people in general, in the like cases of destruction and ruin
by you upon them, for the safety of the people is the Sovereign Law, to which
all must become subject, and for the which all powers human are ordained by
them, for tyrany, oppression and cruelty whatsoever, and in whomsoever, is in
it self unnatural, illegal, yea absolutely anti magisteriall, for it is even
destructive to all human civil society, and therefore resistable.

Now Sir the Commons of this Nation, having empowered their Body Representative,
whereof you are one, with their own absolute Sovereignty, thereby Authoritively
and legally to remove from amongst them all oppressions and tyranies,
oppressors and tyrans, how great soever in name, place or dignity, and to
protect, safeguard, and defend them from all such unnatural monsters, vipers
and pests, bred of corruption or which are entrusted amongst them and as much
as in them lies, to prevent all such for the future. And to that end, you have
been assisted with our lives and fortunes, most liberally and freely, with most
victorious and happy success, whereby your Arms are strengthened with our
might, that now you may make us all happy within the confines of this Nation,
if you please; and therefore Sir, in reason, equity and justice, we deserve no
lesle at your hands, and (Sir) let it not seem strange unto you, that we are
thus bold with you for our own.

For by nature we are the sons of Adam, and from him have legitimatly derived a
natural propriety, right and freedom, which only we require, and how in
equity you can deny us, we cannot see; It is but the just rights and
prerogative of mankind (whereunto the people of England, are heirs apparent as
well as other Nations) which we desire, and sure you will not deny it us, that
we may be men, and live like men; if you do, it will be as little safe for
your selfs and posterity, as for us and our posterity, for Sir, look what
bondage, thraldom, or tyrany soever you settle upon us, you certainly, or your
posterity will taste of the dregs: if by your present policy and (abused) might,
you chance to award it from your selves in particular, yet your posterity do
what you can, will be liable to the hazard thereof.

And therefore Sir, we desire your help for your own sakes, as well as for our
selves, chiefly for the removal of two most insufferable evils, daily
encroaching and increasing upon us, portending and threatening inevitable
destiuction, and coufusion of your selves, of us, and of all our posterities,
namely, the encroashments and usurpations of the House of LORDS, over the
Commons liberties, and freedoms, together with the barberous, inhumaine,
blood-thirsty desires and endeavors of of the Presbyterian Clergy.

For the first, namely, the exhorbitances of the LORDS, they are to such an
hight aspired that contrary to all presidents the free Co^moners of England are
imprisoned, fined and condemned by them (their incomputent illegal, unequal,
improper judges) against the express letter of Magna char. chap. 29. (so often
urged and used) that no free man of England shall be passed upon, tried, or
condemned, but by the lawful judgment of his equals, or by the Law of the
Land. Which as says Sir Edw. Cook in his exposition of Mag. chap. 28. last li.
is Per pares, by his peers, that is, by his equals. And page 46. branch 1. 2.
5. in these words;

1. That no man be taken or imprisoned, but per legem terrae, that is, by the
common Law, Statute Law or custom of England: For these Words, per legem
terrae being toward the end of this chapter, do refer to all the pretended
matters in this chapter, and this has the first place, because the liberty of
a man's person is more precious to him then all therest that follow, and
therefore it is great reason, that he should by law be relieved therein, if he
be wronged, as hereafter shall be showed.

2. No man shall be disseised, that is, put out of seison, or dispossessed of
his freehold, that is, lands or livelihood, or of his liberties or free
customs, that is, of such franchises and freedoms, and free customs, as
belong to him by his free birthright; unless it be by the lawful judgment,
that is verdict of his equals (that is of men of his own condition) or by the
Law of the Land (that is to speak it once for all) by the due course and
processes of Law.

3. No man shall be in any sort destroyed (destruere* 1. quod prius structum
and factum suit, penitus evertere and dimere) unless it be by the verdict of
his equals, or according to the Law of the land.

And chapter 29. of Magna Charta, it is said, secundum legem and consuetudinem
Angliae, after the Law and custom of England, non Regis Angliae, not of the
King of England, lest it might be thought to bind the King only, nec populi
Angliae, nor of the People of England; but that the Law might tend to all, it
is said, per legem terrae, by the Law of the Land. Magna chapta, 29.

Against this ancient and fundamental Law, and in the very face thereof (says
Sir Edward Cook) he found an Act of the Parliament made in the 11. of Hen. the
7. chap. 3. that as well justices of Peace without any finding or presentment
by the verdict of 12. men, upon the bare information for the King before them,
should have full power and authority, by their discretions to hear and
determine all offenses and contempts committed or done by any person or persons
against the form, ordinance, and effect of any Statute made and not repealed:
by color of which Act, shaking this fundamental Law, (it is not credible)
says he what horrible oppressions and exactions (to the undoing of infinite
numbers of people) were committed by Sir Richard Empson Knight, and Edmund
Dudly, being Justices of the Peace through England, and upon this unjust and
injurious act, (as commonly in the like cases it falls out) a new Office was
errected, and they made masters of the Kings Forfitures.

But at the Parliament holden in the 1. of Hen. 8. chap. 6. this Act of Hen. 7.
is receited, made void and Repealed, and the reason thereof is yielded, for
that by force of the said Act, it was manifestly known that many sinister,
crafty, and forged informations had been pursued against diverse of the Kings
Subjects, to their great damage and unspeakable vexation: (a thing most
frequent and usual at this day and in these times) the ill success whereof,
together with the most fearful end of these great Oppressors should deter
others from committing the like, and should admonish Parliaments in the future,
that in stead of this ordinary and precious try all Per legem Terrae they bring
not in an absolute and parciall trial by discretion, Cook 2. institute folio.
51.

And to this end the Judgment upon Symond de Berefrrd, a Commoner, in the 4.
year of Edw. 3. is an excellent precident for these times (as is to be seen
upon record in the Tower, in the second Roll of Parliament held the same year
of the said King, and delivered into the Chancery by Henry de Edenston Clerk of
the Parliament) for that the said Simon de Bereford having counseled, aided
and assisted Roger de M^^timer to the murder of the Father of the said King;
the King commanded the Earls and Barons in the said Parliament Assembled, to
give right and lawful judgment unto the said Simon de Bereford; But the
Earls, Barons and Peers came before the Lord the King in the same Parliament,
and said with one voice, that the aforesaid Simon, was not their Peer or
equal, wherefore, they were not bound to judge him as a Peer of the Land: Yet
notwithstanding all this, the Earls, Barons and Peers (being over swaid by the
King) did award and adjudge (as judges of Parliament, by the assent of the King
in the said Parliament) that the said Simon as a traitor and enemy of the
Realm, should behanged and drawn, and execution accordingly was done: But as by
the said Roll appears, it was by full Parliament condemned and adjudged as
illegal, and as a precident not to be drawn into example; the words of the
said Roll are these, viz

And it is assented and agreed by our Lord the King, and all the Grandees in
full Parliament, that albeit the said Peers as judges in full Parliament took
upon them in presence of our Lord the King, to make and give the said Judgment
by the assent of the King, upon some of them that were not their Peers, (to wit
Commoners) and by reason of the murder of the Liege Lord, and destruction of
him, which was so near of the blood royal and the Kings Father, that therefore
the said Peers which now are, or the Peers which shall be for the time to come,
be not bound or charged to give judgment upon others then upon their Peers,
nor shall do it; but of that for ever be discharged, and acquit, and that the
aforesaid Judgment now given be not drawn into example or consequent for the
time to come, by which the said Peers may be charged hereafter to Judge others
then their Peers, being against the Law of the Land, if any such case happen,
which God defend.

Agrees with the Record. William Collet.

But notwithstanding all this, our Lords in Parliament take upon them as Judges
in Parliament to pass judgment and sentence (even of themselves) upon the
Commoners which are not their Peers, and that to fining, imprisonment, etc.
And this does not only content them, but they even send ^orth their armed men,
and beset, invade, assault their houses and persons in a warlike manner, and
take what plunder they please, before so much as any of their pretended
illegal warrants be showed, as was lately upon the eleventh of August 1646.
perpetrated against me and mine, which was more then the King himself by his
legal Prerogative ever could do, for neither by verbal commands or
commissions under the Great Seal of England, he could ever give any lawful
authority to any General, Captain, or person whatsoever without legal tri^ll
and conviction, forceibly to assault, rob, spoil or imprison any of the free
Commoners of England: and in case any free Commoner by such his illegal
Commissions, Orders or warrants before they be lawfully convicted, should be
assaulted, spoiled, plundered, imprisoned, etc. in such cases his agents and
ministers ought to be proceeded against, resisted, apprehended, indicted and
condemned (notwithstanding such commissions) as Trespassers, Thieves,
Burglarers, Felons, Murderers both by Statute and common Law, as is enacted and
resolvd by Magna Charta, cap. 29. 15. Eliz 3. stat. 1. cap. 1, 2 3, 42 Eliz 5.
cap. 1 3. 28. Eliz. 1. Artic. sup. chartas, cap. 2. 4. Eliz. 3. cap 4 5. Eliz.
3 cap. 2. 24 Eliz. 3. cap. 1. 2. Rich. 2. cap. 7. 5. Rich. 2. cap. 5. 1. Hen.
5. cap. 6. 11. Hen. 2. cap. 1. to 6. 24. Hen. 8. cap. 5. 21. Jacob. cap 3.

And if the King himself have not this Arbitrary power, much less may his
Peers or Companions, the Lords over the free Commons of England. And therefore
notwithstanding such illegal censures and warrants either of King or of Lords
(no legal conviction being made) the persons invaded and assaulted by such
open force of Arms may lawfully arm themselves, fortify their Houses (which
are their Castles in the judgment of the Law) against them, yea disarme, beat,
wound, repress and kill them in their just necessary defense of their own
persons, houses, goods wives and families, and not be guilty of the least
offense, as is expressly resolved by the Statute of 21. Edw. de malefactoribus
in parcis, by 24. Hen. 8. cap. 5. 11. Hen. 6. 16. 14. Hen. 6. 24. 35. Hen. 6.
12. E. 4. 6.

And therefore (Sir) as even by nature and by the Law of the Land I was bound,
I denied subjection to these Lords and their arbit^^ry creatures; thus by open
force invading and assaulting my house person, etc. no legal conviction
preceding, or warrant then showen; but and if they had brought and shown a
thousand such warrants, they had all been illegal, antimagisteriall and void
in this case, for they have no legal power in that kind, no more then the King,
but such their actions are utterly condemned, and expressly forbidden by the
Law: Why therefore should you of the Representative Body sit still, and suffer
these Lords thus to devour both us and our Laws?

Be awakned, arise and consider their oppressions and encroachments, and stop
their Lord-ships in their ambitious carere, for they do not cease only here,
but they soar higher and higher, and now they are become arrogators to
themselves, of the natural Soveraignity the Represented have conveyed and
issued to their proper Representors, even challenge to themselves the tittle of
the Supreamest Court of Judecature in the Land, as was claimed by the Lord
Hounsden, when I was before them, which you may see more at large in a printed
letter published under my name, entitled, A Defiance etc. which challenge of
his (I think I may be bold to assert) was a most illegal, Anti-parliamentary,
audacious presumpsion, and might better be pleaded and challenged by the King
singly, then by all those Lords in a distinction from the Commons: but it is
more then may be granted to the King himself, for the Parliament and whole
Kingdom whom it represents, is truly and properly the highest Supreme power of
all others, yea above the King himself:

And therefore much more above the Lords, for they can question, Cancel,
disanull and utterly revoake the Kings own Royal Charters, Writs, Commissions,
Pattents, etc. Though ratified with the Great Seal, even agianst his personal
will, as is evident by their late abrogation of sundry, Patents, Co^missions,
writs, Charters, Lone, Shipmony etc. yea the body Representative have power to
enlarge or retract the very prerogative of the King, as the Statute de praerog.
Reg. and the Parliament Roll of 1. Hen. 4. number. 18. does evidence, and
therefore their power is larger and higher then the Kings, and if above the
Kings, much more above the Lords, who are subordinate to the King, and if the
Kings Writs, Charters etc. which entrench upon the weal of the People, may be
abrogated, nul'd and made void by the Parliament, the Representateve body of
the Land, and his very prerogatives bounded, restrained and limited by them,
much more may the Orders, Warrants, Commitments etc. of the Lords, with their
usurped prerogatives over the commons and People of England be restrained,
nul'd and made void by them, and therefore these Lord must needs be inferior
to them.

Further the Legislative power is not in the King himself, but only in the
Kingdom and body Representative, who has power to make or to abrogate Laws,
Statutes etc. even without the Kings consent, for by law he has not a negative
voice either in making or reversing, but by his own Coronation Oath, he is
sworn, to grant fulfill and defend all rightful Laws, which the COMMONS of
the Realm shall choose, and to strengthen and maintain them after his power; by
which clause of the oath, is evident, that the Commons not the King or Lords)
have power to choose what Laws themselves shall judge meetest, and thereto of
necessity the King must assent, and this is evident by most of our former Kings
and Parliaments, and especially by the staignes Edw. 1. 2. 3. 4. Rich 2 Hen. 4.
5. and 6. So that it cannot be denied, but that the King is subordinate and
inferior to the whole Kingdom and body Representative: Therefore if the King,
much more must the Lords veil their Bonets to the Commons and may not be
esteemed the upper House, or Supreme Court of Judicature of the Land.

So that seeing the Sovereign power is not originally in the King, or
personally terminated in him, then the King at most can be but chief Officer,
or supreme executioner of the Laws, under whom all other legal executioners,
their several executions, functions and offices are subordinate; for indeed
the Representers (in whom that power is inherent, and from whence it takes its
original) can only make conveyance thereof to their Representors* vicegerents
or Deputies, and cannot possibly further extend it, for so they should go
beyond themselves, which is impossible, for ultra posse (...), there is no being
beyond the power of being: That which goes beyond the substance and shadow of
a thing, cannot possibly be the thing it self, either substantially or
vertually, for that which is beyond the Representors, is not representative,
and so not the Kingdoms or peoples, either so much as in shadow or substance.

Therefore the Sovereign power (extending no further then from the Represented
to the Representors) all this kind of Soveraynity challenged by any (whither of
King Lords or others) i^ usurpation, illegitimate and illegal, and none of the
Kingdoms or Peoples, neither are the People thereto obliged: Thus (Sir) s^ing
the Sovereign or legislative power is only from the Represented, to the
Representors, and cannot possibly legally further extend: the power of the King
cannot be Legislative, but only executive, and he can communicate no more then
he has himself; and the Sovereign power not being inherent in him, it cannot
be conveyed by, or derived from him to any, for could he, he would have carried
it away with him, when he left the Parliament: So that his mere prerogative
creatures, cannot have that which their Lord and creator never had, has, or
can have; namely, the Legislative power: For it is a standing (...) in nature,
omne simile generat simile, every like begets its like; and indeed they are
as like him, as if they were spit out of his mouth.

For their proper station will not content them, but they must make incursions
and inroads upon the Peoples rights and freedoms, and extend their prerogative
pattent beyond their Masters compass; Indeed all other Courts might as well
challenge that prerogative of Soveraignity, yea better then this Court of
Lords. But and if any Court or Courts in this Kingdom, should arrogate to
themselves that dignity, to be the supreme Court of Judicatory of the Land, it
would be judged no les then high Treason, to wit, for an inferior subordinate
power to advance and exalt it self above the power of the Parliament.

And (Sir) the oppressions, usurpations, and miseries, from this prerogative
Head, are not the sole cause of our grievance and complaint, but in especial,
the most unnatural, tyranicall, blood-thirsty desires and continual endeavors
of the Clergy, against the contrary minded in matters of conscience, which have
been so veiled, gilded and covered over, with such various, fair and specious
pretenses, that by the common discernings, such woolseish canniball, inhumaine
intents against their neighbors, kindred, friends and countrymen, as is now
clearly discovered, was little suspected (and less deserved) at their hands;
but now I suppose they will scarce hereafter be so hard of belief, for now in
plain terms, and with open face the Clergy here discover themselves in their
kind, and show plainly that inwardly they are no other but ravening wolves,
even as rearing Lions wanting their pray, going up and down, seeking whom they
may devour.

For (Sir) it seems these cruel minded men to their brethren, have by the
powerful agitation of M. Taet and M Bacon, two members of the House, procured
a most Romish inquisition Ordinance, to obtain an admission into the House,
there to be twice read, and to be referred to a Committee, which is of such a
nature, if it should be but confirmed, enacted, and established, as would draw
all the innocent blood of the Saints, from righteous Abel, unto this present
upon this Nation, and fill the land with more Martyrdomes tyranies, cruelties
and oppressions, then ever was in the bloody days of Queen Mary, yea or ever
before, or since: For I may boldly say that the people of this Nation never
heard of such a diabollicall, murdering, devouring Ordinance, Order, Edict or
Law in their Land as is that;

So that it may be truly said unto England, woe to the inhabitants thereof, for
the Devil is come down unto you, (in the shape of the letter B.) having great
wrath, because he knows he has but a short time, for never before was the
like heard of in England; the cruel villainous, barbarous Martyrdomes, murders
and butcherys of Gods People, under the papal and Episcopal Clergy, were not
perpetated or acted by any Law, so divelish, cruel and inhumain as this,
therefoee what may the free People of England expect at the hands of their
Presbyterian Clergy, who thus discover themselves more firce and cruel then
their fellows? Nothing but hanging, burning, branding imprisoning, etc. is
like to be the reward of the most faithful friends to the Kingdom and
Parliament, if the Clergy may be the disposers, notwithstanding their constant
magnanimity, fidelity and good service both in the field and at home, for them
and the State:

But sure this Ordinance was never intended to pay the Soldiers; their arears
if it be, the Independents are like to have the bast share, let them take that
for their comfort: but I believe there was more Tyth providence, then State
thrift, in the matter, for if the Independents, Anabaptissts, and Brownists,
were but sinceerly addicted to the DVE PAYMENT of TITHES, it would be better to
them in this case then two subsipy men, to acquit them of Felony.

For were it not for the loss of their Trade, and spoiling their custom, an
Anabaptist Brownist, Independent and Presbyter, were all one to them, then
might they without doubt have the Mercy of the Clergy, then would they not have
been entered into their Spanish Inquisition Calender for absolute Fellons, or
need they have feared the popish soul murdering Antichristian Oath of
Ab^^^ation, or branding in the left check with the letter B. the new
Presbyterian Mark of the Beast for you see the Devil is now again entered
amongst us in a new shape, not like an Angel of light, (as both he and his
servants can transform themselves when they please) but even in the shape of
the letter B; from the power of which Presbyterian Beelzebub good Lord deliver
us all and let all the People say Amen; Then needed they not to have feared
their Prisons, their fire and faggot, their gallows and halters, etc. The
strongest Texts in all the Presbyterian new moddle of Clergy divinity, for the
maintenance and reverence of their cloth, and confutation of errors; for he
that does but so much as question that priest fatning-Ordinance for Tithes,
Oblations, Obventions, etc. does flatly deny the fundamentals of Presbytrie,
for it was the first stone they laid in their building, and the second stone,
the prohibition of all to teach Gods word but themselves, and so are ipso facto
all Fellons. etc.

By this (Sir) you may see what bloody minded men those of the black Presbytrie
be, what little love, patience, meeknes, longsuffering and forbearance they
have to their Brethren; neither do they as they would be done to; or do to
others as is done to them; for they would not be so served themselves, of the
Independents, neither have the Independents ever sought or desired any such
thing upon them, but would bear with them in all brotherly love; if they would
be but contented to live peaceably and neighbourly by them, and not thus to
brand, hang, judge and condemn all for Fellons, that are not like themselves.
Sure (Sir) you cannot take this murdering, bloody disposition of theirs for
the Spirit of Christianity, for Christian charety suffers long, is kind,
envieth not, exalts not it self, secketh not its own is not easily provoked,
thinks no evil, bears all things believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things; but these their desires and endeavors are directly
contrary.

Therefore (Sir) if you should suffer this bloody inroad of Martyrdom,
cruelties and tyranies, upon the free Commoners of England, with whose weal
you are betrusted, if you should be so inhumaine, undutifull, yea and
unnatural unto us, our innocent blood will be upon you, and all the blood of
the righteous that shall be shed by this Ordinance, and you will be branded to
future generations, for Englands bloody Parliament.

If you will not think upon us, think upon your posterities, for I cannot
suppose that any one of you would have your children hanged in case they should
prove Independents, Anabaptists, Brownists; I cannot judge you so unnatural
and inhumain to your own children, therefore (Sir) if for our own sakes we
shall not be protected, save us for your childrens sakes, (though you think
your selves secure,) for ye may be assured their and our interest is interwowne
in one, if we perish, they must not think to seape. And (Sir) consider, that
the cruelties, tyranies and Martyrdomes of the papal and episcopal Clergy,
was one of the greatest instigations to this most unnatural war; and think
you, if you settle a worse foundation of cruelty, that future generations will
not taste of the dreags of that bitter cup?

Therefore now step in or never, and discharge your duties to God and to us,
and tell us no longer, that such motions are not yet seasonable, and we must
still wait; for have we not waited on your pleasures, many fair seasons and
precious occasions and opportunities these six years, even till the Halters
are ready to be tied to the Gallows, and now must we hold our peace, and
wait till we be all imprisoned, hanged, burnt and confounded? Blame us not
(Sir) if we complain against you, speak, write and plead thus with might and
maine, for our lives, laws and liberties, for they are our earthly sumnum
bonum, wherewith you are chiefly betrusted; and whereof we desire a faithful
discharge at your hands in especial, therefore be not you the men that shall
betray the blood of us and our posterities, into the hands of those bloody
black executioners: for God is just, and will avenge our blood at your hands;
and let Heaven and earth beat witness against you, that for this end, that we
might be preserved and restored, we have discharged our duties to you, both of
love, fidelity and assistance, and in whatelse ye could demand or devise in
all your several needs, necessities and extremities, not thinking our lives,
estates, nor any thing too precious to sacrifice for you and the Kingdoms
safety, and shall we now be thus unfaithfully, undutifully and ungratfully
rewarded? For shame, let never such things be spoken, far less recorded to
future generations.

Thus Sir, I have so far enboldened my self with you (hoping you will let
greivances be uttered, that if God see it good they may be redressed, and give
loosers leave to speak without offense) as I am forced to at this time, not
only in the discharge of my duty to my self in particular, but to your selves
and to our whole Country in general for the present, and for our several
posterities for the future, and the Lord give you grace to take this timely
advice, from so mean and unworthy an instrument.

One thing more (Sir) I shall be bold to crave at your hands, that you would be
pleased to present my Appeal here enclosed, to your Honorable House;
perchance the manner of it may beget a disaffection in you, or at least a
suspicion, of disfavour from the House: but howsoever, I beseech you, that you
would make presentation thereof, and if any hazard and danger ensue, let it
fall upon me, for I have cast up mine accounts, I know the most that it can
cost me, is but the dissolution of this fading mortality, which once must be
dissolved; but after (blessed be God) comes righteous judgment.

Thus (Sir) hoping my earnest and fervent desires after the universal
freedoms and properties of this Nation in general, and especially of the most
godly and faithful, in their consciences, persons and estates, will be a
sufficient excuse with you, for this my tedious presumption upon your patience:
I shall commit the premises to your deliberate thoughts, and the issue thereof
unto God; expecting and praying for his blessing upon all your faithful and
honest endeavors in the prosecution thereof. And rest;

In Bonds for the just rights and freedoms of the Commons of England, theirs
and your faithful friend and servant, Richard Overton.
From the most contempteous Jail of Newgate (the Lords benediction) Septem.
25. 1646.
To the high and mighty States, the Knights Citizens and Burgesses in
Parliament Assembled; (Englands legal Sovereign power) The humble Appeal and
supplication of Richard Overton, Prisoner in the most contemptible Goal of New
gate.
Humbly shows;
THAT whereas your Petitioner under the pretense of a Criminal fact, being in
a warlike manner brought before the House of Lords to be tried, and by them put
to answer to Interogatories concerning himself, both which your Petitioner
humbly conceives to be illegal, and contrary to the natural rights, freedoms
and properties of the free Commoners of England (confirmed to them by Magna
Charta, the Petition or Right, and the Act for the abolishment of the
Star Chamber) he therefore was enboldened to refuse subjection to the said
House, both in the one and the other; expressing his resolution before them,
that he would not infringe the private Rights and properties of himself, or of
any one Commoner in particular, or the common Rights and properties of this
Nation in general: For which your Petitioner was by them adjudged
contemptuous, and by an Order from the said House was therefore committed to
the Goal of Newgate, where, from the 11. of August 1646. to this present he
has lain, and there commanded to be kept till their Pleasures shall be further
signified (as a copy of the said Order hereunto annexed does declare) which may
be perpetual if they please, and may have their wills; for your Petitioner
humbly conceives that thereby he is made a Prisoner to their Wills, not to the
Law, except their Wills may be a Law.

Wherefore, your liege Petitioner does make his humble appeal unto this most
Sovereign House (as to the highest Court of Judicatory in the Land, wherein
all the appeals thereof are to centure, and beyond which none can legally be
made) humbly craving (both in testimony of his acknowledgment of its legal
regality, and of his due submission thereunto) that your Honors therein
assembled, would take his cause (and in his, the cause of all the free
Commoners of England, whom you represent, and for whom you sit) into your
serious consideration and legal determination, that he may either by the mercy
of the Law be repossessed of his just liberty and freedom, and thereby the
whole Commons of England of theirs, thus unjustly (as he humbly conceives)
usurped and invaded by the House of LORDS, with due repairations of all such
damages so sustained, or else that he may undergo what penalty shall in equity
by the impartial severity of the Law be adjudged against him by this
Honorable House, in case by them he shall be legally found a transgressour
herein.

And Your Petitioner (as in duty bound) shall ever pray, etc.

Die Martis 11. Augusti. 1646.
It is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that (...)
Overton brought before a Committee of this House, for printing scandalous
things against this House, is hereby committed to the Prison of Newgate, for
his high contempt offered to this House, and to the said Committee by his
contempteous words and gesture, and refusing to answer unto the Speaker: And
that the said Overton shall be kept in safe custody by the Keeper of Newgate
or his deputy, until the Pleasure of the House be further signified.

John Brown Cleric. Parl. Examinat. per Ra. Brisco Clricu. de Newgate.

To the Gentleman Usher attending this House, or his Deputy, to be delivered to
the Keeper of Newgate on his Deputy.
Postscript.
SIR,
YOur unseasonable absence from the House, chiefly while Mistres Lilburns
Petition should have been read (you having a REPORT to make in her husbands
behalf, whereby the hearing thereof was deferred and retarded) did possess my
mind with strong jealousies and fears of you, that you either preferred your
own pleasure or private interest before the execution of justice and judgment,
or else withdrew your self, on set purpose (through the strong instigation of
the Lords) to evade the discharge of your trust to God and to your Cou^t^y; but
at your return understanding, that you honestly and ^^^thfully d^d redeem your
absent time, I was dispossessed of those fears and jealousies: So that for my
overhasty censorious esteem of you, I humbly crave your excuse, hoping you
will rather impute it to the fervency of my faithful zeal to the common good,
then to any malignant disposition or disaffection in me toward you: Yet (Sir)
in this my suspicion I was not single, for it was even become a general
surmise.

Wherefore (Sir) for the awarding your innocence for the future, from the
tincture of such unjust and calumnious suspicions, be you diligent and
faithful, instant in season and out of season, omit no opportunity, (though
with never so much hazard to your person, estate or family) to discharge the
great trust (in you reposed with the rest of your fellow members) for the
redemption of your native Country from the Arbitrary Domination and
usurpations, either of the House of LORDS, or any other.

And since by the divine providence of God, it has pleased that Honorable
Assembly whereof you are a Member, to select and sever you out from amongst
themselves, to be of that Committee which they have Ordained to receive the
Commoners complaints against the House of LORDS, granted upon the foresaid most
honorable Petition: Be you therefore impartial, and just, active and resolute
care neither for favors nor smiles, and be no respector of persons, let not
the greatest Peers in the Land, be more respected with you, then somany old
Bellowes-menders, Broom men, Cobblers, Tinkers or Chimney-sweepers, who are all
equally Free borne, with the hudgest men, and lostiest Anachims in the Land.

Do nothing for favor of the one, or fear of the other; and have a care of
the temporary Sagacity of the new Sect of OPPORTUNITY POLITICIANS, whereof we
have got at least two or three too many; for delays and demurres of Justice
are of more deceitful and dangerous consequence, then the flat and open
denial of its execution, for the one keeps in suspense, makes negligent and
remiss, the other provokes to speedy defense, makes active and resolute:
Therefore be wise, quick, stout and impartial: neither spare, favor, or
connive at friend or foe, high or low, rich or poor, Lord or Commoner.

And let even the saying of the Lord, with which I will close this present
discourse, close with your heart, and be with you to the death. Leviticus, 19.
15.

Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment; thou shall not respect the
person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness
shall thou judge thy neighbor.

October 12. 1646.
FINIS.

