THE LIBERTY of THE FREEBORNE ENGLISHMAN Conferred on him by the house of
lords: June 1646.

JOHN LILBURNE. AETAT SVA 23 Ano 1641
G: Glo: fecit.
Gaze not upon this shadow that is vain
But rather raise thy thoughts a higher stain
To GOD (I mean) who, set this young man free
And in like straits can oak deliver thee.
Yea though the lords have him in bonds again
(...) LORD of lords will his Just cause maintain
portrait of John Lilburne

A REMONSTRANCE OF Many Thousand Citizens, and other Freeborn PEOPLE OF
ENGLAND, To their own House of COMMONS.

Occasioned through the Illegal and Barbarous Imprisonment of that Famous and
Worthy Sufferer for his Countries Freedoms, Lieutenant Col.

JOHN LILBURNE.

Wherein their just Demands in behalf of themselves and the whole Kingdom,
concerning their Public Safety, Peace and Freedom, is Expressed; calling
those their Commissioners in Parliament to an Account, how they (since the
beginning of their Session, to this present) have discharged their Duties to
the Universallity of the People, their Sovereign LORD, from whom their Power
and Strength is derived, and by whom (ad been placitum,) it is continued.

Printed in the Year, 1646.

A REMONSTRANCE OF
Many Thousand Citizens, and other Freeborn People of England, to their own
House of COMMONS.
WE are well assured, yet cannot forget, that the cause of our choosing you to
be Parliament Men, was to deliver us from all kind of Bondage, and to preserve
the Commonwealth in Peace and Happiness: For effecting whereof, we possessed
you with the same Power that was in our selves, to have done the same; For we
might justly have done it our selves without you, if we had thought it
convenient; choosing you [as Persons whom we thought fitly quallified, and
Faithful,] for avoiding some inconveniences.

But ye are to remember, this was only of us but a Power of ^^ust, [which is
ever revokable, and cannot be otherwise,] and to be employed to no other end,
then our own well-being: Nor did we choose you to continue our Trust's
longer, then the known established constitution of this Commonly-wealth will
justly permit, and that could be but for one year at the most: for by our Law,
a Parliament is to be called once every year, and oftener (if need be,) as ye
well know. We are your Principalls, and you our Agents; it is a Truth, ^he
you cannot but acknowledge: For if you or any other shall assume, or exercise
any Power, that is not derived from our Trust and choice thereunto, that Power
is no less then usurpation and an Oppression, from which we expect to be
sreed, in whomsoever we find it; it being altogether inconsistent with the
nature of just Freedom, which ye also very well understand.

The History of our Fort-fathers since they were Conquered by the Normans, does
manifest that this Nation has been held in bondage all along ever since by the
policies and force of the Officers of Trust in the Commonwealth, amongst whom,
we always esteemed Kings the chiefest: and what (in much of the formertime)
was done by war, and by impoverishing of the People, to make them slaves, and
to hold them in bondage, our latter Princes have endeavored to effect, by
giving ease and wealth unto the People, but withal, corrupting their
understanding, by insusing false Principles concerning Kings, and Government,
and Parliaments, and Freedoms; and also using all means to corrupt and vitiate
the manners of the youth, and strongest prop and support of the People, the
Gentry.

It is wonderful, that the failings of former Kings, to bring our Forefathers
into bondage, together with the trouble and danger that some of them drew upon
themselves and their Posterity, by those their unjust endeavors, had not
wrought in our latter Kings a resolution to rely on, and trust only to Justice
and square dealing with the the People, especially considering the unaprnesse
of the Nation to bear much, especially from those that pretend to love them,
and unto whom they expressed so much hearty affection, (as any People in the
world ever did,) as in the qulet admission of King James from Scotland,
sufficient, (if any Obligation would work Kings to Reason,) to have endeared
both him and his son King Charles, to an inviolable love, and hearty
affection to the English Nation; but it would not do.

They choose rather to trust unto their Policies and Court Arts, to King-waste,
and delusion, then to Justice and plain dealing; and did effect many things
tending to our enslaving (as in your First Remonstrance; you show skill (...)
manifest the same to all the World:) and this Nation having been by their
delusive Arts, and a long continued Peace, much softened and debased in
judgment and Spirit, did bear far beyond its usual temper, or any example of
our Forefathers, which (to our shame,) we acknowledge.

But in conclusion, longer they would not bear, and then ye were chosen to
work our deliverance, and to Estate us in natural and just liberty agreeable
to Reason and common equity, for whatever our Forefathers were; or what ever
they did or suffered, or were enforced to yield unto; we are the men of the
present age? and ought to be absolutely free from all kinds of exorbitancies,
molestations or Arbitrary Power, and you we choose to free us from all without
exception or limitation, either in respect of Persons, Officers, Degrees, or
things; and we were full of confidence, that ye also would have dealt
impartially on our behalf, and made us the most absolute free People in the
world.

But how ye have dealt with us; we shall now let you know, and let the
Righteom GOD judge between you and us; the continual Oppressors of the
Nation, have been Kings, which is so evident, that you cannot deny it; and ye
your selves have told the King, (whom yet you own,) That his whole 16. Years
reign was one continued act of the breach of the Law.

You snewed him, That you understood his under-working with Ireland, his
endeavor to enforce the Parliament by the Army raised against Scotland, ye
were eyewitnesses of his violent attempt about the Five Members; Ye saw
evidently his purpose of raising War; ye have seen him engaged, and with
obstinate violence, persisting in the most bloody War that ever this Nation
knew, to the wasting and destruction of multitudes of honest and Religious
People.

Ye have experience, that none but a King could do so great introllerable
mischiefs, the very name of King, proving a sufficient charm to delude many
of our Brethren in Wales, Ireland, England, and Scotland too, so far, as to
fight against their own Liberties, which you know, no man under heaven could
ever have done.

And yet, as if you were of Counsel with him, and were resolved to hold up his
reputation, thereby to enable him to go on in mischief, you maintain, The
King can do no wrong, and apply all his Oppressions to Evil Counselors,
begging and entreating him in such submissive language, to return to his
Kingly Office and Parliament, as if you were resolved to make us believe, he
were a God, without whose presence, all must fall to ruin, or as if it were
impossible for any Nation to be happy without a King.

You cannot fight for cur Liberties, but it must be in the Name of King and
Parliament; he that speaks of his crueldes, must be thrust out of your House
and society; your Preachers must pray for him, as if he had not deserved to be
excommunicated all Christian Society, or as if ye or they thought God were ^
respect of the Persons of Kings in judgment.

By this and other your like dealings, your frequent treating, and tampering to
maintain his honor, We that have trusted you to deliver us from his
Opressions, and to preserve us from his cruelties, are wasted and consumed (in
multitudes) to manifold miseries, whilst you lie ready with open arms to
receive him, and to make him a great and glorious King.

Have you shoke this Nation like an Earthquake, to produce no more then this
for us; Is it for this, that ye have made so free use, and been so bold both
which our Persons and Estates? And do you (because of our readiness to comply
with your desires in all things) conceive us so sottish, as to be contented
with such unworthy returns of our trust and Love? No; it is high time we be
plain with you; WE ar^ not, nor SHALL not be so contented; We do expect
according to reason, that ye should in the first place, declare and set forth
King Charles his wickedness openly before the world, and withal, to show the
intolerable inconyeniences of having a Kingly Government, from the constant
evil practices of those of this Nation; and so to declare King Charles an
enemy, and to publish your resolution, never to have any more, but to acquit
us of so great a charge and trouble for ever, and to convert the great revenue
of the Crown to the public treasure, to make good the injuries and injustices
done heretofore, and of late by those that have possessed the same; and this we
expected long since at your hand, and until this be done, we shall not think
our selves well dealt withal in this original of all Oppressions, to wit
Kings.

Ye must also deal better with us concerning the Lords, then you have done?
Ye only are chosen by Us the People; and therefore in you only is the Power
of binding the whole Nation, by making, altering, or abolishing of Laws; Ye
have therefore prejudiced (...), in acting so, as if ye could not make a Law
without both the Royal assent of the King (so ye are pleased to express your
selves,) and the assent of the Lords; yet when either King or Lords assen^ not
to what you approve, yet have so much sense of your own Power, as to assent
what you think good by an Order of your own House.

What is this but to blind oureyes, that We should not knew where our Power
is lodged, nor to whom to apply our selves for the use thereof; but if We want
a Law, We must awaite till the King and Lords assent; if an Ordinance, then
We must wait till the Lords assent; yet ye knowing their assent to be merely
formal, (as having no root in the choice of the People, from whom the Power
that is just must be derived,) do frequently importune their assent, which
implies a most gross absurdity.

For where their assent is necessary and essential, they must be as Free as
you, to assent, or dissent as their understandings and Consciences should guide
them: and might as justly importune you, as ye them. Ye ought in Conscience
to reduce this case also to a certainty, and not to waste time, and open your
Counsels, and be liable to so many Obstructions as ye have been.

But to prevail with them (enjoying their Honors and Possessions,) to be
liable, and stand to be chosen for Knights and Burgesses by the People, as
other the Gentry and Freemen of this Nation do, which will be an Obligation
upon them, as having one and the same interest: then also they would be
distinguished by their virtues, and love to the Commonwealth, whereas now they
Act and Vote in our affairs but as intruders, or as thrust upon us by Kings,
to make good their interests, which to this day have been to bring us into a
slavish subjection to their wills.

Nor is there any reason, that they should in any measure, be less liable to
any Law then the Gentry are; Why should any of them assault, strike, or beat
any, and not be liable to the Law, as other men are? Why should not they be as
liable to their debts as other men? there is no reason: yet have ye stood
still, and seen many of us, and some of your selves violently abused without
repairation.

We desire you to free us from these abuses, and their negative Voices, or
else tell us, that it is reasonable we should be slaves, this being a
perpetual prejudice in our Government, neither confisting with Freedom nor
Safety: with Freedom it cannot; for in this way of Voting in all Affairs of
the Commonwealth, being not Chosen thereunto by the People, they are therein
Masters and Lords of the People, which necessarily implies the People to be
their servants and vassalls, and they have used many of us accordingly, by
committing diverse to Prison upon their own Authority, namely William Larner,
Liev. Col. John Lilburne, and other worthy Sufferers, who upon Appeal unto
you, have not been relieved.

We must therefore pray you to make a Law against all kinds of Arbitrary
Government, as the highest capital offense against the Commonwealth, and to
reduce all conditions of men to a certainty, that none hence-forward may
presume or plead any thing in way of excuse, and that ye will leave no favor
or scruple of Tyrannical Power over us in any what soever.

Time has revealed hidden things unto us, things covered over thick and
threefold with pretenses of the true Reformed Religion, when as we see
apparently, that this Nation, and that of Scotland; are joined together in a
most bloody and consuming War, by the Waste and policy of a sort of Lords in
each Nation, that were malcontents, and vexed that the King had advanced
others, and not themselves to the manageing of State-affaires.

Which they suffered till the King increasing his Oppressions in both Nations,
gave them opportunity to reveal themselves, and then they resolve to bring the
King to their bow and regulation, and to exclude all those from managing
State-affaires that he had advanced thereunto, and who were grown so insolent
and presumptuous, as these discontented ones were liable to continual
molestations from them, either by practices at Counsel-table, High Commission,
or Star Chamber.

So as their work was to subvert the Monarchiall Lords and Clergy, and there
withal, to abate the Power of the King, and to Order him: but this was a
mighty work, and they were no wise able to effect it of themselves: therefore
(say they,) the generallity of the People must be engaged; and how must this be
done? Why say they, we must associate with that part of the Clergy that are
now made underlings, and others of them that have been oppressed, and with the
most zealous religious Non-conformists, and by the help of these, we will lay
before the Generality of the People, all the Popish Innovations in Religion,
all the Oppressions of the Bishops and High Commission, all the exorbitances of
the Counsellboard, and Star Chamber, all the injustice of the Chancery, and
Courts of Justice, all the illegal Taxations, as Ship-mony, Pattents, and
Projects, whereby we shall be sure to get into our Party, the generality of
the City of London, and all the considerable substantial People of both
Nations.

By whose cry and importunity we shall have a Parliament, which we shall by
our manifold ways, alliant, dependant, and relations soon work to our
purposes.

But (say some) this will never be effected without a War, for the King will
have a strong party, and he will never submit to us; it is not expected
otherwise (say they) and great and vaste sums of money must be raised, and
Soldiers and Ammunition must be had, whereof we shall not need to fear any
want: for what will not an oppressed, rich, and Religious People do, to be
delivered from all kinds of Oppression, both Spiritual and Temporal, and to
be restored to purity and freedom in Religion, and to the just liberty of
their Persons and Estates?

All our care must be to hold all at our Command and disposing; for if this
People thus stirred up by us, should make an end too soon with the King and his
party, it is much to be doubted, they would place the Supreme Power in their
House of Commons, unto whom only of right it belongs, they only being chosen
by the People, which is so presently discerned, that as we have a care the
King and his Lords must not prevail, so more especially, we must be careful
the Supreme Power fall not into the Peoples hands, or House of Commons.

Therefore we must so act, as not to make an end with the King and his party,
till by expense of time and treasure, a long, bloody and consuming War, decay
of trade, and multitudes of the highest Impositions, the People by degrees are
tired and wearied, so as they shall not be able to contest or dispute with us,
either about Suprerne or inferior Power; but we will be able, before they are
aware, to give them both Law and Religion.

In Scotland it will be easy to establish the Presbyteriall Government in the
Church, and that being once effected, it will not be much difficult in England,
upon a pretense of uniformity in both Nations, and the like, unto which there
will be found a Clergy as willing as we, it giving them as absolute a
Ministry over the Consciences of the People, over the Persons and Purses, as
we our selves aim at, or desire.

And if any shall prefume to oppose either us or them, we shall be easily able
by the help of the Clergy, by our Party in the House of Commons, and by their
and our influence in all parts of both Nations, easily to (...) and suppress
them.

Well (says some) all this may be done, but we, without abundance of travel
to our selves, and wounding our own Consciences, for we must grossly dissemble
before God, and all the world will see it in times, for we can never do all
this that ye aim at, but by the very same oppressions as we practiced by the
King, the Bishops, and all those his tyrannical Instruments, both in Religion,
and Civil Government.

And it will never last or continue long, the People will see it, and hate you
for it, more then ever they ha^ed the former Tyrants and Oppressou^s: were it
not better and safer for us to be just, and ^^^lly to do that for the People,
which we pretend, and for which we shall so freely spend their lives and
Estates, and s^ have their Love, and enjoy the Peace of quiet Cons^iences?

For (say they) are not We a LORD, a Peer of the Kingdom? Have you your
Lordship or Peerage, or those Honors and Privileges that belong thereunto
from the love and Election of the People? Your interest is as different from
theirs; and as inconsistent with their freed me, as those Lords and Clergy are,
whom we strive to supplant.

And therefore, rather then satisfy the Peoples expectations in what concerns
their Freedoms, it were much better to continue as we are, and never disturb
the King in his Prerogatives, nor his Lords and Prelates in they Privileges:
and therefore let us be as one, and when we talk of Conscience, let us make
conscience, to make good unto our selves and our Posterities those Dignities,
Honors and Preheminencies conveyed unto us by our Noble Progenitors, by all
the means we can; not making questions for Conscience sake, or any other
things; and if we be united in our endeavors, and work wisely, observing
when to advance, and when to give ground, we cannot fail of success, which
will be an honor to our Names for ever.

These are the strong delusions that have been amongst us, and the mystery of
iniquity has wrought most vehemently in all our affairs: Hence it was that
Strafford was so long in trial, and that he had no greater heads to bear his
company. Hence it was that the King was not called to an account for his
oppressive Government, and that the treachery of those that would have enforced
you, was not severely punished.

That the King gained time to raise an Army, and the Queen to furnish
Ammunition; that our first and second Army was so ill formed, and as ill
managed; Sherburn, Brainford, Exeter, the slender use of the Associate
Counties, the slight garding of the Sea, Oxford, Dennington, the West Defeat,
did all proceed from (and upon) the Mystery of Iniquity.

The King and his Party had been nothing in your hands, had not some of you
been engaged, and some of you ensuared, and the rest of you over-borne with
this Mystery, which (...) may now easily perceive, if you have a mind
thereunto, that ye were put upon the continuation of this Parliament, during
the pleasure of both H^ouses, was from this Mystery, because in time these
Polititions had hopes to work, and pervert you to for sake the common Interest
of those that choose and trusted you to promote their unjust Design to enslave
us; wherein they have prevailed too too much.

For We must deal plainly with you, ye have long time acted more like the
House of Peers then the House of Commons: We can scarcely approach your Door
with a Request or motion, though by way of Petition, but ye hold long debates,
whether We break not your Privileges; the Kings, or the Lords pretended
Prerogatives never made a greater noise, nor was made more dreadful then the
Name of Privilege of the House of Commons.

Your Members in all Impositions must not be taxed in the places where they
live, like other men: Your servants have their Privileges too. To accuse or
prosecute any of you, is become dangerous to the Prosecutors. Ye have
imprisonments as frequent for either Witnesses or Prosecutors, as ever the
Star Chamber had, and ye are furnished with new devised Arguments, to prove,
that ye only may justly do these gross injustices, which the
Star Chamber, High Commission, and Counsell-board might not do.

And for doing whereof (whilst ye were untainted,) ye abolished them, for
ye now frequently commit men's Persons to Prison without showing Cause; Ye
examine men upon In eroga^ories and Questions against themselves, and Imprison
them for refusing to answer: And ye have Officious servile men, that write and
publish Sophistical Arguments to justify your so doing, for which they are
rewarded and countenanced, as the Star Chamber and High-Commission-beagles
lately were.

Whilst those that ventured their lives for your establishment, are many of
them vexed and molested, and impoverished by them; Ye have entertained to be
your Committees servants, those very prowling Varlets that were employed by
those unjust Courts, who took pleasure to torment honest conscionable People;
yea vex and molest honest men for matters of Religion, and difference with you
and your Synod in judgment, and take upon you to determine of Doctrine and
Discipline, approving this, and reproaching that, just like unto former
ignora^^ pollitick and superstitions Parliaments and Convocations: And thereby
have divided honest People amongst themselves, by countenancing only those of
the Presbitry, and discountenancing all (...) ^eparation, Anabaprists and
Independents.

And though it rests in you to acquiet all differences in affection, though
not in judgment, by permitting every one to be fully persuaded in their own
minds, commanding all Reproach to cease; yet as ye also had admitted
Machiavells Maxim, Divide and impera, divide and prevail; ye countenance
only one, open the Printing-presse only unto one, and that to the Presbytry,
and suffer them to rail and abuse, and domineere over all the rest, as if also
ye had discovered and digested, That without a powerful compulsive Presbytry
in the Church, acompulsive mastership, or Arristocraticall Government over the
People in the State, could never long be maintained.

Whereas truly we are well assured, neither you, nor none else, can have any
into Power at all to conclude the People in matters that concern the Worship
of God, for therein every one of us ought to be fully assured in our own
minds, and to be sure to Worship him according to our Consciences.

Ye may propose what Form ye conceive best, and most available for
Information and well-being of the Nation, and may persuade and invite
thereunto, but compel, ye cannot justly; for ye have no Power from Us so to
do, nor could you have; for we could not confer a Power that was not in our
selves, there being none of us, that can without wil^ull sin, bind our
selves to worship God after any other way, then what (to a title,) in our own
particular understandings, we approve to be just.

And therefore We could not refer our selves to you in things of this Nature;
and surely, if We could not confer this Power upon you, ye cannot have it,
and so not exercise it justly; Nay, as we ought not to revile or reproach any
man for his differing with us in judgment, more then we would be reviled or
reproached for ours; even so yea ought not to countenance any Reproachers or
revilers, or molesters for matters of Conscience.

But to protect and defend all that live peaceably in the Commonwealth, of what
judgment or way of Worship whatsoever; and if ye would bend your minds
thereunto, and leave your selves open to give ear, and to consider such things
as would be presented unto you, a just way would be discovered for the Peace
and quiet of the land in general, and of every well-minded Person in
particular.

But if you look up your selves from hearing all voices; how is it possible you
should my all things. It is not for you to assume a Power to control and
force Religion, or a way of Church Government, upon the People, because former
Parliaments have so done; ye are first to prove that ye could have such a
Power justly entrusted unto you by the People that trusted you, (which you see
you have not,) we may happily he answered, that the Kings Wri^ that summons a
Parliament, and directs the People to choose Knights and Burgesses, implies the
Establishment of Religion.

To which we answer, that if Kings would prove themselves Lawful
Magistrates, they must prove themselves to be so, by a lawful derivation of
their Authority, which must be from the voluntary trust of the People, and then
the case is the same with them, as between the Peopl and you, they as you,
being possessed of no more Power then what is in the People justly to entrust,
and then all implications in the Writer, of the Establishment of Religion,
shows that in that particular, as many other, we remain under the Norman yoke
of an unlawful Power, from which we ought to free our selves; and which ye
ought not to maintains upon us, but to abrogate.

But ye have lisraed to any Counsels, rather then to the voice of us that
trusted you: Why is it that you have stopped the Press; but that you would have
nothing but pleasing slattering Discourses, and go on to make your selves
partakers of the Lordship over us, without hearing any thing to the contrary:
yea, your Lords (...) Clergy long to have us in the same condition with our
deluded brethren, the Commons of Scotland, where their understandings are so
captivated with a Reverend opinion of their Presbytsy, that they really believe
them to be by Divine Authority, and are as zealous therein, as ever the poor
deceived Papists were.

As much they live in fear of their thunderbolts of Excommunication, and good
cause they have, poor souls, for those Excommunications are so followed with
the civil Sanction, or secular Power, that they are able to crush any opposer
or dissenter to dust, ta undo or ruins any man's: so absolute a Power has
their new Clergy already gained over the poor People there, and earnestly
labor to bring us into the same condition, because if we should live in
greater Freedom in this Nation, it would (they know,) in time be observed by
their People, whose understandings would be thereby informed, and then they
would grow impatient of their thraldom, and shake off their yoke.

They are also in no less bondage in things Civil; the Lords and great Men
overruled all, as they please; the People are scare free in any thing.

-- Friends, these are known Truths. --

And hence it is, that in their Counsels here, they adhere to those that
maintain their own greatness, and usurped rule over us, left if we should
here possess greater liberty, then their vassalls the People in Scotland, they
might in short time observe the same, and discha^ge themselves of their
Oppressions.

It is from the mystery of iniquity, that ye have never made that use of the
People of this Nation, in your wa^re, as you might have done, but have chosen
rather to hazard their coming in, then to Arm your own native undoubted
friends; by which means they are possessed of too many considerable strengths
of this Nation, and speak such language in their late published papers, as if
they were not paid for their slow assistance.

Where as ye might have ended the War long ereathis, if by Sea or Land you
had showed your selves resolved to make us a Free-People; but it is evident, a
change of our bondage is the uttermost is intended us, and that too for a
worse, and long; if we shall be so contended, but it is strange you should
imagine.

But the truth is, wee-finde none are so much bated by you, as those you think
do discern those your purposes, or that apply themselves unto you, with
motions tending to divert you from proceeding therein: for some years now, no
condition of men can prevail with you, to ammend any thing that is amiss in
the Common wealth.

The exorbitances in the Cities Government, and the strivings about
Prerogatives in the Major and Aldermen, against the Freedoms of the (...), (and
to their extreme prejudice,) are (...) the same point they were at in (...)
ti^e, which you observe, and move not, nor (...) the (...), Nay, worse then in
his time, they are justified by the Major, in a book published, and sent by him
to every Common-(...).

The oppession of the Turkey Company, and the (...) Company, and all other
infringements of our Native Liberties of the same nature, and which in the
beginnings of the Parliament, yet seemed to abhominate, are now by you complied
withal, and licensed to go on in their Oppressions.

Ye know, the Laws of this Nation are unworthy a F^^^-People, and deserve
from first to last, to be considered, and seriously debated, and reduced to an
agreement with common equity, and right reason, which ought to be the Form and
Life of every Government.

Magna Charta it self being but a begge^ly thing, containing many marks of
intolerable bondage, and the ^awes that have been made since by Parliaments,
have in very many particulars made our Government much more oppressive and
intolerable.

The Norman way for ending of Controversies, was much more abusive then the
English way, yet the Conquer^^r, contrary to his Oath introduced the Norman
Laws, and his litigious and vexatio^s way amongst us; the like he did also for
punishment of malefactors, Controversies of all natures, having before a quick
and final dispatch in every hundred.

He erected a trade of Judges and Lawyers, to sell Justice and injustice at his
own unconscionable rate, and in what time be pleased; the corruption whereof
is yet remaining upon us, to our continual impoverishing and molestation; from
which we thought you should have delivered us.

Ye know also, Imprisonment for Debt, is not from the beginning; Yet ye think
not of these many Thousand Persons and Families that are destroyed thereby, ye
are Rich, and abound in goods, and have need of nothing; but the afflictions of
the poor; your ^^^ger-starved brethren, ye have no compassion of; Your zeal
makes a noise as far as Argiere, to deliver those captived Christians at the
charge of others, but those whom your own unjust Laws hold captive in your
own Prisons; these are too near you to thinks of; Nay, ye^ suffer poor
Christians, for whom Christ died to kneel before you in the streets, aged, fact
and cripled, begging your halfe-penny Charities, and ye ruffle by them in your
Coaches and filkes daily, without regard, or taking any course for their
constant relief, their sight would melt the heart of any Christian, and yet it
moves not you nor your Clergy.

We entreat you to consider what difference there is, between binding a man to
an Oar, as a Cally-slave in Turkey or Argiere, and Pressing of men to serve in
your War; to surprise a man on the sudden, force him from his Calling, where
he lived comfortably, from a good trade; from his dear Parents, Wife or
Children, against inclination, disposition to fight for a Cause he understands
not, and in Company of such, as he has no comfort to be withal; for Pay, that
will scarce give him snstenance; and if he live, to return to a lost trade, or
beggary, or not much better: If any Tyranny or cruelty exceed this; it must be
worse then that of a Turkish Gally-slave.

But ye are apt to say, What remedy, men we must have? To which we answer, in
behalf of ourselves, and our too much injured Brethren, that are Pressed; That
the Hollanders our provident Neighbors have no such cruelties, esteeming
nothing more unjust, or unreasonable, yet they want no men; and if ye would
take care, that all sorts of men might find comfort and contentment in your
Government, ye would not need to enforce men to serve your Wars.

And if ye would in many things follow their good example, and make this
Nation a State, free from the Oppression of Kings, and the corruptions of the
Court, and show love to the People in the Constitutions of your Government, the
affection of the People, would satisfy all common and public Occasions: and
in many particulars we can show you a remedy for this and all other
inconveniences, if we could find you incimable to hear us.

Ye are extremely altered in demeanor toward us, in the beginning ye
seemed to know what Freedom was; made a distination of honest men, whether
rich or poor, all were welcome to you, and ye would mix your selves with (...)
loving familiar (...) of Courtly observance or behavior.

Ye kept your Com^itte^ doors open, all (...) judge of your dealings, hardly
ye would permit men to stand bare-headed before you, some of you telling them,
ye more regarded their health, and that they should not deem of you, as of
other domineering Courts, ye and they were one, all Commons of England; and
the like ingenious carriage, by which ye wanne our affections to that height,
that ye no sooner demanded any thing, but it was effected; ye did well then,
who did hinder you? the mystery of iniquity, that was it that perverted your
course.

What a multitude of precious lives have been lost? What a mass of moneys have
been raised? What one way was proposed to advance moneys, that was refused by
you, though never so prejudicial to the People, allowing your Committees to
force men to pay or lend, or else to swear that they were not worth so or so:
the most destructive course to tradesmen, that could be devised, fifty entire
subsidies, to be lent throughout London, if not procured, yet authorized by
you; never the like heard of, and the Excise that being once settled, all other
assessments should cease.

Notwithstanding in few months comes forth Ordinance upon Ordinance for more
moneys, and for the Customs, they were thought an oppression in the beginning,
an I being (so high,) an hinderance to Trade, and extremely prejudicial to the
Nation, nevertheless is now confirmed, with many augmentations, in so much as
men of inferior trading find great trouble to provide moneys for Customs,
and have so many Office (...) please, that it is a very slavery to have any
thing to do with (...) no remedy; the first Commissioners being more harsh
(...), then the late Farmers, and the last worse then the former.

Truly it is a sad thing, but too true, a plain quiet-minded man in any place
in England, is just like a harmless sheep in a Thicket, can hardly move or
stir, but he shall be strech'd, and loose his wool: such Committees have ye
made in all Cities and Counties, and none are so ill used as honest Godly men.

Ye have now fate full five years, which is four years longer then we
intended, for we could choose you but for (at most) one year; and now we wish
ye would publish to all the world, the good that you have done for us, the
liberty ye have brought us unto: If ye could excuse your selves, as ye use to
do; by saying it has been a time of war; that will not do: for when the
war might in the beginning have been prevented, if ye had drawn a little
more blood from the right vein, and night often (ere this) have been ended.

Occasion has been given away, and Treated away, and now, when through the
faithfulness of the New Model, ye have almost forced an end, and have no
great part to effect: now again, at the instigation of those that love their
Kings more then all this Nation, and their own, his Sacred or holy Majesty,
must again be treated with, their National and Solemn League and Covenant
with their God, binding them to be respecters of Persons in judgment: and to
preserve His Person in the defense of the true Protestant Religion, and
Liberty of the People; that has constantly against all persuasion and
Obligation, done what ever he could to subvert both: if this be not the height
of the mystery of iniquity, what is higher.

But let not these be deceived, nor thus under zealous expressions deceive you;
we wish your souls may no further enter into their secret: For God will not
be mocked, nor suffer such grass Hypocrisy to pasie without exemplary
punishment: And if ye believe there is a God; ye must believe it; and it ye
do believe it, and consider the ways ye have troad, and truly repent, show
it by walking contrary to what ye have done, or purposed to do, and let us
quickly and speedily partake thereof: For God is a God that takes vergeance,
and will not suffer you to go on to our ruin.

We have some hopes ye will; for amongst you, there have been always
faithful and Worthy men, whose abundant grief it has been to observe the
strange progress of the Chosen men of the Commonwealth, and have strove
exceedingly on all (...) to produce better effects, and some Christians of late
(...) to their praise.

Others there are, that have been only misled by the policies, and stratagems
of politic men, and these, after this our serious advice, will make you more
seriously studdie the common Interrest of this Nation: others there are, and
those a great number, that are newly chosen into your house, and we trust are
such as will exceedingly strengthen the good part, that hitherto has been too
weak to steer an even course amidst so many oppositions and cross waves.

But henceforth joined all in one will be able to do and carry on whatsoever
is just and good for the Commonwealth, the more just and good, the more easily
effected, for such things are easily to be made evident to all men, and can
never fail of the uttermost assistance of all well-minded People.

And therefore we would not have you to be discouraged in attempting
whatsoever is evidently just, for We will therein assist you to the last drop
of our bloods: Fear neither the Anok^ms, nor the sons of the Cyants, For the
LORD our God, he will stand by you in all things that are just, and will
bless and prosper you therein.

For sake, and utterly rencurce all crastie and subtle intentions; hide not
your thoughts from Us, and give us encouragement to be open breasted unto you:
Proclaim aforehand, what ye determine to do, in establishing any thing for
continuance: and hear all things that can be spoken with or against the same,
and to that intent, let the imprisoned Presses at liberty, that all men's
understandings may be more conveniently informed, and convinced, as far as is
possible by the equity of your Proceedings.

We cannot but expect to be delivered from the Norman bondage, whereof we now
as well as our Predecessors, have felt the smart by these bloody wars; and
from all unreasonable Laws made ever since that unhappy conquest; as we have
encouragement, we shall inform you further, and guide you, as we observe your
doings.

The Work ye must note is ours, and not your own, though ye are to be
partakers with us in the well or ill doing thereof: and therefore ye must
expect to hear more frequently from us then ye have done, nor will it be your
wisdom to take these Admonitions and Cautions in evil part.

If ye consider well, ye may wonder We are no tarter: Ye may perceive, we
have not yet left our true English confidence, but are willing that both you,
and all our Neighbour-Nations should know, that we both see and know all
stratagems and Policies that are laid in wait to entrap, and so to enslave us,
and that we hid desyance to their worst our enemies can do; we know we have
stoore of friends in our Neighbor Countries.

Our head is not yet so intoxicated with this New mystery of Iniquity, but that
a reasonable Cordial Administered by your hand, will see us fast in our seat.

Ye are not to reckon that ye have any longer time to effect the Great Work
we have entrusted unto you a for we must not loose our free choice of a
Parliament once every year, fresh and fresh for a continual Parliament.

For so, if a present Parliament be mistaken in their understandings, and do
things prejudicial, We may so long remain under these prejudices, that the
Commonwealth may be endangered thereby, nor do we value a Trieniall
Parliament: before three years come to an end, Grievances and Mischiefs may
be past remedy.

And therefore our advice is, that ye Order a meeting of the chosen of
Parliament Men, to be expressly upon one certain day in November yearly
throughout the Land in the Places accustomed, and to be by you expressed, there
to make choice of whom they think good, according to Law, and all men that have
a Right to be there, not to fail upon a great penalty but no summons to be
expected.

And if any Person without exception, shall write Letters, or use any
endeavors to incline the choosers to choose any man, or use any means to
disturb or pervert them from a free Choice, then that all such sinister
dealing be made punishable, or a most heinous crime.

And that a Parliament so chosen in November, succeeding year by year, may
come instead of the preceding Parliament, and proceed with the Affairs of the
Commonwealth; nor would we have it in the Power of our Parliament, to remove
any Member from his Place or service of the House, without the consent had of
those Counties, Cities and Buroughs respectively that choose him; great
inconveniences depending thereon, whereof we have seen and felt too much.

Now, if ye shall conscionably perform your Trust the year ensuing, and order
the Parliaments to succeed as aforesaid, then We shall not doubt to be made
absolute Freemen in time, and become a just, plenteous and Powerful Nation;
All that is past will be forgotten, and We shall yet have cause to rejoice in
your Wisdom and Fidelity.

POSTSCRIPT.
Moreover, as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in
ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and right way. Only
fear the LORD, and serve him in Truth with all your heart: For considder how
great things He has dine for you. But if ye still do wickedly, ye shall be
consumed, both ye and your King. 1 Samuel 22. 23, 24, 25.



FINIS.

