MORE HEARTS and HANDS Appearing for the WORK.

Being two LETTERS, The one sent from Colonel Robert Overton, Governor of
Hull, to his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL.

The other from him, and the Officers of the said Garrison, to the COUNCIL OF
OFFICERS, sitting at WHITE HALL.

Wherein their real and large affection is declared toward the Armies happy
proceeding; showing withal, the Justness of it, and their readiness to serve
them, and the Commonwealth, in prosecuting so good a work, to their utmost
power.

WITH, A modest and humble desire, that just and good things may be done.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, next door to the gilded Lion in
Aldersgate Street, 1653.

May it please Your Excellency;
I Make bold herein to in close, and humbly present, the Concurrance of the
Officers of this Garrison, with what Your Lordship, and Your Council of
Officers have done and declared, upon the dissolution of the late Parliament:
Herein it is a duty incumbent upon us, to bless Almighty God on your behalves,
who has, we trust, stirred You up to those Undertakings, wherein we witness
with You to the world, our independence to all unjust Powers, and in the
opposition whereof, the Laws of Nature and Nations, are no less pendant, then
perpetual.

Your Actions past and present have dared to declare as much, and no doubt all
lovers of Truth, Righteousness, and Freedom, will be really ready to further
and follow Your Excellency and Honor therein, to do other ways were a crime
inexcusable. This Nation hitherto for many years, patiently expected what the
late Masters of our Vineyards would do, and seeing now the Lord has put their
power upon You, we doubt not but You will so wisely and worthily dispose
thereof, as it may appear You are the persons appointed to perfect that work,
for neglect whereof the late Parliament was laid aside. If herein the Lord
shall please to honor Your Excellency, and the Army, I doubt not but Religion
and Liberty shall again flourish, whilst Tyranny and Oppression, like a
desolate woman, shall dye Childlesse; Thus to see our patient abiding bring
forth the quiet fruits of peace and righteousness, would task all tongues and
hearts, who have prayed for You, to praise God with You, so to do is
undoubtedly neither treason nor tumult; however if the issue of our endeavors
here do not justify us, our Consciences will, and with this resolution I beg
here amongst the rest, to remain

Your Excellencies and Honors humble and assured Servant, R. O.

To his Excellency, and his General Council of Officers.
WE the Officers and Soldiers in the Garrison of Kingston upon Hull, humbly
Remonstrate our free and hearty Concurrence with the Reasons given for Your
dissolution of the late Parliament; whereby we suppose, so plain a pathway is
made for the propagation of Piety, suppressing all unjust Powers, and thereupon
so good grounds laid down for the vindication of Public Liberty, as had we
not seen the Declaration of our Comrades in Scotland, to that effect, we should
not at this have time thought it necessary thus publicly to have appeared.

But seeing that Unity and Resolution, are two great links in the chain of
Government, and it being no less praise actively and unanimously to prosecute,
then resolutely to undertake, though we by our worthless influence cannot at
all strengthen Your hands, yet we hope hereby we may show our hearts and
affections, which for the furtherance thereof should we not do, we might
occasion a question to be made of our integrity to the present undertakings,
for the making good of our former engagements to God and men, or render our
selves not unlike the Carter, who was said to pray in vain, because he put not
his shoulder to the wheel. And though it become not us to be over prodigal in
breaking the ice to others, yet if we follow our leaders herein, as faithfully,
as formerly others have don, we doubt not but like indulgent Parents you will
accept of our good will how weakly soever executed. We need not as we suppose,
at this distance promise more then what our prayers and integrity to our
particular trustties us to: we likewise believe the Lord our God will give you
an active and excellent spirit, to cast out every accursed thing, and to go on
in the establishment of Justice and Righteousness to the Nation; in the
pursuance whereof, we suppose no public spirits will prove sick of Your
superiority, or fall into an emulating Fever, for Your putting a period to the
late Parliament, some whereof were grown so dainty of their duties, and deaf to
our Complaints, as if they had resolved to live idly, and laugh at our
distresses; we hope the People may expect better fruits from your Endeavors,
who well know upon what terms You stand. Your Excellency and Honors, have been
necessitated to take much upon You, for which much will be Expected from You,
and we hope in the best sense, much ascribed to You, otherwise all Your
undertakings like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish, or as the Apples of
Sodom, will consume untoucht or tasted. It would be needless to such
asserters of public liberty, to say much of the popular supremacy, which has
occasioned the great Conquests and Controversies of the world: Your Excellency
well know* how this Fortification has stood strengthened against time, and
Nature in this point jealous of her own interest, has even in ordinary spirits
amongst us and others, opposed oppression. But we believe we shall have cause
to bless Almighty God for these mild and just Administrations of present and
expected Power, wherein piety, may prevail above reason or policy, and prudence
so moderate Authority, as that it may both guard greatness, and make goodness
more good and great.

We are not able to offer much toward the modelling of a new and necessary
Representative, for the establishment of a good and happy Government. It Is true
popular place fits men for fame and business, but such have neither freedom in
person, act, or time, and have only an opinionative felicity, consisting in
much veneration and little rest; yet we deny not, but the discharge of duty is
the end of all things, and persons qualified with parts and piety, put in great
places or power, like heavenly bodies, ought to have influence over us, and can
cause good or evil times, as God gives a gift, or gives not the grace.

Indeed Ambition make some set themselves to action or consultation, yet such
if they rise not with their service, do often make their service fall with
them. But those who seek business upon Conscience, rather then for credit or
profit, can easily discern a busy nature, from a willing mind, and will be
active or passive, according to appointment and opportunity, rather out of
duty, then design.

We wish at this distance we were able to propose or present any new Remedies
for old Evils, but as one said, Its not good meddling with State-masters, all
the Acts thereof are like a Paracelsian Plaster, dangerous; yet we find a
froward retention of custom is more troublesome to these times, then
innovation; for although unnecessitated experiments in States are difficult,
yet where Reformation draws an acting (so desire of Change, pretended
Reformation) all may do well; for self-preservation (if necessitated) is no
less prudent then just, how irregular soever. But we deny not it is unsafe
sometimes to over-chiminize a State, whereby the reverence of Government may be
either lost or laid aside, yet in this respect our fears may o're-fathom our
feeling: we may, to make the Sheep-pasture in peace, hunt away the Wolves from
the fold by force. Take away Taxes, propagate Piety, regulate the Laws,
redress Grievances, pay the Public Debts, squeeze Spungy Oppressors, and
Unworthy persons preferred, and how extrajudiciall soever you are herein, you
may expect a Well done good and faithful Servants, when all is ended.

But all we can add, is, to beg wisdom and council on your behalfes, that as
your Excellency and Honors have undertaken much, so you may have much
religion, reason, and resolution, to discharge those undertakings, that all
your attempts may end in such seize, as may augment the luster of your
former actings, that so all our hearts and hands may be tied unto you, and
strengthened for you; that piety, peace, and prosperity may be promoted,
afflicted virtue comforted, righteousness, and righteous men cherished, all
other good things assured, and ascertained. Upon this account and score, we
unanimously declare our real readiness to live and dye with you in the
opposition of all unjust power, or practices, whether Martial,
Ecclesiastical, or Civil, whether Regal, Royal, or Parliamentary.

FINIS.

