PROPOSALS FOR The furtherance and propagation of the GOSPEL in this NATION.
As the same were humbly presented to the Honorable Committee of Parliament by
diverse Ministers of the Gospel, and others. As also, Some Principles of
Christian Religion, without the belief of which, the Scriptures do plainly
and clearly affirm, Salvation is not to be obtained.

Which were also presented in explanation of one of the said Proposals.

LONDON, Printed for R. Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane. 165^.

The humble Proposals of the Ministers who presented the Petition to the
Parliament, Feb. the eleventh, and other persons, for the furtherance and
propagation of the Gospel in this Nation.
Wherein they having had equal regard to all persons fearing God (though of
differing judgments) do hope that they will also tend to union and peace.
I.
THat persons of godliness, and Gifts in the Universities and elsewhere,
though not ordained, may be admitted to preach the Gospel, being approved, when
they are called thereunto.

II. That no Person shall be admitted to trial and approbation, unless he
bring a testimonial of his piety and soundness in the faith, under the hands
of six godly Ministers, and Christians, gathered together for that end and
purpose, unto whom he is personally known, of which number two at the least to
be Ministers.

III. That a certain number of Persons, Ministers, and others of eminency and
known ability and godliness, be appointed to sit in every County to examine,
judge, and approve all such persons, as being called to preach the Gospel have
received testimonials as above; and in case there shall not be found a
competent number of such persons in the same County, that others, of one or
more neighboring Counties, be joined to them.

IV. That care be taken for removing the residue of Ministers who are ignorant,
scandalous, non-residents, or disturbers of the public peace; and likewise of
all Schoolmasters, who shall be found Popish, scandalous, or disaffected to
the Government of this Commonwealth.

V. That to this end a number of Persons, Ministers, and others of eminent
piety, zeal, faithfulness, ability and prudence, be appointed by authority of
Parliament to go through the Nation, to inquire after, examine, judge of, and
eject all such persons as shall be found unfit for the Ministry, or teaching
Schools, being such as are above described.

VI. That for the expediting of this work, these persons may be assigned in
several Companies or Committees to the six circuits of the Nation, to reside
in each of the Counties for such a convenient space of time as shall be
requisite until the work be done, calling to their assistance in their
respective Circuits such godly and able persons, Ministers, and others in each
of the Counties where they shall then reside, to assist them in this work as
they shall think fit; That these persons so sent, and Commissionated may be
empowered, before they shall depart out of each County, to return and to
represent to the Parliament the names of fit and sufficient Persons, Ministers,
and others, to be appointed Approvers of such as shall be called to preach the
Gospel in such Counties* and that in the mean time the Persons so
commissio^^ed as aforesaid, shall have power, while they reside in each County,
to examine, judge, and approve of such persons, as having a Call to preach the
Gospel in such County, shall upon such testimonial as aforesaid, offer
themselves to such examination.

VII. That it be proposed, That the Parliament be pleased to take some speedy
and effectual course, either by impowring the persons in the several Counties
to be appointed for trial, and approbation of such persons as shall be called
to preach the Gospel there, or in such other way as they shall think fit, for
the uniting and dividing of Parishes in the several Counties and Cities within
this Commonwealth, in reference to the preaching the Gospel there, saving the
civil rights and privileges of each Parish.

VIII. That the Ministers so sent forth and established be enjoined, and
required to attend the solemn Worship of God in Prayer, Reading, and Preaching
the Word, Catechizing, expounding the Scriptures, and (as occasion shall
require) visiting the Sick, and instructing from house to house, residing
amongst the People to whom they are sent, and using all care and diligence by
all ways and means to win souls unto Christ.

IX. That as it is desired, That no persons be required to receive the
Sacraments further then their light shall lead them unto; so no person sent
forth to Preach, and already placed, or which shall be placed in any Parish
within this Nation, be compelled to administer the Sacraments to any, but such
as he shall approve of as fit for the same.

X. That a Law may be provided, That all persons what^^ever within this Nation,
be required to attend unto the public preaching of the Gospel every Lords
Day, in places commonly allowed, and usually called Churches, except such
persons as through scruple of Conscience do abstain from those Assemblies.

XI. That whereas diverse persons are not satisfied to come to the public
places of hearing the Word upon this account, that those places were dedicated
and consecrated, that the Parliament will be pleased to declare, That such
places are made use of, and continued only for the better convenience of
persons meeting together for the public Worship of God, and upon no other
consideration.

XII. That all persons dissenting to the Doctrine and way of Worship owned by
the State, or consenting thereunto, and yet not having the advantage or
opportunity of some of the public meeting places, commonly called Churches,
be required to meet (if they have any constant meetings) in places publicly
known, and to give notice to some Magistrate of such their places of ordinary
meetings.

XIII. That this Honorable Committee be desired to propose to the Parliament,
That such who do not receive, but oppose those Principles of Christian
Religion, without the acknowledgement whereof the Scriptures do clearly and
plainly affirm, that salvation is not to be obtained (as those formerly
complained of by the Ministers) may not be suffered to preach, or promulgate
any thing in opposition unto such Principles.

And further, That the Parliament be desired to take some speedy and effectual
course for the utter suppressing of that abominable cheat of Astrology,
whereby the minds of multitudes are corrupte^ and turned aside from dependancy
upon the providence of God, to put their trust in the lies of men, and
delusions of Satan.

By the thirteenth Article we intend, that no persons be suffered to Preach, or
Print any thing in opposition to those Principles of Christian Religion, which
the Scripture plainly and clearly affirms, that without the belief of them
salvation is not to be obtained.
In the further explication of which Proposal, we humbly offer these following
Principles of our Religion, which we conceive to be generally received, and
therefore have not brought all the Scriptures (or any of them singly) to prove
the truth of the Principles themselves, Romans 10. 8. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12, 13.
but to show, that without the belief of them Salvation is not to be obtained.
FIrst, That the holy Scripture is that rule of knowing God, and living unto
him, which who so does not believe, but betakes himself to any other way of
discovering truth, and the mind of God instead thereof, cannot be saved.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the Truth, that
they might be saved; and for this cause God shall send them strong delusions,
that they should believe a Lie; that they all might be damned, who believe not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, ver. 13. But we are bound to
give th^^ ^s always to God for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God
has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth, ver. 14. whereunto he called you by our
Gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

15. Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been
taught, whether by word, or our Epistle.

1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3. Moreover, Brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel, which I
preached unto you, which also you have received, and wherein ye stand.

By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I Preached unto you,
unless ye have believed in vain.

For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received, how that
Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures.

2 Cor. 1. 13. For we write none other things unto you then what you read, or
acknowledge, and I trust you shall acknowledge even to the end, compared with
Acts 26. 22. etc.

Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing
both to small and great, saying none other things then those which the
Prophets, and Moses did say should come.

Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal
life; compared with Psalm 147. 19. and 20. verses.

He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and Judgments unto Israel, he
has not dealt so with any Nation; and as for his Judgments they have not
known them.

And with John 4. 22. Ye worship ye know ^^t what, we know what we worship;
for Salvation is of the Jews.

2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction, compared with 2 Pet. 3. 1, 2. This second Epistle (beloved)
I now write unto you, in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of
remembrance.

That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy
Prophets, and of the Commandment of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior.

II.
That there is a God, who is the Creator, Governor, and Judge of the world,
which is to be received by faith, and every other way of the knowledge of him
is insufficient. Heb. 11. 3.

Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God; So
that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.

Verse 6. But without faith it is impossible to please God; for he that comes
to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

Romans 1. v. 19. Because that which may be known of God, is manifested in them,
for God has showed it to them.

Verse 20. For the Invisible things of him from the Creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and G^^ ^ead; so that they are without excuse.

Verse 21. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart was darkened.

Verse 22. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools, compared with
--

1 Cor. 1. 21. For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew
not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe.

2 These. 1. 8. To render vengeance on them that knew not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

III.
That this God who is the Creator, is eternally distinct from all the creatures
in his being and blessedness.

Romans 1. v. 18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness.

Verse 25. Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served
the creature more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen.

1 Cor. 8. v. 5. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven,
or in earth (as there be gods many, and lords many.)

Verse 6. But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

IV.
That this God is one in three persons, or subsistences.

1 John 5. 5. Who is this that overcomes the world, but he that believes that
Jesus is the Son of God.

Verse 6. This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by
water only, but by water and blood, and it is the Spirit that bears
witness, because the Spirit is truth.

Verse. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Verse 8. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, the
Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one.

Verse 9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater,
for this is the witness of God which he has testified of his Son. Compared
with John 8. 17.

It is also written in your Law, that the testimony of two men is true.

Verse 18. I am one that bear witness of my self, and the Father that sent me
bears witness of me. Verse 19. Then said they unto him, where is thy Father?
Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my Father, if ye had known me, you
should have known my Father also. Ver. 21. Then said Jesus unto them, Ye
shall dye in your sins.

Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Compared with
Ephesians. 4. 4. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling.

Ver. 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

(...). 6. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all.

1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? he
is Antichrist that denies the Father, and the Son.

Verse 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father; but he
that acknowledges the Son, has the Father also.

2 Epist. John, v. 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine
of Christ, has not God, he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has
both the Father, and the Son.

Verse 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him
not into your house, neither bid him God speed.

V.
That Jesus Christ is the only Mediator between God and man, without the
knowledge of whom there is no salvation.

1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of the truth.

Verse 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus.

Verse 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.

2 Timothy 3. 15. And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

1 Ioh 2. 22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ? He
is Antichrist that denies the Father, and the Son.

Acts 4. 10. Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that
by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth whom ye crucified, whom God raised from
the dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole.

Verse. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other
name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

1 Cor. 3. 10. According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
Master Builder, I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereupon. But
let every one take heed how he builds thereupon.

Verse 11. For other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ.

VI.
That this Jesus Christ is the true God, 1 John 5. 29. And we know that the
Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that we may know him
that is true. And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the true God, and eternal life.

Esa. 45. 21. There is no God else besides me, a just God and Savior, there is
none beside me.

Verse 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, for I am
God, and there is none else.

23 I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow,
every tongue shall swear.

4 Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, even
to him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed.

25. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory,
which the Apostle applies unto Christ, Romans 14. 11, 12. and Philip. 2. 6. to
the 12.

VII.
That this Jesus Christ is also true man, 1 John 4. 2. Hereby know ye the
Spirit of God; every spirit that confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God.

Ver. 3. And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God. And this is that spirit of Antichrist.

2 John 7. For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a Deceiver, and an Antichrist.

VIII.
That this Jesus Christ is God and Man in one Person, 1 Timothy 3. 16. and (...),
with one consent
without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness. God was manifested
in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into glory.

Mat. 16. 13. Jesus asked his Disciples, saying, whom do men say that I the
Son of Man am?

Ver. 14. They said, some say thou art John the Baptist, etc

Ver. 15. But whom say ye that I am?

Ver. 16. Simon Peter answered, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.

Ver. 17. Jesus said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

Ver. 18. And I say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

IX.
That this Jesus Christ is our Redeemer, who by paying a Ransom, and bearing
our sins, has made satisfaction for them.

. Isa. 53. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for
he shall bear their iniquities, compared with

1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree,
that we being dead to sin should live to righteousness, by whose stripes ye
were healed.

25 For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd,
and Bishop of your souls.

. 1 Cor. 15. 2. By which also you are saved, if you keep in memory what I
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.

Ver. 3. For I delivered unto you first of all, that also which I received, how
that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures.

1 Timothy 2. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth.

Ver. 5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus.

Ver. 6. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time, 1
Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price.

X.
That this same Lord Jesus Christ is he that was Crucified at Jerusalem, and
rose again, and ascended into heaven.

. Joh. 8. 24. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall dye in your sins; for
if ye believe not that I amhe, ye shall dye in your sins.

. Acts 4. ver. 10. Be that known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel,
that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God
raised from the dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole.

Ver. 11. This is the stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is
become the head of the corner.

Ver. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

Acts 10. 38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with
power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the
Devil, for God was with him.

Ver. 39. And we are witnesses of all things which he did, both in the Land of
the Jews, and in Jerusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a tree.

Ver. 40. Him God raised up the third day, and showed him openly.

Ver. 41. Not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even
to us who did eat and drink with him, after he rose from the dead.

Ver. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that
it is he, who was ordained of God, to be the Judge of quick and dead.

Ver. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name,
whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins.

. 1 Cor. 15. 2. By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain.

Ver. 3. For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how
that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures.

Ver. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day,
according to the Scriptures.

Ver. 5. And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve.

Ver. 6. After that he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once, of
whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.

Ver. 7. After that he was seen of James, then of all the Apostles.

Ver. 8. And last of all he was seen of me also, Acts 22. 8. Who art thou
Lord? and he said, I am Jesus of Nazareth.

Act. 2. 36. Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God
has made that same Jesus, whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ.

Ver. 37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said
unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we
do?

Ver. 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost.

XI.
That this same Jesus Christ, being the only God and Man in one Person,
remains for ever a distinct person from all Saints and Angels, notwithstanding
their union and communion with him.

Coloss. 2. 8. Beware least any man spoil you, through Philosophy and vain
deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ.

Ver. 9. For in Him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

Ver. 10. And ye are complete in him, which is the Head of all principality
and power.

Ver. 19. And not holding the head, from which all the body by joints and
bands, having nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the
increase of God.

1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifested in the flesh, believed on in the world.

XII.
That all men by Nature are dead in trespasses and sins, and no man can be
saved unless he be borne again, repent, and believe, Joh. 3. ver. 3. Jesus
answered, and said unto him, Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be
borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

Ver. 5, 6, 7. Jesus answered, Verily, verily I say unto thee, Except a man be
borne of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God;
That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the
Spirit, is Spirit.

Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be borne again.

Ver. 10. Jesus answered, and said unto him, Art thou a Master in Israel, and
know not these things?

Acts 17. 30. 31. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now
commands all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a day
wherein he will judge the world in righteousness.

Acts 26. 17, 18, 19, 20. Delivering thee from the people, and from the
Gentiles, unto whom I now send thee, To open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith
in me. VVhereupon I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, but showed
first to them at Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of
Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God, and
do works meet for repentance, Luke 24. 47 that repentance and forgiveness of
sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations.

Acts 20. 20, 21. I have showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from
house to house, testifying both to Jews and Greeks repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

Joh. 5. 24, 25. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life; verily, verily I say unto
you, the hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.

XIII.
That we are justified and saved by Grace, and faith in Jesus Christ, and not
by works.

Acts 15. 24. For as much as we have heard, that certain which went out from
us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls; saying, ye must be
circumcised, and keep the Law, compared with Gal. 1, 6, 7, 8, 9. I marvel that
you are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto
another Gospel, which is not another; but there are some that trouble you, and
would pervert the Gospel of Christ; but though we, or an Angel from heaven
preach another Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any
other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal.
5.

Ver. 2. 4, 5. Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing; Christ is become of none effect unto you: whosoever of
you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace, for we through the
Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by faith.

Romans 9. ver. 31, 32, 33. But Israel, which followed after the Law of
righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness; wherefore?
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law;
for they stumbled at that stumbling stone; As it is written, Behold I lay in
Sion a stumbling stone, and rock of offense, and whosoever believes on him
shall not be ashamed; compared with Romans 10. ver. 3. 4. For they being ignorant
of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness,
have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God; for Christ is the
end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes.

Romans 1. 16, 17. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power
of God unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also
to the Greek; for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith, as it is written, The just shall live by faith, compared with Gal. 3. 11.
But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is evident; for
the just shall live by faith.

Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. For by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast;
for we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before ordained that we should walk in them.

XIV.
That to continue in any known sin, upon what pretense or principle soever,
is damnable.

Romans 1. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which commit such
things are worthy of death, not only to do the same, but have pleasure in
them that do them.

Romans 6. v. 1, 2. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace
may abound? God forbid* How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? Compared with Verse 15, and 16. What then? shall we sin, because we
are not under the Law, but under grace? God forbid. Know ye not, that to whom
ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?

1 John 1. 6. 8. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

Chap. 3. Verse 3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself, even as he is pure. Verse. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. Whosoever commits sin,
transgresses also the Law, for sin is the transgression of the Law. And ye
know that He was manifested to take away our sins, and in him is no sin;
Whosoever abides in him, sins not. Whosoever sins, has not seen him,
neither known him. Little children, let no man deceive you; He that does
righteousness, is righteous; He that commits sin is of the Devil, for
the Devil sins from the beginning; for this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil.

2 Pet. 2. 19, 20. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he
brought in bondage. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the
beginning.

Romans 8. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye, but if ye mortify
the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, ye shall live.

XV.
That God is to be worshipped according to his own will, and whosoever shall
forsake and despise all the duties of his worship, cannot be saved.

Jerem. 10. 15. Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and
upon the families that call not upon thy name, for they have eaten up Jacob,
and devoured him, and consumed him, etc.

Psalm. 14. 4. Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my
people as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord.

Jude v. 18, 19, 20, 21. How they told you there should be mockers in the last
times, shall walk after their own ungodly lusts, these be they who separate
themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit. But ye beloved, building up your
selves in your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in
the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life.

Romans 10. 13. For whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

XVI.
That the dead shall rise, and that there is a day of judgment wherein all
shall appear, some to go into everlasting life, and some into everlasting
condemnation.

1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put
away, concerning faith have made shipwreck; of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander,
whom I have delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme; compared
with 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. And their word will eat as does a canker, of whom is
Hymenaeus and Philetus, who concerning the faith have erred, saying, That the
Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some. Acts 17. 30, 31.
And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every
where to repent, because he has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world
in righteousness.

John 5. 28, 29. All that are in the grave shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil to the resurrection of damnation; compared with 1 Cor. 15. 19.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

FINIS.

