THE Independent's Loyalty. OR, The most Barbarous Plot (to Murder his sacred
Majesty) very fully Discovered.

WITH A clear and perfect Answer, to the Lord WHARTON'S Evasions.

Vir Sapit qui pauca loquitur. Printed, Anno Domini 1648.

Truth drawn out of a Saw-pit.
VICE has an ugly Visage, and is so conscious thereof unto it self, that it
always keeps in the dark; and will never appear in its own colors unto the
World: Nay, the more transcendent it is, the more it hardneth its brow with
impudence to outbrave all Testimony and conceal it self. We have of late a
clear instance of this truth in those persons who were of the Council or did
conceal the resolution to murder his Majesty.

The fact is so horrid that the Law of this Kingdom has made all fences
against it possible; The Lawyers do account in the Notion of the law: That the
least attempt or endeavor which does but look that way, is interpreted as if
the wickedness were accomplished, because the persons which would be so wicked
as to begin, could never think themselves secure, but by the perfection of
that villainy; as the Lord chief Justice Popham, and the rest of the Judges in
the case of Robt. Earl of Essex in the reign of Queen Eliz. nay in other
Kingdoms where Princes have been jealous, the very dream of it has been
made Capital, and the reason given of it; that they would never have Dreamt of
it in their sleep, if sometimes they had not thought of it when they were
awake.

And though a work of such darkness very seldom nath had more light (being
testified by the oath of one witness, if not more, and confirmed by variety
of circumstances and as strong presumptions as such a case can afford:) Yet we
see with what a brow of Brass Cap. Rolfe durst present himself to the house,
how confidently Col. Hammond writes on his behalf, how boldly the Lo. Wharton
dares anticipate the world and himself: first publish the letters which were
sent unto him and the house of Lords with a delusive answer. All of them decry
the fact (if you will take their words,) as boldly as the whore in the
Proverbs, who wiped her mouth, and said what evil have I done: Therefore that
we may take off the mask, and expose the business and Persons to the world
to be Judged of; we shall.

1. Set down the Letters.

2. Give you a Character of the persons mentioned in them.

3. A Narrative of the matter of Fact, and the proceedings thereupon.

4. Answer the Lord Whartons Vindication.

5. And lastly, draw some necessary Inferences or Corollaries, which we shall
confirm by further evidences; In all which we promise so much Candor and
Integrity as not to swerve a tittle from the truth, so far as our Information
(which I have severely endeavered to bottom well) shall hold out.

The Letter to the Lord Wharton June the first.
My Lord,
THOUGH I cannot but imagine I stand so highly condemned in your Lordshippes
and many persons thoughts, that any thing of vindication from me must come with
all the disadvantage and perjudice that may be; yet (my Lord) being conscious
of my own integrity, and confident that I shall be judged by your Lordshippe
by no other Rules but those of justice and reason, I cannot doubt but when I
have discovered the grounds and reasons of my Actions, that it will appear to
your Lordshippe, that what I have done has been agreeable to the several
duties I stand engaged in, as I am supposed to have acted contrary before I am
heard.

Not to detain your Lordship in circumstances, I shall make this Protestation,
that as no other thing but the danger of the Kings life could in reason excuse
such attempt. So I do protest that no inferior consideration did or could
have moved to such an action: But my Lord having had such particular and well
grounded information, that so horrid a design was intended and moved from
those that could when they pleased have had the power to put it in execution; I
hope I shall not be censured for having post posed all other considerations to
that Loyalty which cannot be questioned but I owe to the King.

But not to leave your Lordshippe unsatisfied with this general account, the
intelligence I speak of, concerning this design, I received from Captain
Rolfe, a person very intimate with the Governor, privy to all Counsels and
one that is very high in the esteem of the Army; he my Lord, informed me that
to his knowledge the Governor had received several Letters from the Army,
intimating they desired the King might by any means be removed out of the way,
either by poison or otherwise; And that another time the same person persuaded
me to join with him in a design to remove the King out of that Castle to a
place of more secrecy proffering to take an Oath with me, and to do it
without the Governors privity, who he said would not consent for losing the
allowance of the House; his pretense to this attempt was, That the King was in
too public a place, from whence he might be rescued: But if he might be
conveyed into some place of secrecy he said we might dispose of his person,
upon all occasions, as we thought fit; and this he was confident we could
effect without the Governors privity. My Lord considering all these pregnant
circumstances I think it will appear that there were, if there are no, such
intentions concerning his Majesty's person, as may well justify my endeavors
that have been made for his remove from so much danger: and for my own part my
Lord, I must be so plain as to declare concerning my own actings in relation to
this business, that had I not done this (having such grounds) I must belive I
had then verified all these aspersions of disloyalty and breach of Trust, which
I am contented to suffer from those whose interest is perchance opposed to my
endeavors to prevent such damnable designs

My Lord, I have spoken nothing here but what I shall be ready to testify
upon Oath when ever I shall be called to it, with promise of Freedom and
security, till then I must be content to support all censures and satisfy my
self with the vindication I receive from my own conscience.

I am your Lordships humble servant, Rich. Osborne.
1. June, 1648.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Wharton.
The Letter to the Earl of Manchester.
I Did by a Letter of the first of June acquaint my Lord Wharton with what I
send here enclosed, expecting it would before this have been communicated to
both Houses: what should be the reason of concealing a business af this nature
I know not, except it be to give those time that are concerned in it better to
think of some stratagem to evade this discovery.

I humbly desire your Lordship upon sight of this relation, to communicate it
to the House of Peers; which I shall be ready to attest upon Oath on every
particular, when ever their Lordships shall please to allow me that freedom
and security which ought to be afforded to any Gentleman, and Christian, in
witnessing a truth.

My Lord I am Your Lordships most humble servant, Richard Osborne.
June, 16. 1648,
For the right Honorable the Lord Manchester Speaker of etc.
An account of the Persons who are named
Rolfe. Captain Rolfe (or rather Major Rolfe) is one of no great headpiece,
but of a turbulent and busy spirit, who for his zeal to new light, and
activitie to promote that way; has been advanced from an obscure condition
(having been bred but a poor shoemaker, and as we are informed, not yet
out of his Apprentiship) to be an Officer of the Army by the Lieut. General,
and is employed as a Councellor with, and a spy upon Col. Hammond, by the same
person; for you must know that it is the custom of Cromwell never to send a
Whale without a Pilot Fish, nor prefer any Commander in Chief to a place of
Eminency and Trust, but he pinneth one or two more peteets upon his sleeve,
who are to infuse the fence of the Lieu. Genesis with the Junto into the
Commander: keep them in some awe and inform if they find any tendencie
toward the disadvantage of their private cause. And of this nature was Major
Rolfe at the Isle of Wight, who being a Cap. in Col. Hammonds Regiment when his
Majesty was Jugled into that place, was sent thither with his Company to be a
guard unto the King, and has been ever since at the governors elbow; and in a
manner Deputy governor there. Mr. Osborne. Master Osborne is of a good family.
Eldest son to a Gentleman of good repute and estate, who has been a friend
to the Parliament through this whole contestation.

This young man has been in Arms also in their quarrel, never observed
guilty of any personal vice; long known to the Lord Wharton, and was
preferred unto the charge about his Majesty, by that Lords power and interest.

Hammond The Governor, or Col. Hammond, is a younger brother, but has some
expectation from his Mother a widdowe, and a furious enemy unto his Majesty
which drove him out at the beginning of these Wars into the service, where
until the new Model of this Army he could ascend to no higher pitch then a
Major, he has had his hands in Murder already, and of one of his own party,
for which being in Gloucester likely to suffer, was helped off by Col. Massey
whom he has requited well; But being afterward taken notice of to be stout
enough, and pliable also, was taken into favor by the Lieut. General preferred
to be a Colonel, and when the design was on foot to conveigh the King to
the Isle of Wight, by his power and interest, premised thither for his
Majesty's entertainment. Lord Whartons Character. The Lord Wharton is known
well enough through all the Kingdom to have run high in, and been one of
the prime heads of the Independents Juncto. Of a most inveterate malice unto
his Majesty and that against the bonds of gratitude; one that had a good mind
to have done this Act with his own hand if the King had fallen into the Saw-pit
where his Lordship hid himself; but his Lordship finding that course
dangerous, and being frighted at the First sight, quickly left it, and betook
himself, to act in a safer way.


The Narrative of matter of Fact and proceedings in this.
How long Rolfe had been hatching this Villainy, who drew him in, or who he
had drawn into the design; is known only to God and there consciences. It was
not many months after his first acquaintance with Osborne, but he threw out
his lure: insinuates the merit of the action, the means whereby it might be
done, and the Authority of the Army which would protect the Instrument, and
invited him to be one. But Osborne being startled with the horror of the Fact;
imparts it to some better acquaintance of his in the Isle, consults with them
what course is best to be taken. It is resolved to acquaint his Majesty
therewith and take his advice, where it is concluded: To discover it to any
persons in Command about the King, were to hale on the mischife sooner, and
involve themselves in the danger; there could be no way so safe to the Kings
person nor more honorable for themselves, then to deliver him from such bloody
hands; whereupon they provide horses and Boats; deal with some Sentinells to
wink at his passing, prepare his way by fretting an Iron bar with Aqua
fortis in his window, to pass out by, and were ready to put it in execution.
But one of the Sentinells discovering the design, Osborne flies out of the
Isle, and so soon as he can clear himself of the danger, writes first unto
the Lord Wharton as you see; but after his Lordship had stifled this
information longer then a fortnight, to discharge a good Conscience toward
God, perform his Allegiance to his Majesty, and duty to the Kingdom, he
writes a letter to the Speaker of either house. That to the House of Lords you
may read, that to the House of Commons was the same upon the matter: These
being delivered on Saturday June 18. in the house of Commons, the speaker takes
an advantage of a thin house, and which consisted of most that inclined his
way, communicates these letters, where after a little debate Major Genesis Skipon
rises up and desires that Whereas this seemed to be but an idle paper, it
might not hinder their more serious affairs, which were before them, but be
laid aside. Whereupon it was accordingly voted, and laid up in Lavender, with
an intention to call upon it at doomes day. Upon Monday the Lords (who in
business of this consequence give the house of Commons leave to make them a
president) took the Letter into debate also, where the Lord Say struck in
presently with Major Skipons motion. That it might be laid aside there too,
and had near obtained the same effect, but some Lords that had some sparks of
honor left within them, took so much courage as to press the horror of the
villainy, the duty of their places, and how much it would reflect upon their
house if they should neglect to make enquire after it. This wrought so much,
the business being foul upon the Lord Wharton. he escaped imprisonment with
some difficulty, the house of Commons are acquainted therewith, by which
means the business is resumed into new debate in that house, many messages
pass between the houses: at last there is an Order concluded upon, for
Osburne to appear and make good his accusation at any time within forty
days, and this is commanded to be published by the Sheriff with as much
pomp and show of zeal, as little intention in the most, either to inquire
into the Fact, punish the Authors, or Rescue his Majesty from the like danger.

The Lord Wharton finding these trans-actions would see the Sun now, and having
had experience that Copies would multiply if they were bought up too fast (as
he went once about to do by a Pamphlet which discovered another ignoble Action
of his) steeres another course in the Compass, and causes the Letters to be
published himself; but with an answer, whereby he might anticipate the
credulity of the People, and make his own Defense among them. Not long after,
Master Osborne discovers himself; enters his Appearance; makes affidavit of
his discovery, and confirms it by such pregnant circumstances, that most men
are convinced of the truth: Rolfe, being by this time acquainted with the
Passages, comes up unto the House, presents himself with a a Letter from the
Governor, dated June 21. (which pleades his Case, denies the Design (charge
Osborne with Treachery, and very much extolleth his own care of his Duty and
tender Usage of his Majesty, for which he cites his own Testimony; not
withstanding, the Lords find cause to commit Rolfe to safe custody, where he
remains until he be forgotten, or by the policy and strength of his Party
quitted from the Charge, or released out of Prison.

The Lord Whartons Answer examined.
His Lordships whole Answer may be reduced unto four heads, which shall be
brought unto the Test in their Order.

The first is, That Osborne is a Traitor by the Law of the Land because he
entertained communication, diverse times, with one that intended to take away
the Kings life, by Poison, about that Action and concealed it: whence he would
infer That Osborne is to have no credit given to his Testimony.

To this is Replied.
First, That if the Letter of the Law were truly urged, yet it cannot reach
Osborne, because first it is supposed the Law is in force and can take place
where this Communication is had: Secondly, The Persons who are possessed of the
Authority or Power, in that place, be not guilty, nor accessory to the Treason.

Thirdly, That the witness can with safety of his own life and the Kings,
make his address to those persons: But let all England judge whether Law be
in force in that place where the King is kept in prison, which is Treason in it
self by the Law, and by Lawyers is interpreted a Design against his Life:
Where Soldiers (one of which once answered a Statesman; What do you talk to
us of your Law that wear our Swords by our sides?) rule all the Roast.

The persons in most power there, were either Principalls or Accessories (in
the most favorable construction to be suspected of it) In the Design Rolfe
was in command there, and Principal. The Governor in command of the Island in
chief, and at least likely to be of the Council. Rolfe suggested that he
had received Letters from the Army to that purpose, that he was unwilling to
concur (not out of horror of the wickedness) but fear of his pay. Master
Osborne could not choose but understand by their familiarity that their
interest was all one, that such Actions are never owned by all that are of the
conspiracy: Often times great men, who are the first movers, can stand behind
a Curtain during execution of their own Designs (and as the Ape that thrust
the Catts paw into the fire to take the Chestnut out for his own Palate) put an
inferior Instrument to act the disgraceful or dangerous part of their
contrivance. The suspicion may be great against the Governor, since he
pleades in his defense, and did himself suppress the Letter which Osborne
wrote to the Lord Wharton, which his Lordship tells his friends, and did tell
the House upon his Honor, That he sent immediately to Hammond, yet he
suppressed for above ten days without securing Rolfe or acquainting the houses
therewith. Now let all the world Judge whether it had been best for Osborne in
relation to the Kings safety, or his own, to complain unto these men, or by
holding them in suspense for a while, in the mean time endeavor the
prevention.

2. Master Osborne did reveal this, the hazard considered, as soon as he
could unto the Lord Wharton.

3. He did reveal it to his Majesty and some other who might assist him in
the prevention thereof.

4. Grant that Osborne were as guilty as the Lord Wharton does suggest, he
might as well be allowed for a competent witness, as Master Edward Waller was
against his brother Tomkins and others.

The second head is.
That Osborne did this not out of any intent of good or love unto the King, but
to free himself from his perfidiousnesse to the trust reposed in him by the
Parliament, in his attempt to carry away the King (God knows whether) to the
danger of his person, and to procure for himself liberty and fredome from
Justice, which he fled from.

To the Negative part hereof it is answered.
1. That is spoken Gratis, and upon his Lordships own presumption,

2. Against common reason; can any man think the Gentleman should run that
hazard, endure so much reproach; loose so great friends, for one he wished noe
good, bare no affection unto?

3. Gaunt this for true, it agrues the conscience of his Allegiance, and sense
of so great a sin to be the more, in that he would endure so much for to
avoid it.

To the first part of the affiirmative we Answer.
1. That every man ought to be sensible of, and desire to vindicate his honor
from an unjust aspersion, we wish the Lord Wharton as able to do that, as
willing to quit himself of the true charge.

2. That surely the matter of trust which the Parliament and General reposed
in the Kings attendants, was not (I know not what it is in his Lordshipps
constructions) to assist in the Murder of his Majesty, nor stand by
spectators thereof, without his rescue; but to use all means for preservation
thereof, which was done by him.

3. That all superior trust does null and invalidate a subordinate engagement
when they are incompatible. Now whether a trust which a man is obliged to by
express Oath (as that of Allegiance to omit all other bonds does or should
cause all Subjects to preserve the life of there Prince) to a Supreme Governor
of the Kingdom, enjoined by law, be not first to be satisfied, before a
verbal promise (or perhaps but an implicit trust) to fellow subjects, in a
questionable if not unlawful Action (as the imprisonment of the King is) let
all wise men Judge.

4. That the intention of his Majesty might be to come, and these Gentlemen
to bring him up unto his Parliament for all is yet known: He has often
desired that of late, and surely the Kingdom is convinced where the impediment
is, as we may guess by their petitions.

5. That the Kings person could not possibly be at so much danger in the power
of the grim Tartar or Turkish pirates, as in those hands he has been
trusted, and it is easy for to prove it.

To the second part of the affiirmative we answer.
1. That if it be meant by his Lordships freedom and liberty to come into
the face of Justice to make good his charge; that is granted, and we know not
why it should wring his Lordship so much unless there be some sore thereabout.

2. That if it be general liberty and freedom which his Lordship means, that
cannot be so; for in both his letters he limits his desires of either, but to
testify that which he had writ, and according to law be admitted unto his
Oath.

3. He fled not from the face of Justice, but violence and oppression, so
soon as that was but pretended unto; he presents himself, unto it we have
had many examples of discouragement, imprisonment, and plundring of such as
have formerly offered their testimonies to truth of like nature, and he could
not be blamed to fortify himself against the like.

The third is That Osborne does personate Rolfe only as guilty of the Act,
and brings no other witness. To which is Answered.
That this was a work of darkness, there are few admited into such
Counsels; for the most part one man is made the instrument: And when the
villainy is done, he dispatched also that he may tell no tales: Therefore in
the Civil Law; Presumptio fortis in delictis secretis sufficit pro probatione;
In Crimes which are committed in secrecy, a strong presumption is a good
proof: But in this case here is not the affirmation, but the oath and all
other concurrence of circumstances imaginable as shall hereafter be fully
cleared.

The fourth is that Osborne was guilty of that Action, of which he accuses
Rolfe, to carry away the King when as the Governor and Rolfe were active in the
prevention thereof. To this is Answered.
That he would have done part of that Action; rescue his Majesty from the
place, but not the villainy: Rolfe his design was to Murder; where there
might be no noise, noe help press in to the rescue. Osborne to deliver the
King from that danger. It is no wonder that the Governor or Rolfe should hinder
it; that were to keep the prey in their tallons still, and the King in their
own power and disposition.

Whereas his Lordship writes that Rolfe offered an oath of secrecy, but took
it not; the Sentinells did notwithstanding an oath discover it: I know not to
what purpose that is inserted, Cromwell the Sultan of the Faction, has given
testimony to all the world of how little obligation such petty to yes are, who
is observed to make most fervent promises lard them deepest with imprecations
and oaths, when he means the contrary, and is nearest the execution
thereof; and others have observed that they are allowed to take the Sacrament
with you, make any oaths unto you, which they never intend to keep, for the
advantage of their cause; it was no wonder then, he neither accepted it from
Rolfe, or found the Sentinel noe better principles.

The Letter of the Governor is not worth an answer noe man could expect but he
must deny the Fact, if he had been Principal, or can think his cause the
better, for either that his defending of Rolfe, or bitterness against Osborne,
how he has dealt with his Majesty, after times will declare; there are
witnesses enough of his barbarous incivilities toward Him.

If the King do acquit him (as he boasts) truly the greater is his
goodness; Their whole gang will not afford a Parallel.

The Corollaries or Inferences are.
1. That there was and is a desigue in the Army to murder His Majesty, if it
be not prevented by providence: And that there is so, is not only to be
inferred from the suggestion of Rolfe, but multitudes of other people, of very
many I shall present a few, and shall be ready to make proof of these and
more if I may obtain that Liberty which is afforded Osborne.

At the same time (to go no higher) that the Army pretended to right his
Majesty in their printed Proposalls, wherein they pressed his Majesty's person,
his Queen and Royal Issue may be restored to a condition of freedom honor
and safety in this Kingdom without diminution to there personal rights.

There were many in the Army that urged his Majesty might be decolled by
them, and that there never could be Peace in the Kingdom until that were
done: Their Grandees did daily discourse of the convenience, the advantage, and
disadvantage that might come to their cause thereby.

In their march toward London. They give it out that if the King did declare
against them they would quickly cut Him short, that if they must perish, they
would upon him. A little after a member of the Army, Major Scot, did at
Caversham house in the presence of the King speak openly: That things could
never be well until that man (meaning his Majesty) were shorter by the head,
without punishment or reprose of any of his Company; some Agitators were a
while after that, taken by the watch, as they came late from supper and
Council, and being searched; Papers were found about them, wherein it was
concluded to make away his Majesty: And though these were delivered to Alderman
Wollaston, yet the men were dismissed and never further questioned.
Rainsborough made no bones to press this in Counsels of war and public
meetings. The Lieut. General himself writ to Col. Whaley (as he confessed to
some Comissioners) that he heard that there was a design against his life
suddenly to be executed upon him. Their Apostle Mr. Peter's has often belched
out this Venom: That the King was the only grievance now left, that it was of
noe difficulty to remove him, he was but a dead dog already. The Lieutenant
General has diverse times himself spoken words to that purpose, once Are the
People so mad upon a King, they shall have a May Pole for their King, as soon
as him again. At his first access to the King, coming down Sir John Cutts his
stairs near Cambridge, shaking his head he said; This Man is not fit to
reign: This was more then King Henry the fourth did speak to encourage
Tyrrell to assassine King Rich. the second

Nay the General himself cannot be excused from some concurrence, his
Lordship being taxed by some Ministers, that there was such Indulgence showed
to the King and Malignants, answered, Oh they need not joy in that, if they
knew what measure is intended them. In Sept. 2. from Putny 1647. he writ
letters of intercession to the Parliament, for such men as by the Law were cast
into prison for such words as imported as much as His Murder, as in particular
of one Symball who had said he hoped to see the Kings head upon the Tower
block; and Robt. White, who said if he meet the King he would kill Him as
soon as another man. In the late March of the Army through Southwarke into
Kent, when the People cried out bring home the King, bring home the King, I
will bring his head upon my Pike said one, upon my swords point said another,
and while a woman presuming upon her sex ventured to call him villain, she
hardly got off with her brains in her scull: Of late it has been so frequent
in the mouths of the Parliament men, Members of the Army, that hardly any
Member of the House has heene a stranger thereto; Are you so earnest for your
King, you may have Him to bury, you may have Him shorter by the head, and many
more words unto this purpose. Do but add the placing of Joy and such
principled men at Portsmouth and other places, near the Kings residence,
commending Rainsborough to the Navy, discharging all the Kings old servants
which he knew, or any new, in whom he seemd to have any contentment (perhaps
rather such as they found not for their turn) and settling such a retinue about
him, every one of which in probability would not scruple to be his
assassinate, so it might be done in private.

I know that this is aswered by the pretense of safe custody; but let any one
consider 1. The strength and fastnes of the Castle. 2. The situation of the
Isle in which it stands. 3. The guards by land, perpetually attendant, and
Sentinells. 4. The guard by Sea and other advantages, and he shall find that
there needed not this superaddition of care but for some other purpose, and
that neither King Ed. 2. was under a safer custody either at Kenelworth or
Barkely, nor Richard the second at Pomfract: God divert the Omen.

2. That the Lord Wharton is a Traitor by his own Rule, for the Concealment if
he be not of the Con-spiracie in this wicked intendment.
It is clear that his Lordship was informed of this fact in writing, and that
he conceald this for above a fortnight after from the houses of Parliament,
though he had opportunity and daily resorted thereunto, and that he did not so
much as give intimation thereof, in any Court of Justice, or to any person of
power to inquire thereinto.

His Lordship answered upon his honor (a great obligation) in the house, that
he sent this Letter immediately to Hammond; for prevention of the fact, if
there was any such danger. But this excuses not his silence, only involves
Hammond in the guilt also, and may well be interpreted not to be intended for
prevention, but either to speed the business, or give the Conspirators time
and warning to evade the accusation. Why did not his Lordship write to the
King, or send a Letter to him or desire the Governor to show it to his Majesty.

And if he would have the world believe him to be innocent; let him declare
the contents of the Letter he writ to Hammond, or with what have, or post, he
sent it? or by whom? he might have remembered that it is adjudged Treason to
hinder any that are going to aid the King.

That Sir Nicholas Seagrave A^ 33. Ed. 1. was in Parliament condemned to loose
his life, but for wiithdrawing himself from the Kings Host, and from the Kings
Aid by going to the Court of Paris in France about a discord and contention
which he had moved against John de Crumblewell, and leaving the King amongst
his Enemies.

Whosoever will add unto this that exact correspondence which his Lordship
holds with Cromwell, and that Juncto; the malice which his Lordship
expresses upon all occasions against his Majesty: his Cowardice which all the
Kindome talks of, and is allwaies coupled with cruelty even in the highest
degree, where it can obtain an opportunity; his ingratitude which seldom makes
a stop until it ascend the highest Pinnacle of guilt; they may suspect that
this young Gentleman was sent into such Company, as fit wex to take their
impression, and become assistant in that intended, and horrid villainy.

3. That a great party in either house are conscious of, and ready to promote
that wickedness.
For how else durst any one be so impudent as Skippon was, to move that this
information might be laid aside, and deny to his Majesty that common Justice
which was due to every Lacquy, or fellow in Newgate, how could it be carried
in the House of Commons to that purpose? or admit so long a debate in the house
of Peers whether it should be considered? how could the Lord Wharton escape
imprisonment? and be suffered to revell it up and down, and solicit all ways
to make his evasion from the Charge, whosoever will but reflect upon former
passages shall be convinced, as in particular.

One Hall being a suitor for a ship in the late fleet, was informed against as
one under accusation, in the Commit for the Admirallty. It was asked what
that was? answer being made that he had said; that the Paerliament were fools
that they hired not some bold man to have killed the King when he was in the
hands of the Scotts. But Sir Henry Mildmay replied, Oh if you have noe more
against him, let him go to choose! Yet Sir Henry Mildmay was never so much as
reprehended for this; but Hall although for the present upon a farther
accusation; that he was a mutineere and denied obedience to his superior
officer, for that time was suspended, but within a little while the Command of
a better Ship was given him.

Diverse Indictments have been put in at the Sessions in the Old-Bailie to the
number of 17. or 18. of men for Traitorous speeches within these 7. last
years; amongst which against one Pym an Innkeeper in Bishops-gate-streete;
who said he hoped to wash his hands in the blood of the King, were withdrawn
by a power from thence, and the men dismissed without any punishment.

Cole the Speakers Secretary has been heard more then once to say that
rather than the King should want one to hang Him, he would be His Executioner:
And though the Speaker had intimation thereof yet this man was harbored in his
bosom to his death, but that was no wonder, when

The Speaker and his Independent brother the Tradesman have diverse times
declared: The King was not fit, and should not be trusted to sit upon the
throne again.

Mr. Lilburne and diverse other Agitators being surprised upon the information
of Mr. Masterson at Shore-ditch did a little while after declare unto the house
of Commons the causes of their meetings and passages thereupon, petitioning for
a discharge, in which they do express that a member of the house of Commons
urged that the King was to be made away, and rather then he should not, he
offered himself a Felton for that fact, yet this man never so much as inquired
after.

The frequent expressions to that effect of many of the Members. Especially the
Lord Denby, Coll. Edw. Popham, Ludlow, Martin, Morley, Sir Hen. Mildmay, Sir G.
Norton, etc. (To pass by the impudente of their Ladies, and wives) even
publicly in the houses themselves every day.

And the Declaration of Mr. Abraham Dowcet who also attended upon the Kings
Person. Delivered under his hand, the third day of this instant July 1648, in
the house of Peers. That the said Major Rolfe came unto him whilst he was a
prisoner in Carisbrooke Castle, touching the Kings intended escape, and in a
jearing manner asked him why the King came not down according to his
appointment; and afterward in great indignation and fury said he had waited
three hours under the new platform with a good Pistol ready charged to have
received him if he had come, one sufficient to manifest their most ungodly
purposes.

That base and scandalous Libell or Declaration of lies, which by their
authorities was published in all Churches, and since with all diligence in
Dutch and French; what was it but an antidated sentence before his Majesty was
heard one word? and what conclusion can be parralell therewith, but execution
as preposterous? what could it presage, but an assault upon his Person, after
the murder of his honor.

That unworthie usage, and those vile affronts they have continually offered
unto him, will make any considerate man conclude, they never dare look him in
the face again, whom they have so provoked. The Speaker of the House of Commons
dreamt, (and told it himself) That His Majesty came to the House of Commons
door, and knocking thereat, all the Members ran away, and hid themselves, at
which he awaked, and was very glad, for he was heartily afraid also.
Dreams are the revolutions of the days thoughts; if he were affrighted, at a
vision of the night, how would he be appaled at the Reality and Performance?
A Lord in the debate of a petition for a Treaty in their house, was not
ashamed to say They had as good petition we should hang our selves. There are
very few men that can be spoken withal, but think they do intend to cover
their shame in his blood, and intercept that fear by the height of this
farther guilt.

4. That notwithstanding all pretenses to the contrary there is like to be but
a slight search of this Villainy, and a less punishment of the Authors.
How can any man expect other measure at their hands? the world has experience
how closse they stick one to another, how hard it is to have Justice against
any one of the fraternity, in what cause soever, how one man may interrupt by
captious and pusling interposures, the proceedings of any Committee, nay of the
whole House; what strains of art, and finenesse of wit must we look for in
this case, where so many of the tribe are concerned? their cause lies at stake.
For my part I give up the poor Gentleman who makes the affidavit as a Victim,
and foresee bays provided for the head of the assassinate, according to former
practices and events in the like case. At least the business shall be huffled
in a silent forgetfullnesse until the sense of the People is worn out, and
this tempest blown over, at which time they may securely dismiss their
associate, and revenge themselves by some advantage upon their adversaries.

5. That we their fellow Subjects (or rather Vassalls) can expect but poor
Justice at their hands when we have occasion.
If it fare thus with the Ceder, how shall it with the shrub? If they do thus
by their King, how shall the Subjects speed? Take but the pains to turn over
their Journalls, to examine their Committees, to tread upon their heels in
their eccentricall actings in their several Countries. I doubt it will be a
hard matter to find one Act of Justice which has been done this whole seven
years, unless a Member or an entire friend have had the right, and self
interest been the spur unto it: It must needs be a question, when a
confident of their own, even Mr. Lilburne has proclaimed it in print, and many
more of their friends; nay their Members when they are out of the walls, and in
an impartial fit do daily confess and for injustice and oppression you shall
see such Mountains, that it may be boldly averred. That all the Courts of
Justice, all the persons in judicature, since the Conquest did never commit so
many, (if they were mustred together) by the one half: If these men do behave
themselves thus whiles they are but probationers and candidates of Sovereignty,
we must expect that our Judgments must be unrighteous, our Justice turned into
Gall and Wormwood. Their finger shall be heavier then their Loins, and whips
turned into Scorpions, when their Empire is settled over us, our hands are tied
and our mouths choked up.

6. That the King is a rare example of Wisdom, Patience Fortitude and other
Virtues.
Although most virtues be strongly concentered in his Majesty, yet these are
the more eminent, because they had the greatest objects; because his Majesty
has been clothed with the contrary vices by his enemies and exposed into
that deformity to the world by them; as the Christians, in former times were
covered with the Skins of Bears and Woolves, that Dogs might be the better
invited to tear and worry them.

For his Wisdom. Mark, without prejudice his Messages, his Answers his
Declarations; even as they print them in their own books. Read his Letters
which were writ in private, even as they are exposed in as bad scraps as they
could break them, and joined with a distorting Comment, and you shall be
convinced of what one of their own Members said; That one Line of his was more
worth then a Volume of their own.

Consider those Transactions of his since they bought him of the Scotts, and
you shall confess, That in so little, you never read more.

Take notice of his equal Deportment in all his Conditions, and how he has
won upon most persons, even his deadly enemies, who have conversed with him.
Cromwell said that he employed Huntington as the Man about him, yet he is so
bewitched with the King, that I am afraid of him.

Col. Whaley was under jealousy also, for the expressions he many times let
fall. The very Governor of the Isle of Wight has given him a large Character,
for all Honor and Accomplishment, unto very many.

Master Carill their Chaplain worte home to his wife from New Castle, That he
found him another Solomon.

Master Hinderson found this in his last discourses and disputes with his
Majesty, and therefore at his poenitentiall expiring, Declared him to be a
most Pious and a Learned Prince, and was sorry he had been so far injured.

Their Tub-Preachers Master Kiffen and others, upon their little acquaintance.
have done him that right; and for that been so enamored with him; Nay the
Houses have no other Reason, nor none so great, for their fear to Treat in
Person with him, suffering him to come into play, then that he is too wise. If
you did on the other side surveigh their Actions and Counsels (which sometimes
you could not think but they had their rise in Bedlam) it would render his
Worth the more conspicuous, and you must confess, That my Lord the King is
even as an Angel of God.

For Patience. Though Satan and his Instruments have winnowed him almost as
much as Job; Though he have passed through the furnace of sorrow: Though so
many indignities and affronts have been offered him by his Vassals. such as
have been fed with his bread, such as would have been glad to have fed with
the dogs of his Flock: Yet he endured all like a Lamb, and never, that I could
hear, so much as offended with his Lips, in impatient expression, when the
whole house of Commons is many times in great distemper (to use their own
expressions) upon the wagging of a Straw, as it were, and the smallest
occasions.

His Fortitude Is almost above a Miracle He was never observed to break one
nights rest, though his chamber were beset with Armed and spiteful enemies;
Never to discover any fear, when their confused noises might suggest just
matter to the best resolution.

Witness those passages at that time of night when Joyce offered that violence
upon his person at Holmby, and they all confessed, did neither daunt, nor put
him out of the carriage of a King. He never baulked one dish of meat if he
liked it, though it were Cooked by the hands of a mortal enemy, and passed
through the hands of many more.

When on the otherside, the whole house of Commons startled at the falling of a
little Seeling, and were likely to stifle one another, for fear, least the
sky should fall. Many of them lately at St. Martins did the like nay broake
through the windows upon the fall of a board, Nay their Goliath Sir Tho.
Fairfax with his other Champions were ready to die for fear of being
poisoned: Because it has some mirth in it you shall have the story at length.
A Pragmaticall Cook which had formerly served the Lady Crisp in her
prosperity, hearing the General wanted one of his Trade, presumes to invite
him with some other Officers in his Ladies name to her house in Hamersmith;
where he might show his Skill at his own Charges, and what a feast he could
make for forty shillings: The General and his company after they had eaten,
and discovered that the invitation was not from the Lady, fell into a great
fright, some of them fell very sick and into vomitings, purging for all the
Cordialls they could take; claps up the poor Cook by the heels, for his
requital, and keeps him there until many weeks had made it evident there
was no danger.

His Devotions Are more fervent and frequent then those of their best Saints
amongst them.

His Temperance So signal, that themselves acknowledge it.

His Clemency So great, that his finger was never dipped in the blood of his
worst enemies (more then they drew upon themselves in the field) nay when they
have been at his mercy he has showed them favor. But this Subject would
fill a Volume, we must be short. If his Majesty were a stranger, and had not
such an undoubted right and inheritance in these Kingdoms, and that they were
Elective, his wisdom and profound virtue would represent him like Saul (in
that point) higher by the head then the rest of the People; and most worthy to
be chosen their King.

7. That His Majesty ought to be pitied above all men, and deserves to be
rescued from this danger by His Subjects.
It is Treason by law to imprison the person of the worst King. But so good a
Prince, in so barbarous a way, to be in so much hazard of His life; is an Act
of unparalelld wickedness in those that do, or allow of it. The Oath of
Allegiance (which was by the Law of the Land before the Conquest, to be taken
by every male above 12. years old in the Kingdom, and has been actually by
most of us) obliegeth us to it. Wherein we swear.

That we will bear faith and true allegiance to the Kings highness his
Heirs and lawful Successors, and to our power shall assist and defend all
jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences and authorities granted or belonging
to His Majesty, His heirs and successors, or united and anexed to the
imperial Crown of this Relme.

In the Protestation we Promise, Vow, and Protest to maintain and defend as
far as Lawfully we may, with our lives powers and Estates according to the
duty of our Allegiance, His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate.

In the Solemn League and Covenant we swear, sincerely really and constantly;
through the grace of God, in our several vocations to endeavor with our
Estates and lives to defend and preserve the Kings Majesty's person and
authority etc. and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His
Majesty's just Power and greatness.

The Protestation which these very men contrived, took, and enjoined others to
take; Engages us.

The Vow and Covenant exacteth as much from us too.

And yet we know in the debate upon the framing thereof, the obligation to the
King was minced upon these reasons: That there were other ties of duty toward
Him and others, for the performance and that making so many and full
expressions thereof might harden him against any just compliance.

History tells us of Subjects, nay Slaves, that have thrust themselves betwixt
the stroke of death and their Princes and Masters (who have not been of
eminent desert) Nay, of brute Creatures, which have, at the same cost,
defended their Owners; and shall we the People of England, who are obliged by
duty, by so many Oaths and engagements to preserve the person of the King,
suffer his Life to be engaged every day by such men, who by his Murder would
make way to set their feet upon our own necks; and, at their Pleasure, prey
upon our Liberties, our Lives and estates.

Could loyal Uriah say, Shall I go home to my Wife and take my rest or
comfort, when my Lord Joab, the Captain of the Kings-Host and the Kings-Army
are in the sield. And shall not every man, rather, say as much or more, Now
that my Lord the King is undone and put out of all he has: Now that my Lord
the King is kept from his Wife and Children, and scorned and reviled, and more
Ballads made of him, and abuses put upon him, then ever King David had. Now
that my Lord the King is a Prisoner.

Now that my Lord the King neither sleeps, nor wakes, nor eats, nor drinks
in any manner of safety. And now that my Lord the King is in danger every hour
to be murdered or poisoned; shall we now give our eye lidds any rest? And
shall we not now help to save the King? Curse ye Meroz; nay, now Mr Marshall
do you better expound (that place of Scripture) curse her bitterly, for not
helping him; and if we cannot afford to help him, for the Oaths we have made
unto him, and benefits we have received from him; yet let us rescue our Laws,
Liberties and Estates; and our own souls which will otherwise altogether must
certainly dye and perish with him.

FINIS.

