A TRVE COPY of two several LETTERS Sent by Mr. Richard Osborne (late
Attendant on his Majesty in Carisbrooke Castle,) touching a design to poison
his Majesty: Which Letters were read in the House of Peers June 19. 1648.

Printed 21. June 1648.

A Copy of two Letters sent by Mr. Richard Osborne.
My Lord:
THough I cannot but imagine I stand so highly condemned in your Lordshippes
and many persons thoughts, that any thing of vindication from me must come with
all the disadvantage and prejudice that may be; yet (my Lord) being conscious
of my own integrity, and confident that I shall be judged by your Lordshippe
by no other Rules but those of justice and reason, I cannot doubt but when I
have discovered the grounds and reasons of my Actions, that it will appear to
your Lordshippe that what I have done has been agreeable to the several
duties I stand engaged in, as I am supposed to have acted contrary before I am
heard.

Not to detain your Lordship in circumstances, I shall make this Protestation,
that as no other thing but the danger of the Kings life could in reason excuse
such attempt: So I do protest that no inferior considerations did or could
have moved to such an action: But my Lord having had such particular and well
grounded information, that so horrid a design was intended and moved from
those that could when they pleased have had the power to put it in execution; I
hope I shall not be censured for having post posed all other considerations to
that Loyalty which cannot be questioned but I owe to the King.

But not to leave your Lordshippe unsatisfied with this general account, the
intelligence I speak of, concerning this design, I received from Captain
Rolfe, a person very intimate with the Governor, privy to all Counsels, and
one that is very high in the esteem of the Army; he may Lord, informed me that
to his knowledge the Governor had received several Letters from the Army,
intimating they desired the King might by any means be removed out of the way,
either by poison or otherwise; And that another time the same person persuaded
me to join with him in a design to remove the King out of that Castle to a
place of more secrecy, proffering to take an Oath with me, and to do it
without the Governors privity, who he said would not consent for losing the
allowance of the House, his pretense to this attempt was, that the King was in
too public a place, from whence he might be rescued, but if he might be
conveyed into some place of secrecy, he said we might dispose of his person
upon all occasions as we thought fit; and this he was confident we could
effect without the Governors privity. My Lord considering all these pregnant
circumstances, I think it will appear that there were, if there are no such
intentions concerning his Majesty's person, as may well justify my endeavors
that have been made for his remove from so much danger: and for my own part,
my Lord, I must be so plain as to declare concerning my own actings in
relation to this business, that had I done this (having such grounds) I must
believe I had then verified all those aspersions of disloyalty and breach of
Trust, which I am contented to suffer from those whose interest is perchance
opposed to my endeavors to prevent such damnable designs.

My Lord, I have spoken nothing here but what I shall be ready to testify
upon Oath when ever I shall be called to it, with promise of Freedom and
security, till then I must be content to support all censures and satisfy my
self with the vindication I receive from my own conscience.

I am your Lordships humble servant, Rich. Osborne.
1. June, 1648. For the Right Honorable the Lord Whatton.
A Letter to the right Honorable the Earl of Manchester.
Right Honorable,
I Did by a Letter of the first of June acquaint my Lord Wharton with what I
send here enclosed, expecting it would before this have been communicated to
both Houses: what should be the reason of concealing a business of this nature
I know not, except it be to give those time that are concerned in it better to
think of some stratagem to evade this discovery.

I humby desire your Lordship upon sight of this relation, to communicate it to
the House of Peers; which I shall be ready to attest upon Oath in every
particular, when ever their Lordships shall please to allow me that freedom
and security which ought to be afforded to any Gentleman, and Christian, in
witnessing a truth.

My Lord I am Your Lordships most humble servant, RICHARD OSBORNE.
June 16, 1648.
For the right Honorable the Lord Manchester Speaker of, etc.
FINIS.

