To the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES, Assembled in Holy Convocation at
Westminster; Blessing and Benediction from his Superlative Holiness, Reverend
Young MARTIN MAR-PRIEST.
Dearly beloved Brethren,
HEarken with fear and reverence, unto the Words of His Holiness, Reverend
Young Martin Mar-Priest, as you shall find them written in the fourth Book of
his venerable Sanctity, The Ordinance for Tithes dis(...)ed. But Beloved, the
Glass hasteneth, and it is not seasonable now this Good Time, to detain you
too long; for I know, though out of your Reformed Piety, you dislike the Papal
Sanctity thereof, yet cut of the Presbyterian accuteness of your Stomakes, you
would willingly consecrate your Reverend Intrailes with the delicate
belly-timber sclemnities thereof; for I know, Pl^m-Pottage, Mi^^^d Pyes, and
other such toothsome toys have (...) been very natural (...) pleasing to the
men of our Cloth: Wherefore, Dearly Beloved, least I should transgress too
much upon the servent Zeal of your Appitites, I shall leave the division of the
matter to your selves, as able proficients therein, after a most Scholastic
method; only I shall Devote these my Pious Observations upon the Divinity of
your Title of the Exaction of Tithes, unto your most Sacred Protection and
Perusal, as a Christ(...) Cha^^ll, or pastime for those Holy Days, for your
better concoction, not doubting, but even your selves will also shortly be
thoroughly digested, and be cast out as the Excrements of the Land, if you do
not put a swift period to your Tithe plundering Divinity: And to that end I
have in some measure discovered the iniquity and vanity of your pretended Jure
Divino to the Exaction of Tithes; dispersed and cleared up your mysty fogges,
wherewith you have besotted, corrupted and infattuated the peoples
understandings into a blind zeal thereof; whereby (if they please) they may now
see, that the privilege and property thereof is their own, both by Divine
(...) Episcopal extirpation, the ever to be Honored Petitioners of
Hertfordshire, who now have broke the Ice of this grand Oppression, even
plucked at the (...) against (...) insufferable, (...) Tithes, that the rest of
the Counties may follow them, as they (...) against the Bishops; and the Lord
stir them up, and give them good (...), that our Children after us may reap the
benefit of their happy beginnings.

Thus (grave and Reverend ASSEMBLY,) in testimony that our Holiness (...) the
zeal of (...) our Dedicatory (...) of God, (...) standing, (...) not to (...)
Holynesses thereat (...) and your (...) your Clothes (...) Fort, to (...)

THE ORDINANCE FOR TITHES DISMOUNTED, From all Mosaicall, Evangelicall, and
true Magesteriall Right. OR, The Clergy utterly untitled of their JURE DIVINO,
for their Exaction of TITHES.
The Introduction.
WHERE AS under the late Regal and Episcopal exorbitancy, the Exaction of
Tithes has for a long time been coersively imposed upon the People of this
Kingdom, for the advance and magnificence of one sort thereof, entitled the
Clergy, who (out of their divine Providence) have very prudently ever pretended
and pleadeded their Title thereto, to be JURE DIVINO, whereby both Magestrate
and People have ever been persuaded, as their duties, the one to command, the
other to obey the exaction thereof, thorough the mysterious subtilty, and
specious pretenses of that Chemarim Sect, that Canniball litter of
Tyth-mongring Negroes: And now that we might have a thorrough Reformation (both
in and person, I should say) in Church and State, under the Parliamentary and
Presbyterian Authority, the same is very wisely and discreetly continued and
reconfirmed: O Reader, here with Reverend MARTIN, stand amazed at their wit!
down upon thy knees, up with thy hands, and gloor (Fresbyter-like,) with thine
eyes, admiring and adoring this happy Reformation, and sing Hallalujab for
ever, and for ever, that we are blessed with such a Parliament, such a Synod,
such a Presbytery, such a bomination bundance of Ordinances; Ordinances upon
Ordinances, even whole Carl-loades of contradicting Ordinances, Beloved
Brethreu! to establish such a croaking gender of frisking froggy Presbyters,
bred in, and skipt from the myery Bogges of Episcopacy, thus to enrich them
with the Tenths of the Kingdom, by a more powerful and obligatory Authority
then before: Let all the land fear them let all the Inhabitants thereof stand
in awe of them, for they but speak, and it is done, out of their primative
Zeal, they do but claim them of Divine Right, and the godly Parliament
forthwith most prudently invest their Sanctities, (to confirm as infallible
the Divinity of their Title) with a most juditious elaborate Act, the Hallowed
Ordinance for Tithes, (O the purity of our Times!) dignified and enriched with
power coercive to plunder the Goods, and imprison the Persons of such as shall
refuse the payment thereof; whereby the generallity of the people are awed, and
dare not prye, or once glance into the Arc of their sacred Title, least they
be smit with a Confiscation, etc. that the Divinity of their Title goes now as
current for Tith-ware amongst the vulgarity, as if it had the Gospel-Image and
Superscription upon it, that now the silly souls, even in the midst of their
millitary taxations, Issacbar^ like, humbly couch under the burden of their
Exaction, when as indeed, in equity they had more need to substract then to
add, to shake off, rather then to contract an unnecessary Burden to their
over-burthened shoulders: But the Presbyters do not greatly care, considering
the breadth of their backs.

Wherefore out of duty unto God, and love unto my Country in this time of
public necessity; I shall, as near as I can, discover the vanity of their
Title, that the oppressed may see it, and something case themselves of their
Burden. But that I may the better evince it to every rational and ordinary
capacity, and stop the mouth of the most material opposition, I shall make
trial of their divine Title in their most fundamental pretenses; which may
naturally be digested into their deductions from three heads, to wit,
Mosaicall, Evangelicall, and H(...); and so answerable reduce my matter into
three Sections.

For on these 3. Pillars the Clergy would erect the cock-loft of their Jure
Divine, even from thence hold and maintain their Tenuce of Divine Right unto
the exaction of Tithes; but I shall impactially examine the divinity of their
Title deducted from these several Heads, as being the most rational and
satisfactory way of trial, to lay the Axe unto the root of the Tree, to
unbottome their building; for if I pluck from them their main Pillars, their
Cathedral props, down tumbles the great Goddess, Jure Divino, Pulpits,
Priests, Tythe-pigges, Pullen and all; and what a fray then there will be,
judge ye. And first concerning the Authority of their Mosaicall Title.

SECTION I.
Of the Clergies Mosaicall Title of Jure Divino unto the exaction of TITHES.

THat we may the better make trial hereof, it is to be considered, that the
Clergy of this Kingdom do Parochially Officiate therein as the Ministers of
JESUS CHRIST (as they pretend themselves to be) and yet for their Ministry
require the tenth of all our Substance, by virtue of a Mosaicall Authority, the
which how in equity they can do, in case they should be such, they must
evidence how Gospel Ordinances, such as are proper to the Church of Christ, are
to be practiced, and to receive their authority from a Mosaicall Institution?
If they may not, that is, if nothing can give privilege or right to an
Evangelicall property, but an Evangelicall Authority; then why do you for your
Ministry of the Gospel (as you would make us believe it is) impose upon us the
bondage of a Mosaicall Institution, to wit, the Exaction of Tithes, whose
Authority, Institution and Being was from the Law of Moses, and therein for
that service terminated for the Ministers of his House?

If they be to be practiced from Mosaicall Institutions; then, Is not that to
make the Gospel of none effect, of less authority then the Law, and so CHRIST
interior to Moses; his Ordinances insufficient, and not binding, himself
necessitated to be benolden to Moses for Authority to strengthen his
Institutions, Ordinances, etc. and to make them obligatory, undervalue his
Mediatorship, make himself insufficient for a Savior? for should he not have
Authority of himself for his own Institutions, Ordinances, etc. then would he
be far less sufficient to be the Redeemer of the World; for the work of
Resurrection, Salvation, etc. is of greater Power, then to make a Law
Obligatory, for if he be not able for the less, it is impossible he should
do the greater: And so this is no other, then to deny his MEDIATOURSHIP, his
Redemption, the Resurrection, etc.

Therefore to practice Evangelicall Ordinances, to build the House of Christ
with the mouldred rubbidge and ruins of the Law, to invest Christ's Ministers,
with a bare Mosaicall Authority, to claim an Evangelicall Title from a
Judaicall Institution, to take Tithes under the Gospel, by virtue of Moses his
Commission, cannot possibly be without those horrible absurdities, destructive
to all Religion and Morallity.

Wherefore (ventrable Brethren,) you must, if you will have such a manner of
Maintenance to be yours of Divine Right, prove your Authority from the
Commission of Christ, have a Gospel Ordinance for it: but let me tell you by
the way, when you have done that, to wit, proved the exaction of Tithes from
the Gospel, for the Ministers of the Gospel, yet it remains for you, to prove
your selves to be such Ministers, or else we shall neither esteem you for the
one, or give you the other; for if of Evangelicall Right they be due, and the
men of your cloth the Persons to whom they are due; then from an Evangelicall
Authority, you must prove both the one and the other, your selves the very men,
and this that you require, to be the same that CHRIST allotteth his Servants,
for their Ministerial, Evangelicall Function: For if He be your WORK-MASTER,
and you do His WORK, all Authority being His, and only derivative from him,
He must set the Wages, and the wages he sets, you must there with only be
contented: If you do the WORK, you must have the Wages of the WORK,
otherwise not: if his Wages do not content you, then you are none of His
Servants; for you are his servants whose wages you receive; and if you receive
Moses his Wages, then you are Moses his servants, and so must do his WORK, as
offer Sacrifice and the like, which were to repair and rear up the Partition
Wall again, which CHRIST has broake down betwixt JEW and GENTILE, to deny
him come in the flesh, etc.

Therefore (Reverend Brethren,) you must not think to do CHRIST'S WORK, and
exact Moses his Wages; if out of your Piety you think good of the Work; out
of your honesty you must be content with the Wages belonging to the Work.

And truly (Pious Sirs,) till such time as you give us an express Commandment
out of the Gospel for this Legal, Levitticall exaction of Tithes, for your
service, which you pretend is the Service of the Gospel, till then we shall be
bold to forbear the payment thereof; but no sooner shall you have proved your
selves the Ministers of the Gospel, from a Gospel Authority, and Tithes the
wages of the Gospel, from a Gospel Ordinance, and your service which you
perform, to be the service for which such wages is allowed by the Gospel; I
say, no sooner shall you make these 3. appear, but I shall yield you your
Right, grant your Title to be Jure Divine, and persuade all my Independent
Brethren to do the like to the men of your Order; Then will we pay you your
A^rea^es, fill your Barnes with Tyth-Cocks, both of Hay, and all manner of
grain, enrich you with Herds of Tyth-Pigges, focks of Lambs, of Chickens,
Geese, etc.

Then will we make a Presbyter as glorious, as Pontifical; yea, feed him as
fat as a Bishop: Here Is news for the men of your cloth; go, proclaim a year
of Jubilee, get an Ordinance for it, or at least some directions from both
Houses to keep their Worships in action; for you know their Historical
Directions are mystical Ordinances, witness their late Directions for their
Congregationall, Classical, Provincial and National High Commission-Courts,
which at their coming out were under the notion of Directions, to feel the
pulse and temper of the people, to try whether either they could bear them, or
were afraid to reject them, and now finding them either grossly ignorant,
careless, or else cowardly and degenerate, that they neither do nor dare
oppose them, though it be to enslive themselves and their Posterity in a worse
then an Arbitrary, Regal, or Episcopal servitude, to wit, in endless suites
and appeals from Court unto Court; hereupon, they are concluded in that most
Religious and spiritual Ordinance for the Supper, as absolute Ordinances, as
unalterable as the Directory; for indeed, at the first onset, it was not
policy, to rush such a diabollicall and villainous invention point blanck upon
us, with an, It is Decreed and Ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament. But after a more mysterious manner of Ordination, slily intrude it
upon us unawares in the godly and specious vizor of Rules and Directions, as if
our Religious Parliament Men had such a spiritual and holy care over us, to
give us such wholesome and Pious Directions, while indeed under this innocent
apparition, in the shape of Lambs, they are no other then ravening Wolves,
rending and tearing us in pieces, for did they not pretend the spiritual
welfare of the Kingdom in those Directions, seem to give them, out of a godly
care and pious Providence over us, for our future spiritual Peace and
well-beeing, but what they are, let all the people judge; let them consider
whether there can be the least dram of honesty or Religion in them, or of
respect to the Liberty of this freeborn Nation therein, seeing they lay upon
us a heavier yoke then ever was laid upon us in the days of the Bishops. Now
we shall be so entangled and enthralled in endless fultes and Controversies
from Court unto Court, that if we once fall into the all-ravenous paws of
those spiritual Courtiers, we must scarce expect to finish a suit in 7.
years; and what cheating and cozening, what pilling and polling, raking and
exacting of fees will there be amongst the several Officers of those several
Courts, every ordinary capacity is able to judge of; it will be the greatest
thraldom and bondage that ever the Kingdom was involved into, and by this
Ordinance of the Supper, I am afraid we shall all go Supperlesse to bed, for
there are such baits and entanglements laid for the people, to catch and entrap
them, as multitudes must needs daily fall into their hands, and when they are
fallen into the ravenous jaws of this Hydra-headed High Commission, they must
needs be devoured, there is no way to help themselves: if they be offended, at
the Congregationall High Commission; they may appeal to the Classical
High Commission, if they cannot be righted there, then to appeal to the
Provincial High Commission, and from the Provincial to the National
High Commission, and from thence forsooth, if we can find no Justice in our
tedious expensive traverse through these Spiritual HIGH PLACES, after we have
trudged from High Commission to High Commission, removed our suits from Court
unto Court, been at vast and unreasonable expenses in Fees from Officer to
Officer, we may appeal (forsooth) to our GODS themselves, the PARLIAMENT
(life-Ever-lasting, world without end, AMEN.) Of whom, how may we expect Morcy
or Justice then, that thus beforehand whip as with the stings of Scorpions,
and grind us between the devouring JAWS of such devilish Tyrannical Courts,
which will even crush our bones in pieces, and squeese out our very marrow and
juice, suck out our very hearts-blood, like so many greedy salvage Canniballs,
and devouer our flesh, and swallow it down into the filthy consuming panches of
the barbarous blood-thirsty Clergy: For what Ecclesiastical Court ever was
there in any Nation of the World, managed by the Clergy, which was not improved
to wicked, bloody and Tyrannical ends? Have they not proved (where ever they
have been) the most insufferable burden and bondage the Commonwealth ever
sustained, or groaned under; the most destructive to the Peoples Liberty,
Peace, and well-being? Consider but the Spannish Inquisition, and our late
High Commission, of what desperate and destructive consequence they have been
to the Peoples weal, which after long process of time proved so intolerable
to the people, that they have, and daily spend their lives and fortunes to free
them and their Posterities from such spiritual slavery, and usurpation of
their Liberties, which they so long had sustained by such Ecclesiastical
Courts, which very Courts were Voted and put down, as Tyrannical and
destructive to a Commonwealth by this very Parliament, which thus would
intrude upon us far more and worse then ever we had, or heard of before: It
seems when our old Fathers the Bishops grew decreped and unable, struggling and
gasping for life, their young, brisk and spermatick Sons the Presbyters
committed incest with their old Beldam Mother High Commission, and after her
long Synodean travel, by the skillful subtle powerful hand of a
Parliamentary Midwife, is delivered of a litter of ugly Kubbs, every one more
barbarous, cruel, bloody and Tyrannical then their Mother: For the Kingdom
must be divided into several Provinces (not Diocesses forsooth, that is an
Episcopal term,) and every Parish throughout all the Provinces in the whole
Kingdom must have a bloody Inquisition Court founded in it, which
High-Commission-like shall have power to give and examine upon Oath, and such
and such Parishes in each Province shall make a Classis, so that in one
Province shall be several Classes, and every Classis shall be constituted and
founded into another Inquisition, which shall have Power over so many
particular Parishes of such a Province, and over that Classical Inquisition,
there must be a Provincial Inquisition, and over the Provincial there must be
a National Inquisition: Here Is like to be Inquisition after Inquisition, worse
then the Spanish, after the blood of the people; we thought our selves at the
worst when we knew none but the High Commission, but what shall we think now,
that are like to be ten thousand times worse?

The Bishops Courts stripped us of our clothes, but the Presbyters Courts will
strip us of coats, skins, lives and all, for any thing that I can discern;
For how have these men, before they be invested with this Power, before these
Courts be settled, both in their Writings and Preachings suggested, solicited
and moved the Parliament to out off the contrary-minded to them; Byfeild in his
Sermon, desired that their Houses might be pulled down, and Gibbets made of
the Timber to bang them, and to that end all of them have endeavored to get
this bloody Power into their hands, to that end that they might persecute them
from Court to Court, even unto death, for if they meant freindly toward them,
they would never endeavor after such Courts of (...) and to(...), were (...)
not to confound them with cruelty, they never intend to deal with them by
love; but by Power and Violence, but what kind of success this Kingdom and
people may expect thereby, they may easily discern, if they reflect but their
eyes upon the w^^full Issues of our former Ecclesiastical Courts, and for
better success by them, I dare be bold to Prophecy they shall never obtain.

But to return from this too tedious digression, to our matter, or present
Controversy in hand, be pleased (Venerable Brethren,) to consider, that if you
will have Tithes still to remain, and to be yours of Divine Right, from a
Mosaicall Authority, then you most be the Persons to whom Tithes were commanded
to be paid, for they were nor could be of Divine Right due to none other, then
such to whom they were commanded to be paid, for it is the command of God that
gives a Divine Right unto a thing commanded; Put they were commanded to be paid
to the Levites for their service; therefore if for your Ministerial Function
you will have the Levites wages, then you must every man of you prove your
selves lineally descended from the loins of Levi, and so none but such that
are of that Tribe, to be Ministers of the Gospel, and Tithes to be paid to none
other: Therefore till you show us a perfect Geneallogie of your descent
legitimately from the loins of Levi, we shall not give you the Wages of the
sons of Levi: Go search your Genealogies, turn over your numerous Volumes;
you may find it cock-sure amongst some of the Old Fathers, for they afford
matter for all your necessities.

2. These Tenths were ordained to be of the increase of the Eleven Tribes, from
their several portions in the Land of Canaan, and not of other nations of
people: Therefore if you will have the Levites Portion, you must go to the
Land of Canaan, and receive it of the Eleven Tribes, or else you must prove
England to be Canaan, your selves the Levites, and us the Eleven Tribes, which
for University men, such exact Logitions as your selves, is nothing to do, go
sophisticate (...) into a Syllogism, and you need not doubt of a^^ Ergo, as
infallible as the Empyrick's Proba(...) est: in the mean time, wee^^ lay up
your Tithes for you, and gather them very safe into one Barnes.

Methinks (Right venerable BRETHREN,) you have committed a great oversight of
late, to suffer your Journey-men The two Houses of PARLIAMENT, to put out such
inconsiderate Directions for the Division of the Kingdom into Provinces,
Classes, etc. and not to parallel them (considering it is a time of settling this
Levittio(...) Order) with the division of the Land of Canaan; had you but
consulted with MARTIN, and made him your Directory Journey-man, he would have
reduced the people into Twelve Tribes, divided the Kingdom into answerable
Portions; and your selves then might easily have proved your lineall legitimate
descent from the Loins of Levi, for it had been nothing then from thence to
have drawn an Argument as good as an ORDINANCE of the Lords and Commons for
the true payment of TITHES, or the like; but to return to our matter.

Beloved Brethren, I would have you consider, that the very Jews themselves to
this day have determined the equity of their Tithes to their own Land, for
their Doctors conclude, that regularly no Inhabitants but of the Land of Israel
were to pay any, and even to this day by their Law, (being despersed and
sojourning in strange lands;) no Tithes of their increase in such Lands, is
either paid, demanded or held equal amongst themselves to be paid; yea, by
their Law, they are to pay none. And those that live in the Land of Canaan now,
pay none for want of their Temple and PRIESTHOOD, for their second Temple no
sooner was destroyed, but with it their Law of First Fruits, Therumah, and
Tithes ceased, and those that live dispersed, pay none, both for want of their
Temple, etc. as also for the restrainment thereof to the Land of Canaan; but
you are neither Jews, Levites, in the land of Canaan, have the Temple
Priesthood, or any thing appartaining thereto, and yet you require them by that
Law, and claim them of Divine Right, no commandment or Divine Right being
given to any other but the Sons of Levi to receive them, therefore how equal
your claim is, let those that pay them judge: for if they themselves, that had
the commandment yield up for those considerations, their right and equity in
them, and may not of Divine Right require them, much less may you that are
neither JEWS, LEVITES, or ever had a Commandment from God for them.

3. If you were Levites, yet were it unreasonable and unjust for you to exact
above the Levites portion, a Levitticall right is bounded precisely within a
Levitti call Compass; if you will be numbered amongst the Levites for your
Divine Title, you must be numbered with them in the nature of their revenue, and
thereto precisely confined, and if of their Order for their revenue, then must
you not disdain to be ranked in the nnmber whereto that Revenue was ordained,
and be content with the allowance that shall come to your share from that
Ordination, now the Levites for their maintenance were rancked amongst the
Fatherless, Widows and Strangers, Deutr. 14. 29. and 26. 12.

Such therefore must be your Companions, (think it no disparagement to your
cloth,) and you must be content with your division, and with what falls to
your share; The Fatherless, the Widow, stranger, etc. was to have a share,
and subsistence, to eat and to be satisfied out of the Tithe, as well as the
Levite, therefore for the Levite to exact all the Tithes, were to eat the bread
out of the mouths of the Fatherless, the Widows, and the Srangers, etc.

So then, the encroaching and usurping the whole Tenthes, yea, all things
considered, even the sixth or seventh part of the whole Kingdom into the hands
of the Clergy, under this Levitticall pretense, is no other then such
oprression to the Fatherless, Widow, etc. But we see our Clergy under this
pretense exact all, and more then the Tenthes, and spend it all upon
themselves, and turn the Fatherless, the Widow and the Stranger, to the wide
world; and though every Parish thus largely give their Alms for the general
supply of the poor, these men get all into their hands, and cause the
Fatherless to go naked without clothing, and they take away the sheafe from
the hungery. Job 24. 10. but cloth themselves in costly array, feed on
dainties, live at ease, and take their pleasure, that they are more like Lords
then Almes-men; while the other Almes-people, the Fatherless, Widow, etc. are
ready to perish for food, clothed in rags, and forced to beg, and would
perish quite, should not the Parish take further compassion over them.

Therefore MARTIN would advise the Fatherless, the Widow, and the Stranger,
since this Levitticall Order of Tything must still be retained on foot, to come
in and claim their right, for if the Inheritance must be granted, the
Inheritances must be thereto entitled; so long as the Possession endures, so
long their Interest does continue; as long as they will have the one, so long
they must grant the other: and let not those greedy Cormorants devour up their
portion, that there may be a more competent answerable equallity amongst these
Alms People, the Levite, the Fatherless, the Widow and the Stranger; that
all may have a competency, the Fatherless, Widow and Stranger, as well as the
Levite; that this rich and fruitfall Nation may not longer be branded with the
infamy of such multitudes of Beggars, such miserable forlorn Objects of
Compassions, left destitute in a Land where there is such a redundancy of
Provision; for were the Tithes, which are a vast, and almost unvaluable wealth,
but proportionably divided amongst the Poor throughtout every Parish in the
Kingdom, all would have sufficient, and none would want; only our proud
frisking Levites would be a little abated in their Pride; Their great Buttons
would no more neatly fashion forth their shoulders, then the loops their necks:
their Wives would scarce have Fannes to cool their beauites, or such like
pretty toys to humor their amorous nicer-fancies with, which trivialls way
very well be spared, better then suffer the Fatherless to go naked, lo^^sy;
tattered and torn, beg, and ready to perish in the streets: for it is a most
unreasonable wicked unconscionable thing, that one sort of Almes-men, which
would be counted (forsooth) the Ministers of Jesus Christ, should devour up
the rest, or that any sort should be richer then their Almes-Masters; for there
is above a Thousand Lay-persons (as they call them,) men, women and Children to
one Clery-man throughout the Kingdom; in some Parishes here are above ten
thousand to one, and yet this handful of Venerable vermin must have the Tenth
of the increase of the whole Kingdom, besides their Gleah-land, Oblations,
etc. Which betrays their unsatiable Covesousnesse to take it, and the gross
simplicity of the People to give it, their Been factors must be glad of brown
bread and Pottage to feed their hungry bellies, of leather Jackets or any thing
to cover their nakedness, and rejoice and bless God they can have it by their
sore travel and pains, by their industry and sweat of their brows; they must
cap and congue, and these Almes-men, this Leviticall Clergy, deport themselves,
and live like Lords in Pomp, Honor and Magnificence; for who more honored,
who more stately, proud, or delitious then they?

Oh, MARTIN cannot forget the Germane Proverb, The covetousness of the
Priests, and the Mercy of God endure for ever.

But that we may the more clearly discover their deceit, wherewith they have
bewitched the people under this Levittical Pretense, let us a little further
descant upon the Right of the Levite, that every ordinary capacity may receive
more full and ample satisfaction concerning the equity of their claine, and
that those counterfeit Levites, (our present Presbyters,) may cover their
heads, and hide their faces for shame.

Now for out further inquisition therein, and inquiry thereof, let us consider,
that though the Sons of Levi had a commandment to receive Tithes of the
People, according to the Law, Heb. 7. 5. and though that commandment was only
for the Levites, so that neither any other was to receive them from the People,
but the Levites, nor the people to pay them to any other, but to the Levites
according to tho Law, which both did design their Tithes, and bind them to
their payment, yet could their service for this rich Prerogative, this large
Revenue, bring no perfection: All Offerings, Sacrifices and Services unto God
for the sins of the People, was committed to that Priesthood, and administered
by them, and yet as touching the Conscience, could not purify, or ever take
away sins; therefore there was a necessity that one of another Tribe, that
should not be called after the Order of Aaron should arise, otherwise there
could never have been Salvation, for it could not be by any thing that did at
could proceed, or was administered by the Tribe of Levi, son could it, what
further need was there that another Priest should arise, Heb. 7. 11. therefore
the Priesthood, and commandment there of was (...)lled for the weakness and
unprofitablenesse thereof, verss. 8. and been of whom better things were
spoken, forgiveness of sins, and eternal life, con^^^eth of another Tribe,
of whom no man gave attendance at the Altar, ^ve^ of the Tribe of Judah, of
which Moses spoke nothing concerning the Priesthood; No, not so much as of a
Tyth-pigge, verse. 13, 14, (a that thi^ Man being come, the Priesthood changes,
and that changing, there is made of necessity, a change also of the Law.

These things premised, the Levites therefore themselves have no longer
Authority or Divine Right unto Tysbes, according to the Law, a period being put
to their Office, their Priesthood ceasing, and the Law according to which they
received the wages of their Priesthood ceasing, neither are the people longer
bound to pay them by virtue of that command, seeing both the Law which bound
them to it, and the Preisthood for which it was, are both disannulled,
abrogated, and ceased quite, and a more excellent Ministry obtained,
established upon better Promises, by one of whom Moses spoke nothing of that
Priesthood, so that he being of another Order, and of another Tribe, being
Mediator of a better Covenant, established upon better Promises, neither
Service, nor any thing which pertained to that Tribe, according to the Law,
where of Tithes was one, can be transplanted and grafted into that Stock under
destruction thereof, for if we will have it to bear the fruit of the
Levitticall Priesthood, we cannot be made perfect, receiving the Promise of
Eternal life.

Therefore to ascribe that which belonged to the Levitticall Priesthood, to the
Ministry of our Lord, which sprang from Judah, is to introduce and recall the
Legal Sacrifices and Services, to deny Christ, destroy his Genealogy, and
disannull his Covenant; for whatsoever appartained to the Priesthood, was
proper and essential to the Tribe of Levi, so that whosoever did officiate
therein, or receive any thing belonging to the Office, was one of that Tribe,
therefore to ascribe Tithes to this Order, whereof Christ is, is to make him of
the Tribe and Order of Aaron, and so destroys his Mediatourship, and denies
salvation by him, for of his Order Moses spoke nothing concerning the
Priesthood, now Tithes belonged and was ordained to the Priesthood, (which
Priesthood was not able to cleanse the Conscience from sin, and so not
sufficient for salvation) therefore not at all do they belong unto his
Priesthood, or Mini^tery arising from another Tribe, from whence comes
forgiveness of sins, and eternal life.

4. If you will have Tithes, you must have it of your own brethren, for
verily, they that were of the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the
Priesthood, have a Commandment to take Tithes of the people, according to the
Law, that is of their brethren, etc. Heb. 7. 5. Wherefore we of the Independent
Congregations, being not of your Members, and so none of your brethren, you
have not any authority to demand or receive them of us, the flock which you
feed (if you feed any) is the stock of whose milk you must eat. 1 Cor. 9. 7.
Now we being not of your stock, you must not think to eat of our milk, but
you must be content with the milk of your own flock: when you are our
Pastors, and we your sheep, you shall have the Tyth of our Milk, but in the
mean time, MARTIN would advise you to be content with your own.

5. If you deny to receive Tithes as Levites, and claim them as you are
Priests, then you must have no other then what was due to the Priests, and in
Deuteronomy. 18. 3. etc. it is said, and this shall be the Priests due, from the
People, from them that offer a Sacrifice, whether it be Ox or Sheep, and they
shall give unto the Priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw etc.
and truly, when MARTIN does offer an Ox or a Sheep, he will freely give you
the shoulder, the two Cheeks and the Maw, and he cares not greatly, if you
think that Oxe-cheekes are too course Diet, for the Priests of our days, to
gratify your dainty diviner Pallates, with the great Bag, with all its
venerable appurtenances. But though this were the Priests due, yet for this
were they to stay the Offering, a work too burcherly for Priests now adays;
yea, they were, if there were any war in the I and, to go against the enemy,
and blow an alaram with their Trumpets, and this was an Ordinance for ever
amongst the Priests, throughout their Generations, and they shall be saved from
their enemies, Numb 10. 8, 9. Therefore if you will have our Oxe-cheeks, our
Oxemawes, you must all turn Trumpetters now there is war in the Land, and
sound an Alarm; If you be Priests, you have not done well to forbear all
this while, for the Text says, Ye shall be saved from your enemies. O Pious
and Venerable Brethren, for so I am emboldened to style you; I beseech you be
encouraged, and stir up one another to this good Work, if you be Priests,
sound an alarm, that we may be saved from the Cavaliers, and then you shall
have all our Oxe-cheekes, our Oxe-mawes, Bags and Baggage; for we are weary
of the wars.

Further, if you claim them as Priests, then are you to require none of the
People, for the Laity paid only First Fruits, not Tithes immediately to the
Priests, but one by to the Levites, Singers, and other such Ministers: And the
Levites paid the Tithe of their Tithe to the Priests, Numb. 18. 26. 28. Who so
thorough the Levites, received Tyths from the Possessions of the Laiety, for
the Posterity of Aaron, that had the Priesthood, received none from the people
immediately, but mediately from the bond of the Levite, and that was but a
Tithe of then Tithe.

Therefore, if you will be Priests, (as you all stand Priests by your
Episcopal Ordination, witness the late Ordinance for the Lords Supper, where
it is granted,) then all the Tithe that you can any ways exact, is but the
Tithe of the Tithe, the rest, as first fruits and the like, were left unto the
good will of the People, for seeing you will be the Priests successors for
their maintenance, but not for their Work, being more lazy in your
generation; I tell you, though your succession were good, yet could you be
hereditary to nothing then wherein those Priests had a right; their pattern
can extend no further then their own privilege, though you and your Fathers
have set it upon the Tentures, and streetch'd it unto the portion of the
portion of the Fatherless, the Widow, and the Stranger, and hay racked and
scraped all into your Compass.

Now the First Fruits of the forwardest were offered to the Priests in Ears of
Wheat and Barley, Grapes, Figs, Olives, Pomegranats and Dates, and of these
the First Fruits were paid, in what quantity the owner would, Exodus 23. 19.
Numb. 18. 12. likewise their Therumach. or Heave Offering, or First Fruits of
Wine, Oil, Fleece, and the like, were also given to the Priests; Deuteronomy. 18. 4.
but not determined by Moses of what Quantity: therefore from their example, you
cannot tie as to the tenth of those things, but though you were such Priests,
yet must you be content with such as we out of our own freedom shall give you
thereof. Indeed we read in Ezekiel 45. 13 that the Their (...), or Oblation,
was the sixth part of an Ephath of an Homer of Where, and the like of Barley, and
an Homer, which was alone with a Both, was near our common Bufbell, and. on
Epth was the tenth part of an Homer. V. II. So that all the Obligation for this
or that quantity, that you can impose upon us, is at the most, but what
Ezekiell describes, and that was but the sixtyeth part of an Homer, which
after our account, is the sixtyeth part of a Busbell of Wheat or Barley, for
the Ephah was but the tenth part of the Bushel, and but the sixth part of the
Tenth was to be offered: so that, if the confining of us to this indifferent
portion will not content you, you must even be contented with the good will of
the VULGAR, that Clergy Bugg-bare, for there is no president from any command
for any more; or can we read that Moses his Priests ever exacted more; or
indeed that they ever exicted any quantity, but wholly left it to the
disposition of the People, which, if compared with our Priests, their practice
will be found much derregatory thereto; for though they have no right at all to
the sixtyeth part, or indeed to any such voluntary Offerings (being not the
persons to whom the benefit of Church-contributions were ordained) yet such is
their Avarice, that though they plead for the due of the Mosoicall Priests, yet
that will not content them; for neither will they stand to the good will of the
People, as Moses his Priests did, nor yet be content with the sixtyeth part, as
they were, but they will have the Tenth; yea, above the Tenth, and that by
compulsion, whether the People will or no: therefore let the people judge of
their greedynesse, of their juggling and deceit, who under the pretense of a
thing whereto they have no right, require not only the thing it self, to wit,
the sixtyeth part, but even fifty times more, and that by compulsion.

6. The Officers of the Ministry of the Gospel, are to be chosen by the
members thereof out from amongst themselves, and their Function is not (as
under the Law) confined to this or that Tribe, this or that Generation, but is
general to any Tribe or Generation whatsoever; and so as the service is
ceased, the persons officiating are ceased, and both ceasing, the wages must
needs cease, neither work for which, nor persons to whom, according to the
Law, remaining: But notwithstanding this abolishment, hither you fly to
consecrate your Ordinance for Tithes, with a jure Divino, as if with workmen
and work, the wages were not vanished, but still retained their divine Being
by virtue of that Law, and your selves hereditatory thereto, but not unto the
Work.

Truly (Pious Brethren,) I commend your venerable Sanctities, that are so
provident, both for your profit and ease, you are very wise in your Generation;
indeed it is the profit that fills your spitts with Pigges, Capons, etc. But
(holy Brethren,) it is against all equity and justice, to require the wages of
a Work, and not to do the Work; If a man offer such wages for such a Work,
be that will justly claim the one, must do the other, for his equity to the
Title of the one, is founded in the labor of the other, and not do another
kind of work, the wages whereof he supposes is not so profitable, and exact
the wages of the former, which he conceives is more profitable, that is, Do
the Work of the Gospel for the wages of the Law; this will not serve, there is
neither equity in the one, nor Conscience in the other; If you will have
Lawwages, you must do Law work; If you will have Gospel-worke, which you deem
to be more easy, then you must be con ent with Gospelwages, though not so
profitable, if therewith you will not be content, you must leave the Work.

Thus having tried your Mosaicall Title from the Levitticall Priesthood for
your Divine Right, to the Exaction of Tithes, and finding all your reasonings
from thence empty and ayerie delusions, wherewith you have over shaddowed your
Policy and Deceit from the Peoples discerning, bearing them in hand with their
Divine Institution, but not telling them for what, and to whom they were
ordained: now let us trace you a little further, and try your Cospel Title, and
see what divine Influence it does communicate to your Humane Title; it may be,
you will be found as delusive there, as you were under your Legal Pretenses;
which done, I shall adventure upon your last and mame Battery it self, The
Ordinance for Tithes: and if I dismount you there, your best shift will be, The
good will of the Vulgar, and glad you can have that at a pinch, to piece out
your Jure Divine, and preserve your SANCTITIES from Mechanic Druggery: I will
not too much (if you will but please mine Holiness, and bear with the
contrary-minded) make trial of your Right unto that Title, for should I, you
might rue the day that ever MARTIN was borne; though I confess, you have
little cause to celebrate his Nativity with rejoicing; for it is to be feared,
from what he has already done, Sir JOHN will have much ado to get Possession
of his FATHERS Inheritance with Peace. But to omit trifling, and to return to
our intended purpose, and try what the Apostolical Writings afford either, Pro
or con.

SECTION II.
Of the Clergies EVANGELICALL TITLE of Jure Divino to their Exaction of TITHES.

We read, Acts 20. 16. 20, 27, 28, 29.

THAT Paul having sent to Ephesus for the Elders of the Church, told them, that
he had kept nothing back that was profitable to them, teaching from house to
house, and that he had not shunned, to declare unto them all the COUNCIL of
GOD; and therefere bid them, Take heed, for after him would come grievous
Wolves among them, not sparing the Flock: And to the Galathians, cap. 1. 8. he
faith, Though we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you,
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

Now in all his Writings, and in the whole Book of the Gospelwee do not find
any Declaration of his for supplying any necessities of the Churches, whether
of Elders, or any other Members, by the Exaction of Tithes, but his ORDER for
such supply is otherwise, for to the Corinthians, Epist. 1. cap. 16. 1, 2. he
says, Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given Order to
the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye, upon the first day of the Week, let
every one of you lay by him in store, as God has prospered bin^ and in the 2
Epist. cap. 9. 1. 5. 7) For as touching the Ministering the SAINTS, I thought it
necessary to export the Brethren, that they would got before unto you, and make
up beforehand your bounty, whereof we had notice before, that the some might
be ready, as a matter of hounty, not of covetousness: Every man according as
he parposeth in his heart so let him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity,
for GOD loves a cheerful giver.

And this was Gods ORDINANCE, for the supply of the Saints, declared and
delivered by Paul unto the Churches; therefore he that preaches any other
manner of supply, then what is voluntary, or matter of bounty, as of necessity,
such as the Exaction of Tithes, or the like, is to be accursed; If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the Plagnes that are
written in this book, Deur. 4. 2. Prove. 30. 6. Reu. 22. 18. So that the taking
away this Ordinance of Voluntary contribution, and in the room thereof,
violently intruding the compulsive Exaction of Tithes, is guilty of this curse
Paul proncunceth, and of all the plagues that are written in the book of GOD:
for no other Ordinance, then that of Voluntary contribution was committed by
him for supply of any of the Saints unto the Churches, and he (as he told them)
kept nothing back, but declared unto them the whole Council of God, so that no
place is left of Divine Right, for any other supply, then what he has already
declared: Therefore what will become of our Clergy Tythe-mongers, that tell us,
Tithes is an Ordinance of the Gospel, and not Paul's Ordinance of Contribution,
when God calls them to an account? I am afraid they will be found such as Paul
foretold the Elders of Ephesus would come in amongst them, even greedy Wolves,
not sparing the flock, such as will not leave them to their bounty, to the
purpose of their heart, but count that too beggarly and base for their
Pontifical cloth, scorning such a supply as contemptible and dishonorable to
their breeding and Places, and therefore answerable to their ambitious
University Spirits, must kick Paul's out of place, and countenanee, and
introduce, and constitute a more stately, authorative, commanding Ordinance of
their own, exacting, and extorting their supply by compulsion, not sparing the
flock.

But (deer Brethren) take the wholesome and Pious advice of Revetend MARTIN; If
you be Saints (as you pretend your selves to be) and as it is essential to a
Presbyter or Elder of a Church) do no longer add or diminish from the pure
unalterable Ordinances of God, and be content with what Paul ordained for the
Saints, to supply the Saints Necessities; I desire your Sanctities, as you
tender the Piety of your cloth, the reverend estimate of your Name, and
reputation of Saints, for I know you would be so entered into the Rubricks of
our estimation, even Saints by calling, or Trade; approve your selves to be
Saints indeed, and be content, as the Saints ever were and are, with toe
portion of the Saints, in all their necessities, which is evident, was and is
unalterable to this day, the Voluntary contribution of the people, by
Collection every first day of the Week, and to this, and to no other manner of
supply from the Churches, can the Saints lay any claim of Divine Right.
Therefore if you will challenge any portion from them, Jure Divino, it must be
no other, then the result of their bounties.

Now this Primative Institution and Practice, of the First Day Collection for
the general necessities of the Saints, was continued amongst the Evangelicall
Churches, till about 200 years after Christ, about which time it degenerated
from weekly to monthly, but not from the nature of the thing, as from free
bounty, to coercive exaction; for Tertullian, who lived about that time,
Apalogetic. 39. and 42. says, Modicam unusquisque stipem men struadie, vel cum
velit, and si modo possit, apponit: nam nemo compellisus, sed sponte confert,
etc. Every one monthly, or when he would, provided he were able, gave a
competent portion; for no man was compelled to this or that quantity, but gave
of his own accord; And such their Contributions or Offerings were devoted to
the Necessities of the Poor SAINTS in general; For the goods and Revenues of
the Church were anciently reputed and styled, The Provision of the POOR, even
till about 800. years after CHRIST; and till then, no payment of Tithes in the
Christian Churches can be proved, but indeed, about that time, Christians
degenerating from their Primitive Purity, growing more careless, ignorant, and
remiss, and their leaders, more covetous and ambitious, it intruded it self
through their Policy here and there amongst some Societies, prosessing
themselves Christian, but was not general, but at length, through the
bewitching subtillty of their Priests, the people were infattuated into such a
blind zeal thereof, that it became in such an high adoration, that men of
great Possessions would give unto such a Priest, such an Abbot. etc. the
Tenthes of such and such a Possession, for his soul, the soul of his Wife, the
souls of his Children, or the souls of such and such friends, and after this
manner Tithes crept in, and overspread most part of this Kingdom of England,
having their rise, oustome and practice first from poor depraved seduced
ignorant Souls, through the sorceries of their Pollitick Leaders, and by them
were thus conferred upon the Churches by their voluntary Act: which Donations,
at length were confirmed by the Common Law, and a general exaction thereof
through the whole Kingdom, established upon the Clergy, to be theirs Jure
Divino, whereby they no longer held, or claimed them by virtue of Donation, but
by Divine Right, and thus by degrees they patched up their Goddess Jure
Divino, unto their unjust Exaction of TITHES, concerning which the Reader may
receive further satisfaction in the perusal of Mr. Seldens History of TITHES.

Whence by the way may be observed, what a ravening greedy generation our
Priests ever have been, and this present Generation is as like them, as if they
were spit out of their mouths, that we have cause verily to believe, that at
their Ordination, in stead of that ridiculous foppery, and mocking of Christ,
in breathing on them the holy Spirit, they breathed into them their own spirit
of coverousnes, which makes the children so like their fathers, so expert at
this godly Legerdemaine, this Pious Theft, as ever their Predecessors were, and
can as neatly challenge it of Divine Right, as ever either the Papal or
Episcopal Vermin before them could; indeed, it is essential to their color,
they will never leave their spiritual thievery, as long as their coats are black,
or their girdles be worn about their midles, a cubite below their deserts; for
why should not black Thieves, as well as other colored Thieves, have the
recompense of their reward?

But that we might the more admire their greediness, let us look back, and
recall to our memories the Primative time, where (as we have given a touch,)
we shall see, that all the goods of the Church were devoted to the use and
supply of the poor, and general necessities of the Church, and were so
improved, which if we parallel with our times, we shall find a direct
Antipathy, a vast disparity betwixt them, as betwixt light and darkness: We
shall find amongst us greater Ecclesiastical Donations, larger revenues, and
wealth bestowed (though out of an ignorant blind zeal for sinister ends) upon
Churches (whose proper end being voluntary Contribution, is of Primative
Institution unto such pious ends, as the relief of the poor, and the like,) and
amongst us an abundance of Poor, Fatherless, Widows, etc. in every
Parochial Church, even ready to perish for want of supply, and yet through the
merciless covetousness of the Priests, notwithstanding such large provision
for them, they can never once taste the sweetness of such charitable
Church-Donations, wherein they have aproper Interest of lively hood being
members of such Churches, for such is the avarice and greediness of the
Priests, that they are become sole Treasurers thereof, and cram all into the
wast storehouse of their ungodly dirty Panches, and devour up the Right of
the POOR, the Fatherless, Widows, Strangers, etc. only, sometimes at their
venerable Doors, forsooth, sanctify their Pitchers with a Reverend Mess of
Pottage, to evidence their liberallity, how they are given to Hospitallity, and
send not the hungry and needy empty away: my blessing and benediction be upon
you all, my dear Birds all, but I hope I shall never trouble your doors.

Further, they are not herewith content, thus to rob the Poor of their Right,
but from those their miserable poor members, they extort even the Tenth of
their penurious increase: Here for instance, I could fix a second Century of
Cormorant Priests in this kind, collected out of the heard of Presbyters, since
the edition of the Ordinance for TITHES; A poor man cannot have 2. or 3. hens
and a cock, but they will have the tenth tread, to be jure divino, at least
they will have 2. eggs for a hen, 3. for a cock, 2. for a duck, 3. for a
drake, etc.

But to omit this, let us a little further examine the Evangelicall Authority
and Injunctions concerning the maintenance of the Evancall Ministry: and for
this, let us return unto the second of the Acts, comparing verse. 17. with
verse. 33, 34, 35. Which declares, that Paul having sent for the Elders of the
Church of Ephesits, he told them saying, I have coveted no man's silver or
gold, or apparel, yea your selves know, that these hands have ministered unto
my necessities, and to them that were with me, I have showed you all things,
how that so laboring (to wit, with your hands) yea, (namely the Elders,) ought
to support the weak, and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said,
It is more blessed to give, then to receive: and to this add, 1 These. 2. 9. Ye
remember our laboring night and day, because we would not be chargeable, etc.
and 2 These. 3. 8, 10. We did not eat any man's bread for naught, but wrought
with labor and travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any
of you; for even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any
would not work, he should not eat. From whence is evident, that he laid a
necessity of working upon them, for declaring to the Elders of Ephesus, how he
supplied the necessities of them that were with him, by the labor of his
hands, sets himself forth as a Pattern to the very Elders themselves therein,
and thereupon puts them in mind of his former Precepts in that kind, saying, I
have showed you all things, how that so laboring, ye might to support the
weak; and the equity of this Ordinance unto them, he groundeth upon the saying
of CHRIST; It is more blessed to give, then to receive: from whence is
undeniable, that the Elders or Presbyters were bound to take him for a Pattern
in that practice, and that from him they had received Order for it, as their
duties, because it was a more blessed thing to give then to receive, and this
was given to the Presbyters of Ephesus, that they should endeavor after the
more blessed thing, that their hands, as Paul did, should administer to their
necessities, and to them that were with them; and this was an Ordinance
grounded upon the equity of CHRIST'S saying, not to be repealed, altered, added
or deminished under the penalty of all the Plagues that are written in the Book
of GOD: for as he had received from the Lord, so declared he unto them, and
kept nothing back from them, that was profitable, but delivered to them the
whole Council of God: Therefore, whatsoever he delivered unto them, was the
Council of God, and he delivered this ORDER to the Elders for the ministration
to their necessities, it must needs be from the Council of God: so that this
must either be granted to be Gods Ordinance, or else Paul did not declare the
Will of God, at least, not the whole Council of God: But if Tithes were
ordained by God for them, then he kept back somewhat of the Council of God
from them; for neither to them, nor to any other of the Churches did he declare
any Ordinance for the true payment of TITHES, like that of the LORDS and
COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.

Therefore, this Ordinance of working with their hands, is in force to Elders,
or Presbyters of Churches. But indeed, I cannot much blame our Presbyters,
considering their breeding, that they so much abominate this primative
Ordinance, is too inferior, mechanic and dishonorable to their Calling; for
we must consider our Presbyters are Universitymen, not like the mechanic
Primative Presbyters, like Fishermen, Tent-makers, such inferior fellows as
Paul, the scumme or offsecuring of the World; ours are of a more venerable
honorable Order, and therefore it highly concerns them in insense their
hearers against all mechanic Preachers, as Cobblers, Tinkers, Chimney-swoepers,
Bellows-menders, and the like, for should such Preachers, (as after Paul's
example, works for their livings, with their own hands) come into credit and
reputation, and game acceptance amongst the People; our lazy Preachers, that
live upon the swear of other men's brows, notwithstanding God has enabled them
to work with their own hands, must conclude to give place unto such; for if
the people did not so much dote upon their Spiritualities as if the Word of God
came only to them, and only from them, and were not as well communicative to
Tradesmen, but should in differently entertain the Communications of God in any
sort of People, though Fishermen, Tent-makers, Cobblers, Weavers or the like,
then the adoration of their Order and Cloth, would grow out of date, their
Rever end esteem among the People vanish like a mist before the rising Sun
for truly a leathern Jacket, a blue Apron, or such other Ensign of labor,
would better become a Pulpit, then a black Caslock, a pair of Lilly-white
Hands, or such like badges of Idleness, for that would import the Preaching of
the Gospel freely, without charge unto any, merely out of Conscience, and not
for filthy lucre, where as this can evidence nothing but the direct contrary;
for who can judge that such a one works with his owne-hands that he might be
chargeable to none? And thus much by the way, only to let the People
understand their drift in railing against Trades men that communicate (like
good disposers of the manifold graces of Gods) of the ability that God has
given them, to others.

But least I should appear in this Injunction of working, to wrest Paul's
intent beyond its proper extent, I also aff^c^^e) (...) that like has not so
given it in charge, and imposed it so upon the (...) on Fresbyters of Churches,
as in no case to admit of a mitigation thereof, as if there were no right of
supply upon any occasion or condition, but what they acquired by their own
hands, at all unto them; but he enjoyneth this Ordinance of working upon them,
but in case of possibility thereof, not in case of defection of nature,
lamenesse, sickness, imprisonment, or the like, even as he ^^dameth for the
rest of the poor; for all are commanded to work, none exempted, and for such
causes of imbicility and misery, or for want of work, and the like, the
contribution of the Churches was ordained; and one as well as another; Elders
as well as People, all are to endeavor, that they may not be chargeable, for
it is a (...) blessed thing to give then to receive, and this they are to (...)
at with Paul, though it be with trayell and labor; night and day; no labor or
pains, early or lace, is to be shunned, that this may be attained; and none
are to receive the supply of Bounty, neither in equity is it due unto any, but
in case of necessity, it was never ordained for redundancy and superfluity, and
to make one sort more Wealthy, Lordly, and better arraied and fed then the
rest, but to supply the extremities of miseries or that there might be a
moderate competency of subsistence amongst the meanest, that none might want
that which is necessary for their natural subsistence.

Therefore Paul gives this Ordinance of working, and proposes himself as an
example therein unto the Elders, for their imitation, as the more excellent
way, by how much the more better it is to give then to receive; for to the
Thessalonians in the like case he says, 2 These. 3. 8, 9.

Neither did we eat any man's bread for naught, but wrought with labor and
travel night and day, that we might not be chargeable unto any of you, not
because we have not Power, but to make our selves an exsample unto you to
follow us.

Whence it is evident, That though they had a POWER, yet this was the most
excellent pattern for them to follow, and they were to make him their
ensample, which he proposed to them as a precept for their imitation: Now what
this Power was, remains upon inquiry, and that it could extend it self no
further then is discovered in the Word, is undeniable, and for any other power
extant in the Writings of the Apostles, then to receive supply as poor Saints,
we do not read of; therefore it could be no other power he meant of; and the
poor Saints have no other power, or can lay claim of Divine Right unto any
such supply, but in cases of necessity, and Paul's walking was answer able
hereto; for he never received any thing of them, but in such cases, Phil. 4.
16, 17. For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and again unto my necessities,
not because I desire a gift, etc. 2 Cor. 11. 9. For that which was lacking to
me, the Brethren which came from Macedonia supplied: which compared with other
places, declaring his working night and day with his own hands, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
1. Cor. 11, 12. is very evident, that his power of receiving other supply then
such as was by his own hands, was in cases of such necessities as he could not
supply himself, and that was not the supply of Exaction or force, like this of
Tithes, but of Free-gift, Phil. 4. 15, 16, 17. No Church communicated with me,
as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only, etc. and he endeavored to the
utmost of his power, not to be burdensome. 2 Cor. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. and cap.
12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. and cap. 3. 8, 10. From all which places
it is undeniable, that his utmost endeavor was, not to be burdensome; for he
says, it were better for him to die, then that any man should make his
glorying therein void, that where he preached the Gospel, there he might make
the Gospel of Christ without charge, 1 Cor. 9. 15.

All which considered together, it plainly appears; that his power was but in
cases of necessity, when he could not help it; for woe was unto him, if he did
not make the Gospel free, if possibly he could, though with his own hands he
wrought night and day, verse. 18. he says.

What is my reward then? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the
Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel;
whence observe, That if he should not have endeavored to have made the Gospel
free, he should have abused his power; so that his power could only lie in
cases of necessity; for otherwise he should not have endeavored to make it
free, and so should have abused his power, that is, stretched it beyond its
bounds. For if this power were wholly to rely upon them for maintenance, like
this power that our Presbyters enforce upon us, then if he should in all places
where he preached the Gospel, have relied wholly upon them for his supply, and
not at all endeavored with the labor of his own hands to have made it
without charge, when he could for preaching tended thereon, he had not in so
doing abused his power; but kept himself within the warrant, authority and
property thereof; for that which is done by the proper Right and Authority of a
Power, cannot be an Abuse of the power, but an absolute execution and
fulfilling thereof, and to an abuse of a Power, must either be a Transgression
beyond it, that is, doing more then it authorizes, or else a neglect, or
coming short of it; and one of these two must of necessity be, or else the
POWER cannot possibly be abused. Now the abuse of a Power, (Whether in either
of the extremes;) in not the Power it self, but the power is precisely
confined to its Authority or warrant, for the authority gives being to the
power, and the power, as it cannot come short, neither can it go beyond its
authority, for so should it miss of its Being; for in the authority or
command, the power lives, moves, and has it being: Therefore as Paul was
not to come short, so was he not to go beyond his power, for in so doing, he
should have abused it, so that his power could only be in cases of necessity;
if he had refused supply in case of necessity, or taken it when by his industry
he could have prevented it without damage to his Preaching, he had abused his
power, therefore his power of Divine Right, of living on the Gospel, was but
when otherwise he could not acquire it with prejudice to his preaching: He was
to have his support and livelyhead by it, when as without it, he could not
procure it: So that the Patrimony of the Gospel is only of Divine Right due
unto necessity, and therein only have the Ministers thereof power to live on
it, like as the rest of the Saints had; and thought they were better abilify'd
with Spiritual gifts from God; they were not therefore to be paid for them, to
live lazily and idly, but as they had freely received from the Lord, so were
they freely to Admineller thereof in to the People, for God loves a cheerful
giver, let it be in what kind of duty soever; they were not to make a gain of
the Gospel, to make a Trade of it, like as our Presbyters do, and self it out
by Penny-worths, or enter into the Office thereof, for their own advantage, or
lively hood-sake, but to Preach it fecely out of Conscience, with sinceer
hearts, not looking upon the to (...), bid of gaining fonts into God, not
abusing of their power. And Paul further confirms this saying, and this I
do, for the Gospels sake, that I might be parlker thereof with you; which
plainly implies, That if he had not endeavored to make the Gospel free, but
abused his power, in relying wholly upon it, that then he should not have been
partaker of the Gospel with them, but should have lost the benefit of the
Gospel, and himself become a castaway, therefore woe was unto him, it he did
not so endeavor to make it without charge: Now two things are to be considered.

1. That his power would not extend to his woe and condemnation; but for him
not to endeavor to make the Gospel without charge, was woe, was condemnation
to him; Therefore his Power could not extend thereto, that is, To live wholly
upon the charge of the Gospel, not (when it lay in his power, without prejudice
to his preaching) endeavoring the contrary, under penalty of his Condemnation.

2. That our Fresbyters now have not a greater power, or Divine Right unto
supply, then Paul had: But we see his power extended no further then in cases
of necessity, for then only he could claim it out of a good Conscience, and of
Divine Right: Therefore our Preshyters can claim no other to themselves Jure
Divine

This Premised, it follows then, that the supply whereto the Elders had
power, was not as they were Elders or Presbyters, but as they were poor
Saints; my Reasons are.

1. There is no other supply extant in the Scriptures, then such as is in
common to the poor.

2. There was never any portion set out for them, as thus, and thus much shall
be for the Elders, in such and such a condition, so that one as an Elder might
have challenged the portion of an Elder.

3. They had no right to supply, but in case of necessity, which plainly
implies, That it was only as they were poor men, not as they were Elders, for
so their right thereto had been at all times, in fullness as well as in want,
when they could work, as well as when they could not; for they are Elders in
one condition, as well as in the other, plenty no more then want could alter
their Eldership; and what is due unto Eldership, is due at one time as well as
another, by vertus thereof at all times having a power thereto.

Put we see, they never had power in this kind, but in cases of necessity:
Therefore not as Elders, but as poor Saints.

4. A necessity was laid upon them to Preach the Gospel, under the penalty of a
Woe and a Curse, whether they were paid or no: therefore the payment was not
essential to the Office, for the Office was to be executed without it.
Further, if it were essentially the wager of the Work, the Work could not be
required under such a penalty, and of necessity of the wages thereof, for in
equity there is as much necessity of the wages of a Work, as of the Work; But
wages, or not Wages, there: was a necessity of the Work: As they were Elders,
there was a necessity of Preaching, but not as Elders of exacting a
maintenance; Therefore this Power was not as they were Elders or Preachers, but
as they were poor Elders or Preachers: their Church Portion lay in the
Poor-mans Box, having no Right or Title thereto, but as Poore-men.

5. That though this provision be for the poor Saints, yet all the Saints,
Elders as well as others, are commanded to work, and Elders in special; for,
Act. 20. Paul says to the ELDERS, I have showed you all things, how that so
laboring, (to wit, after his example,) yet ought to support the weak: as if
he should have said, Even ye, that are Elders, as well as we that are
Apostles, or as any others: And to all the Brethren of Thessalonica, none
exempted, he says; This we commanded you, That if any man would not work,
neither should he eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. But were a full Supply due unto Elders,
as they were Elders; then, there were no need of laying upon them the duty of
working with their hands, after Paul's example; for, to provide all things to
their hands, for their full Supply, and yet command them to work with their
hands for it, were a slat contradiction.

6. As well might the Saints lay claim to it, as they are Saints, as those to
lay claim to it, as they are Elders, to wit, barely because they are Elders,
that therefore they must have it; yea, better might the Saints claim it as
Saints; for it was never termed, the portion for Elders, but Collection for the
Saints, or the like: but, it is neither due to the one, nor to the other in
that kind, but to both, (Elders and People,) as they are poor Saints

Alas poore-men, this is a pitiful case for our Presbyters; I am afraid, they
will rather all un-Saint themselves, then suffer such a miserable beggarly
disaster: But we must consider, it was not Parliament-time in Paul's days, when
the Saints portion was set out; but it is otherwise now; Ergo, of necessity now
an Ordinance for Tithes must be theirs Jure Divino.

If therefore their Title be but as poor Saint-Elders, poor Saint-Presbyters,
or the like, then Presbyters must be content to be esteemed (as indeed they be)
the Almes-people of the Church, and for administration to their nessessities,
no other then the Arms of the people, is the patrimony, that they can claim
right of inheritance unto; they may not in the least extort from, or exact upon
their Almis-Masters, more then shall seem good unto their charitable
dispositions; they must not go to Law with them, send Officers to plunder
their Goods, risie their houses, imprison their Persons or the like, in case
they cannot have their desires fulfilled: for my part, I shall count such an
Almes-man, let it be Almes-Presbyter, or what he will, no better then a Thief
by the High-way-side, and that in equity he has more Title to the Galldwes,
then to the Alms of the People, or one penny out of the Poore-mans-box.

Objection.
1 Cor. 9. 46, 7, 9, 14. Have we not power to eat and to drink? or I only,
and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? who feeds a fock, and
eats not of the milk of the flock? for it is written in the Law of Moses,
Thou shall not muzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn: Does God
take care for Oxen? even so the Lord has ordained, That they which preach the
Gospel, should live on the Gospel. From hence the Clergy justify the whiteness
and softness of their hands, as if from thence they had an utter dispensation
from working, and an absolute divine Title to a redundancy of Provision.

Solution.
1. Though he says, have not we power to forbear working? we must not think
that it was an exorbitant unlimitted power, extending to the transgression of
the rule of equity, for so it should have been a sinful power; and to have
such an opinion of any power that is from God, such as this was, is no less
then blasphemy, for as he is a God of equity and justice, so are allhis ways
equal and just; and that only sinful which is not bounded within the
compass of equity, which is not any ways computable with him or his ways:
therefore it cannot reasonably be imagined, that his power of forbearance of
work could be an unlimmited power, transgressing the bounds of equity: and the
Bule of equity concerning working, is, If any man will not work, neither
should be eat, the equity of which rule is, That none should be idle and lazy,
and eat the bread of idleness, and to such a forbearance as this, like that of
our belly-god Lordain Priests, we cannot in reason conceive their power
extended, for so it should have transgressed the Rule of Equity, and had been
an unjust power: but they must be laborious in their kind, for the duty of
working gives title in equity to eating: it does not in the least give them a
dispensation to idleness; as, because they were Ministers of the Word, that
therefore they were utterly exempted from Working, and might lawfully eat the
bread of idleness.

No, Dear Brethren: In equity and duty, all are, and ever were bound to get
their bread by industry, the Apostles as well or others, else they had no
divine Right to eat, so that no main that will eat, can further be excused from
the duty of working, then necessity enforces; and ever necessities God is
compassionate, not requiring impossibilities, but in such cases has provided a
mittigation, according to mercy and equity: For necessity only can excuse, and
Further then necessity the excuse cannot extend. Therefore they could no
further be excused from working, that is, have further Power to forbear working
with their hands, which was a duty, then by their Preaching they were hindered
thereof; and so they were only subject to necessity, not avoiding such
working, but when they were there to necessitated through Preaching the Gospel,
and so were in equity excuseable, and bad a lawful Power to forbear for the
Gospel sakes, for the more noble must take place of the less, as of two
evils, the less is to be chosen, but both to be avoided if possible; so of
two goods, the best is to be preferred, but both to be chosen, if possible; and
where both cannot be, the greater in equity does excuse the less: and so they
bad a just power to forbear; look how much in the discharge of the greater
duty, they were deprived of executing the less, even so much were they
excisable, and free; for the equity of their forbearing hand-labour, had its
being from their Preaching: their Preaching being in it self more excellent,
made such their forbear once equal, by reasmidi was a binderance thereof, so
that the equity of forbearance lay in the necessity of hindranee, and therein
was bounded and confined precisely; for their forbearance of the one could not
justly extend further then the binder once by the other; for where there is an
impediment of working, there can be no excuse of working for minishation to
necessities; has so far, as a man is free from impediment, so far he is
bound in duty of working, to supply his necessities: So that though Paul and
Barhabas bad power to forbear working, that they might Freash the Gospel, that
is, improve time in Preaching which otherwise, (or in such eminens necessity)
they were bound to work in with their hands, to supply their necessities; yet
for all this, they were bound to work, even with their bands, when possibly
they could for Preaching, that they might make the Gospel without (...) can an
utter forbearance, or total dispensotion from working was, not in, their power
without limitation though to Preach they might (...) are, yet when for
Preaching, they could work, they might not forbear, i and when their
preaching occasioned their forbearance, then they were to live on the Gospel,
then were not their murder to be minuted, then were they to beed, on the milk
of the stick; for living on the Gospel is entayl'd on preaching of the Gospel;
the living extends to further then pretebing; for Preaching gives power and
Title thereto; its essence and being is in Preathing; so that it cannot extend
beyond that by which it has its power and being, for should it, it should
give beyond its power and being, and beyond is being, it can have no Title,
or be longer esteemed that power: so that look how far they were deprived of
Ministering to their necessities through Preaching, even so far they had a
right to the Peoples Administration, so far they liad power to eat and to
drink, and no further; they were not to be Idle six days, and Preach on the
seventh, and rely wholly upon the People, that was not in their power, nor yet
in their practice; but when they had spare time from Preaching, they improved
it in laboring for their bread, and at other times, when they were busied in
Preaching, were content with what was given them, receiving no more, but for
their present necessities; they never had, or were to have any more then abare
livelihood; It is enough that the Disciple be as his Master, and the servant as
his Lord, Math. 10. 25. Now their Master lived in great humility, he had never
a Living of 4. or 5. hundred a year; never had a House (like the Dean of
Paul's) confirmed upon him by an Ordinance of PARL. The Foxes have holes, and
the Birds of the Air have nests, but the Son of Man bad not whereon to lay
his head, he lived in mean condition, was lowly and meek, he never was
trundled up and down (Presbyter-like) in a Coach, he sat meekly upon an Ass,
and a colt the foale of an Ass, Matthew. 21. 5. and his Disciples lived the like
life of humility; they made no further use of the World, then for their
necessities, giving up themselves wholly to the Gospel, and were only servants
unto JESUS CHRIST, according to their duties; for no man can serve two Masters;
for either hoe must hate the one, or love the other; or else, he will hold to
the one, and despise the other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6. 24.
therefore his Preachers must not be addicted to the world; be such as plunder
men's goods, and rifle their houses to spend upon their lusts and pleasurs, or
to be such lazy idle Drones (like our Priests,) who take their pleasure and
ease all the week, only give us an house, or two of Hodg-podge delusion the
First Day; No, such come not within the veil of his acceptance, but such
rather that will both Preach and work, that after their Preaching, will fall to
mending old Bellows, sweeping of Chimneys, crying of Brooms, or Small-coale,
or taking any suchlike honest course of livelihood; such are most fit to be
the Ministers of Jesus Christ; yea, indeed it is from such that we receive the
greatest information in the mysteries of Jesus Christ, in these days; for
indeed, they are in his Ordinance, follow his Pattern and example of his
Apostles; Not Preaching for filthy lucre, but out of Conscience.

2. I desire may be observed, That whereas he says, Even so the Lord has
ordained, that they which Preach the Gospel, should live on the Gospel; that
from thence no other livelihood may be concluded, then such as the Lord himself
had ordained for his Preachers, or that Paul himself, that had as great a power
as ever any of them had, did in them words, intend a power further then the
Lords own Ordination. Now the Lords Ordination concerning those that he sent
forth into the world to Preach the Gospel, both to the Twelve Apostles, and
after them the 70. Disciples, was, Luke 10. 7, 8. to eat and to drink such
things as were given, for the labourer is worthy of his hire, and into what
City soever they entered, to eat such things as were set before them by those
that did receive them, and Matthew. 10. 10, 11. they have the same Injunction,
That in the City or house that was worthy, there they were to abide till they
went thence, for the labourer is worthy of his meat: And this was all that ever
the Lords Ordination provided for their living on the Gospel, a power barely
for their Victuals, or present necessities; even such as was given them, was
their hire, and no more, they had power given them to eat of their meat, for
the Labourer was worthy of his meat; that was all that the Lords Laborers were
to require for their hire, or to account themselves worthy of: and those that
would not give this, they were but to shake off the dust from their feet in
testimony against them; far different from the Plundering Ordinance for
Tithes. And no other power then this Paul pleads for to the Corinthians, for
whereas he says, Have we not power to eat and to drink? he pleads it as
one sent from the Lord, to Preach unto the world, as verse. 1. and 10.
declares; Now it is evident what power such had to eating, and drinking; that
is, of such as was given them, of such as was set before them; therefore no
other can be concluded of Paul, but even as the Lord had ordained; and so, and
no otherwise they that Preached the Gospel, were to live on the Gospel: their
necessities were to be looked upon, and for necessity sake, they were merely to
be relieved; for the Lords Provisun was for no more, and therewith his Servants
were to be content. Therefore, their Title to it, was not simply as they were
Apostles or Preachers, but as Apostles and Preachers in necessity.

And thus it is clear, that all the Divine Right they had to other supply, then
what they acquired by their hands, was but in cases of necessity; and that was
but to matters of bounty: So that it is most certain, That the Preachers of
our Lord, in their supply, are but as Almes-men, and so they are to live, and
to be esteemed, and esteem themselves to be no other, then the Almes-men of the
Gospel.

Objection.
Tithes were paid unto Melchesedec, after whose Order was Christ our
High Priest for ever. Therefore, due unto the Evangelicall Order, as well as to
the Levitticall.

Solution.
If Tithes, which Abraham paid unto Melchezedea, were paid unto him, as he was
of that Everlasting Order; it could be at the most but as he was Typically
thereof; for he was no more then Typical himself, shadowing out the Eternal
High Priest, CHRIST JESUS, for Christ was not that Melchezedec, but after the
similitude of that Melchesedec, therefore, if after that similitude, that is,
after that shadow or Type; then Melchesedec's could not be the substance; for
the thing simulating, cannot possibly be the thing simulated; so that the
Priesthood of CHRIST must needs be the substance of that shadow, which
Substance being come, the shadow, with all its Appurtenances, must vanish and
be of no longer force, So that whereas it is said, Abraham paid Tithes unto
Melchezedec, it could be at most, but unto a Typical Priesthood, unto a
Priesthood which was but the shadow of good things to come; and so, and no
otherwise was it due unto the Levitticall Priesthood, all whose services were
but Types and shaddows, serving unto the example and shadow of heavenly
things; and to such Ministers, for such services, was a commandment to receive
TITHES according to the Law:

Whereto Tithes were due, and which had a Commandment to receive them;
therefore there is made of necessity a change also of the Law, and mutter
disannulling of the Commandemour going before; which Commandment brought
within its authority, the imposition of TITHES upon the People, for the Text
says, the sons of Levi, who received the Priesthood, had a Commandemens to
take Tithes; now the Commandment ceasing, the equity of their Exaction must
needs cease; so that now they cannot by Levite or any other, be challenged of
Divine Right; for the challenging them now by Divine Right, is not only a
reduction to the Levitticall Priesthood, but a denial of this Jesus to be an
High Priest for ever after the Order of Melchesedec; implying, that the
substance of that shadow is not come; for the paying of that which was proper
to the similitude or Type, shows that the similitude or Type is still in
force, and so the Substance not come; for while the shadow is in force, there
is no place for the Substance. Therefore the Exaction of Tithes for the
Minsteriall Function of this Everlasting Priesthood, is an absolute denial of
Christ come in the flesh, and of his everlasting Priesthood.

Further, it may be considered, concerning those Tithes unto Melchesedec, that
though they were paid to him, and so to the Order whereof Christ should be our
High Priest forever, yet they were a voluntary gift; for Abraham had no
Commandment from God to bind him precisely to that quantity, though the equity
of the gift might be granted, yet a necessity of the quantity cannot be
enforced, though in equity for his own part he was bound to a gift, for his
own discharge, yet not of necessity to a Tenth, as if he might not have given
more or less, or that the other had a Commandment to receive it, but the one
lest at liberty to give, and the other to receive, for Melchezedec would not
have received them; which plainly proves, he never (...) them, but that they
were a voluntary Offering, and for Voluntary Offerings we do not deny, for if
any be pleased to give the Tenth of their endercase, or more then the Tenth,
they may do as it seems good in their eyes: So that if from the gift of
Abraham to Melebesedee, you will enforce any thing unto that Order, it can be
but free-gift, which we granted be due, so that your Antiquity of Tithes to
this Priesthood is vanished into the (...) gift of the People; and from thence
you can only (...), That Abraham of his own free will gave the Tenth, but not
that the Tenth was ever commanded or exacted.

Thus if we grant you, That Abraham's TITHES at that time were given to that
Order, where of Christ is our High Priest son ever, yet you see, in stead of
gaining, you have lost the vantage of your Antiquity, and it is transacted to
voluntary gift, so that from thence you can never prove other then voluntary
gift to be given to that Order. But if we compare the place in Genes. 14. with
that of Hebr. 7. we shall find that those Tithes, this Gift, was no other then
Melohezedec's proper goods, which Abraham had rescued from Chederloamer: For
Heb. 7. 1. it is said, For this Melchezedec King of Salem, Priest of the Most
High God who met Abraham returning from the slaughter etc. From whence it is
clues, that he who went to meet Abraham, afice his return from the (...), was
Melchesedec, and that it was the Priest of the most High God that met him, and
that this Priest was King of Salem; So that he that went out to meet him, and
was this Priest, and King, must needs be this Melchesedec, and in verse. 1. 2.
it is further said, That to Melchezedec, Abraham offered that tenth, so that
he to whom Abraham offered his tenth, was that Melchezedec, and that
Melchezedec was that Priest, and that Priest was that King, and that King he
that went out to meet Abraham, to whom Abraham gave a tenth of his Spoils; now
these things premised, and compared to the place in Genes. 14. 9, 10, 11. Where
it is said, That Chederlaomer, and the Kings with him, conquered the King of
(...) and took all the goods of Sodom, etc. and verse. 15, 16. Abraham pursued
them unto Hoba, and brought back all the goods, etc. and verse. 17. The King of
Sodom went ora to meek him, after his return from the slaughter etc. and is
fire. He gave him Terter of all; and verse. 21, 22, 23. The King of Sodom said
unto Abram, Groe we the Parsons; (to wit the Captives) and take the goods to
the self; and Abram sold to the King of Sodom, I will not take from a thread
even to a shot-faichet, and that I will not take any thing that is thine, etc.
From whence it is most evident, That this King of Sodom, that was thus
plundered, (...) goods Abram rescared, dire (...) went out to meet Abram, that
this Melcheredde; the Priest if the Most High God; and that the goods that
Abram gave, has Melchezedec's under goods, which (...) had it then from him
from Sodom, (...) Abram would not (...) from in third (...) sold other, he
would not take any thing that was (...) this it seems, that Melchezedec's
goods, (...) from (...), (...) the Tenth of Abrams spoiler; and thus to this
Melchezedec, the Priest of the Most High GOD, Abrahrn gave the Tithes of all;
So that here is a vast disproportion betwixt those Tithes, and the Tithes which
you exact; for those were not the Tenthes of Abraham's increase, but only a
return of Melchezedec's proper goods; which example affords but a sandy
foundation for your practice; your Ordinanve for Tithes, that Roaring-Meg, must
be better planted, or else you will missle your Mark.

SECT. III.
Of the Clergies HUMANE TITLE, the Ordinance for TITHES.

OF all the Scriptures, whether Prophetticall or Apastaticall that ever I read,
none are so positive, none so pointblank to the purpose, us those of the Lords
and Commons; for the Ordinance for Tithes is a Text beyond them all, its
Divinity is Incomprehensible to them, beyond the Spear of their Sanction: But
not to detract from is PARLIAMENTARY WORTH, I shall not adjudge it so far, as
wholly to bannish is Divinity the Precincts of the Bible, neither may I, or
dare I so Deisie its a Sunctity, to equalize it with the Sacred; only I shall
presume, (because I would not too much offend my BRETHREN) to rank be for the
present amongst the Apocryphe Writings, as A Divine Appendix to the (...)
HISTORY of BELL and the DRAGON; for greater Honor then this I cannot deem to
be within the compass of its deferts and it is fite the TWO HOUSES should have
all due Praise and Honors, their Ordinances (...) they may (...) all in time.

This might serve to Answer their Presumption, and though to little, yet to as
good purpose as that ORDINANCE it self; without plundering Divinity be most
Infallible; yet that Divinity which is not founded and derivitive from the
Writings of the PROPHETS and APOSTLES, must give up its Hallowed-Ghost, expire
its Sanctity, and be content with more inferior Reputation, such as it self
is, even Carnal and Diabollicall, and may not be admitted in, but utterly
abominated from the Verge of TRUE MAGISTERIALL RIGHT, for its Bounds is
precisely confmed within the Sacred Line of the WORD, designing its proper
Dementions, how far, and beyond which it may not pass: So that, whatsoever
is Transgressant, that is not truly MAGESTERIALL, and cannot in equity engage
either in Divine or Humane obligement.

Now to intrude upon CHRIST'S PREROGATIVE, to usurp his Royalty, is beyond the
Line and authority of the WORD, and so not within the compass of Magesteriall
Right: But this Ordinance for Tithes does so; Therefore not Magesteriall or
binding. That it does so, I thus Reason.

To reneance any Ordinance of Christ for his Church, over which he is King,
Priest, and Prophet, and introduce a contrary, is an encroachment upon his
Prerogative, an usurpation of his Royalty: But in the room of Christ's Ordinance
of Contribution, this Act of the Lords and Commons has introduced another of a
contrary nature, to wit, Compulsive Exection: Therefore, this Ordinance for
Tithes is no other then an encroachment upon his Royalty, a denial of him to
be Lawgiver to his Church, and a setting the Parliament in his stead, as if
they were so many GODS, coeternall, essential with the Father, for that
prerogative, that Legislative Power, is only proper to the Deity; when as we
know these are but mortal men, such as our selves; they are but Powers of this
World, worldly and humane; and such as their Powers are, such are their
Ordinances, such are their Ministers, even earthly and humane. So that if you
will have Churches, Ordinances, etc. by their power, they can be but Political
Churches, Political Ordinances, etc. not Spiritual. Therefore if you will be
Ministers in that kind, such as your Churches and Ordinances are, such must be
your Preachings, even Political, Occonomicall, teach the Husbandman how to
Plow, the Citizens how to Trade, the Butchers how to kill Calves, the Women to
wash their dishes, etc.

One Passage in this Ordinance I desire (...) be laid to heart of the People,
to wit, page 5. And in (...) no sufficient Distress can be found, that then
the said Justices of Peace, or any other Justices of Peace in the same County
is fortfaid, shall and man commit all and every such person so refusing, to the
next common Grale of the (...) County, there to remain in safe custody without
Beyle or Mainprize, until be or they respectively shall make full
satisfaction, according to the said Judgment. Had not such a Passage gone
under the Title of The LORDS and COMMON'S, who are chosen for the Weal of the
People, I should not have judged ie an Act of Huminity, our rather the result
of an Hell bred Conspiracy by the Devil and his Angels, to confound us with
their unreasonable malice; for what greater Act of Inhumanity can there be,
then to cust a poor man, that has nothing, into a loathsome stinking Goal,
without Bail or Main-prize, there to lie, for those Cannibal devoting
Church-babbers, to ceaze upon (without Redemption) until he have made full
satisfaction, when as before he was cast in, he had nothing to satisfy; and
this was the first Stone these Master Builders laid in their blessed
Resormation; This is the Conscience of our godly Divines, even to swallow us up
quick, Persons, Goods and all. But I commend the Impropriators of the Two
Houses, for their godly Providence over themselves, and the weal of the People:
Yet I am afraid, their wit and Policy in this, out-stript their honesty.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. line 3. for both in Person, r. Both, in (...) and Person p. o. l. 31.
for Religion in them, r. Religion in those Directions. p. (...). (...). for
Ordinance for the Supper, r. Ordinance for Ordination of Ministers.


