The Humble PROPOSALS OF Mr. Owen, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Sympson, and
other Ministers, who presented the Petition to the Parliament, and other
Persons, Febr. 11. under debate by a Committee this 31. of March, 1652. for the
furtherance and Propagation of the Gospel in this Nation. Wherein they having
had equal respects to all Persons fearing God, though of differing judgments,
do hope also that they will tend to union and peace. WITH Additionall
Propositions humbly tendered to the Committee for propagating the Gospel, as
easy and speedy means for supply of all Parishes in England with able, godly,
and Orthodox Ministers. FOR, Settling of right constituted Churches, and for
preventing persons of corrupt judgments, from publishing dangerous Errors,
and Blasphemies in Assemblies and Meetings, by other godly Persons, Ministers,
and others.

Printed at London for Robert Ibbitson. 1652.

Propositions humbly tendered to the Committee for propagating the Gospel, as
easy and speedy means for supply of all parishes in England, with able,
godly, and orthodox Ministers; For settling of right Constituted Churches, and
for preventing persons of corrupt judgments, from publishing dangerous Errors
and Blasphemies in Assemblies and meetings by other godly persons, Ministers,
and others.
I. FOr supply of all Parishes in England with able, godly, and orthodox
Ministers, it is humbly propounded:

1. That the Sheriff of each County, do speedily give account to this, or some
other Committee of every respective Parish within the said County that has no
Minister, and what maintenance each of the said vacant Parishes have belonging
to them.

2. That each of the said Sheriffs do also certify to the Commitee the names
of such Ministers as have no Livings, that, reside in each County, and that so
many of them as shall be found able, godly, and Orthodox, be placed in such
vacant Parishes as by the said Committee shall be thought fit.

3. That for the further supply of those Parishes who shall yet want Ministers,
The Propositions from Mr. Owen, and the rest of those Reverend Ministers be
proceeded in.

II. For settling of right Constituted Churches, it is humbly propounded:

1. That all present Churches that are gathered, and others, so soon as they
shall be gathered, do signify to the Committee of the Universities, or
elsewhere, whom they have chosen, or shall choose for their Pastor; And that
such, and only such, be declared right Constituted Churches, whose Pastor shall
be approved by the said Committee to be able, godly, and orthodox.

2. That when any of the said Pastors dye, or leave them to take up some other
call or employment, they choose and present another Pastor within six months,
and to have one settled with them within twelve months, by approbation from the
said Committee, or to dissolve or disperse themselves into other Churches.

3. That the Committee for the Universities, or where shall be appointed, keep
a Catalogue of all right Constituted Churches in all parts of England, and the
Pastors names.

III. For preventing persons of corrupt judgments, from publishing dangerous
Errors and Blasphemies in Assemblies and meetings, it is humbly propounded:

1. That every Pastor of each right Constituted Church, give under his hand a
testimony to every individual member in fellowship with him, that shall be
approved by the Church to be orthodox, and himself judged to be able to speak
in Assembles and meetings.

2. That none presume under a penalty to speak in any Assembly, or meetings,
but Ministers of the Word, Members of Churches, with such approbation as
aforesaid, or which shall freely be permitted by those whose proper place it is
to speak in the said Assemblies and meetings, except only upon liberty
granted to propound, or desire their opinions, and acquiesse without replies,
or disturbance by disputes except it be meetings purposely for disputes.

3. That where Assemblies or meetings of people be kept up, some person or
persons, undertake to speak and manage the same, who are either Ministers of
the word, have emission from some right Constituted Church, or Certificate from
two or more, able, godly, and orthodox Ministers of their sufficiency to
speak, and soundness in the faith, except Masters to their families, or
Schoolmasters to their Scholars, or others, to such as by their Callings fall
under their Government and charge.

The humble Proposals of Mr. Owen, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Simpson, and
other Ministers, who presented the Petition to the Parliament, and other
Persons, Febr. 11. for the furtherance and propagation of the Gospel in this
Nation; wherein they having had equal respect to all Persons fearing God,
though of differing judgments, do hope also that they will tend to Union and
Peace.
1. THat Persons of Godliness and Gifts, in the Universities and elsewhere,
though not Ordained, may be admitted to preach the Gospel, being approved when
they are called thereunto.

2 That no Person shall be admitted to Trial and Approbation, unless he bring
a Testimonial of his Piety, and soundness in the Faith, under the hands of
six godly Ministers and Christians, gathered together for that end and purpose,
unto whom he is personally known; of which number two at the least to be
Ministers.

3 That a certain number of Persons, Ministers, and others of eminency, and
known ability and godliness, be appointed to sit in every County, to examine,
judge, and approve all such persons, as being to preach the Gospel, have
received Testimony as above. And in case there shall not be found a competent
number of such persons in the same County, that others of one or more neighbor
Counties be adjoined to them.

4 That care be taken for the removing the residue of the Ministers who are
Ignorant, Scandalous, Non-resident, or disturbers of the public peace; and of
all Schoolmasters who shall be found Popish, scandalous, or disaffected to
the Government of the Commonwealth.

5 That to this end a number of Persons, Ministers and others of eminent piety,
zeal, faithfulness, ability and prudence, be appointed by Authority of
Parliament to go through the Nation, to enquire after, examine, judge of, and
eject all such persons as shall be found unfit for the Ministry, or teaching
of Schools, being such as above described.

6 That for the expediting this work, these persons may be assigned in several
Companies, or Committees, to the six Circuits of the Nation, to reside in each
of the Counties for such a convenient space of time as shall be requisite,
until the work be done; and alling to their Assistance in their respective
Circuits, such godly and able Ministers, and others, in each of the Counties
where they shall reside, to assist them in this work, as they shall think fit.

7 That these Persons so sent and Commissioned, may be empowered, before they
shall depart out of each County, to return, and to represent unto the
Parliament the Names of fit and sufficient persons, Ministers, and others to be
appointed and approved of, such as shall be called to preach the Gospel in such
Counties, and in the mean time, the Persons so Commissioned as aforesaid,
shall have power while they reside in each County, to examine, judge, and
approve of such persons, as having a Call to preach the Gospel in such
Counties, shall upon such Testimonial as aforesaid, offer themselves to such
Examination.

8 That it be proposed, that the Parliament be pleased to take some speedy and
effectual course, either by impowering the persons in the several Counties to
be appointed for Trial and Approbation of such persons as shall be called to
preach the Gospel there, or in such other way as they shall think fit, for the
uniting and dividing of Parishes in the several Counties and Cities within
this Commonwealth, in reference to the Preaching of the Gospel there; saving
the Civil rights and privileges of each Parish.

9 That all Ministers so sent forth and established, be enjoined and required
to attend the solemn Worship of God, in Prayer, Reading, and Preaching t the
Word, Catechizing, and Expounding the Scriptures, as occasion shall require,
visiting the sick, and instructing from house to house, residing amongst the
people to whom they are sent, and using all care and diligence by all ways and
means to win souls unto Christ.

10. That it is desired, that no persous be required to receive the Sacrament,
further then their Light shall lead them unto. Nor no person sent forth to
preach, and already placed, or which shall be placed in any Parish within this
Nation, be compelled to administer the Sacrament to any, but such as he shall
approve of, as fit for the same.

11. That a Law may be provided, that all persons whatsoever within this Nation
be required to attend the public Preaching of the Gospel every Lords day, in
places commonly allowed, and usually called Churches, except such persons as
through scruple of Conscience do abstain from those Assemblies.

12. That whereas diverse persons are unsatisfied to come to the public places
of hearing the Word, upon this Account, that those places were Dedicated and
Consecrated: That the Parliament will be pleased to declare, that such places
are made use of, and continued, only for the better convenience of persons
meeting for the public Worship of God, and upon no other consideration.

13. That all persons dissenting from the Doctrine and Way of Worship owned by
the State, or consenting thereunto, and yet not having advantage or opportunity
of some of the public meeting-places commonly called Churches, be required to
meet (if they have any constant meetings) in places publicly known, and to
give notice to some Magistrate of such their place of ordinary meetings.

14. That this Honorable Committee be desired to propose to the Parliament,
That such who do not receive, but oppose those Principles of Christian
Religion, without acknowledgement whereof the Scriptures do clearly and plainly
affirm that Salvation is not to be obtained, as those formerly complained of by
the Ministers; may not be suffered to preach or promulgate any thing in
opposition unto such Principles.

15. And further, That the Parliament be humbly desired to take some speedy and
effectual course for the utter suppressing of that abominable Cheat of
Judicial Astrology, whereby the minds of multitudes are corrupted, and turned
aside from depending upon the Providence of God, to put their trust in the lies
of Men, and delusions of Satan.

FINIS.

Containing these ensuing Occurrences, viz.
A great Victory obtained by Prince Rupert, at Sea, against the Spaniards; the
taking of his golden Fleet; his advance to the Southern Islands, the rich
Present sent to the King of Scots, being a ship Iuden with Gold and silver; and
his design to join with the Hollanders. The Declaration of the said States to
maintain their power by the sword. Their Proclamation to foreign Countries;
and diverse great Armies raising in Denmark, and other places. The breaking off
the Treaty in Scotland; And joyful News from Ireland.

From Wednesday March 24, to Wednesday March 31, 1652.
BY an extrordinary Messenger from the English Agent at Amsterdam, it is
certified, That his Excellency the Lord High Admiral Van Tromp has brought
down his Fleet into the Texel, where they seem to be a great Wood, planted upon
the Seas: Their Running-Gallies lie at Anchor about a league from the Navy:
Their Fireships one league and a half distance: And their Frigates half a
league: The rest of the Fleet lie in the figure of a Half Moon: The whole Navy
consists of about 130 Sail; besides 50 gallant ships are in readiness at
Amsterdam; and a Fleet of Danes are expected suddenly to come in. And although
they seem to agitate for peace; yet the preperations for war go on in most of
the United Provinces: so enraged are the Bores against the English, that they
do nothing but grin and show their Tusks in the open streets; and indeed as
dangerous it is for the English to be amongst them, ^s it was when our
Ambassadors were with them about this time twelve month. The States have set
forth a Proclamation for all the Dutch ships to return to Holland; yet we hear
that it is to be abortive after the 5 of May. For confirmation whereof, be
pleased to peruse the ensuing Letter.

SIR,
THe States of Holland have declared, that their late Imbargo shall continue no
longer then the 5 of May; their Admiral Tromp has received Instructions to
randezvouz the whole Fleet before Scheveling, from whence they are to be
brought into Texel. In Zealand, Flushing, Middleburgh, and other places, the
people are extremely mad against England, insomuch that it is dangerous for an
Englishman to pass the streets. We hear that Prince Rupert is once more
designed for Portugal, but he has not above 4 ships to attend him. He has
richly laden a Flemin with prize goods, and Col. Carteret is dispatched to the
Scotch King for a Judgment, to make sale thereof. There are diverse ships set
forth against the English, who carry the Duchess of Savoys Flag, and we hear
that they have taken diverse English ships; amongst the rest, they have seized
on the Welcome of London, bound from Lisbone to Genoa laden with sugars, and
another ship with cloth bound for Barbary: Having seized on these two prizes,
and made sure of them, a while after they met with another Englishman, and
having given her several broad sides, made up to her, and immediately came to
grapling; but the English seemed at the first to be irresistible, and gave them
22 broad sides one after another, playing their Granadaes, and casting over
balls of wildfire; yet notwithstanding, by reason of their being overpowred by
the Touloners, at last they were overpowred, and soon after boarded; but to the
honor of Englishmen be it spoken, they fought it out by inches, and disputed
both Deck and Hold with great gallantry, even to the last man.

Brill 20 March, 1652.

An Express is sent from the States to the King of Denmark, who are joined
with him in a League, offensive and defensive, desiring him not to let any
shipping (meaning English) to pass the Sound, unless they bring a Certificate
first to have paid the Toll here in Tessel: the Danes have 30 men of Warin a
readiness, and are to assist the Hollander with 6000 men at demand; 50 gallant
men of war are in readiness at Amsterdam. But there is great likelihood that a
bone will be cast between the Swedes and the Dutch, (which will be pure picking
meat for the English) by reason of the last Treaty of peace with the States of
Holland made with the King of Denmark, to the great prejudice and dishonor of
the Crown of Sweden. Col. Li^burn has affix^d a Declaration up at the Exchange
in Amsterdam, seting forth the Grounds and Reasons of his Exilement: many
thousands have been published in print. He preaches constantly, and is much
followed: The Levellers cry him up for a Saint; pray God he proves so. And have
unanimously declared their Resolutions to live and die with him.

From St Edmonds Bury in Suffolk (the 27 instant) it is certified, That on the
12 of this instant March there was one Giles Fenderlyn executed at Nailon, for
murdering of his wife, who confessed, That by the instigation of a Jesuit, he
had made a Covenant with the Devil for 14 years; and that two nights before his
execution, there appeared very fearful and horrid apparitions to him in prison,
to the great astonishment of those that watched with him: But the perfect
relation hereof, and his full examination and confession being to be printed at
large, I shall refer the Reader to the perusal of that for his further
satisfaction. 4 Lawyers, Committee Men, and Treasurers have hanged themselves
near Gray's Inn; that is the way to stop both pleading and bribing. Two women
have lately been beheaded by their husbands; for which bloody act, both of them
soon hanged themselves. Since which time another sad president happened, being
acted by one James Thi^ston et Wigs^n, in Cornwall, against his wife, who cast
her into an Oven, heated exceeding hot, and burnt her to ashes: But of this,
more in my next. Another sad example happened in the County of Essex, upon one
Mary Adams, who named her self the Virgin Mary, saying, That she was conceived
with child by the Holy Ghost; that from her should spring forth the Savior of
the world; and that all those that did not believe in him were damned, etc.
With the manner how she was delivered of the ugl^est illshapen Monsher that
ever eyes beheld, and afterward rotted away in prison. But the perfect
Relation being likewise printed (and this day extant, entitled, The Ranters
Monster) by special authority, I shall refer the Reader to the perusal thereof
for his further satisfaction.

On the 30 of this instant March came to my hands a Letter, bearing date from
Amsterdam the 26 stylo novo; wherein is contained many remarkable things of
notable concernment, in relation to the English and Dutch; and to the end, that
the Reader may not be left unsatisfied, in perusal thereof, be pleased to take
the Letter at large.

SIR,
THe Hollander goes on with his preparations for War, and intends to be very
numerous upon the Seas: diverse are already gone forth with Letters of Mart; and
we hear, that they have either taken, or sunk, one of the Parlaments Frigates:
if true, it will much exasperate the spirits of the English, who scorn to give
an inch of ground either by Sea or Land; as was lately made evident by one of
the Parliaments Frigates (carrying 40 pieces of Ordnance) against three stout
Men of War belonging to the Dutch, who denying to lore their Topsales, the
English immediately gave them a broad side; but they denied to yield obedience
thereunto; and instead of being submissive, answered them again with three
broad sides: Whereupon the English made up close to them, resolving to dispute
it by inches, rather then the Dutch should have had the least preheminency over
them: The Dutchmen perceiving their gallant Resolution, immediately hung forth
a white flag, and soon did obeisance; the which produced a parley, whose
effects and consultations were, That the Dutchmen should have free leave to
pass to the Texel, and for the future (upon what Coast soever) to strike sail
to all ships in general, set forth by the power and authority of the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England; otherwise, the English were resolved to have
fought it out to the last man, and to have sunk by their sides. The Dutch ships
were exceedingly torn and battered; but at last got off (upon composition) with
the loss of about 30 men; and indeed the English did pretty well equalize them
in number, being shot, quite through the stern, and her main yard clean taken
off. The States have set forth a Declaration, showing the grounds and reasons
of their present Design; protesting, That it is for no other ends, then the
preservation of their just rights and privileges, purchased with the expense
of the blood of Thousands; and after a long and tedious War, gloriously
obtained by the Sword; which (according to their solemn Vow and Covenant) they
are resolved to preserve and defend, against all foreign power and force
whatsoever, with the hazard of all that is near and dear unto them.

Amsterdam 26 March, 1652.

From Scotland they write, That the Treaty with the Marq. of Argyle at
Dunbarton is brake off: They had only two meetings; the first at the English
quarters; and the second at his own: there were none present, but Maj. Genesis
Dean, and Major Salloway; the Marquess, and one Col. Camphel his kinsman.
Amongst these four the Treath has been carried on with so much privacy, that
it was not known to any, till after their dissolving: since which time we hear,
that the Marquess has cendescended; That both Nations be again united into
one; which reciprocal expressions of respect and love, deserves to bear this
motto in Letters of Gold, Cogam eos in gentem unam.

From Ireland thus: The enemy does both ebb and flow in several parts; and
still we are much annoyed by the Tories: Galloway holds out stoutly; the truth
on it is, they are a gallant enemy: but Time brings all things to perfection:

On the 25 instant, came an Express from Scotland, signifying, That the Treaty
is begun at Dumbarton between the Parliaments Commissioners, and the Marq of
Argyle, but what the event will be, few days will produce. But its feared to
little purpose; for he has sent a Message to the Presbyterian Ministers,
assuring them, That he will make no agreement without comprehending the
Covenants interest. The Royal party talk much of a Prophetess, which tells
strange stories of bloody fights in the Air, of a Virgin coming to help the
King; but the Kirkists prophecy of great persecution upon them, and that for
70 years they must suffer, and then have a glorious deliverence.

The 27 day presents us further with singular and choice intelligence from
Scotland, intimating, That there are Summons come from the Dutch Merchants, to
remand back and call home all their Merchants and Factors, both in Edinburgh,
and other places, in order whereunto, diverse are already gone, having not the
patience to stay, till they could procure lading for their ships. Its said,
that many of the Dutch Captains have put up the King of Scots Colors on their
Topsales, and Vice Admiral Carew (the Prince of Pirates) has advanced his
Standard aboard his Fleet at Sea. His little Majesty remains still at Paris,
where the Marq. of Ormond, and the L. Inchiquin are arrived, and have delivered
an answer to the Embassy, from foreign Princes: which subject, consists of
great promises, and warlike provisions; but no time prefixed for the
performances.

Genesis Harcourt has raised the Prince of Conde from the siege of Miradeux, and
relieved the Town: he made good his passage over the two great Rivers of
Dordonne and Geronne, where forces had been left by Conde under Col. Balthazar,
to impede him, but they were forced to retire. From thence his Excellency
marched to Xaintes, and immediately stormed it. Since which, his Resolutions are
to streighten Tailleburg, it being the only strength that Conde has in all
Xantogne. His Excellency is resolved forthwith to give battle to the Spanish
Auxiliaries, and the rest under the Dukes of Neumors and Beaufort; whose
condition is dangerous, by reason they have lost their passage over the Seine,
in losing the Town of Mante, where the Lord Digby has slipped into possession
for the King: His Lordship has fallen upon the Maiden-Regiment, raised by
Madaimoselle Barbonetta (daughter to the D of Orleans) and after many desperate
Onsets, charging in person in his half shirt, routed them, killed many, took
diverse prisoners, and ^orced the rest into a great Hall, which he fired over
their heads. He has given the Government of the Castle of Mante to his brother
Sir Lewis Dives.

His Royal Majesty the King of Fran^e is removed from Orlean^ ^o Paris, where
he was R^yal^y entertained by the Citizens, who promise to rai^e four Armies,
for their dread Sovereign, in case the Duke of Orleans should advance with his
^orces, to i^pede or obstruct their present proceedings. The Duke of
Longueville raises generally from 16 to 60, all the Inhabitants of the Duk^dom
of Normandy, for the security of the Kingdom, as he ^^^es against the En^^ish,
whose invasion is much feared by the French. The Dukes of N^m^urs, and
Beaufort, makes all the expedition they possibly can, to hinder the conjunction
of the three Royal Armies, (viz.) the Army with the King, commanded by Marshal
de Hocquincourt, the second by Marshal Tureine, and the third by the knowing
victorious Soldier Count Harcourt. The Duke de Lbe^ufe, the Duke de Bo^villon,
and the Marquis St. Luc, are with their Royal Forces to attend the motion of
the Prince of Condy and Conty, whose forces has been partly shattered, partly
routed, and discomfited lately. Several English Vessels being discried upon
the Coasts of France by those of Cali^e and St. Maloes, it has caused the
Parisians to look about them; and somt have upbraided the Duke of Orleans,
saying, that he has a design on foot to bring in the English, as well as he
did the Spaniards.

By the last Intelligence from France it is certified, That his Excellency the
Lord Genesis Harcourt has given a great overthrow to the Prince of Con^ies Army;
and after a bloody fight (continuing for the space of 7 hours) totally routed
him, killed about 5000 upon the place) amongst the rest, Lieu. Genesis Ma^ein was
slain, took 3000 prisoners, all their Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, Bag and
Bagage, the Princes Standard, his Royal Cabinet, 14 Sumptures, and seven
charging horses; but not without great loss; for the field being disputed with
so great gallantry on both sides, that Victory seemed dubious, until such
time, that Genesis Harcourt flanked the enemies right Wing with 1500 gallant
horsemen, who charged so close, as if they had been linkt together knee to
knee; and his Excellency most heroickly charged in person in a white Satin
doublet (half way unbrac't) with his Rapier in one hand, and a pistol in the
other, dismounting many (as if he had been a second Alexander) and at last
wounded the valiant prince of Conde, and diverse others.

Letters from the Navy advertize, That Vice Admiral Pen is returned from the
Streights (with the Parliaments Fleet) to the Downs, and has brought in five
French prizes, richly laden.

Prince Rupert is coasting the Southern Islands, with the Swallow, and three
other gallant ships, being turned an excellent and notable experienced
Navigator about those Continents; for he rides very safe in those parts with
his ships, and takes many rich prizes; especially from the Spaniard, who has
suffered near upon four hundred thousand pounds loss; part whereof he has
sent to the King of Scots at Paris, haved sent a Frigate, laden with gold and
silver, to him for a present; but withal desires, That He will be pleased to
be instrumental for the recruiting of him with men and ships, and then he
doubts not but in a short time to purchase him his three crowns, and to join
with the Hollander for the scouring of the Seas.

The Duke of Buckingham is gone Ambassador for Italy: The Mar. of Ormond for
Germany; The Lord Wilmot for Poland; The Lord Inchiquin for Sweden; and the
Lord Carew for Denmark: imploring aid and assistance, for the restoring of him
to his Crown and Dignities; But of this more hereafter.

The Emperors Ambassador has concluded upon a peace with foreign Prince,
assuring them that his Royal Master will be instrumental for the restoring of
the true Owners to their Rights; so that upon this account Frankendale will be
surrendered.

There has been proclamation made at Hamburgh, for the raising of ten
Regiments of Horse and foot; and many great Officers have been very active for
accomplishing the same for the Scotch King; but the States have now levelled
their design.

The King of Denmark makes great preparations for war* and is resolved to
fortify Shoonen, the Castle of Conenburgh, and diverse other frontier Towns;
yet notwithstanding he has made proclamation for the increase of Trading with
the English.

The Spanish Ambassador at the Hague has demanded of the States general
restitution of the ship called the Saint Philip with the goods that were in
her, which was taken some months since by a man of war belonging to the
East India Company, which hitherto they have refused to do; and declares, That
in case of denial, the K. his master will soon give satisfaction to the parties
grieved, out of he estates of the Hollanders that will be found in his
Dnminions.

London, Printed by Robert Wood, 1652.


