NEW LAMBETH FAIR NEWLY CONSECRATED AND PRESENTED BY THE POPE HIMSELF,
CARDINALS, BISHOPS, IESVITS, etc.

Wherein all Romes Relics are set at sale, with the old Fair Corrected and
enlarged, Opening and Vending the whole Mystery of Iniquity.

By Richard Overton.

With remarkable Annotations declaring under what Pope, and in what year of
our LORD every Relic and Ceremony came into the Church.

LONDON, Printed By R. O. and G. D. 1642.

To the READER.
THis Vessel once has lane'd into the Maine
But being landed, must to Sea again,
Her decks repaired, and every place beside
She Will venture once more (...) the falling Tide
Fraught with more Relics, the^ she was before
Such as Romes Conclave long has kept in store
Ship-splitting Rocks, with fearce tempestious wind
She dreads not ( Reader) if thou be'st but kind
If Boreas storm, and all the Winds beside,
Thy kind acceptance will allay their pride,
be not prejudicate, but if thine eye
Pry out their faults, be pleased to pass them by.
Thus then, she ventures, to present her Ware
And bids you welcome to* New Lambeth-Fayre.
NEW LAMBETH-FAYRE, Opening and Vending the whole Mystery of Iniquity.
THe Pope of Rome to hear the great distress
Of our Lord Bishops, and their bad success
At the late Fair of Lambeth was perplexed,
And at their trading there was highly vexed,
That in a fury (posting thence amain,)
He came to consecrate the Fair again,
With Pope Silvester the first appointed the College of Cardinals Anno, 315.
Pope Marcellus ordained 16. in Rome to baptize converts from Paganism, and for
the burial of Martyrs.
Cardinals (puffed up with Roman pride)
And lofty Prelates, and a world beside
Of Jesuits, Yea, Hells Infernal Gate
Was set wide open, to advance their state,
From whose black sulpherous smoke, there did arise
Legions of Locusts (darkning all the skies)
Thousand of thousands, Monks and Friars store
And Virgin Nuns, came to attend the WHORE,
It Is end^esse to express, such was the Train The Order of Jesuits was the
Invention of Johannes Columbinus in Sc^na a City of Hethruria Anno, 1368.

That did press after with their might and maine:
Such Troops of Black-coats came unto this Fair,
Which cast a sable darkness on the air,
Which made my Muse, to view that ghastly sight,
To be afraid they would turn the day to Night: * The Order of Monks first raised
by Basilius Magnus Bishop of Cesaria in Cappadocea Anno, 389.

A numerous Fleet of Ships were richly fraught,
And all with safety to the Land vere brought,
With sacred Relics, Trinkets long before
Expelled this Island, now were brought a shore
Which being done; the Pope did then prepare
Himself, again to consecrate the Fair:
The strange Seven headed Beast pranc'd through the Town
Having ten Horns, and every Horn a Crown,
And on his back his Holiness he bore
Which was an Emblem of great Babells WHORE;
The Cardinals, Priests, Prelates, and the rest
Rode in state after ( wondering at the Beast;)
Who as he rode along did consecrate
The Fair again to more propitious Fate:
Which being done, and all their Booths were made,
With all things fitting for that holy Trade,
Upon their Booths and Stalls for fear of evil,
Were Crosses set to scare away the Devil.
The Crier then commanded did proclaim
The Fair again, thus in his Holy Name.
O -- yes -- O -- yes -- O -- yes.

IT is decreed, ordered, and this day commanded by the Council of all the holy
(a) Pope Bennet the 2. obtained the supremacy of Emperor Constantine and to be
Christ's Vicar, St. Peter's Successor etc. Anno, 667.
Church, first of our most holy Father of Fathers a St. Peter's Successor,
Christ's Vicar, our high Priest, chief Pontifex and Pope of Rome, his
Cardinals, Archbishops and Bishops, and of all the Clergy of the Holy
Church, that (in the name of his Holiness, and of the blessed Virgin Mary, and
of all the he and she Saints) forth with this holy and spiritual Fair (thus
consecrated) shall begin, wherein all sorts of sa^red Ware and Babalonish
Relics shall be set at sale for the ransoming of his imprisoned holiness,
William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all
England, his Grace, with the rest of his sacred Brethren now in durance in the
Tower for their most pious papal and Archprelaticall Protestation The said
Emperor gave to Pope Siluester and his successors, Rome. Italy, and the West
parts for St. Peter's Patrimony for ever.
and Petition, and for the raising up supply for their Viaticall expenses with
us in our return to Babylon the Great.

Vivat papa Romanorum Amen Amen.

This done the Pope (in hight of Romish pride)
With Cardinals were appointed by Pope Gregory the 10. for the election of
Popes Anno, 1272.
Cardinals, and all the Troop beside
Of Hell smoak-vented Locusts showed their Ware
Which they brought with them to New Lambeth Fair.
Here Is a rare Head, the Pope cried out amain.
It Is stuffed with Treasons full as't can contain,
Come buy this Head, it is filled with Noble brains,
Take It in your hand, I Will sell't you for small gains,
Would thou know how to sway the Royal Throne?
Live like a King, and make a King like none;
'Ile sell that Art, good as the Devil ere made;
Thou never see a beetter Man of th'Trade,
Buy Treasons of the Maker, here are store,
Upon my word, I am great Babels WHORE:
Here Is Powder Plots, Oh most admired Ware,
They Will blow up Kings and Kingdoms in the Air,
Come hither Sir, are you for Sea or Land?
Here Is Plots for both, will fit you out of hand;
How like you 88. Oh such a Plot
Will tame the fury of the cursed Scot!
Here Is the late Fleet, the Flemish Butter Box,
Saluted lately with so many knocks.
But the best Plot that ever yet was found
Is now on foot upon the Irish Ground,
Oh here is ware will quell your proudest Foe,
And make him swim in blood where ere you go!
Take but one Dram of this, and it will make
Both England, Wales and Scotland too to quake,
It Is the rar'st one my Holiness has brought
Unto this Fair, thus to be sold and bought,
I brought a Pattern purpose for this Land
To bring the Heretics to my command,
Buy't for its virtue, for it has a power
To free my Laud, and set' him out' oath Tower,
Here Is Faux his Brain pan, for a Quaffing Boull
To drink an Health in Treasons to his soul,
Gowries Conspiracy, or what else may be
Fatal to Kings, and Triumph unto Me,
Here Is Straffords Wit, will teach you how to ride
In Charles His Waine, and through the Stars beside,
But like to Phaeton too busy with the Sun
He was thrown out, and so his life was done.
Come hither Sir, do you desire to be
Greater then Pope Innocent arrogated to himself power to crown and deprive
Imperours, Kings, and Princes at his pleasure, Anno. 1195.
Kings, or Emperors in degree,
Make Kings your Pope Alexander the 3. compelled Jews King of France, and
Henry King of England, to be his Lackies. Pope Adrian was angry with the
Emperor for holding the left Stirrup. Anno 1158.
Slaves, and Emperors kiss your Pope Le^ the first offered his feet to Princes
to be k^ssed* Anno 850.
Toe,
And to your Highness make them barefoot go?
I have that Art, no Mortal can compare,
Or ever bring the like to any Fair:
It Is better then Lawn-sleeves, for this will make
Not only Kings, but Kingdoms too to shake,
Not many Kings surceas'd, I was supreme
Here in this I Will, but time has turned the stream.
But though the thing be something out of date,
Here Is Plots to boot, which will renew its state,
Come buy this Gem, then in small time I hope
You Will prove a Prelate, but beware the Rope.
Here Is aid for'th Irish, to subdue and quell
The Protestants, and send them thence to Hell:
Oh that cursed Crew, I have new Plots in store
To shed their blood and leave them in their Goare,
Millions of Money I have had ere while
For stratagems invented for this I Will,
Well let them thrive, I may ere long I hope
Show them a trick thus to abuse the Pope,
My eldest Son sole heir unto my Power
Whom they most falsely have clapped in the Tower,
I will redeem if in this sacred Fair,
I can get money for my popish ware,
I Will be revenged, or else my Triple-crowne
Shall lie at stake, to credit his renown,
You that affect his sacred holiness
I Will sell you plots will free him from distress,
Come buy them Tribe of Levi, for I know
You Would free your Primate, if you knew but how,
Come here ye Dum-Diegoes, view and see
My Romish Conclave, come and buy of me,
If you want Treasons or confounding Plots
To conquer England and subdue the Scots*
Here buy this plot, and take it on my word,
It is the best the Devils in hell afford,
I have a thousand thousand Devils to bring
Tidings from N^tions, and from every King,
How States are swayed, and how they are wheeld about,
Some at the court, and some with rable-rout,
That I know when the fittest time will be
To make a commick state a tragadie,
Whereat my muse began to start aside
As one that scarce durst longer there abide
To see such Sparks of Velvet, as came there
To cheapen treasons; but I will forbear,
To nominate, to whom the Pope did vent
Accursed Plots to break our Parliament:
To see such trading there my Muse resolved,
To try else where what other things were sold,
And thence departing further she espied
The Roman Cardinals in glorious pride,
Their stalls were so adorned with several kinds
Of Babels Trinkets to content their minds,
Which made her wonder, wondering did behold
Pe^secution for conscience came in under Pope Pelagius 1. Anno. 552. after
established, at the great Latteran Council, Anno, 1215. retained in England by
bloody Bishops and their Courts to the year 1641.
Saints in their blood lie grovelling on the mould,
Their Shops and hangings were besmeared with blood
Of Martyred souls, which had their Laws withstood,
Gazing at this, the next thing that she saw
Were bleeding hearts, squees'd in a griping paw,
Dividing air with hell-breath'd Dialect
In these harsh terms, Oh now I could dis^ect,
Thousands of souls, thus peecemale in my spite
Though their cursed Wives and Children were in sight,
Here are devises for to torture those
That shall his holiness or us oppose,
Our Spanish Inquisition if you will buy
'Twill fit you for all tortures presently,
This I brought with me 'cause I heard of late
Your High Commission is grown out of date,
Here Is a conceit will make both great and small
Nations, and peoples, kindreds, tongues and all, * Foretold Rev. 13. first
assaied by Boniface the first, granted by Emperor Ph^cas a Tyrant, and
Emperor Constantine: Obtained by Pope Bennit the 2. Anno. 66^.

Bow to your Mark, and number of your Name
That none shall buy or sell without the same.
Then cries another here is Purgatory,
Limbo Infantum, ^atrum, and the Story
Of Bell and Dragon, Tobit and his Dog
Come buy these Trinkets and away I Will jogg,
Here Is the Pope Le^ the third, decreed that all men's judgment^ must be
subject* to the Popes decrees, Anno. 817. Nicholas the first, that they should
be equal with Gods Word, Anno, 871.
Decretals Pardons for the dead
Indulgences the holy Cross and Bead,
The next to him a salvage Bonner stood
Much like the other that was dipped in blood,
And he sold fire and faggots to torment
And burn the Saints up all incontinent,
Another he had got a world of Spits
With Instruments to hack them all to bits,
Another he sold Hunger Thirst and cold
With loathsome Goales for such as should be bold,
Once to control them in their papal sway,
Or dash their glory with an heavenly ray,
But the most hideous g^stly sight of all
Was a fierce Friend, an other Cardinal:
For in his shop with horror and amaze
Were all the tortures used in former days,
The ten hot Persecutions, in their rage,
And all the rest used in this present Age,
Were there at sale, that he appeard to be
More cruel far then st^arn Tesiphome,
Snakie hair'd Megera, Alecto ^el^,
Are scarce so cruel in the Infern^ll Cell,
Sometimes h^s shop was filled with sulphurie smoke,
One would have thought his chapmen would'been choakt
Then presently the fire and faggot blazed
Which made my muse affrighted stand amazed,
To see such Millions frying in the fire
While this stearn Tyrant gnash't his teeth with Ire,
The Skins of Saints, their Tongues, their eyes, and ears,
Were there at sale with floods of brinish tears.
Weary of this, my Muse displayed her Wing
And soaring higher heard the w^lkin Ring,
With various voices chattering in the Air,
To sell their Trinkets in new Lambeth-Fayre:
Bald-pated Friars, with The Infernal Train
Of Romish Vermin cried with might and maine,
Their several Trinkets, It was decread at a Counsel held at Lions gnder Pope
Grenory the 10. Anno 1271. That ^ Parsons and Vicars should be called for ever
after Priests, and no mo ePrelats,
Priests and all the rest
Of Hell-sent Locusts, that came with the Beast,
Called to their chap-men, swearing by the Mass
Their ware was such as through the World might pass,
Pope Gregory the 1. devised Anthems.
Anthems and Pope Damasus added Hymns to the Service.
Hymns, and Pope Pelagius the 1. Ordained Funeral Dirges, with Masses of
requi^m to be sung For the dead. Anno 552.
Dirges for the dead,
The Pope Greg. the 1. Ordained the Office of the Mass Anno 590. Authors of
the Mass, Gregory, Gelasius, Siricius, Clement, Alexander, Pelagius Sergius
etc. Popes.
Latin Mass with the Incarnate Bread,
Bell Book and Candle, to accurse all evil,
And Invented by Alexander the 1. Anno ^10.
Holy water to affright the Devil,
Divine First commanded by Pope Agapetus Anno, 533.
Procession, holy Pope Cletus allowed Pilgrimages Anno 81.
Pilgrimage
All sorts of Whimsies, fit for every age,
Fresh Avie Mary's from the holy function,
Cream, Oil and Cream, brought in by Pope Clement. Anno. 92,
Salt, and Spittle, with the Appointed for dying Persons, by Pope Felix 4. Anno
525.
sacred Unction,
Orders for Pope (...) ordained Priests for every. Town, village etc Anno 101.
Priests, First M^^kish Order began under Pope Siricius, first raised by
Basilius magnus Bishop of Cesarea in Capp^. d^cea. Anno. 389.
Monks, Pope innocent. 3. in the 18. Year^ of his papacy ordained Friars, there
be nine several Orders of them.
Friars, and the nest
Of Abbie Lubbers, Priors, and the rest,
The shirt of hair, the Penance, was invented by Pope Nicholas the first.
Penance and the Cross in Baptism first commanded by Pope Clement. Anno. 92.
Cross,
Prayers unto Saints, and such like popish dross,
Shroving of women* with such pretty knacks,
To calculate the Stars upon their backs,
Morning Oris^ns, prostrate on their beds,
And Pope John the first raised up the Order of Nuns.
Virgin Nuns cr^'d out their Maiden-heads:
Omne Venale others cry and call
Here Is Money Pardons to forgive you all*
You that are Blades, and do desire to roar,
Here Is Dispensations for to wenth and whore,
Here Is carnal Merits, Rites, and Innovations,
And Ceremonies, for all kind of Nations.
Pope Vitalian first brought in Organs into the Church, An. 653.
Vitalian Cried with Organs on his back
Just fiddler like, what Music do you lack,
And dancing after, Guid^ Arorinus the first, devised these six notes.
Guid^'gan to play,
And quaver'd out, V^, Re, My, Fa, Sol, La,
Lay out your money, others cry'tis dross
Here Is Pope (...) ordained the Paschall ^^pers to be Hallowed, Anno 414.
Paschall Tapers, Pope Gregory the first brought creepings to the Cross into
the Church.
creepings to the cross,
By Gregory.
Tentales for souls departed, Ibid.
sacred Palms,
The first began under Pope Silvester, Anno 3^5.
Hermits ap^rell, consecrated Alms,
Here Is Holy-fire ordained by Zozimus.
holy fire for Easters Eve to hear
Your stomachs to concoct your Sunday's meat,
Pope Ignius first ordained Churches to be hallowed, Anno 143.
Church Consecrations, Ornaments of gold,
And hallowed Golgotha's Pope Calixtus first ordained Churchyards, and the
hallowing of them. An. 222.
Calixtussold,
Collects and (...) Pope Gregory first, and Pope Gelasius first brought them in.
Gregory calls aloud,
And Pope Sabian first brought Bells into the Church. Anno 603.
Sabian with his Bells ran through the crowd,
Iejune To prevent She Popes it was decreed that at their election they should
sit bare arsed in a bottomless Chair, and a Cardinal with all humility should
groape with his hand whether etc. if he had them, then the Cards* (...) should
cry, Testicul^s habet, answer Deo gra^. Anno. 860.
Telesphorus Iack-a-lent did bring
(Brought hither first by Carc^^bertus King.)
Then presently Pope Joan cries as she rides,
My back, my back, my belly and both my sides,
And in a fury calls (as she were wild)
Come hither friends, and buy this holy Child,
And Innocent to wash of Adams sin,
Brought holy water to baptize it in.
Synods and Counsels, others came to vent,
The Lateran, Nicene, Bracharence, and Trent,
The Orleans, Lions: endless is the kind
Of various Relics that are yet behind,
All there at sale: But in the very pride
Of this New Fair, my prying Muse espied
An ugly Owl came fluttering through the air
On purpose sure to view their popish ware,
Much like that schreching broadfac'd Bird of night
Whose three days daring presence did affright,
Romes mighty Senate, that they durst not stay;
But thought it was the Devil, and ran away.
Even so this Owl (pearch'd on the top of all.
The sacred Cross fixed on the Pope his stall;
Which when they saw some began to hoote, and fling
Their Crosier Staffes, to make her take the wing,
But this bold Bird of darkness would not rise
Do what they could, but staring with her eyes,
Out-fac'd them all, which presently amazed
The Pope himself, who thought the Devil had gazed;
That in affright they packed up all their Ware,
For Rome again, and left New Lambeth Fair.
But our more bolder Bishops not afraid,
Of Owls, nor Devils, were nothing disamay'd,
But with undanted Courage all amain,
Came to this Fair thus consecrate again,
The Cleark ofth' Fair was presently bespoken,
To give them liberty their Stalls to open:
Proclaim't again, the Bishops all they cried,
We Will try if we can longer here abide:
The Clerk gave leave, the Crier on a Hill
Standing, began to cry with voice so shrill.
O yes, Oyes, J do cry,
The Bishops Trinckets who will buy?
This being done of Bishops all the Crew,
Began with speed, their wearing Robes to show.
And with extended voice, they all did cry, * About the year^ 248. lived a
priest called Fidus, 158. years after John the Apostle, who would that young
children should be baptized upon the 8. day. But Cyprian with 66. Bishops
ordained they should retain it without delay. About 300. years after the
Apostles it became more general. Cassander in lib. de Infant. Bap. It was
ratified and confirmed by pope Innocent 3. at the second Bracharense Counsel,
Anno 610. Decreed likewise at the 5. Carthage Counsel retained and continued
still in England; more ^ the pity. Pope Euginius decreed Godfathers, and
Godmothers An. 143.

Come Customers, see what you lack and buy;
Here Is ( b) Vestments Consecrate, all sorts and sizes,
You may^have here, if you will come to the prises:
Buy Fayrings for your Children, herr are toys,
Fit for your purpose, be they Gerls, or Boys;
Caps for your Boys, to hurl into the air*
And Beads for Gerles, are here in Lambeth Fair:
What though these Robes were first devised in Hell,
Tush that's no matter, we'll good pen-worths sell:
H^re look upon them, they are good and strong,
They Are neat and handsome, and will last you long,
They Are very full and large, you nere saw stronger;
I would not sell them durst I keep them longer.
Buy a Crucifix, another loud does call,
'Twill scare the Devil, and will preserve your soul;
Lay out your money, hang up worldly self,
I will sel't cheaper, then I had't my self:
It Is strange to se how men their money keep,
What come you all to Lambeth-Fayre to sleep;
Come buy Lawn sleeves I have no money took,
Here try them on, you't like a Bishop look;
And may get honor both of great and small,
And Lord it ore your fellow Brethren all:
If that the times should chance once more to turn,
Then might you Lord it, like as we have done,
Come hither Friend, and buy this silken Gown,
I Am sure you cannot matched in Lambeth Town: (o) Pope Steven the first
decreed that a Priest in time of divine service should use no other but
Hallowed garments Anno 261.

In this same Gown, did Canterburies Grace,
At High Commission show his graceless face;
Many a storm, and shower it will abide,
Yea, and a world of knaverie it will hide;
Sir, look upon it, and view it at your leisure,
Go to the price, for you I feign would pleasure, (p) First brought into
England by Austin the Monk, sent by Pope Gregory the first, to preach the
doctrine of Rome, with all their Superstitions and Traditions first entertained
at Canterbury, Ann. 590.

Come buy his Graces Gown, the price is small,
And if you will I Will sell you grace and all.
Though he have worn't, it is near the worse for wearing,
Girt it but close and never fear the rearing.
Come buy my Crosier staff, another he begins,
It Is excellent to keep Dogs from your shins:
Pray Sir let me some of your money take,
And keep this staff for its old masters sake.
Another comes as if his back would break,
Burdened with Vestures, and began thus to speak,
Trinckets I have good store, within my pack,
I pray you view them, and see what you lack;
See for your love, and for your Money buy,
Name what you want, I Will fit you presently,
My pack it is a Wardrope large and fair,
Wherein are Miters, Caps rotund and square,
The rar'st Episcopalls, that ere you see,
Are in my pack, come pray you buy of me;
Here Is rich Embroydred ware, choose where you please,
I have a thousand such like knacks as these:
Buy this brave Rochet, buy this curious Cope,
The tippet, Scarf, they all came from the Priests apparel invented by Pope
Zachary, Anno 752.
Pope;
'Ile sell them at a fare you cannot loose,
Or else exchange them for a pair of shoofe;
I must to Rome, I can no longer stay,
I pray you buy them, I must hence away.
Then after that unto this jolly Fair,
A little Wren, came flying through the air,
And on his back betwixt his wings be bore,
A minster stuffed, with Crosses, Pope Sixtus the 2. first ordained Altars.
Altars store:
With sacred Pius the first brought in Fonts, Anno 147,
Fonts, and rare guilt Cherubims,
And bellowing Organs chanting curious Hymns;
The hallowed Host, dum Priests and singing boys,
With Antic Cringers, and a thousand toys:
Thus then this mighty Wren, unto the Fair,
Brought his Cathedral pack, thus stuffed with were,
The door's wide-op't, there thousands came to see,
The Romish Relics of the Hierarchy;
Where all were ^et to sale, and at low rate,
Because they began to wax quite out of date:
Buy my high Altars, he lifts up his voice,
All sorts of Mass Books, here you may have choice*
Here Is Durandus says that the sound of Bells cause tempests, thunderings,
Lightnings, Winds, wicked Spirits, and Diveli to crase.
bells baptized, will make a dainty found,
Pray if you please step in and ring them round:
Then after that were seen a Regiment,
Of Hell-borne Locusts from C^ sent,
To draw a mighty Cart wherein were brought*
Plurality of Be^efices was condemned at a Counsel, held at Lions by 600.
Bishops, and 1000. Prelates, Anno 1271. Notwithstanding continued in England
till the year 1642.
Plurality of Churches to be bought:
Then came another if he had been there,
Would scared the Devils from the Infernal Sphere.
For store of Crosses on his back he bore,
Char^, and Cheap Side and a thousand more,
And cried what though they be condemned of Treason?
Come buy them quickly while they are in season:
Then cried an other, Sir, what will you buy?
J pray step in Sir, do not so pass by.
Here Is a Cathedra, once Saint Peterschair^,
The rarest thing to buy in Lambeth-fayre,
The candid under Pope Adrian at a Synod at Franckford; 796.
Surplesse with the Wedding Ringes:
Pictures for Bibles, and such pretty things:
Here Is the late Made by the Convocat. in England An. 1640.
Canons, and the new found Oath:
To sell Et c^tera J am very loath:
You formerly have heard by true Relation
These are the toys we made in the convocation:
Oath ex Officio, here if you will buy:
Or Put down in England, Anno 1641.
High commission, take it presently.
Here Is Calixtus ordained them 4. times in the year Anno 208.
Ember weeks with thin-chapt Jack a lent,
To help you at a pinch when all is spent:
Here Is brought in by several Popes. Easter day by Pope Pius 1. Anno 147.
Midsommer day by Silvester 1. Anno 315. Feast of All Saints by Boniface, 4.
Anno 606. Candlemas, by Pope Swinesnout, A^. 684.
Holy Days to sport the time away:
Or Book of Pastimes for the Sabbath Day:
Here Is Deanes and Pr^bends and the filthy Nest
Of Pursevants, Promoters, and the rest,
Chancelours, Officialls, Surrogates, and all
The lofty Courtiers of Commission Hall.
Come Clergy Chapmen, to your Hierarchy,
Here Is excellent ware, as good as ere you see;
Iure Divino, that is become our Doom,
We Will sel't for Warfage to the Coast of Room,
Burialls, and Churchings, we have wondrous store,
Upon my word, they all came from the Whore;
Then next to him, a fiery fat guts fell.
Brought six and twenty Bishoprics to sell:
With gags and whips, and Prisons for all those
That should their cursed Hierarchy oppose,
With catch him P^^s^vant, take him to the Iayle,
There let him lie without Mainprise or Bail,
'Ere he get from us, we will make him see
Experimentally, we Bishops be;
Our Courts and Jurisdictions are at sale:
Come buy them quickly, 'ere they be too Hale.
An other Bishop, with a Box did ride,
And with extended voice he lo^dly cried,
To Scholars all that Ministers would be,
Come hither, buy the Holy Ghost of me;
But Simon Magus he was in the ground,
And none to buy the Holy Ghost was found.
Another Bishop lifting up his voice,
Cried out amain, of Livings I have choice,
I Will sell you two or th^ee, if that you please,
So you will have money coming in with ease,
If that to Preach your self you cannot indu^e,
Get some poor Iourney-man to serve your Cure;
You Will quickly light on such a one I trow,
We have made more, then how to live do know,
Wax (d) Candells, Tapors, another cries and calls, Brought into the Church by
Gregory 1. Anno 590

These brought I with me from Cathedral Paul's,
They Will scare the Devil, and put him unto flight,
When he perceives a consecrated light;
When we at Mattens, and at Even-song were,
We had them by us then, devoyde of fear;
They Will bring delight unto your eyes and nose,
They burn so clear and smell so like a Rose,
Or else you may on whom you will bestow it,
They Will joy to think a Bishop once did owe it.
Come hither Friend, another loud does call,
I Will sell you here my Common-Prayer-Bookes all,
Sir view this same, and take it in your hand,
This Book but lately no man durst withstand,
For if he did, and we thereof did hear,
We forthwith made him a Commissioner,
And if he chan'd appearance for to miss,
To Limbo Patrum he was sent for this:
And if he did not us some money give,
J^ that Abyss we doomed him still to live.
Money my hearts another loud does call;
J see J am not now in Lambeth Hall,
No sooner J from Dinner then was risen,
Men brought me chinke to free them out of Prison.
J'm broake, I Am broake, another did say,
Come ^uy my Hoods, I can no longer stay:
What mean you Sirs? the day is ^lmost spent,
Come buy my Trinkets all incontinent:
Come thither fri^nd, the price is very small,
I^^ ^^ll my Coat, i^ is Canonical;
Come buy this Miter Sir, if you be able,
The virtue of it is inestimable,
Buy't Sir, and wear it, and then soon I hope,
You will rise higher and become a Pope;
I tell you truly had not fortune left me
I would have kept it until Death bereft me,
An other Bishop he a Pack brought in,
The which was stuffed with Licenses toth'brim,
And presently he cries out with fury,
Here Is Licenses to Preach, to Church and bury:
If Wedding's out and you are disposed to Wed,
Come buy a License and away to Bed.
It now beginning to grow toward night, Marriage made a Church action by
Evaristu^*

Comes a grave Doctor running in with might,
His courage stout was something now abated,
He brings his golden Slippers, consecrated,
And cries, come buy these Slippers here of mine,
They are embossed with Holiness Divine;
They will in all your ways preserve you sound,
And with them you may tread on holy Ground,
They Are filled with Holiness within, and round about,
Here look upon them, see how't breaks out.
What all pass by? it is strange time turns her wheell,
And bends her borw upon us, that we feell,
No handsaile yet, our ware's becharmed sure,
And (like our selves) there is none will it endure,
It Is doomed to dismal fate, despised and scorned,
Though never so costly, or so much adorned;
Here Is own venale, yet no money flies,
Our Ware's dog-cheape, and thus our credit dies:
For such a Fair I never did behold,
We bring our Ware, but nothing can be sold:
I wonder said one, what was our intent,
To make our Fair thus at the Parliament.
For we are mocked here by saucy Jacks,
They bid the Pedl^rs to put up their Packs:
We thought our ware would sold at such a price,
And of our hands been vented in a trice,
That this last Act upon the English Stage
Would 'forded money for our Pilgrimage.
To Babylon the Great: How'ere we dreamed no less
Then Ransom for his 'prisoned Holiness:
But he, nor we, must in this Lambeth Fair
Get help I see by this our Popish Ware.
Whilst thus the Bishops there, their guts, and they,
Called to their Customers to come away:
A Messenger came running through the crowd,
And to the Bishops thus he spoke aloud,
Away to Rome or T^ choose you whether,
I know your shoes are made of running leather:
For all the Laws oth' Land, you have out-ruo,
And I come here to tell you what is done,
The Parliament has cast you from their Sphere,
For dire Aspects that ye have caused there,
Ye are devoted and from thence are hurled
And lie like Stars shot on the lower world;
Your ware's not worth a fart for all your cogging,
See where the Hangman comes away, be jogging;
Then comes young Gregory with an Hempen Broom,
To sweep these Vermin to the Sea of Rome;
A Broom said I? my tongue it surely falters,
'Twas Tiburne hung with six and twenty Halters,
Which scared them all to see that hard mishap,
They Would rather ten times seen a Cornerd Cap.
With that the Bishops cried we are undone,
we are so fatt, alas we cannot run.
But unto them a lusty Porter struts,
Sirs here is a Basket that will hold your Guts;
Take my advise, (the knave has Halters plenty)
You Will run the better when your bellie's empty.
Alas cried they, is all-our labor loss?
Others get money, we have but the Cross!
For we are crossed in our expedition,
And fly we must, for all our late Petition,
Yet notwithstanding herein lies our hope,
We shall be entertained by the Pope.
With that like men of Senses quite bereft,
They trold away and all their trinckets left,
A friend of mine to me did then repair,
Desiring me, to pen this famous Fair,
Which I have done* and have it here to sell;
Come buy the Fair of me, and so farewell.
FINIS.

