OF THE DEATH OF CHRIST, The PRICE he paid, and the PURCHASE he made. OR, The
Satisfaction, and Merit of the Death of CHRIST cleared, the Universality of
Redemption thereby oppugned: And The Doctrine Concerning these things formerly
delivered in a Treatise against Universal REDEMPTION Vindicated from the
Exceptions, and Objections of MR BAXTER.

By J. OWEN, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange, 1650.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, OLIVER CROMWELL, Esquire Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND, etc.
TO excuse the Dedication of a Book, which seems not to be like Apples of Gold
in Pictures of Silver, in a Time of so much Preparation for War, this is my
Apology: The brief Discourse following, being Composed in Ireland, where
through the Presence of God with You, in Your great Employment, I enjoyed Peace
and Quietness for a season in the service of my Master, and now stepping into
the [*] World, by Providence, upon Your return into this Nation, it seems to
crave the Signature of Your Name at the Entrance: Besides, being almost wholly
Polemical (for men of Learning also, have their Polemicks, and those, as in the
mannagement of some, as pernicious to the Nations professing the Name of
Christ, as the Contest of the Sword) it lays a Second Claim thereunto, from its
Proportion to the present Work whereunto You are called forth.

Perhaps the Differences, about which the Contest here managed, is, may appear
to some, not to be of so great Weight and Importance, as to deserve that
serious and public Agitation, which is now given to them: especially in these
days, wherein things of nearer Concernment to the Foundation of Faith, do come
continually under Debate. But besides that no one Title, of the Faith once
delivered unto the Saints, is to be yielded unto gainsayers, the Way whereby
Opposition is made unto any Truth, is seriously to be considered. It was said
of Caesar, That solus accessit sobrius ad perdendam rempublicam, he alone
(amongst many other undertakers) attempted soberly to destroy the
Commonwealth, and therefore was the most earnestly to be resisted. In the
Broaching of many Opinions, abhorrent from the Truth of the Gospel in these
days, very few have gone soberly to Work. For the most part, a perverse Spirit
of Giddiness has been mingled with their undertakings, whereby, though they
have made a great Noise in the World, and overthrown the Faith of some, yet
their beloved self-Conceptions being full of self-Contradictions, asserted with
much Passion and Confidence, little Reason or Judgment, having no determinate
End affixed to them, I no way doubt, but that in due Time they will easily sink
of themselves.

He, with whom, in some part of this Treatise, I have to do, has been serious
in his undertaking, and being not destitute of Abilities for the carrying on of
his Intendment, it is requisite the Truth by him mistaken, should receive a
serious Vindication, which I hope also is performed, so far as Occasion, was by
his Writing, to me administered.

Neither will the things here Discussed I am persuaded seem light unto you, who
have learned to value every Truth of God, at the Rate, whereunto it is stamped
from above: especially those which so nearly Concern him, whom Your Soul
loves, as these following will be found to do.

For my own part, having no kind of Interest in the things now a doing, neither
one way, nor other, but only so far, as the great Interest of Christ and the
Gospel is concerned, nor any design in my Thoughts, but only to lay hold of
every orderly Advantage to Preach the Lord Jesus, and him Crucified, even him
alone; and withal, to give Testimony to the whole Counsel [*] of God, as
revealed in his Word, in Opposition to the many foolish Delusions, which
through the Craft of Satan, and the Vanity of men's darkened minds, have got
entrance into the World, continually lamenting the sad mistake of many
Ministers of the Gospel immixing themselves so far in Civil Contests, as to
make them oftentimes the subject of their public pains in Preaching and
Writing, I hope there is no need of an Apology, for my laboring in this kind.

As to this Presentation of these few Sheets to You, besides what is above
mentioned, my Assurance of Your faithful adherence to the form of wholesome
Words, and pattern of sound Doctrine, that cannot be gainsaid, gave
Encouragement unto,

June 1. Your Excellencies most humble and obliged Servant, in our dearest
Lord, J. OWEN.

To the READER.
OF all the Controversies wherewith the Disciples of Christ, through the Craft
of Satan, and their own knowing but in part, have in several Ages been
exercised; there have been none of so great Weight and Importance upon all
Considerations whatever, as those which imediatly concern the Person and Grace
of him, by whose Name they are called.

As his Person was almost the Sole Subject of Contest, (of any moment) for the
space of many Ages succeeding his converse in the Flesh with the Sons of men;
so in these latter days, through the darkness of their own Spirits, and the
seducements of the Spirit of darkness, many in an especial manner do draw forth
variety of uncouth thoughts concerning his Grace, and the Dispensation of the
Love of God toward mankind in him.

Yet have not these things been so distinctlie managed, but that as they of
old with their Oppositions to his Person, did also labor to decry and disanul
the Work of his Grace, so many of those who of latter days have been led away
into dangerous misapprehensions of his Grace, both as to the Foundation and
Efficacy of it, have also wrested the things concerning his Person to their own
destruction.

Of those that have entangled the Spirits of the men of this Generation,
turning aside many from the simplicity of the Gospel, and the Truth as it is
in Jesus, none have been obtruded upon the Saints of God, with greater
Confidence, nor carried out to a more unhappy Issue, then such, as assisting
corrupted Nature to unbend it self from under the Sovereignty of God, and
loosening the thoughts of Men's hearts from their Captivity to the Obedience of
the Gospel, do suit the Mystery of God in Christ reconciling sinners unto
himself, to the fleshly Wisdom and Reasonings of a Man: It was in our hopes and
Expectation, not many years ago, That the Lord would graciously have turned
back all those bitter streams, which issuing from the Pride, Unthankfulness,
and Wisdom of the Carnal mind, had many ways attempted to overflow the
Doctrine of the Grace of God, that brings Salvation; but finding now by
Experience, That the Day of the Churches rest from Persecution, is the Day of
Satan's main work, for Seducing and Temptation, and that not a few are
attempting once more, to renew the Contest of sinful, guilty, defiled, Nature,
against the Sovereigntie, Distinguishing Love, and effectual Grace of God, it
cannot but be convenient, yea necessary, That the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, be contended for, and asserted from the Word of Truth, in the like
public way, wherein it is opposed.

It has been the constant practice of all Persons in all Ages, who have made
it their Design to beget and propagate a Belief of any Doctrine contrary to the
form of wholesome words, to begin with, and insist mainly upon those Parts of
their beloved Conception and Off spring, which seem to be most beautiful and
taking, for the turning aside of poor weak unlearned and unstable Souls:
knowing full well, That their Judgments and Assertions being once engaged,
such is the frame of men's Spirits under Delusion, that they will choose rather
to swallow down all that follows, then to discharge themselves of what they
have already received.

Upon this Account, those who of late days have themselves drank large
Draughts of the very dregs of Pelagianisme, do hold out at first, only a desire
to be pledged in a taste of the Universality of the Merit of Christ, for the
Redemption (or rather something else, well I wot not what) of all and every
man; finding this rendered plausible from some general Expressions in the Word,
seeming to cast an Eye of favor that way in the Light wherein they stand, as
also to be a fit subject for them to varnish over, and deck up, with Loose,
Ambiguous, Rhetorical Expressions, they attempt with all their might to get
entertainment for it, knowing that those who shall receive it, may well call it
Gad, being sent before, only to take up Quarters for the Troop that follows.

To obviate this Evil, which being thus planted, and watered through other
subtilties and Advantages, Display of Armin. Salus Electoru^ sanguis Jesus.
has received no small Increase, I have once and again cast in my Mite into
the Treasury of that rich Provision, which the Lord has enabled many men of
Eminent Learning and Piety, to draw forth from the inexhaustible storehouse
of Divine Truth, and to prepare it for the use of the Saints.

In one of those Treatises, Salus Elect.
having at large handled the several Concernments of the Death of Christ, as to
the Satisfaction and Merit thereof, in their Nature and tendency, as well as
their Object and Extent, and finding some Opposition made to sundry Truths
therein delivered, I have attemp^ed through the Assistance of Grace, to
Vindicate them, from that opposition, in this Ensuing Discourse, as also taken
Occasion to hold forth sundry other things of weight and importance, of all
which you have an Accoun^ given, in the first Chapters thereof, whither I remit
the Reader.

For the present there are some few things, which (Christian Reader) I desire
to acquaint thee withal in particular, which something nearly concern the
business we have in hand.

Since, not only the complete finishing of this Treatise under my hand, which
is now about 5 Months ago, but also the Printing of some Part of it, the Two
Dissertatious of Dr Davenant, of the Death of Christ, and of Predestination and
Reprobation were setforth: in both which, especially the former, there are
sundry Assertions, Positions, and Thesis, differing from what is delivered in
the ensuing Treatise, and as I suppose repugnant unto Truth it self: The whole
of that Persuasion, I confess, which he endeavors in them to maintain, is
suited to the Expressions of sundry Learned men, as Austine, Hillary,
Fulgentius, Prosper, who in their Generations deserved exceeding well or the
Church of God: But that it is free from Opposition to the Scripture, or indeed
self-Contradiction, is not so apparent. Yea, through the Patience and Goodness
of God, I undertake to demonstrate, That the main Foundation of his whole
Dissertation about the Death of Christ, with many Inferences from thence, are
neither found in, nor founded on the Word, but that the several Parts thereof,
are mutually Conflicting and destructive of each other, to the great prejudice
of the Truth therein contained.

It is a thing of the saddest Consideration possible, That Wise and Learned
men, should once suppose, by tempering the Truths of God, so that they may be
suited to the self-Indulgency of unsubdued Carnal Affections, to give any
Luster to them, Rom 8. 7.
or in the least to remove that Scandal and Offense, which the f^eshlie minded
does take continually at those Ways of God, which are far above out of its
sight. That this is the grand design of such undertakings, as that of the
Learned Bishop now mentioned, even to force the Mysteries of the Gospel, to a
Condescension and sutablnesse unto the unpurged Relics of the Wisdom of
Nature, when all our thoughts ought to be captivated to the obedience thereof,
is to me most apparent. Whence else should it proceed, that so many
unscriptural Distinctions, of the various Intentions of God in the business of
Redemption, with the holding out for the Confirmation of one part of their
Opinion, viz. That Christ died for all, and every one, in such a sense, those
very Arguments, which the most that own the Truth of their Inferences, do
employ merely against the latter part of their Opinion, viz In some sense he
died only for the Elect, with sundry inextricable Intanglements, should fill up
both the Pages of their Discourses. (...):


It is no way clear to me, what Glory redoundeth to the Grace of God, what
Exaltation is given to the Death of Christ, what Encouragement to sinners in
the things of God, by maintaining, That our Savior in the Intention, and from
the Designment of his Father, died for the Redemption of Millions, for whom he
purchased not one dram of saving Grace, and concerning whom, it was the Purpose
of God from Eternity, not to make out unto them effectually, any of those means
for a participation in the fruits of his Death, without which it is impossible
but it should be useless and unprofitable unto them: Ignat. ad Phi^ad.
and yet this is the main Design of that Dissertation concerning the Death of
Christ: What in that, and the ensuing Discourse, is argued and contended for,
according to the mind of God, we thankfully accept: and had it not been
condited with the unsavory salt of human wisdom, it had been exceeding
acceptable, especially at this time. For,

2, That there are some more than ordinary Endeavors for the Supportment and
Re-inforcing of the almost conclamated Cause of Arminianisme, (...).
ready to be handed unto public view, is commonly reported and believed:
concerning which also many swelling words (of which there lies great abundance
on every side) are daily vented, as of some unparalelled product of Truth and
Industry, as though, Nil oriturum alias, nil ortum tale, Homer Iliad.
for the most part, by such as are utterly ignorant, how far these
Controversies have been sifted, (...) v.
and to what Issue they have been driven long ago.

For my part, as I have not as yet of late, heard or read any thing of this
kind, either from Public Disputes, or in Printed Sheets, but only long since
exploded Sophismes, inconsequent Consequencies, weak Objections, fully, soundly
Answered many a day since, nor by the Taste which I have already received, have
I any Reason to expect from the great endeavors which are entering the City of
God with Io Triumphs any thing beyond fruitless Attempts to varnish over with
plausible appearances, formerly decryed Invectives and Reasonings, whose
Deformity and Nakedness have been often discovered to the lothing of them by
the Saints of God; so I no way doubt, (...).
but that the Lord, whose Truth is precious to him, will continue to power out,
from the rich Provision which he has made for the use of his Church, and laid
it up in the Lord Jesus, suitable Gifts and Abilities, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
against all Opposition whereunto by the Craft of Satan it is exposed: I shall
say no more, though Occasion be administered to deplore that success, which the
spirit of Seduction that is gone out in this hour of Temptation, Haereses, de
quorandam infirmitatibus habe^t, quod valent, nihil vale^tes, si in been
valentem fidem in current. Tertul. de Praesc. ad Haer. Mat. 24. 24.
has had in prevaising upon them that live in the Earth, to turn away their
minds from sound Doctrine and the form of wholesome words: Only I desire to
Commend the Reader unto those two Apostolical Cautions, one, 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19.
the other, 1 Timothy 6. 20. and to Commit him to the Grace of God.

May 15th. J. O.

OF THE DEATH OF CHRIST.
CAP. I.
The Occasion of this DISCOVRSE, with the Intendment of the whole.
A Few words will briefly acquaint the Reader with the Occasion of this
Discourse ensuing: It is now about 2 years since I Published a Treatise about
the Redemption, and Satisfaction that is in the blood of Chrst: My aim was to
hold out the whole Work of Redemption, as flowing from the Love of the Father,
dispensed in the blood of the Son, and made effectual by the application of the
Spirit of Grace: And because in this whole Dispensation, and in all the Method
of Gods proceedings to make us nigh to himself in the blood of Jesus: There is
no one thing so commonly Controverted, as the object of that Redemption in
respect of the extent of it: That in the whole, I did specially intend.

What by the grace of him (who supplieth seed to the Sower) was attained in
that undertaking, is left unto the Judgment of men, upon the Issue of his
Blessing thereunto; altogether I am not out of hopes, That, that Labor in the
Lord was not in vain.

The Universality of Redemption (one thing in that Treatise mainly opposed)
having of old, and of late got room in the minds of some men, otherwise
furnished with many precious Truths, and eminent Gifts, I was not without
expectation of some opposition to be made thereunto: Something also (I have
been informed) has been attempted that way; but I am yet at so much quiet in
that regard, as an utter nescience of them, can afford.

Only whereas many other questions are incidently, and by the way handled
therein, as about the Satisfaction, and Merit of Christ, etc. It pleased Mr
Baxter, a learned Divine, in an Appendix to a Treatise of Justification by him
lately Published, to turn aside in the Censure of some of them, and opposition
to them.

Indeed most of his Exceptions do lie rather against Words, then Things;
Expressions, then Oppinions; ways of Delivering things, then the Doctrines
themselves, as the Reader will perceive; so that of this labor I might ease my
self with this just Apology; That I was desired, and pressed to handle the
things of that Discourse, in the most popular way they were capable of, and in
the best accommodation to vulgar Capacities; so that it is no wonder, if some
Expressions therein, may be found to want some grains of Accurateness (though
they have not one dram the less of Truth) in a Scholastical balance:

Notwithstanding, because

1 I am not as yet convinced by any thing in M. Baxters Censure, and
Opposition, that there was any such blameable deviation as is pretended, but
rather the words of Truth, and Sobriety, clothing a Doctrine of wholsomeness;
and especially, because the things pointed at are in themselves weighty, and
needing some exactness in the delivery, to give a right Apprehension of them: I
was willing once more to attempt whether the Grace of God with me, who am less
then the least of all Saints, might give any further light into the right
understanding of them according to the Truth, to the advantage of any that love
the Lord Jesus in sincerity.

The true nature of the satisfaction of Christ, with the kind of Payment of our
Debt by him made and accomplished, is doubtless worthy of our most serious
enquiry: The right Constitution of the immediate Effects of the Death of
Christ, the relation of men to the Election of God, and the Redemption of
Christ, with their several states and Conditions in reference unto those Works
of Grace, ought to be of no less esteem: And that not only for the nature and
excellency of the things themselves, but also because a right disposal of them,
gives more light into the stating and settling many other Controverted Truths
about Faith, Justification, Vocation, and the like: These are the Subjects
about which I am called forth in my own, or rather Truths defense.

For the Treatise, and Subject thereof, whose latter part gives Rise to this; I
shall say no more, but as there are in it many footsteps of Commendable
Learning, Industry, and Diligence; so to my present Apprehension the chief
Intendments of it, with very many occasional Expressions of the Authors
Judgment in sundry Particulars, are obnoxious to just Opposition from Truth it
self.

It is not at all in my thoughts, to engage my self into the chief Controversy
there agitated; though I could desire, That some to whom Providence has given
more leisure, and opportunities for such employments, would heartily examine
those Aphorisms, for the further advantage of Truth and Light.

But whereas the learned Author has to make straight the work he had in hand,
endeavored to cast some part of the Doctrine of the Satisfaction, and
Redemption of Christ, as by me delivered, into a crooked Frame, and that with
some such passages of Censure, as might have been omitted, without losing the
least Grace of his Book, or Style: I shall with the Lords assistance, endeavor
to reinforce what of Truth has been thereby assaulted in vain, and more
especially take occasion from thence further to unfold those Mysteries, which
to our apprehension, are wrapped up in no small darkness: there being in them
some things difficult, and hard to be understood.

The First thing then, which that learned Divine chose to stand in distance
from me in, is concerning the nature of the payment made for sin by the blood
of Christ; Whether it be ejusdem, or tantidem; and of the Sense of those
Expresions, is our First Debate: In handling whereof, I hope I shall not only
satisfy the Reader as to the Truth of what I had before written; but also
further clear the whole Doctrine of Satisfaction, with especial reference to
the kind of the Payment that Christ made, and Punishment which he underwent.

The other Head wrappeth in it self many particulars concerning the immediate
Fruit, or Effects of the Death of Christ, the state of Elect Redeemed ones
before actual Believing, the nature of Redemption, Reconciliation, the
differencing of Persons in Gods eternal Purposes; to the Consideration of all
which, and sundry other particulars, I have occasion offered me, in defense of
the Truth impugned.

These now and the like, being things in themselves weighty, and the difference
about them being for the most part rather as to the way of the delivery, then
as to things themselves: In the handling of them, I could not attend merely to
the advantage offered by M. Baxters Discourse, but choose rather to cast them
into another method, which might be distinct, clear, and accommodate to the
things themselves: So that I hope the Reader may (with some Profit) see the
whole dispensation of the Love of God to his Elect through Christ, with the
relation of the Elect in several Conditions, unto the several actings of God in
that dispensation succinctly laid down.

The Accommodation also of All delivered, to many weighty Controversies, I have
added.

If the way of handling these things here used, be blamed by any, I hope the
judicious will see, That it is such as the matter it self will bear.

There has not been many things in my whole enquiry after the Mind of God in
his Word, which have more exercised my thoughts, then the right ordering, and
distinct disposal of those whereof we treat; If the Lord has discovered any
thing unto me, or made out any thing by me, that may be for the benefit of any
of his, I shall rejoice; it being always in my desire, That all things might
fall out to the advantage of the Gospel: and so I address my self to the matter
before me.

CAP. II.
An entrance into the whole; Of the Nature of the payment made by CHRIST; With
the Right stating of the things in Difference.
MR. Baxter having Composed his Aphorisms of Justification, with their
Explications: before the publishing of them in Print, he Communicated them (as
should appear) to some of his near acquaintance: Unto some things in them
contained, one of his said friends gives in some Exceptions; amongst other
things he opposes unto those Aphorisms, he also points at my contrary
Judgment in one or two particulars, with my Reasons produced for the
Confirmation thereof. This provokes their learned Author (though unwilling) to
turn aside to the Consideration of those Reasons. Now the First of those
Particulars being about the payment made for sin, in the blood of Christ, of
what sort, and kind it is: I shall willingly carry on the Enquiry to this
further Issue, whereunto I am drawn out.

1 He looks upon the Stating of the Question as I professedly laid it down at
my entrance into that Disputation, and declares, That it is nothing at all to
the Question he has in hand, nor looking that way.

He distinguishes (says M. Baxter) betwixt paying the very thing that is in
the Obligation, and paying of so much in another kind: Now this is not our
Question, nor any thing to it. Append. p. 137.

If it be so, I know no reason why I was plucked in to the following Dispute,
nor why M. Baxter should cast away so many Pages of his Book, upon that which
is nothing at all to the business he had in hand.

But though there be nothing to this purpose, Page 137 of my Book, the place he
was sent to, yet Page 140 there is: As also something contrary to what is
expressed in the former Place, which he intimates in these words;

In Page 140, he states the Question far otherwise, (and yet supposes it the
same) viz. Whether Christ paid the idem, or the tantundum? which he
interprets thus, (that which is not the same, nor equivalent unto it, but
only in the Gracious acceptance of the Creditor: Now what he means by (not
equivalent) I cannot tell.

1 If he mean (not of equal value) then he fights with a shadow: He wrongeth
Grotius (for ought I can find in him) who teaches no such Doctrine: However I
do not so use to English (solutio tantidem.) But if he mean that it is not
equivalent, in procuring it is end ipso facto, delivering the Debtor, without
the Intervention of a new Concession or Contract of the Creditor (as solutio
ejusdem does) then I confess Grotius is against him, and so am I.

So also (God's Gracious acceptance) is either in accepting less in value then
was due, and so remitting the rest without payment, (this I plead not for) or
else it is his accepting a refusable payment, which though equal in value, yet
he may choose to accept according to the tenor of the Obligation: This is
Gracious acceptance which Grotius maintains: and so do I: and so distinguish
betwixt solutio, and satisfactio, payment and satisfaction. Thus far he.

Sundry things are here imagined, and asserted: 1 Several Passages are pointed
at in my Treatise, and a Contradiction between them intimated. 2 Various
Conjectures given at my (plain, very plain) meaning, and diverse things objected
answerable to those Conjectures, etc. Wherefore to clear the whole, I shall
First give you in the Passages Opposed, and then Vindicate them from mutual
Opposition, with what is besides Charged on them.

The First place mentioned in my Treatise is in page 137. where after I had
discoursed of the Nature of satisfaction, in reference both unto things Real
and Personal, I laid down a distinction in these words:

There may be a twofold satisfaction: 1 By a solution or payment of the very
thing that is in the Obligation; either, by the Party himself who is bound, or
by some other in his stead: As if I owe a man 20 pounds, and my Friend goes
and pays it, my Creditor is fully satisfied. 2 By a solution or paying of so
much although in another kind, not the same that is in the Obligation, which by
the Creditors acceptance stands in Lieu of it: upon which also, Freedom
follows from the Obligation, by virtue of an Act of Favor.

What now says M. B. to this? Why? It is nothing to the business he has in
hand.

Let then this pass, and look to the next Passage, which is Opposed, and
Supposed to stand in Opposition to the other.

Having laid down the former Distinction, passing on to some other things
concerning the Nature of Satisfaction, and the establishment of That of Christ
from the Scripture, in Page 140, I apply that Distinction laid down before in
General, to the kind of satisfaction made by Christ, in these words:

Whereas I said that there is a twofold Satisfaction, whereby the Debtor is
freed from the Obligation, that is upon him; the one being solutio ejusdem,
payment of the same thing that was in the Obligation: The other solutio
tantidem, of that which is not the same, nor equivalent unto it, but only in
the Gracious acceptance of the Creditor: It is worth our Enquiry, which of
these it was that our Savior did perform.

And accordingly I refer it to the First.

This (says M. B.) is a stating of the Question far otherwise then before, yet
supposing it the same.

But this I was so far from once mistrusting before, as that being informed of
it, I cannot as yet apprehend it to be so.

In Page 137 I lay down a distinction in general about the several kinds of
satisfaction, which page 140 I plainly apply to the satisfaction of Christ,
without any new, much less changed stating of a Question.

My whole aim in that Enquiry, was to search out that kind of punishment, which
Christ underwent in making Satisfaction for sin, viz. Whether it were the same
that was threatened to the Transgressors themselves, or whether something else
which God accepted in Lieu thereof, relaxing the Law, not only as to the Person
suffering, but also as to the Penalty to be undergone?

The First of these (and that with the concurrent suffrage of far the greatest
number of Protestant Divines) I Assert with sundry Arguments, Page 141, 142,
etc. 154, 155, 156. Unto which Assertion, he neither opposes himself, nor once
attempteth to Answer any of the Arguments whereby I proved it.

This being my Intendment, page 137, I intimate that Christ paid the Same Thing
that was in the Obligation, as if in Things Real a Friend should pay 20 pounds
for him that owed so much, and not any thing in another kind: and Page 140 I
Affirm that he paid Idem, that is the same thing that was in the Obligation;
and not tantundum, something equivalent thereunto, in another kind.

The First of these is Nothing to our purpose (says M. B.) but the Latter; the
Latter crossing the Former. So he. But truly (such is my dullness) I cannot as
yet be won to his mind herein.

But though I agree with my self, perhaps I do not with the Truth. That
description of solutio tantidem, viz. That it is a payment of that which is not
the same, nor equivalent unto it, but only in the Gracious Acceptance of the
Creditor, is Peculiarly opposed.

To make this Expression obnoxious to an Exception, M. B. divides it, that so
it may be entangled with a fallacy, (...): And First, he asks (as before) What
I mean by [not equivalent] and hereunto suppossing two Answers, to the First he
opposseth a Shadow, to the Latter Himself.

1 If (says he) by [not equivalent] you mean not of equal value, you fight
with a Shadow, and wrong Grotius: However I do not use so to English solutio
tantidem.

By [not equivalent] I mean that which is not of equal value, Answ.
or certainly I mistook the word; and if so, had need enough to have gone to M.
B. or some other learned man, to have learned to English solutio tantidem.

But, Do I not then fight with a shadow?

Truly cut my words thus off in the middle of their Sense, and they will be
found fit to Cope with no other Adversary: but take them as they lie, and as
intended, and there is scarce any shadow of Opposition to them, cast by M. B.
passing by. My words are, (It is not equivalent, but only in the Gracious
Acceptance of the Creditor:) Is not the plain meaning of these words, That
tantundem in Satisfaction, is not equivalent to idem (...), but only (...)?
what is Denied of it absolutely, is Affirmed in some respect. He that says, It
is not equivalent, but only in Gracious Acceptance, in that sense Affirms it
to be equivalent; and that it is in respect of that sense, That the things so
called, is said to be tantundem, that is equivalent.

Now what excepts M. B. hereunto? Does he assert tantundem to be in this matter
equivalent unto idem (...)? It is the very thing he opposes all along,
maintaining that solutio tantidem stands in need of Gracious Acceptance,
ejusdem of none: and therefore they are not as to their End (...) equivalent.

Or will he deny it to be equivalent in Gods Gracious Acceptance? this he also
contendeth for himself. Though refusable, yet equivalent.

What then is my Crime? I wrong Grotius! Wherein? in imposing on him, that he
should say, It was not of equal value to the Idem* that Christ paid. Not one
such word, in any of the places mentioned. I say, Grotius maintains, That the
satisfaction of Christ, was solutio tantidem. Will you deny it? Is it not his
main endeavor to prove it so? Again, tantundem I say is not in this case
equivalent to Idem, (...), but only (...): does not M. B. labor to prove the
same? Where then is the difference? Were it not for Ignoratio Elenchi in the
Bottom, and Fallacia plurium interrogationum at the Top, this Discourse would
have been very empty.

2, But he casts my words into another Frame, to give their sense another
Appearance; and says,

If you mean That it is not equivalent in procuring it is End, ipso facto,
delivering the Debtor without the Intervention of a new concession or contract
of the Creditor, as solutio ejusdem does, then I confess Grotius is against
you, and so am I.

Of Grotius I shall speak afterward: Answ.
for the present I apply my self to M. B. and say,

1 If he intend to oppose himself to any thing I handle and assert in the place
he considers, he does by this Quaerie-plainly (...), and that from a second
inadvertency of the Argument in hand; It is of the nature of the Penalty
undergon, and not of the Efficacy of the Satisfaction made thereby, that I
there Dispute.

2 I conceive that in this Interrogation and Answer, he wholly gives up the
Cause, that he pretends to plead, and joins with me (as he conceives my sense
to be) against Grotius and himself.

;If (says he) he mean that it is not equivalent, in procuring it is End ipso
facto, without the Intervention of a new Concession or Contract as solutio
ejusdem does, then I am against him.

Well then: M. B. maintains that solutio tantidem is equivalent with solutio
ejusdem in obtaining it is End ipso facto: for says he, If I say it is not
equivalent, he is against me. (...). But is this his mind indeed? Will his
words bear any other sense?

3 Whether tantundem and idem in the way of Satisfaction be equivalent to the
obtaining the End ipso facto aimed at, (which he here asserts, though elsewhere
constantly denies couching in this distinction the (...) of a great part of his
Discourse) certainly is nothing at all to the Question I there agitated;
maintaining, That it was idem and not tantundum that Christ paid, and so the
End of it obtained ipso facto, answerable to the kind of the Efficacy and
procurement thereof.

But perhaps I do not conceive his mind aright: peradventure his mind is, That
if I do maintain the SATISFACTION OF CHRIST to procure the End aimed at, ipso
facto, as solutio ejusdem would have done, then to profess himself my
Adversary. But,

1 This is not here expressed, nor intimated. 2 It is nothing at all to me, who
place the matter of the Satisfaction of Christ, in solutione ejusdem. 3 About
the End of Satisfaction in the place opposed I speak not, but only of the
Nature of the Penalty undergone whereby it was made. 4 To the thing it self, I
desire to enquire;
1 What M. B. intends by solutio ejusdem in the business in hand? Does he not
maintain it to be the Offenders own undergoing the Penalty of the Law? What End
I pray does this obtain ipso facto? Can it be any other but the Glory of Gods
Justice in the everlasting destruction of the Creature? How then can it
possibly be supposed to attain the End spoken of ipso facto? If this be the
only meaning of solutio ejusdem, in this sense, the End of it is distant from
the End of Satisfaction (...).

By the laying the Penalty on Christ, that God intended the freedom of those
for whom he underwent that Penalty, I suppose cannot be doubted: but in
inflicting it on the Offenders themselves, that he has any such aim, wants an
Origin to assert.

2 Whether the Penalty due to One, may not be undergon by Another? and if so,
Whether it be not the same Penalty (the idem) or no? In things Real, I gave an
Instance before: If a man pay twenty pounds for another who owed it, does not
he pay the idem in the Obligation? And may not this hold in things Personal
also?

Of the Satisfaction of Christ procuring it is End ipso facto, (I mean in it is
own kind, for the Death of Christ must be considered as Meritorious, as well as
Satisfactory if deliverance be attended as the End of it) I shall speak
afterward in it is proper place. The present Controversy is no more but this;

Whether Christ underwent the Penalty threatened unto us, or some other thing
accepted in stead thereof, by a new Constitution? Which is all one, Whether in
laying our iniquities upon Christ, the Law of God was relaxed only as to the
Persons suffering, or also as to the Penalty suffered? That is, Whether Christ
paid the idem in the Obligation, or tantundum? To suppose that the idem of the
Obligation is not only the Penalty it self, but also the Offenders own
suffering that Penalty, and then to enquire, Whether Christ underwent the idem,
is to create an easy Enemy, to triumph in his dejection.

That the Law was relaxed, as to the persons suffering, I positively Assert;
but as to the Penalty it self, that is not mentioned. Of these two things alone
then must be our Enquiry.

1 Whether Christ in making satisfaction, underwent that Penalty that was
threatened to the Offenders themselves? 2 Whether the Penalty though undergone
by another, be not the idem of the Obligation?
Of both these after the clearing of the residue of Mr Baxters Exceptions.

Nextly he requires what I intend by Gracious Acceptance, or rather gives in
his own sense of it, in these words. Pa. 138, 139


So also (Gods Gracious Acceptance) is either his accepting less in value then
was due, and so remitting the rest without payment: this I plead not for: or
else it is his accepting of a refuseable Payment, which though equal in value,
yet he may choose to accept according to the tenor of the Obligation. This is
Gracious acceptance which Grotius maintains: and so do I. Thus far, he.

Now neither is this any more to the business (...) have in hand. For,

1 The value of any Satisfaction in this Business, arises not from the innate
worth of the things whereby it is made; but purely from Gods free Constitution
of them to such an End. A distinction cannot be allowed of more or less value
in the things appointed of God for the same End; All their value arises merely
from that appointment: they have so much as he ascribes to them, and no more:
Now neither idem nor tantundum are here satisfactory, but by virtue of divine
Constitution: only in tantundem I require a peculiar acceptance to make it
equivalent to idem in this business, that is as to satisfaction: or (if you
please) an acceptance of that which is not idem, to make it a tantundum. So
that this Gracious Acceptance, is not an accepting of that which is less in
value then what is in the Obligation, but a free Constitution appointing
another thing to the End, which before was not appointed.

2 He supposes me, (if in so many mistakes of his, I mistake him not) to deny
all Gracious Acceptance where the Idem is paid, which (in the present case) is
false: I assert it necessary, because not paid per eundem: yea and that other
person not procured by the Debtor, but graciously assigned by the Creditor.

3 To make up his Gracious acceptance in his latter sense, he distinguishes of
payments refusable, and not refusable; in the Application of which distinction
unto the payment made by Christ, I cannot close with him.

For,

A Payment is refusable either absolutely and in it self, or upon supposal: The
Death of Christ considered absolutely and in it self, may be said to be
refusable as to be made a Payment; not a refusable payment: and that, not
because not refusable, but because not a payment. Nothing can possibly tend to
the procurement and compassing of any End by the way of Payment, with the Lord,
but what is built upon some free Compact, Promise, or Obligation of his Own.
But now consider it as an Issue flowing from divine Constitution, making it a
payment, and so it was no way refusable, as to the compassing of the End
appointed. Thus also, as to the Obligation of the Law, for the fulfilling
thereof, it was refusable in respect of the person paying, not in respect of
the payment made: That former respect being also taken off by divine
Constitution, and Relaxation of the Law as to that, it becomes wholly
unrefusable: that is, As it was paid it was so; for satisfaction was made
thereby upon the former supposals of Constitution and Relaxation.

4 Does not Mr B. suppose, That in the very Tenure of the Obligation there is
required a solution, tending to the same End as satisfaction does? Nay, Is not
that (...) the (...) of this Discourse? Deliverance is the aim of Satisfaction,
which receives it is Spring and Being from the Constitution thereof. But is
there any such thing as Deliverance once aimed at, or intended in the tenor of
the Obligation? I suppose no.

5 Neither is the Distinction of solutio and satisfactio (which Mr B. closes
withal) of any weight in this Business; unless it would hold (...), which it
will not, and so is of no use here.

For,

1 There is solutio tantidem, as well as ejusdem, and therein consists
satisfaction according to Mr B. 2 Whether Satisfaction be inconsistant with
solutio ejusdem, but not per eundem is the (...).
After all this Mr B. ads,

Yet here Mr Owen enters the List with Grotius.

Where I pray? Answ.
I might very justly make enquiry from the Beginning to the Ending of this
Discourse, to find out what it is, that this word HERE, particularly answers
unto. But to avoid as much as possible all strife of words, I desire the Reader
to view the Controversy agitated between Grotius and my self, not as here
represented by Mr Baxter, so changed by a new dress, That I might justly refuse
to take any acquaintance with it, but as by my self laid down in the places
excepted against; and he will quickly find it to be,

1 Not whether the Law were at all Relaxed, but whether it were relaxed as well
in respect of the Penalty to be suffered, as of the Person suffering? That is,
Whether God be only a Rector, or a Rector and Creditor also in this Business?
(which Controversy by the way, is so confusedly Proposed, or rather strangly
handled by Mr B. page 145, where he adjudges me in a successeless assault of
Grotius, as makes it evident he never once perused it.)

2 Nor Secondly, Whether there be any need of Gods Gracious Acceptance in this
business, or no; for I Assert it necessary (as before described) in reference
to solutio ejusdem, sed non per eundem.

3 Neither Thirdly, Whether the Satisfaction of Christ considered absolutely,
and in statu diviso, and materially, be refusable, which I considered not, or
be unrefusable, supposing the Divine Constitution, which Grotius (as I take it)
delivered not himself in. Nor,

4 About the value of the Payment of Christ in reference to Acceptance; but
merely (as I said before,)

Whether the Lord appointing an End of Deliverance, neither intimated nor
couched in the Obligation, nor any of it is Attendencies, constituting a way for
the attainment of that End, by receiving Satisfaction to the Obligation, did
appoint that the thing in the Obligation should be paid though by Another, or
else some new thing that (of it self, and by it self) never was in the
Obligation, either before or after it is solution: As the Payment made by Christ
must be granted such, unless it were for substance the same which the LAW
required.

And here (with most Divines) I maintain the First, viz. That the Law was
Relaxed in respect of the Person suffering, but Executed in respect of the
Penalty suffered: Relaxation and Execution are not in this business opposed
(...) but only (...).

He that would see this further affirmed, may consult what I wrote of it in the
Place opposed, which is not once moved by any thing here spoken to the contrary.

By the way observe, I speak only of the Penalty of the Law, and the Passive
Righteousness of Christ, strictly so called: For his Active Righteousness or
Obedience to the Law, (though he did many things we were not obliged unto, for
the manifestation of himself, and Confirmation of the Doctrine of the Gospel)
that it was the very idem of us required. I suppose none can doubt.

What place that Active Righteousness of Christ has, or what is it is use in
our Justification, I do not now enquire, being unwilling to immix my self
unnecessarily in any Controversy, though I cannot but suppose that M. B. his
Discourse hereabouts gives Advantage enough, even Minorum Gentium Theologis, to
ordinary Divines (as he calls them) to deal with him in it.

CAP. III.
The Arguments of Grotius, And their Defense by Mr. Baxter, about the Penalty
under-gone by CHRIST in making Satisfaction, Considered.
THE State of the Question in hand being as above laid down, let us now see
what Mr Baxter his Judgment is of my success in that undertaking: Concerning
which he thus delivers himself;

Yet here Mr OWEN enters the List with GROTIUS, And,

1 He over-looketh his greatest Arguments. 2 He slightly Answers only Two. 3
And when he has done, he says as Grotius does, and yields the whole Cause.
These Three things I will make appear in Order. Append. page 139.

A most unhappy Issue as can possibly be imagined, made up of Deceit, Weakness.
and self-Contradiction. But how is all this proved?

To make the First thing appear, He produces the Argument over-looked.

The chief Argument of Grotius and Vossius (says he) is drawn from the Tenor
of the Obligation, and from the Event. The Obligation charge Punishment on
the Offender himself. It says [In the day thou eatest thou shall die] And
[Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc.] Now if the same
in the Obligation be paid, then the Law is Executed, and not Relaxed: and then
every Sinner must die himself; for that is the idem, and very thing threatened:
So that here, dum alias soluit, simul aliud solvitur. The Law threatened not
Christ, but us: (besides that, Christ suffered not the loss of Gods Love, nor
his Image and Graces, nor eternity of Torment, of which I have spoken in the
Treatise) What says Mr Owen to any of this?

Let the Reader observe what it is we have in hand. Answ.
It is not the main of the Controversy Debated by Grotius wherein I do oppose
him: Neither yet All in that particular whereabout the Opposition is. Now
suppose (as he does) That the punishing of the Person Offending is in the
Obligation, yet I cannot but conceive that there be Two distinct things here: 1
The Constitution of the Penalty it self to be undergone. 2 The Terminating of
this Penalty upon the Person Offending. For this Latter, I Assert a Relaxation
of the Law, which might be done, and yet the Penalty it self in Reference to
it is Constitution be established. In those places then (In the day thou eatest,
etc.) there is Death and the Curse appointed for the Penalty, and the Person
Offending appointed for the sufferer. That the Law is Relaxed, in the Latter I
grant, That the former was Executed on Christ I prove.

Now what says this Argument to the Contrary?

If the same in the Obligation be paid, then the Law is Executed, not Relaxed.
Then every Sinner must die himself, for that is the idem and very thing
threatened. So that here dum alias soluit aliud solvitur.

Answer:

1 The Matter of the Obligation having plainly a double Consideration, as
before, it may be both Executed and Relaxed in sundry respects. 2 The Idem and
very thing threatened in the Constitution of the Law, is death; The Terminating
of that Penalty to the Person Offending, was in the Commination, and had it not
been Released, must have been in the Execution: but in the Constitution of the
Obligation which respects purely the kind of Penalty, primarily it was not.
Death is the reward of Sin, is all that is there. 3 We Enquire not about
Payment, but Suffering. To make that suffering a Payment supposes another
Constitution: by virtue whereof Christ suffering the same that was threatened:
it became another thing in Payment, then it would have been, if the Person
Offending had suffered himself. 4 That the Law threatened not Christ but us, is
most true: but the Question is, Whether Christ underwent not the threatening of
the Law, not we? A Commutation of Persons is allowed, Christ undergoing the
Penalty of the Offense, though he were not the Person Offending, I cannot but
still suppose that he paid the Idem of the Obligation. 5 For the Parenthesis
about Christ's not suffering the loss of Gods love, etc. and the like
Objections, they have been Answered near a thousand times already, and that by
no ordinary Divines neither; so that I shall not further trouble any therewith.
How this is the Argument, the great chief Argument of Grotius and Vossius,
which Mr Baxter affirms I overlooked.

That I did not Express it, I easily grant: neither will I so wrong the
ingenious Reader as to make any long Apology for my Omission of it, considering
the state of the matter in difference as before proposed: When Mr B. or any man
else, shall be able to draw out any Conclusion from thence, That granting the
relaxation of the Law as to the Person suffering, the Lord Christ did not
undergo the Penalty constituted therein, or that undergoing the very Penalty
appointed, he did not pay the idem in the Obligation, (supposing a new
Constitution for the converting of suffering into a satisfactory payment) I
shall then give a Reason why I Considered it not.

In the next place Mr B. gives in the two Arguments wherewith I deal. And for
the First, about an Acquitment ipso facto upon the payment of the Idem in the
Obligation, with my Answer, refers it to be considered in another place: Which
though I receive no small Injury by, as shall be there declared, yet that I may
not transgress the Order of Discourse set me, I pass it by also until then.

The Second Argument of Grotius with my Answer, he thus expresses:

To the Second Argument that the payment of the same thing in the Obligation
leaves no room for Pardon, he Answers thus:

1 Gods Pardoning compriseth the whole Dispensation of Grace in Christ; As 1
The laying of our Sin on Christ: 2 The imputation of his Righteousness to us,
which is no less of Grace and Mercy. However God pardons all to US, but
nothing to CHRIST: So that the Freedom of Pardon has it is Foundation.

1 In Gods Will freely appointing this Satisfaction of Christ. 2 In a Gracious
Acceptance of the decreed Satisfaction in our stead. 3 In a free Application
of the Death of Christ to us.
To which I Answer, etc. So far he.

Though this may appear to be a distinct Expression of my Answer, yet because
it seems to me, That the very strength of it as laid down, is omitted; I shall
desire the Reader to peruse it as it is there Proposed, and it will give him
some light into the thing in hand. I apply my self to what is here Expressed,
and Answer:

1 To the Objection proposed from Grotius as above, I gave a Threefold Answer.

1 That Gracious Condonation of sin, which I conceive to be the Sum of the glad
tidings of the Gospel, seems to comprize those Two Acts before recounted;
both which I there prove to be free, because the very Merit and Satisfaction of
Christ himself was founded on a free Compact and Covenant, or Constitution.

Now I had Three Reasons (among others) that prevailed with me to make Gracious
Condonation of so large extent, which I shall Express, and leave them to the
thoughts of every Judicious Reader, whether they are enforcing thereunto, or
no; being exceedingly indifferent what his Determination is: For the weight of
my Answer depends not on it at all.

And they are these:

1, Because that single Act of remission of sins to particular persons, (which
is nothing but a disolution of the Obligation of the Law, as unto them, whereby
they are bound over to Punishment) as it is commonly restrained, is affirmed by
them whom Grotius in that Book opposed (into whose Tents he was afterward a
Renegado) to be inconsistent with any Satisfaction at all; yea, that which
Grotius maintains per tantundem. But now if you extend that Gospel phrase to
the Compass I have mentioned, they have not the least Color so to do.

2. Whereas the Scripture mentions, That through Christ is Preached the
forgiveness of Sin, Act. 13. 38. I do suppose that phrase to be Comprehensive
of the whole manifestation of God in the COVENANT of Grace.

3, God expressly says, That this is his Covenant, That he will be merciful to
our unrighteousness, Heb. 8. 12.

By the way I cannot close with Mr B. that this place to the Hebrews, and the
other of Jeremiah, 31. 32, 33. do comprize but part of the Covenant, not the
whole. God saying expressly, THIS IS MY COVENANT: To say it is not, is not to
Interpret the Word, but to Deny it. It is true, it is not said that is the
whole Covenant; no more is it that Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life
only. As the want of that term of nestriction, does not enlarge in that, no
more does the want of the note of Universality restrain in this. To say thus,
because here is no Condition expressed, is (...). If you mean such a Condition
as God requires of us, and yet works in us, it is there punctually
expressed, with reference to the nature of the COVENANT, whereof it is a
Condition, which is to effect all the Conditions thereof, in the Covenanters.
This by the way, having resolvedly tied up my self from a Debate of those
Positions which Mr B. dogmatizeth; though a large field, and easy to be walked
in, lies open on every hand, for the scattering of many Magisterial Dictates,
which with confidence enough are crudily asserted.

This is (to return) my First Answer, to the forementioned Objection, with the
Reasons of it, whereunto Mr B. excepteth, as follows.

1 Pardon implies Christ's Death as a Cause; but I would he had showed the
Scripture that makes Pardon so large a thing, as to comprize the whole
Dispensation of Grace; or that makes Christ's death to be a part of it, or
comprised in it. 2 If such a word were in the Scripture, will he not confess
it to be Figurative, and not proper, and so not fit for this Dispute. 3 Else
when he says, That Christ's Death procured our Pardon, he means that it
procured it self.
So he.

To all which I say,

1 The death of Christ, as it is a Cause of Pardon, is not once mentioned in
any of my Answers: There is a wide Difference (in Consideration) between Gods
imputation of Sin to Christ, and the Death of Christ, as the meritorious cause
of Pardon. So that this is Pura Ignoratio Elenchi.

2 Take Pardon in the large sense I intimated, and so the Death of Christ is
not the meritorious cause of the whole, but only of that particular in it,
wherein it is commonly supposed solely to Consist, of which before: But,

In what sense, and upon what grounds, I extended gracious Condonation of sin,
unto that Compass here mentioned, I have now expressed. Let it stand or fall,
as it suits the Judgment of the Reader: the weight of my Answer depends not on
it, at all.

My Second Answer to that Objection I gave in these words.

That Remission, Grace, and Pardon which is in God for Sinners, is not oppossed
to Christ's Merits and Satisfaction, but ours: He pardons all to us, but he
spared not his only Son, he bated him not one farthing.

To this Mr B, thus expressing it, (But it is of Grace to us, though not to
Christ) Answers: Does not that clearly intimate, That Christ was not in the
Obligation? That the Law does threaten every man personally, or else it had
been no favor to accept it of another.

It is marvelous to me, Answ.
That a Learned man should voluntarily choose an Adversary to himself, and yet
Consider the very leaves which he undertakes to Confute, with so much Contempt
or Oscitancy, as to labor to prove against him, what he possitively Asserts
terminis terminantibus. That Christ was not in the Obligation, that he was put
in as a Surety by his own Consent, God by his Sovereignty dispensing with the
Law as to that, yet as a Creditor exacting of him the due Debt of the Law, is
the maine Intendment of the place Mr Baxter here Considers.

2 Grant All that here is said, how does it prove that Christ underwent not the
very Penalty of the Law? Is it because he was not Primarily in the Obligation?
He was put in as a Surety to be the Object of it is Execution. Is it because the
Law does threaten every man Personally? Christ underwent Really, what was
threatened to others: as shall be proved: but, it is not then of favor to
accept it: but this is the (...). And thus to set it down, is but a Petition
(...).

3 How does this Elude the force of my Answer? I see it not at all.

After this, I give a Third Answer to the former Objection, manifesting how the
FREEDOM of Pardon, may Consist with Christ Satisfaction, in these words:

The Freedom then of Pardon has not its foundation in any defect of the Merit
or Satisfaction of Christ; but in Three other things:

1 The Will of God freely appointing the Satisfaction of Christ: Joh. 3. 16.
Romans 5. 8. 1 John 4. 9. 2 In a Gracious Acceptance of that decreed
Satisfaction in our steads, so many, no more. 3 In a free Application of the
Death of Christ unto us. Remission then excludes not a full Satisfaction by the
solution of the very thing in the Obligation, but only the Solution or
Satisfaction of him to whom Pardon and Remission is granted.
It being the Freedom of Pardon that is denied. Upon the supposals of such a
Satisfaction as I Assert, I Demonstrate from whence that Freedom does accrue
unto it, notwithstanding a supposal of such a Satisfaction: not that Pardon
consists in the Three things there recounted, but that it has its Freedom
from them: That is, Supposing those Three things, notwithstanding the
Intervention of Payment made by Christ, it cannot be, but Remission of Sin unto
us must be a free and gracious Act.

To all this Mr B. opposes diverse things. For,

1 Imputation of righteousness (says he) is not any part of Pardon, but a
necessary Antecedent. 2 The same may be said of Gods Acceptance. 3 Its
Application is a large Phrase, and may be meant of several Acts; but of which
here I know not.
In a word this mistake is very great. Answ.
I affirm the Freedom of Pardon to depend on those things; he Answers, That
Pardon does not consist in these things. It is the Freedom of Pardon, whence it
is; not the Nature of Pardon, wherein it is, that we have under Consideration.

But (says he) how can he call it a gracious Acceptance, a gracious
Imputation, a free Application, if it were the same thing the Law requires
that was paid?

To pay all according to the full exaction of the Obligation, needs no favor
to procure Acceptance, Imputation, or Application. Can Justice refuse to accept
of such a payment? or can it require any more?

Though I know not directly what it is he means by saying (I call it) yet I
pass it over. Answ.


2 If all this were done by the Persons themselves, or any one in their stead,
procured and appointed by themselves, then were there some difficulty in these
Questions; but this being otherwise, there is none at all, as has been
declared.

3 How the Payment made by Christ was of Grace, yet in respect of the
Obligation of the Law needed no favor, nor was refusable by Justice, supposing
its free Constitution, shall be afterward declared. To me the Author seems not
to have his wonted cleerness in this whole Section, which might administer
occasion of further Enquiry and Exceptions, but I forbear.

And thus much be spoken, for the clearing and vindicating my Answer to the
Arguments of Grotius against Christ's paying the Idem of the Obligation: The
next shall further confirm the Truth.

CAP. IV.
Further of the matter of the Satisfaction of Christ, wherein is proved, That
it was the same that was in the Obligation.
IT being supposed not to be sufficient to have showed the weakness of my
Endeavor to Assert and Vindicate from Opposition, what I had undertaken.

Mr Baxter adds, That I give up the Cause about which I contend, as having
indeed not understood him, whom I undertook to Oppose, in these words:

Mr Owen gives up the Cause at last, and says as Grotius: (having not
understood Grotius his meaning) as appears, Page 141, 142, 143.

Whether I understand Grotius or no, Answ.
will by and by appear. Whether Mr B. understands Me, or the Controversy by
me handled, you shall have now a TRIAL.

The Assertion which alone I seek to Maintain, is this;

That the Punishment which our Savior under-went, was the same that the Law
required of us: God relaxing his Law as to the Person suffering, but not as to
the Penalty suffered.

Now, if from this I draw back in any of the Concessions following collected
from page 141, 142, 143. I depracate not the Censure of giving up the Cause I
contended for. If otherwise, there is a great mistake in some body of the whole
business.

Of the things then Observe according to Mr B. his Order, I shall take a brief
account.

1 He acknowledges (says he) That the Payment is not made by the Party to
whom Remission is granted, (and so says every man that is a Christian.)

This is a part of the Position it self I maintain, Answ.
and so no going back from it: So that as to this, I may pass as a Christian.

2 He says (ads he) it was a full valuable Compensation (therefore not of the
same.

1 This Inference would trouble Mr B. to prove. Answ.
2 Therefore not made by the same, nor by any of the Debtors appointment, will
follow, (perhaps) but no more. 3 That by Reason of the Obligation upon us, we
our selves were bound to undergo the punishment. Therefore Christ's punishment
was not in the Obligation, but only ours, and so the Law was not fully
Executed, but Relaxed.
1 This is my Thesis fully, Answ.
the Law was Executed as to its Penalty, relaxed as to the Person suffering.

2 The Punishment that Christ under-went, was in the Obligation, though
threatened to us.

4 He says, he means not that Christ bore the same punishment due to us in
all Accidents of Duration and the like: but the same in weight and preasure
(therefore not the same in the Obligation, because not fully the same Act.

The Accidents I mention, Answ.
follow and attend the Person suffering, and not the Penalty it self. All Evils
in any suffering as far as they are sinful, attend the Condition of the Parties
that Suffer: Every thing usually recounted by those who make this and the like
Exceptions, as far as they are purely penal, were on Christ.

5 He says God had power so far to relax his own LAW, as to have the name of a
Surety put into the Obligation, which before was not there, and then to require
the whole debt of that Surety.

And what says Grotius more then this? If the same things in the Obligation be
paid, then the Law is Executed: and if Executed, then not Relaxed. Here he
confesses. That the Sureties name was not in the Obligation, and that God
Relaxed the Law to put it in. Now the main business that Grotius drives at
there, is to prove this Relaxation of the Law, and the non-Execution of it on
the Offenders threatened. Thus far Mr Baxter.

1 All this proves not at all the things intended, Answ.
neither does any Concession here mentioned, in the least take off from the
main Assertion I maintain, as is apparent any at first view. 2 Grotius is so
far from saying more then I do, that he says not so much. 3 This Paralogisme
if the Law be Executed, then not Relaxed; and on the contrary, ariseth-meerly
from a non-Consideration of the nature of Contradictories: The Opposition
fancied here is not (...), as is required of Contradictions: 4 The Observation,
that Crown main business is other, discovers the Bottom of M. B. his mistake.
Even a supposal that I should oppose Grotius in his main Intendment in the
place Considered, which was not once in my thoughts. It was merely about the
nature of the Penalty that Christ underwent, that I Discoursed. How the
Relaxation of the Law, as to the Commutation of Persons may be Established,
whether we affirm, Christ to have paid the Idem or Tantundem. And that Mr B.
affirms the same with me, I can prove by twenty Instances. The Reader (if he
please) may consult Page 18. and 25. 33, 34, 35. 42. 48. and in plain terms
Page 81. In respect of punishment abstracting from Persons, the Law was not
dispensed withal as to Christ? And what said I more?

And so much (if not too much) to Mr Baxters Exceptions, which of what weight
and force they are, I leave to others to judge.

That which I maintain as to this Point in Difference, I have also made
apparent; It is wholly comprised under these Two Heads:

1 Christ suffered the same Penalty which was in the Obligation. 2 To do so, is
to make Payment ejusdem, and not tantidem.
The REASONS of both, I shall briefly subjoyne.

And as to the FIRST, they are these following:

1 The Scripture has expressly revealed the Translation of Punishment in
respect of the Subjects suffering it: but has not spoken one word of the
change of the kind of Punishment, but rather the contrary is affirmed. Romans 8.
32. He spared not his own SON, but delivered him up for us all.

2 All the Punishment due to us, was contained in the Curse and Sanction of the
Law: That is the Penalty of the Obligation whereof we spoke; but this was
undergon by the Lord Christ. For he has REDEEMED us from the Curse of the LAW,
being made a Curse for us, Gall. 3. 13.

3 Where God condemns sin, there he condems it, in that very Punishment which
is due unto it in the Sinner, or rather to the Sinner for it. He has revealed
but one Rule of his proceeding in this case. How he condemned sin in the flesh
of Christ: or in him, sent in the likeness of sinful flesh. Romans 8. 30. God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin condemned sin
in the flesh. The condemning of Sin, is the infliction of Punishment due to Sin.

4 The whole Penalty of Sin is Death, Genesis 2. 11. This Christ underwent for us.
Heb. 2. 14. He tasted Death. And to die for another, is to undergo that Death
which that other should have undergone, 2 Samuel 18. 33. It is true, this Death
may be considered either in Respect of its Essence, (if I may be allowed so to
speak) which is called the pains of Hell which Christ underwent, Psalm. 18. 6.
and 22. 1. Luke 22. 44. or of its Attendencies, as Duration and the like, which
he could not undergo: Psalm. 16. 20. Acts 2. So that whereas Eternal Death may
be considered Two ways, either as such in potentia, and in its own nature, or
as actually: So, our Savior underwent it not in the latter, but first sense,
Heb. 2. 9. 14. which by the Dignity of his Person, 1 Pet. 3. 18. Heb. 9. 26.
28. Romans 5. 9. which raises the Estimation of Punishment, is aequipotent to the
other. There is a sameness in Christ's sufferings with that in the Obligation in
respect of Essence, and equivalency in respect of Attendencies.

5 The meeting of our Iniquities upon Christ, Isa. 53. 6. and his being thereby
made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. lay the very Punishment of our Sin, as to us
threatened, upon him.

6 Consider the Scriptural Descriptions you have of his Perpessions, and see if
they do not plainly hold out the utmost that ever was threatened to sin. There
is the (...) Isa. 53. 5. Peter's (...), 1 Pet. 2. 24. the liver, nibex, wound,
stripe, that in our stead was so on him, that thereby we are healed. Those
Expressions of the Condition of his Soul in his sufferings, whereby he is said
(...), Mat. 26. 34. Mark 14. 33. (...). Luke 22. 44. Sadness unto death, Mat.
26. 38. That dreadful cry, Why have thou forsaken me? Those cries out of the
deep, and mighty supplications under his fear, Heb. 5. 7. that were upon him do
all make out, That the bitterness of the Death due to Sin was fully upon his
Soul. Sum all his outward appearing Preasures, Mocks, Scoffs, Scorns, Cross,
Wounds, Death, etc. And what do some of their afflictions, who have suffered
for his Name, come short of it? And yet how far were they above those dreadful
expressions of anguish, which we find upon the fellow of the Lord of Hosts, the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who received not the Spirit by measure, but was
anointed with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows? Certainly his
un-conceivable sufferings were in an other kind, and such as set no example to
any of his, to suffer in after him. It was no less then the weight of the wrath
of God, and the whole punishment due to sin, that he wrestled under.

2 The Second Part of my Position is to me confirmed by these, and the like
Arguments: That there is a Distinction to be allowed between the Penalty and
the Person suffering, is a common apprehension: especially when the nature of
the Penalty is only enquired after. If a man that had but one Eye were Censured
to have an Eye put out, and a dear Friend pitying his deplorable Condition,
knowing, that by undergoing the Punishment decreed, he must be left to utter
blindness, should upon the allowance of Commutation (as in Zaleucus case)
submit to have one of his own Eyes put out, and so satisfy the Sentence given,
though by having two Eyes, he avoid himself the misery that would have attended
the others suffering, who had but one. If (I say) in this Case, any should ask,
Whether he underwent the idem the other should have done, or tantundem, I
suppose the Answer would be easy. In things Real it is unquestionable; and in
things Personally, I shall pursue it no further, lest it should prove a strife
of words. And thus far of the suffering of Christ in a way of Controversy:
what follows will be more Positive.

CAP. V.
The Second Head about JUSTIFICATION before Believing.
THE next thing I am called into Question about, is Concerning actual, and
absolute Justification before Believing: this Mr Baxter speaks to page 146, and
so forwards: and First Answers the Arguments of Maccovius for such
Justification, and then page 151 Applies himself to remove such further
Arguments, and places of Scripture, as are by me Produced for the Confirmation
of that Assertion.

Here perhaps I could have desired a little more Candor. To have an Opinionion
fastened on me, which I never once received, nor intimated the least Thought
of, in that whole Treatise, or any other of Mine; and then my Arguments
Answered as to such an end, and purpose, as I not once intended to promote by
them, is a little to harsh Dealing. It is a facile thing, to Render any man's
Reasonings exceedingly weak, and rediculous, if we may impose upon them such,
and such things to be proved by them, which their Author never once intended.

For Partional Justification, Evangelical Justification, whereby a Sinner is
completely Justified, that it should preceed Believing, I have not only not
Asserted, but Positively Denied, and disproved by many Arguments: To be now
traduced as a Patron of that Opinion, and my Reasons for it, Publicly
Answered, seems to me something Uncouth: However I am Resolved not to interpose
in other men's Disputes, and Differencies, yet lest I should be again, and
further mistaken in this, I shall briefly give in my Thoughts to the whole
Difficulty: after I have discovered, and discussed the Ground, and Occasion of
this mistake.

In an Answer to an Argument of Grotius about the Satisfaction of Christ,
denying that by it we are ipso facto delivered from the Penalty due to Sin: I
Affirmed that by his Death, Christ did actually, or ipso facto deliver us from
the Curse, by being made a Curse for us; and this is that, which gave occasion,
to that Imputation before mentioned.

To clear my mind in this, I must desire the Reader to consider, That my Answer
is but a Denial of Grotius his Assertions: In what kind, and respect Grotius
does there deny that we are ipso facto delivered by the Satisfaction of Christ,
in that sense, and that only, do I affirm that we are so: otherwise there were
no Contradictions between his Assertion, and mine, not speaking ad idem, and
eodem respectu.

The truth is, Grotius does not in that place whence this Argument is taken,
fully, or clearly manifest, what he intends by a deliverance which is not
actual, or ipso facto: and therefore I made bold to Interpret his Mind, by the
Analogy of that Opinion wherewith he was thoroughly infected about the Death of
Christ. According to that, Christ delivering us by his Satisfaction, not
actually, nor ipso facto, is so to make Satisfaction for us, as that we shall
have no Benefit by his Death, but upon the performance of a Condition, which
himself by that Death of his, did not absolutely procure. This was that which I
opposed and therefore affirmed, That Christ by his Death did actually, or ipso
facto, deliver us.

Let the Reader then here Observe:

1 That our Deliverance is to be referred to the Death of Christ, according to
its own Causality; that is, as a Cause Meritorious: Now such Causes do
actually, and ipso facto produce all those Effects, which immediately slow from
them; not in an immediation of Time, but Causality. Look then what Effects do
follow, or what things soever are procured by them, without the interposition
of any other Cause in the same kind, they are said to be procured by them
actually, or ipso facto.

2 That I have abundantly proved in the Treatise mentioned, That if the Fruits
of the Death of Christ, be to be communicated unto us upon Condition, and that
Condition to be among those Fruits, and be it self to be absolutely
communicated upon no Condition, then all the Fruits of the Death of Christ, are
as absolutely procured for them, for whom he Died, as if no Condition had been
prescribed; for these things come all to one.

3 I have proved in the same Place, That Faith, which is this Condition, is it
self procured by the Death of Christ, for them for whom he Died, to be freely
bestowed on them, without the prescription of any such Condition as on whose
fulfilling, the Collation of it should depend.

These things being considered (as I hoped they would have been by every one,
that should undertake to Censure any thing, as to this Business in that
Treatise (they being there all handled at large) it is apparent what I intended
by this actual Deliverance: viz. That the Lord Jesus by the Satisfaction and
Merit of his Death, and Obligation made for all, and only his Elect, has
actually, and absolutely purchased, and procured for them all Spiritual
Blessings of Grace, and Glory to be made out unto them, and bestowed upon them
in Gods way, and Time, without dependence on any CONDITION to be by them
performed, not absolutely procured for them thereby: whereby they became to have
a Right unto the GOOD THINGS by him Purchased, to be in due time Possessed
according to Gods Way, Method, and Appointment.

From a faithful adherence unto this Persuasion, I see nothing as yet of the
least Efficacy, or force to dissuade me: and am bold to tell these concerned
therein, That their Conditional Satisfaction, or their suspending the Fruits of
the Death of Christ upon Conditions, as though the Lord should give him to die
for us upon Condition of such, and such things, is a vain Figment, contrary to
the Scriptures, inconsistent in it self, and destructive of the true value, and
virtue of the Death of Christ; which by the Lords Assistance, I shall be ready
at any time to Demonstrate.

My Intention in the place Excepted against being cleared, I shall now tender
my Thoughts to these Two things: 1 The distinct Consideration of the Acts of
the Will of God, before, and after the Satisfaction of Christ: as also before,
and after our Believing toward us, as unto Justification. 2 The distinct
Estate of the Sinner upon that Consideration: with what is the Right to the
Fruits of the Death of Christ which the Elect of God have before Believing.

CAP. VI.
Of the Acts of Gods Will toward Sinners, Antecedent and Consequent to the
Satisfaction of Christ: Of Grotius Judgment herein.
THE distinct Consideration of the Acts of Gods Will, in reference to the
Satisfaction of Christ, and our believing, (according to the former Proposal)
is the First thing to be Considered.

Grotius, who with many (and in an especial manner with Mr Baxter) is of very
great account, (and that in Theology) distinguishes (as himself calls them
with a School term) 3 Moments, or Instances of the Divine Will.

Distinguenda sunt tria momenta divinae voluntatis. Primum est, ante Christi
mortem positam aut re ipsa, aut in decreto Dei, et praescientia. In hoc momento
iratus peccatori est Deus, sed ita, ut non aversetur omnes. irae deponendae
vias, ac rations.
1 Before the Death of Christ, either actually accomplished, or in the purpose,
and foreknowledge of God; in this instant (he says) God is Angry with the
Sinner, but so, as that he is not averse from all Ways of laying down his
Anger.

Secundum momentum est, posita jam Christi morte, in quo Deus jam non
constituit tantum, sed and promittit iram se depositurum.
2 Upon the Death of Christ, or that being supposed, wherein God not only
Purposes, but also Promises to lay aside his Anger.

Tertium est, cum homo vera fide in Christum credit, et Christus ex foederis
formula credentem Deo commendit. Hic jam Deus deponit iram, hominemque in
gratiam recipit. de Satisfact. Christi. Cap. 7.
3 When a man by true Faith believes in Christ, and Christ according to the
Tenure of the Covenant commends him to God: here now God lays aside his
Anger, and receives man into Favor. Thus far he.

Amongst all the attempts of distinguishing the Acts of Gods Will in reference
unto Christ, and Sinners, what ever I considered, I never found any more slight
Atheological, and discrepant from the Truth, then this of Grotius.

Ps. 50. 21 Exodus 3. 14. 1 Samuel 15. 29 Job 23. 13. Psa. 102. 26, 27. Isa. 14.
27.
To measure the Almighty by the Standard of a man, and to frame in the mind a
mutable Idol, instead of the Eternal, Unchangeable God, is a Thing that the
fleshly Reasonings of dark understandings are prone unto. Feigns the Lord in
one Instant Angry, afterward promising to cease to be so, then in another
instant laying down his Anger, and taking up a contrary affection, and you seem
to me, to do no less.

What it may be esteemed in Law, which was that Authors faculty, I know not:
but suppose in Divinity, that (notwithstanding the manifold Attempts of some
(...) in most heads of Religion) 2 King. 19. 6 Isa. 37. 3 1 Timothy 1. 13
the ascribing unto the most holy, things alien, and opposite unto his glorious
nature, is by common consent, accounted no less then Quidcunque negat aliquid
de Deo, quod ei convenit, vel asserit de eo, quod ei non convenit, derogat
divinae bonitati, and est blasphemus. Thom. 22. ae. q. 13. a. 1. c.
blasphemy: whither this be here don, or no, may easily appear. I hope then
without the offense of any, I may be allowed to call those Dictates of Grotius
to the Rule, and Measure of Truth.

1 Before the foresight of the Death of Christ (says he) God is angry with
Sinners, but not wholly averse from all ways of laying aside that Anger.

Answ. 1 That God should be conceived angry after the manner of men, or with
any such kind of Passion, is gross Anthropomorphisme; as bad, if not worse,
then the assigning of him a bodily shape. Libra voluntas ulciscendae injuriae.
The Anger of God is a pure Act of his Will, whereby he will effect* and
inflict the Effects of Anger. Now what is before the foresight of the Death of
Christ, is certainly from Eternity. Gods Anger must respect either the purpose
of God, Quae dicuntur (...), intelligenda sunt (...). Amor, et gaudium, and
alia ejusmodi, cum attribuuntur Deo, significant simplicem actum voluntatis,
cum similitudine effectus, absque passione: Aquin. 12. q. 22. a. 3.
or the Effects of it. The latter it cannot be, for they are undoubtedly all
temporal. It must be then his purpose from Eternity to inflict punishment, Ephesians.
1. 11.
that is the Effect of Anger. This then is the First thing in the business of
Redemption assigned by Grotius, unto the Lord. viz. He purposed from Eternity,
to inflict punishment on Sinners: and on what sinners? even those, for whom he
gives Christ to die, and afterward receives into favor, as he expresses
himself. Behold here a Mystery of Vorstian Theology: God changing his eternal
purposes. Arm. disp. pub. de natu. Dei.
This Arminius at first could not down withal, inferring from hence, That the
Will of God differed not from his Essence, These. 51.
that every act thereof, is, 1 Most Simple: 2 Infinite: 3 Eternal: 4 Immutable:
5 Holy. Reason it self would fain speak in this Cause, but that the Scriptures
do so abound, many places are noted in the Margin. Ja. 1. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Ps.
33. 9, 10, 11. Acts. 15. 18. etc. may be added. A mutable god, is of the
dunghill.

2 That the Death of Christ is not comprised in the first consideration of Gods
Mind, and act of his Will toward Sinners to be saved, is assumed gratis.

3 He is not (says he) averse from all ways of laying down this Anger. This
Schem Grotius places (as is evident) in God, as the foundation, and bottom of
sending Christ for our Redemption. This he immediately subjoyns without the
least intimation of any further inclination in God toward Sinners, for whom he
gives his Son. But,

1 This is a mere negation of inflicting Anger for the present: or a suspension
of that affection from working according to its Quality; which how it can be
ascribed to the pure and active Ep. 1. 11
Will of God, I know not. Yea, it is above disproved.

2 Such a kind of Frame, as it is injurious to God, so to be held out as the
fountain of his sending Christ to die for us, is (I am persuaded) an Abhorrency
to Christians. And,

3 Whether this Answer that, which the Scripture holds out, as the most intense
distinguishing love. Joh. 3. 16. Romans 5. 8. Chap. 8. 32. 1 John 4. 9, 10. is
easily discernable. A natural velleity to the good of the Creature, is the
thing here couched, but was never proved.

In the second Instance, God (says he) the Death of Christ being supposed, not
only determines, but also promises to lay aside his anger.

1 What terms can be invented to hold out more expressly a Change, Answ.
and Alteration in the Unchangable God, then these here used, I know not. 2
That the Will or Mind of God, is altered from one respect toward us, to
another, by the Consideration of the Death of Christ, is a low, carnal
Conception. The Will of God is not moved by any thing without it self. Aliud
est mutare voluntatem, aliud velle aliquarum rerum mutationem.
Alterations are in the things altered, not in the Will of God concerning them.
3 To make this the whole Effect of the Death of Christ, (that God should
determine, and promise to lay aside his wrath) is Mat. 18. ^^ 1 Timothy 1. 15 Ep.
5. 26, 27. Ep. 2. 15, 16. Col. 1. 13. 1 John 1. 7.
no Scripture discovery, either as to Name, or Thing. 4 The Purposes of God,
which are all Eternal, and the Promises of God, which are all made in time, are
very inconveniently ranged in the same Series. 5 That by the Death of Christ,
Atonement is made, everlasting Redemption purchased, that God is Reconciled, a
Right unto Freedom obtained, for those for whom he died, shall be afterward
declared. 6 If God does only Purpose, and Promise to lay aside his Anger upon
the Death of Christ, etc.
but does it not until our actual believing; then, 1 our Faith is the proper
procuring cause of Reconciliation; the Death of Christ, but a Requisite
Antecedent, which is not the Scripture Phrase. Romans 5. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 18. Ephesians.
2. 16. Col. 1. 20, 21. Dan. 9. 24. Heb. 2. 17. Ephesians. 1. 7. Ephesians. 2. 8
Heb. 9. 12. 2 How comes the Sinner by Faith, if it is the Gift of God? Phil.
1. 29
It must be an Issue of Anger, and Enmity, for that Schem only, is actually
ascribed to him, before our enjoyment of it; Strange! that God should be so far
reconciled, as to give us Faith, that we may be reconciled to him, that
thereupon he may be reconciled to us.

3 For the Third Instance, of Gods receiving the sinner into love, and favor
upon his believing, quite laying aside his anger. I Answer: To wave the
Anthropomorphisme, wherewith this Assertion is tainted as the former: If by
receiving into favor, he intend absolute, complete pactional Justification,
being an Act of favor, quitting the sinner from the guilt of sin, charged by
the Accusation of the Law, terminated on the Conscience of a sinner: I confess
it, in order of nature, to follow our beleiving.

I might Consider further the Attempts of others for the right sttating of this
business, but it would draw me beyond my Intention. His failings herein, who is
so often mentioned, and so much used, by him, who gives occasion to this
rescript, I could not but remark. What are my own Thoughts and Apprehensions of
the whole, I shall in the next place briefly impart.

Now to make way hereunto, some things I must suppose: which though some of
them otherwhere controverted, yet not at all in reference to the present
business: and they are these.

1 That Christ died only for the Elect: or God gave his Son to die only for
those, whom he chooses to life, and salvation for the praise of his glorious
Grace.

This is granted by Mr Baxter, where he affirms, That Christ bare not
punishment for them, who must bear punishment themselves in eternal fire. These.
33. p. 162. And again, Christ died not for final Unbelief. These. 32. p. 159.
therefore not for them who are finally Unbelievers, as all non-Elected are, and
shall be. For what Sinners he died, he died for all their sins, Romans 5. 6, 7,
8. 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 John 1. 7.

If any shall say, That as he died not for the final Unbelief of others, so not
for the final Unbelief of the Elect, and so not for final Unbelief at all.

I Answer,

First, If by final Unbelief, you mean that which is actually so, Christ
satisfied not for it. His satisfaction cannot be extended to those things,
whose Existence is prevented by his Merit. The Omission of this in the
consideration of the Death Christ, Heb. 9. 12
lies at the bottom of many mistakes. Merit, and Satisfaction, are of equal
Extent as to their Objects: both also tend to the same End, but in sundry
respects.

Secondly, If by final Unbelief, you understand that which would be so,
notwithstanding all means, and remedies, were it not for the Death of Christ,
so he did satisfy for it. It Is Existens being prevented by his Merit. So then,
if Christ died not for final Unbelief, he died not for the finally Unbeleeving:
Though the Satisfaction of his Death has not paid for it, the Merit of his
Death would remove it.

Thirdly, I Suppose, That the Means, as well as the Ends, Grace, as Glory, are
the Purchase, and procurement of Jesus Christ: See this proved in my Treatise
of Redemption. Lib. 3. Cap. 4. etc.

Fourthly, That God is absolutely immutable, and unchangable in all his
Attributes: Neither does his Will admit of any alteration. This proved above.

Fifthly, That the Will of God is not moved properly by any external Cause
whatsoever, unto any of its Acts, whether imminent, or transient. For,

1 Cum voluntas sit ejus essentia, non movetur ab alio a se, sed a se tantum,
eo modo loquendi, quo intelligere, et velle, dicitur motus, et secundum hoc
Plato dixit, primum movins movet seipsum: Aq. p. 1. q. 19. a. 2. a. 3.
By a moving Cause, we understand a Cause Morally Efficient; and if any thing
were so properly in respect of any Act of Gods Will, then the Act (which is the
Will of God Acting) must in some respect, (viz. As it is an Effect) be less
worthy, and inferior to the Cause; for so is every Effect, in respect of it is
Cause. And,

2 Every Effect produced, proceeds from a Passive possibility unto the
Effect, which can no way be assigned unto God, besides it must be temporary;
for nothing that is Eternal, can have dependence upon that, whose Rise is in
Time: and such are all things external to the Will of God, even the Merit of
Christ himself.

3 I cannot imagine how there can be any other Cause, why God Wills any
thing, then why he not Wills, or Wills not other things, which for any to
Assign, will be found Difficult: Mat. 11. 25. Chap. 20. 15. So then when God
Wills one thing for another, as our Salvation for the Death of Christ, the
one is the Cause of the other; neither moves the Will of God. Hence,

Sixthly, All Alterations are in the things, concerning which the Acts of the
Will of God are, none in the Will of God its self.

These things being premised, what was before proposed, I shall now in order
make out; beginning with the Eternal Acts of the Will of God toward us,
antecedent to all, or any Consideration of the DEATH of CHRIST.

CAP. VII.
In particular of the Will of God toward them for whom Christ died, and their
state, and Condition as Considered Antecedanous to the Death of Christ, and all
Efficiency thereof.
FIRST then, the Habitude of God toward man, Antecedent to all foresight of
the Death of Christ, is an Act of Supreme Sovereignty, and Dominion, appointing
them, by means suited to the manifestation of his Glorious Properties,
according to his Infinitely Wise, and Free Disposal, to Eternal Life, and
Salvation, for the praise of his glorious Grace.

That this Salvation was never but one, or of one kind, consisting in the same
kind of Happiness, in reference unto Gods appointment, needs not much proving.
To think that God appointed one kind of Condition for man if he had continued
in Innocence, and another upon his Recovery from the Fall; is to think, That
his Praescience is but Conjectural, and his Will alterable.

In this Instant then, we suppose no kind of Affection in God, properly so
called: No Changable Resolution, no Inclinableness, and Propensity of Nature,
to the good of the Creature in General, no Frame of being angry, with only a
not-averseness to the laying down of his anger, etc. All which, and the like
are derogatory to the Infinite Perfection of God.

Nor yet any Act of pitying, and pardoning Mercy, much less any quiting, or
clearing of Sinners, whereby they should be justified from Eternity; the
Permission of sin it self in the purpose of it, being not presupposed, but
included in this Habitude of Gods Will toward man, to make it complete.

Neither any Absolute intention of doing good unto man, without respect unto
Christ, and his Merits, they refering to the good to be done, not to his
appointment; for by them is this Purpose of his to be accomplished.

Nor Lastly, does it contain any actual Relaxation, Suspension, or Abrogation
of that Law and it is Penalties, by which it is his Will the Creature shall be
Regulated, in reference to the Persons concerning whom this Act of his Will is:
They standing indeed, in that Relation thereunto, as in the season of their
Existence, their several Conditions expose them to, by virtue of the first
Constitution of that Law.

But it is such an Act of his Will, as in the Scripture is termed (...), Acts
2. 23. Romans 8. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 20. (...), Romans 8. 28. 9. 11. Ephesians. 3. 11. (...),
Mat. 11. 26. Ephesians. 1. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. Luke 12. 32. (...), Ephesians. 1. 11. (...) 2 Timothy 2 19. (...), Ephesians. 1. 5. 11. Romans 8. 29. Ordination, or Appointment unto
life, Act. 13. 48. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5. 9. All which, and diverse other expressions,
point at the same thing.

Divines commonly in one word call it his Decree of Election, and sometimes
according to Scripture, Election it self, Ephesians. 1. 4. Neither does the Word hold
out any Habitude of God toward man. Antecedaneous to all Efficiency of the
Death of Christ, but only this: I speak of them only in this whole DISCOURSE
for whom he died.

That this is an Act of Sovereignty, or Supreme Dominion, and not of Mercy
(properly so called) has been by others abundantly proved. And this I place as
the Causa (...) of the Satisfaction of Christ, and the whole dispensation of
making out Love unto us, through various Acts of Mercy.

This in the Scripture is called the Love of God. Romans 9. 13. and is set out as
the most intense Love, that ever he bears to any of his Creatures: Joh. 3.
16. Romans 5. 8. 1 John 4. 9. Being indeed as properly Love, as love can be
assigned unto God. His Love is but an act of his Will, whereby, (...). And in
respect of Effects, (in which respect, chiefly Affections are ascribed unto
God) it has the most eminent possible. Now this being discriminating, can no
way be reconciled with the common affection before disproved.

For the Order, and Series of the Purposes of God, as most natural for our
apprehension, and agreeable to his own infinite Wisdom, tending to the
completing of this Love, in all its Issues, and Fruits, as it is more curious
(perhaps) in the framing, then necessary to be known, so certainly, it would be
too long and intricate a work for me to discuss at present, in reference to
this Intendment. Only in general, this must be granted, that all the Thoughts
of God, concerning the way of accomplishing this Act of his Will, must be
subordinate hereunto, as comprizing the End, and Coordinate among themselves,
as being concerning the Means.

In Particular, the Constitution, or appointment of the Covenant of Free Grace,
for the Recovery, and bringing home unto God of fallen man, has immediate
dependence thereon, I mean in that way of Dependence, which their order gives
unto them. I cannot assent to what Mr Baxter has asserted in this matter;
These. 14. Expl. p. 90. The Satisfaction of Christ (says he) to the Law, goes
before the new Covenant, though not in regard of its payment (which was in the
fullness of time) yet in undertaking, acceptance, and efficacy; there could be
no treating on new terms, until the old Obligation was satisfied, and suspended.

Had he attempted the proof of this Assertion, perhaps he would have found it a
more difficult Undertaking, then barely to Affirm it. Some few REASONS to the
contrary, that present themselves, I shall briefly set down.

1 Christ himself with his whole Satisfaction, and Merit, is included in the
Covenant: therefore his Satisfaction is not antecedent to the COVENANT. The
First appears, in that all Promises of Pardoning Mercy are in, and of this
new Covenant. Heb. 8. 10. 12. but now, in them, as the foundation of that
Mercy, is Christ himself with his SATISFACTION comprised, Genesis 3. 15. Esa. 9.
6, 7.

2 He, who in all that he is, as made unto us, was the Mediator of the new
Covanant, and whose Merit, and Satisfaction in all that they are, are appointed
for the procuring the Mercies of the NEW COVENANT, his Satisfaction is not
antecedent to the Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. Chap. 8. 6. etc.

3 The Constitution of the New Covenant, as it is in the Purpose of God, is the
Rise, and Fountain of giving Christ with his Satisfaction for us. It is in the
Purpose of God to save us through Faith by pardoning mercy: in the pursuit of
that Design, and for the praise of that glorious Grace, is Christ given. Joh.
3. 16. Romans 8. 32. Or thus:

4 If the designation of that way of life, and salvation, which is administered
by the Gospel, be antecedent to the satisfaction of Christ, then the
satisfaction of Christ is not antecedent to the New Covenant: for nothing can
be before, and after the same thing: Understand the designation of the way of
life, and the satisfaction of Christ, in the same order of Decree, or
Execution. Now the supposal is manifest: The satisfaction of Christ being
appointed as the means of accomplishing that way of life.

If Mr Baxter intends those latter words (There could be no treating on new
terms, before the OLD OBLIGATION was satisfied, or suspended) as a proof of his
former Assertion, he will fail in his intendment, as I supose. For,

1 Treating on new terms, denotes either consilium in eundi foederis, or
exequendi: If the First, it is nothing but the Purpose of God to save his Elect
by pardoning Mercy, for the praise of his glorious Grace: This is wholly
Antecedent to any Efficiency of the death, and Satisfaction of Christ, as being
of mere, and absolute Grace, Jer. 31. 3. Hab. 8. 7, 8.

If the Latter be intended, or the actual taking of Sinners into Covenant, by
working an acceptance of it upon their Spirits, and obedience to the Condition
of it, in their hearts, then though the satisfaction of Christ be antecedent
here unto, yet it is not thence, antecedent to the new Covenant: For the new
Covenant, and taking into Covenant, are distinct.

This then being assigned unto God after our manner of Apprehension, the next
Enquiry is into the State, and Condition of those Persons, who are the peculiar
Object of the act of Gods Will before described, in reference thereunto,
antecedaneous to all Consideration of the Death of Christ, and all Efficacy
thereof.

The Scripture speaking of them in this Condition, says, That they are
beloved: Romans 9. 13. Romans 11. 28. Elected: Ephesians. 14. Ordained unto eternal life:
Acts 13. 48. 2 Thessalonians. 2 13. Whether only the Eternal Actings of the Will of God
toward them, or also their own change, either Actual in respect of real State,
and Condition; or Relative in reference to the Purpose of GOD, is not certainly
evident. Hereunto then, I Propose these Two Things:

1 By the Eternal Love, Purpose, and Act of Gods Will toward them that shall
be saved, (who are so from thence) they are not actually changed from that
Condition* which is common to them, with all the Sons of men after the fall.

2 By virtue of that Love alone, they have not so much as Personal Right unto
any of those things which are the proper Effects of that LOVE, and which it
produces in due season, beseemingly to the Wisdom, and Justice of God.

Either of these ASSERTIONS shall be briefly proved.

For the First, it is manifest:

1 From that Act of Gods Will, which to this Love is Contradistinct: What
change is wrought in the Loved, or Elected, by the Purpose of God according to
Election; an answerable Change must be wrought in the hated, and appointed to
condemnation, by the Decree of Reprobation: Now that this should really alter
the Condition of men, and actually dispose them under the Consequences of that
Purpose, cannot be granted.

2 Anallogie from other Eternal Purposes of God, gives a Demonstration hereof.
The Eternal Purposes of the divine Will, for the Creation of the World out of
Nothing; left that Nothing, as very nothing as ever, until an Act of Almighty
Power gave (in the beginning) Existence, and Being to the things, that are
seen. Things have their certain Fructurition, not instant actual Existence from
the Eternal Purposes of God, concerning them.

3 The Scripture plainly places all men in the same State and Condition before
Conversion, and Reconciliation. We have proved, That Jews, and Gentiles are all
under sin, Romans 3. 9, 10. So every mouth is stopped, and all the World is
become guilty before God. verse 19. All being by nature, Children of wrath:
Ephesians. 2. 3. The Condition of all in Unregeneracy, is really one, and the same.
Those who think it is a mistaken Apprehension in the Elect to think so, are
certainly too much mistaken in that Apprehension. He that believes not the
Son, the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3. 36. If the mis-apprehension be,
as as they say it is, Unbelief, it leaves them, in whom it is, under the wrath
of God.

He that would see this further cleared, and confirmed, may consult my Treatise
of REDEMPTION, Lib. 3. Cap. 8. where it is purposely, and expressly handled at
large.

Hence Mr Baxter may have some directions how to dispose of that Censure
concerning me, which yet he is pleased to say, That he suspendeth, page 158.
viz. That I should affirm Justification to be nothing but the manifestation of
Eternal Love, which I have more, then in one place, or two, Expressly opposed.
That any one should but here, and there consult a few Lines, or Leaves of my
Treatise, I no way blame: In such things we all use our Liberty: but that upon
so slight a view, as cannot possibly represent the Frame, Structure, and
Coherence of my Judgment in any particular, to undertake a Confutation, and
Censure of it, cannot well be done without some regreet to candid Ingenuity.

For the Second Assertion laid down, which goes something farther, then the
former, it is easily deduced from the same Principles therewithal: I shall
therefore add only one ARGUMENT for the Confirmation thereof.

God having appointed that his Eternal Love in the Fruits thereof, should be no
otherwise Communicated but only in, and by Christ, all right thereunto, must
of necessity be of his procurement, and Purchasing. Yea, the End of the
Mediation of the Lord Jesus, is, To give Right, Title, and Possession in their
several Order, and seasons unto, and in all the Fruits, Issues, and Tendency's
of that Love, unto them whose Mediator he is appointed to be.

Thus far then, all is seated in the bosom of the Almighty. All differencing
Acts of Grace flowing from hence, being to be made out as seems Good unto him
in his Infinite wise Sovereignty; from whence alone is the disposal of all
these things, as to that Order which may most conduce to his Glory: And this
also writes vanity upon the Objection (insisted on by Mr Baxter, page 157.)
that when we have a Right, we must presently have a Possession: All these
things being to be moderated according to his free Sovereign disposal.

And this concerns the FIRST INSTANT proposed.

CAP. VIII.
Of the Will of God in Reference to them for whom Christ died immediately upon
the Consideration of his Death; and their State, and Condition before actual
Believing in Relation thereunto.
THE Second Instant Proposed to be Considered, is, In the immediate Issue of
the Death of Christ, as Purposed, and accomplished. Purpose, and Accomplishment
are indeed different; but their Effects in respect of God, are the same. In
reference to us also* the Death of Christ has the same Efficacy as promised,
and as performed. What Acts the Scripture ascribes unto God, antecedent unto
any Consideration of the Death of Christ (or at least such as are absolutely
free, and of Sovereignty, without any influence of causality from thence) we
saw before: (for as for the order of Gods Decrees compared among themselves, I
will not with any one Contend) Here we enquire what it holds out of him, that
being in all its Efficacy supposed.

And we Affirm,

1 That the Will of God is not moved to any thing thereby, nor changed into any
other Respect toward those for whom Christ died, then what it had before; This
was formerly proved, and must again be touched on. But,

2 The Death of Christ purposed, and accounted effectual (as before) God can
agreeable to his infinite Justice, Wisdom, Truth, and appointment, make out
unto sinners for whom Christ died, or was to die, all those good things, which
he before purposed, and Willed by such means to them: those things being
purchased, and procured, and all hindrances of bestowing them, being removed,
by that Satisfaction, and Merit, which by free Compact, he Agreed, and
Consented should be in that Death of Christ.

3 That as the making out of all spiritual blessings, first purposed by the
Father, then purchased by the Son, that they might be bestowed Condecently to
divine Justice; God has reserved it to his own Sovereign disposal. That it be
done, so that they for whom this whole Dispensation is appointed, may really
enjoy the Fruits of it, is all, that necessarily is included, either in the
Purpose, or Purchase.

Hence it is that the discharge of the Debtor, does not immediately follow the
Payment of the Debt by Christ, not because that Payment is refusable; but
because in that very Covenant, and Compact, from whence it is that the Death of
Christ, is a Payment; God reserveth to himself this Right, and Liberty, to
discharge the Debtor, when, and how he pleases. I mean as to Times and
Seasons; for otherwise, the means of actual freedom, is procured by that
Payment, though not considered merely as a Payment, which denotes only
Satisfaction, but as it had adjoined Merit also.

Therefore that Principle much used, and rested on by Mr Baxter in the Business
of Satisfaction, to obviate this very difficulty, of a not immediate discharge,
if Christ paid the Debt, viz. That the Satisfaction of Christ is a refusable
Payment; which he presses Page 149, 150. is neither true in it self, nor
accommodate to this difficulty*

1 Not True: For,

The Suffering of CHRIST may be Considered, either,

1, Absolutely, as in it self, abstracting from the Consideration of any
Covenant, or Compact thereabout; and so it cannot be said to be a refusable
Payment: not because not refusable, but because no Payment. That any thing
should have any such reference unto God as a Payment, or Satisfaction, whether
refusable or otherwise, is not from its self, and its own nature, but from the
Constitution of God alone. Between God, and the Creature there is no Equality,
not so much as of Proportion. Christ in Respect of his Humane Nature, though
United to the Deity, is a Creature, and so could not absolutely satisfy, or
merit any thing at the hand of God: I mean with that kind of merit, which
arises from an absolute Proportion of things. This Merit, can be found only
among Creatures: and the Advancement of Christ's Humanity takes it not out of
that Number. Neither in this sense can any Satisfaction be made to God for sin.
The Sinners own undergoing the Penalty neither is Satisfaction in the sense
whereof we speak, neither can it properly be said to be so at all; no more then
a thing to be done, which is Endlessly in doing.

2 It may be Considered with Reference unto Gods Constitution, and
Determinatiou, Predestmating Christ unto that Work, and appointing the Work by
him to be accomplished, to be satisfactory, equaling (by that Constitution) the
End, and the Means. And thus the Satisfaction of Christ in the Justice of God
was not refusable; the Wisdom, Truth, Justice, and suitable Purpose of God,
being engaged to the Contrary.

2, This distinction is not accommodate to this difficulty; the sole Reason
thereof being what was held out. before, of the Interest of Gods Sovereign
Right to the bestowing of Purposed, Purchased, Promised Blessings, as to Times,
and Seasons, according to the free Council of his own Will.

3, Hence then it is, That God in the Scripture upon the Death of Christ is
said to be reconciled, to be returned unto Peace with them for whom he so died,
the Enmity being slain, and peace actually made, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 16. Collos.
1. 20. because he now will, and may, suitablely to his Justice* Wisdom, and
Appointment, make out unto them? for whom the Atonement was made, all fruits of
Love, Peace, and Amity. Heb. 2. 17. Romans 5. 10, 11. 2 Cor. 5. 19.

The OBJECTION unto this, How then can God deny us the present Possession of
Heaven; used by Mr Baxter, Page 157. is not of any force, the whole disposal of
these Things, being left to his own pleasure.

And this is the SCHEME, which upon the Death of CHRIST, we assign unto God:
He is atoned, appeased, actually reconciled, at peace with those for whom
Christ died, and in due time for his sake will bestow upon them all the Fruits,
and Issues of Love, and renewed Friendship.

This possibly may give some light into the immediate Effect of the DEATH of
CHRIST; which though I shall not purposely now handle, yet Mr Baxter with much
diligence having employed himself in the Investigation thereof, I shall turn
aside a little to Consider his ASSERTIONS, in this Particular.

CAP. IX.
A Degression concerning the Immediate Effect of the Death of Christ.
IT is one of the greatest and noblest Questions in our Controverted Divinity,
What are the immediate Effects of Christ's Death? He that can rightly Answer
this, is a Divine indeed; and by help of this, may expedite most other
Controversies about Redemption, and Justification. In a word; The Effects of
Redemption undertaken, could not be upon a Subject not yet existent, and so no
Subject, though it might be for them. None but Adam and Eve were then Existent:
Yet as soon as we do Exist, we receive benefit from it. The suspending of the
rigorous execution of the Sentence of the Law, is the most observable immediate
Effect of the Death of Christ; which suspension is some kind of Deliverance
from it. Thus far Mr Baxter. These. 9. Explicat. page 67.

There are scarce more lines, Answ.
then mistakes in this Discourse: Some of them may be touched on.

1 Effects are to be Considered with Respect to their Causes. Causes are Real,
or Moral. Real, or Physical Causes, produce their Effects immediately, either
Immediatione suppositi, or Virtutis: Unto them the subject must be Existent. I
speak not of creating power, where the Act produces its Object.

Moral Causes do never immediately acting their own Effects, nor have any
immediate influence into them: There is between such Causes, and their Effects,
the intervention of some 3d Thing, previous to them both, viz. Proportion,
Constitution, Law, Covenant, which takes in the Cause, and lets out the Effect:
And this for all Circumstances of where, how, when, suitable to the limitations
in them expressed, or employed: with the Nature of the things themselves.

The Death of Christ is a Moral Cause, in respect of all its Effects: Whether
those subjects on which it is to have its Effects, be Existent, or not
Existent, at the time of its performance, is nothing at all considerable: If it
wrought Physically, and Efficiently, the Existence of the Subjects on which it
were to work, were requisite. It is altogether in vain to enquire of the
immediate Effects of Christ's Death upon an Existent subject: By the way: That
Adam and Eve only were Existent, when Christ undertook the work of Redemption,
to me is not clear: no, nor yet the following Assertion, That as soon as we do
Exist, we receive Benefit by it: taking benefit, for a benefit actually
collated (as Mr Baxter does) not for a right to a benefit, or the purpose of
bestowing one, which will Operate in its due time: This is easily Affirmed; and
therefore Eadem Facilitate is Denied.

I have no fancy to strive to carry the Bell, and to be accounted a Divine
indeed, by attempting at this time, a right Stating of, and Answer to this
Question Proposed: I am not altogether ignorant of the endeavor of others,
even as to this Particular, and have formerly spoken something that way my self.

Mr Baxter seems here to understand by this Question, (viz. What is the
immediate Effect of the Death of Christ) what is the first benefit, which from
the Death of Christ, accreweth unto them for whom he died: Not what is the
first thing, that every particular person is actually in his own Person, in his
own time made partaker of: but a Benefit Generally established, and in being,
upon the designment of the work of Redemption, which every one for whom Christ
died has a share of: And of this he Positively Affirms, That the suspending of
the rigorous execution of the Sentence of the Law, is the most observable,
immediate Effect of the Death of Christ: and so deserves the Title of a Divine
indeed.

Now truly (though not to contend for the Bell with Mr Baxter, whereof I
confess my self utterly unworthy, and willingly for many commendable Parts
ascribe it unto him) I cannot close with him, nor Assent unto that Assertion:
Very gladly would I see Mr Baxters Arguments for this; but those, (as in most
other Controverted things in this Book) he is pleased to Conceal: and therefore
though it might suffice me, to give in my Dissent, and so wait for further
Proof; yet that it may be apparent, That I do not Deny this merely because its
said, not Proved, (which in things not clear in themselves is a Provocation so
to do) I shall oppose One or Two ARGVMENTS unto it.

All the Effects of the Death of Christ are peculiar only to the Elect, to
some: the suspension of the rigorous execution of the Law, is not so. Ergo.

The Minor is apparent: The Major proved by all the Arguments against Universal
Redemption used in my former Treatise.

2 All the Effects of the Death of Christ are Spiritual, distinguishing, and
saving, to the praise of Gods free Grace.

The suspending of the vigorous Execution of the Law, is not so. Ergo,

The Assumption is manifest: it is only a not immediate casting into Hell, which
is not a spiritual distinguishing Mercy: but in respect to many, tends to the
manifestation of Gods Justice. Romans 9. 22.

The Proposition is evident. The Promises made unto Christ upon his undertaking
this Work, doubtless do hold out all that he Effected by his Death. Of what
Nature they are, and what is the main tendance of them I have elsewhere
discovered, from the first to the last, they are restrained to distinguishing
Mercies: see Isa. 49. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Chap. 53. 10, 11, 12. Isa. 61. 1, 2. and
no less is positively affirmed, Ephesians. 1. 4. Rev. 1. 5, 6.

If Mr Baxter say, that his meaning in this is, That if Christ had not
undertaken the Work of Redemption, and Satisfaction, then the Law must have had
rigorous Execution upon all, and therefore this being suspended upon his
undertaking of it, is the first fruit of the Death of Christ.

Notwithstanding this, Answ.
yet that suspension (which in respect of the different Persons toward whom it
is actually exercised, has different ends) is not a Fruit, nor Effect of the
Death of Christ, but a free Issue, of the same eternally wise Providence,
Sovereignty, and Grace, as the Death of Christ himself is: If then by the
rigorous Execution of the Law, you intend the immediate Execution of the Law in
all its rigor, and punishments, this if it had been effected, could in your
own Judgment have reached Adam, and Eve, and no more; and would have so reached
them, as to cut off the Generation of Mankind in that Root: If so, and this be
the Fruit of Christ's Death, Why do you not reckon the Procreation of humane
race, among those Fruits also? for had it not been for this suspension, that
also had failed: which is as good a Causative Connection, as that between the
Death of Christ, and this Suspension: had not he undertaken the Work of
Redemption, it had not been.

If by a rigorous Execution, you intend the Penalty of the Law, inflicted in
that way, which has pleased the Will of the Lawgiver by several parts, and
degrees, from conception through birth, life, death, to Eternity; the Curse of
it being wholly incumbent in respect of desert, and making out it self,
according to Gods appointment, then the suspension thereof is not the immediate
Effect of the Death of Christ; which (opposing the first Arguments to the
former acceptance) I further prove: If those for whom Christ died do lie under
this rigorous Execution of the Law, that is the Curse of it, until some other
Effect of Christ's Death be wrought upon them, then that is not the first Effect
of the Death of Christ: but that supposal is true: Joh. 3. 36. Ephesians. 2. 3.
therefore so also the Inference.

2 In a word: Take the suspending of the rigorous execution of the Law, for the
Purpose of God, and his acting accordingly, not to leave his Elect under the
actual Curse of it; so it is no Fruit of the Death of Christ, but an Issue of
the same Grace; from whence also the Death of Christ proceeds.

Take it for an actual freeing of their Persons from the Breach of it, and its
Curse, and so it differs not from Justification, and is not the immediate
effect of Christ's Death in Mr Baxters Judgment.

Take it for the not immediately executing of the Law upon the first offense,
and I can as well say, Christ died because the Law was suspended; as you, that
the Law was suspended because Christ died: had not either been, the other had
not been.

Take it for the actual forbearance of God toward all the World, and so it
falls under my Two first Arguments.

Take it thus, that God for the Death of Christ, will deal with all men upon a
new Law, freeing all from the Guilt of the first broken Law, and Covenant: So
it is non Ens.

If you mean by it Gods entering into a New way of Salvation with those for whom
Christ died: this on the part of God is antecedaneous to the Consideration of
the Death of Christ, and of the same free Grace with it self.

For the Question it self (as I said before) I shall not here in Terms take it
up, the following Discourse will give Light into it: I have also spoken largely
to it in another place; and that distinctly.

The Sum is: I conceive that all the intermediate Effects of the Death of
Christ, tending to its ultimate Procurement of the Glory of God, are all in
respect of his death immediate; that is, with such an immediation as attends
Moral Causes: Now these concerning them for whom he died, as they are not
immediately bestowed on them (the ultimate Attingency of the Cause, and the
first Rise of the Effect, lying in an intervening Compact) so not simul, at
once neither: though simul, and a like procured: the Cause of this, being that
Relation, Coherence, and Causality, which the Lord has appointed between the
several Effects (or rather parts of the same Effect) of the death of Christ, in
reference to the main, and ultimate End to be thereby attained: as at large I
have discused: Lib. 2. Cap. 1. p. 52, 53, etc. In one word, The first Effect of
the Death of Christ in this sense, is the first Fruit of Election: For, for the
Procuring* and Purchasing of the Fruits thereof, and them alone, did Christ die.

If I mistake not, Mr Baxter himself is not settled fully in this Persuasion,
that the suspension of the Rigorous Execution of the Law, is the most immediate
Effect of the Death of Christ: for page 52. these words which he uses [God the
Father does accept the Sufferings and Merits of his Son, as a full satisfaction
to his violated Law, and as a valuable Consideration upon which he will wholly
acquit and forgive the Offenders themselves, and receive them again into
favor, so that they will but receive his Son upon the terms expressed in the
Gospel] seems to place the ultimate Efficacy of the Death of Christ in Gods
acceptance of it, as to our good, on the Condition of Faith, and Obedience.

Which, first makes the suspension of the Law to be so far from being the first
effect of the Death of Christ: that the last reaches not so far: And 2dly, the
fond absurdity of this Conditional Acceptance I have before declared.

Neither am I clear to which of those Assertions, that of Page 92, (where he
affirms, That some benefit by Christ the Condemned did receive) is most
accommodate: neither can I easily receive what is here Asserted; if by Benefit
you understand that which in respect of them is intentionally so.

For, First, Condemned Persons, as condemned Persons surely receive no Benefit
by Christ, for they are Condemned.

Secondly, The delay of the Condemnation of Reprobates, is no part of the
Purchase of Christ: The Scripture says, Nor more, nor less of any such thing:
but peculiarly assigns it to another Cause. Romans 9.

CAP. X.
Of the Merit of Christ, and its immediate Efficacy, what it effects in what
it rests, with the state of those for whom Christ died in reference to his
Death, and of their Right to the Fruits of his Death before Believing.
THAT they for whom Christ died, have a right to the things which he Purchased
thereby, (that is an actual Right, for so men may have, to what they have not
in actual Possession) is no singular Conception of mineOur Divines freely
express themselves to this Purpose.

Even the Commender, and Publisher of Grotius his Book of Satisfaction, learned
Vossius himself, Affirms, That Christ by his Death Purchased for us a double
Right: First, a Right of escaping punishment, and then a Right of obtaining the
Reward.

By the way, I cannot close with his Distinction in that place, of some things,
That Christ by his Life, and Death, purchased for us, and other, that he daily
bestows: for the things he daily bestows, are of them, which by his Death
he purchased.

My Expressions then alone are not subject to the Consequences charged on them,
for Asserting a right to Life, and Salvation in them for whom Christ Died, even
before believing.

Yea, Omnes illi pro quibus Christus ex intention Dei satis fecit, sunt Deo
reconciliati. i. e. in Favorem saluti ferum aliquo modo restituti. Ames.
some have gone farther, and Affirmed, That those for whom Christ died, are in
some manner restored into saving favor.

Not to mention some of them, to whose Judgment Mr Baxter seems to accede, who
assert Universal Justification, and Restoration into Grace upon the Death of
Christ: but I lay no weight on these things.

To clear my Thoughts in this Particular, Two things must necessarily be
enquired into, and made out.

1 Seeing the Satisfaction, and Merit of Christ, do tend directly for the Good
of them for whom he died, and that there is a distance, and space of Time,
between that Death, and their Participation of the good things purchased
thereby, Antisinod. p. 164.
wherein lies, or in what rests the Efficacy of that his Death, with the
Principle of the certain Futurition, of the spiritual things so procured, which
those for whom he died, shall assuredly in due time enjoy.

2 Wherein lies the Obligation unto Death, Hell, and Wrath, which before
believing the Scripture Affirms to be upon the Elect, seeing Christ has
actually purchased for them freedom from these things: and this, without more
a-do, will be cleared in the former.

1 For the first then, upon the Issue of the Death of Christ, something being
supposed in God beyond his mere Purpose, of which before, somethings being
actually procured, and purchased by it, which yet they for whom they are so
purchased, neither do, nor possibly can upon the Purchase immediately possess,
and enjoy: It is enquired, Wherein rests the Efficacy of his Death, which in
due Time causes the making out of all those spiritual Blessings, which by it
are so procured.

Now this must be either in those for whom he Died, or in Himself as Mediator,
or in his Father who sent him.

1 That it is not in them for whom he Died, is apparent: Upon the Death of
Christ, in Purpose, and Promise, when first its Efficacy took place. they were
not: I mean actually Existent: True! They were Potentially in the Purpose of
God: but will that make them a meet subject for the Residence of this Right,
and Merit whereof we speak? as is the Thing, such are all its Affections, and
Adjuncts: but possible, if it be no more. This is something actual whereof we
speak.

2 That it is not in Christ as Mediator, is no less evident. He that makes
Satisfaction, and he to whom it is made, he who Meriteth any thing, and he at
whose hands he Meriteth it, must be distinguished. The second Person under the
Notion of performing the work of Mediation, receives not Satisfaction.

The Power Christ receives of the Father, because he is the Son of Man, to
give eternal Life to those given him of his Father, is of latter Consideration
to that we have in hand, being a Result, and Consequence thereof.

3 It must therefore be in the Father, or God, as receiving Satisfaction.

Of all the Attributes of God where this may be placed (to speak after the
manner of men) one of these Four must needs be the proper seat of it: 1 His
Power. 2 His Will. 3 His Justice. 4 His Truth.


1, His Power, and then it must be, not that God has any addition of Power,
for that cannot be to him who is Omnipotent; but that a Way is made for the
Exercise of his Power, which before by somewhat from himself was shut up.

And as some suppose it is no otherwise. That whereas the Lord could not make
out Grace, and Favor unto Sinners because of his Justice necessarily enclining
him to their punishment, and destruction. Now that Justice being satisfied in
Christ, he can collate any spiritual Blessings upon them, as he sees good.

But this I have Disproved elsewhere, and Manifested.

1 That the foundation of this Apprehension, (being an impossibility in God to
forgive sin, without Satisfaction, because of the contrariety of it to the
Properties of his nature) is a groundless Assertion. And, 2 The foundation of
God, in sending his Son to die for his Elect is oppugned hereby. And it, 3 Is
destructive to all the proper Fruits, and Effects of the Death of Christ, etc.
Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
2, In the Will of God, it seems that the Merit and Fruits of the Death of
Christ, whereof we treat seem better to be treasured: and from hence it is,
That he can Will, or Wills to us the Good things purchased by it. But,

1 That the Will of God should by the Death of Christ be changed into any other
Habitude then what it was in before, was before disproved.

2 That now God can Will Good things to us, holds out the enlargement of his
Power as to the acting thereof, mentioned above, rather then any thing properly
belonging to the Will of God.

3 Gods Willing Good things to us, it cannot consist in: his willing of a thing
is operative of it: it is his Efficacious Energetical Will whereof we speak.
When he actually wills Grace, we have Grace: and when he Wills Glory, we
have Glory: but that concerning which we speak, is Antecedent to the actual
making out of Grace, and Glory to us, being the procuring cause of them; though
not of that Act of the Will of God, whereby they are bestowed.

His Justice, and Truth only remain. For Justice, that which is Commutative
properly, with one Consent is removed from God. Who has given first unto him,
and it shall be rendered unto him again. Si de debitum quaeratur* respectu
creaturae in Deum cadere non potest: nisi ex aliqua suppositione ipsi Deo
voluntaria et libera: quae non potest esse nisi promissio aut pactio aliqua, ex
quibus fidelitatis aut justitiae debitum oriri solet: Suares. Relect. de Lib.
Div. Volu. Disp. L. Di. Sec. 2. n. 5.
Neither is distributive Justice to be supposed in him, antecedent to some free
engagement of his own. Where no Obligation is, there cannot be so much as
distributive Justice properly. All Obligation from God to the Creature, is from
his own free engagement: otherwise he stands in no Relation to it, but of
absolute Dominion, and Sovereignty. All the Justice of God then (we consider
not the universal Rectitude of his nature, but) in reference to the Creature,
is Justitia regiminis. Psalm. 33. 4, 5. 1 John Nulla Justitia proprie esse
potest, ubi nulla intercedit obligatio: Deus autem nulla obligatione tenetur,
antequam ipse fidem suam astringat: Ergo ante promissionem nulla Justitia etiam
distributiva in Deo reperitur. Vas. n. 1. q. 21. a. 1. disp. 86.
1. 5. and therefore must suppose some free Constitution of his Will.

This then rightly considered, do I Affirm to be affected with the Merit of
Christ: There I place the procuring Efficacy thereof, whence it is, That all
the Fruits of it are made out unto us. But this in due order.

The first Thing of immediate Concernment hereunto, is the Covenant of the
Father with the Son: the free engagement of God, to do such and such things for
Christ, upon the performance of such other things to him appointed. This is the
foundation of the Merit of Christ as was before declared. Hence is distributive
Justice ascribed to God, as to this thing. It is righteous with him being
engaged by his own free Purpose and Promise, to make out those things, which he
appointed to be the Fruit and Procurement of the Death of Christ. And from
thence it is, that all the things purchased by the Death of Christ, become due
to those for whom he died: even from the Equity attending this Justice of God.

Herein also his Truth has a share: By his Truth, I understand his Fidelity
and Veracity in the performance of all his engagements. This immediately
attends every Obligation that by any free Act of his Will, God is pleased in
his Wisdom to put upon himself: and is naturally under Consideration before
that distributive Justice whereby he is inclined to the Performance it self of
them.

This then is that I say;

God by free Purpose and Compact, making way for the Merit of Christ, which
absolutely could be none, is obliged from the Veracity and Justice, which
attends all his Engagements, to make out as in his infinite Wisdom shall seem
meet; all those things which he has set, appointed, and proposed as the Fruit
and Purchase of his Death, unto all them for whom he died. And in This, rests
the Merit of Christ.

Here Two things may be observed;

1 What we ascribe to the Merit of Christ: viz. The Accomplishment of that
Condition, which God required to make way, that the Obligation which he had
freely put upon himself, might be in actual force. And so much, (how rightly, I
leave to himself to Consider) does Mr Baxter assign to our own works: These. 26.
p. 140.

2 The mistake of those who wind up the MERIT of Christ, as affecting God (if I
may so speak) unto a Conditional Engagement, viz. That we shall be made
Partakers of the Fruits of it, upon such and such Conditions, to be by us
fulfilled. For,

1 All such Conditions (if spiritual Blessings) are part of the Purchase of the
Death of Christ: and if not, are no way fit to be Conditions of such an
Attainment.

2 It cannot be made apparent how any such Conditional stipulation can be
ascribed unto God. That God should engage upon the Death of Christ, to make out
Grace and Glory, Liberty and Beauty, unto those for whom he died, upon
CONDITION they do so, or so.

1 Leaves no proper place for the Merit of Christ.

2 Is very improperly ascribed unto God. Lawyers tell us, That all stipulations
about things future, are either sub Condition, or sub Termino. Stipulations or
Engagements upon CONDITION. that are properly so, do suppose him that makes the
Engagement to be altogether uncertain of the Event thereof.

Stipulations sub Termino, are absolute to make out the things engaged about,
at such a Season. Upon the very Instant of such a Stipulation as this, an
Obligation follows as to the thing, though no Action be allowed to him to whom
it is made, until the Term and Time appointed be come.

In those Stipulations that are under CONDITION, no Obligation arises at all
from them, it being wholly uncertain whether the Condition will be fulfilled or
no. Only in Two Cases does such an Engagement bring on an immediate Obligation.

1 If the Condition required be in things necessary and unalterable: As if
Cajus should engage himself into Tilius to give him an 100. l. for his House on
the morrow if the Sun shine: here arises an immediate Obligation* and it is
the same as if it had been conceived only sub Termino, without Condition at all.

2 If by any means, he that makes the Stipulation, knows infallibly, that the
Condition will be fulfilled, though he to whom it is made, knows it not. In
this Respect also, the Stipulation sub Condition, introduces an immediate
Obligation, and in that regard, is co-incident with that which is only sub
Termino.

Wheither an Engagement upon Condition properly, without the former Respects,
that is a Stipulation to an Event dubious and uncertain, can be ascribed unto
God, is easy to determine. To Assert it, oppugnes the whole nature of the
Deity, and over-throws the Properties thereof, immediately and directly. All
other Stipulations under Condition are co-incident (as I said before) with that
which is sub Termino only, from whence arises an immediate Obligation for the
performance of the thing stipulated about; though there be not an immediate
Action granted him unto whom it is made.

Surely they are wide, (if not very wild) who Affirm, That all the Stipulations
on the part of God upon the Death of Christ are upon a Condition, which himself
knows to be impossible for them to perform to whom they are made, which amongst
wise men are always accounted Nugatory and Null.

This being then so vain, I say that the Merit of Christ flowing from the free
purpose and Compact of God, rests on his Justice thence also arising, fixing
thereon an Obligation to make out all the Fruits of it, unto them for whom he
died, sub Termino only; whereby a present right is granted them thereunto,
though they cannot plead for present Enjoyment.

CAP. XI.
More particularly of the State and Right of them for whom Christ died, before
Believing.
THE former Assertions about the Merit of Christ, being in some measure
cleared, we may hence have light into the State and Condition of those for whom
Christ died in their several Generations before Believing.

To make this the more fully appear, we must distinguish between their present
State or Possession, and their present right. Their State is not changed,
because all the procurements of the Death of Christ, are to be made out unto
them by virtue of a Stipulation sub Termino, that Term or Season being not
come. So that still in present actual state, I leave them as before, not
Justified, not Sanctified, not entered into Covenant.

Right also is twofold: 1 In re, as the Father has a right to his Estate. And
this Jus in re, holds, though the Estate be unjustly, or forcibly detained from
him. 2 Ad rem, so the Son has a Right to the Estate of his Father, being to
enjoy it at his Death.


The first right is presently actionable upon any detainment: the latter not
so. The first, we do not ascribe to the Elect in this Condition, viz. That
which is in re, and instantly actionable; but that which is ad rem, and sub
termino.

This being That which I Aimed at, and being by Mr Baxter Opposed, I will
further Consider it, that it may appear whether any thing in this Assertion be
justly blamable.

I said, That by the Death of Christ, we have actual Right to the good things
purchased by that Death: That Right which is not actual (to speak a word to
that Term) is not. The Contradistinct Affection hereunto, is Potential. And
this is totally destructive to the Nature of a Right. All Right is actual, or
not at all.

To evince the main Assertion; I shall, 1, Show the Nature and Quality of this
Right. 2, The Bottom or Foundation of it; And 3, Prove the Thesis.


1 By Right I understand, Jus in general, now jus est, quod justum est: Aug. in
Psalm. 144. sub. Fon. That is right, which it is just should be. And Quiquid
rectum est, justum est: A^sel. de verit. Cap. 13. it is just, all that should
be, which has a Rectitude in it self. Farther; What this justum is, Aquinas
tells you, 22. ae. q. 57. a. 1. c. justum est quod respondet secundum aliquam
aequalitatem alteri. Then a thing is just when it stands in some aequality unto
those things whereunto it relates. And this Aequality or Adaequation of things
is Twofold.

1 That which arises from the Nature of the Things themselves: As an Eye for
an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth, etc. 2 That which arises from a Proportion
condescended unto, by Condict, Agreement, Covenant, or Common Consent.
Dupliciter est aliquid adaequatum: uno modo ex natura ipsius rei: alio modo cum
est Commensuratum ex condicto sive ex commune placito: Aqui.
In the first Sense, as to a Right that should accrue unto the Creatures in
respect of God, from the Commensuration of the things themselves, we showed
before that it cannot be. It must be from some grant, Compact, Covenant, or the
like, from whence a Right in Reference to the Faithfulness or Righteousness
of God, may arise.

The Right then whereof we speak, which they for whom Christ died, have to the
things which by his Death are procured, consists in that Equity, Proportion,
and Equality, which upon the free Compact, Constitution, and Consent of God the
Father, is, between the Death of Christ and their Enjoyment of the Fruits of
that Death. It is just and equal, that they should enjoy the Fruits of his
Death in due time. Neither is the Right of any Man, to any Thing, any more, but
such a Frame and Order of things, that it is just either from the Nature of the
Things themselves, or from common Consent and Agreement, That he should enjoy
that thing. This is the Right whereof we speak: which in their sense the very
Socinians grant. Christus Jus quoddam ad obtinendam remissionem peccatorum and
salutem (morte sua) nobis dedit. Crellius, adu. Groti. Cap. 1.

2: For the Foundation of this Right: Seeing that before the Consideration of
the Death of Christ (as was declared) it is not, from thence it must needs be,
nothing of any likelihood to be such a Foundation being co-incident therewithal.

Now whereas in the Death of Christ Two things are Considered: 1 The
Satisfaction; And 2dly the Merit thereof; it may be enquired after, under
whether Respect this right relates thereunto.

1 The Satisfaction of Christ tends in all that it is, to the Honor and
Reparation of the Justice of God. This then in its utmost extent and Efficacy,
cannot give ground to build such a Right upon. The ultimate Effect of
Satisfaction, may be accomplished, and yet not the least right to any good
thing Communicated to them for whom this Satisfaction is made. The good things
attending the Death of Christ may be referred unto two heads: The Amotion of
Evil, and the Collation of Good. For the First, The Amotion of Evil, the taking
that from us, that it may not grieve us, and subducting us from the Power and
Presence thereof, it is immediately aimed at by Satisfaction. That the Curse of
the Law be not executed, That the Wrath to come be not powered out, is the
utmost reach of the Death of Christ considered as Satisfactory. Yea in it self,
as only such, it proceeds not so far, as to give us a Right to escape these
things, but only presents that to the Justice of God, whereby it may be
preserved in all its Glory, Severity, and exact Purity, though these things be
not inflicted on us. This I say I conceive to be the utmost Tendency of the
Death of Christ as Satisfactory. That Condemnation cannot possibly de facto
follow where such Satisfaction has been made, is immediately from the Equity of
Justice so repaired as above. For Positive good things, in Grace and Glory by
Satisfaction alone, they are not at all respected.

2, There is the Merit of the Death of Christ, and that Principally intends
the Glory of God in our enjoying those good things whereof it is the Merit or
desert. And this is the Foundation of that Right whereof we treat. What Christ
has Merited for us, it is just and equal we should have; that is, We have
Right unto it: and this before Believing. Faith gives us actual Possession as
to some Part, and a new Pactional right, as to the whole; but this Right, or
that equalling of things upon divine Constitution (Jus est operatio illa qua
sit aequalitas: Pesant. in Tom. 22. ae. q. 57.) whereby it becomes Just and
Right that we should obtain the things Purchased by it, is from the Merit of
Christ alone. What Christ has Merited is so far granted, as that they for whom
it is so Merited have a Right unto it.

The Sum then of what we have to prove, is,

That the Merit of the Death of the Lord Jesus, has according to the
Constitution of the Father, so procured of him the good things aimed at, and
intended thereby, that it is Just, Right, and Equal, that they for whom they are
so procured, should certainly and infallibly enjoy them at the appointed
Season; and therefore unto them they have an actual Right even before
Believing; Faith it self being of the number of those things so procured.

All which I prove as follows;

1, The very Terms before mentioned, enforce no less. If it be justum before
their Believing, that those for whom Christ Died, should enjoy the Fruits of
his Death; then have they even before Believing, jus, or a right thereunto: for
jus est quod justum est: That it is right and equal that they should enjoy
those Fruits is manifest. For.

1: It was the Engagement of the Father to the Son upon his undertaking to die
for them, that they should so do. Isa. 53. 10, 11, 12.

2: In that Undertaking, he Accomplished all that was of him required. Joh. 17.
4.

2; That which is Merited and Procured for any one, thereunto he for whom it is
procured, certainly has a Right. That which is obtained for me is mine in
actual right, though not perhaps in actual Possession. The thing that is
obtained, is granted by him of whom it is obtained, and that unto them for whom
it is obtained. In some sense or other, that is a man's, which is procured for
him. In saying it is procured for him, we say no less. If this then be not in
Respect of Possession, it must be in Respect of Right. Now all the Fruits of
the Death of Christ are obtained and procured by his Merit for them, for whom
he died. He OBTAINS for them eternal Redemption. Heb. 9. 12. purchasing them
with his own Blood. Act. 20. 28. Heb. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18. Gal. 1. 4. Rev. 14.
3, 4.

The very Nature of Merit described by the Apostle, Romans 4. 4. infers no less.
Where Merit intercedes, the Effect is reckoned as of debt: That which is my due
debt, I have a Right unto. The Fruits of the Death of Christ, are the Issues of
Merit, (bottomed on Gods gracious Acceptance) and reckoned as of debt.

He for whom a Ransom is paid, has a Right unto his Liberty by virtue of that
Payment.

3: 2 Pet. 1. 1. The Saints are said to obtain precious Faith through the
reghteousness of God. It is a righteous thing with God, to give Faith to them
for whom Christ died; because thereby they have a Right unto it: Faith being
amongst the most precious Fruits of the Death of Christ, by virtue thereof,
becomes their due for whom he died.

4: The Condition of Persons under Merit, and de-Merit, in respect of Good or
Evil is alike. The Proportion of things requires it. Now men under de-Merit
are under an Obligation unto Punishment: and it is a righteous thing with God,
to recompense tribulation unto them: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. It being the judgment of
God that they who do such things are worthy of death: Romans 1. 32. They then who
are under Merit, have also a Right unto that whereof it is the Merit. It is not
of any force to say, That they are not under that Merit, but only upon
Condition. For this is, 1, False: 2, With God this is all one as if there were
no Condition at the Season and Term appointed; for the making out the Fruit of
that Merit, as has been declared. Neither yet to Object, That it is not their
own Merit, but of another which Respects them: That Other being their Surety,
doing that whereby he Merited only on their behalf; yea in their stead, they
dying with him: though the same in them could not have been Meritorious: they
being at best, mere men; and at worst, very sinful men.

5: A Compact or Covenant being made of giving Life and Salvation upon the
Condition of Obedience to certain Persons, that Condition being completely
fulfilled as it was in the Death of Christ, Claim being made of the Promise,
according to the Tenure of the Compact, and the Persons presented for the
Enjoyment of it, surely those Persons have an Actual Right unto it: That all
this is so, see Isa. 49. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Psalm. 2. 2. 4, 5. Isa. 53. 10, 11,
12. Joh. 17. 3. and 2. 21. Heb. 2.

And so much for this also, concerning the Issue of the Death of Christ, and
the Right of the Elect to the Fruits of it before Believing.

CAP. XII.
Of the way whereby they actually attain and enjoy Faith and Grace, who have a
Right thereunto by the Death of Christ.
THE Way and Causes of bestowing Faith on them, who are under the Condition
before described, is the next thing to be enquired after.

What are the Thoughts of God from Eternity concerning those for whom Christ
was to die, with the State they are left in, in relation to those Thoughts; as
also what is the Will of God toward them, immediately upon the Consideration of
the Death of Christ, with the Right which to them accrews thereby, being
Considered, it remains (I say) that we declare the Way and Method whereby
they obtain Faith through the righteousness of God.

And here we must lay down certain POSITIONS. As;

1, Notwithstanding the Right granted them for whom Christ died, upon his
Death, to a better State and Condition in due Time, (that is in the Season,
suiting the Infinitly-Wise-Sovereignty of God) yet as to their present
Condition in point of Enjoyment, they are not actually differenced from others:
Their Prayers are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 28. 9. all Things are to
them unclean, Tit. 1. 15. they are under the Power of Satan, Ephesians. 2. 2. in
bondage unto death, Heb. 2. 14. Obnoxious to the Curse, and Condemning power of
the Law in the Conscience, Gal. 3. 13. having sin reigning in them, Romans 6. 17.
etc.

2, What spiritual Blessings soever are bestowed on any Soul (I mean peculiarly
distinguishing Mercies and Graces) they are all bestowed and collated for
Christ's sake: That is, They are purchased by his Merit, and procured by his
Intercession thereupon.

That supernatural Graces cannot be traduced from any natural Faculty, or
attained by the utmost Endeavor of Nature, howsoever affected with outward
advantages, I now take for granted. These things I looked upon as the
free-gifts of Love: So the Scripture, Joh. 15. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Ephesians. 2. 8. 1
Cor. 4. 7. Ephesians. 2. 10. Mat. 11. 25, 26. Act. 16. 14. etc.

Now the Dispensation of all these, as it is through Christ, so they are for
Christ. On whomsoever they are bestowed it is for Christ's sake: For Instance,

Peter and Judas are Unbeleevers. Faith is given (for Faith is given) to Peter,
not to Judas. Whence is this difference? Presupposing Gods Sovereign
discriminating Purpose, the immediate procuring Cause of Faith for Peter, is
the Merit of Christ. To us it is given on the behalf of Christ to believe on
him: Phil. 1. 20. We are blessed with all spiritual Blessings in him: Ephesians. 1.
3. Whatsoever is in the Promise of the Covenant is certainly of his
procurement; for therefore he is the Surety, Heb. 7. 22. And his Blood, (the
Ransom he paid) is the Blood of the Covevenant: Mat. 26. 28. Whereby all the
Promises thereof, become in him Yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And whether
Faith be of the Blessings of the Covenant, and Conclude in the Promise thereof
or no; let the Scripture be Judge. Jer. 31. 31, 32. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Heb. 8. 9,
10, 11.

Furthermore, What we have through him, we have so him. All these things, being
made out on this Condition, that he should make his Soul an Offering for sin,
Isa. 53. 10

3, That all the procurements of the Death of Christ in the behalf of his, are
to be made out by virtue of a Stipulation sub termino: or in respect of their
actual collation and bestowing, they are to be made out in the season limited
and appointed by the Will of the Father. Of this before.

4, No Blessing can be given us for Christ's sake, unless in Order of Nature,
CHRIST be first reckoned unto us.

Here I must do two things;

1 Declare what I mean by reckoning Christ unto us: And then, 2 Prove the
Assertion as laid down.
Gods reckoning Christ, in our present sense, is the imputing of Christ unto
ungodly unbeleeving Sinners for whom he died, so far, as to account him theirs,
to bestow Faith and Grace upon them for his sake.

This then I say, at the Accomplishment of the appointed time, the Lord reckons
and accounts and makes out his Son Christ, to such and such Sinners, and for
his sake, gives them Faith, etc. Exercising of Love actually in the bestowing
of Grace upon any particular soul, in a distinguishing manner, for Christ's
sake, does suppose this accounting of Christ to be his, and from thence he is
so indeed: which is the present Thesis, and may be proved. For:

1; Why does the Lord bestow Faith on Peter, not on Judas? Because Christ Dying
for Peter, and purchasing for him the Grace of the Covenant, he had a Right
unto it, and God according to his Promise bestowed it: With Judas, it was not
so.

But then, Why does the Lord bestow Faith on Peter at the 40th year of his Age,
and not before, or after? Because then the Term is expired, which upon the
Purchase, was by the Counsel of Gods Will prefixed to the giving in, the
beginning of the thing Purchased unto him.

What then does the Lord do, when he thus bestows Faith on him? For Christ's
sake (his Death procuring the Gift, not moving the Will of the Giver) he
creates Faith in him, by the way and means snited to such a work. Ephesians. 1. 18,
19. Chap. 2. 1, etc.

If then this be done for Christ's sake, then is Christ made ours, before we
believe. Else, Why is Faith given him at this instant for Christ's sake, and not
to another, for whom also he died? That it is done then, is, because the
appointed time is come; that it is done then for Christ, is because Christ is
first given to him.

I cannot conceive how any thing should be made out to me for Christ, and
Christ himself not be given to me; he being made unto us of God, Righteousness.
1 Cor. 1. 30.

2 The Apostle holds out this very Method of the Dispensation of Grace, Romans 8.
32. He that spared not his Son, but delivered him up to Death for us all, how
shall he not with him freely give us all things?

First Christ is given for us, then to us, then with him (he having the
pre-eminence in all things) all things: and this being, also, for him, (Phil.
1. 29.) he is certainly in the Order of Nature given in the first place. He
being made ours, we receive the Atonement by him, Romans 5. 11.

How Christ is said to be received by Faith, if he be ours before Believing, is
easily resolved. Christ is ours before and after Believing in a different
sense. He who is made ours, in an Act of Gods Love, that for him we may have
Faith, may be found and made ours in a Promise of Reconciliation by Believing.

I offer also, Whether Absolution from the guilt of sin, and obligation unto
death, though not as terminated in the Conscience for complete Justification,
do not proceed our actual Believing. For, What is that Love of God which
through Christ is effectual to bestow Faith upon the Unbeleeving? And how can
so great Love in the actual exercise of it producing the most distinguishing
Mercies, consist with any such Act of Gods Will, as at the same instant should
bind that Person under the Guilt of sin?

Perhaps also this may be the Justification of the ungodly mentioned, Romans 4.
Gods absolving a Sinner in Heaven, by accounting Christ unto him, and then
bestowing him, upon him, and for his sake enduing him with Faith to believe.

That we should be blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ, and yet
Christ not ours in a peculiar manner before the bestowing of those blessings on
us, is somewhat strange. Yea he must be our Christ, before it is given to us for
him to believe: Why else is it not given to all others so to do. I speak not of
the supreme distinguishing Cause, Mat. 11. 25, 26. but of the proximate
procuring Cause, which is the blood of Christ.

Neither yet do I hence assert complete Justification to be before believing.

Absolution in Heaven, and Justification differ as part and whole.

Again, Absolution may be considered, either as a pure Act of the Will of God
in it self, or as it is received, believed, apprehended, in, and by the soul of
the Guilty. For Absolution in the first sense, it is evident it must proceed
believing: as a discharge from the Effects of Anger, naturally proceeds all
Collation of any fruits of Love, such as is Faith.

Object. But if God account Christ unto, and bestow him upon a Sinner before
Believing, and upon that Account, absolve him from the Obligation unto Death
and Hell which for sin he lies under, what wants this of complete Justification?

Answ. Much every way.

1 It wants that Act of pardoning Mercy (on the part of God) which is to be
terminated and completed in the Conscience of the Sinner; this lies in the
Promise. 2 It wants the Hearts persuasion concerning the Truth and Goodness, of
the Promise, and the Mercy held out in the Promise.
3 It wants the Souls rolling it self upon Christ, and receiving of Christ, as
the Author and Finisher of that Mercy, an All-sufficient Savior to them that
believe.
So that by Faith alone we obtain and receive the forgiveness of sin: for
notwithstanding any antecedent Act of God concerning us, in and for Christ, we
do not actually receive a complete Soul-freeing discharge until we believe.

And thus the Lord Christ has the pre-eminence in all things. He is the Author
and finisher of our Faith.

This then is that which here we assign unto the Lord. Upon the Accomplishment
of the appointed Season, for the making out the fruits of the Death of Christ
unto them for whom he died, he loves them freely, says to them, Live, gives
them his Son, with, and for him, all things, bringing forth the choicest Issue
of his being reconciled in the blood of Jesus, whilst we are Enemies, and
totally alimated from him.

It will not be requisite at all, (as to our purpose in hand) to make
particular enquiry into the State and Condition of them toward whom such are
the Actings of God as we before described. What it is that gives them the first
real alteration of Condition and distinguishment from others, I have now no
occasion to handle.

So far as Advantage has been offered, I have labored to distinguish aright
those things, whose Confusion and mis-apprehension lies at the bottom of very
many dangerous Mistakes: How the forgoing Discourse may be accommodated and
improved for the Removeal of those Mistakes, I shall leave to the Consideration
of others.

CAP. XIII.
The Removal of sundry Objections to some things formerly taught, about the
Death of Christ: Upon the Principles now delivered.
HAving fully declared not only what was my Intendment in the Expressions so
exceedingly mistaken by Mr Baxter, as has in part already been made manifest,
and will instantly more fully appear; I shall now take a view of what is
Imposed on me as my Judgment, and the Opposition made thereunto, so far as may
be needful for the clearing of the One, and removing of the Other, at least in
what they may really concern what I did deliver in the Treatise impugned.

In Page 146 of his Apendix Mr Baxter endeavors to vindicate a Thesis of his
from some Exceptions, that he was by his friend pointed to, unto which it
seemed liable and Obnoxious.

The Thesis he lays down, is, That no man is actually and absolutely Justified
upon the mere payment of the debt by Christ, till they become believers.

Against this Article (as he calls it) he produces some Objections of
Maccovius, censuring his Assertions to be senseless, his Positions strange and
abhored, his Arguments weak and ineffectual; with some other Expressions to the
same purpose.

1, I am now by the Providence of God in a Condition of Separation from my own
small Library, neither can I here attain the sight of Maccovius Disputations;
so that I shall not at all interpose my self in this Contest; only I must needs
say. 1 I did not formerly account Maccovius to be so senseless and weak a
Disputant as here he is represented to be.

2, That for Mr Baxters Answer to that Argument (where the Debt is paid, there
Discharge must follow; by Asserting the Payment made by Christ to be refusable,
and the Interest of sinners in that Payment to be purely upon the performance
of a Condition. I have fully before in both parts of it Demonstrated to be
weak, and inconsistent with it self, and Truth. That the Interesting of Sinners
in the Payment made by Christ, at such and such a Season, is from the
Sovereignty of God, and his free Engagement sub Termino for this End; has been
also fully manifested.

But Secondly, Mr Baxter Affirms, That to these Arguments of Maccovius, Mr Owen
adds some in the place against Grotius whereunto he was referred.

To what End, you will say, does Mr Owen add these Arguments? Why to prove
that men are actually, and absolutely, Justified upon the mere Payment of the
Debt by Christ before believing.

But, Fidem tuam! Is there any one Argument in my whole Book used to any such
purpose? Do I labor to prove that which I never Affirmed? never thought? never
believed?

In what Sense I Affirmed that by the Death of Christ, we are actually, and
ipso facto, delivered from Death (that is (...), we have in due time, the time
appointed, free and full Deliverance thereby, without the Intervention of any
Condition on our part, not absolutely procured for us by his Death) I have
before declared. How much this comes short of actual and absolute
Justification, I need not now mention: I shall therefore only so far Consider
the Answers given by Mr Baxter; as they may seem to impair or entrench upon the
main Truth I Assert, and that in the Order by him laid down.

These (says he) Mr Owen lays down.

1 By Death he delivers us from Death.

Answ. Not immediately, nor absolutely, nor by his Death alone, but by that as a
Price, supposing other Causes on his part, and Conditions on ours, to concur
before the actual Deliverance.

Reply. 1 To what End I mention that place of the Apostle was before declared:
2 By the Death of Christ we are immediately delivered from Death with that
Immediation which is proper to the Efficiency of Causes, which produce their
Effects by the way of Moral procurement: that is certainly, without the
Intervention of any other Cause of the like kind: And, 3 Absolutely, no
Condition being interposed between the Cause and the Effect, Christ's Death, and
our total Deliverance, but such as is part of our Deliverance, and solely
procured by that Death: Though that Death of Christ be not considered as alone,
that is separated from his Obedience, Resurrection, and Intercession, when the
Work of Redemption is assigned to it in the Scripture.

4 By the Death of Christ as a Price: I suppose you understand his Purchase, as
well as his Payment; his Merit, as well as his Satisfaction; or else this is a
false Notion of the Death of CHRIST, as the Cause of our Deliverance.

5 All other Causes concurring on the Part of Christ for our Deliverance, are 1
Either not of the same kind with his Death; Or, 2 Bottomed on his Death, and
flowing from thence; so that summarily all may be resolved therinto.

6 The Conditions on our Part, in the Sense intended, are often mentioned,
never proved; nor I am persuaded will never be. But he Adds:

2 He says the Elect are said to die, and rise with Christ.

Answ. 1 Not in respect of time, as if we died and rose at the same time,
either really, or in Gods esteem. 2 Not that we died in his Dying, and rose in
his Rising. But, 3 It is spoken of the distant mediate Effects of his Death,
and the immediate Effects of his Spirit on us, Rising by Regeneration to Union
and Communion with Christ. So he.

Reply. 1 I pass the 1, and 2, Exceptions, notwithstanding, that of Gods not
esteeming of us as in Christ upon his Performance of the Acts of his Mediation
for us, might admit of some consideration.

2 The Inference here couched, That these things are the immediate Effects of
Christ's Spirit on us, therefore the distant and mediate Effects of his death
for us, is very weak and unconcluding. The death of Christ procures these
things as a Cause Moral and Impelling: the Spirit works as an Efficient, and
therefore the same thing may be the immediate Effect of them both, according to
their several kinds of Efficacy. And so indeed they are. Our actual Conversion,
the Efficient whereof is the Spirit, is the immediate procurement of the Merit
of Christ: see this at large in my Treatise opposed. I know not any man that
has run out into more wide mistakes about the immediate Effects of the death
of Christ, than Mr Baxter, who pretends to so much Accurateness in this
Particular.

3 He says (ads Mr Baxter) Christ has redeemed us from the Curse, being made
a Curse for us.

Answ. I explained before how far we are freed by Redemption: He has restored
us, that is, paid the price, but with no intent that we should by that
Redemption, be immediately or absolutely freed.

Yet when we are freed, it is to be ascribed to his death as the Meritorious
Cause, but not as the Only Cause.

Reply. 1 A being freed so FAR, or so far, by Redemption, and not wholly,
fully, or completely, what ever men may explain, the Scripture is wholly silent
of.

2 That Christ in paying a price, had no intent that those he paid it for,
should be immediately or absolutely freed, is crudely enough asserted. 1 Of the
immediateness of their Delivery, I have spoken already. It has as strict an
Immediation as the Nature of such Causes and Effects will bear. 2 If he
intended not that those for whom he died should be absolutely freed, then either
he intended not their freedom at all, and so the Negation is upon the term
freed: or the Negation of his Intention is only as to the qualification,
absolutely, and so his Intention to free them is Asserted, and the Affection of
absolutness in that Intention, only denied.

If the First be meant; 1 It is contrary to innumerable express Testimonies of
Scriptures. 2 It renders the Son of God, dying with no determinate End, or
designed Purpose at all, in Reference to them for whom he dyed: A thing we
would not ascribe to a Wise man, in a far more easy Undertaking.

If the Second: 1 I desire to know, What is this Intention here assigned to our
Savior? He paid a Price, or Ransom for us, he bought and purchased us by his
blood, to be a peculiar People to himself; he redeemed us from the Curse and
Wrath due to us, that we may be conditionally freed. All things intended under
Condition, are as to their Accomplishment uncertain. The Condition may be
fulfilled, or it may not be fulfilled; and therefore the thing intended
thereon, can have no certainty as to its Accomplishment, in the mind of the
Intender. This then is That which is ascribed to the Lord Jesus: Making his
Soul an Offering for sin, laying down his Life a ransom for Mercy, and tasting
Death, to free the Children given him from Death, praying together that those
for whom he died, might be partakers of his Glory; yet was altogether uncertain
whether ever any one of them, should at all partake of the Good things, which
in his whole undertaking of Mediation, he aimed at. Thus is he made a Surety of
an uncertain Covenant, a Purchaser of an Inheritance perhaps never to be
enjoyed, a Priest Sanctifying none by his Sacrifice, etc.

2 Is the Accomplishment of this Condition, upon which freedom depends in the
Intention of Christ, certain in his mind, under that Intention? I ask then,
Whence that Assurance does accrue? Is it from his foresight of their good using
their Abilities to fulfill the Condition to them prescribed? See then, whither
you have rolled this stone! The Folly, and Absurdity of this, has been long
since sufficiently discovered.

But is it from hence, because by his Death, he Purchases for them, the
completing of that Condition in them? Thus, he pays a Price with Intention
that those for whom he pays it, shall be freed, by enjoying that freedom under
such a Condition as he procures for them; and thereupon knows, That at the
appointed time, it shall be wrought in them. What differs this in the Close
from absolute freedom?

Further: Feign some of them for whom Christ died to fulfill this Condition,
others not; and it will be more evident, That the greatest uncertainty
possible, as to the Issues of his Death, must be assigned to him in his dying.
The pretense of an effectual discriminating purpose of free Grace, following
the Purpose of giving Christ, promisuously for all, will not salve the
Contradictions of this Assertion.

But the Truth is, This whole figment of Conditional freedom, is every way
unsavory: That very thing which is assigned for the Condition of our freedom,
being it self the chiefest part of it: the whole indeed as here begun:
Potential, Conditional, not actual, not absolute Issues and Effects of the
Death of Christ, have been abundantly disproved already.

That which follows in Mr Baxter from Page 152, unto page 155. Chap. 19.
belongs not to me: being only a Declaration of his own Judgment about the
things in hand: wherein, although many things are not only incommodiously
expressed, to suit the un-Scriptural Method of these Mysteris which he has
framed in his mind, but also directly opposite to the Truth; yet I shall not
here meddle with it, refering them who desire Satisfaction in this Business, to
a serious Consideration of what I have abovewritten to this purpose.

Page 155. C. 20. he returns to the Consideration of My Assertion concerning
our Deliverance ipso facto, by the blood of Christ: And tells you,

I do not understand Mr Owen his meaning: for he says, That Christ did
actually, and ipso facto, deliver us from the Curse and Obligation; yet we do
not instantly apprehend and perceive it, nor yet possess it: but only we have
actual Right to all the Fruits of his Death. etc. So he.

Answ. The things of that Treatise were written with the Pen of a vulgar
Scribe, that every one might run and read: whence then it should be, That so
learned a man should not understand my meaning, unless from his own prejudice,
I know not: However, I have now so fully delivered my Sense and Meaning as to
these things, That I hope no place remains for Discreptation thereabout. But
let us look a little into Mr Baxters Enquiry after that, which he professes
not well to understand:

1 (Says he) Whether a man may fitly be said actually and ipso facto to be
delivered and discharged, who is not at all delivered, but only has a Right to
deliverance: I doubt.

Answ. To unriddle this, with most of the following Exceptions, and to Resolve
his Doubt so far as I am concerned, as having administered occasion thereunto, I
shall transcribe the place from whence these Difficulties are pretended to
arise.

The Passage is in Lib. 3. Cap. 7. of that Treatise, Page 140, 141. as
follows:

That actual freedom from the Obligation does not follow the Satisfaction made
by Christ, cannot be granted. For by his Death, he did deliver us from Death:
and that actually so far, as that the Elect are said to Die and Rise with him:
he did actually or ipso facto deliver us from the Curse, by being made a Curse
for us. The handwriting that was against us, even the whole Obligation was
taken out of the way, and nailed to his Cross. It is true, all for whom he did
this do not instantly actually apprehend and perceive it: which is impossible.
But yet that hinders not; but that they have all the Fruits of his Death in
actual Right, though not in actual Possession: which last they cannot have
until at least it be made known to them. As if a man pay a Ransom for a
Prisoner detained in a foreign Country; the very day of the Payment and
Acceptance of it, the Prisoner has Right to his Liberty, though he cannot
enjoy it, until such time as Tidings of it is brought unto him, and a Warrant
produced for his Liberty. So that, that Reason is nothing but a begging (...).
2dly, The Satisfaction of Christ by the Payment of the same thing that was in
the Obligation, is no way prejudicial to that free Gracious Condonation of Sin
so often mentioned. Gods Gracious Condonation of Sin, comprizeth the whole
dispensation of Grace toward us in Christ: whereof there are Two Parts: 1 The
laying of our Sin on Christ; or making him to be Sin for us, which was merely
and purely an act of free Grace. 2 The Gracious imputation of the Righteousness
of Christ to us: or making us the Righteousness of God in him; which is no less
of Grace and Mercy: However that Remission, Grace, and Pardon which is in God
for Sinners, is not opposed to Christ's Merits, but ours. He pardons all to
us, but he spares not his only Son: The freedom then of Pardon has not its
Foundation in any defect of the Merit or Satisfaction of Christ, but in Three
other things: 1 The Will of God freely appointing this Satisfaction of Christ:
Joh. 3. 10. Romans 5. 8. 2 In a Gracious Acceptance of that decreed Satisfaction
in our steads, so many, no more. 3 In a free Application of the Death of Christ
unto us: Remission then excludes not a full Satisfaction by the solution of the
very thing in the Obligation, but only the solution or Satisfaction of him to
whom Remission is granted, etc.

All that is here Affirmed, may be Reduced to these Heads:

1 Actual freedom from the Obligation is the immediate Fruit of the Death of
Christ: understand such an Immediation, as I have often described.

2 Hence, Christ is said actually or ipso facto to deliver us, because our
Deliverance which is to be accomplished sub Termino, is the infallible,
absolute, immediate Issue and Product of what he did for us. Actual and ipso
facto, are opposed to the Intervention of any such thing, as should make our
Deliverance to be only Potential, or Conditional.

3 Those for whom Christ does work this Deliverance, are not as to a simulty of
time actually delivered: They neither enjoy, nor are acquainted with any such
Deliverance until the appointed time be come, but have actual right thereunto,
to possess it in due Season.

This being the sum and plain Intendment of that place, I suppose there will
not need any operous Endeavor to remove the Objections that are laid against
it: And therefore to that before expressed, I say, Christ has actually and
ipso facto procured our Deliverance: Hence we have actual right unto it, but
not actual possession of it: And where the difficulty of this should rest, I
know not. Men may as often as they please create Contradictions in their own
minds, and entangle themselves with Doubts in the Knots which themselves have
tied. But,

2 (Says he) Knowledge and Possession of a Deliverance are far different
things.

Answ. 1 He makes them so, who plainly intimates, That the Reason why it is
not apprehended, is, Because it is not possessed: and always speaks
disjunctively of them.

2 Besides, This Proposition of the distance of these Two, is not universally
true, as I could easily demonstrate.

3 Our Knowledge therefore (he ads) does not give us Possession: so that the
Similitude sails: for it is the Creditors Knowledge and Satisfaction that is
requisite to Deliverance: and our Creditor was not in a far and strange
Country, but knew immediately, and could either have made us quickly know, or
turned us free before we had known the Cause.

Answ. 1 Whether or no, or how far Knowledge gives us Possession, I shall not
now Dispute: only considering in what sense Knowledge is here used; and often
in the Scripture, the Deliverance also spoken of, being such, as no small part
thereof consists in this Knowledge, and without it (in the seed at least) is
not, I cannot but say, That such kind of Affirmations in things of this weight,
are very slender proofs: Yea further, Whereas the Enjoyment of this Deliverance
is either as to the Being of it, or to the Comfort of it; the Latter is given
us by this Knowledge merely, the Former consists therein mainly, Joh. 17. 3.

2 Similitudes are allowed their Grains to make them Current: But yet, as our
Creditors Knowledge and Satisfaction is required to our Deliverance, so not
that only; but ours also, as to our actual Enjoyment of it. It is true, he
could have made us quickly know it: but who has been his Counselor? this is
left to his Sovereign and free disposal, our Deliverance being Purchased to be
made out in the season thereby appointed. But, That God could have made us
free, before we knew the Cause, (supposing his Constitution of the way of
Salvation revealed in the Blood of Jesus, which lies at the bottom of all
these Disputes) is a most Anti-Evangelical Assertion, and diametrally opposed
to the whole way of Gods dealing with Sinners. But he adds,

4 Neither can it be understood how God can so long deny us the Possession of
Heaven, if we had such actual absolute Right so long ago, which seems to me to
express a jus ad rem, and in re.

Answ. 1 I love not to enquire into the Reason of Gods actings, Ephesians. 1. 11
which are according to the Counsel of his own Will: and yet think it not very
difficult to conceive how a Son is for a season kept as a Servant, Gal. 4. 1
though he be Heir of all.

2 He speaks as though this Deliverance lay all in Heaven, Joh. 1. 12
whereas it is here fully enjoyed on the Earth though not in all the degrees of
the Fruits thereof. Romans 5. 11


3 If the Right whereof we speak were Jus in re, Ephesians. 1. 11
I see not well indeed how God could keep us from the Possession of it as Mr
Baxter says: Col. 1. 12, 13, 14.
a man cannot be kept long from what he has. But says he,

5 If he mean a Right to future Possession, I do not see how Right and
Possession should stand at so many years distance: To have Right to Gods
favor, and Possession of that favor seem to me of nearer kin. Except he
should think that Possession of favor is nothing but the Knowledge or feeling
of it: And that Faith Justifies only in loco Conscientia: but I will not
Censure so hardly until I know.

Answ. 1 If at so many years distance it may not be allowed, he had done well
to express at how many it might. For my part, placing this Right upon the
Purchase of Christ, (as before,) and Possession in the actual Enjoyment of the
Fruits of that Purchase; then refering the distance between them to the Good
pleasure of God, who had granted and established that Right to an Enjoyment sub
termino, I see no difficulty, no perplexity in this at all.

2 That no small portion of favor consists in a sense and knowledge of the
kindness of God in its Actings terminated upon the Conscience, Psalm. 4. 6
I must believe, whatever Mr Baxter be pleased to Censure. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
It is far more facile to give the hardest Censures, then to Answer the easiest
Arguments.

3 The place where Faith Justifies I am not so solicitous about, as the manner
how: which of all other ways commonly insisted on, I conceive not to be; as it
is our now Obedience: yet that in this Work, it looks further then the
Conscience, I easily grant.

The most of what is subjoyned to these Exceptions, is fully Answered in what
went before.

As much as possible, I shall avoid all Repetitions of the same things: Only
whereas he Affirms, That to have Right to Justification, and to have
Possession of it, is all one; I must needs enter my Dissent thereunto: which
may suffice until it be attempted to be put upon the Proof. If he shall say,
That a Right to a future Justification at the day of Judgment, is the same with
the Possession of present actual Justification, it is neither true, nor any
thing to the Business in hand.

In the Close, he shuts up this Discourse, and enters into another; giving in
his Thoughts about the immediate Effects of the Death of Christ: A matter
wherein he pretends to great Accurateness, (...).
Censuring others, for not being able to distinguish aright of them, and so to
spend abundance of labor in vain, in their Discourses thereabout. Particularly
here he denies (and calls it A dangerous Error to suppose) That actual
Remission and Justification are immediate Effects of his Death, or any Right
thereunto, which he attempteth to prove by sundry Arguments.

Of the Effects of the Death of Christ, and what Relation they all stand in
thereunto, I have spoken at large before. Now because actual Remission is
denied to be an immediate Effect of the Death of Christ, and so a potential
Remission not once mentioned in the Book of God is tacitly substituted in the
Room thereof, and this also in Opposition to what I had Delivered, I shall
briefly consider his Arguments, and so give an End to this Debate.

Argum. 1 What Right soever God gives unto men in things supernatural (such as
Justification, Remission, and Adoption) he gives it by his written Laws. But
by these Laws he has given no such thing to any unbeleevers, such as are the
Elect before Conversion: therefore, etc.

The Major is evident: Gods Decree gives no man a Personal Right to the Mercy
intended him. And for the Minor, no man can produce the Scripture giving to
unbeleevers such a Right.

Answ. 1 Taking the Laws of God in the strict and proper sense, Lex aut punit,
aut vetat, aut permittit, aut consulit, aut hortatur:
and it is so far from being a Truth, That what Right God gives to any, he
gives it by his written Laws; that indeed the Laws of God give no Right to any
one, concerning any thing, whether supernatural or otherwise. The End of the
Law is not to give Right, but to exact Obedience: and that chiefly if not upon
the sum, solely. The usual proper genuine signification of Gods Laws, F. de
Leg. 1 John 3. 4.
being his revealed Will for our Obedience, I know not why Mr Baxter should
bring them in, in the Latitude of his single Apprehension to be a Medium in an
Argument. Hence,

2 Here is not a sufficient Annumeration of Causes; the Promises of God are to
be added, and those either made to us, or to any other for our Good. But,

3 That the Decree of God gives to no man a Right to the thing concerning which
the Decree is, Decretum nil ponit in esse, praedestinatio in praedestinato
Aquin.
is so far from being a sufficient proof of the Major, That it is in it self
very questionable, if not unquestionably false. That the Decree gives not being
and Existence to the things concerning which it is, is an old Rule. That no
Right should from it arise, unto that thing by virtue thereof, is not yet so
clear. Right is but Jus. Jus est quod justum est. If it be just or Right, that
any one should have such a thing, he is said to have a Right thereunto. Ephesians. 1.
4.
Now, supposing the Decree of God, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
that a man shall, by such means, have such a thing, is it not Just, equitable
and Condecent unto Righteousness that he should have it? But yet further,

4 We are not at all speaking of a Right founded on Gods Decrees, Cururceus
exit.
(which considering what was proposed to be proved by this Argument; I wonder
how it found any mention here) but upon Two other things.

1 The Covenant of God with Christ about the Pardoning, Justifying, and Saving
of those, for whose sin he should make his Soul an Offering: which Covenant
respecting Christ as Mediator God and man, is not to be reckoned among the mere
Decrees and Purposes of God, containing in it self al those Promises and
Engagements whereon the Lord Jesus in the Work of Redemption rolled himself.
Isa. 50. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Now in this Covenant, God Engaged himself (as I said before) to make out to
those for whom Christ undertook, whatsoever was the Fruit of his Purchase, and
that was what in his good pleasure was assigned thereunto. And this is the
first bottom of this Right.

2 The Purchase of Christ being completed by the Performance of all things by
divine Constitution thereunto allotted, Joh. 17. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
and himself acquitted and exonerated of the whole Debt of their Sin for whom he
suffered, which was charged on him; Joh. 17.
he makes Demand of the Accomplishment of the forementioned Engagement made to
him, Heb. 9. 24.
concerning the freedom and deliverance of the Persons whose Sins were laid on
him, and whose bringing unto Glory he undertook.

On these Two, I say it is, That our Right to the Fruits of the Death of
Christ, even before believing, does depend: from hence at least it is right and
equal, That we do in the time appointed enjoy these things. Yea to say, That we
have Right upon believing to the Fruits of the Death of Christ affirmed
universally, can only be affirmed of a Jus in re, such a Right, as has (at
least in part) conjoined actual Possession, believing it self being no small
Portion of these Fruits.

This Argument then being fallacious, omitting the chief Causes in
Annumeration, concludes not the thing proposed. Besides it is in no small
measure faulty, in that the first thing proposed to be confirmed was, That
Remission of Sin, and Justification are not the immediate Effects of Christ's
Death, whereof in this Argument there is (...).

Argum. 2. If God hate all the Works of Iniquity, and we are all by Nature the
Children of Wrath, and without Faith it is impossible to please God, and he
that believes not is Condemned already, then certainly the Elect while they
are unbeleevers, are not actually de facto, no nor in personal Right delivered
from this Hatred, Wrath, Displeasure, and Condemnation: But, Ergo.

Answ. 1 This Argument, for what indeed it will prove is handled at large in my
Treatise of Redemption, as also re-urged in the Pages foregoing. Against actual
Justification from Eternity, it has its Efficacy.

2 It does also Conclude, That the Elect whilst unbeleevers, are not actually
and de facto put in Possession of the Issues of Love, Faith being with the
first of them. But,

3 That they have not upon the Grounds forementioned, a Right to these things.

Or,

4 That Justification is not the immediate Effect of the Death of Christ (being
the sole things in question) it has the same unhappiness with the former, not
once to mention.

Argum. 3. If we are Justified only by Faith, then certainly not before Faith.
But we are Justified only by Faith. Ergo.

Answ. 1 If I mistake not, it is not Justification before Faith, but a Right to
the Fruits of the Death of Christ before Faith that is to be proved.

2 That Justification is not the immediate Effect of the Death of Christ to
which Ends for this Argument, Valeat quantum valere potest: to me, it comes not
within many miles of the thing in Question. So that with the absurd ANSWERS
supposed thereunto, we pass it by.

The like also I am enforced to say of the Two other that follow, being of the
same length and breadth with those foregoing, too short and narrow to cover the
things in Question so that though they may have their strength to their own
proper End, yet as to the things proposed to be proved, there is nothing in
their Genuine Conclusions looking that way.

If I might take the Liberty of ghessing, I should suppose the Mistake which
lead this Author to all this labor in vain, is, That the immediate Effects of
the Death of Christ must be immediately enjoyed by them for whom he died. Which
Assertion has not indeed the least Color of Truth. The Effects of the Death
of Christ are not said to be immediate, in reference to others enjoyment of
them, but unto their Causality by that Death. Whatever it be, that in the first
place is made out to Sinners for the Death of Christ, when ever it be done,
that is the immediate Effect thereof, as to them: As to them I say, for in its
first tendency, it has a more immediate Object.

If Mr Baxter go on with his Intentions about a tract concerning universal
Redemption, perhaps we may have these things cleared: and yet we must tell him
before hand, That if he draw forth nothing on that Subject but what is done by
Amiraldus, and like things to them, he will give little Satisfaction to learned
and stable men, upon the Issue of his undertaking.

I shall not presume to take another man's Task out of his hand, especially
one's who is so every way able to go through with it; Else I durst undertake to
demonstrate that Treatise of Amiraldus, mentioned by Mr Baxter, to be full of
weak and sophistical Argumentations, absurd Contradictions, vain strife of
Words; and in sum to be, as birthless a tympanous Endeavor, as ever so learned
a man was engaged in.

For the present, being by Gods Providence removed for a Season from my Native
soil, attended with more then ordinary weaknesses and infirmities, separated
from my Library, burdened with manifold Employments, with constant Preaching to
a numerous multitude, of as thirsting a People after the Gospel, as ever yet I
conversed withal; it suffices me, That I have obtained this Mercy, Briefly and
plainly to Vindicate the Truth from mistakes, and something further to unfold
the Mystery of our Redemption in Christ, all with so facile and placid an
Endeavor, as is usually upon the Spirits of men, in the familiar writings of
one Friend to another. That it has been my Aim to seek after Truth, and to
keep close to the form of wholesome words delivered to us, will (I hope)
appear to them that love Truth, and Peace.

Dublin-Castle, December. 20. 1649. (...).
FINIS.
ERRATA.
The Author having no opportunity to attend the Press, and being absent many
miles during the Printing the most part of it, finds the Accenting of sundry
Greek Expressions omitted, with other mistakes, which he desires the Reader to
Correct as follows:
Page 5. l. 10. r. have. p. 9. l. 23. (...). p. 10. l. 8. (...), so also in
other places. l. 9. (...). p. 11. l. 10. (...). l. 26. (...). p. 12. l. 21.
(...). p. 15. l. 3. (...). l. 14. (...). p. 16. l. 9. hudled. p. 19. l. 10.
alius. p. 20. l. 4. now. p. 22. l. 22. (...). p. 24. l. 22. (...). p. 27. l.
12. observed. p. 28. l. 24. not all the thing. l. 26. to any. p. 29. l. 4. Now
the. p. 30. l. 6. Now he. p. 31. l. 1. (...). l. 4. (...). l. 11. pressures. p.
32. l. ult. Pactional. p. 33. l. 24. Contradiction. p. 34. l. 33. Oblation
made. p. 36. l. 22. that ever I. l. 31. feign. p. 44. l. 8. (...). p. 47. l.
3. of God, is thus held out. l. 27. Analogy. l. 33. fturition. p. 54. l. ult.
actuate their own. p. 76. l. 29. Concluded. p. 78. l. 30. preceed. p. 82. l.
27. (...). p. 85. l. 28. many. p. 87. l. 20. disceptation. p. 88. l. 17. (...).
p. 91. l. 20. foro Conscientiae. p. 95. l. 3. (...). Page 29. in the Margin,
(...).


