ARTICLES OF High Treason Exhibited against CHEAP SIDE CROSS.

WITH The last WILL and TESTAMENT of the said CROSS.

And certain EPITAPHS upon her Tomb.

By R. OVERTON.

Newly Printed, and newly come forth; with his HOLINESS Privilege, to prevent
false Copies.



LONDON, Printed for R. Overton, 1642.

The Author to his Muse.
MY Muse scarce hatched erects her spiring eye,
And through the air sees flocks of Muses fly;
And wanting Wings, she skipt into this paper:
And after flies, puffed up with windy vaper:
But hasty Muse take this advice (I pray)
In this thy flight keep in the Middle way;
Fly not too high, for fear of scorching beams;
Nor yet too low, for fear of vvatery streams;
Thy vvings are paper, if thou do aspire
Sols fiery throne, he will set thy wings on fire,
To trident Neptune if thou do descend,
He Will wet thy vvings, and bring thee to thy end:
Thus to the Mean I leave thee: let none be
Offended at thy flight, nor yet at me.
R. O.

ARTICLES OF HIGH TREASON Exhibited against Cheape-side CROSS, Dialogue-wise,
Betwixt Master Papist a professed Catholic, and Master News a Temporiser.
Papist. WHat News I pray thee, thou can tell I know.

News. You must go upright, and forget to bow,
The Cross in Cheap Side it is accused of Treason.

Pa. O fie, thou speaks without all sense or Reason;
The Cross accused of Treason! heavens forbid:
Sure it is accused of what it never did;
The Usurers bags thou may as well accuse,
And say they are stuffed with Traitors (Mr. News)
The Cutpurse too, stands guilty of high Treason,
Who by his slightlets Traitors out of Prison.
What Is free from Treason now: Oh dismal year!
The very Horn shrouds Traitors too I fear.
Alas poor Crisse-Crosse who would ere have thought,
Under the Horn a Traitor should been caught:
Have thou fore-run the Alphabet of Art
So long, and now to act a Traitors part:
It Is not thy part alone, there is others share,
And are arraigned for Traitors at the Bar.
It Is not enough those Reverend Fathers stand
Impeacht of Treason by so High an hand?
But this poor Cross, whose glory has erewhile
Grown big with honor through this famous Isle,
Should be condemned? oh what an age is here!
We shall be all proved Traitors now I fear.
But Master News, how comes this thing about, Is It not effected by the Rabble
rout?

Ne. Peace Sir, what now? the Rabble rout ye knave?
It Is Patience that brings Crosses to the grave.
Cheap Side with patience long has borne the Cross,
But now't must be disburthen'd of that dross.

Pa. What has the Cross committed, Mr News,
That you and others should it thus abuse?
What harm does it? do not adorn the City?
If It be accused of Treason mores the pity.

Ne. What though Vox populi has past this doom,
If you will have Crosses, you must go to Rome.

Pa. I need not Sir, what greater Cross can fall,
If this fall down, we shall have Crosses all.
Cross here, cross there, we must resolve on losses,
Come what come will, we shall have store of Crosses.
But what is the Treason this blessed monument
Is now attacht of by such joint consent?

Ne. Ple tell you Mr. Papist if you please
The Articles against it, they be these.

The ARTICLES.
IMprimis, That this Idolatrous Cross has most traitorously gone about by her
evil example, and by many and sundry suggestions, to seduce his Majesty's
liege Subjects from the true Protestant Religion, to the Romish Cathalike
faith, to the utter subversion and ruin of the Kingdom by civil war. Item,
That the said Babylonish Cross has traitorously endeavored to bring in the
Popes supremacy, by instigating all the superstitious Crosses in this Kingdom,
to join with her in that Jesuitical design. Item, That this profane Heretic
has most traitorously introduced sundry and diverse innovations into the
Church, as, the Cross in Baptism, Images, Crucifixes, and the like. Item,
That this Romish popish Idol, this Diabolical overtwhart has most
tratterously supported the portractures of Cardinals and Bishops, to the
confirmation of popery, the countenancing and vindication of Traitors. Item,
That this Judaicall Tiburne has most traitorously gone about to crucify the
Author of Lambeth fair. Item, That this huge great papisticall Image has
seditiously occasioned diverse tumultuous insurrections, polititicall and
National disturbances, to the great overthrow of trading and Merchandary
commerce. Item, That this vilanous piece of superstition, this pestiferous
Romish relic, under pretense of frightning the Devil out of the Market, has
brought the Devil or some Familiar spirit of knavery amongst them, to the
cheating and undoing his Majesty's poor subjects, their wives and children.
Ne. Thus Mr. Papist you have heard the Bill
Whereof she stands accused against her will:
She is convicted and condemned of Treason,
And dye she must while Crosses are in season;
And I am sent here to declare her fate;
Then Cross prepare, for thou must end thy date;
Vox populi has doomed thee to thy end,
They Will let thee live no longer to amend.
Then make thy Will to all the holy Tribe,
Here stands a Papist let him be thy Scribe.
At which sad News the Cross began to shake,
And all the pictures there began to quake,
As if an Earthquake had possessed the place,
Which made the Popes nose shatter from his face:
That Babels whore looks as she would got the pox,
Then woe to him that next takes up her smock.
In this affright the Virgin lost her Crown.
Hands they flew off, and legs came tumbling down.
The Crosier staff was broke, which might have kept
His Holiness from dogs, while he had slept.
The Pilgrims they were fit to step aside,
For on the Cross they durst scarce there abide.
Such frightning terror so possessed the Beast
That nere an Image there could be at rest.
Yea 'twas so mighty it was thought by most
The forlorn Beast would then given up the Ghost.
But after that the Cross had paused a while,
She forced these words out with a scurvie smile.
Oh dismal doom, oh more accursed fate,
The Cross in Cheap Side quite crossed out of date!
And must I down? tell him that passes by,
I lived a Cross, and by a Cross I dye.
Now holy Brother if you please to write,
My Will and Testaement, I Will thus indite.

The last will and Testament of Cheap Side Cross.
IN the name of the Virgin Mary, and of his Holiness, Amen. I, the Cross in
Cheap Side in London, professed Catholic; being fore sick in body, but in
p^rfect memory, do m^ke my last Will and Testament, in manner and form as
follows.

Imprimis, I do bequeath my Catholic ghost of consecration to him that gave
it, my body to be buried in the divine Sanctum Sanctorum of S. Paul's, in full
assurance to be Canonized a Martyr, and for ever eternized in his Holiness
Rubricks.

Item, I give and bequeath all the Lead that is about me, to the hostile
Catholics in Ireland, to make Bullets to confound that cursed crew of
Heretics.

Item, I bequeath the Miters that invest the sacred Temples of my Cardinals
unto the Reverend Fathers the Bishops of this Land

Item, Their Crosier statics to the Catholic Shepherds of this Kingdom, for
Sheephookes.

Item, I bequeath the Iron about me to make a Clapper for his Holiness
passing bell.

Item, My poor Pilgrims that stand with their faces against all mind and
Weather, I recomm^nd unto his Holiness of Rome,to report the sad tidings of my
most miserable and immature destruction.

Item, The gilt that is about me, and such other sacred Relics as my
Executors shall think fit, to be sold next Lambeth Fair, for the discharge of
my funerals.

Lastly, I constitute and ordain the Graces of Canterbury and of York, my
Lawful Executors for the administration of this my last Will and Testament.

Sealed and Delivered in the presence of etc. Dated, Anno ultimo Guilielmi. The
Cross her mark.

This being done the Cross set such a groan
Would pierced an heart that had been made of stone.
Each Cardinal and Picture that was there,
To hear this sigh, gave up the Ghost for fear.
But the poor Pilgrims crampir'd by the back,
Withstood the storm, till that the Cross did crack:
A second sigh the Cross began to breath,
But sighing breathed her last, and took her leave.
At which the Papist stood as one half dead,
And swore by the Mass he would rather lost his head.
But since it was so come to pass, he would
See her with honor brought unto the mould.
Which was performed in such a pompous glory,
That I want art for to express the story:
One thing except, and that I will rehearse
Some Epitaphs which were pined to her Hearse.
Epitaphs upon the death of Cheap Side Cross.
COme here all you that feign would learn to weep,
And ask who is here, that in this tomb does sleep,
You may receive an Answer, that will make
Your eye strings burst your heart to yearne and quake,
But must not be revealed, lest it bring in
A second Deluge on the world for sin.
ALIUD.
Sure Death and Hell do now conspire in one
T invent new torments for us when we are gone,
For bygone Ages thrown into the Dust,
Rest in their Graves, to show the Grave is just.
But he that next shall here possession have,
He shall poor man find Crosses in the Grave.
ALIUD.
Here lies, I Will tell you if you please to know,
A certain thing where at men used to bow;
But Death has bowd it (that unhappy Knave)
And sent it for a Token to the Grave.
The AUTHOR to his Muse.
Return my Muse, perchance thou wast too blame,
But if thou be crave pardon for the same.
Pardon she craves for this presumptuous flight,
It she offend, she will vanish out of sight.

