TO The right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, the Parliament
of England, assembled at Westminster, The humble Appeal and Petition of Mary
Overton, prisoner in Bridewell:
SHOWS,
THat whereas the public safety and liberty of the people is the maine end of
all Government, and Governors, whether Regal, Parliamentarie, or other; and
the Law of the Land usually called the Common Law, being grounded upon right
reason and equity, the true Rule and Directory, both for ruling and obeying,
which to preserve, as the King declares in his Answer to your Petition of the
23. of May, 1643. ought to be the perpetual and vigilant care of a Prince,
and acknowledges, that upon the observation of the Fundamental Laws, the
public happiness and welfare of the people is founded and constituted;
calling God to witness, That the preservation of the Law, and the Liberty of
the People, should always be as much his care and industry, as the life or
lives of his dearest children; professing, to make the Law the measure of his
Power, and that there was no man so near unto him in place or affection, whom
he would not leave to the justice of the Law; himself acknowledging the Law
to be the Inheritance of every Subject, and the only security he can have for
his life, liberty, or estate, the which being neglected, violated, or
disesteemed under what specious shows or pretenses soever, a very great
measure of infelicity, if not irreparable confusion would in avoydably ensue;
and that he was resolved not only to observe the Laws himself, but to
maintain them against all opposition: and the Law respects nothing more then
the Liberty and Freedom of a man's person, according to the ancient and grave
Lawyer Forteseue, Impius and crudelis est, qui libertati non favet: Angliae
Jura in omni casu libertati dant favorem; yet notwithstanding these so many
reiterated professions and asseverations, so often emitted in the Kings
Declarations and Answers, and other golden baits of profit and preferment,
neither your Petitioners husband (now prisoner in Newgate by the House of
Lords) nor your Petitioner could in the least wise be induced to comply with
the King or his party against this honorable House, as many thousands have
done, who now are at liberty, and under your protection, to your high
dishonor, and to the great grief of your best and most faithful friends: but
being confident that you the betrusted of the Kingdom, according to your many
Vows and Protestations, Covenants, Declarations, Remonstrances, Ordinances,
and to the high and great Trust reposed in you, would have long ere now
improved all your endeavors, powers, and interests for the redemption and
advancement of our ancient (though of late years much invaded) Rights, Laws
and Liberties, which are our Birthright and Inheritance, as you (as well as the
King) have often told us, calling God to witness, that the peace and good of
the people ever was your only aims; professing unto us in the presence of the
all-seeing Diety, that our peace and safety is the only end of all your
Counsels, and endeavors, resolving therein to continue free from all private
aims, or personal respects whatsoever: and that you never intended to
introduce any new Law to our prejudice, much less to exercise any arbitrary
power at all, but to your utmost to prevent it, holding it your duty to use
your best endeavors that the meanest of the Commonalty might enjoy their
Rights, Liberty, and Benefits of the Law, being equally interested and
entitulled thereto, with the greatest Subject, confessing and acknowledging,
that the sitting of the PARLIAMENT ought not to suspend the Law, the execution
thereof according to equity, being the very Spirit (as you tell us) which gives
life to authority; from all which and manifold other Premises, and Obligations,
even out of your own mouths, the Commonalty of England are invited and enabled
justly to challenge and expect from this House the just defense, preservation,
and fruition of all their Rights, Laws, and Liberties, in their lives, persons
and estates, restraint of, and protection against the malice and fury o those
that seek their ruin, by any arbitrary domination, or other practices
whatsoever; and therefore for that end are all obliged to stand by you, and for
you: but on the contrary, to return contrary effects, for contrariorum
contraria sunt consequentia.

But now so it is, though your Petitioners husband has constantly adhered to
the Parliament, and has given ample testimony of his sincere and upright
affections to this honorable House, to the just Laws and Freedoms of England
in general, and to the Rights and Properties of all and every Commoner in
particular, by his constant and faithful endeavors to that end, as many
hundreds in the City, yea (I may take the boldness to say) many thousands in
the Kingdom can witness in his behalf, yet notwithstanding upon the 11. of
August, 1646. had his house surrounded with diverse armed men with swords and
muskets, under the Conduct of one Robert Eales, and by the said Robert Eales
(Deputy-Catchpole to the House of Lords) with his Sword drawn in his hand, and
by one M. Eveling (dweller at the green Dragon in the Strand) with his pistol
ready cocked, was suddenly and violently entered, and his person laid hold of,
without Warrant either Legal or pretended first shown, and so by force of
arms was in an hostile manner led captive to the House of Lords, who would
(High-Commission-like) have examined him against himself; which he refusing,
and appealing to this honorable House as his proper and competent Judges, was
therefore by the Lords, under the pretense of contempt to that House, committed
to the infamous Goal of Newgate, there to be kept til their pleasures should
be further signified; Which (as your Petitioner humbly conceives) tends to
the high violation of the fundamental Laws of this Land, the utter subversion
of the Common Liberties of the people, and of your Petitioners husbands native
Right and Inheritance in particular, for by the great Charter of Liberties the
Lords cannot pass Judgment upon any Commoner in cases criminal concerning
life, liberty, or estate, neither can any other Court or Justices whatsoever,
before Indictment or presentment, or by other due process in Law, take away
Commoners life, liberty, or goods; nor ought any man by Law, to be forced by
Oath to answer to Interregatories to accuse himself in any criminal causes,
which concern either his life, liberty, loss of goods, or freehold, but ought
to be convicted first by witnesses, presentment, or the verdict of twelve men,
or upon or by his own voluntary confession without oath or co-action, as by
the Laws, Statutes, and Authorities here set down, is clearly proved.

The Statute of Magna Charta (31. times confirmed in Parliament) cap. 29.
Enacts, That no Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or disseased of his
Freehold or Liberties, or free Customs, or outlawed, or exiled, or otherwise
destroyed: neither will we pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. Now what is understood by
the Law of the Land, these ensuing Statutes yet in force, declare and explain.
The Statute of 5. Edw. 3. c. 9. ordains, That no man from henceforth shall be
attached for any Accusation, nor fore-judged of life, nor limb, against the
form of the great Charter.

The Statute of the 25. Edw. 3. c. 4. enacts, That from henceforth none shall
be taken by Petition or Suggestion made to the King, or to his Council,
unless it be by Indictment and presentment of good and lawful men, where such
deeds be done, in due manner, or by process made by Writ Original at the
Common Law, etc. and if any thing be done against the same, it shall be
redressed, and holden for none.

The Statute of 28. Edw. 3. c. 3. provides That none of what estate or
condition that he be, shall be taken or imprisoned, without being brought to
answer by due process of Law.

The Statute of 42. Edw. 3. c. 3. complains and concludes thus, To eschew the
mischiefs and damages done to diverse of the Commoners by false accusers, which
have often times made their accusations more for vengeance and singular profit,
then for the profit of the King, or of his People, of which accused persons
some have been imprisoned, and others caused to come before the Kings Council
by Writ, and otherwise upon grievous pain against the Law: It is assented and
accorded for the good Government of the people, that none be put to answer
without presentment before Justices, or other matter of Record, or by due
Process, or by some Writ Original, according to the old Law of the Land; and
if any thing from henceforth be done the contrary, it shall be void in Law and
holden for error.

All these recited Statutes are mentioned and ratified as the undoubted Laws
and Liberties of the Kingdom, by the late Petition of Right, 3. Caroli.

The Statute of 25. Hen. 8. c. 14. recites, That it stands not with the right
order of justice nor good equity, that any person should be convict and put to
the loss of his life, name, or goods, unless it be by due accusation and
witness, or by presentment, verdict, confession, or Process of Outlawry:
since by the Law of the Realm no man can be put to death for treason committed
to the peril of the Kings most royal Majesty, but by Presentment, Verdict,
Confession or Process of Outlawry.

And the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 1. enacts, that no man shall be indicted or
arraigned for any offense against the Law, but by two sufficient Witnesses at
the least, and that viva voce, face to face, if they be alive, or within the
Realm. The reason given in the Law Books against enforced Oaths, is, because
no man is bound to bewray himself in things which concern his credit,
liberty, life, or forfeiture of his estate; in which cases any may lawfully
refuse to take an oath, or give any answer at all, as these Law-Authorities
conclude and resolve. 49. Ed. 3. 2. a. Fitz. Challenge. 100. Brook 25. 7. H.
4. 10. a. Fitz. Justice of Peace. 172. Cromptons Justice of Peace, 182. 219. 2.
Eliz. 33. Dier. 288. p. 51.

Also many godly Martyrs have by their doctrine and practice taught and
affirmed it a thing contrary to the Law of God, of nature, equity, common
reason, and to the Common and Civil Law it self, for men to bewray and accuse
themselves; and therefore refused to take any oaths, or to answer any Articles
to accuse themselves, declaring against such oaths and proceedings as
Antichristian, bloody, tyrannical, unnatural, uncharitable, unreasonable,
unjust, yea execrable and diabolical. Fox Acts and Monuments, printed Anno
1510. page 950, 951. 1006. 1022. 1643. 1616. 1661. 1777. 1778. 1813. 1814.
1815. 1849. 1872. 1873. And the Ancients (called the Fathers) as Athanasius,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, and many others, mentioned by Sextus Senensis in
Bibliotheca sancta, l. 6. p. 434, 435. as well as Modern Writers, have all
passed joint sentence of condemnation against those selfe-oaths and
proceedings, exceedingly declaiming against them, as the direct road to
perjury, and the very Devils prescript to tumble men headlong into hell, as
Slades Case, 4. Report fol. 95.

Now in direct opposition to all the sore-cited Laws, Statutes, Antiquities,
Authorities, etc. and contrary to the course of all other Courts of Justice
(even of the Star Chamber while it continued) the House of Lords did without
any Summons, or other Process for appearance, not only attach, apprehend, and
imprison your Petitioners husband, violently (by their Officers) breaking open,
searching and ransacking his house, felloniously taking away his goods, not
saving to him his contenniment or livelihood, but also, before any Indictment,
Presentment, or other due Process of Law preceding, send forth their Officers
again to enter, search, ransack and rifle your Petitioners house, her trunks,
chests, etc. to rob, steal, plunder, and bear away her goods, which were her
then present livelihood for her imprisoned husband, her self, and three small
children, her brother and sister; and to bring your Petitioner, with Thomas
Overton her husbands brother, unto their Prerogative-Barre, which was
accordingly done. And by reason your Petitioner would not be subject to the
arbitrarie and diabolical accustomarie proceedings of that House, to answer to
Interrogatories, or to make oath against her husband or her self, concerning
his or her life, liberty, or goods, was, together with her said Brother-in-Law,
(himself also refusing subjection to the said illegal proceedings) committed
to the New Prison in Maiden Lane, where he still most unjustly remains, and
is illegally detained: and from thence, under color of another Arbitrary Order
from the House of Lords, your Petitioner, with her tender Infant in her arms
of half a years age, was most inhumanely and barbarously dragged headlong
upon the stones through all the dirt and the mire in the streets, and by the
way was most unjustly reproached and vilified by their Officers, with the
scandalous, infamous names of wicked Whore, Strumpet, etc. and in that
contemptible, barbarous manner was cast into the most reproachful Goal of
Bridewell, that common center of Whores, Strumpets, etc. where from the 8. of
January 1646. to this present, she remains in cruel restraint, being most
unnaturally and tyrannically divided and divorced by a forced separation, from
the comfort and society of her husband in this her afflicted condition; her
husband, her self, and her brother being imprisoned, and her three helpless
children exposed to the mercy of the wide world; an act so abhorred of God, of
Nature, of Nations, yea of the most wild and barbarous Heathens, of Turks,
Infidels, and Pagans. Which proceedings of these merciless cruel Lords exceed
all temporal exorbitant Usurpers before them, in violence, injustice, cruelty,
and oppression, being paralleled by none but by the Spanish or Romish
Inquisitors: a tyrannical grievance and exorbitancie so excessive and
intolerable, so contrary to all Law, equity and justice, that the Parliament 7.
Iacobi in their Petition of Grievances exhibited to King James, and by sundry
Parliaments since, and by this present Parliament in their Remonstrance of the
15. of December 1642. is complained against as an insufferable Outrage,
Burglarie and oppression, desiring a speedy reformation; upon which they and
you received royal promises, that those exorbitances should be redressed: yet
notwithstanding this kind of insufferable tyranny, injustice, violence,
enforced slaverie and oppression of the Lords, through your neglect of
restraint and moderation, is now become more frequent and common then in any
former ages, subjecting us under worse slaverie, and greater and more
exorbitant unlimited arbitrary power and usurpation, then formerly we were by
the Prerogative, Star Chamber and High Commission: yet when we have appealed to
this House both for judgment and redress, all approaches to justice have
been interrupted and hitherto delayed, our Petitions and Complaints slightly
rejected or disregarded, our friends wearied, vexed and molested with long and
fruitles attendance, while we, our husbands, brethren, friends and servants,
contrary to all Law (severally, and in a forced and unjust separation from our
husbands) are kept and mewed up in your several starving, stinking, murdering
prison-houses, and if at any time we get access, or a Petition read, which is
seldom obtained, we are referred over to one Committee or other, who never
will bring their reports unto the House, to the obstructing and perverting the
whole course of justice. Whereas the grand Traitors, the rebellious Lords, who
have been in arms against you, and other the professed and known enemies of
the Kingdom, yea some of the Rebels exempted from pardon in the Propositions
sent to the King, can have liberty upon their paroll, enjoy their estates,
obtain favor and free access unto you, ready acceptance and hearing of their
Petitions, quick dispatches of their business: And notwithstanding the great
and urgent Affairs of the Kingdom (that common pretense for the obstruction
and suspense of the just and necessary redress of your best friends, and
faithful lovers of their country) you can find leisure, and take time weekly
and daily to pass Ordinances for compositions and pardons for Delinquents,
declared Traitors, sometimes twenty, sometimes more upon one day; to hear the
Petitions of such as are malevolently affected, not only against your best,
most faithful untainted friends, assistants and adherents, but even against
the sinews of yours and the Kingdoms defensive might, the Army, endeavoring
and supplicating their speedy dissolution, and the removal of all the best
affected, even while there was a threatening, puissant Army of another Nation
within the bowels of the Land, to pass Votes, Ordinances, Declarations, etc.
against preaching of the Gospel, just as if you were running a tilt against
Christ, to destroy, root out, and confound all such as are religiously
affected, and have been (under God) the very props and pillars of your house,
the subduers and conquerers of yours and the Kingdoms enemies, and all under
the sacred pretense of suppression of Heretics, Schismatics, etc. prevention
of Heresies, Schisms, Blasphemies, etc. and under that religious guise stab
your friends to the heart; and when such your faithful oppressed Assistants
come with their Petitions for redress and case of their grievances, they are
ordinarily slighted, scoffed and derided, even by the Members of your House: a
most abhorred impiety, most barbarous ingratitude! for these and such like
enormities and abuses of the people, you can find leisure and opportunity
enough, but you are so busied with the great affairs of the Kingdom (as you
call it) that you can find no time these six years to proclaim liberty to the
captive, freedom to the oppressed, to right the cause of the poor, to hear
the cry of the fatherless and widow, to reform the cruelties and extortions
of Goalers, which like so many vulters upon a dead karkase, eat the flesh, and
pick the bones of those poor miserable souls that are cast into their custody;
to protect or countenance the Commoners against the Prerogative usurpers and
invaders of the great Charter of their Liberties, or to restrain or curb their
insolent aspiring dominations; to restore the City of London and other Cities,
Towers and Buroughs to their ancient Liberties and Franchises; to disrobe the
London Gown-men of their Prerogative usurpation of the freemens Property in the
election of their public Officers: to bring Delinquents amongst you to trial,
to give encouragement to the people to bring in their just charge against any
amongst you, which shall betray their trust, or deal treacherously with the
people, Laws, Free-Customes, or Liberties; to reform the abuses of the Law
through all the Courts in the Kingdom, to cause the Laws of the Land to be
translated out of Pedlars French and Latin, into the English Tongue, etc. So
that many begin to fear by these your delays of justice, by your connivance
at the Lords increasing usurpations, and atonement with and pardons of the
Kingdoms Enemies, by your discouragements and sleightings of your friends, you
give way to the Lords to carry on a design to alter the whole frame of the
Legal Government of the Land, and of subjection of us to a tyrannous, lawless
orbitrary Power, and vassilage, to the total overthrow and irrecoverable loss
and ruin of all our just Rights, and native Liberties; for what is tyranny,
but to admit no Rule of Government, but their wills, as with them by your
permission is familiar and frequent: and we know (as sometimes the King has
told you) the misery of Athens was at the highest, when it suffered under
thirty Tyrants; and if instead of one Tyrant we have got three or four
hundred, we cannot be far from the height of ours.

Now for as much as by the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, no Justices or
other Judges of the Realm can make a Warrant upon bare surmise to break any
man's house for a fellon, or for stolen goods (much less for a free-mans own)
the same being against Mag. Charta cap. 29. and contrary to the Statute of 42.
Ed. 3. c. 3. etc. and in this case before Indictment, neither the Constable nor
any other man can break open any man's house for the apprehension of the party
suspected, or charged with Felony, for it is in Law, the arrest of the party
that has the knowledge or suspicion, who cannot break any house, 2. H. 7. 3.
and 15. 4. H. 7 2 3. 5. H. 7. 4. 10. H. 7. 17. 20. H. 7. 12. 7. Ed. 4 20. 8. E.
4 3. 10. E. 4. 17. 9. E. 4 26. 11. E. 4. 4. 13. E. 4. 9. 7. H. 4. 35. 17. E. 4.
5. 27. H. 8. 23. Dier. 7. Eliz. 23. 6. Cooks Reports 1. 5. Fol. 9. 92. Semanies
case.

And forasmuch as imprisonment by the Lords is inflicted by their censures as a
punishment, and so their first imprisoning before other Summons being no other
then to begin execution before hearing, which is contrary to all Law and
Reason: And forasmuch as justice and right is to be done freely without fail,
fully without denial, and speedily without delay, Quia dilatio est quaedam
negatio; for so be the words of the great Charter, We will defer justice to
no man, cap. 29. confirmed by the Statutes, 2. E. 3. c. 8. 14. E. 3. c. 14. 20.
E. 3, c. 1, 2. 11. Ric. 2. c. 11. And lastly, for that no Act, Order, or
Ordinance of the Lords binds the Subject without concurrence of this Honorable
House, as notably appears by several Records, An. 6. Ed. 3. n. 6. Rot.
Claus. An. 44. E. 3. And the Lords plead a joint concurrence for nullity of the
proceedings and Compositions of Goldsmiths Hall.

Your Petitioner therefore does make her humble Appeal from the Jurisdiction
of the House of Lords, to the legal trial, judgment and determination of
this House, either for justification or condemnation, as by your Honors it
shall be legally found.

And she humbly prays this honorable House to take into your due and speedy
consideration the miserable distress and deplorable condition of your
Petitioner, her husband, and brother, long groaning under the oppression and
injustice of the arbitrary and tyrannical power of the Lords, who without
fault or Law have cast them into three several chargeable Goales, and sometimes
have kept your Petitioners husband in double irons.

And in regard the Committee for consideration of the Commoners Liberties
having taken your Petitioners husbands cause into their trial and judgment,
and have for these three months deferred the report thereof unto this House,
concluded by the said Committee, to the great misery and damage of your
Petitioner, her husband and children, by reason of his long and tedious
imprisonment (in expectation of the legal determination of this House) to the
great wrong and prejudice of the Peoples Liberties in the general.

It is therefore further the humble desire of your Petitioner, that her
husband, her self, and her brother, without further procrastination and delay,
may receive the just and speedy sentence of this House accordingly as it shall
be legally found and determined by the Vote of this House; that in case by Law
it shall be found that your Petitioners husband, her self and her brother have
done ought worthy of death, or other exemplary punishment, that they may
forthwith receive their just execution accordingly. But and if your Petitioner,
her husband and her brother be legally found not guilty of any transgression
of the known Laws of the Land, that then by an Order from this House they may
forthwith be discharged from under the vassallage and bondage of those
insulting tyrannizing Lords; and that for the future you would be pleased to
protect them and the rest of their National Brethren the free Commoners of
England from the like Prerogative-insolencies, cruelties and oppressions: and
that in case this House by the Law of the Land shall find your Petitioners
husband, her self and her brother wronged and abused, that you would according
to justice give them full and ample reparations for their long and unjust
imprisonment, like as you have done of late to sundry of your own Members your
Petitioners Fellow Commoners; that you will not any longer deny them the
benefit of the Law, which is their birthright and inheritance, and let them not
be deprived of that which every monthly Sessions you do allow to thieves and
murderers, to have a free and speedy trial: and as you can and do without
interruption of your other affairs, free and discharge your own Servants and
Attendants out of prison the same or the next day after their commitments; so
now at length, after so long attendance, and so many months cruel and harsh
imprisonment, let us receive the like impartial speedy justice.

And by reason your Petitioners husband, your Petitioner and her brother have
chosen bonds and affliction under these Norman Prerogative-Task-masters the
House of Lords, rather then they will for their parts yield up the birthright
and inheritance of the Commoners unto their Lordships Prerogative-jurisdiction.
Let not therefore your Petitioners husband, her self and her brother be more
unjustly and illegally dealt with then traitors, thieves and murderers, but
let them with such have an equal benefit of the Law, whether for speedy
penalty or present release; which request is so legal and reasonable; that if
it be by you denied, it will be a certain evidence of your disaffection to the
Commonalty of England, and of your evil intentions to their Laws, Rights and
Freedoms. And if for your Petitioners plainness with you, and just desires
for redress of her most insufferable grievances, you shall be provoked to
exercise further cruelty and affliction either upon her self or her husband,
it will be a certain confirmation to all that shall hear of it (which shall be
the whole Kingdom, if your Petitioners husband miss not of his aim) that you
are absolutely resolved, if possibly you can, to inslave the Commons of England
to a Lordly arbitrary vassallage and bondage, to conquer and destroy their
Laws, Rights, Liberties and Freedoms, and to turn co-Vsurpers and
joynt-Tyrants with that Norman brood of insolent domineering Tyrants and
Usurpers, the House of Lords.

Do therefore justice, and discharge your trust unto the People, and do no
less unto us who have engaged our selves, our lives and all for their Rights
and Freedoms to well as for our own, then you would be esteemed to do unto
all and every Commoner of England, but remove this grievous Norman Prerogative
yoke of bondage from off our necks, and from the necks of all the free
Commoners of England; then which nothing will more manifest your real and
cordial care and affection to the public liberty and safety of the People,
which is the Sovereign Law, and for which all other Laws are and ought to be
made, and for no other end. And thus you shall in a high manner discharge your
trust unto the People, conciliate and beget their affections, their hearts,
hands, etc. and become the praise amongst the people above all other
Parliaments before you; and give just cause to your Petitioner, her husband,
etc. to bless God for you.

And your Petitioner (as in duty bound) shall ever pray, etc. Per me Mary
Overton.


