AN INDICTMENT Against TITHES: OR, Tithes no Wages for Gospel Ministers:
Wherein is declared, I. The time when Tithes were first given in England. II.
By whom, and by whose Authority and power Tithes were first by a Law
established in England. III. To whom, and to what end and purpose Tithes were
first given, and after continued in England. IV. Ministers pretending a
threefold Right to Tithes, 1. By Donation. 2. By the Laws of the Nation. And 3.
By the Law of God; examined and confuted.


By John Osborne, a Lover of the Truth as it is in Jesus.

To which are added, Certain Reasons taken out of Doctor Burgess his CASE,
concerning The buying of BISHOPS LANDS, Which are as full and directly against
Tithes, as to what he applied them.

Likewise a QUERY to William Prynne.

By JOHN CAN.

Micah 3. 5. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that deceive my
people, and bite them with their teeth, and cry Peace; but if a man put not
into their mouths, they prepare war against him. Isa. 57. 14. And he shall say,
Cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the way of my
people. London, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley.
1659

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, now
sitting at Westminster.

FOrasmuch as it has pleased the great Jehovah, who is the only wise Disposer
of all things, to re-call You to Your Places, from whence You were unjustly
deposed by an Usurped Power; Therefore I beseech You consider, that great
things are now expected from You: And I do humbly entreat and beseech You, that
You will be pleased to act prudently and vigorously for the Glory of GOD, the
Peace and Tranquillity of this Nation, and the Comfort, Liberty and Freedom of
all the faithful Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, within this Commonwealth.
And forasmuch as some grievances and pressures rest upon the hearts and Spirits
of many Godly, Conscientious People of this Land; and one especially upon mine
own Spirit and Conscience in particular, (as well as upon diverse others) I mean
that unsupportable burden of Tithes, so dishonorable to God, and destructive to
his true Worship, and so much tending to the abasement of the Kingdom of
Christ, and the advancement of the power and dominion of Satan and Antichrist:
This, I say, is a grievance necessary to be considered, and speedily reformed;
Because I do not find any Warrant in in the Word of God, to uphold Minister
Maintenance by Tithes. And therefore, I, as a Lover of the Truth as it is in
Jesus, and as an obedient Servant and Subject to the Lord Jesus Christ, do
exhort and beseech You, that You will have a tender care and compassion upon
all fad oppressed Souls. And to stir You up thereunto, am bold to offer to Your
view the short ensuing Treatise, humbly desiring that You will be pleased to
read it deliberately, and consider it seriously: and to make it a chief part of
Your work, according to the counsel of the Lord, by the Prophet, Isa. 58. 6. To
loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and let the
oppressed go free, and that You break every yoke. And then in so doing, God
will bless You in all Your consultations and actions.

But I beseech You mistake not my good intent and meaning herein: For I purpose
not to take upon me to teach You Your Duties in Your places and callings; but
to inform You of such a growing evil in this Commonwealth, as if it be not
timely suppressed, may speedily draw down the wrath and judgments of God upon
this Nation.

Wherefore I desire to stir up your minds, that by your godly actings and
proceedings, God may be glorified, your own souls comforted, and poor oppressed
Consciences relieved.

Which shall ever be the Prayer of

Your most humble Servant in the Lord Jesus Christ, John Osborne.

TO THE READER.
A Few months before the sitting of this present Parliament, In a Book
Entitled, A twofold Shaking of the Earth.
I declared my opinion concerning the late Government by a Single Person, or
the Second State-Apostacy; that is, how it should be plucket up root and
branch, by the Representatives of the People. This Representative of the
People, (whoever they should be, for I positively pitched upon none) I took to
be the Earthquake in Rev. 11. 13. Now so it is (and blessed be the Lord for
it) we see the same is come to pass, to the great joy and comfort of all
upright ones every where.

This blessed of the Lord (which is marvelous in our eyes) not only
strengthens me in my former opinion, viz. That the Earthquake is begun: but
likewise what I have there spoken concerning the effects of that Earthquake (as
to Tithes, the carnal Church, Ministry, Worship and Government, with all the
corrupt Laws of the Nation) will in some short time, by this Earthquake, be
utterly razed down. The Sun may shine, and yet not be seen, because it is under
a cloud. I am persuaded the great works of the last day are upon us, and the
Spirit is moving upon the face of the waters, howbeit darkness covers the
earth.

But to the end I may not be mistaken, when I speak of the Earthquake, I would
not be understood as fixing either Persons or Time: For howsoever, (as I said
before) the Earthquake (I think) is begun among us, yet for the Instruments
whom the Lord will make use of, to carry on his work, it is known only to
himself. So likewise for the Time, though I humbly conceive it shall gradually
go foreward, and have no more such a death upon it, as it had before;
Notwithstanding, like the Hand of a Watch, the motion may be such, as men
looking upon it may not perceive that it turns about.

But seeing at this time, the great Controver sie is about Tithes, awd that
there is so much writing Pro and Con, I shall therefore lay down some few
Reasons why I think they will not long stand, but be taken away, as the first
effect of the Earthquake.

That the Lord intends to have something done against 1 Reason.
Tithes, I have cause to think so, in that there has been discovered of late,
such horrid Oppression and Cruelty in Tythe-Takers, as I think the like was
never heard of in any former Generation. In truth, it is almost incredible what
inhumane and most unchristian cruelty has been lotely exercised upon many poor
people, for refusing (of conscience) to pay Tithes. Now doubtless this is for
some good end; I say, there is something in it, that the Lord should just now
bring such things to light: for if we observe his ways of old; Such wickedness
as he brought to light by wonderful Providence, he soon after punished most
severely.

There seems to be by the godly on all sides, a great desire to have all
ignorant and scandalous Ministers rejected 2 Reason.
Now I think by this time, it does appear to every one that understands the
present state of the Nation, how impossible it is, that such unsavory salt
should be cast out to the dunghill, while Tithes do stand. Those that would be
rid of Rooks, for the hurt and annoyance they do them, destroy their Nest, If
England be ever freed of such unclean Birds, viz. ignorant and scandalous
Priests, Tithes must be taken away: for the truth is, this is that which keeps
them in public places, as the Nest does the Rook. I cannot but wonder that
such who pretend to a godly and Gospel Ministry should plead for Tithes,
considering (and they cannot but see it, if they will open their eyes) that so
long as such a way of maintenance stands, most unworthy wretches will creep
into public places, what care soever be taken to prevent it. But

3. Howsoever some men have very little hope 3 Reason.
(as things now stand) that this Parliament will take them away; yet this I
say, (whatever they do or not do) many Reasons may be given why the contrary
may be expected from them.

1. It is well known that such as are the Parliaments best and real Friends,
and have at all times adhered to them, have not only often declared their
dissatisfaction concerning Tithes, but showed in many particulars, what a
grievous burden and oppression they are to the Nation. Alexander was wont to
say, His trusty Friends were his chiefest Treasure.

2. Whatsoever encouragement is given to the continuance of Tithes, yet this we
know, they who cry out loudest for them, are (for the most part) for a Single
Person, or for them, Interest of Charles Stuart: I say, more a great deal for a
King then a free Commonwealth.

Ingratus, si non, quisquis amatur, amat. I much question whether the
establishing of Tithes will ever bring over the National Clergy heartily to
this present Government, or to subscribe affirmatively ex animo to a
Parliament, without King and House of Lords. Now it is a State-Maxime, Not to
trust such men too far, whose Friendship, if you have it, must be bought or
hired.

3. Never Parliament had a fairer opportunity and more encouragement to do
great things for the Interest of Christ and his people, and the public Freedom
of the three Nations, then this: both in respect of the Army and good people
every where. But says the Sluggard, There is a Lion in the way. I answer, It
is only feared, and nothing else. The ruins of Babels Tower seem big (they
say) and very great at a distance: But the nearer thou come to it, the lesser.
Works of Reformation are Mountains far off; but when Men come to them with Zeal
and Resolution, they are mole-hills. And this the Parliament knows to be true,
by some former experiences.

4. Who can think that the Lord will make use of him, and honor him in things
of great concernments, if he have no heart for God and his Cause in lower and
lesser matters? He that cannot endure the light of the Candle, how will he
endure the Suns light? If thou have run with the footmen, and they have wearied
thee, then how can thou contend with horses? Jer. 12. 5. There are things
expected, and to be managed by the Peoples Representatives, far higher then
what at present are under debate. The Lord will do his work, his strange work;
and bring to pass his act, his strange act, Isa. 28. 21. And therefore if we
are not fit to do a little, much less a great deal.

5. It is thought by some, that the Parliament sees cause enough to take away
Tithes, and intend to do it, when opportunity serves, because they speak in
their last Vote, of looking out some better and more equal way. If it be true
what is commonly reported, viz. That some poor men have been imprisoned for
non-payment of a Groat and two Pence for Tithes; others forced to pay them,
that had the Alms of the Parish; Poor Laborers that could hardly get bread for
their Families, have had their little household goods taken from them; Others
forced to pay 70 or 80 l. whereas the debt was not above 5 or 6 l. If these
things, I say, be true, and the Parliament upon examination shall find it so,
I cannot but think they will consider of some better and more equal way, and
not suffer such crying sins in the Nation, especially to be practiced by men
who call themselves the Ministers of the Gospel, and Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ. Besides, in their last Act of Indemnity they declare to be much for
mercy: new one would think men of such vast pity, cannot but take some pity on
other poor people, who are daily undone through the oppression of Tithes. Oh
let not that be said of them,

Dat veniam corvis, vexat Censura Columbas.

I have but this to add, and it is to wipe off an aspersion which some would
fasten upon us, as if in seeking to have Tithes down, we sought to destroy the
preaching of the Gospel. To which I answer, We are so far from seeking to stop
the passage of the Gospel, as that one main end why we desire the removing of
them, it is to have the Gospel thereby advanced, and ignorant and carnal people
the sooner turned from the Error of their Ways. And doubtless whenever this
shall come to pass, the truth of God, and the power of it will more increase
and spread abroad, then ever it has done since the rise of the Beast. Again,
Though we are against Tithes, yet not against a Godly Gospel Ministry, but
would have it in all places (where it is) encouraged; yea, and care taken that
the people every where through the Nation, may be instructed in a way agreeable
to the Gospel.

I have been often asked by Friends, why I have not answered William Prynne, in
regard there is scarce a book which he has lately published, but has my name
in it. Now to satisfy such and others, 1. I know how to improve my time
better, and to more advantage (especially being an old man) then to answer one
who has no reason with him, but railing; and in his writing is like to one
that turns himself many times about, but moves not out of the place. All that
he says concerning me, is (Homaeologia) one thing often said over and over.
But 2. Howsoever he uses my name often, and quotes a book of mine, yet I never
saw any Answer that he has made to my Reasons there against Tithes. But as
Lizards, who out of the open field do run into bushes, so he leaves the
Question, and Case truly stated, and hides himself under a multitude of
frothywords, bitter Invectives, and old Motheaten Statutes, not any thing to
the matter or purpose. What Origin said of Celsus works, may fitly be applied
to his later writings, Non est periculum ut eis subvertuntum ullus fidelium.
Lib. 1. cont. Cells.
There is no danger lest any faithful man be subverted by them. But 3. That the
man is so froward and angry I marvel not, being (as is to be feared) under the
sprinkling of a Vial. He has had something of the mark of the Beast so long
upon him, as no wonder if a noisome and Grievous Sore be upon him for it:
Neither do I expect (under the pain and torment he is) but he will more and
more blaspheme the name of God, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven. 4. And to observe here the wise man's counsel, Pro. 26. 4, 5. thus far I
take notice of the man: seeing he will be doing, and by the ten idle Queries
which he put forth the other day, it is apparent his wit lies not that way; I
will put this Question to him.

Suppose a man has a fair pool of water in his ground, the which in time
becomes corrupted, Weeds grow, Mud increases, and Frogs creep into it. Now to
help this, the Owner cuts a new channel, and draws the Water out to another
place, and leaves the filth and corruption behind. The Question is, (and the
Case is put to Will. Prynne in the behalf of the Frogs) Whether the water be
the Frogs, because the pit is theirs in which the waters formerly stood, and
whether the Frogs have cause to croak and foam, as if they had wrong done them;
or condemn those Fishes for Heretics, Sectaries and Schismatics, which refuse
the stinking Mud, for the other Crystal Stream.

This pit we will take to be the old Form of Government by King, Lords and
House of Commons; the Weeds and Mud, Tyranny and Idolatry of all sorts and
sizes; the Frogs, Archbishops, Bishops, and the whole Hierarchy, down to the
Parish-Clerk, not excluding the Lawyers; the Waters, the just Rights and
Liberties of the People, in things Civil and Ecclesiastical; the Owner, the
People, in their Representatives.

Now something is already done in cutting a new channel, and drawing the Waters
to another place, to wit, a free Commonwealth, and to leave the Weeds and Mud
behind: And here is some work for William Prynne, if he can leave his peevish
passion, and be sober a while, to show us what wrong the owner does to these
Frogs, and why they must be Sectaries, Anabaptists, Jesuits, etc. that prefer
the sweet and wholesome waters of Truth and Righteousness, before the Weeds and
Mud of Tyranny and Idolatry, We will allow William Prynne the Pit, and the
Weeds, and Mud: But the water is the Owners of the ground. And therefore if the
Peoples Representatives shall go forward in bringing away all the good Water to
this other place, I mean a Commonwealth, and leave the Weeds and Mud to the
Frogs in the Pit, there are not a few will justify their doing against all
that William Prynne can say for the Pit, the Weeds, Mud and Frogs.

For conclusion; Great is the difference among us, about the Good Old Cause;
one says it is thus, and another takes it otherwise: Now the way to be
patient, quiet, contented, it is to take notice, that the Lord is coming forth
to decide the controversy. And it will not be long (I am strongly persuaded)
but he will make it clear and certain, (that he may run that reads) whether
the Case which William Prynne has stated, be the Good Old Cause, or what
others otherwise have asserted. It was the Lord who by a wonderful appearing
decided the Controversy between Moses and the Magicians; so afterward between
Elias and the Priests of Baal. I am apt to think the present difference about
the Good Old Cause, will not be decided but by some visible and eminent hand of
God. There have been many Appeals (especially of late) put up to God about it:
and I am waiting (and many more) by faith and prayer, for an answer from
Heaven: that is, shortly to see shame and final confusion upon whatsoever is
not the Good Old Cause, but cried up by corrupt men, for self-interest; and
what is the Good Cause indeed, to be glorious and alone exalted. Be silent O
all flesh before the Lord; for he is raised out of his holy habitation, Zech.
2. 13.

From my house without Bishopsgate, at the three Stills, the 13th of the 5th
month, 1659. John Can.

AN INDICTMENT Against TITHES.
THe consideration of the great oppression that is now exercised in this land,
by imposing upon men that intolerable burden of Tithes, which lies heavy upon,
and is grievous to the people of this Nation in general; and more particularly
to the Husbandmen and Farmers of Lands, who after great labor and charges in
plowing and ordering their Land, and sowing their Seed, and maintaining their
Family and Cattle, and payment of Rents, and other Charges and Taxes imposed
upon them, wait patiently for a plentiful Harvest to countervail their pains
and charges; but then comes a Tithe taker with his Cart, and sweepeth away (in
the name of a Tenth) a fourth, if not a third part of the Husbandmans profit:
But most especially, this unlawful payment of Tithes is most burdensome to
the conscientious and faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, who desire to obey
him and his Commandments. These (I say) and such like considerations, have
incited me to inquire seriously, and to search out diligently; First, the time
1. The time when. 2. By whom. 3. To whom, and to what end.
when Tithes were first given in England. Secondly, by whom, and by whose
Authority a Law for payment of Tithes was first established, and after
confirmed. And thirdly, to whom, and for what end and purpose Tithes have been
formerly, and yet are paid in England. And of these I shall speak briefly in
order as I have laid them down. And first, to the time when Tithes were first
given 1. The time.
in England. I find it affirmed by several Authors, that in the first Three
hundred years after Christ, no Tithes were paid in England; but the Priests in
those times were maintained by the free benevolence and contribution of the
people, as Tertullian, Origin, and Cyprian do testify. And in the next Three
hundred years, in the time of the Danes and Saxons, Heathenism and Paganism did
totally overspread this Land, until about the year of our Lord Six hundred,
when Gegory the great sent over Augustine the Monk into England (assisted with
forty Preachers) to convert the Saxons from Paganism to Popery; which was
effected in the time of Ethelbert, the first Christian King of Kent, who being
converted, was afterward an instrument for the conversion of his Nation the
Saxons. This Ethelbert is reported to have been very bountiful to the said
Austine the Monk, and gave him the Lordship and Royalty of his chief City
Canterbury; but that he gave him any Tithes, or ever commanded Tithes to be
paid to him or to any other, or made any Law for payment of Tithes, it does not
appear to me by any History: Nor can it be proved that any Law was made for
payment of Tithes in England, until the year of our Lord 786. And then in the
time of Off a King of Mercia (which was in 2. By whom.
the time of the Heptarchy) there was a great Council holden in Mercia by two
Legates sent from Pope Hadrian the first; wherein (as it is reported) Tithes were
first established. So that the first Law for payment of Tithes came from the
Pope, and decreed only by his Agents in the Kingdom of Mercia, being but a
seventh part of England; and afterward as Popery increased, so Tithes also
were established in other parts of England by the several Kings thereof, who
out of an ignorant superstitious zeal (being thereunto persuaded by the Pope
and his Agents) did many things contrary to the Law of God. And this leads me
to my third particular (viz.) to whom, and to what end and purpose Tithes were
formerly given, and yet are paid in England.

It is reported, that the foresaid Offa King of Mercia 3. To what end.
was a man of a high stomach and stoutness, endeavoring by wars and bloodshed
to enlarge his own Kingdom; and after many conquests, making Egfryd his Son a
King with him, in great devotion went to Rome, where (with the like zeal and
example of Inas the West Saxon King) he made his kingdom subject to a Tribute,
then called Peterpence, afterward Rome-scot; besides other rich gifts that he
gave to Pope Hadrian for canonizing Albane a Saint. And returning home again
(about the year of our Lord 795.) in honor of the Saint, and pretending
repentance for his sins, built a Magnifick Monastery over against Verolanium,
indowing it with Lands and rich Revenues for maintenance of one hundred Monks:
Also, in testimony of his repentance for the blood he had spilt, and the sins
he had committed, he gave the tenth part of all his own goods to the Churchmen
and to the poor, hoping thereby to expiate his sins, and to merit Salvation.
The next in order was Ethelwolph the nineteenth King of the Ethelwolph
West Saxons, who (in his youth was committed to the care of Helmestan Bishop
of Winchester, and by him to Swithun a famous learned Monk of that time) took
such a liking to the quiet and solitary life (only enjoyed by men of Religion)
that he undertook the Monkish vow and profession, and was made Deacon, and
afterward elected Bishop of Winchester. But the death of his father King
Egbert immediately following, by great entreaty of the Nobles, and partly by
constraint of the Clergy, he was made King, and was by the authority of Pope
Gregory the fourth (whose Creature he was in both Professions) absolved and
discharged of his vows. In the nineteenth year of his Reign, remembering his
former Ecclesiastical Profession, ordained, That Tithes and Lands due to holy
Church should be free from all Tributes or Regal Services: And in great
devotion went himself to Rome, where he was honorably received, and
entertained the space of a whole year; new built the English-School, that Offa
the Mercian King before had there founded; confirming also his grant of
Peter Pence, and further covenanting to pay yearly Three hundred marks to Rome,
to be thus employed; One hundred to St. Peter's Church, another hundred to St.
Paul's Light, and the third to the Pope.

It is also said, that Athelstan King of the West Saxons, Ethelstan.
about the year of our Lord 924. to pacify the Ghost of his murdered brother
Edwin (to whose death he is said to have consenced) did not only undergo seven
years Penance, but also built certain Monasteries, and decreed that Tithes
should be paid, by himself, his Bishops and Officers, (but not by all his
Subjects) hoping thereby to expiate his sins. Such was the blindness and
ignorance of men in those times, being seduced and led away from the truth by
the Pope and his ungodly Agents, being persuaded in their hearts, that the Pope
had power to pardon all their sins, were they never so great and heinous.

Edgar (about the year of our Lord 959) is said to Edgar.
have confirmed the payment of Tithes upon as bad a ground as Athelstan did.

This Edgar was a man of a vicious life, favorable to the Monks: he displaced
the married Priests, and brought in Monks of single life to possess their
places: He built Forty seven, some say.
and repaired diverse. Monasteries and Nunneries: he was cruel to Citizens, and
a deflowrer of Maidens. The first act was committed against the Virgin
Wolfhild, a sacred Nun; the second offense was against the virgin Ethelfleda;
another of his lascivious acts was joined with the blood of Earl Ethelwold,
that he might enjoy Elfrida his wife: And as one says, For the most part such
seed-plots were ever sown in the furrows of blood, as plainly appears in these
and diverse other examples.

Canutus also the first Danish King, who being guilty of Canutus.
the blood of Edward and Edmund, sons of Ironside, and Heirs to the Crown,
about the year 1016. confirmed Tithes, built the Abbey of St Bennet in Norfolk;
and in Suffolk he with great devotion built and endowed the Monastery of St
Edmund; which Saint he most dreadfully feared, for the seeming Ghost of him
often affrighted him; for which cause, as also to expiate the sins of his
Father, he confirmed Tithes, etc. Unto such strange illusions were the Princes
then led by the blind Guides, that ever made gain of their devotions.

Many other such like examples I might produce; but the few before mentioned
may suffice to show, First, When 1. The time when.
Tithes were first given in England. Secondly, By whom, and whose authority the
first Law for payment of Tithes in 1. By whom.
England was made: And thirdly, To whom, and to what end and purpose Tithes
were first paid in England; not to Ministers 3. To what end.
of Christ to preach the Gospel, but to Antichristian Idolaters, and to a
wicked, idolatrous superstitious end, viz. for satisfaction of the sins of the
Donor, to maintain a popish, idle, sottish Clergy, to say and sing mass, to
pray for the souls of the Donors, their wives and children living and dead. And
as at the first Tithes were given to Mass-Priests to read and sing the
Latine-Mass: So they have (for many years) been since continued for reading the
English-Mass (the book of Common Prayer) as may plainly be made to appear by
the Statutes of the second year of Edward 6. and the Statute of the first of
Eliz. and no Law extant for payment of Tithes to Ministers for preaching the
Gospel: For although (heretofore in the time of the Bishops) a Minister
preached never so often, yet if he refused to read the Book of the
Common Prayer, he was by the Law to be deprived of his spiritual promotions.
Seeing then that Tithes were first established, and since continued upon so
evil and sandy foundation, and to wicked ends: Therefore they ought utterly to
be abolished, and rooted out of this and all other Christian Commonwealths, as
popish, idolatrous, superstitious, and derogatory to the worship and service of
God; because God never commanded that Tithes should be paid to any man, but to
the Priests and Levites only, in the time of the Levitical Law, in the Land of
Canaan, and not elsewhere; and by the Jews only, but never by the Gentiles.

But it is objected by the pleaders for Tithes in these Objection.
our days, That Tithes are due to the Receivers thereof by a threefold Right:
First, by ancient donation thereof to the Church for maintenance of
Christianity, Four hundred years 1. Right.
before the Donation in times of Popery: but they prove it not. Secondly, by
the Law of the Land. And thirdly, by the Law 2. Right.
of God; all which I shall (by Gods assistance) seriously examine, and
according to my best understanding give a brief 3. Right.
and satisfactory Answer thereunto in order as they are propounded.

To the first (viz. Donation) I shall not need to make Answer.
any long answer, because I have formerly proved, first, the time when, and by
whom Tithes were first given in England. Secondly, By whom, and by whose
authority they were by a Law first established. And thirdly, To whom, and to
what end and purpose Tithes were first given in England, and since continued.

If they were first given to the Church for maintenance of Christianity (as is
by some pretended) Four hundred years before the time of Popery: Then I desire
to know who were the first Donors of them, and to what Church they were
dedicated; whether to the Church of Christ, or to some Idol-Temple: For I find
it reported by Sir Henry Spelman, that the Heathens and Pagans (before the
conversion of the Saxons in England to Christianity) gave In his larger work of
Tithes.
Tithes to their Idol-Gods and Goddesses; as the Arabians, to their God Sabin;
the Siphnians, to their God at Delphos; the Romans to Hercules; the Ephesians,
to Diana; and others, to Jupiter and Apollo, etc. So that if any man will boast
of the Antiquity of Tithes to have been Four hundred years before the time of
Offa, then he must claim them by an Heathenish Donation: for I am confident
that there was no such donation in England, until the year of our Lord 786. For
in the Primitive times, for Three hundred years after Christ, no Tithes were
paid in England (as I have already proved) although there were many Christians
then in England, and many Churches gathered in Asia and elsewhere: And whereas
it is alleged, that Constantine the great (who was the first Christian
Emperor) upon whose Donation some do much rely; I cannot find that he did
ever command Tithes to be paid in any place, or to any persons: But I do read
in the History of his life, that he bestowed Houses, Lands, large favors, and
Possessions upon Bishops and Priests, and large gifts and favors upon
Christian people; but no Tithes mentioned amongst all those gifts and favors.
And Sabellicus, (who was himself a Roman) questioneth the truth of those large
Donations. Yet doubtless his bounty was so great to the Bishops and Priests of
those times, that thereby they became proud, covetous, and contentious; the
seeds whereof were so deep sown, that they are not yet totally eradicated.

To the second right (as some call it) which (say Answer to the second Right.
they) is by the Laws of the Land: I answer, That I endeavor not to destroy,
but to maintain the Laws of the Land, which are consonant to, and grounded upon
the Laws of God, and desire that they may be rightly expounded, and righteous
judgment given upon them; yea, even those which are thought to make most for
payment of Tithes.

I begin with the Statute of the 27 year of H. 8. whereby 1. Law for Tithes.
Ministers are enabled to sue for Tithes: but where? In the Ecclesiastical
Court only, and not elsewhere. For before that time, I find no Law extant to
compel men to pay Tithes, or to be sued at Law for non-payment of them. But
only a decretal Epistle of Pope Innocent the third; which (says Sir Edward
Cook) was no binding Law: Also Instit. part 2.
in the Two and thirtieth year of Hen. 8. another Act of Parliament was made
especially for the benefit of Impropriators, 2. Law for Tithes.
who before that time had no power given them to recover Tithes; but in that
Act is a special Proviso, That no person Ecclesiastical or temporal shall sue
for any Tithes in any temporal Court, but only in the Ecclesiastical Court.
Thirdly, in the second year of Edward 6. another 2. Law for Tithes.
Act of Parliament was made, whereby the two former Acts, of the twenty seven
and thirty two of Hen. 8. and every Article and Branch therein contained, are
ratified and confirmed: but upon serious consideration of the several parts of
this Act, it will appear, that it gives no power to sue for Tithes at the
Common Law, nor in any Court of Equity: For in the first branch thereof (which
is a very imperfect one) it is said, that every Subject of the King 1.
Imperfect.
shall set out and pay his predial Tithes; and that no person shall carry away
any such Tithes, before he has set out for the Tithes thereof, the Tenth part
of the same, or agreed with the Proprietor, etc. upon pain of forfeiture of the
treble value, etc. So that it appears to me, that the forfeiture given by
this Act, is not the treble value of the Tenth part of all a man's Corn and Hay,
but a treble value of a Tenth part of the Tenth of Corn and Hay.

Secondly, it is not therein declared, who shall have, 2. Imperfect.
sue for, and recover that forfeiture of treble value. And no private person
can claim a forfeiture given by any penal Law, except it be given him in
express terms by the same Law. Therefore I do conceive, that the forfeiture (if
there be any such) given by the first branch of this Act, ought to be recovered
and employed to the use of the chief Magistrate, or of the Commonwealth, and
not of any private or particular person whosoever.

Thirdly, it is not thereby appointed how or where the said penalty shall be
recovered, as in all other penal 2. Imperfect.
Acts it is declared, That the forfeture shall be either to the King solely, or
to the King and Informer, or to the Party grieved, to be recovered in some
Court of Record, by Action of debt, bill, plaint or information. But there is
no such limitation in that Branch of that Statute. Therefore I do call it an
imperfect branch; because in two other branches of the same Statute of 2 Edw.
6. it is enacted and declared, That no person shall be convented or sued for
any Tithes before any other judge then Ecclesiastical.

And further, in a latter branch of the same Act, power is given to sue at the
Common Law for the penalty forfeited, for not delivering in a Copy of the Libel
and suggestion whereupon a Prohibition is granted. And for these
considerations, and some other Reasons following, I am persuaded that the
makers of that Law never intended that any penalty given by the first branch of
that Statute, should be recovered in any temporal Court, but (if any place,
then) in the Ecclesiastical Court only: And I am induced so to judge, for
these five reasons following.

First, because, if they had intended to have given Reason 1.
power to sue at the Common Law for any forfeiture given by that first branch,
they would therein as fully have declared their meaning, as they did in the
latter branch of that Act.

Secondly, Because this Act is called an additional Act, Reason 2.
added to the two former Acts of the 27 and 32 of Hen. 8. and herein only some
penalties added, whereof that of treble value is one: but nothing taken away by
this Act from the said two former Acts; and therefore the Proviso contained in
the said Act of the 32 of Hen. 8. (whereby all men are restrained to sue for
Tithes in any temporal Court) stands still firm, in full force, and
unrepealed: And it is, and has been the opinion of some men, that this penalty
of treble value expressed in the said Act of 2. Edw. 6. was rather (in
terrorem) to cause men for fear of a greater danger to pay their Tithes
willingly, then that the said forfeiture should be exacted.

Thirdly, because the Bishops were at that time powerful Reason 3.
in this land, and then sitting in Parliament; and can it be conceived, that
had they understood that the Parliament intended to give liberty thereby to sue
for that forfeiture (...) the Common Law in temporal Courts, and thereby to
deprive the Bishops Courts of their Privileges, and their Officers of their
profits; that ever they would have consented to the passing of that Act? for it
is well known, that they did always endeavor to uphold their Ecclesiastical
Courts, and to continue and enlarge their own profits, pomp, and lordly
dignity, and were more willing to hold Plea in Causes that belonged not to
their Cognizance, then to abate any of their Privileges, as appears, by a
Prohibition directed to the Prelates, Archdeacons, etc. of the Diocese of
Norwich, which is to be seen in Rastals Abridgement.

Fourthly, because all the Judges in their Answers to Reason 4.
the Bishops Objections, in the fourth year of the late King James,
acknowledge, that if the question be upon payment, or setting out of Tithes,
they send it to the Ecclesiastical Court there to be determined.

Fifthly, because it is most fit, that where the principal Reason 5.
(viz. Tithes) are to be recovered, there the accessory (viz. the forfeiture)
should be demanded; for Tithes are the principal, the forfeiture of treble
value is but accessory. Therefore they that say, that they sue not for Tithes,
but for the forfeiture of treble value, do but delude men; as if they would
teach them to build an House without a Foundation. Tithes are the Foundation;
for if a man pay his Tithes, there can be no forfeiture, nor cause of action:
So that it is a mere juggle, and a forged cavil of those men who so object. Sir
Edward Cook in the first part of his Instit. says, That it is the most natural
and genuine exposition of a Statute, to construe one part of the Statute, by
another part of the same Statute; for that best expresses the meaning of the
makers.

And again, every penal Law is to be taken according to the letter of the Law,
without wresting or adding, and not according to men's various conceits and
interpretations. And so King James very well told his Judges in the
Star Chamber, in the year of our Lord 1616. charging them to do Justice
uprightly, and indifferently, without delay or partiality; and yet not to utter
their own conceits, but the true meaning of the Law; not making laws, but
declaring the Laws, and that according to the true sense thereof; remembering
that their Office is jus dicere, and not jus dare; to declare the Law, not to
give a Law. And the same King James in a Speech to the Parliament in the year
of our Lord 1607. tells them, That as every Law would be clear and full, so
the obscurity in some points of our written Law, and want of fullness in others;
the variation of Cases, and men's curiosity breeding every day new questions,
has enforced the Judges to judge in many Cases here, by Cases and Presidents,
wherein, I hope, Lawyers themselves will not deny, but that there must be a
great uncertainty: And where there is variety and uncertainty, although a just
Judge may do rightly, yet an ill Judge may take advantage to do wrong; and then
are all honest men that succeed him, tied in a manner to his unjust and partial
conclusions. Wherefore, leave not the Law to the pleasure of the Judge, but let
your Laws be looked into: for I desire not the abolishing of the Laws, but
only the clearing and sweeping off the rust of them; and that by Parliament
our Laws be cleared and made known to all the Subjects. So far King James.

And I desire, with all mine heart, that you our Worthies, the Representatives
now assembled in Parliament, and all others that may succeed you, would
seriously consider, and set upon the regulating of the Laws of this
Commonwealth, and repeal such as are unnecessary, reform such as are faulty,
explain such as are dark and mystical, and make such new ones as may be to the
glory of God, and comfort of all his faithful and peaceable Servants.

But it may be some will here object and say, that Objection.
Tithes are paid in England by an ancient custom, and our Law is grounded much
upon custom.

Then I demand who first brought in that custom, (was it Answer.
not the Pope?) and why is not that custom one and the same in all places of
this Land? and why are there several and diverse customs, and manner of tythings
in several Parishes? And why are not all reduced to one kind and manner of
tything in all the Parishes of England? For in some Parishes the tenth of all
the Corn, Grain, and Hay is paid in kind, and in some Parishes only a small
sum of money, and in others a piece of Meadow is allowed for the Tithe of all
the Hay arising yearly within that Parish: Also in some Parishes tythe-milk is
paid in kind every tenth day during the greatest part of the year, and in
other places but two pence, or (it may be less) for a Cows milk for the whole
year. If any one of these Customs be good and warrantable, why are not all the
rest made conformable thereunto? But if all be evil (as certainly they are) why
are they not all abolished? For it is a Maxim in the Law, Malus usus abolendus
est, An evil Custom is to be abolished. Doctor Ridley in his view of the
Civil-Law, Page 147.
says, That the Customs we pay our Tithes by at this day, were settled upon
this Kingdom by the Popes Legates in Provincial and Synodal constitutions. And
Mr Seldom in his Chap. 11.
History of Tithes, says, As Tithes are popish, so are they likewise a Relic
of Superstition: Because given at the first out of a superstitious opinion of
satisfaction for the sins of the Donor; yea, and as superstitiously paid at
this day by many ignorant people, who think Tithes to be due by the Law of God,
and so deceive themselves. Let not any man think (says Sir Henry Spelman) that
he has right to Tithes too hot, etc.
Tithes, because the Law of man has given them to him: for Tully himself, the
greatest Lawyer of his time, confesses, That nothing is more foolish, then to
think all is just that is contained in the Laws or Statutes of any Nation.
Experience teaches us, that our own Laws are daily accused of imperfection,
often amended, expounded, and repealed. Look back into times past, and we shall
find, that many of them have been unprofitable for the Commonwealth, many
dishonorable to the Kingdom, some contrary to the word of God, and some very
impious and intolerable; yet all propounded, debated, and concluded by
Parliaments. So Tully and the Roman Historians cry out, That their Laws were
often by force, and against all Religion imposed upon the Commonwealth.

And forasmuch as it appears plainly, as I have formerly showed, That Tithes
were by Parliaments established for Massing-Triests, to say and sing Mass, and
such other superstitious services; and after confirmed for reading the Book of
Common Prayer: Therefore an Idolatrous gift and establishment, unlawful in the
Givers, unlawful in the Actors and Receivers, and therefore ought to revert to
the right Heirs of the Donors; and all ought to repent of such an ungodly
action. The Prophet Isaiah proclaims against such Laws and Lawmakers; Woe be
Isa. 10. 1, 2
unto them that make wicked Statutes, and write grievous things. So also in
Micah 6. 16. God threatens to punish such Lawmakers, and Law-observers; The
Statutes of Omri are kept, and all the manner of the House of Ahab. etc.
Therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my people. Statutes of Princes are no
excuse to transgress Gods Law; God cannot be confined, restrained, or concluded
by any Parliament. Let no man therefore think that he has right to Tithes,
because the Law of man has given them to him; for the Law of man can give him
no more then the Law of God will permit. The Law of man may Spel. 173.
give a man jus ad rem, right to a thing, as to demand it, or to defend it
against another man; but it cannot give him jus in re, right in the thing, to
claim it in right against or without the Law of God. Right to the thing is a
lame title; they must have Right in it, that will have a perfect title. The Law
may make a man the possess^r or enjoyer of a thing; but it cannot make him the
very owner of the thing. The Books of the Law themselves confess, That all
Prescriptions, Statutes and Customs against the Law of Nature, or of God, be
void, and against justice. Now I might here proceed to their third right; but
before I pass from this their second right, (as they call it) I desire to
answer one Objection which I have heard from the mouth of a Judge in this
Nation, made in defense of the Statute for Tithes of 2 Edw. 6.

But (says he) although some are of opinion that the Objection.
Act of 2 Edw. 6. does not give power to sue for Tithes at the Common Law: Yet
it has been the constant practice and determination of the Judges for many
years, to maintain Actions at the Common Law upon that Statute for the treble
value of Tithes not set out; and that a hundred Judgments have been given in
that Case.

To which I answer; If ten thousand Judgments have Answer.
been given in that Case upon a false ground, must all succeeding Judges of
necessity follow their example, without a rule to guide them by? Sir Edw. Coke
says, That the Laws are the Judges Guides or Leaders, their safest Teacher and
Fortress; and we know that Judges opinions are not always to be taken for
sound and good Law; neither are we so to be bound up by them, that we may not
receive a better opinion when it is offered. For says Sir Edw. Coke, No man's
authority ought to be so prevalent with us, that we should not approve a better
opinion, if any man offer it unto us. And I have already showed how
inconvenient Instit. part 1.
and dangerous it is, for Judges to judge by Cases and Presidents, where there
is no Law to guide them, nor a just Rule to direct them: For Judges are but
men, they are not infallible, they are subject to failings: And some of the
chief Justices of both Benches, and others very learned in the Laws of this
Land, have erred grossly, Hub. de Bu^go. Thorp. Triscilian Belknap. Lock^on, etc.
and been punished severely, ^ome by banishment and confiscation of goods, and
others by death, as may appear by ancient Records in Henry the third's time, in
Edward the third's time, and in Richard the second's time. But what need I look
so far back for examples of this nature, seeing that there is one to be found
amongst us of late years, yet fresh in our memories, in the case of Ship Money,
wherein all the Judges that then were (except two) gave Judgment against Mr
Hampden, contrary to the known Laws of this Land? And of what evil consequence
that might have been, and how destructive to this Commonwealth, and to our
Liberties, I leave to the judgments of all understanding men. For if that
Judgment had continued upon Record, and in force, and not been reversed by the
Parliament, it might have been a President for all succeeding Judges to judge
by in future times; and so might we and future generations have been made mere
Vassals and Slaves to the arbitrary will of our Governors. And for the further
manifestation of the invalidity of the first Branch of that Act of 2 Edward 6.
I am able to make it appear, that it lay dead, and no action of debt brought
upon it at the Common Law for the penalty of the treble value, for almost fifty
years after the making of it, and no Judgment given upon it until the fortieth
year of Queen Elizabeth; since which time, the succeeding Judges, being guided
by the opinions of those former Judges, without any other ground or warrant for
their so doing, make it a standing Law.

To the third Right, (as some do call it) which, say 3. Right answered.
they, is by the Law of God; I answer, that some Pleaders for Tithes do cite
several Texts of Scripture to prove what they would have: but having seriously
examined and considered those Scriptures, I do not find one that will stand by
them to prove their assertion.

Their first Scripture is in Genesis 14. 2. and 21. 22. to 1. Scrip.
prove that Abraham and Jacob by the Law of Nature gave Tithes long before the
Ceremonial-Law was instituted; and that God did afterward confirm the payment
of Tithes by the Ceremonial-Law, for the maintenance of the Priests and
Levites; and that they ought still to be continued for the maintenance of the
Ministers of the Gospel.

Whereunto I answer, That true it is that Abraham Answer.
gave Tithes to Melchisedeck of the spoils of his Enemies, (but not of all his
own proper goods) and but at that one time only, and no more. And that Jacob
vowed to give to God the tenth of all that he should give him, is true also:
but Non ex debito, sed ex gratia.
neither Abraham nor Jacob had a command from God so to do: So that it was in
them a free offering only, and not of constraint.

Again, If Abraham and Jacob, being guided by Nature, without any command from
God, gave Tithes, and that God (as some say) approving the same, afterward
gave a Law to the Jews, commanding them thereby to pay Tithes to the Priests
and Levites, and after abrogated that Law: Then it is very clear, that by the
taking away of that Law, Tithes are utterly abolished and taken away; and men
ought not to set them up again until they have a command from God so to do,
lest they come under the reproof that our Savior gives to the Scribes and
Pharisees, Matthew. 15. 6. Thus have ye made the Commandments of God of none
effect by your own Tradition. And I desire all men to consider, that as Abraham
gave Tithes to Melchisedeck, and Jacob vowed to give the tenth of his goods to
God, long before the Levitical Law: So also Abraham and Jacob offered Sacrifice
long before the Law was given; and so did Cain and Abel also long before them.
Must we therefore now, according to their examples, offer Sacrifice because
they did so? God commanded the Jews only to pay Tithes in the Land of Canaan,
which Law ceased with the Levitical Priesthood; but God never commanded the
Gentiles to pay Tithes in any place. Therefore the Levitical Law, or the
examples of Abraham and Jacob, are not binding to us now in the time of the
Gospel, nor do they make any thing at all for payment of Tithes now, but rather
strongly against them. And how dangerous it is to do any thing in the worship
or service of God which he has not commanded, appears plainly in the
examples of Nadab and Abihu, for offering strange fire, Levit. 10. 1. So also
in Moses, Numb. 20. 8, 9, 10. God commanded Moses to speak to the Rock, etc.
But because he without a command from God did strike the Rock, therefore he was
not suffered to enter enter into the Land of Canaan. Saul also for not
destroying the Amalekites according to the command of God, 1 Samuel 15. 22, 23.
was deprived of his Kingdom; for this was counted to him for disobedience and
rebellion. Oh that these examples might work upon the hearts of all men, not to
set up again by a Law that which God has cast down, and we by a solemn League
and Covenant have sworn to extirpate, as a Relic of Popery and Superstition;
even that bitter root of Tithes, so destructive to the true worship and service
of God, to the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ; and so prevalent in
promoting of Antichrist and his power and worship; it being one of the strong
holds and props of Antichrist, whereby his Kingdom is upheld.

Their second Scripture is in the 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Do 2. Scripture.
ye not know that they which minister, etc. And they which wait at the Altar
are partakers with the Altar: So also (for so the ancient translation reads it,
and the Greek renders it) has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel. But Doctor Gauden does not approve of this
Translation, but he will have it (even so) according to the last Translation;
and thereupon he raises such a dust to blind the eyes of ignorant men, as
that he would make them believe, that Tithes are See what Christ has appointed
his Ministers to take for their wages, Matthew. 10. 8, 9, Luke 10. 8. Especially
not in Tithes.
due by a divine right; and that this, Even so has the Lord or dained, etc. is
a Gospel-Ordinance, commanding Tithes to be paid to the Ministers of the
Gospel: for he says, That they do import an Ordinance of God, an Evangelical
Institution; and yet presently after confesses, that his Even so, extends
not to all particulars properly Levitical, which are ceased. Then, say I, if
his Even so, must not hold parallel in all that the Levitical Priests enjoyed;
then it must hold in nothing: for either all or no part of the Ceremonial-Law
(which typed out Christ) is abrogated. But the Levitical Priesthood typed out
Christ, and the Priests and Levites were maintained by Tithes; and that
Priesthood being abrogated by Christ, and that legal service ended, the wages
also by Tithes must of necessity end therewith. For it is said, Heb. 7. 12. The
Priesthood being changed, there must then of necessity be made a change also of
the Law.

The Apostle in that of 1 Cor. 9. does not say that the Lord has declared of
old, and does now by him renew it as an Ordinance of God; but it is the Doctors
pleasure to say so: they are but his own words; and thereby he perverteth the
Apostles words and meaning: for I do not find in the New Testament any such
Ordinance for payment of Tithes; and therefore non-payment of Tithes is now no
violation of Gods Law: For where no Low is, there is no Romans 4. 15.
transgression.

And I hope that all true Christians will ingenuously acknowledge, that it is
not safe for men to make a Law contrary to Gods Law, or to renew or establish
that Law which our Savior has abrogated. And here the Doctor having taken a
great deal of pains to show (according to his promise) a Gospel-Ordinance for
payment of Tithes to Gospel Ministers; but finding none, he confesses, that
the Lord in the Gospel has not given any direct Precept for payment of Tithes.
Therefore (say I) Tithes ought not now to be paid: for certainly, if the Lord
Jesus would have had his Ministers in the time of the Gospel to be maintained
by Tithes, as the Priests and Levites were under the Law, he would (no doubt)
in abrogating the old, have established a new Gospel-Ordinance for payment of
Tithes.

But there is not the same reason, right, or equity, that the Ministers of
England should be maintained by Tithes as the Priests and Levites were, who
served constantly at the Altar, and were daily employed in the service of God
in slaying beasts, and offering Sacrifice to the Lord.

For first, they were one whole Tribe; and if not a full Reason 1.
tenth, yet near a tenth part of the People.

Secondly, they had none inheritance amongst their brethren in the Land of
Canaan; for the Lord was their portion.

Thirdly, the poor, the widow and the fatherless were to Reason 3.
partake of the Tithes with them.

But first, the Ministers of England are not the hundredth 1.
part of the people of England.

Secondly, They (or most of them) have besides their 2.
Tithes, Glebe-lands, and some of them a competent estate in temporal
fee-simple-Lands, and some of them have a good portion of goods and moneys, and
some other profitable ways to gain by.

Thirdly, Few of them feed the hungry, cloth the naked, 3.
relieve the poor widows and Orphans, as they ought to do. And therefore how
dare they pretend Scripture, Equity, or Reason for payment of Tithes to them,
when God has left no such Rule upon Record in any part of the New Testament?
Nor did the Lord ever challenge Tithes of the Gentles, as he did of the Jews:
and God is now so far from being honored by payment of Tithes, as that he is
highly dishonored thereby, and Jesus Christ denied to be come in the flesh;
and the Levitical Priesthood seemingly upholden and maintained.

But it is further asserted by the same Doctor, that Objection.
Christ chalengeth Tithes as a Right and Due belonging to himself, and that he
has given them to the Ministers of the Gospel for their maintenance, and
therefore are to be paid to the Ministers of England at this day.

To this I answer, That when he or any other man shall Answer.
prove this assertion by a positive text of Scripture in the New Testament,
then shall I be silent, and oppose him no more. But I fear that this will not
content him; because he still strongly endeavors to prove his Scriptural
right, (as he calls it) 1 Cor. 9. 14. by multiplying a great sound of words,
but not according to the form of sound words; ten times repeating that
pregnant place (as he calls it) 1 Cor. 9. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained,
that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. And this he would
have to be an Ordinance of God for Ministers maintenance by Tithes at this day:
Even so, as the Levitical Priests were maintained by Tithes in the time of the
Law. I deny not that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; but
it must be in such a way, and by such means as Christ has appointed them; that
is, as the Ministers of the Gospel lived in the Primitive times, by the
benevolence and free gift of People, and not by Tithes. For Christ and his
Apostles never had any Tithes or great Parsonages (as the Ministers of England
have) although they preached the Gospel diligently from house to house, and
from Country to Country. Our Savior says, Luke 9. 58. Foxes have holes, and
the Birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his
head. He had not a great house to dwell in, nor worldly rich Revenues to
maintain him (though he was Lord of all) he had not so much money as would pay
custom for himself and Peter, until it was taken out of the fishes mouth,
Matthew. 16. 27. And he says, That the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
servant above his Lord. Yet many of the Ministers Matthew. 10. 24.
of England, who style themselves the servants of Christ, strive for great
livings, fair houses, dainty fare, and the pomp and pleasure of this world,
rather then to be rich in good works.

But to answer directly to his Even so.

First, I say, that the Apostles meaning in that place 1 Cor 9. 14.
is either wholly mistaken, or unjustly wrested by the Doctor, to make good his
assertion; for there is not one word of Tithes for Ministers maintenance in all
that Chapter. True it is, that the Apostle pleads there for a competent
maintenance for the Ministers of the Gospel, but not by Tithes (as the Doctor
would have it.) God himself appointed, that the Ministers that served at the
Altar should partake with the Altar, and that they should receive Tithes, and
such part of the Sacrifices as was not consumed by fire. But the Office of the
Priests and Levites being abolished, and the Law for Tithes abrogated, and no
new donation of the like maintenance made by Christ, to the Ministers of the
Gospel; by what right can the Ministers of England now claim Tithes?

And further to his Even so, (which he urges so often) I answer, that I
conceive, he builds but upon a sandy foundation: for if he well considers
the Greek, he shall find it to be there, (...), which in our English
Translations is rendered, And so, or So also; and the word Even, is found only
in the last translation of the Bible.

But secondly, suppose that the Original may bear that Translation, Even so;
yet that will not prove, that it is a Divine Ordinance, enjoining men to pay
Tithes to the Ministers of England: For I do not find in any part of the New
Testament, that God complains against Christians for robbing him of his
honor, and Christ of his homage, Ministers of their maintenance, and the People
of the means of Salvation, because they pay not Tithes. But sure I am, that
many Ministers of England rob God of his honor by their licentious
conversation; Christ of his homage, See Heb. 2. 9.
by not acknowledging him to have died for all men; and men of their goods, by
unjustly exacting Tithes to 1 John 2. 2.
spend upon their own lusts. So that it may be justly said, that the taking of
Tithes (and not the withholding of Tithes) arises from loose principles, and
argues, that such as take Tithes for preaching, without any Law of God to
warrant them, are not the true Ministers of Jesus Christ: For there is no such
agreement between the Old and New Testament in point of Tithes, as the Doctor
would have men to believe: Therefore I leave it to the judgment of wise
conscientious men, to judge whether I or the Doctor do err in this point from
the truth of the Scripture.

Some other Arguments have been also drawn from the Scriptures by others,
defenders of Tithes; but I shall wave them at present, and follow the Doctor a
little further; who in the next place goes about to maintain the lawfulness of
Tithes for Ministers maintenance by a Catholic Custom, confirmed by Antiquity
and Universality: (two strong props or pillars whereupon the Popish Religion,
Idolatry, and will worship is upholden) but I find no such custom in the
Church of Christ in the first Six hundred years after Christ, as it is affirmed
by some Historians: By others, Eight hundred fifty five years, by others Nine
hundred; and by others, not until the Council of Lateran, Anno 1215. or as some
others do affirm, that in or about the year of our Lord, One thousand two
hundred, a decretal Epistle by Pope Innocent the third, dated at Lateran, was
directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, that Tithes should be paid to the
Parish Churches: For before that time, any man might have given his Tithes to
what spiritual person he would: But (says Sir Edward Coke) this Epistle
decretal bound not the Subjects of this Realm, but they allowed the same, and
so it became Lex terrae, a Law of the Land: And so by the Popes Law Tithes were
paid in England (without any other Law, until the Twenty seventh year of Hen.
8. And I do not read that Tithes are at this day paid for the Ministers
maintenance in any Christian reformed Church, except only in the Church of
England. And if no custom can commend, what is in its nature evil, or change it
into good, (as the Doctor confesses) then a Popish custom of paying Tithes in
England, (although most men approve it) cannot be good, nor ought to be
followed; For we must not follow a multitude to do evil. For although Tithes be
not precisely in plain terms forbidden; yet they being no where commanded in
the New Testament, we ought not to pay them; we are not to do more or less in
the worship of God, then God in his Word has commanded.

Therefore what Custom has been brought up and practiced in England by
Authority of men, without any precept or rule in the Word of God, is an evil
Custom, and ought to be abolished. But the Custom of paying Tithes in England
was brought up and practiced by authority of men, without any precept or rule
in the Word of God: Therefore the Custom of paying Tithes in England is an evil
Custom, and ought to be abolished. That cannot rightly be called a free gift to
God, or to this Ministers, which is by a strong hand and compulsion taken from
men. But Tithes are by a strong hand and compulsion taken from men: therefore
Tithes cannot be called a free gift to God, or to his Ministers.

But I intend brevity, and not to trouble the Reader with tautologies, or vain
repetitions, and therefore do refer him to the former part of this my
Discourse; wherein I have showed,

First, The time when Tithes were first appointed to 1.
be paid in England.

Secondly, By whom, and by whose Authority Tithes 2.
were first settled by a Law in England.

And thirdly, to whom, and to what end and purpose 3.
Tithes were at the first given, and afterward continued in England.

And so I shall leave the Doctor, and proceed to answer another man's Arguments,
who in one of his Arguments, Argument 3.
drawn from Gal. 6. 6. says; That people are bound to communicate to their
Pastors in all good things, (or in all his goods:) and then asks the
question, What good things, or goods are these, if not Tithes, the Apostle
refers to? And for proof of his Argument, he refers me to Beza, and St. Jerome.

Wereunto I answer, that what he has said, proves nothing Answer.
to the point in hand: For the Apostle Paul speaks not one word of Tithes in
all that chapter. And can it be by any man conceived, that the Apostle there
intended to command payment of Tithes to Gospel Ministers for their
maintenance, and to bring the Galatians back to the Ceremonial Law, whereunto
he did know them to be too much addicted? and therefore in the third and fifth
chapters of that Epistle, he labors strongly to take them off from the
Ceremonial Law: and can it be thought, that he would then in the sixth chapter
refer them again to the Ceremonial Law, for Ministers maintenance under the
Gospel? If the Apostle had said, that by those good things you are to
understand Tithes to be communicated and given to the Ministers of the Gospel
for their maintenance, I would have believed him: but because he says no such
thing, therefore this man refers me to Jerome and Beza, as if their testimony
were sufficient to satisfy me where the Scripture is silent. The Apostle in
that place says only, Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto
him that teaches him, in all good things, not naming Tithes or any
particulars. But the same Apostle says in 1 Timothy 6. 8. Having food and
raiment, let us be therewith content: And herewith agree Tertullian, Origin,
Cyprian and others, who say that the Clergy were then maintained by the
benevolence of the People, and not by taxation. And Cyprian further says, That
about the year 240. the Priests had every man his allowance delivered monthly
per Sportulas. And Origin in his sixteenth Homily upon Genesis, says, Let us
make haste to depart from the Priests of Pharaoh (who enjoy earthly
Possessions) to the Priests of the Lord, who have no portion in Earth, for that
the Lord is their Portion. And in his 31 Homily upon Matthew, he says, Because
it is written, The Lord has appointed, that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel; That we therefore take not occasion to seek more for
our selves, then our simple diet and necessary apparel.

I have heard also a fourth Argument drawn from 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown
unto you spiritual things, is it a Argument 4. answered.
great thing if we reap your carnal things? From whence they conclude, that
those carnal things there mentioned by the Apostle, must of necessity be
Tithes: and so by wresting the Scripture for their own ends, wrong both the
Apostle and the Spirit of God, and would make men believe that the Apostle
there pleads for Ministers maintenance by Tithes; where the Apostle not so
much as once names Tithes in that chapter, (as I have formerly showed:) but
some men endeavor to draw in Tithes there, by references of the New Testament
to the Old, making Law and Gospel all one, without putting any difference
between them; and so by putting them together, would have them to hold forth so
much, and yet they cannot find a command for payment of Tithes to
Gospel Ministers in any part of the Old or new Testament.

A fifth Argument has been brought by one, drawn 5 Argum.
from 1 Timothy 5. 17. which (says he) proves a maintenance for Gospel Ministers,
with an express reference to the Old Testament for it, in ver. 18. And that the
Evangelical Prophets in the Old Testament are for Tithes, as Mal. etc. and that
express places in the New Testament confirm them without all revocation.

Whereunto I answer, first, I do acknowledge, such a Answer.
maintenance for Gospel Ministers, as Jesus Christ has appointed them to take,
they may lawfully receive: But Christ has no where appointed them to take
Tithes, nor does the Apostle in that place, 1 Timothy 5. 17. nor in any other
place say, that Gospel Ministers ought to be maintained by Tithes: Therefore
Gospel Ministers ought not to receive Tithes; and so this Scripture proves
nothing for him, but altogether against him.

Secondly, That God by the Prophet, Mal. 3. 8. complains that the people had
spoiled him in Tithes and Offerings: But what makes this for Ministers
maintenance by Tithes in the time of the Gospel? for Tithes were of Gods own
appointment to be paid by the Jews, for the maintenance of the Priests and
Levites, and the poor; and Tithes were part of the Ceremonial Law, which was
then in force, and not abrogated; for Christ was not then come in the Flesh.

Thirdly, I cannot find one express place in the New Testament, commanding, or
confirming payment of Tithes to Gospel Ministers for their maintenance. For the
true Ministers of Christ preach not for hire. The Prophet Micah in chapter 3.
sets down that as a character of a false Prophet, saying, The heads thereof
judge for rewards, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof prophecy for money, etc.

Another Argument has been brought for Tithes, from Matthew. 22. 21. which
proves as little to that purpose, 6 Argum.
as the rest of his Arguments do, there being not one word of Tithes in that
verse.

For the question there is about giving tribute to Caesar; but that Tithes are
there (or in any other place of Answer.
the New Testament) appointed by Christ for the maintenance of his Service and
Officers in the time of the Gospel, or that they are to be paid to him for that
purpose, I find no Scripture produced to prove it: but instead of Scripture,
the testimony of Hierome, Pareus, and the Annotations on the Bible are
alleged; but those give me no satisfaction, I must have a word from Christ or
his Apostles.

And further, I say that the speech of the Prophet Malachi, and that of our
Savior in Matthew. 22. 21. Mal. 3.
were uttered when the Ceremonial Law was in force, and before Christ had by
his death put an end to the Levitical Priesthood: so that this proves nothing
for Ministers maintenance by Tithes.

A seventh Argument is from Matthew. 23. 23. and Luke 7 Argum.
11. 42. where, says he, Tithes are named.

To which I answer, that those Scriptures do not prove a command from Christ
for payment of Tithes to Gospel Ministers, Answer.
(though Tithes be there named) for the Levitical Priesthood was not then
abolished, nor the Ceremonial Law abrogated: from which two Scriptures,
whosoever will derive a right to Tithes for Gospel Ministers, must of necessity
maintain the Ceremonial Law to be still in force: For Christ did not then give
a new Law for payment of Tithes, nor confirmed the old for payment of Tithes to
Gospel Ministers after his death; but only confirmed the old Law until the
appointed time, that he by his death should put an end to the Levitical
Priesthood, and Ceremonial Law: For he says, That he came not to break the
Law, but to fulfill the Law, and therefore he paid Tribute to Caesar. And if any
man will be pleased to view the Annotations on the Bible, (whereof my
Antagonist sometimes makes use) he shall find in the Annotation upon Luke 11.
42. these words, That Christ would not break the very least Commandment, before
all things were accomplished; but taught them to stick to the chiefest, and not
prefer the inferior Ceremonies, which must quickly be abolished. So that
whosoever will not acknowledge that Tithes were part of the Ceremonial Law, and
appointed of God for maintenance of the Levitical Priesthood only, during the
continuance thereof, and no longer; and that Christ by his death put an end to
that Priesthood, and so to that maintenance by Tithes also; Such a man (I say)
may be said to deny, that Christ is come in the Flesh; and then such a man has
not the Spirit of God: For the Apostle John says, 1 John 4. 2, 3. Hereby know
ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in
the Flesh, is of God: and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the Flesh, is not of God: and this is the Spirit of Antichrist.

Another Argument for confirmation of Tithes, is 8 Argum.
grounded upon Heb. 7. 8. where (says the Opponent) the everlasting God owns
Tithes, and professes himself to be the Receiver of them, though not in
person, but by his Ministers.

For Answer hereunto, I say, when any Minister of the Answer.
Gospel can show me an Ordinance of Christ in the New Testament, whereby he own
Tithes, and has substituted his Ministers to receive Tithes in his name, and
to his use, I shall believe it: But in the mean time I cannot be otherwise
persuaded, but that Tithes were merely ceremonial, appointed of God for the
maintenance of the Priests ahd Levites during the continuance of that
Priesthood only, and no longer. And therefore that Priesthood which was
typical and ceremonial being abolished, Tithes must of necessity cease also.
For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of
the Law, Heb. 7. 12. So that it appears plainly, that Tithes were part of the
Ceremonial Law, and abolished by Christ at his death, and not translated to
Gospel Ministers for their maintenance (as some would have it to be.) And to
prove this more fully, I will now also produce several other Scriptures and
Testimonies to prove the utter abolition of the Levitical Priesthood and
Ceremonial Law (whereof Tithes were a part.) The Apostle Paul tells the
Galatians, That they were under the Law till Christ came. But now after that ye
have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and
beggarly Elements whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? Gal. 4. 9. and
Ephesians. 2. 15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of
Commandments, contained in Ordinances, etc. Again, Col. 2. 14. Blotting out the
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. And what were these weak and
beggarly Elements, Law of Commandments, and handwriting of Ordinances, but the
Levitical Ceremonies and duties enjoined by that Law? And the Priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law, Heb. 7. 12. I
will cite only one witness more, a modern learned Writer, to prove the repeal
of the Law of Tithes: Doctor Hall, in his Passion-Sermon, upon the last words
of our Savior, at his death upon the Cross, Consummatum est, It is finished,
says thus: What is finished? First, all the prophesies that were of him in the
Old Testament, are fulfilled in the New. Secondly, all legal observations that
prefigured him: For Christ is the end of the Law, Romans 10. 4. What Law?
Ceremonial and Moral: Of the Moral, it was kept perfectly by himself, satisfied
fully for us. Of the Ceremonial, it referred to him, was observed of him,
fulfilled in him, abolished by him. All the Jewish Ceremonies looked at Christ,
and had their virtue from Christ, relation to him, and their end in him. (Thus
far he)

And hereunto I might add also the testimony of those two faithful Martyrs,
Walter Brute, and William Thorp, who deny Tithes to be due by the Gospel: and
also the example of that pious Worthy the Lord Cromwell, by whose counsel King
Henry the eighth dissolved the Abbeys, Monasteries, Nunneries, and all those
habitations of an idle, luxurious and adulterous people; and took away all
their Lands, Tithes, and great Revenues, and converted them to temporal and
civil uses, to the benefit of his Subjects, as may be seen at large in Fox his
History of the Martyrs; whereunto I refer the Reader, because I intend brevity,
and not to trouble you with a tedious Discourse.

Therefore having briefly showed, how that threefold cord, so much boasted of
by the National Ministers of England, is utterly broken in pieces, Tithes
having no good foundation, either by donation, or by the Law of God, or of men;

I shall now cease to proceed any further in the prosecution of this point at
this time; but shall leave it to the judgment of all understanding men, who
are not biased by prejudice, nor blinded by covetousness.

And if I have herein declared any thing contrary to the truth of the
Scriptures, I desire to be better informed, and my error to be manifested unto
me, that I may repent of it, and not persist in it: For, humanum est errare,
belluinum perseverare; It is incident to humane nature to err, but it is a
beastly property pertinaciously to go on, and to persevere in an Error. But if
I have done nothing herein but what I am warranted to do by the Holy Scripture:
Then I desire all men, as they desire the glory of God and their own good, to
refrain from giving or taking of Tithes, and from encouraging any man to take
Tithes as wages for preaching the Gospel.

A Postscript.
THere being some room left, I thought good to fill it up with an Argument
taken from the Authors Major, and Doctor Burges's Minor: And being put
together, shall leave it to the judicious and impartial Reader to judge whether
from both, he may not rationally conclude, That Tithes are unlawful.

The Author of this Treatise has proved as clear as the sun at noon day, That
Tithes (as they are now required) were first dedicated upon false grounds, and
for superstitious and base ends, most derogatory to God and Christ, and merely
to maintain and countenance a cursed Brood of Vipers in their lies and beastly
vanities So He.

Doctor Burgess comes in with the other part, and with great confidence assarts
it: That Things not appointed by God from the beginning, but His Case concering
the buying of Bishops Lands, etc. page 30, 31.
dedicated to him, without his order and allowance, is a laying aside, and a
rejecting the Commandment of God, and making the Word of God of none effect,
Mark 7. 8, 9, 13. Yea, he says further, (and let all Tythe-taking Priests note
his words) If things are dedicated upon a false ground, SUCH A DEDICATION IS NO
WHIT BETTER THEN THE HIRE OF A WHORE, OR THE PRICE OF A DOG (that is, then
Money gotten by whoredom, and the sale of a dog) brought into the house of the
Lord, and dedicated to him; both which he abhors, and he looks no otherwise
upon them, then as the offering of swines blood, the cutting off of a dogs
neck, or the blessing of an Idol. And when it can be proved (says he) that God
accepted of such offering in the time of the Law, then also it may be granted
that he will own such MONGREL DED'CATIONS in the days of the Gospel. Again, It
is apparent (says he) that those gifts to Bishops, were no longer to be
continued then the Function of those to whom they were given, remained. Datur
Beneficium, propter Officium: Office and Benefice, are Relatives: like twins,
they live and die together.

Judge Reader, whether the Doctor be not entangled in his own words, according
to that in the Poet:

Non est Lex justior ulla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
For if this be true which he says, then none but Mass-mongers ought to
receive Tithes: For no man I think has the face to deny it, but Tithes came
first up in England for Masses to be sung or said for quick and dead: It was
not given as maintenance to a Gospel-Minister. And therefore by the Doctors own
confession, Tithes were no longer to be continued then the Function of those to
whom they were given did remain. So that if the Doctor deny the Function of a
Mass Priest, he must (if true to his own principle) deny taking of Tithes: for
like twins, they live and die together.

A little more out of the Doctor. Things once given to God by his command,
warrant or approbation, may not be al^^ned to other uses whilst the use of
Gods appointment does continue: but not all that men pretend or say they give
to God. As in persons, so in things, such only as the Lord chooses or
accepts (and none else) are holy, Number. 16. 7. let men say or think what they
will to the contrary Here I agree with the Doctor in both points. 1. That
things dedicated to God by his own order and allowance, ought to stand, whilst
the use of Gods appointment does continue. So likewise, things not appointed by
God at first, but dedicated to him upon false grounds and superstitious ends,
ought to be aliened; neither is it any sin or sacrilege to buy or sell them.
But such are Tithes, as has been proved. But the Doctor possibly will say, He
wrote in the defense of the lawfulness of buying Bishops Lands, not intending
Tithes. It is true he did so, and tells us That Tithes are still due by divine
right to Christ. But the man is again snared in his own words, and may well cry
out Heu patior telis vulnera facta meis.

The Argument which he brings to prove it lawful that Bishops Lands may be
aliened, diverted or purchased to common use, notwithstanding their first
dedication, is, Because there is no warrant in Scripture for the giving of
Lands to Bishops, nor arguments to prove Christ's acceptance of them, as holy to
the Lord: There is no word (says he) in the new testament, that requires or
countenanceth such endowments. Ergo. There are six particulars, which he has
for Tithes, to prove them Jure divino, and are still due (as he says) by
divine right unto Christ. But I desire all men in all places to take notice,
that there is not one word in any of his six particulars, which proves Tithes
to be Gods Ordinance for the maintenance of Evangelical Ministers. I say again,
and will stand by it, He shows us not one Scripture in the New Testament, that
ever the Lord required Tithes under the Gospel. So that it is apparent enough
he has as little to say for Tithes from the Scripture, as for the Bishops
Lands: and I am persuaded, should these Tithes be aliened, diverted or
purchased for common use, he and others, who are now great Champions for them,
would face about, and undertake that there is no more sacrilege or sin to buy
and sell the Tithes of the nation, then Bishops Lands. And I have good ground
for what I say: for 1. what he waits against the Bishops, for the alienation
of their Lands and Revenues, is as full and direct against the Tithes of the
Clergy, that they should be taken away. Neither 2. can he justify by Scripture
his bold Assertion, viz. That Tithes are the proper maintenance set apart for
the Ministers of the Gospel, and cannot be alienated without sacrilege: I say
he can no more make this good by the word of God, then the Bishops could prove
the buying or selling of their Lands to be sacrilege.

I have only one thing to add, and it is, Humbly to advise all such as shall
read the present Controversy concerning Tithes, to take heed they are not
abused. For those who commonly plead for them will deceive the Reader (unlesshe
do observe their craft) by their extravagant and impertinent discourses, using
many words, but nothing to the Question. But no man is more wild, and rangeth
from the Case rightly stated, then Will. Prynne, We read of one Doria the
Admiral of Genoa, being to fight at sea against the Saracens, he fetched his
course so far about to gain the wind, that he could never come to strike a
blow before the battle was ended. Their manner is (and here lies Will. Prynn's
proper gift, unless railing) to blot much paper with proving what was never
questioned; we have sometimes a hundred Scriptures quoted to prove Tithes
lawful under the Law; another while as many old Statutes made by popish Princes
and Parliaments, commanding Tithes; Then the practice of Heathens and Pagans
are cited, paying Tithes to their Priests. But what is all this to the matter?
for what purpose and end are these things mentioned, if not to beguile an
ignorant Reader? Ego de Alliis loquor, tu responderes de Cepis. They know well
enough (or ate very ignorant about the question of Tithes) what they spend most
of their breath for, is not denied by their Opposites. But the Case stated is
principally thus: And I shall conclude with the Argument.

Things not appointed by God, but dedicated to him without his order and
allowance, and upon a false ground, and for idolatrous and superstitious ends,
as unlawful and sinful are to be removed. So Doctor Burgess.

But Tithes under the New Testament were never appointed of God, but dedicated
to him, without his order and allowance, upon false grounds, and for Idolatrous
and superstitious ends. So the Author.

Therefore Tithes as unlawful and sinful, are to be taken away.

FINIS.

