A LETTER FROM Ma. Genesis OVERTON, Governor of Hull, And the Officers under his
Command. Directed for the Honorable Leiut. General FLEETWOOD, To be communicad
to the Council of Officers of the ARMY.
Right honorable,
THis day having brought to my Hands yours, with the enclosed Representation
and Petition of several Officers of the Army, to which you desire the
Subscription of the Officers of this Garrison; I have accordingly convened and
imparted your Letter and Paper to them; Upon consideration whereof, finding our
selves at this distance to be wholly ignorant of the late proceeds whereupon we
suppose it to be grounded: as also for that it is already tendered to the
Parliament, which we apprehend has Resolved our Subscriptions out of season,
We have thought it improper for us to subscribe the same. Nevertheless, that
we may not leave you without satisfaction as to our concurrence with you, in
what may express our faithfulness to the Parliament, from whom we are
Commissionated upon public Account, and thereby bound in all due Obedience, We
look upon our selves as obliged to Declare our full purpose of heart to
manifest our steadfastness to the Parliament, according to the tenor of our
respective Intrustments, in adhering to them in all their just and Warrantable
proceedings, in pursuance of the Trust reposed in us; whereby we hope, that nor
only the Designs of all public and private Adversaries will be disappointed;
but we shall further (by Gods blessing) expect to see some further fruit of our
former Declarations for Truth and Righteousness.

This, as we doubt not but it will satisfy you of our firm and unfeighned
intents to the Parliament in all their Just and Equitable determinations: So we
trust the former Reasons, moving us to wave the Subscriptions of yours
enclosed, will be of weight with you, to give us your excuse, and esteem us
still as,

Your very affectionate and humble Servants, Sic subscribitur
Rt. Overton, Tho. Everard, Tho. Pigott, Rich. Cox, He. Boade, Tho. Somatsen
Jo. Nary, John Durdoe, Wal. Thimelson, Will. Dawson. Will. Figes.

Hull October. 11rh. 1659.

