GOD'S Presence with a People, THE Spring of their Prosperity; With Their
special Interest in abiding with Him.

A SERMON, Preached to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland
and Ireland, at Westminster, October. 30. 1656. A Day of Solemn Humiliation.

By JOHN OWEN, D. D. a servant of JESUS CHRIST, in the work of the Gospel.

Printed by Order of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in Paul's
Church yard. 1656.

Friday the 31. of October. 1656.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the thanks of this House be given unto Dr.
OWEN, Dean of Christ-Church, and Vicechancellor of the University of Oxon, for
his great pains taken in his Sermon preached before this House yesterday in
Magarets Church Westminster, being a day set apart for Solemn Fasting and
Humiliation, and that he be desired to print his Sermon; And that he have the
like privilege in Printing thereof, as has been formerly allowed to others in
like Cases.

And Major General Kelsey is desired to give him the thanks of this House
accordingly.

Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with
the Dominions thereunto belonging.
Sirs,
MY hope that some Impression may possibly remain upon your hearts and spirits,
of, and from the things delivered unto you in the ensuing Sermon, make me
willing unto the obedience of presenting it unto you, upon your command in this
manner. Were I not persuaded, that your peace, interest and concernment is
expressed therein, and knew not with what simplicity of heart you were minded
thereof, I should have chosen on many accounts to have waved this duty. But
having now performed what is incumbent on me, to render this service useful,
recommending it yet further to the Grace of God, I humbly beg that it may not
in this return unto you, be looked on as a thing of course and so laid aside,
but be reviewed with that intension of spirit which is necessary in duties of
this importance; whereby you may manifest that your command unto this service,
was grounded on a sense of some advantage to be made by that performance of it.
Sundry things I confess that were spoken unto you, are gone beyond my recovery,
having had their rise from the present assistance which God was pleased to
afford in the management of the work it self. The sum of what was provided
before hand and no otherwise, without the least addition, is here presented
unto you, with hearty desires, that the vision of the truth herein considered
may be to them that love you, and the accomplishment thereof be found in the
midst of you. So prays

Your humblest Servant in our dear Lord Jesus: John Owen.
November 17.
A Sermon Preached to the PARLIAMENT of England, at their Public Fast, held
the 30. of October. 1656.
2 CHRONICLES. 15. 2. And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him; Hear ye me
Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin, the Lord is with you, while ye be with him:
and if ye seek him, he will be found of you; But if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you.
IT will not, I am sure, seem strange to any, that I have taken a Text to
Preach on in a Day of Humiliation, out of a Thanksgiving Sermon, such as this
discourse of Azariah seems to be; if they shall but consider the suitableness
of the Instruction given therein, to any great and solemn occasion, whether of
Humiliation, or rejoicing. The words indeed are the sum of all directions
that in such Cases can be given; the standard of all Rules, and Exhortations,
wherein any Nation, or people in any Condition are, or may be Concerned, so
plainly measuring out our fate and lot, the Event, and Issue of our Affairs,
with all the great undertaking of the people of God in this Nation, that of
themselves I hope they will make some passage to the hearts of them, to whom
the Inferences from them, shall this day be applied.

In the foregoing Chapter, we have an account of a great victory that Asa, and
the people of Judah fighting in faith, and with prayer obtained against the
huge host of the Aethiopians, with the abundant spoils which they took, and
carried away thereupon.

In their Triumphant return to Jerusalem, the spirit of God stirs up a Prophet
to go out, and meet them, to give them an account of the rise, and cause of
their success, and direction for their future deportment under the enjoyment of
such mercies and deliverances.

The Lord knows how apt even the best of men, are to forget the spring of their
mercies; how negligent in making suitable returns by a due improvement of the
advantages put into their hands, unto the Lord of all mercies. Therefore are
they in all seasons to be minded of their proper interest, and duty; This is
done in my Text to Asa and Judah by Oded, and I desire in my Sermon, that it
may with the same spirit, and the same success, be done by me unto you.

The words I intend principally to insist on, having the same thing for
substance three times repeated in them, the opening of the first clause with
the general tendency of the whole, will suffice as to their Exposition, and the
grounding of that general proposition which I shall improve. Two things are
then principally to be inquired into.

First, what it is for God to be with any people. Secondly, 1.
what it is for a people to be, or abide with, God; and according to the
Analogy of these two the following Assertions of seeking the Lord, and
forsaking him will be easily understood. For though the words differ in
expression, yet they are all of the same way of Assertion: They are 3,
hypothetical propositions, or promissory assertions on supposition. If you
abide with the Lord, he will be with you, if you seek the Lord, he will be
found of you, if you forsake the Lord, he will forsake you: The same matter is
trebled for the fuller and surer confirmation of the thing Asserted. Only
whereas the last proposition supposes a thing possible, namely that they might
forsake the Lord; the first supposes a thing present, and therefore it is so
expressed, whilst you are with him; because they had abode with God in their
late war and trial.

Before I enter upon the opening of the words themselves, I cannot pass by the
Earnest Preface of the Prophet; Hear ye me O Asa: he saw the people upon their
success, taken up with many thoughts, thinking of many businesses, full of many
contrivances, one imagening one thing, another another; all of them (it may be)
how they should use and improve their peace, and success to their Advantage,
Interest, Profit, or Security. Or the Princes, and Rulers, as it is probable,
and usual in such cases might be considering how to carry on their victory, how
to make the best advantage of it, in their dealing with Neighbor Princes, and
Nations, in making peace or war. In the midst of these thoughts, the Prophet
meets them and diverts them with all Earnestness, to things quite of another
nature, and of unspeakably greater importance and concernment to them. Here ye
me says he; it is not your own Counsel nor your own valor, that has brought
about this great work, this mighty victory; the Lord himself has done it, by
his presence with you. It is not of any concernment unto you, what other
Nations do, or may do, but the presence of God Concerns you alone to look
after. The great concernment of any Obs.
People or Nation, is to know, that all their prosperity is from the presence
of God amongst them, and to attend to that which will give continuance
thereunto. You may tire your selves in the imaginations and contrivances of
your own hearts, and lay out your thoughts and time about things that will not
profit, nor advantage you, this is your interest, this is your concernment:
Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin. Of this proposition afterward.

For the words themselves, the first thing proposed to be inquired into for
their explanation is this; what it is for God to be with a people? God may be
said to be with men, or present with them in sundry respects.

First, he may be said to be with them in respect 1.
of the omnipresence of his Essence; so he is naturally, and necessarily
present with all creatures; indistant from them, present with them. The
ubiquity and immensity of his Essence, will not allow that he should be distant
from any thing to which he has given a being. The heavens, even the heaven of
heavens cannot contain him. 1 Kings 8. 27. Does he not fill heaven and earth?
Is he a God at hand only, and not afar off, as to the ends of the Earth? This
presence of God with all things David emphatically declares. Psalm. 139. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. But it is not that, that is here intended: that is universal to
all Creatures, natural, and necessary, this especial to some, voluntary, and of
mercy; that of nature and essence, this of Will and Operation.

Secondly, God may be said to be with one in respect 2.
of personal union, so he was with, and only with the man Christ Jesus. Acts
10. 38. (...). God was with him, that is, in personal union; the humane nature
being taken into subsistence with the son of God.

Thirdly, God is present, or with any in respect of 3.
the Covenant of Grace. He is with them to be their God in Covenant, the Tenor
whereof is, that he will not leave them, nor shall they forsake him, he will be
for them, and they shall be for him, and not for another. He is with them for
all the ends of mercy, love, kindness, pardon, salvation, that are proposed,
and exhibited in it: But neither is this the presence of God here intended,
though this be something that flows from it, and does attend it: for,

First, that presence of God with his people has 1.
not such a conditional establishment, as this here mentioned: it stands on
other terms, and better security than that here proposed; it has received an
Eternal ratification in the blood of Christ; is founded in the immutable
purpose of Grace, and is not left to the conditionality here expressed, as we
shall see afterward.

Secondly, the presence here mentioned, respects 2.
the whole body of the people; all Judah and Benjamin in their national state,
and consideration, unto whom, as such, the effectual Covenant of grace was
never extended; For they were not all Israel who were of Israel.

Thirdly, the presence here promised respects immediately 3.
the peculiar end of blessing the whole people with success in their wars and
undertakings; so the occasion of the words, and the Context, with regard to the
following discourse do undeniably evince; It is not then this presence of God
only that is intended, though, as it will afterward appear, it is not to be
separated from it.

Fourthly, there is a presence of God in respect of 4.
providential dispensations, and this is twofold.

First, General; Ordering, disposing, guiding, 1.
ruling all things, according to his own wisdom, by his own power, unto his
own glory; Thus he is also present with all the world; He disposes of all the
affairs of all the sons of men as he pleases; sets up one and pulls down
another: changes times, seasons, Kingdoms, bounds of Nations, as seems good to
him. The help that is given to any he does it himself. The shields of the Earth
belong unto God; He works deliverance in the Earth, even among them that knows
him not.

And the Evils, desolations and destruction, that the Earth is full of, are
but the effects of his wrath and Indignation, revealing its self against the
ungodliness of men. He is thus present with every person in the world, holds
his breath, and all his ways in his hand; disposes of his life, death, and all
his concernments, as he pleases: He is present in all Nations, to set them up,
pluck them down, alter, turn, change, weaken, establish, strengthen, enlarge
their bounds as he sees good; and the day is coming, when all his works will
praise him: Neither is this here intended: It is necessary, and belongs to God,
as God; and cannot be promised to any; It is a branch of Gods natural
dominion, that every Creature be ruled and disposed of, agreeably to its
nature, unto the end whereunto it is appointed.

Secondly special; attended with peculiar love, favor, 2.
good will; special care toward them, with whom he is so present: So
Abimelech observed that he was with Abraham. Genesis 21. 22. God is with thee in
all that thou do: with thee, to guide thee, bless thee, preserve thee, as
we shall see afterward: So he promised to be with Joshua, Chap. 1. 5. and so
he was with Gideon. Judges 6. 12. to bless him in his great undertaking; and
so with Jeremie, Chap. 15. 20. This is fully expressed Esa. 43. 1, 2, 3. I have
redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine: when thou passest
through the water, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not
overflow thee; and this is the presence of God here intimated; his presence
with the People, as to special providentiall dispensations, as is manifest
from the whole discourse of the Prophet; and wherein this consists, shall be
afterward at large declared.

Secondly, What is a Peoples abiding with God? 2.
There is a twofold abiding with God.

First, In personal obedience, according to the tenor 1.
of the Covenant, This is not here intended, but supposed: There is no abiding
in any thing with God, where there is not an abiding in this thing: yet this,
as I said, is not here principally intended, but supposed, something further is
intended: for as has been declared, it is National work, and National
abiding, that is intended; so that

Secondly, There is an abiding with God in National 2.
Administrations: this is a fruit of the other, in those who are called to
them; And that this is principally here intended, is evident, from that use
that Asa made of this Information, and Exhortation of the Prophet: He did not
only look to his personal walking thereupon; but also immediately set upon
the work of ordering the whole affairs of the Kingdom; so as God might be
glorified thereby; how this may be effected shall at large afterward be
declared; what has already been spoken may suffice for a foundation of that
proposition, which I shall this day insist upon: and it is this. The presence
Ob.
of God with a people in special providential dispensations for their good,
depends on their obediential presence with him, in national administrations to
his Glory: The Lord is with you, whilst you are with him.

For the Explication of this proposition some few things are to be premised.

First, the presence of God with his people, as to 1.
special grace in the Covenant; and his presence with them, as to special
assistance in providence, proceed on very different accounts.

First, they have a very different Rise: the foundation, 1.
and principal Law of special grace dispensed in the Covenant is this; that
some sinned, and another was punished. So it is laid down expressly Isa. 53. 6.
All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way,
and the Lord has made to meet on him the iniquity of us all 2 Cor. 5. 21. He
was made sin for us, that we might become the righteousness of God in him. Gal.
3. 13. 14. a Curse for us that the blessing of faithful Abraham might come on
them that believe. 1 Pet. 2. 24. This is the great and sovereign principle of
the Covenant of Grace, that a Commutation should be made of persons, as to
punishments, and rewards; that sinners should be provided of a substitute; one
that should undergo the punishment due to them, that they might go free and
procure a reward for them who could procure none for themselves.

Now the Supreme, and sovereign Law of providential dispensations is utterly
diverse and alien from this of the Covenant of grace. This you have asserted
Ezekiel. 18. 20. The soul that sins it shall die: one shall not bear the
iniquity of another: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and
the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him: Take this for a Law of
Universal Right and indispensable, extend it to the Covenant of Grace, and it
is absolutely Exclusive of the Substitution and satisfaction of Christ. But it
is the Ground, Rule, and Law, of providential dispensations, that God is there
treating about; and vindicating his dealing with any people as to his presence
with them, and acting toward them therein; which is diverse, as you see from
the foundation of the Covenant before mentioned.

Secondly, As the foundations are diverse, so is the 2.
Rule of their Continuance. What is the Rule and measure of Gods continuance
with his people in the Covenant of Grace? plainly this; that he will never
forsake them; and on that account will take care that they shall never forsake
him, but abide with him for ever. It is not whilst they do so, and so, he will
abide with them, and when they Cease so to do, he will forsake them, as to his
foederal and Covenant presence: there is not such a sandy foundation left us,
of our abiding with God in Christ. See the tenor of the Covenant, Jer. 31. 33.
Chap. 32. 38, 39, 40. The sum is, that God will be with them, and take care
that they always abide with him; and therefore has he provided for all
interveniences imaginable, that nothing shall violate this Union: God lays his
unchangableness as the foundation of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 6. and he therein
makes us unchangable; not absolutely so, for we change every moment; but with
respect to the terms and bounds of the Covenant; He has undertaken, that we
shall never leave him. The Law of Gods presence in respect of providential
dispensations, and all special privileges attending it, is quite of another
importance: it is purely conditional, as you may see in my Text. The tenor of
it is expressed to the height: 1 Samuel 2. 30. I said indeed that thy house and
the house of thy Father should walk before me for ever: but now the Lord says,
that be far from me, for them that honor me, I will honor, and they that
despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Here is no alteration of Counsel, or
purpose in God: but merely an explanation of the Rule, Law, and Tenor of
providential dispensations; no interpretation of the Covenant of Grace; Eli
held not the priesthood by that Covenant; but an explication of the tenor of a
privilege given in especial providence. Psalm. 89. 32, 33. Hence is that
variety of Gods dealings with men mentioned in the Scripture which yet are
always righteous, according to one or other of these Rules, and Laws. Isa. 43.
23. 24. says God of his people; Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou
have been weary of me, O Israel. Thou have not brought me the small cattle of
thy burnt-offerings, neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices: Thou
have bought me no sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the
fat of thy sacrifices: but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have
wearied me with thy iniquities. What then shall be done with this people?
depart from them, destroy them, let them dye; No, verse 25. I, even I am he
that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember
thy sins. So also Chap. 57. ver. 17. For the iniquity of his covetousness I was
wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the
way of his heart. Surely now God will utterly consume them, root, and branch,
as persons incorrigible, and irrecoverable: No, the Case is quite otherwise
verses 18, 19. I have seen his way, and will heal him, I will lead him also and
restore comfort to him: I will pity him, pardon him, save, sanctify him, and
fill him with Consolation. Go now to Ezekiel Chap. 33. 18. When the righteous
turns from his righteousness; what then? God will heal him and restore comforts
unto him, as it was in the places before mentioned. Noe, Noe! He shall die; he
shall be cut off: what is the reason of this diversity? Why! in the first place
God speaks of his dealings unto their souls as to his Covenant of Grace, and
all the mercies of it; in this last, as to his dealing with their persons, and
their outward concernments, in the dispensations of his providence. And the not
heeding hereof has made some pronounce inconsiderately, the Covenant of Grace
to be merely conditional; because they find many mercies, and privileges
spoken of under such a Notion; not considering that all those proposals belong
to the Law of outward providence, and not to the nature of the Covenant of
promise established in the blood of Christ. And unless this be allowed, nothing
can be more contrary to my Text, than that promise, and (such as that) which we
have Isa. 54. 9. where provision is made for Gods abiding with his people
notwithstanding all their backslidings, and provocations, which he will so far
heal, as that he may not forsake them; and this is firstly to be observed, that
we do not in the consideration of Gods presence and withdrawings, as to
providential dispensations, cast any reflection on the stability, and
unchangableness of the Covenant of Grace. David has fully stated this business
2 Samuel 23. 5. says he, Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, for this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow: David had
a promise for the prosperity of his house: he had also an engagement of the
sure mercies of the Covenant. The different tenor of these engagements, as to
their success and establishment, he gives us this account of. The Covenant is
absolute and unchangable, that is, ordered in all things and sure: the
prosperity of his house depends on another Law and Rule, that is, subject to
Aleration.

Secondly, Observe the nature of this dependence 2.
of Gods presence on our abiding with him: it does not depend upon it, as the
Effect upon its proper cause, as though it were procured by it, merited by it;
we enjoy not the least morsel of bread on any such account, much less such
eminent privileges as attend Gods special providential presence; we deserve
nothing at the hand of God, and therefore if he should take us in the midst
of the choysest obedience, and fill us with the fiercest of miseries, he did us
no wrong; and therefore the Lord does so deal sometimes with his; and that not
only with particular persons, as in the case of Job, but also with his people
in general, as Psalm, 44. 17, 18, 19. All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant. Our heart is not
turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way. Though thou have
sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of
death. Though he requires our duty at our hands, yet he is not tied to any such
present reward. This is all: it ordinarily depends upon it as a Consequent upon
an Antecedent, which allows an interposition of grace, and mercy, as Nehemioh
9. 19. Nevertheless thou being merciful for sookest them not; so elsewhere,
that good man prays remember me for good, and spare me according to the
multitude of thy Mercies: For the glory of his righteousness, and of his ways
in the world, God has Ordered, that his people shall walk with him, when he
abides eminently and conspicuously in a special manner with them.

Thirdly, Observe, that our abiding with God, even in 3.
National administrations, is the proper Effect of his presence with us in
Covenant dispensations; so that all in the Issue is of mere Mercy, and grace;
though the Condition seems to be imposed on us, yet it is from him alone that
we have strength for its performance. It is in this, and such like cases, as
David said it was with them, at their dedicating their silver, and gold for the
building of the Temple; (...), of thine own, Lord have we given unto thee; we
do but return him his own, we give him but the fruits of his own grace, and
without it, we can make no return what ever.

These things being premised, I shall give the proposition some Confirmation,
and so descend to the due improvement of it.

I suppose I need not go for proof, beyond the observation of the constant
tenor of Gods Proceedings with his People of old. When did he not deal thus
with them? what instance can be given of transgressing this Rule? Is the whole
story of the Nation of the Jews, any thing but the illustration of this
proposition; some ruled well, and sought the Lord, and the Lord was with them;
and prospered them in all their ways; some fell from him, and walked according
to their own imaginations, and the Lord cut them short on that account. Yea,
sometimes the same man, as Solomon, Asa, Uzziah, experienced both these states,
and conditions. Has not the state of all nations, since they came into the
power of men professing the knowledge of him, been the same? look on the Roman
Empire, did it not flourish under the hand of men who ruled with God, and were
faithful with the Saints? Is not the present distraction of it under the fury
and cruelty of Turk and Pope, the Issue of the violence, unrighteousness,
Idolatry, Luxury and persecution of ill Governors? Does not the Demonstration
of all Gods people in the world, the consideration whereof in particular, might
be insisted on as the Ground and Reason of the Truth insisted on, require that
it should be thus? Leviticus 26. and almost the whole Book of Deutronomy, are
Sermons on this Text, and every verse almost in them, would afford a new
confirmation of the truth in hand, I shall need rather then to Caution from
mistakes, then further to Confirm the Proposition. For this end, take these
ensuing Observations.

First, all outward flourishing, or prosperity of 1.
a People, does not always argue the special presence of God with them. There
are sundry things required to make success and prosperity an Evidence of the
presence of God.

First, That the People themselves prospered, be 1.
his People, his peculiar. How many wicked nations are there in the world, that
for a long season, have received blessings (as it were) and success in their
undertakings? Is the Lord amongst them by his special presence? not at all: He
is using them indeed for his own end, and purposes, to break others, or fill
up the measure of their own iniquities; that their destruction may be an
evident demonstration of his vengeance, and righteous Judgments to all the
World, but present with them in the sense contended about; he is not. The case
is stated. Hab. 1. 2. as you may see in those Chapters at large. It is the same
case with the Antichristian, and Mahumetan Nations in the world at this day:
Their prosperity is no evidence of Gods presence, because themselves are his
enemies. Other bottomes, reasons, and grounds there are of their successes;
Gods owning of them, is none of them.

Secondly, That the whole work be good, and 2.
have a tendency to Gods glory; wherein they are engaged. David's Counsel for
the killing of Uriah prospered, and took effect, yet was not God with him
therein; the work engaged in, must be according to his mind: and

Thirdly, made useful and subservient to his glory: 3.
when the hearts of a people can secure themselves in these things, then may
they rejoice in their prosperity, as a pledge of Gods presence with them.

Secondly, Even great Afflictions, eminent distresses 2.
long perplexities, may have a consistency with Gods special presence; Though
the wheel goes on, yet it may have a cross wheel in it, that may cause rubs
and disturbances. The Rule of Gods acting in his presence, is his own wisdom,
and our good in the Issue, not our partial self-destroying desires. Had the
best people in the world, all their own desires, they would be every way
ruined. When God is nigh to us he knows what is best for us. Security from
destroying evils, not trying evils, he gives to them with whom he is.

And this is all that I shall offer for the Explication, Confirmation, and
Cautioning of the proposition insisted on, what remains further to be opened,
will fall in under the Uses of it: which now ensue.

This special presence of God, being (as you have Use 1.
heard) the great and only concernment of any people, the tenure, or condition
thereof being our abiding with him, let our first Use be to instruct us
particularly.

First, what this special presence of God is, and 1.
wherein it does consist.

Secondly, what it is for us to abide with God, 2.
so as we may enjoy it. For the full discovery of the first, I shall consider
it in that eminent instance, wherein of old he did grant his presence to his
people. The bottom of that stupendous undertaking of the Israelites in leaving
Egypt, and journeying through the wilderness into Canaan, lay in the promise of
this presence of God with them: Exodus 7. 10, 11, 12, On this one consideration,
their whole undertaking and affair turned; to this issue it is put by Moses
Exodus 33. 15. If thy presence go not with us, carry us up not hence. They will
not move one step without him; and with him they care not whither they go. Now
this presence of God with them, Symbolically did consist in, or rather was
represented by, two things:

First, the pillar of the cloud, and fire which was 1.
with them ordinarily.

Secondly, the Appearance of his Glory which they en-joyed on extraordinary
Occasions.

The first, with the first use of it is mentioned Exodus 2.
13. 21, 22. And the Lord went before them by day in the pillar of a cloud, to
lead them in the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, to
go by day and night: he took not away the pillar of the cloud by day; nor the
pillar of fire by night, from before the people.

There is mention here, as if it were of two pillars, one by day, and another
by night, but it seems to have been the same pillar with several properties:
for Chap. 14. 19, 20. the same pillar at the same time, performs both these
offices, in respect of several persons; to some it was on the one side a cloud,
and darkness, to others bright, and shining as fire. The pillar of the cloud
went from before their face, and stood behind them; and it came between the
Camp of the Egyptians, and the Camp of Israel, and it was a cloud of darkness
to them, and it gave light by night to these.

After this when the Arc was made, and the Tabernacle erected, this cloud,
which until then, went before the Camp, came, and covered the Tabernacle night
and day, as it stood in the midst of the Camp, or the Congregation; as a cloud
it was by day and as a pillar of fire by night. Exodus 40. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38.
and there it continued with the people all the while they were in the
wilderness. Nehem. 9. 19. This being the first eminent pledge of the presence
of God, with that people, let us consider what was indulged or granted to them
thereby.

First, they had hereby constant direction in all their 1.
journeyings, and undertakings, they were by this pillar directed in their way;
so at large it is expressed Numbers 10. 33. as also Exodus 40. God by this
pledge of his presence, was the beginning of all their rest, and motion: the
guide, and directour of all their undertakings: so that they moved, acted,
rested, proceeded, according to his will and Counsel; he guided them by his
Eye, and led them by his Counsel. Psalm. 32. 18. Sometimes perhaps they would be
forward, they would be up, acting, doing, their hearts are full of desires; and
they are impatient of delay. If it be not according to his mind, he will cause
a Cloud to abide on their Tabernacle, or their Assemblies and meetings; a Cloud
that shall darken them, and distract them in their Consultations, that they
shall not be able to take one step forward. Though their desires be great,
their intentions good, yet the cloud shall be upon them, and they shall not
know their way.

Sometimes perhaps they are heavy, fearful, slothful, there is a Lion in the
way, Giants are in the land, difficulties, and perplexities lie in the way
before them in such and such undertakings, they have no heart to them, the way
is long, and perilous, better return than go forward. Would God now have them
pass on, and engage? the cloud shall break up, and go before them, they shall
see so far on their way, as to go forth with cheerfulness. Only observe this!
that when the cloud was taken up, they knew they were to go on in the way
wherein they were, and journeyed accordingly; yet they know not whither they
should go, nor what would be the end of their journey: And therefore it is
said, that when they journeyed the Arc went before them to seek out a resting
place for them Numb. 10. 33. It was carried on, to see where the pillar, or
cloud of direction would stay, and there they rested where ever it were. When
God gives a people so much direction, as that they see it is their duty to go
on, and to trust him in so doing, though they see not the end, nor know what
their resting place will be, yet it is a pledge of Gods presence with them. I
suppose in your Assembly you have had the cloud taken off, as to your
engagements in some undertakings, concerning which you are to trust, that the
Ark of Gods presence, the Lord Jesus Christ, will find you out a resting place,
which as yet appears not unto you.

What a full Experience have we had of this kind of proceeding among us? In the
last Assembly of Parliament, How many had no less real intentions to be at
work for God, than now? God saw that it would not be for the advantage of the
people that they should proceed: hence the cloud rested on that Assembly, that
they could not see how to take one step forward. He was still present with us,
but it was by a darkning cloud, that we could not journey toward our rest. Nor
is it the will, or counsel of man, but of God, that is to be looked to in these
things. We now hope the cloud is up, and we are journeying toward our rest.
The Great Angel of his presence will find a rest for us in the good providence
of God.

This then lies in Gods special presence, He is with us to give us direction in
all our undertakings; to take away darkness, perplexities, difficulties from
our Councels, or to cause us to rest and cease from whatever may come into our
hearts, that is not according to his mind; The Lord give us evermore of this
his presence.

I cannot stay to show you the several ways whereby God now communicates
direction to a people, how he inclines their hearts insensibly, yet powerfully;
fixes the bent of their spirits effectually, (their hearts being in his hand as
the rivers of water, which he turns as he pleases,) supplys them with
reasonings and consultations beyond the verge of their own wisdom, proposes,
occasions, invitations, provocations; gives them Spirit and courage, beyond
their natural frames, and tempers; enlarges them in prayer, or shuts them up;
makes walls on the one hand, and open paths on the other, with innumerable
such ways, and means as in his infinite wisdom he is pleased to make
effectual for their guidance. It suffices, that in the use of means, through
patience and waiting upon him, they shall be directed to that which is pleasing
to him: so is he with them.

The second use of this pillar was, to give them 2.
protection and defense in all their way. So Exodus 14. 19, 20. 24. This
protected them from the Egyptians, and from thence God troubled their Enemies;
out of the pillar, that is from his especial presence. This use of it is
insisted on Isa. 4. 5. 6. The cloud that was as smoke by day, and as fire by
night; was also a shadow, a place of refuge, and a covert: in one word: a
protection, or a defense.

And this is a second thing, which is in Gods special presence; He will
protect, or defend them with whom he is so present. He is their dwelling place,
Psalm. 90. then when in this world they had none; their refuge in the time of
trouble. So Isa. 25. 4. 26. 1. 31. 4. promises, and instances to make this good
abound; they are known to all: The time would fail me to insist upon them. I
might go over all the Causes, means, and ways of the fears, dangers, ruins of
such a people, and show you how a defense is provided against them all.

Are their fears from themselves, because of their folly, weakness, and
division, or from pretended friends, because of their envy and desertion, or
from open enemies; because of their Power, Cruelty, Malice, and Revenge, a
defense is provided on every account, heat, rain, tempests, storms,
adversity, prosperity, all are provided against where God is present. Isa.
32. 1, 2. And if any people in the world have experience of this truth, we have
it this day. Had not the Lord been with us, who had not destroyed us? Enemies,
friends, abroad, at home, our own follyes, all, any of them had done the work,
had not the Lord himself been with us.

Only observe, that the presence of God, as to these effects, may sometimes in
some perticulars be eclipsed, and the Effects themselves, for some season be
entangled, though there be not an utter breach between him and his People. How
often did the Israelites attempt things without his direction? how often did he
break in upon them to their woe and sorrow? yet for the maine, he forsook
them not, until the great work intended by them was accomplished. Nehem. 9.
19. It is not every intanglement, every disappointment, every defeat, that
argues Gods departure, as to his special presence. It may be good for us
sometimes to be in such a Condition, and then that desertion that carries into
it, is from the presence of God; We are now grown to that, that if every thing
immediately surmount not our imagination, say some, God is gone from them, not
because it is so, but because they would have it so, but he is Merciful with
whom we have to do, and will not cast off his People for ever.

Secondly, The People with whom God was, had 2.
the Glory of Jehovah, as a pledge of his presence with them; this appeared
only at extraordinary seasons, so it did at the giving of the Law. Exodus 24.
16. so also at the setting up of the Tabernacle. It differed from the cloud,
for when the cloud was upon the Tabernacle, the glory of the Lord filled it. It
appeared again to to all the People, Levit. 9. 23. I shall not now enquire what
was this visible representation of the Majesty of God, it suffices as to the
purpose in hand, that when God gives his presence to a People, at extraordinary
seasons, he affords them extraordinary manifestations of his Glory. So in
Ezekiels Vision of those dreadful wheels of Providence, the glory of the Lord
is said to appear in the Temple; and as his Especial presence departed from
the Temple, and the City, so the glory by several degrees departed also.
Chap. 2. 10. 18, 19. Chap. 11. 23.

Eminent, and glorious appearances with, and for a People in extraordinary
seasons, is then another thing that accompanies Gods special providentiall
presence with them; when they are at an utter loss in their Counsels, at a
stand in their Motions, disappointed in their undertakings, deserted in their
enterprises, pressed on every side above measure; or called to some
extraordinary work, so that their Ordinary direction and protection will not
carry them on, nor bear them up; then will God relieve them by some especial
appearance of his Glory. In the Mount will the Lord be seen. This will give a
relief, when all is at a loss. And in this lies the most discriminating
evidence of special Providence. Glorious appearances in great streights are
eminent testimonies of Gods regard. Could I now insist on some of the
instances, that might be given, of this kind of dealing with us in England, in
the pursuit of the Cause we have in hand, it would make us ashamed of all our
unworthiness, carnal fears, and unbelief.

This is the second Evidence of Gods presence. He is with a People to direct
them, to protect, to manifest his glory amongst them; His glory in ballancing
the Issues of Providence one in respect of another; so that all shall
acknowledge that of a truth the Lord is amongst them. Blessed is the People,
that is in such a Case; yea, blessed is the People whose God is the Lord. What
would you have more? here is ease of all cares, a remedy for all sores,
security in the midst of troubles, Rest, and Peace, and assured dwelling
places, though the Assyrian should be in the Land.

Thus you see what is this great Concernment of any People: Let us now consider
the tenure of this Blessedness: on what account it is to be obtained, or
enjoyed: now this is, our abiding with God; This then is nextly to be
considered, what it is for a People, what it is for you, and us so to abide
with God, as that we may in all our affairs, enjoy his presence in the ways
before described.

Now something is hereunto previously required: something it consists in.

1. First, That we may abide with God, this is indispensably 1.
required? that we may have Peace with him in Jesus Christ. If we are never
with him, we cannot abide with him; no man can abide, where he never comes. The
acceptance of our persons, lies at the bottom of the acceptance of our duties.
As the special presence of God with any, is in, and by Christ, and no
otherwise: so is our abiding with God, in, and through him. God with us, is the
name of Christ: Our being with God, is in him who is our Peace. Two cannot
walk together, unless they be so agreed. Amos. 3. 3. Now because this is not
to be expected from all the individualls of a Nation: yet this thing is to be
endeavored.

That the Rulers of it be such as have this Interest. I do not divest of a
share in Government, those who have no share in Christ, if lawfully called
thereunto. But I say, when God gives Governors, whom he intends to make a
blessing unto a People, they shall be such as are blessed of him in Christ. And
if ever the Government of this Nation, in this present Constitution, suppose it
the most exactly framed, and balanced, in the several parts of it, for the
furtherance of Public Good, be devolved into the hands of men, not interessed
in God by Christ, Though the constitution may be absolutely good, yet the
Government will not be blessed, and the Nation will be ruined: for God and his
glory will depart. Micah. 5. 5, 6. It is Christ that is our Peace, even in
outward troubles? They are seven Shepherds under him, and Eight principal men,
accepted with him, that are to be our releife.

It is true, for some particular actions, or works, a wicked man may be
anointed particularly; as Jehu, and Jeroboam the son of Joash: But you have no
instance that ever God was with a People to bless them indeed, in a course of
special providence, when wicked men by their own consent were their Rulers;
where the Union and Relation, between them and the people is considerable. I
confess unto you, I never think of the State of Englnnd, but my heart trembles
at this thing; Namely, that those who have, and it is fit should have so great
a Share in the Government of this Commonweal, should have their rise from the
body of the People, that is dark, and profane, and full of Enmity against the
Remnant; did not God overruled men contrary to their own inward principles, and
lusts, How soon would ruin, and desolation break in upon that hand. And give
me leave to say, that God in his sovereign Providence, having called so many
at this time to the place of Rule, and Authority, who indeed (as we believe)
love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, it seems to me, to look as your Duty, to
consider all ways and means whereby the Power of these Nations may be in
succeeding seasons, devolved on men of the like spirit and Condition.

I shall not interpose in that, which by some is so much spoken of; The reign
of the Saints; I am sure the means used, and attempted by some, to set upon,
and to set up such a rule and dominion, have not become sobermen, much less
Saints of Christ; yet this I must say, and in the saying of it, I dare say,
Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin; If ever God cease to call Saints,
that is, men interessed personally in Christ, to places of Chief Authority in
this Nation, or commit the power of it into other hands; and when those called
to Power, cease to exert it in a subserviencie to the Kingdom of Christ, for
the true spiritual advantage of his people, there will be an end of Englands
glory and happiness. I say, hear ye this all ye People.

This I have delivered long ago, and many times in this place, this I say
still, and in this persuasion hope to live, and die.

The Lord guide you in this thing: however we shall live on the good providence
of our God, who has hitherto taken care for us.

This then I say, is prerequired, as a qualification of any person, to the
performance of this duty of abiding with God. It is the Psalmist's advice.
Psalm. 2. 11, 12. Let this principle be always owned amongst you: by it, honor
Christ in the world; give him the pre-eminence, it is the Fathers will he
should have it in all things. Expect not the presence of God, but upon this
account. Bear Testimony herein against the world of profane men, who despise
these things. Seeing then it cannot be expected, to have this qualification
diffused universally as yet through the body of the People, let the Rulers take
care, that they be not the Cause of Gods departure from us.

Secondly, What is it now for such persons to abide 2.
with God; so as they may expect Comfortably the continuance of his presence
with them, which is their all, that they need or desire.: I shall name some few
things that are signally required thereunto.

First, that they enquire of God, ask Counsel at 1.
his hand, look to him for direction in all their Affairs. He is present with
them to give them direction; not to seek for it at his hand, is exceedingly to
despise him, it must arise from one of these two apprehensisions, either he
cares not for us, or he knows not how to direct us. When he gave direction by
the cloud on the Tabernacle, the people being reproved for their carnal
fears, and unbelief, upon the return of the Spies; some of them would needs
instantly into the Mountain, and fight with the Canaanites: but says the holy
Ghost, the Arc abode in the Camp; They went without Gods Direction, and
prospered accordingly. With what contempt does God speak of the wisdom, and
Counsels of the sons of men, when they will adhere unto them? How does he
make it his glory to turn all their Consultations into folly? and to make them
err in their ways, like a drunken man? how does he bid them take Counsel
together, when he intends to destroy them? what instances may be given of all
good and prosperous Rulers of old, of their seeking direction from God? what
Promises of a success, and a blessed Issue in so doing are there? The words of
my Text will suffice, as an instance in every kind.

But you will say; how shall we enquire of God? the Nations had their Oracles,
whereby they deluded themselves. The People of God had their Vrim and Thummim,
their Prophets and Oracle. Bring hither the Ephod, and enquire of God, was the
word with them? but alas! what is all this to the advantage we have of seeking
Counsel of God; and taking direction from him? We have an High Priest always
present with us, by whom we may enquire. Our High Priest is the Angel of Gods
Presence, the mighty Counselor, the power, and eternal wisdom of God
himself? and where is he? he appears in the presence of God for us, in the holy
place, not made with hands, having made a new and living way for us to come
within the Veil, to enquire of the Oracle. What would we have more? he is our
Captain, our Leader, our High Priest, Urim, and Thummim, our Oracle, our Arc,
on whom the cloud of direction rests, and abides for ever.

Would you then be with God? take direction from him by Christ in all your
undertakings; so do indeed, and not in word, or profession only.

I hope, I need not stay to give you directions, how this duty is to be
performed, the Unction will teach it you, and your fellowship, I hope, is with
the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus; Only now take these few words with
you.

First, Captivate all your desires to his glory: set 1.
your hearts on nothing, but with this express reserve, if it is consistent
with, and expedient unto the Glory of Christ, and his Kingdom. Be not sick of
your own violent Desires, but lay all your aims and designs at his feet
always; becoming as weaned Children before him.

Secondly, Bear before him a real sense of your 2.
own weakness, and folly both severally, and jointly, if not directed by him;
that in his pity and Compassion, he may relieve you.

Thirdly, Keep your hearts in that integrity, that you 3.
may always press and urge him with his own Concernment in all your Affairs,
this is a thing that none but upright hearts can do uprightly.

Fourthly, Actually enquire by faith and prayer, 4.
what is his will and mind; do it severally, and jointly; do it privately,
publicly; do it every day, and in days set apart for that purpose; he will
assuredly be found of you. You know how easy it were to exemplify all these
things, by testimonies, and instances, but time will not permit.

If in stead of these things, you bear your selves up on the wings of your own
Wisdom, and contrivances,; though you may seem for a season to have attained
a fair pitch and flight; you will be entangled, and brought down in the midst
of your Course with shame and sorrow; for the Lord will not be with you.

Secondly, Another thing wherein we are to be with God is by trusting in him
for protection. O! trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah, there
is everlasting strength. This man made the Lord his refuge. He that trusts in
the Lord shall be as Monnt Sion, that shall never be removed. Commit your ways
to the Lord, roll your burden on him, stand still and see his salvation. What
glorious things are spoken of this trusting to the Lord for protection, you all
know. It were endless to insist on Commands and promises to this purpose; and
to single out one, or two, were but to weaken the Cause in hand, seeing
hereunto the whole Scriptures bear witness. I shall only show you what it is so
to do, in some few particulars.

First, It is to strengthen, and encourage your hearts 1.
in difficult affairs, a comfortable Issue whereof, you cannot on visible
causes conjecture, on the account of Gods engagement for your good. To omit the
instance of Asa, Jehosaphat, and many others; take that signal one of David in
his great distress at Ziglak 1 Samuel 30. You know the story: His habitation was
burnt and spoiled, his wives and children captived, his people consulting to
stone him, so that he was greatly distressed, the enemy numerous, and without
his reach; all means of relieving his condition and bringing it to a
comfortable issue, far removed; But what course did he now take? did he
despond? did he give over? did he rest on his own Counsel and strength, No,
says the holy Ghost; But David encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Have
you any Affair that lies before you that is good, and honest, but yet dreadful,
difficult, entangled? your hearts are ready to faint, when ever you think of
it; it is almost beyond your Imaginations, to contrive a comfortable Issue: In
such a season if you will be with God, he will be with you; if you so trust him
as to encourage your hearts on the account of his wisdom, goodness, power;
that he can find out, and bring about a comfortable glorious end; this is to
trust him for protection. Psalm. 46. is this Doctrine delivered to the full.

Secondly, To trust God for protection, is to wait 2.
under discouragements, and disappointments for a desired Issue, of the affairs
we commit to him. He that believes will not make have. Isa. 28. 16. This the
Lord pleads for Hab. 2. 3, 4. Men will have their desires precisely
accomplished this year, this month, this week, or they will wait no longer;
these, says God are proud men, their hearts are lifted up in them, they trust
not me for protection. Men love to trust God (as they profess) for what they
have in their hands, in possession, or what lies in an easy view; place their
desires afarr of, carry their accomplishment behind the clouds, out of their
sight, interpose difficulties, and perplexities, their hearts are instantly
sick, they cannot wait for God; they do not trust him, nor ever did. Would you
have the presence of God with you; learn to wait quietly for the salvation you
expect from him. Then indeed is he glorified, when he is trusted in a storm;
when he is waited for under long perplexities, and distresses. Want of this,
ruined the Israelites in the wilderness; their work was long, their
difficulties, and intanglements many, they would have had an immediate end of
their troubles. What! more difficulties, more hardships, nay then let us chose
a Captain and go down again into Egypt; we know the worst of that, where this
will end we know not. This laid their carcasses in the wilderness, and deprived
them of enjoying the good land.

Thirdly, It is to commit your affairs to the Lord 3.
with submission to his will, as to their Issue, and accomplishment. Trust
respects protection, but it prescribes not, as to particular Events. It is to
commit our Affairs to God, with thoughts of his infinite wisdom, sovereignty
and goodness; with resolutions thereupon, that the product of his will, is that
which will be good, be best for us, though it should not at all fall in with
our present desires. It is true the Psalmist says, Commit your ways unto the
Lord, trust also in him, he shall bring it to pass. Psalm 37. 5. and so he
shall and will in all such cases, as that there particularly insisted on by the
Psalmist, wherein his own Glory is particularly engaged. But this prescribs
not, as to all cases that we should cry, give me this child or I die. The rule
is known; Abide in this frame, and we shall have that we desire, or that which
is better for us; but I must not abide in these things* See Psalm. 37. 3, 4, 5.
Psalm. 73. 23, 24, 25, 26.

And these are some of those ways wherewith we abide with God, as to our
trusting of him in reference to special protection.

A third thing I should fix upon is, a peoples Universal owning of Gods
concernments in the world. His presence with them is, his owning their
concernments, and certainly he expects that they abide with him in the owning
of his. Gods concernment in the world, is his people as invested with the
privileges purchased for them by Christ Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The Lords portion is his
people. This is that which the Lord has perticularly Kept to himself. The
Vineyard that he has chosen out of all the forests of the world; the handful
that he has taken to himself, his Sons, and Daughters, his Family; These he
expects that you abide by, if you would have him abide by you; Yea it is most
certain, as your respect, and regard shall be to them and their interest, as
his people; so will his respect, and regard be to you, and your interest, as
the people of this Nation. But I have formerly spoken hereof unto you, and
therefore, though it be a matter of the greatest importance, I shall not
further insist upon it.

And these are some of the Conditions of Gods special presence with you,
pleasant conditions, their performance, is your glory, your rest, your
blessedness, not your bondage, not your burden; Not one duty does God on this
account require of you, but it is also your reward. O blessed terms of peace,
and agreement. Blessed be the great peacemaker, cursed be the breakers of this
blessed Agreement. Is this all indeed that is required, that we may have the
special presence of God with us for ever? O how inexcusable shall we be, if we
neglect these terms? how just will be our ruin? Behold, I have set before you
life and death this day. The life, or death of these Nations. O choose life,
seeing it may be had on such easy, such blessed terms: Terms wherein in
doing good to others, you will also do good to your own souls; you will give
peace to the Nation, and have peace, and rest in your own souls.

Look on this presence of God as your main concernment? Use 1.
This is that which the Prophet calls for in the words of the Text; so the
Psalmist, there are many that say, who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up
the light of thy countenance upon us. Psalm. 4. Let other men make what
enquiries they please, look for good, for rest, for peace in what they best
fancy; Acquiesce you in this, that the light of Gods countenance, a pledge of
his presence with you, is that alone which you are to enquire after. I remember
since the beginning of these last wonderful days, how often we have thought
our selves utterly ruined; if such alterations come, we are undone; if such men
dye, fall off, oppose, there is little hope of the carrying on the work wherein
we are engaged. If such shakings, such divisions befall us, our ruin is at
hand; If we break with such, and such foreign Nations, what hope remains:
But alas we have found by experience, that our Affairs have turned on none of
these things; our prosperity has been built on none of those principles: such
desertions, as we feared, have happened; such Alterations, such divisions have
befallen us; we have been sometime almost reduced to Gideons number; such
breaches with forragin Nations have ensued; one party, that was with us have
gone off, and asked, what will ye now do? And then another party has gone off,
and asked us what will ye do now? And no sooner do any fall off, but instantly
they expect, and foretell destruction to them that do abide; as though they
were God and not man, or as though God were bound to follow them with his
presence in all their passions, in all their wanderings. It would I confess be
more desirable unto me than life it self, to see all those, at least who stick
to the Cause of God in its greatest difficulties, and trialls, and then when it
Ceased to be carried on in the ordinary paths of Nations, United again in the
same common interest; to see their passions, and prejudices cured, and their
persons returned to their former usefulness: but this is that which is the
result of all this discourse. It is not this, or that thing, or any thing what
ever; but the presence of God alone with a people, that is their life, their
preservation, their protection and prosperity. If our strength had lain in
any thing else in this world, our light had gone out long ago, and it had
departed from us: But hence it is that we are not consumed. Now if you are so
careful not to loose these, and these friends, this, and that Party of the
Nation, not to provoke this, or that people 'causelesly; Oh what weight ought
it to have upon your hearts and souls, that you provoke not the Lord to depart
from you, that you take care for the continuance of his presence with you. This
is your life, your safety, your success, your peace. Learn to prize it, value
it etc.

Secondly. Whilst you have any pledge of the presence 2.
of God with you, be not greatly moved, nor troubled by any difficulties that
you may meet withal; be not moved with any terror, but sanctify the Lord of
Hosts in your hearts, and make him your dread, and your fear, and he shall be
a refuge, and a hiding place unto you.

Some pretend to Visions of God, and they prophecy your ruin, and
destruction; yea, they have limited times thereof, to the shame of their
Prognostications: some are full of revenge, and they threaten your Ruin, and
talk what a Catholic Interest is complicating, and rising up against you:
some are troubled at your proceedings, that they are not in such equal paths
as might be desired; as though that were a work, and way of yesterday; as
though we had not been turned, and driven out of old tracks, and paths, above
ten year ago, and as though the old paths were not so worn to the interest
of a profane multitude, that it is yet impossible to keep the burden upright
in them, whose guidance you are entrusted with.

Some say you will never be able to go through with the charge of your
undertakings? as though God had never said, the Gold and Silver is mine. Should
these things busy, or distract you; does the Issue of the business in hand,
depend on the thoughts of these men? will the end be according to their
contrivances? have these things indeed any influence at all into the
determination of this Controversy? will not this one Consideration guide your
hearts, and spirits, when all these waves roll all together upon you? Yea but
the whole of this affair must be ordered, and will fall out according as the
presence of God is with us, or otherwise. If God be with us, who shall be
against us? How may you on this account, triumph against all oppositions
whatsoever.

Thirdly, Fix then your thoughts on the things 3.
which lie in a tendancy toward the Confirming of Gods special providential
presence with you; You have heard of the tenure of it, the means whereby it is
procured, and retained. These things I have spoken to in general before;
besides your own dependence on God, and comportment with his providence, the
things incumbent on you, are such as respect either persons, or things.

First, for persons! it is that which I have minded 1.
you of before, and which I shall do, whilst I have life, and opportunity to
speak to you or any concerned in the government of this Nation, in public or
private, because I know it is your life, your peace, your duty; and that is,
that the End, and aim of all your Consultations be the protection,
encouragement, liberty, of the seed of Jacob, the remnant, the hidden people!
those whom God has owned, accepted, blessed, given his presence unto, and
amongst them. I plead not for their Exaltation, Promotion, Preferment, I know
not what! but charge it as your duty to take care, that this be not trodden
under foot, nor swallowed up, nor exposed to the rage, and contempt of the man
of the Earth; It is not this or that party of them that I speak of, but the
generation of them that seek the face of God, whose Cause alone it is, and not
of any other men, or frame of things, that is through the mighty power of God
triumphant in these Nations. They are to God as the apple of his Eye, and let
their safety be so also to you; and you will not fail of the presence of God.

Secondly, For things, they are either the things of 2.
God, or men; of each a word.

First for the things of God, or the public profession 3.
of Religion in the land, my time is too far spent for me to enter into a
serious discourse on the subject: somethings have of late been done, which when
envy, and anger, and disappointment shall cease to operate, the whole people
of God in this Nation will have cause to rejoice in.

Let it not be thought amiss, if I mind you of one part of the Nation in
especial, the example of the saints allow us a special regard to those of our
own Nation, our kinsfolks in the flesh. It is for Wales I speak, where the
unhappiness of almost all men running into extremes has disadvantaged the
Advancement of the Gospel, and the progress of it, when we had great ground,
for the expectation of better things. Some are still zealous of the traditions
of their fathers, and nothing almost will satisfy them, but their old road of
beggarly Readers in every Parish: Others again, perhaps out of a good zeal,
have hurried the people with violence beyond their principles, and sometimes it
may be beyond the Truth; and as Jacob said; Over driving the Cattle, and young
ones, have almost destroyed the whole flock; between Complaints on one side,
and the other, I fear between misguided zeal, and formality, the whole work is
almost cast to the ground, the business of Zion, as such, is scarce by any
cared for. The good Lord guide you to somewhat for its relief, that those who
are Godly may be encouraged: and those that need instruction may not be
neglected.

Secondly, The things of man, or righteous Administrations of Justice in things
relating to this present 2.
pilgrimage. These wheels also are you to set going. Many particulars lie
before you; more will present themselves, troublesome times have always
produced good Laws; Your wisdom will be to provide for good Execution, that
not only the generations to come, but the present, may eat of the fruit of your
labors and travel.

The End.
A CATALOGUE of the other Books published by Dr. OWEN, and sold by Philemon
Stephens, at the gilded Lion in Paul's Church yard.
1. A Display of the Errors of the Arminians, concerning the old Pelagian Idol
Free Will, the new Goddess Contingency, etc. in 14 Chapters, 40. 2. Salus
electorum Sanguis Jesu. A treatise of the Redemption and reconciliation that is
in the blood of Christ, with the merit thereof, and the Satisfaction wrought
thereby; wherein the whole controversy of Universal Redemption is fully
discussed, in Four Books, with an Appendix upon occasion of a late Book
published by Mr. Joshua Sprigge. 3. The Duty of Pastors and People
distinguished, touching the means to be used by the People (distinct from
Church Officers) for increasing of Divine Knowledge. 4. Eshcol, or Rules of
Direction, for the walking of the Saints in fellowship, according to the order
of the Gospel. 5. A Fast Sermon to the Parliament. April 29. 1646. on Acts 16.
11. A Vision appeared, etc with an Appendix touching Church Government, with an
Essay for practice thereof (in the Country) also of Tolerarion, and Petitions
about these things. 6. Eben ezer, being an Exposition on the first ten verses
of the third Chapter of the prophecy of Habbakkuk, in two Sermons, one at
Colchester, the other at Rumford, in memorial of the Deliverance of Essex
County and Committee. 1648. 7. A Fast Sermon to the Parliament, Jan. 31 1648.
on Jer. 15. 19, 20. Let them return to thee, but return not thou unto them.
with a Discourse about Toleration, and the duty of the Civil Magistrate about
Religion. 8. A Fast Sermon to the Parliament. April. 19. 1649. on Heb. 12. 27.
And this word, Yet once more, signifies the removing of those things, etc. 9.
The glory of the Church in its Relation to Christ, in two Sermons, one at
Barwick, the other at Edenbrough, on Esaias 56. 7. For mine House shall be called
an House of Prayer for all People. 10. The laboring Saints dismission to Rest.
A Sermon at the Funeral of H. Ireton, Lord Deputy of Ireland, on Daniel. 12.
13. But go thou thy way, till the end be: for thou shall rest, and stand in
the lot at the end etc. 11. A Thanksgiving Sermon to the Parliament, October. 24.
1651 for the Victory at Worcester, on Ezeck 17. 24. And all the Trees of the
Field shall know, etc. 12. A Fast Sermon to the Parl. October. 13. 1652. on
Daniel 7. 15. I Daniel was grieved in my Spirit, etc. 13. A Sermon Preached at
the opening of the Parliament, Septem. 17. 1656, on Esaias. 14. 22. 14* Diatriba
de Justitia Divina* 15 The Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, vindicated in a
full answer to the discourse of Mr. John Goodwin, against that doctrine in his
book, entitled Redemption Redeemed. 16 A Treatise of the true Nature of
Schism, with Reference to the present differences in Religion. 8. 17 A
Trearise of Mortification of sin in sinners, Resolving Cases of of Conscience
there unto belonging 18 Socinianisme Examined in the Confutation of Mr.
Biddles, and the Racovian Catechism, 4. 19 A Review of the Annotations of H.
Grotius, in Reference to the doctrine of the Deity and saitisfaction of Christ,
in Answer to Dr. Hammond 4. A Commentary on the 12 small Prophets, by Mr. John
Trap. A Practical Exposition on these 4 Psalm. viz. The 27, 84. 85. 87, by Mr.
Thomas Pierson. Tho. Campanella, his Treatise, showing by what means the King
of Spain may attain to an Universal Monarchy. Published in English in regard
much of his advice is already accomplished concerning England, France and
Holland. Tithes too hot to be touched, a Treatise showing Tithes to be neither
Jewish, Popish, nor inconvenient, but due by the Law of Nature, Scripture, and
Reason, by Sir H. Spelman Knight, with the same Authors Treatise de Non
Temerandis Ecclesiis; against violating the Rights due unto Churches. Mr.
George Herberts Poems reprinted, with an Alphabeticall Table, together wath the
Synagogue, being divine Poems, in imitation of Mr. Herberts Poems.
Paralipomena, Orthographiae, Etymologiae, Prosodiae una cum scholiis ad Canones
de genere substantivorum, de anomalis praeteritis and supinis verborum, Syntaxi
Carminum ratione et figuris collecta ex optimis Autoribus in quatuor libris per
Johan. Danesij* Tho. Gatakeri, Tetragrammaton de nomine Jehovah, dissertatio
qua vocis Jehovah apud nostros receptae usus defenditur, et a quorundam
cav^llationibus iniquis pariter atque manibus vindicatur. Magnetis Reductorium
theologicum, Tropologicum, in quo ejus novus, verus and supremus usus indicatur
per. S. Ward. The Christians Conflict, showing the difficulties and duties of a
Christian Soldier in his warfare, with the armor and graces necessary
thereto; as also a discussion of the Case of Usury and depopulation, with the
errors of the Antinomians. Together with a Treatise of the Society of Saints,
and Christian fellowship. By Tho. Bentham. The holy life, and happy death of J
Bruen, ^f Bruen Stapleford in Cheshire Esquire exhibiting variety of memorable
passages, useful for all sorts of people, as a path way to Piety and Charit,
By W. Hind.

