To the right Honorable, the (...)n the Commons House of Parliament (Englands
legal Sovereign Power
The humble Petition of the Jnhabitants of Buckingham-shire, and Hartfordshire,
Whose Names are hereunto subscribed.
HVMBLY SHOWS;
THat your Petitioners, and the rest of the freemen of England, before the
beginning of this Parliament, being almost destroyed of their Laws, Liberties,
and Freedoms, by the arbitrary machinations, politic designs, and practices
of the Pattentee-Monopolizers, and of other arbitrary supplanters and Agents,
which labored to subvert the Fundamental Constitutions of this Realm, and to
set up a tyrannical Government, tending to the utter vassalage and overthrow
of all the free people of this Kingdom, together with their Natural,
National, and Legal Rights and Liberties, God putting into our hands, an
opportunity to free our selves from those tyrannies and oppressions; We, for
our better weal and happiness, chose and betrusted your Honors for the same
end and purpose; and to that end we have elected, invested, and betrusted you
with our indubitable and natural power and Birthrights, for the just and
legal removal of our National Evils; In the expectation whereof, we have
waited ever since your first sitting; continually and cheerfully assisting you
with our lives, persons, and estates, being much encouraged thereto by the
several Protestations, and Declarations, wherein you have solemnly protested
before the great God of Heaven and Earth, and to the whole world declared your
upright and well grounded resolutions, to vindicate the just liberties of every
Freeborn English man without exception.

Now therefore, our most humble request unto your Honors, is, that you would
(according to your duties, and the Great Trust reposed in you) take into your
consideration, the slavish condition, that we the free People of England are
yet subject unto, by reason of those Arbitrary practices that are still
continued, acted, and perpetrated upon us by some prerogative-men of this
Kingdom; whom we humbly conceive, have no power over our bodies or Estates,
they being not elected thereunto by the Freemen of England; and therefore may
not commi^ our bodies to prison (contrary to the Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom) as we suppose has been done to some Freemen of this Kingdom without
producing any Legal Authority, that your Petitioners can hear of; for what
they did. Wherefore your Petitioners most humble desire is, that you would,
according to the respective Appeals of the said Free Subjects unto this
Supreme House, be pleased to take their cause into the legal judgment, and
speedy determination of this House, as the whole matter thereof shall be
reported unto you, by the honorable Committee, for consideration of the
Commons Liberties, who have their whole manner of the proceedings against them,
together with their respective defenses ready to represent unto your Honors,
and to grant unto them your indubitable justice (according to their late
Petitionarie, and still constant desires) whereby they may receive the Sentence
of this House, either for their present justification, or condemnation; that
they may not be ruined and undone by an arbitrary and injustifiable
Imprisonment. And if that, through the urgent affairs of the Kingdom, your
occasions will not afford you so much time, as to consider and expedite their
business at present: Our humble request is, that you would by an Order from
this House, forthwith set them free out of prison; they giving legal security
for their future forthcoming, until such time as your honors shall be pleased
to hand out to them full and effectual Justice. And that you would be pleased,
in case the principal Informers and Actors be found guilty, to grant them full
and ample reparations according to the Law of the Land. And further, that you
would take care, for the time to come, to free us and our children from the
fear and prejudice of the like Arbitrarie and Prerogative-proceedings,
according to your late promise in your most just Declaration of the 17. of
April, 1646. And your Petitioners as in duty bound shall ever pray, etc.

Instructions agreed upon as the sense of the Petitioners of Buckingham-shire,
and Hartfordshire.
First, the persons imprisoned, Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, Mr. Overton,
his Wife and Brother, Mr. Larners, Brother and Maid, etc.

Secondly, by Prerogative-men, we mean such as sit to try Commoners, and are
not elected by the free choice of the people.

Thirdly, by Arbitrary practices, we mean such as are contrary to the Law of
the Kingdom.

As first, for any persons to try those that are not their Peers or Equals:
witness Magna Charta. C. 29, E. 3. 1. 6. Sir Edward Cooks exposition of the
14. and 29. Chapters of Magna Charta, etc. (as the House of Lords have done and
would have done all the above mentioned.)

Secondly, for any to imprison men for not answering to Interrogatories in
Criminal Causes.

To the Reader,
THis Petition was signed with almost ten thousand hands, and was brought to
the Parliament on the 11. of Febr. 1646. with about 500. Gentlemen and yeomen,
who did not find that fair access unto the Parliament that they expected. In
which regard, they went all out of the Town, saving six whom they chused out
from among themselves, as Commissioners. with whom they left the aforesaid
Instructions to explain somthings in the Petition, in case it were demanded of
them, and also gave them further order to improve their utmost interest to get
the Petition read and answered.

But, those they had to deal with, bearing (as it seems) a greater affection
to the tyranny of the House of Lords, then to the Liberties and Freedoms of
those that choose, and trusted them, would not vouchsafe it a reading in their
House, though the aforesaid Commissioners attended many days at the doors of
the House, and with all earnestnest, and faithfulness pressed to have it read,
but could not prevail, and so were forced in great discontent to return to
their sever all dwellings, and truly to acquaint the rest of their
fellow-Petitioners, what hard dealings they had found from the hands of the
peoples great Trusties at Westminster.

But in regard that my self and all the Commons of the Kingdom, are so much
concerned in this Petition; I therefore out of an apprehension of a singular
duty have published to my self, and to the whole Nation, to the view of all
the Commons of England the Petition with the Instructions, and these few lines,
and remain,

Thy true friend, if thou be true to the Liberties of the Commons of England.
Richard Overton. Prerogative-Prisoner in! Newgate,


