A REVIEW OF THE ANNOTATIONS OF HVGO GROTIVS, In Reference unto the Doctrine of
the Deity, and Satisfaction of CHRIST. WITH A Defense of the Charge formerly
laid against them.

By JOHN OWN D. D.

OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL, Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for THOM. ROBINSON.
1656.

A second Consideration of the Annotations of Hugo Grotius.
HAving in my late defense of the doctrine of the Gospel, from the corruptions
of the Socinians, been occasioned to vindicate the Testimonys given in the
Scripture to the Deity of Christ, from their exceptions, and finding that Hugo
Grotius in his Annotatios had (for the most part) done the same things with
them, as to that particular, and some other important Articles of the Christian
faith, that book of his being more frequent in the hands of Students, then
those of the Socinians, I thought it incumbent on me, to do the same work in
reference to those Annotations, which it was my design to perform toward the
writings of Socinus, Smalcius, and their companions and followers. What I have
been enabled to accomplish by that endeavor, with what service to the Gospel
has been performed thereby, is left to the judgment of them who desire (...).
Of my dealing with Grotius I gave a brief account in my Epistle to the
Governors of the University, and that with reference to an Apology made for
him, not long before. This has obtained a new Apology under the name of a
second defense of Hugo Grotius; with what little advantage either to the repute
of Grotius, as to the thing in Question, or of the Apologist himself, it is
judged necessary to give the ensueing account: for which I took the first
leisure hour I could obtain, having things of greater weight, daily incumbent
on me. The only thing of importance by me charged on those Annotations of
Grotius, was this; that the Texts of Scripture both in the Old Testament and
New, bearing witness to the Diety, and Satisfaction of Christ, are in them
wrested to other senses and significations, and the Testimonies given to those
grand truths, thereby eluded. Of those of the first kind I excepted one, yet
with some doubt, least his expressions therein, ought to be interpreted
according to the Analogy of what he had elsewhere delivered: of which
afterward.

Because that which concerns the Satisfaction of Christ will admit of the
easyest dispatch, though taking up most room, I shall in the first place
insist thereon. The words of my charge on the Annotations, as to this head of
the doctrine of the Scripture are these. The condition of these famous
Annotations as to the satisfaction of Christ is the same. Not one Text in the
whole Scripture, wherein Testimony is given to that sacred truth, which is not
wrested to another sense, or at least the Doctrine in it, conceald and obscured
by them.

This being a matter of fact, and the words containing a crime charged on the
Annotations, he that will make a defense of them, must either disprove the
Assertion by instances to the contrary, or else granting the matter of fact,
evince it to be no crime. That which is objected in matter of fact, aut
negandum est aut defendendum, says Quintilian: lib. 5. cap. de refut: and
extra haec in judiciis fere nihil est. In other cases, Patronus, neget,
defendat, transferat, excuset, deprecetur, molliat, minuat, avertat, despiciat,
derideat; but in matters of fact, the two first only have place. Aristotle
allows more particulars for an Apologist to divert unto, if the matter require
it: he may say of what is objected, (...). (Rhet. lib. 3. cap. 15.) all which
in a plain matter of fact may be reduced to the former heads. That any other
Apology can or ought to take place in this, or any matter of the same
importance will not easily be proved. The present Apologist takes another
course. Such ordinary paths are not for him to walk in. He tells us of the
excellent book that Grotius wrote de satisfactione Christi, and the exposition
of sundry places of Scripture, especially of diverse verses of Isa. 53: given
therein; and then adds sundry inducements to persuade us, that he was of the
same mind in his Annotations. And this is called a defense of Grotius. The
Apologist I suppose knows full well, what Texts of Scripture they are, that
are constantly pleaded for the Satisfaction of Christ, by them who do believe
that doctrine. I shall also for once take it for granted, that he might without
much difficulty, have obtained a sight of Grotius Annotations; to which I shall
only add, that probably if he could from them have disproved the Assertion
before mentioned, by any considerable instances, he is not so tender of the
Prefacers credit, as to have concealed it on any such account. But the
Severalls of his plea for the Annotations in this particular, I am persuaded
are accounted by some, worthy consideration; a breife view of them will suffice.

The signal place of Is. 53. he tells us, he has heard taken notice of by
some; (I thought it had been probable the Apologist might have taken notice of
it himself,) as that wherein his Annotations are most suspected; therefore on
that he will fasten a while* Who would not now expect that the Apologist should
have entered upon the consideration of those Annotations, and vindicated them
from the imputations insinuated: but he knew a better way of procedure, and who
shall prescribe to him, what suits his purpose and proposal.

This I say is the instance chosen to be insisted on; and the vindication of
the Annotations therein, by the interpretation given in their Author his book
de Satisfactione Christi is proposed to consideration. That others, if not the
Apologist himself, may take notice of the emptiness of such precipitate
Apologyes, as are ready to be tumbled out, without due digestion, or
consideration, I shall not only compare the Annotations and that book as to
the particular place proposed, and manifest the inconsistency of the one with
the other; but also to discover the extreme negligence and confidence, which
lie at the bottom of his following attempt, to induce a persuasion, that the
judgment of the man of whom we speak, was not altered (that is, as to the
interpretation of the Scriptures relating to the Satisfaction of Christ) nor is
others in his Annotations, then in that book; I shall compare the one with the
other, by sundry other instances, and let the world see how in the most
important places contested about, he has utterly deserted the interpretations
given of them by himself in his book de Satisfactione, and directly taken up
that which he did oppose.

The Apologist binds me in the first place to that of Is. 53. which is ushered
in by the 1 Pet. 2. 24.

From 1 Pet. 2. 24. (says the Apologist) Grotius informs us that Christ so
bare our sins, that he freed us from them, so that we are healed by his stripes.

This thus crudely proposed, Socinus himself would grant it, is little more
then barely repeating the words; Grotius goes farther, and contends that (...)
the word there used by the Apostle, is to be interpreted, tulit sursum eundo,
portavit, and tells us that Socinus would render this word abstulit, and so
take away the force of the Argument from this place. To disprove that
insinuation, he urges sundry other places in the new Testament, where some
words of the same importance are used, and are no way capable of such a
signification. And whereas Socinus urges to the contrary Heb. 9. 28. where he
says (...) signifies nothing but auferre peccata, Grotius disproves that
instance, and manifests that in that place also it is to be rendered by tulit,
and so relates to the death of Christ.

That we may put this instance given us by the Apologist, to vindicate the
Annotations from the crime charged on them to an issue, I shall give the Reader
the words of his Annotations on that place: it is as follows:

(...) etc:] (...) hic est, abstulit, quod sequentia ostendunt, quomodo idem
verbum sumi not avimus, Heb. 9. 28. eodem sensu (...) Ioh. 1. 29. and (...) and
(...) Isa. 53. 4. ubi Graeci (...): vitia nostra it a interfecit, sicut qui
cruci affiguntur interfici solent. Simile loquendi genus Col. 2. 14. vide Romans
6. 6. Gal. 2. 20. 24. est autem hic (...); non enim proprie Christus cum
crucifigeretur, vitia nostra abstulit. Sed causas dedit per quas auferrerentur.
Nam crux Christi fundamentum est predicationis; praedicatio vero poenitentiae,
paenitentia vero aufert vitia.

How well the Annotator abides here by his former interpretation of this place,
the Apologist may easily discover: 1 There he contends that (...) is as much as
tulio, or sursum tulit: and objects out of Socinu^, that it must be abstulit,
which quite alters the sense of the Testimony. Here he contends with him, that
it must be abstulit. 2 There Heb. 9. 28. is of the same importance with this 1
Pet. 2. 24. as there interpreted: here, as here; that is in a quite contrary
sense, altogether inconsistent with the other. 3. For company (...) used Is.
53. is called in to the same signification, which in the book de satisfactione
he contends is never used in that sense, and that most truly. 4. Upon this
exposition of the words, he gives the very sense contended for by the
Socinians; non enim proprie Christus cum crucifigeretur vitia nostra abstulit,
sed causas dedit per quas auferreretur: what are these causes; he adds them
immediately, Nam crux Christi fundamentum est praedicationis, praedicatio vero
poenitentiae, poenitentia vero aufert vitia. He that sees not the whole
Socinian poison wrapped up and proposed in this interpretation, is ignorant of
the state of the difference, as to that Head, between them, and Christians. (5)
To make it a little more evident, how constant the Annotator was to his first
principles, which he insisted on in the management of his disputes with Socinus
about the sense of this place, I shall add the words of Socinus himself,
which then he did oppose. Verum animadvertere oportet primum in Graeco, verbum,
quod interpretes verterunt pertulit, est (...), quod non pertulit sed abstulit
vertendum erat, non secus ac factum fuerit in epistola ad Hebraeos cap. 9. 28.
ubi idem legendi modus habetur, unde constat (...) non perferre peccata, sed
peccata tollere, sive auferre, significart. Socin. de Jes. Christ. sat. lib. 2.
cap. 6.

What difference there is between the design of the Annotator, and that of
Socinus, what compliance in the quotation of the parallel place of the
Hebrews, what direct opposition and head is made in the Annotations against
that book de Satisfactione, and how clearly the cause contended for in the
one, is given away in the other; needs no farther to be demonstrated. But if
this instance makes not good the Apologists assertion, it may be supposed, that
that which follows, which is ushered in by this, will do it to the purpose;
let then that come into consideration.

This is that of Isa. 53. Somewhat of the sense which Grotius in his book de
Satisfactione contends for, in this place, is given us by the Apologist.

The 11th verse of the chapter which he firsts considers (in my book) page 14:
he thus proposes and expounds: justificabit servus men's justus multos and
iniquitates ipsorum bajulabit. in Heb. est: (...) vox autem (...) iniquitatem
significat, atque etiam iniquitatis poenam. 2. Reg. 7. 9. vox autem (...) est
sustinere, bajulare, quoties autem bajulare ponitur cum nomine peccati aut
iniquitatis, id in omni lingua and maxim in Hebraismo significat poen as
far, with much more to this purpose. The whole design of the maine dispute
in that place, is, from that discourse of the Prophet to prove, that Jesus
Christ properly underwent the punishment due to our sins, and thereby made
satisfaction to God for them.

To manifest his constancy to this doctrine, in his Annotations he gives such
an Exposition of that whole chapter of Isaiah 53. as is manifestly, and
universally inconsistent with any such design in the words, as that which he
intends to prove from them in his book de Satisfactione. In particular (to
give one instance of this assertion) he contends here that (...), is as much as
bajulare, portare, and that joined with iniquity (in all languages, especially
in the Hebrew) that phrase of bearing iniquity, signifies to undergo the
punishment due to it; in his Annotations on the place, as also in those on 1
Pet. 2. 24. he tells you the word signifies auferre, which with all his
strength he had contended against. Not to draw out this particular instance
into any greater length, I make bold to tell the Apologist (what I suppose he
knows not) that there is no one verse of the whole chapter, so interpreted in
his Annotations, as that the sense given by him, is consistent with, nay is not
repugnant to, that which from the same verses he pleads for in his book de
Satisfactione Christi. If notwithstanding this information, the Apologist be
not satisfied, let him if he please consider what I have already animadverted
on those Annotations, and undertake their vindication. These loose discourses
are not at all to the purpose in hand, nor the Question between us, which is
solely; whether Grotius in his Annotations have not perverted the sense of
those texts of Scripture, which are commonly, and most righteously pleaded as
Testimonies given to the Satisfaction of Christ. But as to this particular
place of Isaiah, the Apologist has a farther plea, the sum whereof (not to
trouble the Reader with the repetition of a discourse so little to the purpose)
comes to this head; that Grotius in his book de Satisfactione Christi gives
the mystical sense of the chapter, under which consideration, it belongs to
Christ and his sufferings; In his Annotations the literal, which had its
immediate completion in Jeremy, which was not so easily discoverable or
vulgarly taken notice of. This is the sum of his first observation on this
place to acquit the Annotator of the Crime charged upon him. Whether he approve
the application of the prophecy to Jeremiah or no, I know not. He says,
Grotius so conceived. The design of the discourse seems to give approbation to
that conception. How the literal sense of a place should come to be less
easily discovered then the mystical, well I know not. Nor shall I speak of
the thing it self concerning the literal and mystical sense supposed to be
in the same place and words of Scripture, with the application of the
distinction to those Prophesies which have a double accomplishment in the Type
and thing or person typified, (which yet has no soundness in it) but to keep
to the matter now in hand, I shall make bold for the removal of this engine
applied by the Apologist for the preventing all possible mistake, or
controversy about the Annotators after-charge in this matter, to tell him,
that the perverting of the first literal sense of the chapter, or giving it a
completion in any person whatsoever, in a first, second, or third sense, but
the Son of God himself, is no less then Blasphemy; which the Annotator is no
otherwise freed from, but by his conceiving a sense to be in the words,
contrary to their literal importance, and utterly exclusive of the concerment
of Jesus Christ in them. If the Apologist be otherwise minded, I shall not
invite him again to the consideration of what I have already written in the
vindication of the whole prophecy from the wretched corrupt interpretation of
the Annotator, (not hoping that he will be able to break through that
discouragment he has from looking into that treatise, by the prospect he has
taken of the whole by the Epistle) but do express my earnest desire, that by
an exposition of the severalls of that chapter, and their application to any
other (not by loose discourses foreign to the Question in hand) he would
endeavor to evince the contrary; if on second thoughts he find either his
judgment, or ability, not ready or competent for such an attempt, I heartily
wish he would be careful hereafter of ingenerating apprehensions of that
nature, in the minds of others, by any such discourses as this.

I cannot but suppose that I am already absolved from a necessity of any
farther procedure, as to the justifying my charge against the Annotations,
having sufficiently foiled the instance produced by the Apologist for the
weakening of it. But yet least any should think, that the present issue of this
debate, is built upon some unhappiness of the Apologist in the choice of the
particulars insisted on; which might have been prevented, or may yet be
removed, by the production of other instances: I shall for their further
satisfaction, present them with sundry other, the most important Testimonies
given to the Satisfaction of Christ, wherein the Annotator has openly
prevaricated, and does embrace and propose those very interpretations, and that
very sense, which in his book, de Satisfactione Christi, he had strenuously
opposed.

Page 8. of his book de Satisfactione, he pleads the satisfaction of Christ,
from Gal. 2. 21. laying weight on this, that the word, (...), signifies the
want of an antecedent cause, on the supposition there made. In his Annotations
he deserts this assertion, and takes up the sense of the place given by Socinus
de servator. lib. 2: cap. 24. His departure into the tents of Socinus on Gal.
3. 13. is much more pernicious. page 25, 26, 27. urging that place and
vindicating it from the exceptions of Socinus, he concludes, that the Apostle
said Christ was made a Curse, quasi dixerit Christum factumesse (...): hoc est
poenae a Deo irrogatae, and quidem ignominiosissimae obnoxium. To make good
this, in his Annotations, he thus expounds the words: duplex hic figura; nam
and (...) pro (...), quomodo circumcisio pro circumcisis: and subauditur (...):
nam Christus it a cruciatus est, quasi esset Deo (...), quo nihil homini
pessimo in hac vita pejus evenire poterat: which is the very interpretation of
the words given by Socinus which he opposed; and the same that Crellius insists
upon in his vindication of Socinus against him. So uniforme was the judgment of
the Annotator, with that of the Author of the book de Satisfactione Christi.

Pages 32, 33, etc: are spent in the exposition and vindication of Romans 3. 25,
26. that expression (...), manifesting the end of the suffering of Christ, is
by him chiefly insisted on. That by (...) is there intended that justice of
God, whereby he punishes sin, he contends and proves from the nature of the
thing it self, and comparing the expression with other parallel texts of
Scripture: Socinus had interpreted this of the Righteousness of Christ's
fidelity and veracity: Lib. 2. de Servator. cap. 2. (ut ostenderet se veracem
and fidelem esse.) but Crellius in his vindication of him places it rather on
the goodness and liberality of God, which is, says he, the Righteousness
there intended. To make good his Ground, the Annotator, thus expounds the
meaning of the words* vocem (...) malim hic de bonitate interpretari, quam de
fide in promissis praestandis, quia quae sequuntur non ad Judaeos solos
pertinent, sed etiam ad Gentes, quibus promissio nulla facta erat. He rather
(he tells you) embraces the interpretation of Crellius then of Socinus; but for
that which himself had contended for, it is quite shut out of doors: as I have
elsewhere manifested at large.

The same course he takes with Romans 5. 10. which he insists on page 26. and 2.
Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21. concerning which he openly deserts his own former
interpretation, and closes expressly with that which he had opposed, as he
does in reference to all other places, where any mention is made of
Reconciliation: The substance of his Annotations on those places, seeming to be
taken out of Socinus, Crellius, and some others of that party.

That signal place of Heb. 2. 17. in this kind, deserves particularly to be
taken notice of; Cap. 7 page 141. of his book de Satisfactione, he pleads the
sense of that expression, (...), to be, (...): and adds, significat ergoibi
expiationem quae fit placando: But Crellius defense of Socinus had so possessed
the man's mind before he came to write his Annotations, that on that place he
gives us directly his sense, and almost his words in a full opposition to what
he had before asserted: (...), hoc quidem loco, ut ex sequentibus apparet, est
auferre peccata, sive purgare a peccato, id est, efficere ne peccetur, vires
suppeditando pro modo tentationum: So the Annotator on that place; indeavoring
farther to prove his Interpretation. From Romans 4 last, Cap. 1. page 47, of his
book de Satisfactione, he clearly proves the Satisfaction of Christ: and
evinces that to be the sense of that expression, traditus propter peccata
nostra: which he thus Comments on in his Annotations: poterat dioere qui and
mortuus est, and resurrexit ut nos a peccatis justificaret, id est, liberaret.
Sed amans (...) morti conjunxit peccata, quae sunt mors animi, resurrectioni
autem adeptionem Iustitia, quae est animi resuscitatio: mire nos and a peccatis
retrahit and ad Iustitiam ducit: quod videmus Christum mortem non formidasse
pro doctrina sua peccatis contraria, and ad Iustitiam nos vocanti Testimonio;
and a Deo suscitatum, ut eidem doctrinae summa conciliaretur Authoritas. He
that sees not, not only that he directly closes in, with what before he had
opposed, But also, that he has here cou^hed the whole Doctrine of the
Socinians, about the Mediation of Christ, and our Justification thereby, is
utterly ignorant of the state of the Controversy between them, and Christians.

I suppose it will not be thought necessary for me to proceed with the
comparison instituted. The several books are in the hands of most Students,
and that the case is generally the same in the other places pleaded for the
Satisfaction of Christ, they may easily satisfy themselves. Only because the
Apologist seems to put some difference between his Annotations on the
Revelations, (as having received their linedments and colors from his own
pencill,) and those on the Epistles which he had not so completed; as I have
already manifested, that in his Annotations on that book, he has
treacherously tampred with, and corrupted the Testimonies given to the Deity of
our blessed Savior, so shall I give one instance from them also, of his
dealing no less unworthily with those that concern his Satisfaction.

Socinus in his second book against Covet, second part, and chap. 17. gives us
this account of those words of the holy Ghost, Rev. 1. 5. who has loved us,
and washed us in his own blood: Johannes in Apocalyp. cap. 1. v. 5. alia
Metaphora seu Translatione, (quae nihil aliud est quam compendiosa quaedam
comparatio) utens, dixit de Christo and ejus morte, qui dilexit nos and lavit
nos a peccatis in sanguine suo, nam quemadmodum aqua abluuntur sordes corporis,
sic sanguine Christi, peccata, quae sordes animi sunt absterguntur.
Absterguntur, inquam, quia animus onster ab ipsis mundatur, etc. This
interpretation is opposed and exploded by Grotius lib. de Satisf. c. 10. p.
208, 209. the substance of it being, that Christ washed us from our sins by his
death, in that he confirmed his doctrine of Repentance and newness of life
thereby, by which we are turned from our sins; as he manifests in the close of
his Discourse, hoc saepius urgendu^ est, (says Socinus) Iesum Christum ea
ratione peccata nostra abstulisse, quod effecerit, ut a peccando desistamus.
This Interpretation of Socinus, being reinforced by Crellius, the place falls
again under the Consideration of Grotius in those Annotations on the
Revelations; which as the Apologist tells us, received their very lineaments
and colors from his own Pencill. There then he gives us this Account thereof,
(...): Sanguine suo, id est, morte tolerata, certos nos reddidit veritatis
eorum quae docuerat, quae talia sunt, ut nihil sit aptius ad purgandos a vitiis
animos. Humidae naturae, sub qua est sanguis, proprium est lavare. Id vero per
egregiam (...) ad animum transfertur. Dicitur autem Christus suo sanguine nos
lavisse, quia and ipse omnia praestitit quae ad id requirebantur and apparet
secutum in plurimis effectum. I desire the Apologist to tell me what he thinks
of this piece thus perfected, with all its lineaments and colors by the
pencill of that skillful man; and what beautiful aspect he supposes it to
have. Let the Reader, to prevent further Trouble in perusing transcriptions of
this kind, consider Rev. 13. 8, page 114. Heb. 9. 25. to the end; which he
calls an illustrious place in the same page and forward: I John 2. 2. page 140,
Romans 5. 10, 11. page 142, 143. Ephesians. 2. 16. page 148, 149, Col. 1. 20, 21, 22.
Tit. 2. 14. page 156. Heb. 9. 14, 15. page 157, 158. Act. 20. 28. and many
others; And compare them with the Annotations on those places, and he will be
farther enabled to judge of the defense made of the one, by the instance of the
other. I shall only desire that he who undertakes to give his judgment of this
whole matter, be somewhat acquainted with the state of the difference, about
this point of the doctrine of the Gospel, between the Socinians and us: that
he do not take auferre peccata, to be far peccata: nostri causa, to be
nostra vice, and nostro loco: causa (...), to be (...): liberatio a jugo
peccati, to be redemptio a reatu peccati: Subire poenas simpliciter, to be
subire paenas nobis debitas: to be (...), and (...) in respect of the event, to
be so as to the proper nature of the thing; offerre seipsum in coelo, to be as
much as offerre seipsum in cruce, as to the work it self: that so he be not
mistaken to think that, when the first are granted, that the latter are so
also. For a close of the discourse relating to this head, a breife account may
be added, why I said not positively, that he had wrested all the places of
Scripture giving Testimony to the Satisfaction of Christ, to another sense: but
that he had either done so, or else concealed or obscured that sense in them.

Though I might give instances from one or two places in his Annotions on the
Gospells, giving occasion to this assertion, yet I shall insist only on some
taken from the Epistle to the Hebrews, where is the great and eminent seat of
the doctrine of Christ's satisfaction. Although in his Annotations on that
Epistle, he does openly corrupt the most clear Testimonies given to this
Truth, yet there are some passages in them, wherein he seems to dissent from
the Socinians. In his Annotations on chap. 5. verse. 5. he has these words,
Jesus quidem Sacerdotale munus suum aliquo modo erat auspicatus; cum semet
patri victimam offerret. That Christ was a Priest when he was on the earth, was
wholly denied by Socinus both in his book de Servatore, and in his Epistle to
Niemoieuius, as I have showed elsewhere. Smalcius seems to be of the same
judgment in the Racovian Catechism. Grotius says, Sacerdotale munus erat
aliquo modo auspicatus: yet herein he goes not beyond Crellius, who tells us:
mortem Christus subiit duplici ratione, partim quidem ut foederis mediator seu
sponsor, partim quidem ut Sacerdos, Deo ipsum oblaturus: de causis mortis
Christi page 6. And so Volkelius fully to the same purpose. Parts (says he)
muneris Sacerdotis, haec sunt potissimum; mactatio victimae, in tabernaculum ad
oblationem peragendam, ingressio, and ex eodem egressio: Ac mactatio quidem
mortem Christi, violentam sanguinis profnsionem continet: de Relig. lib. 3.
cap. 47. page 145. and again: Hinc colligitur solam Christi mortem nequaquam
illam perfectam absolutamque ipsius oblationem (de qua in epistola ad Hebraeos
agitur) fuisse, sed principium and praeparationem quandam ipsius Sacerdotii in
caelo demum administrandi extitisse, ibid. So that nothing is obtained by
Grotius his munus Sacerdotale aliquo modo erat auspicatus, but what is granted
by Crellius and Volkelius. But in the next words, cum semet offerret patri
victimam, he seems to leave them: but he seems only so to do. For Volkelius
acknoledgeth that he did slay the Sacrifice in his death, though that was not
his complete and perfect oblation, which is also afterward affirmed by
Grotius: and Crellius expressly affirms the same. Nor does he seem to intend a
proper expiatory and satisfactory Sacrifice in that expression; for if he had,
he would not have been guilty of such an (...), as to say, semet obtulit patri.
Besides, though he do acknoledge elsewhere, that this victima was (...), and
(...), yet he says in another place (on ver: 3.) Sequitur Christum quoque
obtulisse prose (...); giving thereby such a sense to that expression, as is
utterly inconsistent with a proper expiatory Sacrifice for sin. And which is
yet worse, on chap. 9. 14. he gives us such an account why expiation is
ascribed to the blood of Christ, as is a key to his whole interpretation of
that epistle: Sanguini (says he) purgatio ista tribuitur: quia per sanguinem,
idest, mortem Christi, secuta ejus excitatione and evectione, gignitur in nobis
fides, quae deinde purgat corda. And therefore where Christ is said to offer
himself by the eternal Spirit, he tells us, Oblatio Christi hic intelligitur
illa, quae oblationi legali in adyto factae respondet, ea autem est, non
oblatio in altari Crucis facta, sed in adyto caelesti: So that the purgation of
sin is an effect of Christ's presenting himself in heaven only: which how well
it agrees with what the Apostle says chap. 1. v. 3. the Reader will easily
judge. And to manifest that this was his constant sense, on those words v. 26.
(...), he thus comments; (...), Vt peccatum in nobis extinguatur: fit autem hoc
per passionem Christi, quae fidem nobis ingenerat, quae cordae purificat.
Christ confirming his doctrine by his death, begets faith in us, which does the
work. Of the 28th verse of the same chapter I have spoken before. The same he
affirms again, more expressly, on chap. 10. verse. 3. and on ver. 9. and
verse 12. he interprets the oblation of Christ, whereby he took away sin, to
be the oblation or offering himself in heaven, whereby sin is taken away by
Sanctification, as also in sundry other places, where the expiatory Sacrifice
of Christ on earth, and the taking away of the guilt of sin, by Satisfaction,
is evidently intended. So that notwithstanding the concession mentioned, I
cannot see the least reason to alter my thoughts of the Annotations, as to this
business in hand.

Not further to abound in causa facili; in all the differences we have with the
Socinians, about Christ's dying for us, concerning the nature of Redemption,
Reconciliation, Mediation, Sacrifice, the meaning of all the phrases and
expressions, which in those things are delivered to us, the Annotator is
generally on the apostate side throughout his Annotations: and the truth is, I
know no reason why our Students should with so much diligence and charge,
labor to get into their hands the books of Socinus, Crellius, Smalcius, and
the rest of that Crew, seeing these Annotations, as to the most important heads
of Christian Religion, about the Deity, Sacrifice, Preisthood, and Satisfaction
of Christ, original sin, free will, Justification etc, afford them the
Substance and Marrow of what is spoken by them; so that as to these heads, upon
the matter, there is nothing peculiar to the Annotator, but the Secular
learning which in his Interpretations he has curiously and gallantly
interweaved. Plautus makes sport in his Amphitruo with several Persons, some
real, some assumed, of such likeness one to another, that they could not
discern themselves by any outward appearance; which caused various contests
and mistakes between them. The Poets fancy raised not a greater similitude
between Mercury and Sosia, being supposed to be different persons, then there
is a dissimilitude between the Author of the book de Satisfactione Christi,
and of the Annotations, concerning which we have been discoursing, being one
and the same. Nor was the contest of those different persons so like on
another, so irreconcilable, as are these of this single person, so unlike
himself in the several treatises mentioned. And I cannot but think it
strange that the Apologist could imagine no surer measure to be taken of
Grotius's meaning in his Annotations then his treatise of the Satisfaction of
Christ does afford, there being no two treatises that I know, of any different
persons whatever, about one and the same Subject, that are more at variance.
Whither now any will be persuaded by the Apologist to believe that Grotius was
constant in his Annotations to the Doctrine delivered in that other treatise, I
am not sollicitous.

For the reinforced plea of the Apologist, that these Annotations were not
finished by him, but only collections that he might after dispose of; I am not
concerned in it; having to deal with that book of Annotations that goes under
his name; if they are none of his, it is neither on the one hand or other, of
any concernment unto me. I say not this, as though the Apologist, had in the
least made good his former plea, by his new Exceptions to my evidence against
it, from the Printers preface to the Volume of Annotations on the Epistles. He
says! what was the opus integrum that was commended to the care of (...)? and
answers himself, not that last part or volume of Annotations, but opus
integrum, the whole volume or volumes that contained his (...) adversaria on
the new Testament. For how ill this agrees with the intention and words of the
Prefacer, a slight inspection will suffice to manifest. He tells us, that
Grotius had himself published his Annotations on the Gospells, five years
before: that at his departure from Paris, he left a great part of this volume
(that is this on the Acts and Epistles) with a friend; that the reason why he
left not opus integrum, that is, the whole volume with him, was because the
residue of it was not so written, as that an Amanuensis could well understand
it. That therefore in his going toward Sweden, he wrote that part again with
his own hand, and sent it back to the same person (that had the former part
of the Volume committed to him) from Hamburge. If the Apologist read this
Preface, he ought, as I suppose to have desisted from the plea insisted on: If
he did not, he thought assuredly he had much reason to despise them, with whom
he had to do: But as I said, herein am I not concerned.

The Consideration of the charge on the Annotations relating to their tampering
with the Testimonies given in the Scripture to the Deity of Christ, being an
other head of the whole, may now have place.

The Sum of what is to this purpose by me affirmed, is, that in the
Annotations on the old and new Testament, Grotius has left but one place
giving Testimony clearly to the Deity of Christ. To this assertion I added both
a limitation, and also an enlargment in several respects. A limitation that I
could not perceive he had spoken of himself, clearly on that one place. On
supposition that he did so, I granted that perhaps one or two places more,
might accordingly be interpreted. That this one place is Ioh. 1. 1. I
expressly affirmed: that is the one place wherein, as I say, he spoke not home
to the business. The defense of the Apologist in the behalf of Grotius
consists of sundry discourses. First to disprove that he has left more then
that one of John free from the corruption charged; he instances in that one of
John 1. 1. wherein as he says, he expressly asserts the Deity of Christ: but
yet wisely forseeing, that this instance would not evade the charge, having
been expressly excepted, (as to the present enquiry) and reserved to further
debate; he adds the places quoted by Grotius in the exposition of that place as
Prove. 8. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Isa. 45. 12. and 48. 13. 2 Pet. 3. 5. Col.
1. 16. from all which he concludes, that the Annotations have left more
Testimonies to the Deity of Christ untampered withal and unperverted, then my
assertion will allow; reckoning them all up again Section the 10th. and
concluding himself a successful Advocate in this case, or at least under a
despair of ever being so in any, if he acquit not himself clearly in this. If
his failure herein be evinced, by the course of his late writings himself will
appear to be most concerned. I suppose then that on the view of this defense,
men must needs suppose that in the Annotations on the places repeated, and
mustered a second time by the Apologist, Grotius does give their sense as
bearing witness to the Deity of Christ. Others may be pleased to take it for
granted without farther consideration: for my part being a little concerned to
inquire, I shall take the pains to turn to the places, and give the Reader a
brief account of them.

For Prove. 8. his first note on the wisdom there spoken of is: Haec de
easapientia quae in Lege apparet exponunt Haebraei, and sane ei, si non sol^;
at praecipue haec atributa convenient: Now if the attributes here mentioned,
agree either solely or principally to the wisdom that shines in the Law, how
they can be the attributes of the person of the eternal Son of God, I see not.
He adds no more to that purpose, until he comes to the 22 ver. the verse of
old contested about with the Arrians. His words on that are Graecum Aquilae,
est, (...), ut and Symmachi and Theodosionis, res^pondetque been Haebraeo
(...), and Caldaeus habet (...), and 70 (...), sensu non malo, si creare sumas
pro facere ut appareat: viae Dei sunt operationes ipsius: sensum hujus loci and
sequentium non male exprimas cum Philone de Coloniis: (...).

On verse 27, he adds aderam, id est, (...), ut infra John Evang. 1. 1. What
clear and evident Testimony, by this exposition is left in this place to the
Deity of Christ I profess my self as ignorant, as I was, before I received
this Direction by the Apologist: He tells us that (...) is rendered not amiss
by the Chaldee (...) and the 70 (...), though he knew that sense was pleaded by
the Arrians, and exploded by the ancient Doctors of the Church. To relieve this
Concession, he tells us that creare, may be taken for facere ut appareat,
though there be no evidence of such a use of the word in the Scripture, nor can
he give any instance thereof. The whole interpretation runs on that wisdom
that is a property of God, which he manifested in the works of Creation: of
the Son of God, the essential wisdom of God, subsisting with the father, we
have not one words nor does that Quotation out of Philo relieve us in this
business at all. We know in what sense he used the word (...): how far he and
the Platonicks, with whom in this expression he consented, were from
understanding the only begotten Son of God, is known. If this of Philo has any
aspect toward the opinion of any professing themselves Christians, it is
toward that of the Arians, which seems to be expressed therein. And this is
the place chosen by the Apologist to disprove the assertion of none being left,
under the sense given them by the Annotations, bearing clear Testimony to the
Deity of Christ; his comparing (...) ibi ego, which the vulgar renders aderam,
with (...) seems rather to cast a Suspicion on his intention in the expression
of that place of the Evangelist, then in the least to give Testimony to the
Deity of Christ in this. If any one be further desirous to be satisfied, how
many clear unquestionable evidences of the Deity of Christ, are slighted by
these Annotations on this Chapter, let him consult my vindication of the place
in my late Vindiciae Evangelicae, where he will find something tendered to him
to that purpose. What the Apologist intended by adding these two places of
Isaiah, Chap. 45. 12. and the 48. 13. (when in his Annotations on those places,
Grotius not once mentions the Deity of Christ, nor any thing of him, nor has
occasion so to do, nor does produce them in this place to any such end or
purpose; but only to show that the Chaldee paraphrase, does sundry times, when
things are said to be done by God, render it, that they were done by the word
of God) as instances to the prejudice of my Assertion, I cannot imagine.

On that of Peter, 2 Epistle, 3. 5. (...): he adds indeed, vide quae diximus
ad initium Evangelii Iohannis: but neither does that place intend the natural
Son of God, nor is it so interpreted by Grotius.

To these he adds in the close, Col. 1. 16. in the exposition whereof in his
Annotations, he expressly prevaricates, and goes of to the interpretation
insisted on by Socinus and his companions, which the Apologist well knew.
Without farther search upon what has been spoken, the Apologist gives in his
Verdict concerning the falsnesse of my assertion before mentioned, of the
Annotators speaking clear and home to the Deity of Christ but in one, if in
one place of his Annotations: But

1. What one other place has he produced, whereby the contrary, to what I
assert, is evinced? Any man may make Apologies at this rate as fast as he
pleases.

2. As to his not speaking clearly in that one, notwithstanding the
improvement made of his Expressions by the Apologist, I am still of the same
mind as formerly: For although he ascribes an Eternity (...), and affirms all
things to be made thereby; yet considering how careful he is, of ascribing an
(...), how many Platonicke interpretations of that expression he interweaves in
his expositions, how he has darkened the whole council of God in that place
about the subsistence of the word, its omnipotency and incarnation, so clearly
asserted by the holy Ghost therein, I see no reason to retract the assertion
opposed. But yet as to the thing it self, about this place I will not contend:
only it may not be amiss to observe, that not only the Arians, but even
Photinus himself acknoledged that the world was made (...), that how little is
obtained toward the confirmation of the Deity of Christ by that concession, may
be discerned.

I shall offer also only at present, that (...), is threefold, (...) and (...).
The (...) or (...) is Christ, mentioned John 1. 1. his personal or eternal
subsistence, with his omnipotency, being there asserted. Whether Christ be so
called any where else in the New Testament may be disputed, Luke 1. v. 2.
(compared with the 1 of Job. 1. 1.) 2 Pet. 1. 16. and Act. 20. 32. Heb. 4. 12.
are the most likely to give us that use of the word. Why Christ is so termed, I
have showed elsewhere. That he is called (...) Psalm. 33. 6. is to me also
evident. (...) is better rendered (...), or (...), then (...). Where that word
is used, it denotes not Christ: Though 2 Samuel 23. 2. where that word is, is
urged by some to that purpose. He is also called (...) Hag. 2. 5. so perhaps in
other places. Our present Quakers would have that expression of, the word of
God, used no where in any other sense: so that destroying that, as they do, in
the issue they may freely despise the Scripture, as that which they say is not
the word of God, nor any where so called. (...) amongst men is that which
Aristotle calls (...) says Hesichius. (...) is that which we speak in our
hearts, says Damascen. de Orthod. fid. Lib. 1. cap. 18. So Psalm 14. (...).
This as spoken in respect of God, is that egresse of his power, whereby
according to the eternal conception of his mind, he works any thing. So Genesis
1. 2. God said let there be light, and there was light. Of this word of God the
Psalmist treats, 147. v. 18. he sedeth out (...) and melts the Ice, and Psalm.
148. 8. the same word is used. In both which places the Septuagint renders it
by (...). This is that which is called (...), Heb. 1. 2. and Heb. 11. 3. where
the Apostle says the heavens were made (...): which is directly parallel to
that place of 2 Pet. 3. 5. where it is expressed (...): for though (...) more
properly denotes (...), yet in these places, it signifies plainly that egresse
of Gods power for the production and preservation of things, being a persuite
of the eternal conception of his mind, which is (...). Now this infinite wise
and eternal conception of the mind of God, exerting its self in power,
wherein God is said to speak, (he said let there be light) is that which the
Platonicks, and Philo with them harped on, nener once dreaming of a
coessentiall and hypostaticall word of God, though the word (...) occur
amongst them. This they thought was unto God, as in us, (...) or (...). and
particularly it is termed by Philo* (...): de Agric. That this was his (...) is
most evident: Hence he tells us (...): de Mund. opific. and a little after,
(...). The whole tendency of his discourse is, that the word of God, in his
mind, in the creation of the world, was the image of himself; and that the
idea or image of the things to be made, but especially of light. And whereas
(if I remember aright, for I cannot now find the place) I have said somewhere,
that Christ was (...), though therein I have the consent of very many learned
Divines, and used it merely in opposition (...); yet I desire to recall it: nor
do I think there is any propriety in that expression of (...) used of Christ,
but only in those of (...) and (...), which the Scripture (though not in the
very terms) will make good. In this second acceptance, (...), Photinus
himself granted that the world was made by the word of God. Now if it be
thought necessary, that I should give an account of my fear that nothing but
(...) in this sense decked with many Platonicall encomiums was intended in the
Annotations on Ioh. 1. (though I confess much from some quotations there used,
may be said against it) I shall readily undertake the Task; but at present in
this running Course, I shall add no more.

But now, as if all the matter in hand, were fully dispatched, we have this
triumphant close attending the former discourse, and observations.

If one Text acknowledged to assert Christ's eternal Divinity (which one was
granted to do it, though not clearly,) will not suffice to conclude him no
Socinian) which I said not he was, yea expressly waved the management of any
such charge) If six verses in the Proverbs, two in Isaiah; one in St. Peter,
one in St. Paul added to many in the beginning of St. John, (In his Annotations
on all which, he speaks not one word to the purpose) will not yet amount to
above one Text; or lastly if that one may be doubted of also, which is by him
interpreted to affirm Christ's eternal subsistence with God before the
Creation of the world (which he does not so interpret, as to a personal
subsistence) and that the whole world was created by him; I shall despair of
ever being a successful Advocate for any man; from which Condition I hope some
little time will recover the Apologist.

This is the Sum of what is pleaded in chief, for the defense of the
Annotations: wherein what small cause he has to acquiesce, who has been put
to the labor and trouble of vindicating nere 40 Texts of Scripture in the old
Testament, and new, giving express Testimony to the Deity of Christ from the
Annotators perverse interpretations, let the Reader judge. In the 13th Section
of the Apologist's discourse, he adds some other Considerations to confirm
his former vindication of the Annotations.

1 He tells us, that he professes not to Divine, what places of the old
Testament, wherein the Deity of Christ is evidently testified unto, are
corrupted by the learned man, nor will he upon the discouragement already
received make any inquiry into my Treatise.

But what need of Divination? The Apologist cannot but remember at all times,
some of the Texts of the old Testament that are pleaded to that purpose; and he
has at least as many encouragements to look into the Annotations, as
discouragements from casting an eye upon that Volume (as he calls it,) wherein
they are called to an account. And if he suppose, he can make a just defense
for the several places so wrested, and perverted, without once consulting of
them, I know not how by me he might possibly be engaged into such an inquiry.
And therefore I shall not name them again, having done somewhat more then name
them already.

But he has two suppletory considerations, that will render any such inquiry
or inspection needless. Of these the first is

That the word of God being all and every part of it of equal truth, that
doctrine which is founded on five places of Divine writ; must by all Christians
be acknoledged to be as irrefragably confirmed, as an 100 express places would
be conceived to confirm it.

Ans. It is confessed, that not only five, but any one express Text of
Scripture, is sufficient for the confirmation of any divine truth. But that
five places have been produced out of the Annotations by the Apologist for the
confirmation of the great truth pleaded about, is but pretended, indeed there
is no such thing. The Charge on Grotius was, that he had depraved all but one;
if that be no crime, the defense was at hand; if it be, though that one should
be acknowledged to be clear to that purpose, here is no defense against that
which was charged, but a strife about that which was not. Let the places be
consulted, if the assertion prove true, by an induction of instances, the Crime
is to be confessed, or else the charge denied to contain a crime: but

Secondly he says, That this charge upon inquiry will be found in some degree,
if not equally, chargeable on the learned and most valued of the first
Reformers, particularly upon Mr. Calvin himself, who has been as bitterly and
injustly accused and reviled upon this account (witness the book entitled
Calvino Turcismus) as ever Erasmus was by Bellarmine and Beza, or as probably
Grotius may be.

Though this at the best be but a diversion of the Charge, and no defense, yet
not containing that truth which is needful to countenance it, for the end for
which it is proposed; I could not pass it by. It is denied (which in this case
until further proof must suffice) that any of the learned of the first
Reformers, (and particularly Mr. Calvin) are equally chargeable, or in any
degree of proportion with Grotius, as to the Crime insisted on. Calvin being
the man instanced in, I desire the Apologist to prove that he has in all his
Commentaries on the Scripture corrupted the sense, of any Texts of the old
Testament or new, giving express Testimony to the Deity of Christ, and
commonly pleaded to that end and purpose. Although I deny not, but that he
differs from the common judgment of most, in the interpretation of some few
prophetical passages, judged by them to relate to Christ. I know what
Genebrard and some others of that faction, raved against him; but it was
chiefly from some expressio^s in his institutions about the Trinity (wherein yet
he is acquitted by the most learned of themselves) and not from his expositions
of Scripture, for which they raised their Clamours. For the book called
Calvino Turcismus, written by Reynolds and Giffard, the Apologist has forgotten
the design of it. Calvin is no more concerned in it, then others of the first
Reformers; nor is it from any doctrine about the Deity of Christ in particular,
but from the whole of the reformed Religion, with the Apostasyes of some of
that profession, that they compare it with Turcisme. Something indeed, in a
chapter or two, they speak about the Trinity, from some expressions of Luther,
Melancton, Calvin and others: but as to Calvin's expositions of Scripture, they
insist not on them. Possibly the Apologist may have seen Pareus his Calvinus
Orthodoxus, in an answer to Hunnius his Calvinus Judaizans; if not, he may at
any time have there an account of this calumny.

Having passed through the Consideration of the two considerable heads of this
discourse, in the method called for by the Apologist (having only taken liberty
to transpose them, as to first and last) I must profess my self as yet
unsatisfyed as to the necessity, or suitableness, of this kind of defense. The
sum of that which I affirmed (which alone gives occasion to the defensative
now under consideration) is: that to my observation Grotius in his Annotations
had not left above one text of Scripture, if one, giving clear evidence to the
Deity of Christ; of his Satisfaction I said in sum the same thing. Had the
Apologist been pleased to have produced instances of any evidence for the
disproovement of my assertion, I should very gladly and readily have
acknoledged my mistake and oversight. I am still also in the same resolution,
as to the latitude of the expression, though I have already by an induction of
particulars, manifested his corrupting and perverting of so many, both in
respect of the one head, and of the other, with his express compliance with
the Socinians in his so doing, as that I cannot have the least thought of
letting fall my Charge, which with the limitation expressed (of my own
observation) contains the truth in this matter, and nothing but that which is
so.

It was indeed in my thoughts to have done somewhat more in reference to those
Annotations, then thus occasionally to have animadverted on their corruption in
general; namely to have proceeded in the vindication of the truths of the
Gospel from their Captivity under the false glosses put upon them, by the
interpretations of places of Scripture wherein they are delivered. But this
work being fallen on an abler hand viz. that of our learned professor of
Divinity, my desire is satisfied, and the necessity of my endeavor for that
end removed.

There are sundry other particulars insisted on by the Apologist, and a great
deal of Rhetoric is laid out about them; which certainly deserves not the
Readers trouble in the perusal of any other debate about them. If they did, it
were an easy matter to discover his mistakes in them all along. The foundation
of most of them, lies in that, which he affirms Sect. 4. where he says, that
I thus state the Jealousies about H. G. as far as it is owned by me, viz. that
being in doctrine a Socinian, he yet closed in many things with the Roman
interest. To which he replies, that this does not so much as pretend that he
was a Papist.

As though I undertake to prove Grotius to be a Papist, or did not expressly
disowne the management of the Iealousy, stated as above; or that I did at all
own it, all which are otherwise: yet I shall now say, whither Grotius ad
nocentissimae haereseos atque ^frenis licentiae scyllam, iterumque ad
tyrannidis charybdin declinavit fluctuans: Essen.
he was in Doctrine a Socinian or no, let his Annotations before insisted on,
determine: And whether he closed with the Roman interest or no, besides what
has been observed by others, I desire the Apologist to consider his
observation on Rev. 12. v. 5. that book, (himself being judge,) having
received his last hand. But my business is not to accuse Grotius, or to charge
his memory with any thing but his prevarication in his Annotations on the
Scripture.

And as I shall not cease to press the general Aphorism (as it is called)
that no drunkard etc. nor any person whatever not borne of God or united to
Christ the head, by the same Spirit that is in him, and in the sense thereof,
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, shall ever see his face in glory, so
I fear not what conclusion can regularly in reference to any person living or
dead, be thence deduced.

It is of the Annotations whereof I have spoken: which I have my liberty to do:
and I presume shall still continue, whilst I live in the same thoughts of
them: though I should see -- a third defense of the learned Hugo Grotius.

The Epistles of Grotius to Crellius mentioned by the Apologist in his first
defense of him, giving some light to what has been insisted on, I thought it
not unfit to communicate them to the Reader, as they came to my hand, having
not as yet been printed that I know of. This book of Crellius lay unanswered
by Grotius above 20 years. For so long he lived after the publishing of it. It
is since fully answered by Essenius.

Reverendo summaeque eruditionis ac pietatis viro Domino Johanni Crellio
pastori Racov. H. G. S.
LIbro tuo quo ad eum quem ego quondam scripseram (Eruditissime Crelli)
respondisti, adeo offensus non fui, ut etiam gratias tunc intra animum meum
egerim, nunc and hisce agam literis. Primo, quod non tantum humane, sed and
valde officiose mecum egeris, ita ut quaeri nihil possim, nisi quod in me
praedicando, modum interdum excedis, deinde vero, quod multa me docueris,
partim utilia, partim jucunda scitu, meque exemplo tuo incitaveris ad penitius
expendendum sensus sacrorum librorum. Been autem in Epistola tua, quae mihi
long gratissima advenit, de me judicas, non esse me eorum in numero qui ob
sententias salva pietate dissidentes alieno a quoquam sim animo, aut boni alicu
jus amicitiam repudiem. Equidem in libro That is the body of Socinian Divinity
written by Crellius and Volkelius.
de vera Religione, quem jam percurri, relecturus and posthac, multa invenio
summo cum judicio observata. Illud vero saeculo gratulor, repertos homines qui
nentiquam in controversiis subtilibus tantum ponunt, quantum in vera vitae
emendatione, and quotidiano ad Sanctitatem profectu. Utinam and mea scripta
aliquid ad hoc studium in animis hominum excitandum inflammandumque confer
possint: tunc enim non frustra me vixisse hactenus existimem. Liber de veritate
Religionis Christianae magis ut nobis esset solatio, quam ut aliis documento
scriptus, non video quid post tot aliorum labores utilitatis afferre possit,
nisi ipsa forte brevitate. Siquid tamen in eo est, quod tibi tuique similibus
placeat, mihi supra spem^euenit. Libris de jure belli and pacis mihi praecipue
propositum habui, ut feritatem illam, non Christianis tantum, sed and hominibus
indignam, ad bella pro libitu suscipienda, pro libitu gerenda, quam gliscere
tot populorum malo quotidie video, quantum in me est, sedarem. Gaudeo ad
principum quorundam manus eo^ libros venisse, qui utinam partem eorum meliorem
in suum animum admitterent. Nullus enim mihi ex eo labor suavior fructus
contingere possit. Te vero quod attinet, credas, rogo, si quid unquam facere
possim tui, aut eorum quos singulariter amas, causa, experturum te, quantum te
tuo merito faciam. Nunc quum aliud possim nihil, Dominum Jesum supplice animo
veneror, ut tibi aliisque pietatem promoventibus propitius adsit.

x. Maii. M. DC. XXVI. Tui nominis studiosissimus H. G.

TAm pro Epistola (vir Clarissime) quam pro transmisso libro, gratias ago
maximas. Constitui and legere and relegere diligenter quaecunque a te
prosiciscuntur, expertus quo cum fructu id antehac fecerim. Eo ipso tempore quo
literas tuas accepi, versabar in lectione tuae interpretationis Let the Reader
judge what Annotatio^s on that Epistle we are to exspect from this man.
in Epistolam ad Galatas. Quantum judicare possum and scripti occasionem and
propositum, and totam seriem dictionis, ut magna cum cura indagasti, ita
feliciter admodum es assequutus. Quare Deum precor, ut and tibi and tui
similibus, vitam det, and quae alia ad istiusmodi labores necessaria. Mihi ad
juvandam communem Christianismi causam, utinam tam adessent vires, quam
promptus est animus: quippe me, a prima aetate, per varia disciplinarum genera
jactatum, nulla res magis delectavit, quam rerum sacrarum meditatio. Id in
rebus prosperis moderamen, id in adversis solamen sensi. Pacis consilia and
amavi semper, and amo nunc quoque: eoque doleo, quum video tam pertinacibus
iris committi inter se eos, qui Christi se esse dicunt. Si recte rem putamus,
quantillis de causis --

Januarii. M. DC. XXXII. Amstelodam.
FINIS.

