Of the Divine Original, AUTHORITY, self-evidencing LIGHT, and POWER of the
SCRIPTVRES. With an Answer to that Enquiry, How we know the Scriptures to be
the Word of God.

Also A Vindication of the Purity and Integrity of the HEBREW and GREEK Texts
of the Old and New Testament; in some Considerations on the PROLEGOMENA, and
Appendix to the late BIBLIA POLYGLOTTA. Whereunto are subjoyned some
Exercitations about the Nature and Perfection of the Scripture, the Right of
Interpretation, internal Light, Revelation, etc.

By JOHN OWEN: D. D.

(...).

Joh. 5. 39. OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL, Printer to the University, for THO:
ROBINSON. 1659.

To my Reverend and Worthy Friends, the PREBENDS of Ch: Church College in
Oxford, with all the STVDENT'S in Divinity in that Society.
THE reason of my inscribing the ensuing pleas for the Authority, purity, and
perfection of the Scripture, against the pretenses of some to the contrary, in
these days, unto you, is because some of you value and study the Scripture as
much as any I know, and it is the earnest desire of my heart, that all of you
would so do. Now whereas two things offer themselves unto me, to discourse with
you by the way of Preface, namely the commendation of the Scripture, and an
exhortation to the study of it on the one hand, and a discovery of the reproach
that is cast upon it, with the various ways and means that are used by some
for the lessening and depressing of its Authority and excellency on the other;
the former being to good purpose, by one or other almost every day performed; I
shall insist at present on the latter only; which also is more suited to
discover my aim and intention in the ensuing discourses. Now herein as I
shall, it may be, seem to exceed that proportion which is due unto a Preface
to such short discourses as these following; yet I know, I shall be more brief
then the nature of so great a matter as that proposed to consideration does
require. And therefore (...), I shall fall upon the subject that now lies
before me.

Many there have been and are, who, through the craft of Satan, and the
prejudice of their own hearts, lying under the power of corrupt and carnal
Interest, have engaged themselves to decry, and disparage, that excellency of
the Scripture which is proper and peculiar unto it. The several sorts of them
are too many particularly to be considered, I shall only pass through them in
general, and fix upon such instances by the way as may give evidence to the
things insisted on.

Those who in this business are first to be called to an account, whose filth
and abominations given out in gross^, others have but parcelled among
themselves, are they of the Synagogue of Rome. These pretend themselves to be
the only keepers and preservers of the Word of God in the world; the only
ground and pillar of truth. Let us then a little consider in the first place,
how it has discharged this trust; for it is but equal that men should be
called to an account upon their own principles; and those, who supposing
themselves to have a trust reposed in them, do manifest a treacherous mind,
would not be one whit better if they had so indeed.

What then have these men done in the discharge of their pretended trust? nay
what has that Synagogue left unattempted? yea what has it left unfinished,
that may be needful to convince it of perfidiousnesse? that says the
Scripture was committed to it alone, and would, if it were able, deprive all
others of the possession of it or their lives; what Scripture then was this, or
when was this deed of trust made unto them? The oracles of God, they tell us,
committed to the Jews under the Old Testament, and all the writings of the
New; and that this was done from the first foundation of the Church by Peter,
and so on to the finishing of the whole Canon. What now have they not done in
adding, detracting, corrupting, forging, aspersing those Scriptures to falsify
their pretended trust? They add more books to them, never indicted by the Holy
Ghost, as remote from being (...): so denying the self evidencing power of
that word, which is truly (...), by mixing it with things (...), of an humane
rise and spring; manifesting themselves to have lost the spirit of discerning,
promised with the Word, to abide with the true Church of God for ever. Isa: 59.
21. They have taken from its fullness and perfection, its sufficiency and
excellency, by their Massora their, orall law or verbum (...), their unknown,
endless, bottomless, boundless treasure of traditions; that (...) for all
their abominations. The Scripture its self; as they say, committed to them,
they plead, to their eternal shame, to be in the Original Languages
corrupted, vitiated, interpolated, so that it is no stable rule to guide us
throughout in the knowledge of the will of God. The Jews, they say, did it
whilst they were busy in burning of Christians. Therefore in the room of the
Originals, they have enthroned a translation that was never committed to them,
that came into the world they know neither how, nor when, nor by whom. So that
one says of its author, Si quis percontetur Gallus fuerit an Sarmata, Judaeus
an Christianus, Erasmu^.
vir an mulier, nihil habituri sint ejus patroni quod expedite respondeant. All
this to place themselves in the throne of God, and to make the words of a
Translation authentic from their stamp upon them, and not from their relation
unto, and agreement with, the words spoken by God himself. And yet farther, as
if all this were not enough to manifest what Trustees they have been, they have
cast off all subjection to the authority of God in his word, unless it be
resolved into their own; denying that any man in the world can know it to be
the word of God, unless they tell him so; it is but ink and paper, skin of
parchment, a dead letter, a nose of wax, a Lesbian Rule, of no authority unto
us at all. O faithful Trustees! holy mother Church! infallible chair! can
wickedness yet make any farther progress? was it ever heard of from the
foundation of the world, that men should take so much pains, as these men have
done, to prove themselves faithless, and treacherous in a trust committed to
them? Is not this the sum and substance of volumes that have even filled the
world; the Word of God was committed to us alone, and no others; under our
keeping it is corrupted, depraved, vitiated; the copies delivered unto us we
have rejected, and taken up one of our own choice; nor let any complain of
us, it was in our power to do worse. This sacred depositum had no (...),
whereby it might be known to be the Word of God; but it is upon our credit
alone, that it passes in the world, or is believed; we have added to it many
books upon our own judgment, and yet think it not sufficient for the
guidance of men, in the worship of God, and their obedience they owe unto him:
yet do they blush? are they ashamed as a thief when he is taken? nay do they
not boast themselves in their iniquity? and say, they are sold to work all
these abominations? The time is coming, yea it is at hand, wherein it shall
repent them for ever, that they have lifted up themselves against this sacred
grant of the wisdom, care, love, and goodness of God.

Sundry other branches there are of the Abominations of these men, besides
those enumerated; all which may be reduced to these three corrupt and bloody
fountains.

1. That the Scripture at best, as given out from God, and as it is to us
continued, was, and is, but a partial revelation of the will of God: the other
part of it, which how vast and extensive it is no man knows, (for the Jews
have given us their (...) in their Mishna and Gemara; These kept them locked up
in the breast, or chair of their holy Father) being reserved in their
magazine of Traditions.

2. That the Scripture is not able to evince or manifest its self to be the
Word of God, so as to enjoy and exercise any Authority in his name, over the
souls and consciences of men; without an accession of Testimony, from that
combination of politic, worldly minded men, that call themselves the Church
of Rome.

3. That the Original copies of the Old and New Testament are so corrupted (
ex ore tuo, serve nequam) that they are not a certain standard and measure of
all doctrines, or the touchstone of all Translations.

Now concerning these things you will find somewhat offered unto your
considerations in the ensuing discourses; wherein, I hope* without any great
alter^ation or disputes, to lay down such principles of truth, as that their
Idol imaginations will be found cast to the ground before the sacred Arc of
the word of God, and to lie naked without wisdom or power.

It is concerning the last of these only, that at present I shall deliver my
thoughts unto you; and that because we begin to have a new concernment therein,
wherewith I shall afterward acquaint you. Of all the Inventions of Satan to
draw off the minds of men from the word of God, this of decrying the authority
of the Originalls seems to me the most pernicious. At the beginning of the
reformation, before the Council of Trent, the Papists did but faintly, and not
without some blushing, defend their vulgar Latin Translation. 1. Praef. in 5.
lib. Mos. 2. In August. de Civit: Dei. lib. 15. cap. 13. 3 Defens. Conc. Trid:
lib. 4. 4* Proleg. Biblica. 5 Praef. in Bibl: in Lat: and passim. 6 Praef. in
Comment. in Josh.
Some openly preferred the Original before it, as 1 Cajetan, Erasmus, 2 Vives,
and others. Yea, and after the Council also, the same was done by Andradius 3,
^erarius 4, Arias Montanus 5, Masius 6, and others. For those who understood
nothing but Latin amongst them, and scarcely that, whose ignorance was
provided for in the Council* I suppose it will not be thought meet that in
this case we should make any account of them. But the State of things is now
altered in the world, and the iniquity, which first wrought in a mystery, being
now discovered, 7 Loc. Com. lib. 1. cap. 13. 8 De opt. Genesis Interpr. lib. 1. 9.
Lib. 2. de verb. Dei 10 Tom. 1. D. 5 Q. 3. 11 De Translat. Stae. cum Comment.
in Jsa.
casts off its vizard and grows bold; nihil est audacius istis deprensis. At
first the design was managed in private writings, Melchior Canus 7, Gulielmus
Lindanus 8, Bellarminus 9, Gregorius de Valentia 10, Leo Castrius 11, Huntlaeus
12, Hanstelius 13, with innumerable others, some on one account, some on
another, have pleaded that the Originalls were corrupted; 12 Epito. Controv.
Contr. 1. C. 8.
some of them with more impudence than others. Leo Castrius, 13. Dispunctio
Calum. Casaub.
as Pineda observes, raves almost, where ever he falls on the mention of the
Hebrew text. Sed is est Author (says he) dum in hujusmodi Ebraizationes
incidit, Pined. lib. 5. de Reb. Solom. C. 4. S. 1.
vix sui compos; and bono licet zelo, tamen vel ignoratione rerum quarundam,
vel vehementiori aliqua affectione, extra fines veritatis and modestiae
rapitur: and si ex hujusmodi tantum unguibus Leonem illum estimaremus, non
etiam ex aliis praeclaris conatibus, aut murem aut vulpem censeremus, aut canem
aut quiddam aliud ignobilius. Yea Morinus, who seems to be ashamed of nothing,
Morin. Exercit. de Sincerit. Exerc. 1. c. 2.
yet shrinks a little at this man's impudence and folly. Apologetici libros
(says he) sex been longos scripsit, quibus nihil quam Judaeorum voluntarias
and malignas depravationes demonstrate nititur; zelo sane pio scripsit
Castrius, sed libris Hebraicis ad tantum opus quod moliebatur parum erat
instructus. In the steps of this Castrius walks Huntley a subtie Jesuit, cap.
10. lib.
who in the treatise above cited, ascribes the corruption of the Hebrew Bible
to the good providence of God, for the honor of the vulgar Latin. But these
with their companions have had their mouths stopped by Reinolds, Whitaker,
Junius, Lubbertus, Rivetus, Chamierus, Gerardus, Amesius, Glassius, Alstedius,
A mama, and others. So that a man would have thought this fire put to the house
of God had been sufficiently quenched. But after all the endeavors hitherto
used, in the days wherein we live, it breaks out in a greater flame; they now
print the Original it self, and defame it; gathering up translations of all
sorts, and setting them up in competition with it. When Ximenius put forth the
Complutencian Bibles, Vatablus his, and Arias Montanus those of the King of
Spain, this Cockatrice was not hatched, whose fruit is now growing to a flying
fiery Serpent. It is now but saying the ancient Hebrew letters are changed from
the Samaritane to the Chaldean; the points or vowels and accents are but lately
invented, of no Authority, without their guidance and direction nothing is
certain in the knowledge of that tongue, all that we know of it comes from the
translation of the 70* the Jews have corrupted the old Testament, there are
innumerable various lections both of the old and new; there are other copies
differing from those we now enjoy, that are utterly lost. So that upon the
matter, there is nothing left unto men, but to choose, whether they will be
Papists or Atheists.

Here that most stupendous fabric that was ever raised by ink and paper,
termed well by a learned man magnificentissimum illud (quod post homines natos
in lucem prodiit unquam) opus biblicum; Edm. Castle. Praef. ad Animad: Samar.
in Bib. Poly.
I mean the Parisian Bibles, is prefaced by a discourse of its Erector Michael
de Jay, wherein he denies the Hebrew text, prefers the vulgar Latin before it,
and resolves that we are not left to the word for our rule, but to the Spirit
that rules in their Church: pro certo igitur atque indubitato apud nos esse
debet, vulgatam editionem, quae communi catholicae Ecclesiae lingu^
circumfertur verum esse and genuinum sacrae Scripturae fontem; Mich. le Jay
Praefat. ad opus Bibl:
hanc consulendam ubique, inde fidei dogmata repetenda; ex quo insuper
consentaneum est, vera ac certissima fidei Christianae autographa in Spiritu
Ecclesiae residere, neque ab ejus hostium manibus repetenda.

Et certe quamcunque pietatis speciem praetexunt, non religione quapiam, aut
sincera in Scripturam sacram veneratione aguntur dum eam unicam, quasi
ineluctabilem salutis regulam, usurpant* neque spiritus Evangelici veritatem
investigare decreverunt; dum ad autographa curiosius recurrentes, ex quibus,
praeter perplexa quaedam vestigia, vix aliquid superest, vel capitales fidei
hosts, vel eos qui Ecclesiae minus faverint, de contextuum interpretatione a^
germano sacrorum codicum sensu consulunt. Scilicet non alia est opportunior via
a regio illius itinere secedendi, neque in privatarum opinionum placitis
blandius possunt acquiescere, quas velut unicas doctrinae suae regulas sectari
plerunque censuerunt.

A page caecam animorum libidinem, non jam in institutionem nostram subsistit
litera, sed Ecclesiae spiritus; neque e sacris codicibus hauriendum quidquam,
nisi quod illa communicatum esse nobiscum voluerit. So he, or Morinus in his
name; and if this be indeed the true state of things, I suppose he will very
hardly convince men of the least usefulness of this great work and
undertaking. To usher those bibles into the world, Morinus puts forth his
Exercitations, entitled of the syncerity of the Hebrew and Greek Text, indeed
to prove them corrupt and useless. He is now the man amongst them that
undertakes to defend this cause: in whose writings whether there be more of
Pyrgopolynices, or Rabshekah, is uncertain. But dogs that bark^ loud, seldom
bite deep; nor do I think many ages have produced a man of more confidence and
less judgment; a prudent Reader cannot but nauseate at all his leaves, and the
man is well laid open by a learned person of his own party. By the way, Simeon*
de Muys Defens. ^^nc. Text. Heb.
I cannot but observe, that in the height of his boasting, he falls upon his
mother Church, and embraces her to death. Ex^rcit. 1, cap. 1. page 11. that he
might vaunt himself to be the first and only discoverer of corruptions in the
original of the old Testament, with the causes of them, he falls into a
profound contemplation of the guidance of his Church, which being ignorant of
any such cause of rejecting the originalls, as he has now informed her of, yet
continued to reject them, and prefer the vulgar latin before them hic admirare
lector (says he) Dei spiritum ecclesiae praesentissimum, illam per obscura,
perplexa, and invia quaeque, inoffenso pede agentem: quanquam incognita esset
Rabbinorum supina negligentia, portentosa ignorantia, saed^que librorum
Judaicorum corruptela, and Haeretici contraria his magna verborum pompa
audacter jactarent; adduci tamen non potuit Ecclesia, ut versio, qua sola per
mill fere and centum annos usa fuerit, ad normam and amussim Hebraei textus
iterum recuderetur. But is it so indeed, that their Church receives its
guidance in a stupid brutish manner, so as to be fixed obstinately on
conclusions, without the least acquaintance with the premises? it seems she
loved not the Originalls, but she knew not why; only she was obstinate in this,
that she loved them not. I If this be the state with their Church, that when it
has neither Scripture, nor Tradition, nor Reason, nor New Revelation, she is
guided she knows not how, as Socrates was by his Demon, or by secret and
inexpressible species of pertinacy and stubbornness falling upon her
imagination; I suppose it will be in vain to contend with her any longer. For
my own part I must confess, that I shall as soon believe a poor deluded
fanaticall Quaker, pretending to be guided by an infallible Spirit, as their
Pope with his whole conclave of Cardinals, upon the terms here laid down by
Morinus.

But to let these men pass for a season; had this leprosy kept it self within
that house which is thoroughly infected, it had been of less importance: it is
but a farther preparation of it for the Fire. But it is now broken forth among
Protestants also; with what design, to what end or purpose, I know not, (...),
God knows, and the day will manifest. To declare at large how this is come
about, longa esset Historia; too long for me to dwell upon; some heads of
things I shall briefly touch at. It is known to all, that the Reformation of
Religion, and restoration of good learning were begun, and carried on at the
same time, and mostly by the same persons. There was indeed a Triumvirate among
the Papists of men excellently skilled in Rabbinicall learning before the
Reformation. Raymundus Martinus, Porchetus de sylvaticis, and Petrus Galatinus,
are the men; of the which, the last dedicated his book to Maximilian the
Emperor, after that Zuinglius and Luther had begun to preach. Upon the matter
these three are but one: great are the disputes, whether Galatinus stole his
book from Raymundus or Porchetus; from Porchetus, says Morinus, and calls his
work plagium portentosum, cui vix simile unquam factum est: Exerc: 1. Cap. 2.
from Raymundus, says Scaliger, Epist. 2. 41. mistaking Raymundus Martinus for
Raymundus Sebon; but giving the first tidings to the world of that book. From
Raymu^dus also, says Josephus de Voysin in his prolegom: to the Pugio fidei,
and from him Hornebeck in his Proleg. ad Judae. I shall not interpose in this
matter, the method of Galatinus and his style are peculiar to him, but the
coincidence of his Quotations too many to be ascribed to common Accident. That
Porchetus took his Victoria adversus impios Judaeos for the most part from
Raymundus, himself confesses in his Preface. However certain it is,
Galatinus had no small opinion of his own skill, and therefore, according to
the usual way of men, who have attained, as they think, to some Eminency in
any one kind of learning, laying more weight upon it than it is able to bear,
he boldly affirms, that the Original of the Scripture is corrupted, and not
to be restored but by the Talmud; In which one concession he more injures the
cause he pleads for against the Jews, then he advantageth it by all his books
beside. Of his (...) of Rabbena Haskadosh there is no more news as yet in the
world, then what he is pleased to acquaint us withal. At the same time
Erasmus, Reuchlin, Vives, Xantes, Pagninus, and others, moved effectually for
the restoration of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. But the work principally
prospered in the hands of the first Reformers, as they were all of them
generally skilled in the Hebrew, so some of them as Capito, Bibliander, Fagius,
Munster to that Height and usefulness, that they may well be reckoned as the
Fathers and Patriarchs of that learning. At that time lived Elias Levita, the
most learned of the Jews of that Age, whose Grammatical writings were of huge
importance in the studying of that tongue. This man as he was acquainted with
many of the first Reformers, so he lived particularly with Paulus ^agius, as I
have else where declared. Now in one book, which in those days he published,
called Massorech, Hammasoreth, he broached a new opinion, not much heard of, at
least not at all received among the Jews, nor for ought that yet appears, once
mentioned by Christians before, namely that the points or vowels, and accents
used in the Hebrew Bible, were invented by some critical Jew or Massorite,
living at Tiberias about 5 or 600 years after Christ: no doubt the man's ^ime
was to reduce the world of Christians to a dependence on the ancient Rabbis,
for the whole sense of the Scripture; Hinc prima mali labes, Here lies the
first breach in this matter. The fraud being not discovered, and this opinion
being broached and confirmed by the great and almost only master of the
language of that Age, some even of the first Reformers embraced his fancy.
Perhaps Zuinglius had spoken to it before: justly I know not. After a while the
poison of this error beginning to operate, the Papists waiting on the mouths of
the Reformers, like the servants of Benhadad on Ahab, to catch at every word
that might fall from them to their advantage, beg an to make use of it. Hence
Cochlaeus, lib. de Auth. Scripturae, Cap. 5. applauds Luther, for saying the
Jews had corrupted the Bible with Points and distinctions, as well he might,
for nothing could be spoken more to the advantage of his cause against him.
Wherefore other learned men began to give opposition to this Error; so did
Munster, Junius, and others, as will be showed in the ensuing discourse. Thus
this matter rested for a season. The study of the Hebrew tongue and learning
being carried on, it fell at length on him, who undoubtedly has done more
real Service for the promotion of it, than any one man whatever, Jew or
Christian. I mean Buxtorsius the Elder; his Thesaurus Grammaticus, his
Tiberias, or Commentarius Massorethicus, his Lexicons and Concordan^es, and
many other Treatises, whereof some are not yet published, evince this to all
the world. Even Morinus says that he is the only man among Christians, that
ever thoroughly understood the Massora; and Symeon de Muys acknowledges his
profiting by him, and learning from him; Other Jews who undertake to be
teachers, know nothing but what they learn of him. To omit the Testimony of
all sorts of learned men, giving him the pre-eminence in this learning, it may
suffice that his works praise him. Now this man in his Tiberias or
Commentarius Massorethicus, printed with the great Rabbinicall Bible of his own
correct setting forth at Basil, An. 1620, considers at large this wh^l matter
of the points, and discovers the vanity of Elias his pretension about the
Tiberian Massorites. But we must not it seems rest here: within a few years
after, to make way for another design, which then he had conceived; Ludovicus
Capellus published a discourse in the defense of the opinion of Elias, (at
least so far as concerned the rise of the punctation) under the Title of
Arcanum punctationis revelatum. The book was published by Erpenius without the
name of the Author. But the Person was sufficiently known; and Rivetus not long
after took notice of him, and says he was his friend, but concealed his name.
Isag. ad Scr. 1. cap. 8. This new attempt immediately pleases some. Among
others, our learned Professor Dr. Prideaux reads a public Lecture on the
Vespers of our Comitia on that subject; wherein though he prefaceth his
discourse with an observation of the advantage the Papists make of that opinion
of the novelty of the points, and the danger of it, yet upon the matter he
falls in wholly with Capellus, though he name him not. Among the large
Encomiums of himself, and his work, printed by Capellus in the close of his
Critica sacra, there are two Letters from one Mr. Air here in England, in one
whereof he tells him, that without doubt the Doctor read on that subject by the
help of his book; as indeed he uses his Arguments, and quotes his Treatise,
under the name of Sud Hanisebhoth Hanaegalah. But that ( I say) which seems to
me most admirable in the Doctors discourse is, that whereas he had prefaced it
with the weight of the controversy he had in hand, by the advantage the Papists
make of the opinion of the novelty of the Points, citing their words to that
purpose, himself in the body of his exercitations falls in with them, and
speaks the very things which he seemed before to have blamed. And by this means
this opinion tending so greatly to the disparagement of the Authority of the
Originals, is crept in amongst Protestants also. Of the stop put unto its
progress by the full and learned Answer of Buxtorfius the younger (who alone
in this learning, in this age, seems to answer his Fathers worth) unto
Capellus, in his discourse de origin and antiquitate Punctorum, I shall speak
more afterward. However it is not amiss fallen out that the masters of this
new persuasion are not at all agreed among themselves. Capellus would have it
easy to understand the Hebrew text, and every word, though not absolutely by it
self, yet as it lies in its contexture, though there were no points at all.
Morinus would make the language altogether unintelligible on that account; the
one says, that the points are a late invention of the Rabbis, and the other,
that without them, the understanding of the Hebrew is (...), yet though they
look diverse ways, there is a firebrand between them. But we have this Brand
brought yet nearer to the Churches bread corn, in the prolegomena to the
Biblia Polyglotta, lately printed at London. The solemn Espousall of this
opinion of the Hebrew punctation, in that great work, was one chief occasion
of the second discourse, as you will find it at large declared in the entrance
of it. I dare not mention the desperate consequences that attend this
imagination, being affrighted among other things, by a little Treatise lately
sent me (upon the occasion of a discourse on this subject) by my worthy and
learned friend Dr. Ward, entitled fides divina, wherein its Author, who ever
he be, from some principles of this Nature, and unwary Expressions of some
learned men amongst us, labors to eject and cast out as useless the whole
Scripture or word of God. I should have immediately returned an answer to that
pestilent discourse, but that upon consideration, I found all his objections
obviated or answered in the ensuing, treatises, which were then wholly
finished. And this, as I said, was the first way whereby the poison of
undervaluing the Originalls crept in among Protestants themselves.

Now together with the knowledge of the tongues, the use of that knowledge in
Critical observations, did also increase. The excellent use of this study and
employment, with the fruits of it in the explanation of sundry difficulties,
with many other advantages, cannot be easily expressed. But as the best things
are apt to be most abused, so in particular it has fallen out with this kind of
learning and study. Protestants here also have chiefly managed the business.
Beza, Camerarius, Scaliger, Casaubon, D^usius, Gomarus, Usher, Grotius,
Hensius, Fuller, Dieu, Mede, Camero, Glasius, Capellus, Amama, with innumerable
others, have excelled in this kind. But the mind of man being exceedingly
vainglorious, curious, uncertain, after a door to reputation and renown, by
this kind of learning was opened in the world, it quicly spread its self over
all bounds and limits of Sobriety. The manifold inco^veniences, if not
mischiefs, that have ensued on the boldness and curiosity of some in
criticizing on the Scripture, I shall not now insist upon; and what it might
yet grow unto, I have often heard the great Usher, expressing his fear. Of the
success of Grotius in this way we have a solid account weekly in the Lectures
of our learned Professor, which I hope, he will in due time benefit the Public
withal. But it is only one or two things that my present design calls me
upon to remarke.

Among other ways that sundry men have fixed on to exercise their critical
abilities, one has been the collecting of various lections both in the old
Testament and New. The first and honestest course fixed on to this purpose, was
that of consulting various copies, and comparing them among themselves; wherein
yet there were sundry miscarriages, as I shall show in the second treatise.
This was the work of Erasmus, Stephen, Beza, Arias Montanus, and some others;
some that came after them finding this Province possessed, and no other world
of the like nature remaining for them to conquer, fixed upon another way,
substituting to the service of their design, as pernicious a principle, as
ever I think was fixed on by any learned man since the foundation of the
Church of Christ, excepting only those of Rome. Now this principle is that upon
many grounds, which some of them are long in recounting: there are sundry
corruptions crept into the Originals, which by their critical faculty, with
the use of sundry Engines, those especially of the Old Translations are to be
discovered and removed. And this also receives countenance from these
Prolegomena to the Biblia Polyglotta, as will afterward be shown and
discussed. Now this principle being once fixed, and a liberty of criticizing on
the Scripture, yea a necessity of it thence evinced, it is inconceiveable what
springs of corrections and amendments rise up under their hands. Let me not be
thought tedious if I recount some of them to you.

1 It is known that there is a double Consonancy in the Hebrew Consonants
among themselves; of some in figure that are unlike in sound, of some in sound
that are unlike in figure, of the first sort are (...) of the latter are (...),
Now this is one principle of our new Critics, that the Scribes of the Bible
were sometimes mistaken by the likeness of the Letters, in respect of figure,
sometimes by their liknesse in respect of sound; and so remembering the words
they wrote, oftentimes put one for another; so that whether they used their
Eyes, or their Memories, they failed on one hand or another; though the Jews
deny any Copy amongst them to be written but exactly by pattern, or that it is
lawful for a man to write one word in a Copy, but by pattern, though he could
remember the words of the whole Bible: now whereas the signification of every
word is regulated by its radix, it often falls out, that in the formation and
inflexion of words, by reason of letters that are defective, there remains but
one letter of the Radix in them, at least that is pronounced: How frequent this
is in this tongue, those who have very little skill in it, may guess by only
taking a view of Frobenius his Bible, wherein the Radical letters are printed
in a distinct character, from all the praefixes and affixes in their
variations. Now if a man has a mind to criticize and mend the Bible, it is but
taking his word, or words, that he will fix upon, and try what they will make
by the co^mutation of the letters that are alike in figure or sound. Let him
try what (...) will do in the place of (...) or on the contrary; which as they
are radical, or as they are prefixed, will sufficiently alter the sense; and
so of all the rest mentioned. If by this means any new sense that is
tolerable, and pleases the Critic, does emerge, it is but saying the Scribe
was mistaken in the likeness of the Letters, or in the affinity of the sound,
and then it is no matter, though all the Copies in the world agree to the
contrary, without the least variation. It is evident that this course has
stood Capellus and Grotius in very good stead. And Symeon de Muys tells us a
pretty story of himself to this purpose. de Heb. Edit. Antiq. and Verit. S. S.
Yea this is the most eminent spring of the Criticismes on the old Testament,
that these times afford: a thousand instances might be given to this purpose.

2. But in case this course fail, and no relief be afforded this way, than
the transposition of Letters offers its assistance; those who know any thing in
this language, know what alteration in the sense of words may be made by such a
way of procedure, frequently words of contrary senses, directly opposite
consist only of the same Letters diversely placed. Every Lexicon will supply men
with instances, that need not to be here repeated.

3. The points are taken into consideration; and here bold men may even
satisfy their curiosity. That word, or those three Letters (...) are instanced
in by Hierome to this purpose, Hom. 9. 12: as it may be printed it will afford
8 several senses (...) is verbum and (...) is pestis; as far distant from
one another as life and death; those letters in that order may be read with --
and -- and -- and -- and --, the Jews give instances how by this means, men
may destroy the world. But

4. Suppose that this ground proves barren also, it is but going to an old
Translation, the 70, or vulgar Latin, and where any word likes us, to consider
what Hebrew word answers unto it, and if it discovers an agreement in any one
Letter, in Figure or sound, with the word in that Text, then to say that so
they read in that copy; yea rather then fail, be the word as far different
from what is read in the Bible as can be imagined, aver it to yield the more
convenient sense, and a various lection is found out.

And these are the chief heads and springs of the criticisms on the old
Testament, which with so great a reputation of learning men have boldly
obtruded on us of late days. It is not imaginable what prejudice the Sacred
truth of the Scripture, preserved by the infinite love and care of God, has
already suffered hereby, and what it may further suffer, for my part, I cannot
but tremble to think. Lay but these two Principles together, namely that the
points are a late invention of some Judaicall Rabbis, (on which account there
is no reason in the world that we should be bound unto them) and that it is
lawful to gather various Lections by the help of Translations, where there are
no diversities in our present Copies, which are owned in the Prolegomena to the
Biblia Polyglotta, and for my part I must needs cry cut (...), as not seeing
any means of being delivered from utter uncertaintie in and about all sacred
truth. Those who have more wisdom and learning, and are able to look throngh
all the digladiations that are likely to ensue on these principles, I hope will
rather take pains to instruct me, and such as I am, then be angry or offended
with us, that we are not so wise or learned as themselves. In the mean time I
desire those who are shaken in mind by any of the specious pretenses of
Capellus and others, to consider the specimen, given us, of reconciling the
difficulties, that they lay as the ground of their conjectures in the
miscellany notes, or Exercitations of the learned Mr Pocock; as useful and
learned a work as is extant in that kind, in so few sheets of paper. The
dangerous and causeless attempts of men, to rectify our present copies of the
Bible, the Reader may there also find discovered and confuted.

But we have not as yet done; there is a new invention of Capellus, greatly
applauded amongst the men of these opinions. He tells us lib. 6. c. 10. Crit.
S^cr: Planum est omnem quae hodie est in terrarum orb linguae Hebraicae
cognitionem servandam tandem esse and ascribendam Graecae (...) 70. Sacrorum
Bibliorum translationi. This is greedily taken up by Morinus (as nothing could
be spoken more to his purpose) who also tells us, that the learned Prefacer to
these Biblia Polyglotta is of the same judgment; Morin: Praefat: ad opusc.
Haebr: Samarit. Hereupon he informs us, that in the Translation of the
Pentateuch he went for the meaning of sundry words unto Hierome, and the
Translation of the 70. But it is not unknown to these learned persons, that
Hierome, whom one of them makes his rule; tells us over and over, that
notwithstanding the Translation of the 70. he had his knowledge of the Hebrew
Tongue, from the Hebrew it self; and the help of such Hebrews as he hired to
his assistance. And for Capellus, is not that the Helena for which he contends,
and upon the matter the only foundation of his sacred work of Criticizing on
the Scripture, that there was a succession of learned men of the Jews at
Tiberias until an hundred years after Hierome, who invented the Points of the
Hebrew Bible, and that not in an arbitrary manner, but according to the
tradition they had received from the^ who spoke that language in its purity?
shall these men be thought to have had the knowledge of the Hebrew tongue from
the Translation of the 70; Certainly they would not then have hated it so, as
he informs us they did. But this thing is plainly ridiculous. The Language
gives us the knowledge of it self. Considering the helps that by providence
have been in all Ages, and at all times afforded thereunto, ever since the time
wherein Capellus says, some knew it so well, as to invent and affix the
present Punctation, there has been a succession of living or dead Masters to
further the knowledge of it. And this will not seem strange to them who have
given us exact Translations of the Persian, and Aethiopick pieces of Scripture.
In the (...) we are little assisted by the 70. The chiefest seeming help unto
this tongue is from the Arabic. And thus have I given you a brief account,
how by the subtilty of Satan, there are principles crept in, even amongst
Protestants, undermining the Authority of the Hebrew verity, as it was called
of Old; wherein Jerusalem has justified Samaria, and cleared the Papists in
their reproaching of the Word of God. Of the New Testament I shall speak
particularly in the second discourse ensuing. Morinus indeed tells us, de Heb:
and Graec: Tex: Sincerit. Exercitat: 1. cap: 1. p. 5. it is a jocular thing
that the Heretics in their Disputations do grant, that there are Corruptions,
and various Lections in the Greek and Latin copies of the Scripture, but deny
it as to the Hebrew: but why, I pray, is this so ridiculous? It is founded on
no less stable bottom than this experience, that whereas we evidently find
various lections in the Greek copies which we enjoy, and so grant that which
ocular Inspection evinces to be true; yet although men discover such virulent
and bitter spirits against the Hebrew Text, as this Morinus does, calling all
men fools or knaves that contend for its purity, yet they are none of them
able to show out of any Copies yet extant in the World, or that they can make
appear ever to have been extant, that ever there were any such various
lections in the Originalls of the Old Testament. And is there any reason that
we should be esteemed Ridiculous, because believing our own eyes, we will not
also believe the Testimony of same few men of no credit with us, asserting that
for truth, which we have abundant cause to believe to be utterly false; But of
these men so far.

I thought at the Entrance of my discourse to have also insisted on some other
ways, whereby Satan in these days assaults the sacred truth of the Word of
God in its Authority, Purity, Integrity, or Perfection; especially in the Poor,
Deluded, Fanaticall souls amongst us, commonly called Quakers. For the
instruction of the younger sort, against whose abominations I have subjoyned
the Theses in the Close of the other Treatises. But I am sensible how far
already I have exceeded the bounds of a Preface unto so small Treatises as
these ensuing; and therefore giving a brief account of my undertaking in this
Cause of God and his Word, for the vindication of the Authority and Integrity
of it, I shall put a Close to this discourse.

It may be some of you have heard me professing my unwillingnesse to appear
any more in the World this way. I have not in some things met with such
pleasing Entertainment, as to encourage me unto it: where I have been for
Peace, others have made themselves ready for war. Some of them, especially M.
G. F.
one of late, neither understanding me, nor the things that he writes about,
but his mind for opposition was to be satisfied. This is the manner of not a
few in their writings; they measure other men by their own ignorance, and what
they know not themselves, they think is hid to others also; Hence when any
thing presents its self new to their minds; as though they were the first that
knew, what they then first know, and which they have only an obscure glimpse
of, they rest not until they have published it to their praise. Such are the
discourses of that person, partly trivial, partly obviated and rendered utterly
useless to his purpose by that treatise, which he ventured weakly to oppose. I
wish I could prevail with those, whose interest compells them to choose rather
to be ignorant, then to be taught by me, to let my books alone. Another after
two or three years consideration, in answer to a book of near 140 sheets of
paper, returns a scoffing reply to so much of it, Mr. I. G.
as was written in a quarter of an hour. I am therefore still minded to
abstain from such Engagements. And I think I may say if there were less
writing by some, there would be more reading by others, at least to more
purpose. Many books full of profound learning lie neglected, whilst men spend
their time on Trifles; And many things of great Worth are suppressed by their
Authors, whilst things of uo value are poured out, one on the neck of another.
One of your selves I have often solicited for the Publishing of some Divinity
lectures, Dr. Henry Wilkinson public Reader of Divinity in the University.
read at solemn times in the University, which, if I know ought, are, to say
no more, worthy of public view. I yet Hope a short time will answer my desire
and expectation. Of my present Undertaking there are 3 parts. The first is a
Subject that having preached on, I was by many urged to publish my thoughts
upon it, judging it might be useful: I have answered their requests; what I
have performed through the grace of Christ in the work undertaken, is left to
the judgment of the Godly learned Reader. The second concerns the Prolegomena
and Appendix to the late Biblia Polyglotta: of this I said often, ab alio
quovis hoc fieri mallem, quam a me, sed a me tamen potius quam a nemine. The
reasons of my engaging in that work are declared at large in the entrance of
it. The theses in the close were drawn in by their affinity in Subject to the
other discourses, and to complete the doctrine of the Scripture concerning the
Scripture, I endeavored to co^prize in the^ the whole truth about the Word of
God, as to name and thing opposed by the poor fanaticall Quakers, as also to
discover the Principles they proceed upon in their Confused opposition to that
Truth.

I have no more to add, but only begging I may have the Continuance of your
prayers, and assistance in your several stations, for the carrying on the
work of our Lord and Master in this place committed unto us, that I may give
my account with joy and not with Grief, to him that stands at the door, I
commend you to the powerful word of his Grace; and remain

Your fellow labourer and Brother in
From my study, September. 22. 1658.
Of the Divine Original, with the Authority, self evidencing Power, and Light
of the Holy Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
The Divine Original of the Scripture, the sole foundation of it is Authority,
The Original of the old Testament, Heb. 1. 11. Several ways of immediate
Revelation. The peculiar manner of the Revelation of the word. Considerations
thereon. Various expressions of that way, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. The written word,
as written, preserved by the Providence of God. Capellus opinion about various
lections considered. The Scripture not (...). The true meaning of that
Expression. How the word came of old, and how it was received. Entirely from
God to the least Title. Of the Scriptures of the New Testament and their
peculiar prerogative.

Sect. 1. THAT the whole Authority of the Scripture in it is self, depends
solely on it is Divine Original, is confessed by all who acknowledge it is
Authority. The evincing and declaration of that Authority, being the thing at
present aimed at; The discovery of it is divine Spring and Rise, is in the first
place, necessarily to be premised thereunto. That foundation being once laid,
we shall be able to educe our following Reasonings and Arguments, wherein we
aim more at weight than number, from their own proper Principles.

Sect. 2. As to the Original of the Scripture of the Old Testament, it is said
God SPOKE (...), Heb. 1. 1; of old, or formerly in the Prophets. From the days
of Moses the Lawgiver, and downwards, unto the consignation and bounding of the
Canon delivered to the Judaicall Church, in the days of Ezra and his
companions (...) the men of the great Congregation, so God spoke. This being
done only among the Jews, they as his Church, (...). Romans 3. 2, 9, 4. were
entrusted with the Oracles of God. God spoke, (...) for (...) ( Chrysostom,
Theophilact) in for by: (...), by the Prophets, as Luke 1. 70. (...), by the
mouth of the Holy Prophets; But there seems to be somewhat farther intended in
this Expression.

Sect. 3. In the Exposition, or giving out the eternal Counsel of the Mind
and Will of God unto men, there is considerable his speaking unto the Prophets,
and his speaking by them, unto us. In this expression, it seems to be, that
(...) or filia vocis, that voice from heaven that came to the Prophets which is
understood. So God spoke in the Prophets, and in reference thereunto there is
Propriety in that Expression, (...)* in the Prophets. Thus the Psalms are many
of them said to be, To this, or that man. (...) A Golden psalm to David; that
is, from the Lord; and from thence their tongue was as the Pen of a writer,
Psalm. 45. 1. So God spoke in them, before he spoke by them.

Sect. 4. The various ways of special Revelation, by Dreams, Visions,
Audible voices, Inspirations, with that peculiar one of the Law giver under the
Old Testament, called (...) face to face, Exodus 33. 11. Deuteronomy. 34. 10: and (...)
Numb. 11. 8; with that which is compared with it, and exalted above it, ( Heb.
1. 1, 2, 3.) in the New, by the Son, (...), from the bosom of the father, Joh.
1. 17. 18, are not of my present consideration, all of them belonging to the
manner of the thing enquired after, not the thing its self.

Sect. 5. By the Assertion then laid down of God speaking in the Prophets of
old, from the beginning to the End of that long tract of time, consisting of
1000 years, wherein he gave out the writings of the old Testament; Two things
are ascertained unto us, which are the foundation of our present discourse.

Sect. 6. 1 That the Laws they made known, the Doctrines they delivered, the
Instructions they gave, the Stories they recorded, the Promises of Christ, the
Prophesies of Gospel times they gave out, and revealed, were not their own,
not conceived in their minds, not formed by their Reasonings, not retained in
their memories from what they had heard not by any means before hand
comprehended by them, (1 Pe. 1. 10, 11.) but were all of the^ immediately from
God; there being only a passive concurrence of their rational faculties in
their Reception, without any such active obedience, as by any Law they might be
obliged unto. Hence,

Sect. 7. 2ly God was so with them, and by the Holy Ghost so spoke in them, as
to their receiving of the word from him, and their delivering of it unto others
by speaking or writing, as that they were not themselves enabled by any
habitual light, knowledge or Conviction of Truth, to declare his Mind and
Will, but only acted, as they were immediately moved by him. Their Tongue in
what they said, or their hand in what they wrote, was (...) no more at their
own disposal, than the Pen is, in the hand of an expert Writer.

Sect. 8. Hence, as far as their own Personal concernments, as Saints, and
Believers did lie in them, they are said (...), to make a diligent inquiry into
and investigation of the things, which (...), the Spirit of Christ, that spoke
in themselves did signify, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Without this, though their Visions
were express, so that in them their eyes were said to be open, Numb. 24. 3, 4;
yet they understood them not. Therefore also, they studied the writings and
Prophesies of one another, Dan. 9. 2. Thus they attained a saving useful
habitual knowledge of the Truths delivered by themselves and others, by the
Illumination of the Holy Ghost, through the study of the Word, even s^we, Psalm.
119, 104. But as to the receiving of the Word from God, as God spoke in them,
they obtained nothing by study or Meditation by enquiry or Reading, Amos. 7.
15. Whether we consider the matter, or manner of what they received, and
delivered, or their receiving and delivering of it, they were but as an
instrument of Music, giving a sound according to the hand, intention, and
skill of him that strikes it.

Sect. 9. This is variously expressed. Generally it is said (...) The word was
to this, or that Prophet, which we have rendered, the word came unto them. Ezekiel.
1. 3. (...) it came expressly; essendo fuit; It had a subsistence given unto it,
or an effectual in-being, by the Spirits entering into him, verse. 14. Now this
coming of the Word unto them, had oftentimes such a Greatness, and Expression
of the Majesty of God upon it, as it filled them with dread and Reverence of
him, Heb. 3. 16, and also greatly affected even their outward man, Dan. 8. 27.
But this dread and terror (which Satan strove to imitate, in his filthy
Tripodes, and (...),) was peculiar to the Old Testament, and belonged to the
paedagogie thereof; He. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. The Spirit in the declaration of
the New Testament, gave out his mind and will in a way of more Liberty and
Glory. 2 Cor. 3. The expr^ssnesse and immediacy of Revelation was the same; but
the manner of it related more to that glorious liberty in fellowship and
Communion with the Father, whereunto Believers had then an access provided
them by Jesus Christ. Heb. 9. 8. Chapter 10. 19, 20. Chapter 12. 23, 24. So our Savior
tells his Apostles. Mat. 10. 20. (...); you are not the Speakers of what you
deliver, as other men are, the figment and imagination of whose hearts are the
fountain of all that they speak; And he adds this reason* (...); The Spirit
of the Father (is) he that speaks in you. Thus the Word that came unto them,
was a Book which they took in, and gave out without any alteration of one
tittle or syllable. Ezekiel. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. Chap. 3. 3. Revel. 10. 9, 10, 11.

Sect. 10. Moreover, when the Word was thus come to the Prophets, and God had
spoken in them, it was not in their power to conceal it, the hand of the Lord
being strong upon them. They were not now only on a general account to utter
the Truth they were made acquainted withal, and to speak the things they had
heard and seen, which was their common Preaching work according to the analogy
of what they had received. Act. 4. 20; but also the very individual Words that
they had received were to be declared. When the word was come to them, it was
as a fire within them, that must be delivered, or it would consume them. Psalm.
39. 3. Jer. 20. 9. Amos. 3. 8. Chap, 7. 15, 16. So Jonah found his attempt to
hide the Word that he had received, to be altogether vain.

Sect. 11. Now because these things are of great importance and the foundation
of all that does ensue; namely the discovery that the Word is come forth unto
us from God, without the least mixture or intervenience of any medium obnoxious
to fallibility, (as is the wisdom, Truth, Integrity, knowledge, and memory, of
the best, of all men,) I shall further consider it from one full and eminent
declaration thereof, given unto us, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. The words of the Holy
Ghost are; (...). Knowing this first, that no proph^sy of Scripture is of any
private interpretation; for the Prophesy came not in old time by the will of
man, but Holy men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

Sect. 12. That which he speaks of is, (...); The Prophesy of Scripture, or
written Prophesy.

There were then traditions among the Jews, to whom Peter wrote exalting
themselves into competition with the written Word, which not long after got the
Title of an or all Law, pretending to have it is Original from God. These the
Apostle tacitly condemns; and also shows under what formality he considered
that, which verse. 19. he termed (...), the word of Prophesy; namely as WRITTEN.
The written word, as such, is that whereof he speaks. Above 50 times is (...),
or (...), in the New Testament put absolutely for the Word of God. And (...) is
so used in the Old, for the Word of Prophesy; 2 Chronicles. 21. 12. It is the (...),
that is (...) 2 Timothy 3. 16; The Writing, or Word written, is by inspiration
from God. Not only the Doctrine in it, but the (...) its self, or the Doctrine
as written, is so from him.

Sect. 13. Hence the Providence of God has manifested it is self no less
concerned in the preservation of the writings then the doctrine contained in
them. The writing it is self being the Product of his own eternal counsel for
the preservation of the Doctrine, after a sufficient discovery of the
insufficiency of all other means for that End and purpose. And hence the
malice of Satan has raged no less against the Book, then the Truth contained
in it. The dealings of Antiochus under the old Testament, and of sundry
persecuting Emperors under the new, evince no less. And it was no less crime
of old to be Traditor libri, than to be Abnegator fidei. The reproach of
Chartacea scripta, and membranae (Coster: Enchirid: Cap. 1.) reflects on it is
Author. Haebraea volumina nec in una dictione corrupta invenies. Sant. Page
(...), Mat. 5. 18.
It is true we have not the (...) of Moses and the Prophets, of the Apostles
and Evangelists; but the (...) which we have, or copies contain every iota
that was in them.

Sect. 14. It is no doubt but that in the Copies we now enjoy of the old
Testament there are some diverse readings, or various lections. The (...)
Reading, in the margin, and writing, in the line.
(...) the Correctio scribarum, or the amendment of some small apicu^i in 18
places.
The (...) Ablatio scribarum or a note of the ^edundancy of (...) in 5 places.
Vid Raymond: pugio fid. Petru^ Galat lib: ^: cap: 8:
(for the (...) are are of another nature) the various lections of Ben-Asher or
Rabbi Aaron the Son of Rabbi Moses of the tribe of Asher, and Ben Nepthali, or
R: Moses the Son of David of the Tribe of Nepthali; of the East and Western
Jews, which we have collected at the End of the great Bible with the Masora,
evince it. But yet we affirm that the whole Word of God, in every Letter and
Title, as given from him by Inspiration, is preserved without Corruption. Where
there is any variety it is always in things of less, indeed of no importance.
Haebraei. V. T. Codices per universum terrarum orbem, per Europam, Afiam and A
fricam, ubique sibi sunt similes, eodemque modo ab omnibus scribuntur and
leguntur; si forte exiguas quas^a^ apiculorum quorunda^ differentias excipias,
quae ipsae tamen nullam vari^tatem efficient. ^uxtorf. Vindic. Ver. Heb. 2.
cap. 14.
God by his Providence preserving the whole entire, suffered this lesser
variety to fall out, in or among the copies we have, for the quickening and
exercising of our diligence in our search into his Word.

Sect. 15. It was an unhappy Attempt (which must afterward be spoken unto)
that a learned man has of late put himself upon, Lud. Capell. Crit. Sac.
namely, to prove variations in all the present (...) of the old Testament in
the Hebrew Tongue from the Copies used of old, merely upon uncertain
conjectures, and the credit of corrupt Translations. Whether that Plea of his
be more unreasonable in it is self and devoid of any real ground of Truth, or
injurious to the Love and care of God over his Word and Church, I know not sure
I am, it is both in an high degree. The Translation especially insisted on by
him, is that of the LXX. That this Translation either from the mistakes of it is
first Authors (if it be theirs, whose name and number it bears) or the
carelessenesse or ignorance, or worse of it is Transcribers, is corrupted and
gone off from the original in a 1000 places twice told, is acknowledged by all
who know ought of these things. Strange that so corrupt a stream should be
judged a fit means to cleanse the fountain. That such a Lesbian Rule should
be thought a fit measure to correct the original by; and yet on the account
hereof, with some others not one whit better, or scarce so Good, we have 1826
various lections exhibited unto us, with frequent insinuations of an infinite
number more yet to be collected. It were desirable that men would be content to
show their learning, Reading and diligence, about things where there is less
danger in Adventures.

Nor is the relief He provides against the charge of bringing things to an
uncertainty in the Scripture, which he found himself obnoxious unto less
pernicious than the opinion he seeks to palliate thereby; although it be since
taken up and approved Proleg. ad Bibl. p^lyglot.
by others. Satis ergo est quod eadem salutaris doctrina quae fuit a Mose^,
Prophetis, Apostolis ^t Evangelistis in suis (...) primum literis confignata,
eadem omnino pariter in Toxtibus Graeco and Hebraeo, and in Translationibus cum
ve^eribus, tum recentibus, clare certo and sufficienter inveni^tur. Pariter
illae omnes una cum Textibus Gr^eco and Hebrae^ sunt and dici possunt
Authenticae, sacrae, Divinae, (...) -- respectu materiae etc. Sunt in
Scripturis multa alia non usque aleo (...) necessaria, etc Capel. Critic. Sac.
l. 6. cap. 5.. 10, 11.
The Saving Doctrine of the Scripture, He tells us, as to the matter and
substance of it, in all things of moment it is preserved in the Copies of the
original, and Translations that do remain.

Sect. 17. It is indeed a great Relief, against the inconvenience of corrupt
Translations, to consider that although some of them be bad enough, yet if all
the Errors and mistakes that are to be found in all the rest, should be added
to the worst of all, yet every necessary saving fundamental truth, would be
found sufficiently testified unto therein. But to depresse the sacred Truth of
the originalls, into such a condition, as wherein it should stand in need of
this Apology, and that without any color or pretense from discrepancies in
the Copies themselves that are extant, or any tolerable evidence that there
ever were any other, in the least differing from these extant in the world,
will at length be found a work unbecoming a Christian Protestant Divine.
Besides the injury done hereby to the Providence of God toward his Church, and
care of his Word, It will not be found so easy a matter, upon a supposition of
such corruption in the Originalls as is pleaded for, to evince unquestionably
that the whole saving doctrine its self, at first given out from God,
continues entire and incorrupt. The nature of this doctrine is such, that there
is no other Principle or means of it is discovery, no other Rule or measure of
judging and determining any thing about or concerning it, but only the writing
from whence it is taken: it being wholly of divine Reevlation, and that
Revelation being expressed only in that writing. Upon any corruption then
supposed therein, there is no means of rectifying it. It were an easy thing to
correct a mistake or corruption in the transcription of any Problem or
Demonstration of Euclide, or any other ancient Mathematician, from the
consideration of the things themselves about which they treat, being always
the same, and in their own nature equally exposed to the knowledge and
understanding of men, in all Ages. In things of pure Revelation, whose
knowledge depends solely on their Revelation, it is not so. Nor is it enough to
satisfy us, that the doctrines mentioned are preserved entire; every Tittle and
(...) in the Word of God, must come under our care and consideration, as being
as such from God; But of these things we shall Treat afterward at large;
return we now to the Apostle.

Sect. 17. This (...), this written Prophesy, this (...); is not of any private
Interpretation. Some think that (...) is put for (...) or (...), which
according to Hesychius denotes Afflation, inspiration, conception within; so
Calvin; In this sense the importance of the words, is the same with what I have
already mentioned; namely that the Prophets had not their private conceptions,
or self fancyed Enthusiasmes of the things they spoke. To this Interpretation
assents Grotius. And (...), for (...), is reckoned amongst the various Lections
that are gathered out of him, in the Appendix to the Biblia polyglotta. Thus
(...), is the other side of that usual expression, (...), or (...). Camero
contends for the retaining of (...); and justly. We begin a little to late to
see, whether men's bold Conjectures in correcting the Original Text of the
Scriptures are like to proceed. Here Is no color for a various Lection; one Copy
it seems by Stephen read (...); without ground, by an evident error; and such
mistakes are not to be allowed the name or place of various Readings. But yet
says Camero, (...) is such a Resolution and Interpretation as is made by
Revelation. He adds that in that sense (...) is used by the 70, in the
business of Joseph's Interpretation of Pharaoh's Dream, Genesis 40; which was by
Revelation. But indeed the word is not used in that Chapter. However he falls
in with this sense, (as do Calvin and Grotius) that (...), is not to be
referred to our Interpretation of the Prophets, but to the Way and manner of
their receiving the Counsel and Will of God.

Sect. 18. And indeed, (...); taking (...), for an Interpretation of the Word
of prophesy given out by writing, as our Translation bears it, is an
Expression that can scarcely have any tolerable sense affixed unto it; (...),
or (...) relates here, to (...): and denotes the first giving out of it is Word,
not our after consideration of it is sense and meaning. And without this sense
it stands in no coherence with, nor opposition to, the following sentence,
which by it is causall connection to this, manifests that it renders a Reason of
what is herein affirmed, in the first place; and in the latter, turning with
the adversative (...), an opposition unto it: (...); for Prophecy came not at
any time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost. What Reason is in the first part of this verse, why the
Scripture is not of our private interpretation? or what opposition in the
latter to that Assertion? Nay on that supposall, there is no tolerable,
correspondency of discourse in the whole (...). But take the Word to express
the coming of the Prophecy to the Prophets themselves, and the sense is full
and Clear.

Sect. 19. This then is the intention of the Apostle; the Prophecy which we
have written, the Scripture, was not an issue of men's fancied Enthusiasmes; not
a product of their own minds and Conceptions, not an Interpretation of the Will
of God by the understanding of man, that is of the Prophets themselves; neither
their rational apprehensions, Enquiries, conceptions of fancy, or Imaginations
of their hearts, had any place in this business; no self Afflation, no
rational meditation managed at liberty by the understandings and Wills of men,
had place herein.

Sect. 20. Of this, says the Apostle, (...); knowing, judging, and determining
this in the first place. This is a Principle to be owned and acknowledged by
every one that will believe any thing else. (...) is not only to know, to
perceive to understand; but also to judge, own, and acknowledge. This then in
our Religion is to be owned, acknowledged, submitted unto, as a Principle,
without further dispute. To discover the Grounds of this submission and
Acknowledgment, is the business of the ensuing discourse.

Sect. 21. That this is so indeed, as before asserted, and to give a Reason why
this is to be received as a Principle, he adds, ver s. 21. (...). That word of
Prophesy which we have written, is not (...), of private conception, for it
came not at any time by the will of man. (...) which is the passive Conjugation
of (...) from (...), denotes at least to be brought in; more than merely it
came; It was brought into them by the Will of God. The Affirmative, as to the
Will of God, is included in the negative, as to the will of man. Or it came as
the voice from heaven to our Savior on the mount: verse. 18; where the same
word is used. So Eze. 1. 3. (...) essendo fuit verbum; it was brought into him,
as was showed before. Thus God brought the word to them, and spoke in them, in
order of nature, before he spoke by them. As (...). it was brought to them, it
was (...) the voice of the Lord, Ge. 3. 8. or (...) as the Jews call it; as
spoken by them or written, it was properly (...) verbum Dei* the word of God;
which by his immediate voice he signified to the Prophets. Thus some of them in
visions, first eat a written book, and then prophesi'd, as was instanced before
And this is the first spring of the Scripture; the beginning of it is emanation
from the Counsel and Will of God. By the Power of the Holy Ghost, it was
brought into the organs or instruments, that he was pleased to use, for the
Revelation, and declaration of it unto others.

Sect. 22. That which remains for the completing of this dispensation of the
Word of God unto us, is added by the Apostle; (...); When the Word was thus
brought to them, it was not left to their understandings, Wisdoms, Minds,
Memories, to order, dispose and give it out; but they were borne, acted,
carried out by the Holy Ghost, to speak, deliver and Write, all that, and
nothing but that, to every tittle, that was so brought to them* They invented
not Words themselves, suited to the things they had learned; but only expressed
the Words, that they received. Though their mind and understanding were used in
the choice of Words, whence arises all the difference, that is in the manner of
expression, (for they did use (...) Words of Will, or choice,) yet they were so
guided, that their words were not their own* but immediately supplied unto
them; and so they gave out (...) the writing of uprightness, and (...) Words
of truth, it is self. Ecles. 12. 10. Not only the Doctrine they taught, was the
Word of truth, Truth it is self, Joh. 17. 17; but the Words whereby they taught
it, were Words of truth from God himself. Thus allowing the contribution of
passive instruments for the Reception and Representation of words, which
answers the mind and tongue of the Prophets, in the coming of the voice of God
to them, every Apex of the written word is equally divine, and as immediately
from God as the voice wherewith, or whereby he spoke to, or in the Prophets;
and is therefore accompanied with the same Authority, in it is self, and unto
us.

Sect. 23. What has been thus spoken of the Scripture of the old Testament,
must be also affirmed of the new; with this addition of advantage and
pre-eminence, that (...) Heb. 2. 3. it received it is beginning of being spoken
by the Lord himself, God spoke in these last days (...) in the Son. Heb. 1. 1.

Sect. 24. Thus God who himself began the writing of the Word with his own
finger, Exodus 31. 11; after he had spoken it Exodus 20; appointing or approving
the writing of the rest that followed, Deuteronomy. 31. 12. Josh. 23. 6. 1 King. 2, 3.
2 King. 14. 6. 2 King. 17. 13. 1 Chronicles. 21. 15. 2 Chronicles. 25. 4, 4. Ezekiel. 2. 9,
10. Hab. 2. 2. Luke 16. 29. Joh. 5. 39. Joh. 20. 31. Act. 17. 11; does lastly
command the close of the immediate Revelation of his Will, to be written in a
Book. Re. 1. 11; and so gives out the whole of his Mind and counsel unto us in
writing; as a merciful and steadfast relief, against all that confusion,
darkness, and uncertainty, which the vanity, folly, and loosnesse of the minds
of men, drawn out and heightened by the unspeakable alterations, that fall out
amongst them, would otherwise have certainly run into.

Sect. 25. Thus we have laid down the Original of the Scriptures, from the
Scripture it is self; and this Original is the basis and foundation of all
it is Authority. Thus is it from God; entirely from him; As to the Doctrine
contained in it, and the Words wherein that Doctrine is delivered, it is wholly
his; what that speaks, He speaks himself. He speaks in it and by it; and so
it is vested with all the moral Authority of God over his Creatures.

CHAP. II.
The maine Question proposed to consideration. How we may know assuredly the
Scripture to be the word of God. The Scripture to be received by divine faith.
The Ground and foundation of that faith enquired after. The Answer in the
General Thesis of this discourse. The Authority of God that foundation. The
way whereby that Authority is evidenced or made known. What is meant by the
Authority of the Scriptures. Authority is in respect of others. First general
Evidence given to the Thesis laid down. The various ways of Gods Revealing
him, self and his mind. 1 By his works: 2. By the light of nature; 3. By his
word. Each of these evince themselves to be from him. His word especially.

Sect. 1. HAving laid in the foregoing Chapter the foundation that we are to
build and proceed upon, I come now to lay down the Enquiry, whose Resolution
must thence be educed. That then which we are seeking after is; How We, and the
rest of men in the world, who through the merciful dispensation of God, have
the Book or Books wherein the Scripture given out from him as above declared,
is contained, or said to be contained, who live so many Ages from the last
Person who received any part of it immediately from God, or who have not
received it immediately our selves, may come to be assertained, as to all ends
and purposes wherein we may be concerned therein, that the whole and entire
written word in that Book, or those Books, has the original and consequently
the Authority that it pleads and avowes, namely that it is, (...) and not
(...), from God, in the way and manner laid down, and not the Invention of men,
attending (...). 2 Pet. 1. 26; or to cuningly devised fables.

Sect. 2. Now seeing it is expected from us, and required of us by God
himself, and that on the penalty of his eternal Displeasure, if we fail in
our duty (2 These. 1. 8, 9, 10.) that we receive the Scripture not as we do
other Books in relation to their Author, with a firm Opinion, built on
prevailing probable Arguments, prevalent against any actual conclusions to the
contrary; but with divine and supernatural faith, omitting all such inductions
as serve only to ingenerate a persuasion, not to be cast out of the mind by
contrary reasonings or objections; it is especially inquired, what is the
foundation and formal Reason of our doing so, if we so do. Whatever that be,
it returns an answer to this important Question; why, or on what Account do you
believe the Scriptures, or Books of the old and new Testament to be the word of
God. Now the formal Reason of things being but one, what ever consideration
may be had of other inducements or Arguments to beget in us a Persuasion that
the Scripture is the Word of God, yet they have no influence into that divine
faith wherewith we are bound to believe them. They may indeed be of some use,
to repel the objections that are, or may, by any, be raised against the Truth
we believe; and so indirectly cherish, and further faith its self; but as to a
Concurrence unto the foundation, or formal Reason of our believing, it is not
capable of it.

Sect. 3. Having then laid down the Divine Original of the Scriptures, and
opened the manner of the Word's coming forth from God, an Answer shall now on
that sole foundation be returned to the Enquiry laid down. And this I shall do
in the ensuing Position.

The Authority of God, the supreme Lord of all; the first and only absolute
Truth whose Word is Truth, speaking in, and by the Penmen of the Scriptures,
evidenced singly in, and by the Scripture its self, is the sole bottom and
foundation, or formal Reason, of our assenting to those Scriptures as his
word, and of our submitting our hearts and Consciences unto them, with that
faith and obedience, which morally respects him, and is due to him alone.

Sect. 4 God speaking in the Penmen of the Scripture, Heb. 1. 1, his Voice to
them was accompanied with its own Evidence, which gave Assurance unto them; And
God speaking by them, or their Writings unto us, his Word is accompanied with
its own Evidence, and gives Assurance unto us. His Authority and Veracity did,
and do in the one and the other sufficiently manifest themselves, that men may
quietly repose their Souls upon them, in believing and obedience. Thus are we
built (...), Ephesians. 2. 20. on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, in
our believing.

Sect. 5. That then which to the establishment of the Souls of Believers, I
shall labor to prove and evince, is plainly this; namely, that the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament, do abundantly, and uncontroleably manifest
themselves to be the Word of the living God; so that merely on the account of
their own proposal of themselves unto us, in the Name and Majesty of God, as
such, without the contribution of help or Assistance from Tradition, Church, or
any thing else without themselves, we are obliged upon the penalty of eternal
damnation (as are all to whom by any means they come, or are brought) to
receive them, with that subjection of soul which is due to the Word of God.
The Authority of God shining in them, they afford unto us all the divine
Evidence of themselves, which God is willing to grant unto us, or can be
granted us, or is any way needful for us. So then* the Authority of the
written Word, in its self and unto us, is from its self, as the Word of God,
and the eviction of that Authority unto us, is by its self.

Sect. 6. When the Authority of the Scripture is enquired after, strictly its
power to command, and require Obedience in the name of God, is intended. To
ask then whence it has its Authority, is to ask, whence it has its Power to
command in the name of God. Surely men will not say, that the Scripture has
its power to command in the name of God, from any thing but its self. And it
is indeed a contradiction for men to say, They give Authority to the
Scriptures. Why do they do so? Why do they give this Authority to that Book
rather then another? They must say, because it is the Word of God. So the
Reason why they give Authority unto it, is the formal Reason of all its
Authority, which it has antecedently to their charter and concession of Power.
(...) Joh. 17. 17. Thy Word is Truth.

Sect. 7. Some say indeed, that the Scripture has its Authority in its self,
and from its self, or its own divine Original, but not quoad nos; not in
respect of us; that it may reach us, that we may know, and understand, and
submit to its Authority, it must be testified unto aliunde, from some other
person, or thing appointed thereunto: Ans.

1. But may not this be said of God himself, as well as of his word? If God
reveal himself to us, it must be by means; and if those means may not be
understood to reveal him, unless they are testified unto from somewhat else,
God cannot reveal himself to us. Si Deus hominibus non placuerit, utique Deus
non erit. If God and his Word, will keep themselves, within themselves, to
themselves, they may be God and his Word still, and keep their Authority; but
if they will deal with us, and put forth their Commands to us, let them look
that they get the Churches Testimonials, or on this Principle, they may be
safely rejected; but

Sect. 8. Authority is a thing that no Person or Thing can have in him, or its
self, that has it not in respect of others. In its very nature it relates to
others, that are subject unto it. All Authority arises from Relation; and
answers it throughout. The Authority of God over his Creatures, is from their
Relation to him as their Creator. A Kings Authority is in respect of his
subjects. And he who has no subjects, has no Kingly Authority in himself,
but is only a Stoicall King. The Authority of a Minister relates to his flock;
and he who has no flock, has no Authority of a Minister; if he have not a
Ministerial Authority, in reference to a flock, a People, a Church; he has
none, he can have none in himself. So is it in this Case; If the Scripture
has no Authority from its self, in respect of us, it has none in its self,
nor can have. If it has it in its self, it has it in respect of us. Such a
Respect, that is, a Right to Command and oblige to Obedience, is as inseparable
from Authority, or a Moral Power, as heat is from fire. It is true: A man may
have de jure, a lawful Authority over them, whom de facto, he cannot force or
compel to obedience. But want of force does not lessen Authority. God loses
not his Authority over men, though he put not forth toward them, (...). or
(...), the greatness of his Power, or the Efficacy of the might of his
strength to cause them to obey. It is fond then to imagine, that a Man, or any
thing, should have an Authority in himself, or its self, and yet not have
that Authority in respect of them who are to be subject thereunto. That is not
a Law properly at all, which is not a Law to some. Besides, all the evil of
Disobedience relates to the Authority of him that requires the Obedience.
James. 2. 10, 11. No action is Disobedience, but from the subjection of him who
performs it, unto him who requires Obedience. And therefore if the Scripture
has not an Authority in its self, toward us, there is no evil in our
disobedience unto its commands; or our not doing what it commands, and our
doing what it for bids, is not disobedience, because it has not an
Authority over us; I speak of it as considered in its self, before the
Accession of the Testimony pretended necessary to give it an ^uthority over us.
Hitherto then have we carried this objection; To disobey the commands of the
Scripture, before the communication of a Testimony unto it by men, is no sin;
eredat Apella.

Sect. 9. The sense then of our Position is evident and clear; and so our
Answer to the Enquiry made. The Scripture has all its Authority from its
Author, both in its self, and in respect of us; that it has the Author and
Original pleaded for, it declares its self, without any other Assistance by
the Ways and Means, that shall afterward be insisted on: the Truth whereof,
I shall now confirm by one General induction. 2. By Testimonies. 3ly. By
Arguments, expressing the Ways and means of its Revelation of its self.

Sect. 10. There are 3 ways, wereby God in several Degrees reveals
himself, His Properties, His Mind, and Will, to the Sons of men.

1. He does it by his Works, both of Creation and Providence. All thy works
praise thee. Psalm. 145. 10. etc. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
firmament tells the works of his hands. Day unto day utters speech, and
night unto night declares knowledge. There is no speech or language where
their voice is not heard. Their line is gone out throughout the earth, and
their word to the end of the world, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4: etc. So Job: chap.
37. chap. 38. chap. 39; throughout. God who made heaven and earth, and the Sea,
and all things that are therein, suffered in times past all nations to walk in
their own ways, yet he left not himself without witness in that he did Good,
and gave us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and Gladness, Act. 14. 15, 16, 17. And, God that made the world and all
things therein, seeing he is the Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in
temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he
needed any thing, seeing he gives unto all life and breath, and all things,
and has made of one blood all mankind to dwell on the face of the eart, and
assigned the seasons which were ordained before, and the bounds of their
habitations (...), that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him and find him. Act. 17. 24, 25, 26, 27: for, that which may be known
of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them; for the invisible
things of him, from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.
Romans 1. 18, 19, 20, All which places God assisting shall be opened before long,
De natura and Studio Theologiae.
in another Treatise. The sum of them amounts to what was before laid down;
namely, that God reveals and declares himself unto us, by the Works of his
hands.

Sect. 11. God declares himself, his Sovereign power and Authority, his
Righteousness and Holiness, by the innate (or ingrafted) light of nature, and
Principles of the consciences of men. That indispensible moral obedience,
which he requires of us, as his creatures subject to his law, is in general
thus made known unto us. For the Gentiles which have not the law, do by
nature the things contained in the law; they having not the law, are a law unto
themselves, showing the work of the law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts in the mean time
excusing or accusing one another. Romans 2. 14, 15. By the light that God has
indelibly implanted in the minds of men, accompanied with a moral instinct of
Good and evil, seconded by that selfe-Judgment which he has placed in us, in
reference to his own over us, does he reveal himself unto the Sons of men.
3ly. God reveals himself by his Word, as is confessed. It remains then that
we enquire, how we may know, and be ascertained that these things are not
deceivable Pretenses, but that God does indeed so reveal himself by them.

Sect. 12. First; The Works of God, as to what is his Will to teach and reveal
of himself by them, have that Expression of God upon them; that stamp and
character of his Eternal Power and Godhead, that Evidence with them that they
are his, that where ever they are seen and considered, they undeniably evince
that they are so, and that what they teach concerning him, they do it in his
Name and Authority. There is no need of Traditions, no need of Miracles, no
need of the Authority of any Churches to convince a rational Creature, that
the works of God are his, and His only; and that he is Eternlal, and infinite
in Power that made them. They carry about with them their own Authority. By
being what they are, they declare whose they are. To reveal God by his works,
there is need of nothing, but that they be by themselves represented, or
objected to the consideration of Rational creatures.

Sect. 13. The Voice of God in nature is in like manner effectual. It declares
it self to be from God by it is own light and Authority. There is no need to
convince a man by substantial Witnesses, that what his Conscience speaks, it
speaks from God. Whether it bear Testimony to the Being, Righteousness,
Power, Omniscience or Holiness of God himself; or whether it call for that
moral obedience which is eternally and indispensably due to him, and so shows
forth the work of the law in the heart; it so speaks and declares it self,
that without further Evidence or Reasoning, without the Advantage of any
considerations, but what are by it is self supplied, it discovers it is
Au-Author from whom it is, and in whose name it speaks. Those (...), those
common notions, and general Presumptions of him and his Authority, that are
inlayed in the natures of Rational Creatures by the hand of God, to this End,
that they might make a Revelation of him as to the Purposes mentioned, are able
to plead their own divine Original, without the least contribution of
strength or Assistance from without.

Sect. 14. And thus is it with those things; Now the Psalmist says unto God,
Thou have magnified (...) over all thy name the Word thou have spoken. The Name
of God is all that whereby he makes himself known. Over all this, God
magnifies his Word. It lies all in a subserviency thereunto. The name of God,
is not here God himself; but every thing whereby God makes himself known.
Now it were very strange that those low, dark and obscure Principles and
Means of the Revelation of God and his Will, which we have mentioned, should
be able to evince themselves to be from him, without any external help,
Assistance, Testimony, or Authority, and that which is by God himself
magnified above them, which is far more noble and Excellent in it is self,
and in respect of it is end and Order, has far more divinely conspicuous and
glorious impressions and Characters of his Goodness, Holiness, Power, Grace,
Truth then all the Creation, should lie dead, obscure, and have nothing in it is
self to reveal it is Author, until this or that superadded Testimony, be
called in to it is Assistance. We esteem them to have done no service unto the
Truth, who amongst innumerable other bold denyalls, have insisted on this also;
that there is no natural knowledge of God arising from the innate Principles
of Reason, and the Works of God proposing themselves to the consideration
thereof; let now the way to the progress of supernatural Revelation be
obstructed, by denying, that it is able to evince it self to be from God, and
we shall quickly see what banks are cut to let in a flood of Atheism upon the
face of the Earth.

Sect. 15. Let us consider the issue of this General Induction. As God in the
creation of the World, and all things therein contained, has so made and framed
them, has left such characters of his Eternal Power and Wisdom, in them, and
upon them, filled with such Evidences of their Author, suited to the
Apprehensions of rational Creatures, that without any other Testimony from
himself, or any else, under the naked consideration and Contemplation of what
they ARE, they so far declare their Creator, that they are left wholly
unexcusable, who will not learn, and know him from thence; So in the giving
out of his Word to be the foundation of that World, which he has set up in
this world, as (...) a wheel within a wheel, his Church, He has by his Spirit
implanted in it, and impressed on it, such Characters of his Goodness, Power,
Wisdom, Holiness, Love to mankind, Truth, Faithfulness, with all the rest of
his Glorious Excellencies and Perfections, that at all times, and in all Places
when (...) the Expansion of it, is stretched over men by his Providence,
without any other Witness or Testimony given unto it, it declares it is self
to be his, and makes good it is Authority from him, so that the refusal of it
upon it is own evidence brings unavoidable condemnation on the souls of men.
This comparison is insisted on by the Psalmist, Psalm. 19, where as he ascribes
(...) and (...) a voice, and line to the creatures, so (...) etc. Light, Power,
stability and Permanency like that of the heavens and Sun, in commutation of
properties to the Word, and in an unexpressable Exaltation of it above them;
The light of one day of this Sun, being unspeakably more, than that of seven
others, as to the manifestation of the Glory of God.

Sect. 16. This then is fixed as a Principle of Truth; whatever God has
appointed to reveal himself by, as to any special or general End, that
those whom he intends to discover himself unto, may either be effectually
instructed in his mind and will, according to the measure, degree, and means
of the Revelation afforded, or be left inexcusable for not receiving the
Testimony that he gives of himself, by any Plea or pretense of want of clear,
evident, manifest, Revelation; That, what ever it be has such an impresssion
of his Authority upon it, as undeniably to evince that it is from him. And this
now concerning his Word, comes further to be confirmed by Testimonies and
Arguments.

CHAP. III.
Arguments of two sorts. Inartificiall Arguments by way of Testimony, to the
Truth. To whom these Arguments are valid. Isa. 8. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 16. of (...).
The (...) that accompanies the voice of God. Jer. 3. 26, 27, 28, 29. The
rejection of a plea of (...), wherein it consists. Luke 16. 31. of miracles,
their efficacy to beget faith, compared with the word. 2 Pe. 1. 16, 19, 20.

Sect. 1. HAving declared the Divine Original, and Authority of the Scripture,
and explained the Position laid down as the foundation of our ensuing
discourse, way is now made for us, to the consideration of those
s^lf^-Evidences of it is divine Rise* and consequently Authority that it is
attended withal, upon the account whereof we receive it, as, (believing it to
be) the Word of God.

Sect. 2. The Arguments whereby any thing is confimed are of two sorts;
Inartificiall, by the Way of Testimony; and Artificial, by the Way of
Deductions and Inferences. What ever is capable of contributing Evidence unto
Truth, falls under one of these two heads. Both these kinds of Proofs we make
use of, in the business in hand. Some profess they own the Authority of the
Scriptures, and also urge others so to do; but they well dispute on what
grounds and Accounts they do foe. With those we may deal in the first way, by
Testimony from the Scriptures themselves, which upon their own Principles they
cannot refuse. When they shall be pleased to inform us, that they have
relinquished those Principles, and do no longer own the Scripture to be the
Word of God, We will withdraw the Witnesses upon their Exceptions whom for the
present we make use of. Testimonies that are innate and ingrafted in the Word
it is self, used only as Mediums of Artificial Arguments to be deduced from
them, which are of the second sort, may be used toward them who at present own
not the Authority of the Scripture on any account whatever, or who are desirous
to put on themselves the Persons of such men, to try their skill and Ability
for the management of a Controversy against the Word of God.

Sect. 3. In both these cases the Testimony of the Scripture is pleaded, and is
to be received; or cannot with any pretense of Reason be refused; in the
former, upon the account of the acknowledged Authority and Veracity of the
Witness though speaking in its own case; in the latter upon the account of
that self Evidence which the Testimony insisted on is accompanied withal,
made out by such Reasonings and Arguments as for the kind of them, Persons who
own not it is Authority, cannot but admit. In humane things; if a man of known
Integrity and unspotted Reputation bear Witness in any cause, and give
uncontrolable Evidence to his Testimony, from the very nature and Order of the
things whereof he speaks, as it is expected that those who know and admit of
his Integrity and Reputation do acquiesce in his Assertion, so those to whom
he is a Stranger, who are not moved by his Authority, will yet be overcome to
assent to what is witnessed by him, from the nature of the things he asserts,
especially if there be a coincidence of all such circumstances, as are any way
needful to give Evidence to the matter in hand.

Sect. 4. Thus it is, in the case under consideration. For those who profess
themselves to believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and so own the
credit and fidelity of the Witness, it may reasonably be expected from them,
yea in strict Justice demanded of them, that they stand to the Testimony, that
they give to themselves, and their own divine Original. By saying that the
Scripture is the Word of God, and then commanding as to prove it so to be, they
render themselves obnoxious unto every Testimony that we produce from it, that
so it is; and that it is to be received on it is own Testimony. This Witness
they cannot wave without disavowing their own Professed Principles; without
which Principles they have not the least color of imposing this task on us.

Sect. 5. As for them, with whom we have not the Present advantage of their own
Acknowledgment, it is not reasonable to impose upon them with the bare
Testimony of that Witness concerning whom the Question is, whether he be
worthy the Acceptance pleaded for; But yet Arguments taken from the Scripture,
from what it is, and does, it is Nature and Operation, by which the causes and
springs of all things are discovered, are not to be refused.

Sect. 6. But it is neither of these, that principally I intend to deal
withal; my present Discourse is rather about the satisfaction of our own
consciences, than the Answering of others Objections. Only we must satisfy our
Consciences upon such Prinples as will stand against all men's Objections. This
then is chiefly enquired after; namely what it is that gives such an Assurance
of the Scriptures being the Word of God, as that relying thereon we have a sure
Bottom and foundation for our receiving them as such; and from whence it is,
that those who receive them not in that manner, are left inexcusable in their
damnable unbelief. This we say, is in, and from the Scripture its self; so
that there is no other need of any further witness or Testimony, nor is any,
in the same kind, to be admitted.

Sect. 7. It is not at all in my Purpose to insist largly at present on this
subject, and therefore I shall content my self with instancing in some few
Testimonies and Arguments, beginning with one or two of the first sort. Isa. 8.
20. To the law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word,
there is no light in them. What ever any one says be it what, or who it will,
Church, or Person, if it be in or about the things of God, concerning his Will
or Worship, with our Obedience to him, it is to be tried by the Law and
Testimony. Hither we are sent; This is asserted to be the Rule and standard,
the touchstone of all speakings whatever. Now that must speak alone for its
self, which must try the speaking of all, but its self, yea its own also.

Sect. 8. But what does this Law and Testimony, that is, this written Word
plead, on the account whereof, it should be thus attended unto? What does it
urge for its Acceptance? Tradition, Authority of the Church, Miracles, consent
of men? or does it speak (...), and stand only upon its own Sovereignty? The
Apostle gives us his Answer to this Enquiry, 2 Timothy 3. 16. (...). Its Plea for
Reception in Comparison with, and Opposition unto all other ways of coming to
the knowledge of God, his Mind and Will, founded whereon, it calls for
attendance and submission with supreme uncontroleable Authority is its (...)
or divine inspiration. It remains then only to be enquired, whether, when
(...) is pleaded, there be any middle way, but either that it be received with
divine faith, or rejected as false.

Sect. 9. Suppose a man were (...), divinely inspired, and should so profess
himself in the name of the Lord, as did the Prophets of old, Amos 7. supposing
I say he were so indeed; it will not be denied, but that his message were to be
received and submitted unto on that account. The denial of it, would justify
them, who rejected and slew those, that spoke unto them in the name of the
Lord. And it is to say in plain terms, we may reject them whom God sends.
Though miracles were given only with respect to Persons, not things, yet most
of the Prophets, who wrought no miracles, insisted on this, that being (...)
divinely inspired, their doctrine was to be received, as from God. In their so
doing, it was sin, even Unbelief, and Rebellion against God, not to submit to
what they spoke in his name. And it always so fell out, to fix our faith on
the right bottom, that scarce any Prophet that spoke in the name of God, had
any Approbation from the Church, in whose days He spoke. Math. 5. 12. chap.
23. 29. Luke 17. 47, 48. Acts 7. 52. Math. 21. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. It is
true! (...); 2 Pet. 2. 1. there were false Prophets, that spoke in the name of
the Lord, when he sent them not, Jerem. 23. 22. Yet were those whom he did
send, to be received on pain of damnation: on the same penalty were the others
to be refused. Jerem. 23. 28, 29. The foundation of this duty lies in the
(...), that accompanied the Word that was (...); of which afterward. And
without a supposall hereof, it could not consist with the Goodness and
Righteousness of God, to require of men, under the penalty of his eternal
displeasure, to make such a discrimination, where he had not given them (...),
infallible tokens to enable them so to do.

Sect. 10. But that he had, and has done so, he declares, Jerem. 23. How long
shall this be in the heart of the Prophets that Prophesy lies? that are
Prophets of the deceit of their own heart; which think to cause my people to
forget my name by their dreams, which they tell every man to his neighbor, as
their fathers have forgotten my name for Baal. The Prophet that has a dream,
let him tell a dream, and he that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully; what is the chafe to the wheat, says the Lord; is not my word
like a fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the mountains in
Pieces. In the latter days of that Church, when the People were most eminently
perplexed with false Prophets, both as to their number and subtilty, yet God
lays their Eternal and Temporal safety, or Ruin, on their discerning aright
between his Word and that which was only pretended so to be. And that they
might not complain of this imposition, he tenders them security of its
easiness of Performance. Speaking of his own Word comparatively, as to every
thing that is not so, he says, it is as Wheat to Chafe, which may
infallibly, by being what it is, be discerned from it; and then absolutely that
it has such Properties, as that it will discover its self; even Light and
heat, and Power. A Person then who was truly (...), was to be attended unto,
because he was so.

Sect. 11* As then was said before, the Scriptures being (...), is not the case
the same, as with a man that was so? is there any thing in the VVriting of it
by Gods Command, that should impair its Authority? nay is it not freed from
innumerable prejudices that attended it, in its first giving out by men;
arising from the personal infirmities, and supposed interests of them that
delivered it? Jerem. 43. 3. Joh. 9. 29. Acts. 24. 5.

Sect. 12. This being pleaded by it, and insisted on, its Testimony is
received, or it is not. If it be received on this account, there is in it we
say the proper basis and foundation of faith, whe^eon it has its (...) or
subsistence. If it be rejected, it must be not only with a refusal of its
witness, but also with a high detestation of its pretense to be from God. What
ground or plea for such a refusal and detestation any one has, or can have,
shall be afterward considered. If it be a sin to refuse it, it had been a duty
to receive it: if a duty to receive it as the Word of God, then was it
sufficiently manifested so to be. Of the objection arising from them who
pretend to this inspiration falsely, we have spoken before; and we are as yet
dealing with them that own the Book whereof we spoke to be the Word of God,
and only call in Question the Grounds on which they do so; or on which others
ought so to do. As to these it may suffice, that in the strength of all the
Authority and truth they profess to own and acknowledge in it, it declares
the foundarion of its Acceptance to be no other, but its own divine
inspiration; hence it is (...).

Sect. 13. Again in that dispute, that was between Abraham and the Rich man,
Luke 16. 31. about the best and most effectual means of bringing men to
Repentance: The Rich man in Hell, speaking his own conception, fixes upon
Miracles; if one rise from the dead, and preach, the work will be done:
Abraham is otherwise minded, that is, Christ was so, the Author of that
parable: He bids them attend to Moses and the Prophets, the Written Word, as
that which all faith and Repentance was immediately to be grounded on. The
enquiry being, how men might be best assured, that any message is from God, did
not the Word manifest its self to be from him, this direction had not been
equal.

Sect. 14. The Ground of the Request for the rising of one from the dead, is
laid in the common Apprehension of men not knowing the power of God in the
Scriptures; who think, that if an evident miracle were wrought, all pretenses
and pleas of Unbelief would be excluded; who does not think so? Our Savior
discovers that mistake, and lets men know, that those who will not own, or
submit to the Authority of God in the Word, would not be moved by the most
signal miracles imaginable. If an holy man, whom we had known assuredly to
have been dead for some years, should rise out of his grave, and come unto us
with a message from God; could any man doubt whether he were sent unto us of
God or no? I suppose not. The rising of men from the dead was the greatest
miracle that attended the Resurrection of our Savior, Math. 27. 52, 53. yea
greater then his own, if the Socinians may be believed: namely; in that he
raised not himself by his own power; yet the evidence of the mission of such
an One, and the Authority of God speaking in him, our Savior being Judge, is
not of an Efficacy to enforce belief beyond that which is in the Written Word,
nor a surer foundation for faith to repose its self upon.

Sect. 15. Could we hear a Voice from Heaven, accompanied with such a divine
power, as to evidence its self to be from God, should we not rest in it as
such? I suppose men think they would; can we think that any man should withdraw
his Assent, and say, yea but I must have some Testimony that this is from God;
All such Evasions are precluded in the supposition, wherein a self evidencing
Power is granted. What greater miracles did the Apostles of Christ ever behold,
or hear; then that Voice that came (...), from the most excellent Glory; This
is my beloved Son: yet Peter who heard that voice tells us, that comparatively
we have greater security from, and by the Written Word, then they had in, and
by that miraculous voice: We have (...); we heard says he that voice indeed,
but we have a more sure word of Prophesy to attend unto. More sure! not in in
its self, but in its giveing out its Evidence unto us. And how does it appear
so to be? The Reason he alleges for it, was before insisted on, 2 Pet. 1. 18,
19, 20.

Sect. 16. Yea suppose that God should speak to us from Heaven, as he spoke to
Moses; or as he spoke to Christ; or from some certain place, as Numb. 7. 8, 9.
How should we be able to know it to be the Voice of God? Cannot Satan cause a
Voice to be heard in the Air, and so deceive us? or, may not there be some way
in this kind found out, whereby men might impose upon us with their delusions.
Pope Celestine thought he heard a voice from heaven, when it was but the cheat
of his Successor. Must We not rest at last in that (...), which accompanies the
true Voice of God, evidencing its self, and ascertaining the Soul beyond all
possibility of mistake. Now did not this (...) accompany the written Word at
its first giving forth? if it did not, as was said, how could any man be
obliged to discern it from all delusions; if it did, how came it to loose it?
did God appoint his word to be Written, that so he might destroy its Authority?
If the Question be whether the doctrines proposed to be believed, are Truths of
God, or cunningly devised fables, we are sent to the Scripture its self, and
that alone, to give the Determination.

CHAP. IV.
Innate Arguments in the Scripture, of its divine original and Authority.
These the formal Reason of our Believing. Its self evidencing Efficacy. All
light m^nifests it self. The Scripture, Light. What kind of Light it is.
Spiritual light evidentiall. The ground of men's not discerning this Light.
Consectaries from the Premises laid down. What the self Evidencing Light of
the Scripture peculiarly is. The Proposition of the Scripture as an object of
faith is from and by this Light. Power, self Evidencing. The Scripture the
Power of God. And Powerful. How this Power exerts its self. The whole
Question resolved.

1. HAving given some few instances of those many Testimonies, which the
Scripture in express Terms bears to its self, and the spring, rise, and
fountain of all that Authority, which it claims among and over the sons of
men, which all those who pretend on any account whatever, to own and
acknowledge its Divinity, are bound to stand to, and are obliged by; The second
thing proposed, or the innate Arguments that the Word of God is furnished
withal for its own manifestation, and whereby the Authority of God is
revealed for faith to repose its self upon, comes in the next place into
consideration. Now these Arguments contain the full and formal Grounds of our
Answer, to that enquiry before laid down; namely, why and wherefore we do
receive and believe the Scripture to be the word of God; It being the formal
Reason of our faith, that whereon it is built, and whereunto it is resolved
that is enquired after, we answer as we said before; we do so receive, embrace,
believe, and submit unto it, because of the Authority of God who speaks it, or
gave it forth as his Mind and Will, evidencing its self, by the spirit, in,
and with that word unto our minds and Consciences; or because that the
Scripture being brought unto us, by the good Providence of God, in Ways of his
Appointment and Preservation, it does evidence its self infallibly unto our
consciences to be the Word of the living God.

Sect. 2. The self evidencing Efficacy of the Scripture, and the grounds of
it, which consist in common mediums, that have an extent and latitude
answerable to the Reasons of men, whether as yet they acknowledge it to be the
Word of God or no, is that then which in the remainder of this discourse I
shall endeavor to clear and vindicate. This only I shall desire to premise,
that whereas some Grounds of this efficacy seem to be placed in the things
themselves contained in the Scripture, I shall not consider them abstractedly
as such, but under the formality of their being the Scripture or Written Word
of God; without which consideration and Resolution, the things mentioned would
be left naked and utterly divested of their Authority and efficacy pleaded for;
and be of no other nature and importance, then the same things found in other
Books. It is the Writing its self, that now supplies the place and Room of
the Persons, in, and by whom God originally spoke to men. As were the Persons
speaking of old, so are the Writings now: It was the Word spoken, that was to
be believed, yet as spoken by them from God; and it is now the Word written,
that is to be believed, yet as written by the Command and Appointment of God.

Sect. 3. There are then two things, that are accompanied with a self
evidencing Excellency; and every other thing does so, so far as it is pertaker
of their nature, and no otherwise; now These are 1 Light. 2. Power for, or in
Operation.

Sect. 4. 1 Light manifests its self. Whatever is Light does so: that is, it
does whatever is necessary on its own part for its manifestation and discovery.
Of the defects that are, or may be in them, to whom this discovery is made, we
do not as yet speak: And whatever manifests its self is Light. (...). Ephesians.
5. 13. Light requires neither proof nor Testimony for its Evidence. Let the
Sun arise in the firmament, and there is no need of VVitnesses to prove and
confirm unto a seeing man that it is day. A small candle will so do. Let the
least child bring a candle into a room that before was dark, and it would be
a madness to go about to prove by substantial VVitnesses, men of Gravity and
Authority, that Light is brought in. Does it not evince its self, with an
Assurance above all that can be obtained by any Testimony whatever? Whatever is
Light, either naturally or morally so, is revealed by its being so. That which
evidenceth not its self, is not Light.

Sect. 5. That the Scripture is a Light, we shall see immediately. That it is
so, or can be called so, unless it has this nature and Property of Light, to
evidence its self, as well as to give light unto others, cannot in any
tolerable correspondency of speech be allowed. Whether Light spiritual and
intellectual regarding the mind, or natural with respect to bodily sight, be
firstly and properly Light, from whence the other is by Allusion denominated, I
need not now enquire. Both have the same properties in their several kinds.
(...): true light shines. (...): 1 John 1. 5. God himself is light; and he
inhabiteth (...), 1 Timothy 6. 16. Biddle Catech.
not a shining glistering brightness, as some grossly imagine, but the Glorious
unsearchable Majesty of his own Being, which is inaccessible to our
understandings. So Isa. 57. 15. inhabiteth eternity. So (...) says the
Psalmist, thou cloathest thy self with Light: and Dan. 2. 22. (...) the Light
remains with him; God, He is light essentially, and is therefore known by the
beaming of his Eternal Properties, in all that outwardly is of him. And light
abides with him, as the fountain of it; he communicating Light to all others.
This being the fountain of all Light, the more it participates of the nature
of the fountain, the more it is Light; and the more properly, as the
Properties and Qualities of it are considered. It is then spiritual, moral,
intellectual Light, with all its mediums, that has the pre-eminence, as to a
participation of the nature and properties of light.

Sect. 6. Now the Scripture the word of God is light; those that reject it are
called (...) lights rebels, men resisting the Authority which they cannot but
be convinced of. Psalm. 19. 9. and 43. 3. and 119. 105, 130. Prove. 6. 23. Isa.
9. 2. Hos. 6. 5. Math. 4. 16. and 5. 14. Joh. 3. 20. 21: It is a Light so
shining with the majesty of its Author, as that it manifests its self to be
his. 2 Pet. 1. 19. A Light shining in a dark place, with an eminent advantage
for its own discovery, as well as unto the benefit of others.

Sect. 7. Let a light be never so mean and contemptible; yet if it shines,
casts out beams and rays in a dark place, it will evidence its self. If
other things be wanting in the faculty, the Light as to its innate Glory and
beauty, is not to suffer prejudice. But the Word is a glorious shining Light,
as has been showed; an illuminating Light; compared to, and preferred above
the light of the Sun. Psalm. 19. 5, 6, 7. Romans 10. 18. Let not then a reproach
be cast upon the most glorious Light in the world, the most eminent reflection
of uncreated light and Excellencies, that will not be fastened on any thing,
that on any account is so called. Math. 5. 19.

Sect. 8. Now as the Scripture is thus a Light, we grant it to be the duty of
the Church, of any Church, of every Church, to hold it up, whereby it may
become the more conspicuous. It is a ground, and pillar to. set this light
upon. 1 Timothy 3. 15. (...), may refer to the mystery of Godliness, in the
next words following, in good coherence of speech, as well as to the Church;
but granting the usual reading, no more is affirmed, but that the Light and
Truth of the Scripture is held up, and held out by the Church. It is the duty
of every Church so to do: almost the whole of its duty. And this duty it
performs ministerially, not Authoritatively. A Church may bear up the light,
it is not the light. It bears witness to it, but kindles not one divine beam
to further its discovery. All the Preaching that is in any Church, its
Administration of Ordinances, all its walking in the Truth, hold up this light.

Sect. 9. Nor does it in the least impair this self evidencing Efficacy of
the Scripture, that it is a moral and spiritual, not a natural light. The
Proposition is Universal to all kinds of light; yea more fully applicable to
the former, than the latter. Light I confess of it is self will not remove the
defect of the visive faculty. It is not given for that end; Light is not Eyes.
It suffices that there is nothing wanting on it is own part for it is discovery
and Revelation. To argue that the Sun, cannot be known to be the Sun, or the
great means of communicating external light unto the World, because blind men
cannot see it, nor do know any more of it, then they are told will scarce be
admitted; nor does it in the least impeach the Efficacy of the light pleaded
for, that men stupidly blind cannot comprehend it. Joh. 1. 5.

Sect. 10. I do not assert from hence, that wherever the Scripture is brought,
by what means soever (which indeed is all one) All that read it, or to whom it
is read, must instantly, of necessity assent unto it is Divine Original. Many
men (who are not stark blind) may have yet so abused their Eyes, that when a
Light is brought into a dark place, they may not be able to discern it. Men
may be so preposessed with innumerable prejudices, Principles received by
strong Traditions, corrupt Affections, making them hate the light, that they
may not behold the Glory of the word, when it is brought to them. But it is
nothing to our present discourse, whether any man living be able by and of
himself to discern this Light, whilst the defect may be justly cast on their
own blindness. 2 Cor. 4. 2, 3*4. By the manifestation of the truth we commend
our selves to every ones conscience in the sight of God; but if our Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the God of this world has
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the Gospel of
Christ who is the image of God, should shine unto them. There is in the
dispensation of the Word an Evidence of Truth commending it is self to the
consciences of men; Some receive not this Evidence; is it for want of Light in
the Truth it is self? No! that is a Glorious light that shines into the hearts
of men; Is it for want of Testimony to assert this light? No! but merely
because the God of this world has blinded the Eyes of men, that they should
not behold it.

Sect. 11. From what then has been laid down, these two things may be
inferred.

1. That as the Authority of God the first and only absolute Truth, in the
Scripture, is that alone which divine faith rests upon, and is the formal
object of it; so wherever the Word comes, by what means soever, it has in
it is self a sufficiency of Light to evidence to all, (and will do it
eventually to all that are not blinded by the God of this world) that Authority
of God it is Author; And the only Reason why it is not received by many in the
World to whom it is come, is, the Advantage that Satan has to keep them in
ignorance and blindness, by the lusts, corruptions, prejudices, and hardness
of their own hearts.

Sect. 12. The word then makes a sufficient Proposition of it is self, wherever
it is. And he to whom it shall come, who refuses it because it comes not so, or
so Testified, will give an account of his Atheism and infidelity. He that has
the witness of God, need not stay for the Witness of men, for the Witness of
God is greater.

Sect. 13. Wherever the Word is received indeed, as it requires it self to be
received, and is really assented unto as the Word of God; it is so received
upon the Evidence of that Light which it has in it is self, manifestly
declaring it is self so to be. It is all one, by what means, by what hand,
whether of a Child or a Church, by Accident or Traditions, by common consent of
men, or pecular Providence, the Scripture comes unto us; Come how it will, it
has its Authority in it is self, and toward us, by being the Word of God; and
has it is power of manifesting it is self so to be, from it is own innate Light.

Sect. 14. Now this light in the scripture for which we contend, is nothing but
the beaming of the Majesty, Truth, Holiness, and Authority of God, given unto
it, and left upon it, by it is Author the Holy Ghost; An impresse it has, of
God's Excellency upon it, distinguishing it by infallible (...), from the
product of any creature; By this it dives into the Consciences of men, into all
the secret recesses of their hearts; guides, teaches, directs, determines, and
judges in them, upon them, in the name, majesty and Authority of God. If men
who are blinded by the God of this world, will yet deny this light, because
they perceive it not, it shall not prejudice them who do. By this self
evidencing Light, I say, does the Scripture make such a proposition of it is
self, as the Word of God, that whoever rejects it, does it at the peril of
his eternal Ruin; and thereby a bottom and foundation is tendered for that
faith which it requires, to repose it is self upon.

Sect. 15. For the proof then of the Divine Authority of the scriptures, unto
him or them, who as yet on no account what ever do acknowledge it, I shall
only suppose, that by the Providence of God the Book it is self be so brought
unto him or them, as that He, or they, be engaged to the consideration of it;
or do attend to the reading of it. This is the work of God's providence in
the Government of the world; upon a supposall hereof, I leave the Word with
them; and if it evidence not it is self unto their conscience, it is because
they are blinded by the God of this world; which will be no plea for the
refusal of it, at the Last day; And they who receive it not on this Ground,
will never receive it on any, as they ought.

Sect. 16. The second sort of things that evidence themselves, are things of an
Effectual powerful Operation in any kind. So does fire by heat, the Wind by
it is noise and force; salt by it is taste and savor, the Sun by its light and
heat; So do also moral principles that are effectually operative. Romans 2. 14,
15. Men in whom they are, (...), Do manifest the Work of them; or them by
their work and Efficacy. Whatever it be that has an innate power in it is
self, that will effectually operate on a fit and proper subject, it is able to
evidence it is self, and it is own nature and condition.

Sect. 17. To manifest the interest of the Scripture to be enrolled among
things of this nature, yea under God himself, who is known by his great power
and the Effects of it, to have the Pre-eminence, I shall observe only one or
two things concerning it, the various improvement whereof, would take up more
time, and greater space, then I have allotted to this discourse.

Sect. 18. It is absolutely called the Power of God; and that unto it is proper
End, which way lies the tendency of it is Efficacy in Operation. Romans 1. 16. It
is (...), vis, virtus Dei; the Power of God. (...), the word concerning the
Cross, that is the Gospel, is (...). 1 Cor. 1. 18; the Power of God; And
faith which is built on that word, without other helps or Advantages, is said
to stand in the Power of God. 1 Cor. 2. 5. That is, effectually working, in and
by the Word; it works, (...); in the demonstration of the spirit and of
power. (...): it is spiritual Power gives a demonstration of it. Thus it comes
not as a naked Word, 1 These. 1. 5, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and
(...); giving all manner of Assurance and full persuasion of it is self, Even
by it is Power and Efficacy. Hence it is termed (...) the Rod of power, or
strength. Psalm. 110. 2; denoting both Authority and Efficacy; surely that which
is thus the Power and Authority of God, is able to make it is self known so to
be.

Sect. 19. It is not only said to be (...), Power, the Power of God in it is
self; but also (...), able and powerful in respect of us. Thou have learned
says Paul to Timothy (...), the sacred letters (the written word) (...), which
are able to make thee wise unto salvation. They are powerful and effectual to
that purpose. It is (...). James. 1. 21. The Word that has power in it, to
save. So Acts 20. 31. I commend you (...), to the able, powerful Word. And
that we may know what kind of power it has, the Apostle tells us, that it is
(...), it is living and effectual (Heb. 4. 12.) and sharper then any two edged
sword, peircing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.
It is designed of God to declare (...), the effectual working of his power.
See Joh. 6. 68, 69. 2 Cor. 6. 41. 2 Cor. 15. 58. Gal. 2. 8. By virtue of this
Power, it brought forth fruit in all the world. Col. 1. 6. Without sword,
without (for the most part) miracles, without humane Wisdom, or Oratory,
without any inducements or motives, but what were merely and solely taken from
it is self, consisting in things, that eye had not seen, nor ear heard, nor
could enter into the heart of man to conceive; has it exerted this it is power
and efficacy, to the conquest of the World; causing men of all sorts, in all
times and places, so to fall down before its Divine Authority, as immediately
to renounce all that was dear to them in the world, and to undergo whatever
was draedful, terrible and destructive to nature in all it is dearest
concernments.

Sect. 20. It has been the work of many to insist on the Particulars, wherein
this Power exerts it is self: so that I shall not enlarge upon them. In
general they have this Advantage, that as they are all spiritual, so they are
such, as have their seat dwelling and abode in the hearts and consciences of
men, whereby they are not liable to any Exception as though they were
pretended. Men cannot harden themselves in the rejection of the Testimony they
give, by sending for Magitians to do the like; or by any pretense that it is a
common thing, that is befallen them on whom the Word puts forth it is power. The
seat and residence of these Effects, is safeguarded against all Power and
Authority but that of God. Its diveing into the hearts Consciences and secret
recesses of the minds of men, its judging and sentencing of the^ in themselves,
it is co^victions, terrors, conquests, and killing of men; it is converting,
building up, making wise, holy, obedient, its administering consolations in
every condition, and the like effects of it is power are usually Spoken unto.

Sect. 21. These are Briefly the foundations of the Answer returned to the
Enquiry formerly laid down which might abundantly be enlarged. How know we
that the Scripture is the Word of God; how may others come to be assured
thereof? The Scripture, say we, bears Testimony to it is self, that it is the
Word of God; that Testimony is the witness of God himself, which who so does
not accept and believe, he does what in him lies to make God a liar; To give us
an infallible Assurance that in receiving this Testimony, we are not imposed
upon by cunningly devised fables, the (...), the (...), the Scriptures, have
that Glory of Light and Power accompanying of them, as wholly distinguishes
them by infallible signs and Evidences from all Words and Writings not divine,
conveying their Truth and Power, into the souls and consciences of men, with
an infalible certainty. On this account are they received, by all that receive
them as from God; who have any real distinguishing foundation of their faith,
which would not be, separated from these grounds, as effectual an expedient
for the reception of the Alcoran.

CHAP. V.
Of the Testimony of the Spirit. Traditions. Miracles.

Sect. 1. BEfore I proceed to the consideration of those other Testimonies,
which are as Arguments drawn from those innate Excellencies, and Properties of
the Word which I have insisted on, some other things whose right understanding
is of great importance in the cause underdebate, must be laid down and stated.
Some of these refer to that Testimony of the Spirit, that is usually and
truly pleaded, as the great ascertaining Principle, or that, on the account
whereof, we receive the Scriptures to be the Word of God. That it may be seen,
in what sense, that is usually delivered by our Divines, and how far there is
a coincidence between that Assertion, and what we have delivered, I shall lay
down what that Testimony is, wherein it consists, and what is the weight or
stresse that we lay upon it.

Sect. 2. That the Scripture be received as the Word of God, there is required
a twofold Efficacy of the spirit. The first respects the subject or the mind of
man that assents unto the Authority of the Scripture; now concerning this Act,
or work of the Spirit, whereby we are enabled to believe the Scripture, on the
account whereof we may say that we receive the Scripture to be the word of God,
or upon the Testimony of the Spirit, I shall a little enquire, what it is, and
wherein it does consist.

Sect. 3. 1st. Then, It is not an outward or inward vocal Testimony concerning
the Word, as the Papists would impose upon us to believe and assent. We do not
affirm that the spirit immediately, by himself, says unto every individual
Believer, this Book is, or contains the Word of God; We say not that the
Spirit ever spoke to us of the Word, but by the Word. Such an Enthusiasme as
they fancy is rarely pretended, and where it is so, it is for the most part
quickly discovered to be a delusion. We plead not for the usefulness, much
less the necessity of any such Testimony. Yea the Principles we have laid
down, resolving all faith into the Public Testimony of the Scriptures
themselves, do render all such private Testimonies altogether needless.

Sect. 4. 2ly. This Testimony of the spirit consists not in a persuasion that a
man takes up, he knows not well how, or why; only this he knows, he will not
Depose it though it cost him his life. This would be like that, which by
Morinus is ascribed to the Church of Rome, which though it knew no Reason why
it should prefer the vulgar latin Translation before the Original, Morin.
Excere. de Heb. Tex. fincer and excercit. 1. cap. 1.
yet by the guidance of the Spirit would do so, that is unreasonably. But if a
man should say, that he is persuaded that the Scripture is the Word of God, and
that he will dye a 1000 times to give Testimony thereunto; and not knowing any
real ground of this persuasion, that should bear him out in such a Testimony,
shall ascribe it to the Spirit of God, our concernment lies not in that
Persuasion. This may befall men by the Advantage of Traditions, whereof men are
usually Zealous; and obstinate in their defense. Education in some
constitutions will give pertinacy in most vain and false persuasions. It is
not then a Resolution and Persuasion induced into our minds we know not how,
built we know not upon what foundations, that we intend in the Assignation of
our receiving the Scripture, to be the Word of God, to the effectual work and
witness of the Holy Ghost.

Sect. 5. Two things then we intend by this Work of the spirit upon the mind
of man 1. His communication of of spiritual Light; by an act of his Power,
enabling the mind to discern the saving Truth, Majesty, and Authority of the
Word, (...). There is a blindness, a darkness upon the minds of men, (...),
that not only disenables them from discerning the things of God, in their
certainty, Evidence, Necessity, and beauty; (for (...);) but also causes them
to judge amiss of them; as things weak and foolish, dark, unintelligible,
not answering to any Principle of Wisdom whereby they are guided: 1 Cor. 2.
Whilst this (...) abides on the minds of men, it is impossible that they should
on any right abiding foundation assent to the Word of God. They may have a
prejudicate opinion, they have no faith concerning it. This darkness then must
be removed by the Communication of Light by the Holy Ghost, which work of his
Illumination is commonly by others spoken unto; and by me also in another place.

Sect. 6. 2. The Holy Ghost together with, and by his work of Illumination,
taking off the perverse disposition of mind that is in us by nature, with our
Enmity to, and Aversation from the things of God, effectually also persuades
the mind, to a receiving and admitting of the Truth, Wisdom, and Authority of
the word; Now because this perverse disposition of mind, possessing the (...)
of the soul, influences the Will also into an Aversation and dislike of that
Goodness, which is in the Truth proposed to it; it is removed by a double act
of the Holy Ghost.

7. 1. He gives us Wisdom, Understanding, a spiritual Judgment, whereby we
may be able to compare spiritual things with spiritual, in a spiritual
manner, and to come thereby to a clear and full Light of the heavenly
Excellency and Majesty of the Word; and so enables us to know of the doctrine,
whither it be of God. Under the benefit of this Assistance, all the parts of
the Scripture in their Harmony and Correspondency, all the Truths of it in
their power and necessity, come in together to give Evidence one to another,
and all of them to the whole; I mean as the mind is enabled to make a
spiritual Judgment of them.

8. 2. He gives (...), a spiritual sense, a Taste of the things themselves upon
the mind, Heart, and Conscience; when we have (...) senses exercised to
discern such things. These things deserve a more full handling, and to be
particularly exemplified from Scripture, if the nature of our present design
would admit thereof.

Sect. 9. As in our natural Estate in respect of these things of God, the mind
is full of vanity, darkness, blindness, yea is darkness its self, so that
there is no correspondency between the faculty and the Object; and the Will
lies in an utter unacquaintednesse, yea impossibility of any acquaintance with
the life, power, savor, sweetness, relish, and Goodness, that is in the
things proposed to be known and discerned, under the dark shades of a blind
mind; so for a removal of both these, the Holy Ghost communicates Light to the
Understanding, whence it is able to see and judge of the truth, as it is in
Jesus, and the Will being thereby delivered from the dungeon wherein it was,
and quickened a new, performs its office, in embracing what is proper and
suited unto it in the object proposed. The Spirit indeed discovers to every
one (...); according to the counsel of his will; but yet in that way, in the
General whereby the Sun gives out his light and heat, the former making way
for the latter: But these things must not now be insisted on.

Sect. 10. Now by these works of the Spirit, He does, I say, persuade the Mind
concerning the Truth and Authority of the Scripture; and therein leave an
Impression of an effectual Testimony within us: And this Testimony of his, as
it is Authoritative, and infallible in its self, so of inconceivably more
Efficacy, Power and Certainty unto them that do receive it, then any Voice, or
internal Word, boasted of by some, can be. But yet this is not the work of the
spirit at present enquired after.

Sect. 11. 2 There is a Testimony of the spirit, that respects the object, or
the Word its self; and this is a public Testimony, which, as it satisfies our
souls in particular, so it is, and may be pleaded, in reference unto the
satisfaction of all others, to whom the Word of God shall come. The Holy Ghost
speaking in and by the Word, imparting to it Virtue, Power, Efficacy, Majesty
and Authority, affords us the Witness, that our faith is resolved unto. And
thus whereas there are but two heads, whereunto all Grounds of Assent do
belong, namely Authority of Testimony, and the self Evidence of Truth, they do
here both concur in one. In the same Word we have both the Authority of the
Testimony of the spirit, and the self Evidence of the Truth spoken by him; yea
so, that both these are materially one and the same, though distinguished in
their formal conceptions. I have been much affected with those verses of
DANTES the Italian Poet, which some body has thus word for word turned into
Latin.

-- larga pluvia
Spiritus sancti quae est diffusa
Super veteres, and super novas membranas,
Est syllogismus qu^ eam mihi conclusit
Acute adeo ut prae illa
Omnis demonstratio mihi videatur obtusa.
The spirits communication of his own Light, and Authority to the Scripture,
as Evidences of its original, is the Testimony pleaded for.

Sect. 12. When then we resolve our faith into the Testimony of the Holy Ghost,
it is not any Private whisper, Word, or voice given to individual Persons; It
is not the secret and effectual persuasion of the Truth of the Scriptures,
that falls upon the minds of some men, from various involved considerations of
Education, Tradition, and the like, whereof they can give no particular
account: It is not the effectual work of the Holy Ghost upon the minds and
wills of men, enabling them savingly to believe, that is intended; The Papists
for the most part pleading about these things, do but show their ignorance and
malice. But it is the Public Testimony of the Holy Ghost given unto all, of
the Word, by and in the word, and its own divine light, Efficacy, and Power.

Sect. 13. Thus far then have we proceeded. The Scripture, the Written Word
has its infallible Truth in its self; (...) Joh. 17. from whence it has its
Verity, thence it has its Authority; for its whole Authority is founded in its
Truth. Its Authority in its self, is its Authority in respect of us; nor has
it any whit more in its self, then de jure it has toward and over all them
to whom it comes; That de facto some do not submit themselves unto it, is their
sin and rebellion. This Truth and consequently this Authority, is evidenced and
made known to us, by the public Testimony which is given unto it by the Holy
Ghost speaking in it, with divine Light and Power, to the minds, souls, and
consciences of men: being therein by its self proposed unto us, We being
enlightened by the Holy Ghost, (which in the Condition wherein we are, is
necessary for the Apprehension of any spiritual thing or truth in a spiritual
manner) we receive it, and religiously subject our souls unto it, as the Word
and Will of the everliving, sovereign God, and judge of all* And if this be
not a bottom and foundation of faith, I here publicly Profess, that for
ought I know, I have no faith at all.

Sect. 14. Having laid this stable foundation; I shall with all possible
brevity consider some pretenses, and Allegations, for the confirmation of the
Authority of the Scripture, invented and made use of by some, to divert us from
that foundation, the closing wherewith, will in this matter alone bring peace
unto our souls; and so this Chapter shall as it were, lay in the balance, and
compare together, the Testimony of the Spirit before mentioned and explained,
and the other pretenses and pleas, that shall now be examined.

Sect. 15. 1. Some say, when on other accounts they are concerned so to say,
that we have received the Scripture from the Church of Rome, who received it by
Tradition, and this gives a credibility unto it. Of Tradition in general,
without this limitation which destroies it, of the Church of Rome, I shall
speak afterward. Credibility, either keeps within the bounds of probability,
as that may be heightened to a manifest uncontr^leablenesse, whilst yet its
principles exceed not that sphere; in which sense it belongs not at all to our
present discourse; or it includes a firm, suitable foundation, for faith
supernatural and divine. Have we in this sense received the Scripture from
that Church, as it is called? is that Church able to give such a credibility to
any thing? or does the Scripture stand in need of such a credibility to be
given to it from that Church? are not the first most false, and is not the last
blasphemous? To receive a thing from a Church, as a Church, is to receive it
upon the Authority of that Church: If we receive any thing from the Authority
of a Church, we do it not because the thing its self is (...), worthy of
Acceptance, but because of the Authority alleged. If then we thus receive
the Scriptures from the Church of Rome, why (in particular) do we not receive
the Apocryphal Books also, which she receives? How did the Church of Rome
re^eive the Scriptures? shall we say that she is authorized to give out what
seems Good to her, as the Word of God? not: but she has received them by
Tradition; so she pleads, that she has received the Apocryphal books also; we
then recive the Scriptures from Rome; Rome by Tradition; We make our selves
Judges of that Tradition; and yet Rome says, this is one thing, that she has
by the same Tradition, namely, that she alone is judge of what she has by
Tradition; But the common fate of liars is befallen that Harlot: she has so
long, so constantly, so desperately lied in many, the most things that she
professes, pretending Tradition for them, that indeed she deserves not to be
believed, when she tells the Truth. Besides, She pleads that she received the
Scriptures from the Beginning, when it is granted that the copies of the Hebrew
of the old, and Greek of the new Testament were only authentic: These she
pleads now under her keeping to be woefully corrupted, and yet is angry that we
believe not her Tradition.

Sect. 16. Some add that we receive the Scripture to be the Word of God upon
the account of the miracles that were wrought at the giving of the Law, and of
the new Testament; which miracles we have received by universal Tradition. But
first I desire to know whence it comes to pass, that seeing our savior Jesus
Christ wrought many other miracles besides those that are written, Joh. 20. 30.
chapter 21. 25. and the Apostles likewise, they cannot by all their Traditions help
us to so much as an obscure report of any one, that is not written; (I speak
not of Legends) which yet at their performance were no less known then those
that are; nor were less useful for the end of miracles then they. Of
Tradition in General afterward* But is it not evident that the miracles
whereof they speak, are preserved in the Scripture and no otherwise? And if so;
can these miracles operate upon the understanding or judgment of any man,
unless they first grant the Scripture to be the Word of God, I mean to the
begetting of a divine faith of them, even that there were ever any such
miracles. Suppose these miracles alleged, as the Ground of our believing of
the word, had not been written, but like the Sybills leaves had been driven up
and down, by the Worst and fiercest wind that blows in this world, the breath
of man; Those who should keep them by tradition, that is men, are by nature so
vain, foolish, malicious, such liars, adders, detracters, have spirits and
minds so unsuited to spiritual things, so liable to alteration in themselves,
and to contradiction one to another, are so given to impostures, and are so apt
to be imposed upon, have been so shuffled and driven up and down the world in
every Generation, have for the most part so utterly lost the Remembrance of
what themselves are, whence they come, or whether they are to go, that I can
give very little credit to what I have nothing but their Authority to rely upon
for, without any Evidence from the nature of the thing it is self.

Sect. 17. Abstracting then from the Testimony given in the Scriptures to the
miracles wrought by the prime Revealers of the mind and will of God in the
Word; and no tolerable assurance as to the business in hand, where a
foundation for faith is enquired after, can be given that ever any such
miracles were wrought. If numbers of men may be allowed to speak, we may have
a Traditionall Testimony given to the blasphemous figments of the Alcoran,
under the name of True miracles. But the constant Tradition of more than a 1000
years, carried on by innumerable multitudes of men, great, wise, and sober,
from one Generation to another, does but set open the gates of hell for the
Mahumetans; Yet setting aside the Authority of God in his Word, and what is
resolved thereinto, I know not why they may not vye Traditions with the rest of
the world. The world indeed is full of Traditions flowing from the Word; that
is, a knowledge of the Doctrines of the word in the minds of men; but a
Tradition of the Word, not resolved into the Word, a tradition referred to a
fountain of sense in seeing, and hearing, preserved as an orall law, in a
distinct channel, and stream by it is self, when it is evidenced, either by
instance in some particular preserved therein, or in a probability of securing
it through the Generations passed, by a comparison of some such effect in
things of the like kind, I shall be ready to receive it.

Sect. 18. Give me then, as I said before, but the least obscure report, of any
one of those many miracles that were wrought by our Savior and the Apostles,
which are not recorded in the scriptures, and I shall put more valuation on the
pretended Traditions, than I can as yet persuade my self unto. Besides! many
VVriters of the Scripture wrought no miracles, and by this Rule their writings
are left to shift for themselves. Miracles indeed were necessary to take of all
prejudices from the Persons, that brought any new doctrine from God; but the
doctrine still evidenced it is self: The Apostles converted many, where they
wrought no miracles. Act. 16. 17, 18; and where they did so work, yet they for
their doctrine, and not the doctrine on their account was received. And the
Scripture now has no less Evidence and demonstration in it is self of it is
Divinity, than it had, when by them it was preached.

Sect. 19. But because this Tradition is pretended with great confidence as a
sure bottom and foundation for receiving of the Scriptures, I shall a little
farther enquire into it. That which in this case is intended, by this (...) or
Tradition, Est r^i de manu in manu^, aut doctrinae ex animo in animum mediante
docentis voce, qua seu manu doctrina alteri traditur. Buxtor. Comment. Mas.
is a Report of men, which those who are present have received from them that
are gone before them. Now this may be either of All the men of the World, or
only of some of them; if of All; either their suffrages must be taken in some
Convention, or gathered up from the individualls as we are able, and have
opportunity. If the first way of receiving them were possible, which is the
utmost improvement that Imagination can give the Authority enquired after, yet
every individual of men being a Liar, the whole convention must be of the same
complexion, and so not be able to yield a sufficient basis to build a faith
upon, cui non potest subesse falsum, that is infallible, and cannot possibly be
deceived: much less is there any foundation for it, in such a Report as is the
Emergencie of the Assertion of Individualls.

Sect. 21. But now if this Tradition be alleged as preserved only by some in
the World, not the half of rational Creatures, I desire to know, what reason
I have to believe those who have that Tradition, or plead that they have it,
before and against them who profess they have no such Report delivered to them
from their forefathers; Is the Reason hereof because I live among these who
have this Tradition, and they are my neighbors whom I know? by the same Rule
those who live among the other Parts of men, are bound to receive what they
deliver them upon Tradition; and so men may be obliged to believe the Alcoran
to be the Word of God.

Sect. 22. It is more probable it will be answered, that their Testimony is to
be received because they are the Church of God; but it does not yet appear,
that I can any other way have any Kowledge of them so to be, or of any
Authority that any number of men, more, or less, can have in this case, under
that Name or Notion, unless by the Scripture it is self; And if so, it will
quickly appear what place is to be allotted to their Testimony, who cannot be
admitted as Witnesses, unless the Scripture it is self be owned and received;
because they have neither plea nor claim to be so admitted, but only from the
Scripture: If they shall aver, that they take this honor to themselves, and
that without Relation to the Scripture they claim a right of Authoritative
witness bearing in this case, I say again, upon the general grounds of
natural Reason, and Equity, I have no more inducements to give credit to their
Assertions, then to an alike number of men holding out a Tradition utterly to
the contrary of what they assert.

Sect. 23. But yet suppose, that this also were granted, and that men might be
allowed to speak in their own name and Authority, giving Testimony to
themselves, which upon the hypothesis under consideration, God himself is not
allowed to do; I shall desire to know whither, when the Church declares the
scriptures to be the Word of God unto us, it does apprehend any thing in the
Scripture as the Ground of that Judgment and declaration or no? If it says no;
but that it is proposed upon it is sole Authority; then surely if we think Good
to acquiesse in this decision of this doubt and enquiry, it is full time for
us, to lay aside all our studdies and enquiries after the Mind of God, and seek
only what that man, or those men say, who are entrusted with this Authority, as
they say, and as they would have us believe them, though we know not at all how
or by what means they came by it; seeing they dare not pretend any thing from
the Scripture, least thereby they direct us to that, in the first place.

Sect. 24. If it be said, that they do upon other accounts judge and believe
the scripture to be true, and to be the Word of God; I suppose it will not be
thought unreasonable if we enquire after those Grounds and accounts, seeing
they are of so great concernement unto us; All Truths in Relations consisting,
in their consonancy and Agreement, to the nature of the things they deliver, I
desire to know how they came to judge of the consonancy, between the nature of
the things delivered in the Scripture, and the delivery of them therein? The
things whereof we speak being heavenly, spiritual, mysterious, and
supernatural, there cannot be any knowledge obtained of them but by the Word
it is self. How then can they make any Judgment of the Truth of that Scripture
in the Relation of these things, which are no where to be known (I speak of
many of them) in the least, but by that Scripture its self.

Sect. 25. If they shall say, that they found their judgment and declaration
upon some discovery, that the Scripture makes of its self unto them; they
affirm the same that we plead for: only they would very desireously
appropriate to themselves the Privilege of being able to discern that
discovery so made in the Scripture. To make good this claim, they must either
plead somewhat from themselves, or from the Scriptures: if from themselves, it
can be nothing, but that they see, like the men of China, and all others are
blind, or have but one eye at the best, being wiser then any others, and more
able to discern then they. Now though I shall easily grant them to be very
subtle and cunning, yet that they are so much wiser then all the world besides,
that they are meet to impose upon their belief things that they neither do,
nor can discern or know, I would not be thought to admit, until I can believe
my self and all others not of their society or combination, to be beasts of
the field, and they as the serpent amongst us.

Sect. 26. If it be from the Scripture that they seek to make Good this claim;
then as we cause them there to make a stand, which is all we aim at, so their
plea must be from the promise of some special Assistance granted to them for
that purpose; if their assistance be that of the spirit, it is either of the
spirit that is promised to believers, to work in them as before described and
related, or it is some private Testimony that they pretend is afforded to them;
If the former be affirmed, we are in a condition, wherein the necessity of
devolving all on the scripture its self, to decide and judge who are
beleivers, lies in every ones view; if the latter, who shall give me Assurance,
that when they pretend that witness and Testimony, they do not lie and
deceive; we must here certainly go either to the Scrippture, or to some cunning
man to be resolved. Isa. 8. 19, 20.

Sect. 27. I confess the Argument which has not long since been singled out,
and dextrovsly managed by an able and learned pen, namely; of proving the
Truth of the doctrine of the Scripture, D. Ward Essay etc.
from the Truth of the story, and the Truth of the story from the certainty
there is that the Writers of the Books of the Bible, were those Persons whose
names and inscriptions they bear; so pursuing the Evidence, that what they
wrote was true and known to them so to be, from all requisita that may possibly
be sought after for the strengthening of such Evidence, is of great force and
efficacy. It is I say of great force and efficacy as to the end for which it is
insisted on; that is to satisfy men's rational Enquiries; but as to a ground of
faith, it has the same insufficiency with all other Arguments of the like
kind; Though I should grant that the Apostles and penmen of the Scripture were
persons of the greatest industry, honesty, integrity, faithfulness, holiness
that ever lived in the world, as they were; and that they wrote nothing, but
what themselves had as Good Assurance of* as what men by their senses of seeing
and hearing are able to attain; yet such a Knowledge and Assurance is not a
sufficient foundation for the faith of the Church of God; if they received not
every Word by inspiration, and that evidencing it is self unto us, otherwise
then by the Authority of their Integrity, it can be no foundation for us to
build our faith upon.

Sect. 28. Before the committing of the Scriptures to writing, God had given
the World an Experiment what keepers men were of this Revelation by tradition;
Within some hundreds of years after the flood, all knowledge of him, through
the craft of Satan, and the vanity of the minds of men which is unspeakable,
was so lost, that nothing, but as it were the creation of a new World, or the
Erection of a new Church state by new Revelations, could relieve it. After that
great trial what can be farther pretended, on the behalf of Tradition I know
not.

Sect. 29. The sum of all is; The merciful Good Providence of God, having by
diverse and various means; using therein amongst other things, the ministry of
men and Churches, preserved the Writings of the Old and New Testament in the
World; and by the same gracious disposal afforded them unto us, they are
received and submitted unto by us, upon the Grounds and evidences of their
divine Original before insisted on.

Sect 30. Upon the whole matter then, I would know, whither if the Scriptures
should be brought to any man, when, or where, he could not possibly have it
attested to be the Word of God, by any public or private Authority of man, or
Church, Tradition, or otherwise, he were bound to believe it or no? whither he
should obey God in believing, or sin in the rejecting of it? suppose de do but
take it into consideration, do but give it the reading or hearing, seeing in
every place it avers it is self to be the Word of God, he must of necessity
either give credit unto it, or disbelieve it; To hang in suspense, which
arises from the imperfect actings of the faculties of the soul, is in it is
self a weakness, and in this case being reckoned no the worst side, is
interpretatively a Rejection. If you say it were the duty of such an one to
believe it, you acknowledge in the scripture it is self a sufficient Evidence
of it is own original Authority; without which it can be no man's duty to
believe it. If you say, it would not be his sin to reject and refuse it, to
disbelieve all that it speaks in the name of God; then this is that you say;
God may truly and really speak unto a man, (as he does by the Scripture) and
yet that man not be bound to believe him. We deal not thus with one another.

Sect. 31. To wind up then the plea insisted on in the foregoing Chapter,
concerning the self evidencing Light and Power of the Scripture, from which we
have diverted, and to make way for some other considerations, that tend to the
confirmation of their divine Original, I shall close this discourse with the
two general considerations following.

Sect. 32. 1 Then laying aside these failing pleas, there seems to be a moral
impossibility that the Word of God, should not manifest it is own Original, and
it is Authority from thence. Quaelibet herba deum. There is no Work of God, as
was showed, but reveals it is Author. A curious Artificer imparts that of
form, shape, proportion, and comeliness to the fruit of his Invention, and
work of his hands, that every one that looks upon it, must conclude, that it
comes from skill and Ability. A man in the delivery of his mind in the writing
of a Book, will give it such an impression of Reason, that though you cannot
conclude that this, or that man wrote it, yet you must, that it was the product
of a man, or Rational creature: yea some individual men of Excellency in some
skill, are instantly known by them, that are able to judge in that Art or
skill, by the Effects of their skill. This is the Piece, this is the hand, the
Work of such an one. How easy is it for those who are conversant about ancient
Authors to discover an Author by the spirit and style of his writings. Now
certainly this is strange beyond all belief, that almost every Agent should
give an impresse to it is work, whereby it may be appropriated unto him, and
only the Word, wherein it was the design of the Great and Holy God to give us
a portraiture as it were of his Wisdom, Holiness and Goodness, so far as
we are capable of an Acquaintance with him in this Life, is not able to declare
and evince it is Original. That God who is prima Veritas, the first and
sovereign Truth, infinitely separated and distinguished from all creatures on
all accounts whatever, should Write a Book, or at least immediately indite it,
commanding us to receive it as his, under the penalty of his Eternal
displeasure, and yet that Book not make a sufficient discovery of it is self
to be his, to be from him, is past all belief. Let men that live on things
received by Tradition from their Fathers, who perhaps never had sense of any
real Transaction between God and their souls, who scarce ever perused the
Word seriously in their lives, nor brought their Consciences to it; please
themselves in their own imaginations; The sure Anchor of a soul that would
draw nigh to God in and by his Word, lies in the things laid down.

Sect. 33. I suppose it will not be denied but that it was the Mind and Will of
God, that those to whom his Word should come, should own it and receive it as
his; if not, it were no sin in them to reject it, unto whom it does so come;
if it were, then either he has given those Characters unto it, and left upon
it that impression of his majesty whereby it might be known to be his, or he
has not done so; and that either because he would not, or because he could
not; To say the latter, is to make him more i^firme than a man, or other worms
of the earth, than any naturally e^fectuall cause. He that says the former,
must know, that it is incumbent on him, to yield a satisfactory account, why
God would not do so, or else he will be thought blasphemously to impute a want
of that Goodness and Love of mankind unto him, which he has in infinite Grace
manifested to be in himself. That no man is able to assign any such Reason, I
shall firmly believe, until I find some attempting so to do; which as yet
none have arrived at that height of Impudence and wickedness as to own.

Sect. 34. 2ly. How horrible is it to the thoughts of any Saint of God, that
the scripture should not have it is Authority from it is self. Tertullian
objects this to the Gentiles; Apol. Cap. 5. Facit and hoc ad causam nostram,
quod apud vos de humano arbitratu divinitas pensitatur; nisi homini Deus
placuerit, Deus non erit; homo ja^ Deo propiti^s esse debebit. Would it be
otherwise in this case if the Scripture must stand to the mercy of man for the
Reputation of its Divinity? nay of its verity; for whence it has its
Authority, thence it has its verity also, as was observed before; and many
more words of this nature might be added.

CHAP. VI.
Consequentiall considerations for the confirmation of the divine Authority of
the Scripture.

Sect. 1. I said in the former Chapter, that I would not employ my self
willingly, ^o enervate or weaken any of the Reasons or Arguments that are
usually insisted on, to prove the divine Authority of the Scripture. Though I
confess, I like not to multiply Arguments, that conclude to a probability
only, and are suited to beget a firm Opinion at best, where the principle
intended to be evinced is de fide, and must be believed with faith divine, and
supernatural. Yet because some may happily be kept to some kind of Adherence
to the Scriptures; by mean grounds, that will not in their own strength
abide, until they get footing in those that are more firm; I shall not make
it my business to drive them from their present station; having persuaded them
by that which is better.

Sect. 2. Yea, because on Supposition of the Evidence formerly tenderd, there
may be great use at several seasons, of some consequentiall considerations and
Arguments to the purpose in hand, I shall insist on two of that kind, which to
me, who have the Advantage of receiving the Word on the forementioned account,
seem not only to persuade, and in a great measure to convince to undeniable
probability, but also to prevail irresistably on the understanding of
unprejudiced men, to close with the divine Truth of it.

Sect. 3. The first of these is taken from the nature of the doctrine its
self, contained in the Scripture, the second from the mannagement of the whole
design therein; the first is innate, the other of a more external and
Rational consideration.

Sect. 4. For the first of them, there are two things considerable in the
doctrine of the Scripture, that are powerful, and if I may so say,
uncontroleably prevalent as to this purpose.

Sect. 5. First its universal suitableness upon its first clear discovery
and Revelation to all the Entanglements and perple^ities of the souls of men,
in reference to their Relation to, and dependence upon God. If all mankind have
certain Entanglements upon their hearts and spirits in reference unto God,
which none of them that are not utterly brutish, do not wrestle withal, and
which all of them are not able in the least to assoyle themselves in, and
about, certainly that Doctrine which is suited universally to satisfy all their
perplexities, to calm and quiet their spi^its in all their tumultuatings, and
does break in upon them with a glorious Efficacy to that purpose in its
discovery and Revelation, must needs be from that God, with whom we have to
do, and none else. From whom else I pray should it be. He that can give out
such a Word, ille mihi semper erit Deus.

Sect. 6. Now there are 3 general heads of things, that all and every one of
mankind, not naturally brutish are perplexed withal, in reference, to their
dependence on God, and Relation to him.

1 How they may worship him as they ought.

2 How they may be reconciled, and at peace with him, or have an Atonement for
that guilt which naturally they are sensible of.

3 What is the nature of true Blessedness, and how they may attain it, or
how they may come to the enjoyment of God.

Sect. 7. That all mankind is perplexed and entangled with, and about these
Considerations, that all men ever were so, without Exception more or less, and
continue so to be to this day; that of themselves, they miserably grope up and
down in the dark, and are never able to come to any satisfaction, neither as to
what is present, nor as to what is to come, I could manifest from the State,
Office, and condition of conscience, the indelible (...) and presumptions about
them, that are in the hearts of all by nature. The whole History of all
Religion which has been in the World, with the design of All ancient and
present Philosophy, with innumerable other uncontroleable Convictions (which
also God assisting, de natura Theologiae.
I shall in another Treatise declare) do manifest this Truth.

Sect. 8. That, surely then which shall administer to all and every one of
them, equally and universally, satisfaction as to all these things, to quiet
and calm their spirits, to cut off all necessity of any further Enquiries,
give them that wherein they must acquiesce, and wherewith they will be
satiated, unless they will cast off that Relation, and dependence on God,
which they seek to confirm and settle; surely I say, this must be from the all
seeing, all-satisfying Truth, and Being, and from none else. Now this is done
by the doctrine of the Scripture, with such a glorious uncontroleable
Conviction, that every one to whom it is revealed, the eyes of whose
understanding are not blinded by the God of this world, must needs cry out
(...), I have found that which in vain I sought elsewhere, waxing foolish in
my imaginations.

Sect. 9. It would be too long to insist on the severalls; take one instance in
the buisinesse of Atonement, Reconciliation, and Acceptance with God. What
strange horrible fruits and effects have men's contrivances on this account
produced? What have they not invented? What have they not done? What have they
not suffered? and yet continued in dread and bondage all their days? Now with
what a Glorious soul appeasing Light does the doctrine of satisfaction and
Atonement, by the blood of Christ the son of God, come in upon such men? This
first astonisheth, then conquereth, then ravisheth, and satiateth the soul.
This is that they looked for, this they were sick for, and knew it not. This is
the design of the Apostles discourse in the 3 first Chapters of the Epistle to
the Romans. Let any man read that discourse from v. 18. of chap. the first, and
onward, and he will see with what Glory and Beauty, with what full and ample
satisfaction this Doctrine breaks out. Chap. 3. v. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

Sect. 10. It is no otherwise as to the particulars of present Worship, or
future Blessedness; this meets with men in all their wanderings, stops them in
their disquisitions, convinces them of the darkness, folly, uncertainty,
falsenesse of all their Reasonings about these things; and that with such an
Evidence and Light, as at once subdues them, captivates their understanding,
and quiets their souls: so was that old Roman World conquered by it; so shall
the Mahumetan be, in Gods good and appointed time.

Sect. 11. Of what has been spoken, this is the sum. All mankind that
acknowledge their dependence upon God, and Relation to him, are naturally (and
cannot be otherwise) grievously involved and perplexed in their hearts,
thoughts, and Reasonings, about the Worship of God, Acceptance with him having
sinned, and the future Enjoyment of him; some with more clear and distinct
Apprehensio^s, of these things; Some under more dark and general notions of
them are thus exercised; To extricate themselves, and to come to some issue in
and about these enquiries, has been the great Design of their Lives, the Aim
they had in all things they did, as they thought, Well and laudably in this
world. Notwithstanding all which, they were never able to deliver themselves,
no not one of them, or attain satisfaction to their souls, but waxed vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish hearts were more and more darkened; In
this estate of things, the Doctrine of the Scripture comeing in with full,
unquestionable satisfaction to all these, suited to the enquirings of every
individual soul, with a largeness of Wisdom, and depth of Goodness, not to
be fathomed, it must needs be from that God with whom we have to do. And those
who are not persuaded hereby, that will not cast Anchor in this harbor, let
them put to sea once more, if they dare; turn themselves loose to other
considerations, and try if all the forementioned perplexities do not inevitably
return.

Sect. 12. Another consideration of the Doctrine of the Scripture to this
purpose regards some particulars of it. There are some Doctrines of the
Scripture, some Revelations in it, so sublimely glorious, of so profound and
mysterious an Excellency, that at the first proposal of them, nature startles,
shrinks, and is taken with Horror, meeting with that which is above it, too
great and too excellent for it, which it could desirously avoid and decline;
but yet gathering it self up to them, it yields, and finds, that unless they
are accepted, and submitted unto, though unsearchable, that not only All that
has been received, must be rejected, but also the whole dependence of the
Creature on God be dissolved, or rendered only dreadful, terrible, and
destructive to nature its self. Such are the Doctrines of the Trinity, of the
Incarnation of the son of God, of the Resurrection of the dead, of the new
birth, and the like. At the first Revelation of these things, nature is amazed,
cries, how can these things be? Or gathers up it self to Opposition; this is
babbling, like the Athenians; folly, as all the wise Greeks. But when the Eyes
of Reason are a little confirmed, though it can never clearly behold the Glory
of this Sun, yet it confesses a Glory to be in it, above all that it is able
to apprehend. I could manifest in particular, that the Doctrines before
mentioned, and several others are of this importance; namely though great,
above and beyond the reach of Reason, yet upon search found to be such, as
without submission to them, the whole comfortable Relation between God and man
must needs be dissolved.

Sect. 13. Let us take a view in our Way of one of the Instances. What is there
in the whole Book of God, that nature at first sight does more recoyle at, then
the Doctrine of the Trinity? How many do yet stumble and fall at it? I confess
the Doctrine its self is but sparingly, yet it is clearly and distinctly
delivered unto us in the Scripture. The sum of it is; that God is one; His
nature, or his Being, one; That all the Properties, or infinite Essential
Excellencies of God, as God, do belong to that one nature and Being. This God
is infinitely Good, Holy, Just, Powerful, He is eternal, omnipotent,
omniprese^t; and these things belong to none, but him that is that One God.
That this God is the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; which are not diverse names
of the same Person, nor distinct Attributes or Properties of the same nature or
Being; but One, Another, and a Third, all equally that One God, yet really
distinguished between themselves by such uncommunicable Properties, as
co^stitute the One to be that One, and the Other to be that Other; and the
Third to be that Third. Thus the Trinity is not the Union, nor Unity of three,
but it is a Trinity in Unity, or the Ternary number of Persons in the same
Essence; nor does the Trinity in its formal conception denote the Essence, as
if the Essence were comprehended in the Trinity, which is in each Person; but
it denotes only the distinction of the Persons comprised in that Number.

Sect. 14. This I say is the sum of this Doctrine, as it is delivered unto us
in the Scripture. Here Reason is entangled; yet after a while finds evidently,
that unless this be embraced, all other things wherein it has to do with God,
will not be of value to the soul; this will quickly be made to appear. Or all
that Communion which is here between God and man, founded on the Revelation of
his mind and will unto him, which makes way for his Enjoyment in Glory, there
are these two parts. 1 Gods gracious Communication of his Love, Goodness etc.
with the fruits of them unto man: 2. The obedience of man unto God in a way of
Gratitude for that Love, according to the mind and will of God revealed to him.
These two comprise the whole of the intercourse between God and man. Now when
the mind of man is exercised about these things, he finds at last that they are
so wrapped up in the Doctrine of the Trinity, that without the belief,
receiving, and acceptance of it, it is utterly impossible that any interest in
them, should be obtained, or preserved.

Sect. 15. For the first; or the Communication of God unto us in a Way of Love
and Goodness, it is wholly founded upon, and enwrapped in this Truth, both as
to the eternal Spring, and actual Execution of it. A few instances will
evince this Assertion. The Eternal fountain of all Grace, flowing from Love
and Goodness, lies in Gods Election, or Predestination. This being an Act of
Gods Will, cannot be apprehended, but as an eternal act of his Wisdom, or
Word also. All the eternal thoughts of it is pursuit, lie in the Covenant that
was between the Father and the Son, as to the Son's undrtaking to execute that
Purpose of his. This I have at large elsewhere declared.

Take away then the doctrine of the Trinity, and both these are gone; There can
be no purpose of Grace by the Father in the son, no Covenant for the putting of
that purpose in Execution; and so the foundation of all fruits of Love and
Goodness, is lost to the soul.

Sect. 16. As to the Execution of this Purpose, with the actual dispensation
of the fruits of Grace and Goodness unto us, it lies wholely in the
unspeakable Condescension of the Son unto Incarnation with what ensued thereon.
The Incarnation of the Eternal Word, by the Power of the Holy Ghost, is the
bottom of our Participation of Grace. Without it, it was absolutely impossible
that man should be made partake^ of the favor of God. Now this enwraps the
whole Doctrine of the Trinity in it is bosom; nor can once be apprehended,
without it is Acknowledgment. Deny the Trinity, and all this means of the
Communication of Grace, with the whole of the satisfaction, and Righteousness
of Christ falls to the Ground. Every Tittle of it speaks this Truth: And they
who deny the one, reject the other.

Sect. 17. Our actual Participation of the fruits of this Grace, is by the
Holy Ghost. We cannot our selves seize on them, nor bring them home to our own
souls. The impossibility hereof I cannot now stay to manifest. Now whence is
this Holy Ghost? Is he not sent from the Father, by the Son? Can we entertain
any thought of his effectual working in us, and upon us, but it includes this
whole Doctrine? They therefore who deny the Trinity deny the Efficacy of it is
operation also.

Sect. 18. So it is, as to our Obedience unto God, whereby the Communion
between God and man is completed. Although the formal object of Divine
worship be the nature of God; and the Persons are not worshipped as Persons
distinct, but as they are each of them God; yet as God they are every one of
them distinctly to be worshipped. So is it, as to our faith, our Love our
thanksgiving, all our Obedience, as I have abundantly demonstrated in my
Treatise of distinct communion with the Father in Love, the Son in Grace, and
the Holy Ghost in the Privileges of the Gospel. Thus without the
Acknowledgment of this Truth, none of that Obedience which God requires at our
hands, can in a due manner be performed.

Sect. 19. Hence the scripture speaks not of any thing between God and us,
but what is founded on this Account. The Father works, the Son works, and
the Holy Ghost works. The Father works not but by the Son and his spirit;
The Son and Spirit work not, but from the Father. The Father Glorifieth the
Son; the Son Glorifieth the Father; and the Holy Ghost glorifieth them both.
Before the foundation of the world, the Son was with the Father, and rejoiced
in his peculiar work for the Redemption of mankind. At the Creation, the
Father made all things, but by the Son, and the Power of the Spirit. In
Redemption the Father sends the Son; the Son by his own condescension
undertakes the work, and is incarnate by the Holy Ghost. The Father as was
said, communicates his love, and all the fruits of it unto us by the Son; as
the Holy Ghost does the merrits, and fruits of the mediation of the Son. The
Father is not known nor worshipped, but by and in the Son; Nor Father or Son
but by the Holy Ghost, etc.

Sect. 20. Upon this discovery the soul that was before startled at the
Doctrine in the notion of it, is fully convinced that all the satisfaction it
has sought after in it is seeking unto God, is utterly lost, if this be not
admitted. There is neither any foundation left of the communication of love to
him, nor means of returning Obedience unto God. Besides, all the things that
he has been enquiring after, appear on this account in their Glory, beauty
and reality unto him: so that, that which most staggerd him at first in the
receiving of the Truth, because of it is deep mysterious glory, does now most
confirm him in the embracing of it, because of its necessity, Power, and
heavenly Excellency.

Sect. 21. And this is one Argument of the Many belonging to the things of the
Scripture, that upon the Grounds before mentioned, has in it, as to my sense
and Apprehension, an Evidence of Conviction not to be withstood.

Sect. 22. Another consideration of the like Efficacy, may be taken from a
brief veiw of the whole Scripture with the design of it. The consent of parts
or Harmony of the scripture in it is self, and every part of it with each
other, and with the whole, is commonly pleaded as an Evidence of it is divine
Original. Thus much certainly it does evince beyond all possible
contradiction, that the whole proceeds from one and the same principle; has
the same Authout; and He wise, discerning, able to comprehend the whole
compass of what he intended to deliver and reveal. Otherwise, or by any
other, that oneness of Spirit, design and aim, in unspeakable variety and
diversity of means of it is delivery, that absolute correspondency of it to
it is self, and distance from any thing else, could not have been attained. Now
it is certain, that this principle must be summum in it is kind; either bonum,
or malum. If the Scripture be what it reveals and declares it self to be, it
is then unquestionably the Word of the Living God, Truth it is self; for that
it professes of it is self, from the beginning to the ending; to which
profession all that it reveals answers absolutely, and unquestionably in a
tendency to his Glory alone. If it be not so, it must be acknowledged that the
Author of it had a blasphemous design to hold forth himself to be God, who
is not so; a malicious design to deceive the Sons of men, and to make them
believe that they Worship and honor God; and obey him when they do not; and
so to draw them into everlasting destruction, and that to compass these ends
of blasphemy, Atheism and malice, he has laid out in a long course of time,
all the industry and wisdom, that a Creature could be made partaker of: Now he
that should do thus, must be the Devil, and none else; no other creature can
possibly arrive at that height of obstinacy in evil. Now certainly whilst God
is pleased to continue unto us any thing, whereby we are distinguished from the
Beasts that perish; whilst there is a sense of a distance between Good and
Evil abiding amongst men, it cannot fall upon the understanding of any man,
that that Doctrine which is so holy and pure, so absolutely leading to the
utmost improvement of whatever is good, just, commendable and praise Worthy, so
suitable to all the Light of God, of Good and Evil that remains in us; could
proceed from any one everlastingly hardened in Evil, and that in the pursuit
of the wickedst design, that that wicked one could possibly be engaged in;
namely to enthrone himself, and maliciously to cheat, cosen and ruin the
souls of men; so that upon necessity the Scripture can own no Author but him,
whose it is, even the Living God.

As these considerations are far from being the bottom and foundation of our
faith, in our assenting to the Authority of God in the Word; so on the
supposition of what is so, they have an usefullnesse, as to support in trialls
and temptations, and the like seasons of difficulty: but of these things so
far.

Of The Integrity and Purity of the Hebrew and Greek Text of the Scripture,
With Considerations on the PROLEGOMENA, and APPENDIX to the late BIBLIA
POLYGLOTTA.

OXFORD, Printed by H. H. for THO: ROBINSON. 1659.

CHAP. I.
1. The occasion of this Discourse. 2. The Danger of supposing corruptions in
the Originalls of the Scripture. 3. The great usefullnesse of the Biblia
Polyglotta. 4. The Grounds of the ensuing animadversions. 5. The Assertions
proposed to be vindicated laid down. 6. Their weight and importance. 7. Sundry
principles in the Prolegomena prejudicial to the Truth contended for, laid
down. 8. Those Principles formerly asserted by others. Reasons of the
opposition made to them.

Scte. 1. WHEN this whole little precedent Treatise was finished, and ready to
be given out unto the Stationer, there came to my hands the Prolegomena and
Appendix to the Biblia Polyglotta lately published. Upon the first sight of
that volume, I was somewhat startled with that Bulkie collection of various
Readings, which the Appendix tenders to the view of every one that does but
cast an eye upon it. Within a while after I found that others also men of
Learning and Judgment, had apprehensions of that work, not unlike those which
my own thoughts had suggested unto me. Afterward, considering what I had
written, about the Providence of God in the preservation of the Original
Copies of the Scripture in the foregoing discourse, fearing least from that
great Appearance of Variations in the Original Copies, and those of all the
Translations published with so great care and diligence, there might some
unconquerable objections against the Truth of what I had asserted, be educed; I
judged it necessary to stop the progress of those thoughts, until I could get
time to look through the Appendix, and the various Lections in that great
Volume exhibited unto us, with the grounds and Reasons of them in the
prolegomena. Having now discharged that task, and (as things were stated)
duty, I shall crave leave to deliver my thoughts to some things contained in
them, which possibly men of perverse minds may wrest to the prejudice of my
former Assertions, to the prejudice of the certainty of divine Truth, as
continued unto us through the Providence of God in the Originalls of the
Scripture.

Sect. 2. What use has been made, and is as yet made in the world, of this
supposition, that corruptions have befallen the Originalls of the scripture,
which those various lections at first view seem to intimate; I need not
declare. It is in breife, the foundation of Mahumetisme, Alcor. Azoar. 5.
Whitak Cham. Rivet. de S. S. Molin. nov. Pap. Mestrezat. Cont. Jesuit. Regourd.
vid. Card. Perron. respon. ad Reg. mag. Bullen. l. 5. c. 6.
The chiefest and principal prop of Popery, the only pretense of Fanaticall
Anti Scripturists, and the root of much hidden Atheism in the World. At
present there is sent unto me by a very learned Person, upon our discourse on
this subject, a Treatise in English, with the Latin Title of fides Divina,
wherein it is namelesse Author, on this very foundation labors to evert and
utterly render useless the whole scripture. How far such as he may be
strengthened in their infidelity by the consideration of these things, time
will manifest.

Had there not been then a necessity incumbent on me, either utterly to desist
from pursuing any thoughts of publishing the foregoing Treatise, or else of
giving an account of some things contained in the Prolegomena and Appendix, I
should for many Reasons have abstained from this Employment. But the truth is,
not only what I had written in the first Chapter about the Providence of God in
the preservation of the Scripture, but also the maine of the Arguments
afterward insisted on by me, concerning the self Evidencing power and Light
of the Scripture, receiving in my Apprehension a great weakening by the things I
shall now speak unto, if owned and received as they are proposed unto us, I
could not excuse my self from running the hazard, of giving my thoughts upon
them.

Sect. 3. The Wiseman tells us, that he considered all travel and every right
work, and that for this a man is envied of his neighbor, which says he, is
vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 4. 4. It cannot be denied, but that this
often falls out through the Corruption of the hearts of men, that when Works,
right Works, are with most sore travel brought forth in the world, their
Authors are repayed with envy for their Labor, which mixes all the issues of
the best endeavors of men, with vanity, and vexation of spirit. Hiereme of old
and Erasmus of late, are the usual instances in this kind. That I have any of
that guilt in a peculiar manner, upon me in reference to this work of
publishing the Biblia Polyglotta, which I much esteem, or the Authors and
contrivers of it, (fir^e my writing of this some of the chief overseers of the
Work, Persons of singular worth are known to me.)
whom I know not, I can, with due consideration, and do utterly deny. The
searcher of all hearts, knows I lie not. And what should possibly infect me
with that leaven? I neither profess any deep skill in the Learning used in
that work, nor am ever like to be engaged in any thing that should be set up
in competition with it; nor did ever know that there was such a Person in the
world, as the chief Author of this Edition of the Bibles, but by it. I shall
then never fail on all just occasions, to commend the Usefullnesse of this
work, and the Learning Diligence and pains of the worthy Persons that have
brought it forth; nor would be wanting to their full praise in this place, but
that an entrance into this discourse with their due commendations might be
liable to misrepresentations. But whereas we have not only the Bible published,
but also private opinions of men, (and collections of various Readings (really
or pretendedly so we shall see afterward,) tending some of them as I
apprehend, to the disadvantage of the great and important Truth that I have
been pleading for, tendered unto us, I hope it will not be Grievous to any nor
matter of Offense, if using the same Liberty, that they, or any of them whose
hands have been most eminent in this work have done, I do with (I hope)
Christian candor and moderation of spirit, briefly discover my thoughts upon
some things proposed by them.

Sect. 4. The renownedly learned Prefacer unto the Arabic Translation in this
Edition of it, tells us, that the Work of translating the Pentateuch into that
Language, was performed by a Jew, who took care to give countenance to his own
private opinions, and so render them Authenticke by bringing them into the Text
of his Translation.

It is not of any such Attempt, that I have any cause to complain, or shall so
do in reference to these Prolegomena and Appendix; only I could have wished,
(with submision to better Judgments be it spoken,) that in the publishing of
the Bible, the Sacred Text, with the Translations, and such naked historical
accounts of their Originalls and preservation, as were necessary to have laid
them fair and open to the Judgment of the Reader, had not been clogged with
disputes and pleas for particular private opinions, imposed thereby with too
much advantage on the minds of men, by their constant neighborhood unto
canonical Truth.

Sect. 5. But my present considerations being not to be extended beyond the
concernement of the Truth which in the foregoing discourse I have pleaded for,
I shall first propose a brief abstract thereof, as to that part of it, which
seems to be especially concerned, and then lay down what to me appears in
it is prejudice in the Volumes now under debate; not doubting but a fuller
account of the whole, will by some or other be spedily tendered unto the Learned
and impartial Readers of them. The sum of what I am pleading for, as to the
particular Head to be vindicated is; that as the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, were immediately, and entirely given out by God himself, his mind
being in them represe^ted unto us, without the least interveniency of such
mediums, and Ways, as were capable of giving change or alteration to the least
iota or syllable; so by his Good and merciful providentiall dispensation, in
his Love to his Word and Church, his whole Word as first given out by him, is
preserved unto us entire in the Original Languages; where shining in its own
beauty and luster, (as also in all Translations so far, as they faithfully
represent the Originalls) it manifests and evidences unto the consciences of
men, without other foreign help or assistance, its divine original and
Authority.

Sect. 6. Now the several Assertions or Propositions contained in this
position, are to me such important Truths, that I shall not be blamed in the
least by my own Spirit, nor I hope by any others, in contending for them,
judging them fundamental parts of the faith once delivered to the saints; and
though some of them may seem to be less weighty then others, yet they are so
concatenated in themselves, that by the removal or destruction of any one of
them, our interest in the others is utterly taken away. It will assuredly be
granted, that the persuasion of the coming forth of the Word immediately from
God, in the way pleaded for, is the foundation of all faith, hope, and
obedience. But what I pray will it advantage us, that God did so once deliver
his Word, if we are not assured also, that, that word so delivered, has been
by his special care and providence preserved entire and incorrupt unto us; or
that it does not evidence and manifest its self to be his Word, being so
preserved. Blessed may we say were the Ages past, who received the Word of God
in its unquestionable power and purity, when it shone brightly in its own
glorious native Light, and was free from those defects and corruptions, which
through the default of men, in a long tract of time it has contracted; but for
us, as we know not well where to lay a sure foundation of believing, that this
Book rather then any other does contain what is left unto us of that Word of
his, so it is impossible we should ever come to any certainty almost of any
individual Word, or expression, whither it be from God or no; far be it from
the thoughts of any Good man, that God whose Covenant with his Church, is, that
his Word and spirit shall never depart from it. Isa. 59. 21. Math. 5. 18. 1
Pet. 1. 25. 1 Cor. 11. Math. 28. 20. has left it in uncertainties, about the
things that are the foundation of all that faith and obedience which he
requires at our hands.

As then I have in the foregoing Treatise, evinced as I hope the self
Evidencing Light and power of the Scripture, so let us now heartily for the
sake and in the persuit of Truth, deal with a mind freed from prejudices and
disquieting Affections, save only the trouble that arises from the necessity of
dissenting from the Authors of so useful a work, address our selves to the
consideration of what seems in these Prolegomena and Appendix to impair the
truth of the other Assertions, about the entire preservation of the Word as
given out from God, in the copies which yet remain with us. And this I shall
do, not doubting, but that the Persons themselves concernd, will fairly
accept and weigh, what is conscientiously tendered.

Sect. 7. As then I do with all thankfulness acknowledge that many things are
spoken very honorably of the Originalls in these Prolegomena, and that they
are in them absolutely preferred above any Translation whatever, Prolegom. 7.
sect 17.
and asserted in general as the Authentic Rule of all Versions, contrary to
the thoughts of the Publisher of the great Parisian Bibles, and his infamous
hyperaspistes Morinus; so as they stand in their aspect unto the Appendix of
various Lections, there are both opinions, and Principles confirmed by suitable
Practices, that are of the nature and importance before mentioned.

1 After a Prolegom. 3. s^c. 8. and seq.
long dispute to that purpose, it is determined, that the Hebrew Points or
Vowels and Accents, are a novell Invention of some Judaicall Rabbis, about 5
or 600 years after the giving out of the Gospel. Hence

1. An Antiquity is ascribed to some Translations, 2 or 3 at the least, above
and before the invention of these points, whose agreement with the Original
cannot therefore by just consequence be tried by the Present Text, as now
pointed and accented.

2. The whole credit of our Reading and Interpretation of the Scripture, as far
as regulated by the present punctation, depends solely on the faithfulness and
skill of those Jews, whose invention this work is asserted to be.

2 The (...) of which sort are above 800 in the Hebrew Bibles, Prolegom. 8.
Sect. 23. etc.
are various Lections, partly gathered by some Judaicall Rabbis out of ancient
copies, partly their critical amendments.

And therefore

After these various lections, as they are esteemed, are presented unto us, in
their own proper order wherein they stand in the great Bibles (not surely to
increase the Bulk of diverse Readings, or to present a face of new variety to a
less attentive Observer but) to evidence, that they are such various lections
as above described, they are given us over a second time, Append. p. 5.
in the method whereinto they are cast by Capellus the great patriarch of these
mysteries.

3. That there are such Alterations befallen the Original, Prolegom. 7. sec.
12.
as in many places may be rectified by the Translations that have been made of
old.

And therefore

Various Lections may be observed and gathered out of those Translations,
Prolegom. 6. sect. 8, 9, 10.
by considering how they read in their copies, and wherein they differed from
those which we now enjoy.

4. It is also declared, that where any gross faults or corruptions are
befallen the originalls, Prolegom 6. sect. 12.
men may by their faculty of critical conjecturing amend them, and restore the
native Lections that were lost; though in general without the Authority of
Copies, this be not to be allowed.

And therefore

A collection of various Readings out of Grotius, consisting for the most part
in such conjectures, is in the Appendix presented unto us.

5. The voluminous Bulk of various Lections, as nakedly exhibited, seems
sufficient to be get scruples and doubts in the minds of men, about the Truth
of what has been hitherto by many pretended concerning the Preservation of the
Scripture through the care and providence of God.

Sect. 8. It is known to all men acquainted with things of this nature, that in
all these, there is no new opinion coined or maintained by the learned prefacer
to these Bibles. The severalls mentioned, have been asserted and maintained by
sundry learned men. Had the opinion about them been kept in the ordinary Sphere
of men's private conceptions in their own private writings, running the hazard
of men's Judgments on their own strength and Reputation, I should not from my
former discourse have esteemed my self concerned in them. Every one of us must
give an account of himself unto God. It will be well for us, if we are found
holding the foundation. If we build hay and stubble upon it, though our work
perish, we shall be saved. Let every man in these things be fully persuaded in
his own mind, it shall be to me no offense. It is their being laid as the
foundation of the usefulness of these biblia polyglotta, with an endeavor to
render them catholic, not in their own strength, but in their Appendage to the
Authority, that on Good grounds is expected to this work, that calls for a due
consideration of them. All men who will find them stated in these prolegomena,
may not perhaps have had leisure, may not perhaps have the Ability to know what
issue the most of these things have been already driven unto, in the writings
of private men.

Sect. 9. As I willingly grant then, that some of these things may without any
great prejudice to the Truth, be heartily debated amongst learned men; so
taking them altogether, placed in the advantages they now enjoy, I cannot but
look upon them, as an engine suited to the destruction of the important truth
before pleaded for; and as a fit weapon put into the hands of men of
Atheistical minds and Principles, such as this Age abounds withal, to oppose
the whole evidence of Truth revealed in the Scripture. I fear with some,
either the pretended infallible Judge, or the depth of Atheism will be found
to lie at the door of these considerations. Hoc Ithacus vellet. But the debate
of the Advantage of either Romanists or Atheists from hence, belongs to another
place and season. Nor is the guilt of any consequences of this nature charged
on the workmen, which yet may be feared from the work its self.

CHAP. II.
1 Of the Purity of the Originals. 2 The (...) of the Scripture lost. 3 That of
Moses, how, and how long preserved; Of the book found by Hilkiah. 4 Of the
(...) of the New Testament. 5 Of the first copies of the originalls: the
Scribes of those copies not (...). What is ascribed to them. 9 The great and
incomparable care of the scribes of it. 7 The whole Word of God, in every
Tittle of it preserved entire in the copies of the Original extant. 8 Heads of
Arguments to that purpose. 9 What various lections are granted in the Original
of the old and new Testament. Sundry considerations concerning them,
manifesting them to be of no importance. 10. 11. 12. 13. That the Jews have not
corrupted the Text; the most probable instances considered.

Sect. 1. HAving given an account of the Occasion of this discourse, and
mentioned the particulars that are, all, or some of them, to be taken into
further consideration, before I proceed to their discussion, I shall by way of
Addition, and Explanation to what has been delivered in the former Treatise,
give a brief account of my Apprehensions concerning the purity of the present
Original copies of the Scripture, or rather copies of the Original languages,
which the Church of God does now, and has for many Ages enjoyed, as her
chiefest Treasure; whereby it may more fully appear, what it is, we plead for
and defend against the insinuations and pretenses above mentioned.

Sect. 2. First then, it is granted that the individual (...) of Moses, the
Prophets, and the Apostles, are in all probability, and as to all that we know,
utterly perished and lost out of the world. As also the copies of Ezra. The
Adrianus Ferrariensi^ flagellum Judaeor: lib. 9. 6. 2. Rab: Azarias Me^ or
Henaim. pa. 13. cap. 9.
Reports mentioned by some to the contrary, are open fictions. The individual
Ink and Parchment, the Rolls or books that they wrote, could not without a
miracle have been preserved from mouldring into dust before this time. Nor does
it seem improbable, that God was willing by their loss to reduce us to a
nearer consideration of his care and Providence in the preservation of every
Tittle contained in them. Had those individual writings been preserved, men
would have been ready to adore the^, as the Jews do their own (...) in their
Synagogues.

Sect. 3. Moses indeed delivered his original copy of the Pentateuch, in a
public Assembly unto the Levites, (that is, the sons of Korah) to be put into
the sides of the Arc, and there kept for a perpetual monument. Deuteronomy. 31. 25,
26. That individual Book was, I doubt not, preserved until the destruction of
the Temple. There is indeed no mention made of the Book of the Law in
particular, when the Arc was solemnly carried into the Holy place after the
building of Solomon's Temple; 2 Chronicles. 5. 4, 5. But the Tabernacle of the
congregation continued until then. That, and all that was in it, is said to be
brought up: v. 5. Now the placing of the Book by the sides of the Arc, being
so solemn an Ordinance, it was no doubt observed. Nor is there any pretense to
the contrary. Some think the Book found by Hilkiah, in the days of Josiah, was
this (...), or (...) of Moses, which was placed by the sides of the Ark. It
rather seems to have been some ancient Sacred copy, used in the service of the
Temple, and laid up there; as there was in the second Temple, Joseph: de B^l^.
Judaic. lib. 7. cap. 24.
which was carried in Triumph to Rome. For besides that he speaks of his
finding it in general in the house of the Lord, upon the occasion of the work
which was then done, 2 Chronicles. 14. 15. which was not, in, or about the Holy
place, where he, who was high Priest, knew full well this book was kept, it
does not appear that it was lawful for him to take that sacred depositum from
its peculiar Archives to send it abroad, as he dealt with that Book which he
found. Nay doubtless it was altogether unlawful for him so to have done, it
being placed there by a peculiar Ordinance, for a peculiar or special End.
After the destruction of the Temple, all enquiry after that Book is in vain.
The Author of the 2d Book of Maccabees mentions not its hiding in Nebo by
Jeremiah, with the Arc and Altar; or by Josiah, as say some of the Talmudists.
Nor were it of any importance if they had. Of the Scripture preserved in the
Temple at its last destruction, Josphus gives us a full account: de bello Juda:
lib. 7. cap. 24.

Sect. 4. For the Scriptures of the new Testament, it does not appear, that
the (...) of the several Writers of it were ever gathered into one Volume;
there being now no one Church to keep them for the rest. The Epistles though
immediately transcribed for the use of other Churches: Col. 4. 16, were
doubtless kept in the several Churches, whereunto they were directed. 1 Timothy
2. 1.
From those (...), there were quickly (...), transcribed copies given out to
faithful men, whilst the infallible spirit yet continued his guidance in an
extraordinary manner.

Sect. 5. For the first Transcribers of the Original copies, and those who in
succeeding Ages have done the like work from them, whereby they have been
propagated and continued down to us, in a subserviency to the Providence and
Promise of God, we say not, as is vainly charged by Morinus, and Capellus, that
they were all or any of them (...) and (...), infallible and divinely inspired,
so that it was impossible for them in any thing to mistake. It is known, it is
granted, that failings have been amongst them, and that various Lections are
from thence risen, of which afterward. Religious care and diligence in their
work, with a due Reverence of him, with whom they had to do, is all we ascribe
unto them. Not to acknowledge these freely in them, without clear and
unquestionable Evidence to the contrary, is high uncharitableness, impiety,
and ingratitude. This care and diligence we say, in a subserviency to the
Promise, and Providence of God, has produced the Effect contended for. Nor is
any thing further necessary thereunto. On this account to argue (as some do)
from the miscarriages and mistakes of men, their Oscitancy and negligence in
transcribing the old Heathen Authors, Homer, Aristotle, Tully, we think it not
tolerable in a Christian, or any one that has the least sense of the nature
and importance of the Word, or the care of God toward his Church. Shall we
think that men who wrote out Books, wherein themselves and others were no more
concerned, then it is possible for men to be in the writings of the Persons
mentioned, and others like them, had as much Reason to be careful and diligent
in that they did, as those who knew and considered that every letter and Tittle
that they were transcribing, was part of the Word of the Great God, wherein the
eternal concernment of their own souls, and the souls of others did lie.
Certainly whatever may be looked for from the Religious care and diligence of
men, lying under a loving and careful Aspect from the Promise and Providence
of God, may be justly expected from them who undertook that work. However we
are ready to own all their failings, that can be proved. To assert in this
case without proof is injurious.

Sect. 6. The Jews have a common saying among them, that to alter one letter
of the Law is no less sin, then to set the whole world on fire; and shall we
think that in writing it, they took no more care then a man would do in
writing out Aristotle or Plato, who for a very little portion of the world,
would willingly have done his endeavor to get both their works out of it?
Considering that the Word to be transcribed was every Title and (...) of it the
Word of the great God, that, that which was written, and as written was proposed
as his, as from him, that if any failings were made, innumerable Eyes of men,
owning their eternal concernement to lie in that Word, were open upon it to
discover it, and that thousands of Copies were extant to try it by* and all
this known unto, and confessed by every one that undertook this work; it is
no hard matter to prove their care and diligence to have out gone that of other
common scribes of Heathen Authors. The Truth is, they are prodigious things
that are related of the exact diligence and reverentiall care of the ancient
Jews in this work, especially when they entrusted a Copy to be a Rule for the
trial and standard of other private copies. Maimonides in (...) Chap. 8. 3, 4;
tells us that Been Asher spent many years in the careful exact writing out of
the Bible. Let any man consider the 20 things, which they affirm to profane a
Book or Copy, and this will farther appear. They are repeated by Rabbi Moses.
Tract at. de libro Legis. cap. 10; one of them, is (...) if but one letter be
wanting; and an other, if but one letter be redundant. Of which more shall be
spoken if occasion be offered.

Even among the Heathen, we will scarce think that the Roman Pontifices, going
solemnly to transcribe the Sybils verses, would do it either negligently or
treacherously, or alter one Tittle from what they found written; and shall we
entertain such thoughts of them, who knew they had to do with the living God,
and that in and about that, which is dearer to him, than all the world besides.
Let men then clamor as they please, and cry out of all men as ignorant and
stupid which will not grant the corruptions of the old Testament which they
plead for, which is the way of Morinus; or let them propose their own
conjectures of the ways of the entrance of the mistakes that they pretend are
crept into the original copies, with their Remedies, which is the way of
Capellus, we shall acknowledge nothing of this nature but what they can prove
by undeniable, and irrefragable instances, which as to any thing as yet done by
them, or those that follow in their footsteps, appears upon the matter to be
nothing at all. To this purpose take our sense in the word of a very learned
man. Ut in iis libris qui sine vocalibus conscripti sunt, certum constantemque
exemplarium omnium, tum excusarum scriptionem similemque omnino comperimus, sic
in omnibus etiam iis quibus puncta sunt addita, non aliam cuipiam nec
Discrepantem aliis punctationem observavimus; nec quisquam est qui ullo in loco
diversa lectionis Hebraicae exemplaria ab iis quae circumferuntur, vidisse se
asserat, modo Grammaticam rationem observatam dicat. Et quidem Dei consilio ac
voluntate factum putamus, ut cum magna Graecorum Latinorumque fere omnium
ejusdem auctoris exemplarium, ac praesertim manuscriptoru^ pluribus in locis
varietas deprehendatur, magna tamen in omnibus Hebraicis quaecunq, nostro
saeculo inveninutur, Bib iis, scriptionis aequalitas, similitudo atque
constantia servetur quocunque modo scripta illa sint, sive solis consonantibus
constent, sive punctis etiam instructa visantur; Arias Montan. Praefat. ad
Bibia Interlin. de varia Hebraicorum librorum scriptione and lectione.

It can then with no color of probability be asserted, Prolegom. 7. Sect. 12.
(which yet I find some learned men too free in granting) namely that there
has the same Fate attended the Scripture in its transcription, as has done
other Books. Let me say without offense; this imagination asserted on
deliberation, seems to me to border on Atheism. Surely the Promise of God for
the Preservation of his Word, with his Love and Care of his Church, of whose
faith and obedience that word of his is the only Rule, require other thoughts
at our hands.

Sect. 7. 3ly. We add that the whole scripture entire, as given out from God,
without any loss, is preserved in the Copies of the Originalls yet remaining;
What varieties there are among the Copies themselves shall be afterward
declared; in them all, we say, is every letter and Title of the Word. These
Copies we say, are the Rule, standard and touchstone of all Translations
ancient or modern, by which they are in all things to be examined, tried,
corrected, amended, and themselves only by themselves. Translations contain
the Word of God, and are the Word of God, perfectly or imperfectly according as
they express the words, sense and meaning of those originalls. To advance any,
all Translations concurring, into an Equality with the Originalls, so to set
them by it, as to set them up with it, on even terms, much more to propose and
use them as means of castigating, amending, altering any thing in them,
gathering various lections by them, is to set up an Altar of our own by the
Altar of God, and to make equal the Wisdom, care, skill and diligence of men,
with the wisdom, care and Providence of God himself. It is a foolish
conjecture of Morinus from some words of Epiphanius, that Origin in his Octopla
placed the Translation of the 70 in the midst, to be the Rule of all the
Rest; even of the Hebrew its self, that was to be regulated and amended by it.
( media igitur omnium catholica editio collocata erat, ut ad eam Hebraea caeter
aeque editiones exigerentur and emendarentur; Excercit. lib. 1. cap. 3. page
15.) The Truth is, he placed the Hebrew, in Hebrew Characters in the first
place as the Rule and standard of all the rest; the same in Greek Characters
in the next place, then that of Aquila, then that of Symmachus, after which, in
the fifth place followed that of the 70 mixed with that of Theodotion.

Sect. 8. The various Arguments giving Evidence to this Truth that might be
produced, are too many for me now to insist upon; and would take up more room
then is allotted to the whole discourse, should I handle them at large and
according to the merit of this cause. 1. The Providence of God in taking care
of his Word, which he has magnified above all his name, as the most Glorious
Product of his Wisdom and Goodness, his great concernement in this world,
answering his promise to this purpose; 2ly. The Religious care of the Church (I
speak not of the Romish Synagogue) to whom these Oracles of God were
committed. 3ly. The care of the first Writers in giving out Authentic Copies
of what they had received from God, unto many which might be Rules to the first
transcribers. 4ly. The multiplying copies to such a number, that it was
impossible any should corrupt them all, wilfully or by negligence. 5ly. The
preservation of the Authentic copies: first in the Jewish Synagogues, then in
Christian Assemblies, with Reverence and diligence. 6ly. The daily Reading and
studying of the Word by all sorts of Persons ever since it is first writing,
rendering every Alteration liable to immediate observation and discovery, and
that all over the world: with, 7ly. The consideration of the many millions that
looked on every Tittle and letter in this Book as their inheritance,
Hierosolymis Babilonica expugnatione deletis, omne instrumentum Judaicae
literaturae per Esdram constat restauratum. Tertull. lib. de Hab. Mal. c. 3.
which for the whole world they would not be deprived of; And in particular for
the old Testament (now most Questioned) 8ly. The care of Ezra and his
companions, the men of the great Synagoue, in restoring the Scripture to its
purity, when it had met with the greatest trial that it ever underwent in this
World considering the paucity of the Copies then extant. 9ly. The care of the
Massorites from his days and downward, to keep perfect, and give an account of
every syllable in the Scripture, of which see Buxtorfius: Com: Mas: with 10;
The constant consent of all copies in the world, so that as sundry learned men
have observed, there is not in the whole Mishna, Gemara, or either Talmud, any
one place of Scripture found otherwise read, then as it is now in our copies.
11. The security we have that no mistakes were voluntarily or negligently
brought into the Text before the coming of our Savior who was to declare all
things, in that he not once reproves the Jews on that account, Quod si aliquis
dixerit Hebraeos libros a Judaets esse falsatos, audiat Originem, quid in
octavo volumine explanati^num Esaiae respondeat Quaestiunculae; Quod nunquam
dominus and Apostoli qui caetera crimina arguunt in Scribis and Pharisaeis, de
hoc crimine quod erat Maximum reticuissent. Sin autem dixerint post ad ventum
domini and praedicationem Apostolorum libros Hebraeos f^^sse falsatos Ca^hinnum
tenere non patero. Hierom. in c. 6. Esaiae.
when yet for their false Glosses on the word he spares them not. 12.
Afterward the watchfulness which the two nations of Jews and Christians, had
always one upon another, with sundry things of the like importance might to
this purpose be insisted on. But of these things I shall speak again if
ocasion be offered.

Sect. 9. Notwithstanding what has been spoken, we grant that there are, and
have been various Lections in the old Testament and the new; For the old
Testament the Keri and Cethib; the various Readings of Ben Asher and Ben
Nepthali; of the Eastern and Western Jews evince it. Of the (...) I shall
speak peculiarly afterward: They present themselves to the view of every one
that but looks into the Hebrew Bible. At the End of the great Rabbinicall
Bibles (as they are called) printed by Bombergias at Venice, as also in the
Edition of Buxtorfius at Basil, there is a Collection of the various Readings
of Ben Asher, and Ben Nepthali; of the Eastern and Western Jews; We have
them also in this Appendix. For the two first mentioned, they are called among
the Jews, one of them, R: Aaron the Son of R. Moses of the Tribe of Asher; the
other R: Moses the Son of David, of the Tribe of Nepthali. They flourished, as
is probable among the Jews, about the year of Christ 1030, or thereabouts;
and were Teachers of great renown, the former in the West or Palestina, the
latter in the East, or Babylon. In their exact consideration of every letter,
point, and accent of the Bible wherein they spent their lives, it seems they
found out some varieties; Let any one run them through as they are presented in
this Appendix, he will find them to be so small, consisting for the most part
in unnecessary accents of no importance to the sense of any word, that they
deserve not to be taken notice of. For the various Readings of the Oriental,
or Babilonian, and Occidentall or Palestine Jews, all that I know of them,
(and I wish that those that know more of them would inform me better) is that
they first appeared in the Edition of the Bible by Bombergius under the care of
Felix Pratensis, gathred by R: Jacob Ben Cajim who corrected that impression.
But they give us no account of their Original. Nor (to profess my ignorance)
do I know any that do, it may be some do; but in my present have, I cannot
enquire after them. But the thing it is self proclaims their no importance,
and Capellus the most skillfull and diligent improver of all Advantages for
impairing the Authority of the Hebrew Text, so to give countenance to his
Critica Sacra, confesses that they are all trivial, and not in matters of any
moment. Besides these, there are no other various lections of the old
Testament. The conjectures of men, conceited of their own Abilities to correct
the word of God, are not to be admitted to that Title. If any other can be
gathered, or shall be hereafter out of ancient copies of credit and esteem,
where no mistake can be discovered as their cause, they deserve to be
considered. Men must here deal by instances not conjectures. All that yet
appears, impaires not in the least the Truth of our Assertion, that every
Tittle and letter of the Word of God, remains in the copies preserved by his
merciful Providence for the use of his Church.

Sect. 10. As to Jews, besides the mad and senseless clamor in General for
corrupting the Scriptures, three things are with most pretense of Reason
objected against them. 1. The (...) Tikkun Sopherim; or correctio scribarum, by
which means it is confessed by Elias, that 18 places are corrected. But all
things are here uncertain, uncertain that ever any such things were done;
uncertain who are intended by their Sopherim; Ezra and his companions most
probably; nor do the particular places enumerated discover any such
correction; They are all in particular considered by Glassius, lib. 1. Tract.
1; but the whole ter is satisfactory determined by Buxtorfius in his letters to
Glassius, printed by him, and repeated again by Amama, Anti: Barb: Bib: lib:
1. page 30. 31. Because this thing is much insisted on by Galatinus, to prove
the Jews corrupting of the Text, it may not be amiss to set down the words
of that great Master of all Jewish learning.

Sect. 11. Ad tertium quaesitum tuum, de Tikkun Sopherim, 18 voces hanc
censuram suhiisse Massora passim notat. Recensio locorum in vestibulo libri
Numerorum, and Ps. 106. Utrobique non nisi 16 recensentur, sed in Number. 12. 12.
duo exempla occurrunt, ut notat R: Solomon. Deest ergo unus locus mihi, quem ex
nullo Judaeo hactenus expiscari potui, nec magnus ille Mercerus eum invenit.
Galatinus hoc thema non intellexit, and aliena exemplaadmiscet Sic and alii qui
corruptiones ista esse putant. Nec ullum hactenus ex nostris sive Evangelicis
sive Catholicis vidi, qui explicarit, quae fuerint Scribae isti, and quales
(...) ipsorum. Quam antiquae hae notae de Tikkun sint, liquido mihi nondum
constat. Antiquior ipsarum memoria est in libro (...) qui ante Talmud
Babilonicum fertur conscriptus. Dissentiunt tamen Hebraei; de ejus autore and
tempore. In Talmud neutro ulla plane istius Tikkun mentio fit, cum alias (...)
long minoris negotii in Talmud commemoretur. Si aliter ista loca fuissent
aliquando scripta, Onkelos and Jonathan id vel semel expressissent. Nec
Josephus reticuisset, qui contrarium Hebraeis adscribit, nullam scilicet unquam
literam mutatam fuiste in lege ab Hebraeis popularibus suis, lib. 1. contra
Appionem. Talmudistae in Levit. 27. verse. ult. diversis locis notant, nec
Prophetae ulli licitum fuisse vel minimum in Lege mutare vel innovare. Quomodo
ergo Scribae quidam vulgares hanc audaciam sibi arrogassent, textum sacrum in
literis and sensu corrigere? In silentio itaque omnium, in aurem tibi dico,
Sopherim hosce fuisse ipsos autores sacros, Mosen and Prophetas, qui nunquam
aliter scripserunt, quam hodie scriptum legitur. At sapientes Hebraeorum
nasutiores, animadvertentes inconvenientiam quandam in istis locis,
scripserunt, aliter istos autores loqui debuisse, and secundum cohaerentiam
propositi textus, sic vel sic scribere, sed pro eo maluisse sic scribere, and
id sic efferre, ut illud hodie in textu est. Veluti Genesis 18. 22. lectum
scriptum, and Abraham adhuc stabat coram Domino. Itane? ubi legitur, inquiunt
sapientes, quod Abraham venerit ad Dominum, and steterit coram eo; Contrarium
dicitur in praecedentibus, DEUS scilicet venit ad Abraham, and dixit ad eum:
Number ego celo ab Abrahamo etc. Clamor Sodomae and Gomorrhae magnus est etc.
Ideoque Moses scribere debuit. Et Dominus adhuc stabat coram Abrahamo. At ita
serviliter de DEO loqui non decuit Mosen, unde (...) correxit and mutavit
stylum sermonis, honoris majoris causa, and dixit: Et Abraham adhuc stabat etc.
Hinc R: Salamo adjicit (...) scribendum ipsi (Mosi) erat, (Sen) scribere
debebat, Et Dominus stabat; non quod aliter sic scripserit antea, and postea id
ab aliis Scribis correctum sit, aut corruptum. Hinc R. Aben Ezra. ad aliquot
loca irridet nasutos, inquiens, nullo Tikkun opus fuisse, id est, nihil esse,
quod nasuti isti sapientes put arint, autorem debuisse aliter ibi loqui vel
scribere. Vide and eum Job. 32. 3. Habes Mysterium prolixe explicatum, in quo
and multi Hebraeorum impegerunt. Thus far Buxtorfius.

Sect. 12. The (...) are insisted on by the same Galatinus; but these are only
about the use of the letter (...) four or five times; which seem to be of the
same rise with them foregoing.

13. Sect. But that which makes the greatest cry at present is the corruption
of Psalm. 22. 17; where instead of (...) which the 70 translated (...) they
dug or pierced, that is, my hands and feet, the present Judaicall copies, as
the Antwerpe Bibles also, read (...) as a Lion, so depraving the Prophesy of
our Savior's suffering, they dug or peirced my hands and my feet; leaving
it no sense at all; as a Lion my hands and my feet. Simyon de Mues upon the
place, pleads the substitution of (...) for (...) to be a late corruption of
the Jews; at least that (...) was the Keri, and was left out by them. Johannes
Isaak, lib. 2. ad Lindan: professes that when he was a Jew, he saw (...) in a
book of his Grandfathers: Buxtorfe affirms one to have been the Cethib, the
other the Keri, and proves it from the Massora; and blames the Antwerpe Bibles
for printing (...) in the line. With him agree, Genebrard, Pagnin: Vatablus,
Mercer, Rivet, etc. Others contend that Cari, as a Lion, ought to be retained;
repeating (...) the verb (...) they compassed me about; affirming also that
word to signify to tear, rent, and strike, so that the sense should be, they
tare my hands and feet as a Lion. So Voetius de insolubil: Scripturae; but that
(...) cannot be here rendered sicut leo, most evince, partly from the anomalous
position of the praefix (...) with Camets, but chiefly from the Massora,
affirming that that word is taken in another sense then it is used, Esa. 38.
13; where it expressly signifies as a lion: the shorter determination is, that
from the radix (...) by the Epenthesis (...), and the change which is used
often of (...) into (...) (as in the same manner it is, Ezra 10, and the last)
in the third person plural, the preterperfect tense of Kal, is (...)
perfoderunt, they dug, or peirced through my hands and my feet; but to what
purpose is this gleaning after the vintage of Mr Pococke to this purpose, in
his excellent Miscelanies.

Sect. 14. The place of old instanced in by Justine Martyr, Ps. 96. v. 10.
Where he charges the Jews to have taken out those words (...)* from the wood;
making the sense, the Lord reigned from the wood, or the Tree, so pointing out
the death of Christ on the Cross, is exploded by all: For besides that he
speaks of the 70, not of the Hebrew Text, it is evident that those words were
foisted into some few copies of that Translation, never being generally
received, as is manifested by Fuller Miscellan: l. 3. Cap. 13. And it is a
pretty story, that Arias Montanus tells us, of a learned man (I suppose he
means Lindanus) pretending that those words were found in an Hebrew Copy of
the Psalms of Venerable Antiquity beyoud all exception here in England; which
Copy coming afterward to his hand, he found to be a spurious, corrupt novel
Transcript, wherein yet the pretended words were not to be found: Arias Mont.
Apparat. de variis lec: Heb. and Mass: and I no way doubt, but that we want
opportunity to search and sift some of the copies that men set up against the
common reading in sundry places of the new Testament, we should find them, not
one whit better, or of more worth than he found that copy of the Psalms.

CHAP. III.
Of various lections in the Greek Copies of the new Testament.

Sect. 1. FOR Various Lections in the Greek Copies of the new Testament, we
know with what diligence and industry, they have been collected by some, and
what improvement has been made of those Collections by others. Protestants for
the most part have been the chiefest collectors of them; Stephanus, Camerarius,
Beza, Camero, Grotius, Drusius, Hensius, D'Dieu, Capellus, all folrowing
Erasmus, have had the prime hand in that work. Papists have plowed with their
Heifer to disparage the original, and to cry up the vulgar Latin; A specimen
of their endeavors we have in the late virulent Exercitations of Morinus. At
first very few were observed. What an heap or Bulk they are now swelled unto,
we see in this Appendix. The collection of them makes up a Book bigger than
the new Testament it self. Of those that went before, most gave us only what
they found in some particular Copies that themselves were possessors of; some
those only which they judged of importance, or that might make some pretense to
be considered whether they were proper or no; Here we have all, that by any
means could be brought to hand, and that whether they are tollerably attested
for various lections or no; for as to any contribution unto the better
understanding of the Scripture from them; it cannot be pretended. And whether
this work may yet grow, I know not.

Sect. 2. That there are in some Copies of the new Testament, and those some of
them of some Good Antiquity, diverse Readings, in things or words of less
importance is acknowledged; the proof of it lies within the reach of most, in
the Copies that we have; and I shall not solicit the reputation of those who
have afforded us others, out of their own private furniture. That they have
been all needlessly heaped up together, if not to an eminent scandal is no
less evident. Let us then take a little view of their rise and importance.

Sect. 3. That the Grecian, was once as it were the vulgar language of the
whole world of Christians is known. The writing of the new Testament in that
language in part found it so, and in part made it so. What Thousands? yea what
millions of copies of the new Testament were then in the world, all men
promiscuously reading and studdying of the scripture, cannot be reckoned. That
so many Transcriptions, most of them by private Persons, for private use,
having a standard of correction in their public Assemblies ready to relieve
their mistakes, should be made without some variation, is, (...). From the
copies of of the first Ages, others in the succeeding have been transcribed,
according as men had opportunity. From those which are come down to the hands
of learned men in this latterage, whereof very few or none at all, are of any
considerable Antiquity, have men made it their business to collect the various
Readings we speak of; with what usefullnesse and serviceablenesse to the
Churches of God, others that look on must be allowed their liberty to Judge. We
know the Vanity, Curiosity, Pride, and naughtiness of the heart of man: How
ready we are to please our selves, with things that seem singular and remote
from the observation of the many; and how ready to publish them as evidences of
our Learning and diligence, let the fruit and issue be what it will. Hence it
is come to pass, not to question the credit of any man speaking of his M S S,
(which is wholly swallowed in this Appendix) that whatever varying word,
syllable, or Tittle, could be by any observed, wherein any Book, though of
yesterday, varyeth from the common received copy, though manifestly a mistake,
superfluous, or deficient, inconsistent with the sense of the place, yea
barbarous, is presently imposed on us as a various lection.

Sect. 4. As then I shall not speak any thing to derogate from the worth of
their Labor who have gathered all these various Readings into one body or
volume, so I presume I may take liberty without offense to say, I should more
esteem of theirs, who would endeavor to search and trace out these
pretenders, to their several originalls, and rejecting the spurious brood that
has now spawned its self over the face of so much paper, that ought by no
means to be brought into competitio^ with the common Reading, would reduce them
to such a necessary number, whose consideration might be of some other use,
then merely to create a Temptation to the Reader, that nothing is left sound
and entire in the word of God.

However now Satan seems to have exerted the utmost of his malice, men of
former Ages the utmost of their negligence, of these latter Ages of their
diligence, the Result of all which, we have in the present collection in this
Appendix, with them that rightly ponder things there arises nothing at all to
the prejudice of our Assertion, as may possibly, God assisting, be further
manifested hereafter in the particular consideration of some, or all of these
diverse Readings therein exhibited unto us. Those which are of importance, have
been already considered by others; especially Glassius; Tract. 1. lib. 1.

Sect. 5. It is evident that the design of this Appendix was to gather
together every thing of this sort, that might by any means be afforded; At the
Present, that the Reader may not be too much startled at the fruit of their
diligence, whose work and labor it was, I shall only remarke concerning it
some few things that on a general view of it occur unto me.

Sect. 6. 1. Then here is professedly no choice made, nor judgment used in
discerning, which may indeed be called various Lections; but all differences
whatever that could be found in any copies, printed or written, are equally
given out. Hence many differences that had been formerly rejected by learned
men for open corruptions, are here tendered us again. The very first
observation in the Treatise next printed unto this collection in the Appendix
it self, rejects one of the varieties, as a corruption. So have some others of
them been by Arias Montanus, Camero, and many more. It is not every variety or
difference in a copy that should presently be cried up for a various Reading. A
man might with as good color and pretense take all the printed copies he could
get, of various editions, and gathering out the errata Typographica, print them
for various Lections, as give us many, I shall say the most of these in this
Appendix, under that name. It may be said indeed, that the Composers of this
Appendix found it not incumbent on them, to make any judgment of the Readings,
which de facto they found in the copies they perused, but merely to represent
what they so found, leaving the judgment of them unto others; I say also it may
be so; and therefore as I do not reflect on them, nor their diligence, so I
hope they nor others, will not be offended, that I give this notice of what
Judgment remains yet to be made concerning them.

Sect. 7. 2 Whereas Beza, who is commonly blamed by men of all sides and
parties, for making too bold upon various lections, has professedly
stigmatized his own M S, that he sent unto Cambridge, as so corrupt in the
Gospel of Luke, that he durst not publish the various lections of it, for
fear of offense and scandal, however he thought it had not fallen into the
hands of Heretics, that had designedly depraved it; we have here, if I mistake
not, all the corruptions of that copy given us as various Readings; for though
I have not seen the copy its self, yet the swelling of the various lections in
that Gospel, into a bulk as big or bigger, than the collection of all the
new Testament besides the Gospels and Acts, wherein that copy is cited 1440
times, puts it out of all question that so we are dealt withal: Now if this
course be taken, and every stigmatized copy may be searched for differences,
and these presently printed to be various readings, there is no doubt but we
may have enough of them to frighten poor unstable souls into the arms of the
pretended infallible guide; I mean as to the use that will be made of this
work, by such persons as Morinus.

Sect. 8. 3 I am not without Apprehensions that opere in longo obrepsit somnus,
and that whilst the learned Collectors had their hands and minds busied about
other things, some mistakes did fall into this work of gathering these various
lections. Some things I meet withal in it, that I profess, I cannot bring to
any good consistency among themselves; to let pass particular instances, and
insist on one only of a more general and eminent importance. In the entrance
unto this collection an account is given us of the antiert copies, out of which
these observations are made; Among the rest one of them is said to be an
ancient copy in the Library of Emanuell College in Cambridge: this is noted by
the letters Em: throughout the whole collection. Now whereas it is told us in
those preliminary cautions and observations, that it contains only Paul's
Epistles, I wonder how it is come to pass, that so many various lections in
the Gospels and Acts, as in the farrago its self are fixed on the credit of
that book, could come to be gathered out of a copy of Paul's Epistles; certainly
here must be some mistake, either in the learned Authors of the previous
directions, or by those employed to gather the varieties following; And it may
be supposed that that mistake goes not alone; so that upon a farther
consideration of particulars, it may be, we shall not find them so clearly
attested, as at first view they seem to be. It would indeed be a miracle, if
in a work of that variety many things should not escape the eye of the most
diligent observer.

Sect. 9. I am not then upon the whole matter out of hopes, but that upon a
diligent review of all these various Lections, they may be reduced to a less
offensive, and less formidable number; Let it be remembered that the vulgar
copy we use, was the public possession of many generations; that upon the
invention of Printing, it was in actual authority throughout the World, with
them that used and understood that Language, as far as any thing appears to
the contrary. Let that then pass for the standard which is confessedly its
right and due, and we shall God assisting quickly see, how little reason there
is to pretend such varieties of Readings, as we are now surprised withal. For
1. Let those places be separated, which are not sufficiently attested unto, so
as to pretend to be various lections: it being against all pretense of Reason,
that every mistake of every obscure private copy, perhaps not above 2 or 300
years old, (or if elder) should be admitted as a various lection, against the
concurrent consent of it may be all others that are extant in the world, and
that without any congruity of Reason, as to the sense of the Text where it is
fallen out. Men may if they please take pains to inform the world, wherein
such and such copies are corrupted, or mistaken, but to impose their known
failings on us as various lections, is a course not to be approved.

2. Let the same judgment, and that deservedly, pass on all those different
places, which are altogether inconsiderable, consisting in accents or the
change of a letter, not in the least intrenching on the sense of the place, or
giving the least intimation of any other sense to be possibly gathered out of
them, but what is in the approved reading; to what end should the minds of men
be troubled with them or about them, being evident mistakes of the scribes, and
of no importance at all.

3. Let them also be removed from the pretenses which carry their own
convictions along with them, that they are spurious, either 1 By their
superfluity or redundancy of unnecessary Words, or 2ly their deficiency in
words, evidently necessary to the sense of their places, or 3. their
incoherence with the Text in their several stations, or 4. evidence of being
intended as expository of difficulties, having been moved and assoyled by some
of the ancients upon the places, and their resolutions being intimated; or 5.
are foysted out of the 70, as many places out of the new have been asserted
into that copy of the old; or 6. are taken out of one place in the same penman,
and are used in another, or 7. are apparently taken out of one Gospel, and
supplied in another, to make out the sense of the place; or 8. have been
corrected by the Vulgar Latin, which has often fallen out in some copies, as
Lucas Brugensis shows us on Math. 17. 2. Mark. 1. 38. and 7. 4. and sundry
other places; or 9. arise out of Copies apparently corrupted, like that of Beza
in Luke, and that in the Vatican, boasted of by Huntly the Jesuit, which Lucas
Brugensis affirms to have been changed by the Vulgar Latin, and was written
and corrected, as Erasmus says, about the Council of Florence, when an
agreement was patched up between the Greeks and Latins; or 10. are notoriously
corrupted by the old Heretics, as ^ Joh. 5. 7. Unto which heads, many, yea the
most of the various l^ctions collected in this Appendix may be referred; I say
if this work might be done with care and diligence (whereunto I earnestly
exhort some in this University, who have both ability and leisure for it) it
would quickly appear, how small the number is of those varieties in the Greek
copies of the new Testament, which may pretend unto any consideration under the
state and Title of various Lections; and of how very little importance they
are, to weaken in any measure my former Assertion concerning the care and
providence of God in the preservation of his Word. But this is a work of more
time and leisure, than at present I am possessor of; what is to come, (...). In
the mean time I doubt not, but to hear tidings from Rome concerning this
variety; no such Collection having as yet been made in the world.

CHAP. IV.
1 General Premises. 2 Opinions prejudicial to the Authority of the Originals
in the Prolegomena, enumerated. 4 The just consequences of those Premises. 5
Others engaged in these opinions: of Capellus. 6 Of Origin, Cimenius, Arias
Montanus Editions of the Bible.

Sect. 1. HAving now declared in what sense, and with what Allowance as to
various lections, I maintain the Assertion laid down in the foregoing
Treatise, concerning the providentiall preservation of the whole Book of God,
so that we may have full Assurance, that we enjoy the whole Revelation of his
will, in the copies abiding amongst us, I shall now proceed to weigh what may
be objected further, (beyond what has already been insisted on) against the
Truth of it, from the Prolegomena and Appendix to the Biblia Polyglotta, at the
entrance of our discourse proposed to consideration.

Sect. 2. 1. To speak somewhat of them in General, I must crave leave to say,
and it being but the Representation of men's avowed Judgments, I hope I may say
without offense, that together with many high and honorable expressions
concerning the Originalls, setting aside the incredible figment, of the Jews
corrupting the Bible out of hatred to the Christians, which being first
supposed by Justin Martyr (though he speak of the Septuagint only) has scarce
found one or two since to own it, but is rejected by the Universality of
learned men, ancient and Modern, unless some few Papists mad upon their
Idols, and the Thesis preferring in general this or that Translation above the
Original, there is no opinion that I know of, that was ever ventilated among
Christians, tending to the depression of the worth, or impairing the esteem of
the Hebrew copies, which is not directly, or by just consequence owned in these
Prolegomena. Thence it is contended that the Present Hebrew Character is not
that used by God himself, and in the old Church before the captivity of
Babylon, but it is the Chaldean, the other being left to the Samaritans; That
the Points, or vowels and accents are a late invention of the Tiberian
Massorites, long after sundry Translations were extant in the world; That the
Keri Uketif are critical notes, consisting partly of various lections gathered
by the late Massorites and Rabbis; That considering how often times in
likelihood Translators read the Text before the invention of the Points and
accents, the Present Reading may be corrected and amended by them, and that
because the old Translators had other copies, or differing copies from them
which we now enjoy. That where gross faults are crept into the Hebrew Text,
men may by their own conjectures find out various lections, whereby they may be
amended; and to this purpose an instance of such various lections, or rather
corrections of the Original is in the Appendix exhibited unto us out of
Grotius. That the Books of the Scriptures have had the fate of other Books; by
passing through the hands of many Transcribers, they have upon them the marks
of their negligence, ignorance and sloth.

Sect. 3. Now truly I cannot but wish that some other way had been found out to
give esteem and reputation to this noble collection of Translations, then by
espousing these opinions, so prejudicial to the Truth and Authority of the
Originalls. And it may be justly feared, that where one will relieve himself
against the Uncertainty of the Originalls, by the considerations of the various
Translations here exhibited unto us, being such, as upon trial they will be
found to be, many will be ready to question the foundation of all.

Sect. 4. It is true, the Learned Prefacer ownes not those wretched
consequences, that some have labored to draw from these Premises; yet it must
be acknowledged also, that sufficient security against the lawful deriving
those consequences from these Premises, is not tendered unto us; He says not,
that, because this is the state of the Hebrew Language and Bible, therefore all
things in it are dubious and uncertain, easy to be turned unto various senses,
not fit to be a Rule for the Trial of other Translations, though he knows full
well who thinks this a just consequence from the opinion of the novelty of the
vowells; and himself grants that all our knowledge of the Hebrew is taken from
the Translation of the 70, as he is quoted to that purpose by Morinus; Praefat.
ad opuse: Hebrae: Samarit. He concludes not, that on these accounts we must
rely upon as infallible living Judge, and the Translation that he shall commend
unto us; though he knows full well who do so; and himself gives it a for rule,
that at the correction of the Original, we have the consent of the guides of
the Church: I could desire then I say, that sufficient security may be tendered
us against these inferences, before the premises be embraced; seeing great and
wise men, as we shall further see anon, do suppose them naturally and
necessarily to flow from them.

Sect. 5. It is confessed that some learned men, even among the Protestants,
have heretofore vented these or some of these paradoxes: especially Capellus in
his arcanum punctationis revelatum, Critica sacra, and other Treatises: in the
defense whereof, as I hear, he still labors, being unwilling to suffer
loss in the fruit of so great pains. What will become of his reply unto
Buxtorfius in the defense of his Critica, I know not: reports are that it is
finished; And it is thought he must once more fly to the Papists by the help of
his Son, a great zealot amongst them, as he did with his Critica to get it
published. The generality of learned men among Protestants are not yet infected
with this leaven. Nor indeed do I find his boldness in conjecturing approved
in these Prolegomena. But let it be free for men to make known their judgments
in the severalls mentioned. It has been so, and may it abide so still. Had not
this great and useful Work been prefaced with the stating of them, it had not
been of public Concernment (as now it seems to be) to have taken notice of
them.

Sect. 6. Besides it is not known whither this inconvenience will grow. Origin
in his octupla, as was declared, fixed the Hebrew original as the Rule and
measure of all Translations. In the reviving of that kind of work by Zimenius
in the Complutensian Bibles, its Station is left unto it. Arias Montanus who
followed in their steps (concerning whose performances under his master the
King of Spain) I may say for sundry Excellencies, nil oriturum alias, nil
ortum tale) was religiously careful to maintain the purity of the Originalls,
publishing the Hebrew verity (as it is called by Hierome, Austin, and others of
the Ancients) as the rule of Examining by it all translations whatever; Morln.
Exerci: de Heb. Text. sinc. lib. 1. Ex. 1. cap. 4.
for which he is since accused of Ignorance by a petulant Jesuit, that never
deserved to carry his books after him. Michael le Jay has given a turn to
this progress, and in plain terms exalts a corrupt Translation above the
Originalls; and that upon the principle under consideration, as is abundantly
manifest from Morinus. And if this Change of judgment which has been long
insinuating it self, by the curiosity and boldness of Critics, should break
in also upon the Protestant World, and be avowed in public works, it is easy
to conjecture what the End will be. We went from Rome under the conduct of the
purity of the Originalls, I wish none have a mind to return thither again,
under the pretense of their corruption.

CHAP. IV.
1. The original of the Points proposed to consideration in particular. 2 The
importance of the points to the right understanding of the Scripture; the
testimony of Morinus, Junius, Johannes Isaac, Cevallerius, and others. 3 The
use made by the Papists of the opinion of the Novelty of the Points. 4 The
importance of the Points farther manifested. The extreme danger of making the
Hebrew Punctation Arbitrary. 5 That danger evinced by Instance. 6 No relief
against that Danger, on the grounds of the opinion considered. 7 The Authors of
the Hebrew Punctation according to the Prolegomena: who and what. Morinus his
folly. The improbability of this pretense. 8 The state of the Jews, the
supposed inventors of the Points after the destruction of the Temple. 9 Two
attempts made by them to restore their Religion. The former under Barchochab
with its issue. 10 The second under R. Juda, with its issue. 11 The rise and
foundation of the Talmuds. 12 The state of the Jews upon, and after the writing
of the Talmuds. 13 Their rancour against Christ. 14 Who the Tiberian Massorites
were, that are the supposed Authors of the Hebrew Punctation: their
description. 15 That figment rejected. 16 The late Testimony of Dr. Light foot
to this purpose. 17 The rise of the opinion of the Novelty of the Points. Of
Elias Levita. The value of his Testimony in this case. 18 Of the Validity of
the Testimony of the Jewish Rabbis. 19 Some considerations about the antiquity
of the Points; the first from the nature of the Punctation its self, in
reference unto Grammatical Rules. 20 From the Chaldee Paraphrase, and
integrity of the Scripture as now pointed.

THis being in my Apprehension the state of things amongst us, I hope I may
without offense proceed to the consideration of the particulars before
mentioned, from whence it is feared that Objections may arise against the
purity and self evidencing power of the Scriptures pleaded for in the
foregoing Treatise. That which in the first place was mentioned, is the
Assertion of the Points, or vowels and Accents to be a novell invention of some
Rabbis of Tiberias in Palaestina. This the learned Author of the Prolegomena
defends with Capellus his Arguments, and such other Additions as he was pleased
to make use of. To clear up the concernments of our Truth in this Particular,
it will be necessary to consider, 1 what influence into the right understanding
of the Text these points have, and necessarily must have. 2 What is their
Original, or who their Invention is ascribed unto in these Prolegomena. As to
the assertive part of this controversy, or the vindication of their true sacred
Original, some other occasion may call for additions to what is now (by the
way) insisted on. And as I shall not oppose them who maintain that they are
Coaevous with the letters, which are not a few of the most learned Jews and
Christians; so I no ways doubt, but that as we now enjoy them, we shall yet
manifest that they were completed by (...) the men of the great Synagogue,
Ezra and his Companions, guided therein by the infallible direction of the
spirit of God.

Sect. 2. That we may not seem (...), or to contend de lana caprina, the
importance of these points as to the right understanding of the Word of God, is
first to be considered, and that from Testimony and the nature of the thing its
self. Marinus in his preface to his Hebrew Lexicon, tells us that without the
points, no certain truth can be learned from the Scriptures in that Language,
seeing all things may be read diverse ways, so that there will be more
confusion in that one tongue, than was amongst all those at Babylon. (Nulla
igitur certa doctrina poterit tradi de hac lingua, cum omnia possint
diversimodo legi, ut futura sit major confusio unicae hujus linguae, quam illa
Babylonis) Morinus plainly affirms that it is so indeed: instancing in the word
(...), which as it may be variously pointed, has at least 8. several
significations, and some of them as distant from one another, as heaven and
earth. And to make evident the uncertainty of the language on this account, he
gives the like Instance in c: r. s. in latin. Junius in the close of his
Animadversions on Bellar: de verbo Dei. lib. 2. cap. 2, Commends that saying of
Johannes Isaac against Lindan: he that reads the Scriptures without points, is
like a man that rides an horse (...), without a bridle; he may be carried he
knows not whither. Radulphus Cevallerius goes farther, Rudiment. ling. Heb.
cap. 4. Quod superest de vocalium and Accentuum antiquitate, eorum sententiae
subscribo, qui linguam Hebraeam tanquam omnium aliarum (...) absolutissimum
plane ab initio scriptam confirmant: quandoquidem qui contra sentiunt, non modo
authoritatem sacrae scripturae dubiam efficient, sed radicitus (meo quidem
judicio) convellunt, quod absque vocalibus and distinctionum notis, nihil certi
firmique habeat. As for the antiquity of the vowels and Accents ( says he) I
am of their opinion, who maintain the Hebrew language as the exact pattern of
all others, to have been plainly written ( with them) from the beginning:
seeing that they who are otherwise minded, do not only make doubtful the
Authority of the Scriptures, but in my judgment wholly pluck it up by the
roots. for without tho vowels and notes of distinction, it has nothing firm
and certain.

In this man's judgment, (which also is my own) it is evident to all, how
obnoxious to the opinion now opposed the Truth is that I am contending for.

To these also may be added the Great Buxtorfs, Buxtorf. Tiberias.
father and De Antiqui^ate punct.
son. Exeg. loc. com. To^. 1. de Sa: Sc.
Gerard. de Text. Heb. ^uri:
Glassius, loc. com quoas (...) extendat. Author. SSa.
Voetius. Clav. Sa: p. 2. Trac. 6.
Flac: Ilyric: Polan: Whitaker. de Templ. Ezec.
Hassret. dis utat: Jenae.
Wolthius.

Sect. 3. It is well known what use the Papists make of this conceit.
Bellarmine maintains that there are errors crept into the original by this
addition of the points. de Verb. Dei: lib. 2. cap. 2. Hisce duabus sententiis
refutatis restat tertia quam ego verissimam puto, quae est, scripturas
Hebraicas non esse in universum depravatas opera and malitia Judaeorum, nec
tamen omnino esse integras and puras, sed habere suos errores quosdam, qui
partim irrepserint n^gligentia and ignorantia librariorum, etc: partim
ignorantia Rabbinorum qui puncta addiderunt: itaque possumus si volumus puncta
detrahere, and aliter legere. These two opinions being confuted, the third
remains which I supose to be most true, which is that the Hebrew scriptures
are not universally corrupted by the malicious work of the Jews, nor yet are
wholly pure or entire, but that they have errors, which have crept in partly by
the negliligence and ignorance of the transcribers, partly by the ignorance of
the Rabbis who added the points: whence we may if we please reject the points
and read otherwise.

In the voluminous opposition to the Truth made by that learned man, I know
nothing more pernitiously spoken: nor do yet know how his inference can be
avoided, on the hypothesis in Question. To what purpose this insinuation is
made by him is well known, and his Companions in design exactly declare it.
That their Hebrew Text be corrected by the vulgar latin, is the express
desire of Gregory de valentia, Tom. 1. disput. 5. qu. 3: and that because the
Church has approved that Translation, it being corrected (says Huntly) by
Hierome before the invention of points. But this is put out of doubt by
Morinus, who from hence argues the Hebrew tongue to be a very nose of wax, to
be turned by men which way they please: and to be so given of God on purpose,
that men might subject their consciences to their infallible Church: Exercit.
l. 1. Exer. 1. c. 2. Great has been the endeavor of this sort of men, wherein
they have left no stone unturned, to decry the originalls. Some of them cry out
that the old Testament is corrupted by the Jews, 1 De Transl^t. Scripturae. 2
Controversiarum Epitome. 3. Loc. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 13. 4. Arcan Cathol. lib.
1. 5. Ex ercit. de Heb. Text fincer. 6. Prolegom: 7 Deve^oo Del lib. 2. 8 In
Psalm 21. ^ers 19. 9 Bibliot c. lib. 8 Haeres. 13. 10 Praefat ad Bib. in terlin.
11. respons. ad Linda^. 12 De rebus Solom. cap. 4. Sect. 1. 13 Praefat, ad
^osu. 14 Proleg^m. Biblica.
as 1. Leo Castrius, 2. Gordonius Huntlaeus, 3. Melchior Canus; 4. Petrus
Galatinus, Morinus, Salmeron, Pintus; Mersennus, Animad. in Problem. Georgii
Venet, etc. page 233: that many corruptions have crept into it, by negligence,
and the carelessnesse of Scribes, so 7 Bellarmine, 8 Genebrard, 9 Sixtus
Sinensis with most of the rest of them; In these things indeed they have been
opposed by the most learned of their own side; as 10 Arias Montanus; 11
Jobannes Isaac: 12 Pineda, 13 Masius, 14 Ferarius, 15 Andradius and sundry
others who speak honorably of the Originals; But in nothing do they so pride
themselves, as in this conceit of the Novelty of the Hebrew punctation; whereby
they hope with Abimelech's servants utterly to stop the wells or fountains,
from whence we should draw our souls refreshment.

Sect. 4. This may serve for a short view of the Opinions of the parties at
variance, and their several interests in these Opinions. The importance of the
points is on all hands acknowledged, whether aiming at the Honor, or dishonor
of the Originalls. Vowels are the life of words; Consonants without them are
dead and immovable, by them are they carried to any sense, and may be to
diverse. It is true that men who have come to acquaintance with the scriptures
by the help of the Vowels and Accents, being in possession of an habitual
notion and apprehension of that sense and meaning which arises from them, may
possibly think that it were a facile thing to find out and fix upon the same
sense by the help of the matres lectionis (...), and the Consideration of
Antecedents and Consequents with such like Assistances. But let them be all
taken out of the way (as I shall manifest it is fit they should be, if they
have the original assigned to them by the Prolegomena) and let men lay aside
that Advantage they have received from them, and it will quickly appear into
what devious ways all sorts of such Persons will run. Scarcse a Chapter, it
may be a verse, or a Word, in a short time would be left free from perplexing
contradicting conjectures. The Words are altogether innumerable whose
significations may be varied, by an arbitrary supplying of the points. And when
the Regulation of the punctation shall be left to every single Person's
conjectures upon Antecedents and Consequents (for who shall give a rule to the
rest) what end shall we have of fruitless contests? What various, what
pernicious senses shall we have to contend about? suppose that men sober,
modest, humble, pious, might be preserved from such miscariages, and be brought
to some agreement about these things, (which yet in these days upon many
accounts is not to be looked for; yea from the nature of the thing it self
seems impossible) yet this gives us but an humane fallible persuasion that the
readings fixed on by them, is according to the mind of God; But to expect such:
an agreement is fond and foolish. Besides who shall secure us against the
luxuriant Atheistical Wits and spirits of these days who are bold upon all
advantages (...), and to break in upon every thing that is holy and sacred;
that they will not by their huckstering, utterly corrupt the Word of God? How
easy is it to foresee the dangerous consequents of contending for various
readings, though not false nor pernicious, by men pertinaciously adhering to
their own conjectures? The Word of God, as to its literal sense, or Reading of
the words of it, has hitherto been (...), and the acknowledged touchstone of
all Expositions; Render this now a (...), and what have we remaining firm and
unshaken?

Sect. 5. Let men with all their confidence as to the knowledge of the sense
and meaning of the Scriptures which they have already received by such helps
and means as are all of them resolved into the present punctation of the
Bible, (For all Grammars, all Lexicons, the whole Massora, all helps to this
language, new and old in the world, are built on this foundation) reduce
themselves to such an indifferency, as some of late have fancied as a meet rise
for knowledge; and fall seriously to the Reading of some of the Prophets whose
matter is sublime and Mystical, and their Style elipticall and abstruse,
without the help of points and Accents: Let them fix them, or any figures to
answer their sounds arbitrarily, merely on their judgment in the Language, and
conjectures at the sense of the place, without any advantage from what they
have been instructed in, and let us see whether they will agree as they
fabulously report of the 70 Translators? What ever may be the issue of their
industry, we need not fear quickly to find as learned as they, that would lay
their work level with the ground. I confess considering the days we live
in, wherein the bold and curious wits of men, under pretense of critical
observations, alluring and entising with a show of Learning have ventured to
question almost every word in the Scripture, I cannot but tremble to think,
what would be the issue of this supposition, that the Points, Vowels and
Accents are no better guides unto us, than may be expected from those who are
pretended to be their Authors. The Lord I hope will safeguard his own, from
the poison of such Attempts; The least of its evil, is yet thoroughly
considered. So that whereas saving to my self the liberty of my Judgment, as
to sundry particulars both in the impression its self and in sundry
Translations, I acknowledge the great usefullnesse of this work, and am
thankful for it, which I here publicly testify; yet I must needs say, I had
rather that it, and all works of the like kind, were out of the world, than
that this one opinion should be received, with the Consequences that
unavoidably attend it,

Sect. 6. But this trial needs not be feared. Grant the points to have the
Original pretended, yet they deserve all regard, and are of singular use for
the right understanding of the scripture: so that it is not lawful to depart
from them, without urgent necessity, and Evidences of a better l^ction to be
substituted in the room of that refused. But as this relieves us not, but
still leaves us within the sphere of rational conjectures. So whether it can
honestly be pretended and pleaded in this case, comes nextly to be discovered
by the consideration of the supposed Authors of this Invention.

Sect. 7. The founders of this story of the Invention of the Hebrew points,
tell us, that it was the Work of some Rabbis, living at Tiberias a City in
Galilee, about the year of Christ 500, or in the next Century, after the death
of Hierome, and the finishing of the Babilonian Talmud; The improbability of
this story or Legend, I am not now to insist upon. Morinus makes the lie
louder. He tells us that the Babilonian Talmud was finished but a little before
the year 700, Ex. 2. Cap. 3. par poster: that the Massorites (to whom he
ascribes the invention of the points) wrote a long time after the finishing of
the Talmud, and the year 700 p: p: 5. cap. 3; this long time cannot denote
less than some 100d, of years. And yet the same man in his preface to his
Samaritica opuscula; boasting of his finding Rab: Juda Chiug. manifests that he
was acquainted with the present punctation, and wrote about it. Now this Rabbi
was a Grammarian; which kind of learning among the Jews succeeded that of the
Massorites. And he lived about the year 1030; so that no room at all seems
to be left for this work. That there was formerly a School of the Jews, and
learned men famous at Tiberias is granted. Hierome tells us that he hired a
learned Jew from thence for his assistance. Epist:ad Chromat: Among others,
Lightfoot Fall of Hierus. Sect. 3. 4, 5. etc.
Dr Light foot has well traced the shadow of their sanedrym with their
presidents in it, in some kind of succession to that place. That they continued
there in any esteem, number or Reputation, unto the time designed by our
Authors for this Work, is not made to appear from any History or record of
Jews or Christians; yea it is certain, that about the time mentioned the
chiefest flourishing of the Jewish Doctors was at Babylon, with some other
Cities in the East, where they had newly completed their Talmud, the great
Pandect of Jewish Laws and constitutions as themselves every where witness and
declare. That any persons considerably learned were then in Tiberias is a mere
conjecture. And it is most improbable, considering what destruction had been
made of them at Diocaesaria and Tiberias, about the year of Christ 352, by
Gallus at the command of Constantius. That there should be such a collection of
them, so learned, so Authorized; as to invent this Work, and impose it on all
the world, no man once taking notice that any such persons ever were, is beyond
all belief. Notwitstanding any intanglements that men by their conjectures may
put upon the persuasion of the Antiquity of the points, I can as soon believe
the most incredible figment in the whole Talmud, as this fable. But this is not
my business; Let it be granted, that such Persons there were; on the
supposition under consideration, I am only enquiring what is the state and
condition of the present Hebrew pointing, and what weight is to be laid
thereon. That the Reader then may a little consider what sort of men they were,
who are assigned in these Prolegomena as the Inventours of this Artifice of
punctation, I shall take a brief view of the state of the Jews after the
destruction of the Temple down to the days enquired after.

Sect. 8. That the Judaicall Church state continued, not only de facto, but in
the merciful forbearance of God so far, that the many 1000s of Believers that
constantly adhered to the Mosaicall worship, were accepted with God, until the
destruction of the Temple; that, that destruction was the ending of the world
that then was by fire, and the beginning of setting up solemnly the new heaven
and new earth wherein dwells Righteousness, I have at large elsewhere
declared, and may God assisting yet farther manifest in my thoughts on the
Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews. The time between the beginning of Christ's
preaching, to the utter desolation of the City and Temple, an open visible
rejection of that Church, as such was made. Thereon an utter separation of the
true Israel from it ensued; and the hardened residue became (...) and (...) a
people not in Covenant or Delight, but of curse and indignation. What their
state was for a season, on wards both civil and Religious many have declared. I
shall only insist on the heads of things. In general then, they were most
remote from accepting of the punishment of their sin, or considering that God
was revenging upon them the quarrel of his Covenant to the utmost, having
broken both his staves, Beauty and Bands. So far were they from owning their
sin in selling of their Messiah, that seeing an End put to all their former
worship thereupon, there is nothing recorded of them but these two things,
which they wholly in direct opposition unto God gave themselves up unto. (1)
They increased in rage and madness against all the followers of Christ,
stirring up persecution against them all the world over. Hereunto they were
provoked by a great number of Apostates, who when they could no longer retain
their Mosaical rites with the profession of Christ; being rejected by the
Chuches, fell back again to Judaisme or semijudaisme. 2ly. A ^ilthy lusting
and desire after their former worship now become abominable, and a badg of
infidelity, that so their table might become a snare unto them. and what had
been for their safety, might now become the means of their utter ruin and
hardening. Of the former, or their stirring up of Persecution, all stories are
full of Examples and Instances. The latter, or their desires and attempts for
the Restoration of their worship, as conducing to our present business, must
be farther considered.

Sect. 9. For the Accomplishment of a design to restore their old Religion, or
to furnish themselves with a new, they made two desperate Attempts. The first
of these was by Arms under their Pseudo-Messias Barchochab, in the days of
Adrian. Under the conduct and influencings of this man, to whom one of the
chief Rabbis, (Akiba) was armor bearer; in the pursuit of a design to
restore their Temple and Worship, they fell into Rebellion against the Romans
all the World over. In this work, after they had committed unheard of
outrages, Massacres, unparallelled murders spoils and cruelties, and had
shaken the whole Empire, they were themselves in all parts of the World,
especially in the City Bitter, where was the head of their Rebellion, ruined
with a destruction, seeming equal to that which befell them at Jerusalem, in
the days of Vespasian and Titus.

That the Rise of this war was upon the twofold cause mentioned, namely their
desire to retain their former worship, and to destroy the Christian is
evident. For the first it is expressed by Diocas^ius. Hist. Romans lib. 69. in
vita Had. (...) (...). It was the defiling of the soil whereon the temple
stood, which God suffered on set purpose, to manifest their utter rejection,
and that the time was come wherein he would be no more worshipped in that place
in the old manner, that put them in arms, as that Author declares at large.
And for the latter, Justin Martyr, who lived at that time informs us of it.
Apol. 2da. ad Anton. Pium: (...). His fury was in an especial manner against
the Christians, whom he commanded to be tortured and slain, unless they would
deny and blaspheme Jesus Christ. See Eusebius. chron. ad an. Christi 136. And this
war they managed with such fury, and for a while success, that after
Hadrian had called together against them the most experienced soldiers in the
world, particularly Julius Severus out of England, and had slain of them
5080000 in battle, with an infinite number besides as the Historian speaks by
famine, sickness and fire were consumed, He found himself to have sustained
so much loss by them, that he began not his letter to the Senate in the wonted
manner; (...); He could not assure them, that it was well with him and his army.

By this second desolation they were very low, made weak and contemptible, and
driven into obscurity all the world over. In this state they wandered up and
down for some season in all manner of Uncertainty. They had not only lost the
place of their solemn worship, seeing it wholly defiled, the name of Jerusalem
changed into Aelia, and themselves forbid to look toward it upon pain of
death, but also being now unspeakably diminished in their number, Eusebius. Hist.
lib. 4. cap 6. Orosius. lib. 7. c. 13. Hieron. Com. in Ze^h. c. 11. vid
Tzemach. David. and Hotting. Histt. ecclesi. nov. Testa.
all hopes of contriving themselves into any condition of observing their old
rites and worship was utterly lost. Dispersi, palabundi and coeli and soli sui
extorres, vagantur per orbem sine homine, sine Deo, Rege, quibus nec advenarum
jure terram patriam saltem vestigio salutare conceditur. Tertull: Apol:


Sect. 10. Here they sat down amazed for a season; being at their wits end, as
was threatened to them in the Curse. But they will not rest so. Considering
therefore that their old Religion could not be continued without a Jerusalem
and a Temple, they began a nefarious attempt against God, equal to that of the
old world in building Babel, even to set up a new Religion, that might abide
with them wherever they were, and give them countenance in their Infidelity,
and opposition to the Gospel unto the utmost. The head of this new Apostasy
was one Rabbi Jehuda, whom we may not unfitly call the Mahomet of the Jews.
They term him Hannasi, the Prince, and Hakkadosh, the holy. The whole story of
him and his companions, as reported by the Jews, is well collected by Joseph de
Voisin, observat. in proaem: ad pugi: fidei: p. 26, 27. The sum of the whole
concerning this work is laid down by Maimonides, in his praefatio in Seder
Zeraiim, page: 36, 37. of the edition of Mr Pococke, wherein also a sufficient
account is given of the whole Mishna, with the name of the Rabbis, either
employed in it, or occasionally mentioned. This man about the year of Christ
190, or 200, when the Temple had now lain wast almost three times as long as
it did in the Babylonish Captivity, being countenanced as some of themselves
report, Post haec procesi^ temporis ventum est ad Rabbinu Hakkidosh, cui pax,
qui fuit se culi sui phoenix, etc: Ille legem in Israele co^fi^mavit ^enten
^is, dicti^ and differentiis ore traditis a Mose, usque ad tempora sua
colle^is, cum and ipse esset ex iis qui ore ^^adita referebant. Collectis
igitur sententiis and dictis istis, manum admovit componendae Mish^^ae, quae
omnium quae in lege scripta sunt praeceptorum explicationem contineret, par^im
traditionibus a Mose (cui pa^) ore acceptis, pa^^im consequenti^s
argumentatione elicitis etc. vid. R. Maimon. praefat. i^ Zeder. Zerailm. edit.
Pocock. p. 36, 37, 38.
by Antoninus Pius, compiled the Jewish Alcoran, or the Mishna, as a Rule of
their worship and ways for the future. Only whereas Mahomet afterward
pretended to have received his sigments by Revelation, (though indeed he had
much of his Abominations from the Talmud) this man pleaded the receiving of his
by Tradition; the two maine Engines that have been set up against the Word of
God. Out of such Pharisaicall Traditions as were indeed preserved amongst them,
and such Observances as they had learned and taken up from Apostate Christians,
as Aquila and others, with such figments as were invented by himself* and his
predecessors, since the time of their being publicly rejected and cursed by
God, This man compiled the (...) Mishnaioth, which is the Text of their Talmud,
and the foundation of their present Religion, under the name of the old orall
Law. That sundry Christian Ceremonies and institutions vilely corrupted were
taken up by the Jews of those days, many of them being Apostates, as were also
some of Mahomets Assistants in compiling of the Alcoran, I shall (God
assisting) elsewhere endeavor to evince and manifest. That any Gospel
observances were taken from the Jews, as being in practice amongst them, before
their institution by Christ will appear in the issue to be a bold and
groundless fancy.

Sect. 11. The foundation mentioned being laid in a Collection of Traditions,
and new invention of Abominations under the name of old Traditions by this
Rabbi the following Talmuds are an improvement of the same attempt, of setting
up a Religion under the Curse, and against the mind and Will of God; that being
rejected by him, and left without King, without Prince, without sacrifice,
without image, without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim, and kind of worship,
true or false, they might have something to give them countenance in their
unbelief. The Talmud of Jerusalem, so called, (for it is the product of many
comments on the Mishnae in the city of Tiberias, where Rabbi Juda lived)
because it was compiled in the land of Canaan, whose metropolis was Jerusalem,
was published about the year of Christ 230. so it is commonly received; though
I find Dr. Lightfoot of late, on suppositio^ of finding in it the name of
Diocletianus the Emperor, to give it a later date. But I confess I see no
just ground for the alteration of his judgment, from what he delivered in
another Treatise before. The Doclet mentioned by the Rabbis was beaten by the
Children of Rabbi Jehuda Princeps (as himself observes) who lived in the days
of one of the Antoninus's, an hundred years before Diocletian. Neither was
ever Diocletian in a Low condition in the East, being a Sarmatian born, and
living in the Western parts; only he went with Numerianus that Expedition into
Persia, wherein he was made Emperor at his return: but this is nothing to my
purpose. See Lightfoot Chronograph. cap. 81. p. 144. The Babylonian Talmud so
called, because compiled in the land of Babylon, in the cities of Nahardea,
Sora, and Pumbeditha, where the Jews had their Synagogues and schools, was
finished about the year 506 or 510. In this greater work was the mystery of
their iniquity finished, and the Engine of their own Invention for their
further obduration perfectly completed. These are now the Rule of their faith,
the measure of their Exposition of Scriptures, the directory of their worship,
the ground of their hope and Expectation.

Sect. 12. All this while the Jews enjoyed the Letter of the Scriptures, as
they do to this day, yea they receive it sometimes with the honor and
Veneration due to God alone. God preserved it amongst them for our present use,
their farther condemnation, and means of their future conversion. But after
the destruction of the Temple, and rejection of their whole Church State, the
Word was no longer committed to them of God, nor were they entrusted with it,
nor are to this day. They have it not by promise, or Covenant, as they had of
old. Isa. 59. 21. Their possession of it is not accompanied with the
Administration of the spirit, without which, as we see in the instance of
themselves, the Word is a dead letter, of no efficacy for the Good of souls.
They have the letter amongst them, as sometimes they had the Ark in the battle
against the Philistines, for their greater ruin.

Sect. 13. In this state and condition they every where discover their rancour
and malice against Christ, calling him in contempt and reproach (...), who is
(...) relating monstrous figments concerning him, and their dealing with him,
under the name of Jesus the son of Pandira. Some deny that by Jesus the son of
Pandira and Stada in the Talmud the blessed Messiah is intended. So did
Galatinus. Arcan: Relig. Cathol: lib. 1. cap. 7. and Reuchlins Cabal. lib. 1.
p. 636. Guliel: Schickard: in Prooem. Tarich. p. 83. The contrary is asserted
by Reynoldus praelec. in lib. Apoc. praelec. 103. p. 405, 406. Buxtorfius
lexic. Rab. voce (...) and also in (...); Vorstius not: ad Tzem: Dau: page 264.
And in truth the Reason pleaded by Galatinus and others, to prove that they did
not intend our Savior does upon due consideration evince the contrary. The
Jesus (say they) who is mentioned in the Talmud, lived in the days of the
Machabees, being slain in the time of Hyrcanus or of Aristobulus, an 100
years before the death of the true Messiah: so that it cannot be he who is by
them intended. But this is invented by the cursed wretches, that it should not
appear that their Temple was so soon destroyed after their wicked defection
from God, in killing of his son. This is most manifest from what is cited by
Genebrard from Abraham Levita in his Cabala hystoriae, where he says, that
Christians invented this story that Jesus was crucified in the life of Herod,
(that is the Tetrarch) that it might appear that their Temple was destroyed
immediately thereupon: when (says he) it is evident from the Mishna, and
Talmud, that he lived in the time of Alexander, and was crucified in the days
of Aristobulus. So discovering the true ground why they perverted the whole
story of his Time: namely lest all the world should see their sin and
punishment standing so near together. But it is well, that the time of our
Saviors suffering and death was affirmed even by the Heathens, before either
their Mishna or Talmud were borne or thought of. Abolendo rumori (he speaks of
and Nero of his firing Rome) subdidit reos; and quaesitissimis poenis affecit,
quos per flagitia invisos, vulgus Christianos appellabat. Author nominis ejus
Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante per procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio
affectus erat. Tacit. Annal. lib. 15. To return to our Jews: universally in
all their old Writings, they have carried on a design of impugning him in his
Gospel. For as we need not their testimony, nor any thing but the Scripture
for their Conviction and (...), so to acknowledge the truth, the places cited
out of their Talmuds and Gemara, from the Cabalists and other Rabbis, by
Martinus Raymundus, Porchetus, Galatinus, Reuchlinus, and others,) setting
aside Galatinus his Gale Rezeia which must be set aside) seem to be wrested
the most of them besides their intentions, as things obscurely, Metaphorically,
and Mystically written, are easily dealt withal. Their disputes about the
Messiah, when they speak of him of set purpose, as in lib. sanedrim, are
foolish contradictious triflings, wherein they leave all things as uncertain,
as if they were wrangling in their wonted manner, de lana Caprina. So that for
my part, I am not much removed from the opinion of Hulsius (lib. 1. pa. 2. dic:
sup. de Temp. Messiae) that Aesops fables are of as much use in Christian
Religion, as the Judaicall Talmud. Whilst they keep the Scripture, we shall
never want Weapons out of their own armory for their destruction. Like the
Philistine, they carry the weapon that will serve to cut off their own Heads.
Now the Tiberian Massorites, the supposed Inventors of the points, vowels and
Accents, which we now use, were men living after the finishing the last Talmud,
whose whole Religion was built thereon.

Sect. 14. Let us then a little, without prejudice or passion, consider who, or
what these men were, who are the supposed Authors of this work. 1. Men they
were (if any such were) who had not the Word of God committed to them in a
peculiar manner, as their forefathers had of old, being no part of his Church
or People, but were only outwardly possessors of the Letter, without just Right
or Title to it; utterly uninterested in the promise of the communication of the
Spirit, which is the great Charter of the Churches preservation of truth: Isa.
59. 21. 2 Men so remote from a right understanding of the Word, or the Mind and
Will of God therein, that they were desperately engaged to oppose his Truth in
the Books which themselves enjoyed in all matters of importance unto the Glory
of God, or the Good of their own souls, from the beginning to the ending.
fundament: nonum apud Maimon. praefat. ad Perck. Chelek. p. 175. Edit. Poc.
The foundation of whose Religion, was infidelity, and one of their chief
fundamentals an opposition to the Gospel. 3. Men under the special Curse of
God, and his vengeance, upon the Account of the Blood of his dear Son. 4. Men
all their days feeding themselves with vain fables, and mischeivous devices
against the Gospel, laboring to set up a new Religion under the name of the
old, in despite of God, so striving to wrestle it out with his curse to the
utmost. 5. Men of a prosound ignorance in all manner of Learning and knowledge,
but only what concerned their own dunghill Traditions; Sh^bet Jehuda, p. 40.
as appears in their stories, wherein they make Pirrhus King of Epirus, help
Nebuchadnezzar against Jerusalem; with innumerable the like fopperies. 6. Men
so addicted to such monstrous figments, as appears in their Talmuds, as their
successors of after ages are ashamed of, and seek to palliate, what they are
able; yea for the most part Idolaters and Magicians, as I shall evince. Now I
dare leave it to the judgment of any godly prudent person, not addicted to
parties and names of men, who is at all acquainted with the importance of the
Hebrew vowels and Accents unto the right understanding of the Scripture, with
what influence their present fixation has into the literal sense we embrace,
whether we need not very clear evidence and Testimony, yea undeniable and
unquestionable, to cast the rise and spring of them upon the invention of this
sort of men.

Sect. 15. Of all the fables that are in the Talmud, I know none more
incredible than this story: that men, who cannot by any story or other record,
be made to appear, that they ever were in rerum natura: such men, as we have
described, obscure, unobserved, not taken notice of by any Learned man, Jew or
Christian, should in a time of deep ignorance in the place where they lived,
amongst a people wholly addicted to monstrous fables, themselves blinded under
the Curse of God, find out so great, so excellent a work, of such unspeakable
usefulness, not once advising with the men of their own profession and
Religion, who then flourished in great abundance at Babylon, and the places
adjacent, and impose it on all the World (that receive the Scriptures) and have
every Tittle of their work received, without any opposition or question, from
any person or persons, of any principle whatever; yea so, as to have their
Invention made the constant Rule of all following Expositions, Comments, and
Interpretations: Credat Apella.

To draw then to the close of this discourse; I must crave liberty to profess,
that if I could be thoroughly convinced, that the present Hebrew punctation were
the figment and invention of these men, I should labor to the utmost to have
it utterly taken away out of the Bible, nor should (in its present station)
make use of it any more. What use such an Invention might be of under catholic
rules in a way of Grammar, I shall not dispute; but to have it placed in the
Bible, as so great a part of the Word of God, is not tolerable. But blessed be
God, things are not as yet come to that pass. I shall only add, that whereas
some of the most eminently learned and exercised persons in all the learning
and Antiquity of the Jews, that these latter ages have produced, have appeared
in the confutation of this fancy of the Invention of the points by some
Posttalmudicall Massorites, I am sorry their respect to the Rabbis has kept
them from the mannagement of this consideration, which is to me of so great
Importance.

Sect. 16. To what I have spoken, I shall add the words of learned Dr
Lightfoot in his late Centuria Chorograph. which came to my hands since the
finishing of this discourse, cap. 81. p. 146. sunt qui punctata Biblia credunt
a sapientibus Tiberiensibus; ( he means Elias only, for other Jews of this
opinion there are none) Ego impudentiam Judaeorum, qui fabulam invenerunt non
miror: Christianorum credulitatem miror, qui applaudunt. Recognosce (quaeso)
nomina Tiberiensium, a sita illic primum Academia ad eam expirantem: and
quidnam tandem invenies, nisi genus hominum, prae Pharisaismo insaniens,
traditionibus fascinans and fascinatum, coecum, vafrum, delirum; ignoscant, si
dicam Magicum, and monstrosum? ad opus tam divinum homines quam ineptos, quam
stolidos! Perlege Talmud Hierosolymitanum, et nota qualiter illic se habeant R.
Juda, R. Chamnath, Z. Judan, R. Hoshaia, R. Chaija Rubba, R. Chaija bar Ba, R.
Jochananan, reliquique inter Tiberienses grandissimi doctores, quam serio nihil
agunt, quam pueriliter seria, quanta in ipsorum disputationibus vafrities,
spuma, venenum, fumus, nihil: and si punctata fuisse Biblia in istiusmodi
Schola potes credere, creed and omnia Talmudica. Opus spiritus sancti sapit
punctatio Bibliorum, non opus hominum perditorum, excae^atorum, amentium. In
the words of this learned person there is the sum of what I am pleading for.
Says he, I do not admire the Jews Impudence, who found out that fable; I
admire Christians credulity who applaud it. Recount I pray the names of the
Tiberians from the first foundation of an University there to the expiring
thereof, and what do you find, but a sort of men being mad with (or above) the
Pharisees, bewitchi^g and bewitched with traditions, blind, crafty, raging;
pardon me if I say Magical, and monstrous? what fools, what Sots as to such a
divine work? Read over the Talmud of Jerusalem, consider how R. Juda, R.
Chanina, R. Chajia Bar Ba, R. Jochanan, R. Jonathan, and the rest of the great
Doctors among the Tiberians do behave themselves? how seriously they do of
nothing? how childish they are in serious things, how much deceitfulness,
froth, venom, smoke, nothing, in their disputations: and if you can believe
the points of the bible to proceed from such a school, believe also all their
Talmuds; the pointing of the Bible savours of the work of the holy spirit, not
of wicked, blind, and mad men.

Sect. 17. The Jews generally believe these points to have been from Mount
Sinai, and so downward by Moses and the Prophets; at least from Ezra and his
companions, the men of the great synagogue, not denying that the use and
knowledge of them received a great reviving by the Gemarists and Massorites,
when they had been much disused; so Rabbi Azarias at large; Imre Binah. cap. 59.

Had it been otherwise, surely men stupendously superstitious in inquiring
after the Traditions of their Fathers would have found some footsteps of their
Rise and progress. It is true, there is not only the opinion, but there are
the Arguments of one of them to the contrary, namely Elias Levita; This Elias
lived in Germany about the beginning of the Refomation, and was the most learned
Grammarian of the Jews in that age. Sundry of the first Reformers had
acquaintance with him; The task not only of reforming Religion, but also of
restoring good literature being incumbent on them, they made use of such
assistances as were to be obtained then to that purpose. This man (which Eodem
fere tempore Palatinus ab^olita Poutificia Authoritate doctrinam Lutheri
recepit, ^aque de causa Paulum Fagium ^a^ernis Rhenanis in Palatinatu natum
Hidelbergam evocavit. Is sub Volfingo Capitone perfectissimam linguae sanctae
cognitione^ adeptus* cum egestate premeretur, Petri Busteri viri locu^letis
Is^ae in qua ille docebat Senatoris liberalitate sublevatus H^lia^ illum
Judaeorum doctissimum accersendum curavit, and instituta typographica offcina,
maximum ad solidam rerum Hebrai. carum cognitionem ^omentum attulit. Thuanus
Hist. lib. 2. ad An. 1564. 546*
Thuanus takes notice of) lived with Paulus Fagius, and assisted him in his
noble promotion of the Hebrew tongue. Hence happily it is that some of those
worthies, unwarily Embraced his novell opinion, being either over borne with
his Authority, or not having leisure to search farther after the Truth. That
the Testimony of this one Elias should be able to outweigh the constant
Attestation of all other learned Jews to the contrary, as Capellus affirms
and pleads, and as is insinuated in our Prolegomena, Proleg. 3. Sec. 42.
is fond to imagine; and the premises of that learned man fight against his own
conclusion. It is known says he, that the Jews are prone to insist on every
thing that makes for the honor of their people and Language, and therefore
their testimony, to the Divine original of the present punctation being in
their own case, is not to be admitted. Only Elias who in this speaks against
the common interest of his people is presumed to speak upon conviction of
truth. But the whole evidence in this cause is on the other side. Let us grant
that all the Jews are zealous of the honor and reputation of their Nation and
Language; as they are: let us grant that they greedily close with every thing,
that may seem to have a tendency thereunto? what will be the issue, or
natural inference from these Premises? Why as nothing could be spoken more
honorably of the Jews, whilst they were the Church and people of God, then
that of Paul, that to them were committed the oracles of God, so nothing can be
imagined or fixed on, more to their honor, ^ince their divorce from God, then
that their Doctors and Masters should make such an addition to the scripture,
so generally acknowledged to be unspeakably useful. And to this purpose Elias
who was the Father of this Opinion, was far from making such deductions
thence as some do now adays; namely, that it is lawful for us to change the
Vowells and Accents at our pleasure; But ties all men as strictly to them as if
they had been the work of Ezra; It is Elias then that speaks in his own
case; whose Testimony is therefore not to be admitted. What was done of old,
and in the days of Ezra is ours, who succeed into the privileges of that
Church; what has been done since the destruction of the Temple, is properly
and peculiarly theirs.

Sect. 18. It may perhaps be thought that by the account given of the Rabbis,
their state and condition of old and of late, I might have weakened one great
Argument which learned men make use of, to confirm the sacred Antiquity of the
present Hebrew punctation, taken from the universal consent and testimony of
the Jewish Doctors, Ancient and modern, this one Elias, excepted. Who can
think such persons are in any thing to be believed. But indeed the case is
quite otherwise. Though we account them wholly unmeet for the work that is
ascribed unto them, and on supposition that it is theirs, affirm that it had
need undergo another manner of trial then as yet out of Reverence to its
generally received Antiquity, it has met withal; yet they were men still, who
were full-well able to declare what de facto they found to be so, and what they
found otherwise. It cannot, I think, be resonably supposed, that so many men
living in so many several Ages, at such vast distances from one another, who
some of them it may be, never heard of the names of other some of them, should
conspire to cosen themselves and all the world besides, in a matter of fact
not at all to their Advantage. However for my part, what ever can be proved
against them, I shall willingly admit. But to be driven out of such a rich
possession, as is the present Hebrew punctation, upon mere surmises and
conjectures, I cannot willingly give way or consent.

Sect. 19. It is not my design to give in Arguments for the Divine original of
the present Hebrew punctation; neither do I Judge it necessary for any one so
to do, whilst the learned Buxtorfius discourse de origin and antiquitate
punctorum, lies unanswered. I shall therefore only add one or two
considerations, which to me are of weight, and not as I remember mentioned by
him, or his Father in his Tiberias, or any other that I know of in their
disputes to this purpose.

1 If the points; or vowels and Accents, be coaevous with the rest of the
Letters, or have an original before all Grammar of that Language (as indeed
languages are not made by Grammar, but Grammars are made by Languages) then the
Grammar of it and them, must be collected from the observation of their use, as
they were found in all their variety before any such art, was invented or used;
and Rules must be suited thereunto; The drawing into Rules all the Instances
that being uniforme would fall under such Rules, and the distinct observation
of Anomalous words, either singly, or in Exceptions comprehending many under
one head, that would not be so reduced, was the work of Grammar. But on the
other side, if the Vowels and Accents were invented by themselves, and added to
the Letters, then the Rule and Art of disposing, transposing, and changing of
them, must be constituted and fixed before the disposition of them; for they
were placed after the Rules made, and according to them. A middle way that I
know of, cannot be fixed on. Either they are of the Original writing of the
Language, and have had Rules made by their station therein, or they have been
supplied unto it according to Rules of Art. Things are not thus come to pass
by chance; nor was this world created by a casual concurrence of these Atoms.
Now if the Grammar or Art was the ground and foundation, not the product of
their use, as I am confident I shall never see a tolerable answer given to that
enquiry of Buxtorfius the elder in his Tiberias, why the Inventors of them left
so many words Anomalous and pointed otherwise then according to Rule, or the
constant course of the Language, precisely reckoning them up when they had so
done, and how often they are so used, as " and for: and " for t and the like,
when they might, if they had so pleased, have made them all regular, to their
own great ease, advantage of their Language, and facilitating the learning of
it to all posterity, the thing they seem to have aimed at; so I cannot be
satisfied why in that long operous and curious work of the Massorites, wherein
they have reckoned up every word in the Scripture, and have observed the
irregularity of every tittle and letter, that they never once attempt to give
us out those Catholic Rules whereby they, or their masters proceeded in
affixing the points; or whence it came to pass, that no learned Jew for 100ds
of years after, should be able to acquaint us with that way, but in all their
Grammatical Instructions, should merely collect Observations, and inculcate
them an 100 times over, according as they present themselves to them by
particular Instances. Assuredly had this wonder^ull Art of pointing, which for
the most part may be reduced to catholic Rules, and might have wholly been so,
if it were an arbitrary Invention limited to no praeexisting wiritng, been
found out first, and established as the norma and canon of affixing the vowels,
some footsteps of it would have remained in the Massora, or among some of the
Jews, who spent all their time and days in the consideration of it.

Sect. 20. 2 In the days of the Chaldee Paraphrast when the Prophesies of the
Humiliation and death of their Messiah were only not understood by them, yet we
see into how many several ways and senses they are wrested by that Paraphrast
to affix some tolerable meaning to them. Take an instance on Isaiah the 53:
Jonathan there acknowledges the whole prophesy to be intended of Christ, as
knowing it to be the common faith of the Church; but not understanding the
state of humiliation which the Messiah was to undergo, he wrests the words
into all forms, to make that which is spoken passively of Christ, or to his
suffering from others, to signify actively, as to his doing and exercising
judgment upon others. But now more then 500 years after, when these points are
supposed to be invented, when the Rabbis were awake, and knew full well what
use was made of those places against them, as also that the Prophets
(especially Esaiah) are the most obscure part of the whole Scripture, as to the
Grammatical sense of their words in their coherence without points and
Accents, and how facile it were, to invert the whole sense of many periods by
small alterations, in these Rules of reading; yet as they are pointed, they
make out incomparably more clearly the Christian faith, then any ancient
Translations of those places whatever. Johannes Isaac, a converted Jew, lib. 1.
ad Lindan. tells us that above 200 Testimonies about Christ may be brought out
of the Original Hebrew, that appear not in the vulgar latin, or any other
Translation. And Raymundus Martinus; noverint quae ejusmodi sunt (that his who
blamed him for translating things immediately out of the Hebrew, not following
the vulgar latin) in plurimis valde sacrae scripturae locis veritatem multo
planius atque perfectius pro fide Christiana haberi in litera hebraica quam in
translatione nostra: Proaem. ad pug. fid. sec. 14. Let any man consider those
two rackes of the Rabbis, and swords of Judaicall unbelief, Isa: 53. and Dan.
9; as they are now pointed and accented, in our Bibles, and compare them with
the translation of the 70: and this will quickly appear unto him. Especially
has this been evidenced, Faustus Socin. de Jesu Christo Servatore Crellius
Cont: Gr^t, page 62.
since the Socinians as well as the Jews, have driven the dispute about the
satisfaction of Christ to the utmost Scrutiny, and Examination of every word in
that 53d of Isaiah. But yet as the text stands now pointed, and accented,
neither Jews nor Socinians (notwithstanding the relief contributed to them by
Grotius, wresting that whole blessed Prophesy to make Application of it unto
Jeremiah, thinking therein to outdoe the late or modern Jews, Abarbinel, and
others applying it to Josiah, the whole people of the Jews, Messiah Ben Joseph
and I know not whom) have been able, or ever shall be able to relieve
themselves, from the sword of the truth therein. Were such Exercitations on the
Word of God allowable, I could easily manifest, how by changing the distinctive
accents, and vowels, much darkness and perpelxity might be cast on the
contexture of that glorious Prophesy. It is known also, that the Jews
commonly plead, that one Reason why they keep the Copy of the Law in their
Synagogues without points is, that the Text may not be restrained to one
certain sense; but that they may have liberty to draw out various, and as they
speak more eminent senses.

CHAP. V.
1 Arguments for the novelty of the Hebrew points, proposed to consideration.
2. The Argument from the Samaritan letters considered and Answered 3. Of the
copy of the Law preserved in the Synagogues without points: 4. The testimony of
Elias Levita, and Aben Ezra considered. 5. Of the silence of the Mishna, Talmud
and Gemara about the points. 6. Of the Keri and Chethib. 7. Of the number of
the points. 8. Of the Ancient Translations, Greek, Chaldee, Syriak. 9. Of
Hierome. 10. The new Argument of Morinus, in this cause: The conclusion about
the necessity of the points.

Sect. 1. BUT Because this seems to be a matter of great importance, wherein
the truth formerly pleaded for, appears to be nearly concerned, I shall (...)
very briefly consider the Arguments that are usually insisted on (as in these
Prolegomena) to prove the points to be a novell Invention; I mean of the men,
and at the time before mentioned. Particular Instances I shall not insist upon:
nor is it necessary I should so do; it has been done already. The heads of
Arguments which yet contain their strength, are capable of a brief dispatch;
which shall be given them in the order wherein they are represented by the
Prolegomena; Proleg. 3. 38, 39, 40.

Sect. 2. 1 It is said then, that whereas the old Hebrew letters, were the
present Samaritan, the Samaritan letters having been always without points as
they yet continue, it is manifest that the Invention of the points must be of a
later date than the change of the letters, which was in the days of Ezra, and
so consequently be the work of the postalmudical Massorites. Pergula Pictoris!
This whole Objection is made up of most uncertain conjectures. This is not a
place to speak at large of the Samaritans, Their Pentateuch and its
Translation. The Original of that nation is known from the Scripture, as also
their Worship of God, 2 Kings. 17. Their solemn Excommunication and casting
out from any interest among the people of God, is also recorded, Ezra. 9.
Nehem. 6: and c. 13. Their continuance in their abominations after the closing
of the Canon of the scripture is reported by Josephus Antiq. lib. 11. c. 8. In
the days of the Machabees they were conquered by Hyrcanus, and brought into
subjection by the Jews. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13: cap. 17. Yet their Will
worship upon the credit of the tradition of their Fathers continued to the
days of our Savior, and their hatred to the people of God, Joh. 4. When, by
whom, in what Character they first received the Pentateuch, is most uncertain;
not likely by the Priest sent to them; for notwithstanding his instructions
they continued in open Idolatry; which evidences that they had not so much as
seen the book of the Law. Probably this was done when they were quered by
Hyrcanus, and their Temple razed after it had stood 200 years. So also did the
Edomites. What Diligence they used in the preservation of it, being never
committed to them by God, we shall see afterward. That there are any of them
remaining at this day, or have been this 1000 years past, is unknown. That
the Letters of their Pentateuch were the ancient Hebrew letters, as Eusebius,
Hierome and some of the Rabbis report, seems to me (on the best enquiry I
have been able to make) a groundless Tradition and mere fable. The evidences
tendered for to prove it, are much to weak to bear the weight of such an
Assertion. Eusebius spaeks only on report; affirmatur; it was so affirmed, on
what ground he tells us not. Hierome indeed is more positive; but give me leave
to say, that supposing this to be false, sufficient instances of the like
mistakes may be given in him. For the Testimony of the Talmud, I have often
declared, that with me it is of no weight, unless seconded by very good
evidence. And indeed the foundation of the whole story is very vain. The Jews
are thought and said to have forgot their own Characters in the Captivity, and
to have learned the Chaldean, upon the account whereof they adhered unto it
after their return; when the same men were alive at the burning of one, and
the building of the other Temple; that the men of one and the same generation
should forget the use of their own letters, which they had been exercised in,
is incredible. Besides they had their Bibles with them always, and that in
their own character only; whither they had any one other book or no we know
not: and whence then this forgetting of one Character, and learning of another
should arise, does not appear. Nor shall I in such an improbable fiction lay
much weight on Testimonys, the most ancient whereof is 600 years later then the
pretended matter of fact.

Sect. 3. The most weighty proof in this case is taken from the ancient
Judaicall coins, taken up with Samaritan Characters upon them. We are now in
the high road of forgeries and fables: in nothing has the world been more
cheated. But be it granted that the pretended coins are truly Ancient; must it
needs follow, that because the Letters were then known, and in use, that they
only were so: that the Bible was written with them, and those now in use
unknown. To salve the credit of the coins, I shall crave leave to answer this
conjecture with another. The Samaritan Letters are plainly praeternaturall (If
I may so say) a studied inventio^; in their frame and figure fit to adorn,
when extended or greatned by way of engraving or embossing any thing they shall
be put upon, or cut in. Why may we not think they were invened for that
purpose: namely to engrave on vessels, and to stamp on coin, and so came to be
of some use in vvriting also. Their shape and frame promises some such thing.
And this is rendered the more probable from the practice of the Egyptians,
(...). Clem. Alex. stromat. lib. 5.
who as Clement Alexan: tells us, had 3 sorts of letters, one which he calls
(...), with which they vvrote things of common use; another termed by him
(...), used by the Priests in the sacred vvritings: and the other (...): which
also was of two sorts, simple and symbolicall. Seeing then it was no unusual
thing to have sundry sorts of letters for sundry purposes, it is not improbable
that it was so also among the Jews: Not that they vvrote the sacred vvritings
in a peculiar character, as it were to hide the^, which is declaimed against,
but only that the other Character might be in use for some purposes which is
not unusual: I cannot think the Greeks of old used only the unciall letters,
which yet we know some did; though he did not, who vvrote Homers Iliads in
no greater a volume, then would go into a nutshell.

Sect. 4. But if that should be granted, that cannot be proved, namely that
such a Change was made; yet this prejudices not them in the least, who affirm
Ezra and the men of the great Congregation to have been the Authors of the
Points, seeing the Authors of this rumor affixed, that as the time wherein the
old Hebrew letters were excommunicated out of the Church; together with the
Samaritans. Nay it cast a probability on the other hand, namely that Ezra
laying aside the old letters because of their difficulty, together with the
new, introduced the points to facilitate their use. Nor can it be made to
appear that the Samaritan letters had never any vowels affixed to them.
Postellus affirms that the Samaritans had points in the days of Hierome, and
that their loss of them is the cause of their present corrupt reading. Punctis
hodie quae habebant Hieronimi temporibus carent: leguntque sine punctis admodum
depravate. Postell. Alphab. 12. lingua: There were always some copies written
without vowels, which might be preserved, and the other lost. That people (if
we have any thing from them,) being wicked, ignorant, sottish, superstitious,
Idolatrous, rejectors of the greatest part of the Scripture, Corruptors of what
they had received, might neglect the task of transcribing Copies with Points,
because a matter of so great Care and diligence to be performed aright. Nor is
it improbable, what ever is pretended to the contrary, that continuing in their
sepation from the people of God, they might get the Law written in a Character
of their own choosing, out of hatred to the Jews. Now let any man judge,
whither from this heap of Uncertaintyes any thing can arise with the face of a
Witness, to be admitted to give Testimony in the cause in hand. He that will
part with his possession on such easy Terms, never found much benefit in it.

Sect. 5. 2 The Constant Practice of the Jews in preserving in their Synagogues
one Book, which they almost adore, written without points, is alleged to the
same purpose; for what do they else hereby but tacitly acknowledge the Points
to have an humane Original. An: But it is certain they do not so acknowledge
them, neither by that practice, nor by any other way; it being the constant
Opinion and persuasion of them all, ( Elias only excepted) that they are of a
divine extract; And if their Authority be to be urged, it is to be submitted
unto in one thing, as well as in another. 2 The Jews give a threefold account
of this practice. First, the difficulty of Transcribing Copies without any
failing, the least rendering the whole book as to its use in their Synagogues,
profane. 2 The liberty they have thereby, to draw out various Senses,, more
eminent as they say, indeed more vain and curious, then they have any
advantage to do, when the reading is restrained to one certain sense by the
vowels and accents. 3 To keep all Learners in dependence on their Teachers,
seeing they cannot learn the mind of God, but by their Exposition: Rab:
Azarias: lib. Jmre Bina: cap. 59. If these Reasons satisfy, not any as to the
ground of that practice, they may be pleased to enquire of them for others, who
intend to be bound by their Authority; That the Points were invented by some
late Massorites, they will not inform them. For Jesuiticall stories out of
China, they are with me for the most part of the like credit with those of the
Jews in their Talmud; He that can believe all the miracles, that they work,
where men are not warned of their juggling, may credit them in other things.
However, as I said, I do not understand this Argument; the Jews keep a book in
their Synagogues without points, therefore the points and accents were invented
by the Tiberian Massorites; when they never read it, or rather sing it, but
according to every point and accent in ordinary use. Indeed the whole profound
mystery of this business seems to be this; that none be admitted to read or
sing the Law in their Synagogues, until he be so perfect in it, as to be able
to observe exactly all points and Accents, in a book wherein there are none of
them.

Sect. 6. 3. The testimony of Elias Levita, not only as to his own judgment,
but also as to what he mentions from Aben Ezra and others, is insisted on. They
affirm, says he, that we have received the whole Punctation from the Tiberian
Massorites. An. It is very true, that Elias was of that judgment; and it may
well be supposed, that if that Opinion had not fallen into his mind, the world
had been little acquainted with it at this day. That by receiving of the
punctation from the Tiberians, the Continuation of it in their School, not the
invention of it is intended by Aben Ezra, is beyond all exception evinced by
Buxtorfius. De Punct. Antiq. p. 1. cap. 3. Nor can any thing be spoken more
directly to the contrary of what is intended, than that which is urged in the
Prolegomena from Aben Ezra, comment. in Exodus 25. 31. where he affirms that he
saw some books examind in all the letters, and the whole punctation by the wise
men of Tiberias; namely to try, whether it were done exactly, according to the
patterns they had. Besides all Elias Arguments are notably answered by Rabbi
Azarias; whose Answers are repeated by Joseph de Voysin in his most learned
observations, on the Proemium of the Pugio fidei, page 91. 92. And the same
Azarias shows the consistency of the various opinions that were among the Jews
about the vowels, ascribing them as to their virtue and force, to Moses, or God
on mount Sinai; as to their figure and character to Ezra; as to the
restoration of their use, unto the Massorites.

Sect. 7. 4. The silence of the Miskna Gemara, or whole Talmud concerning the
Points is further urged. This Argument is also at large discussed by
Buxtorfius, and the instances in it answered to the full: nor is it needful
for any man to add any thing further, until what he has discoursed to this
purpose be removed. See part. 1. cap. 6. See also Glassius lib. 1. Tract. 1^ de
Text. Hebrai punctat: who gives instances to the contrary; yea and the Talmud
its self in Nedarim, or of vows chap. 4. on Nehem. 8. 8* do plainly mention
them: and Treatises antienter than the Talmud cited by Rabbi Azarias in Jmre
Binah expressly speaks of them. It is to me a sufficient evidence, able to
overbeare the conjectures to the contrary, that the Talmudists both knew, and
in their Readings were regulated by the points now in use, in that, as many
learned men have observed, there is not one Text of Scripture to be found cited
in the Talmud, in any other sense, as to the literal reading and meaning of
the word, then only that which it is restrained unto by the present punctation:
when it is known that the Patrons of the Opinion under Consideration, yield
this constantly as one Reason of the 70 Translators reading words and sentences
otherwise then we read them now in our Bibles; namely, because the books they
used were not pointed, whereby they were at liberty to conjecture at This or
That sense of the Word before them. This is one of the maine Pillars of
Capellus his whole fabric in his Critica Sacra. And how it can be fancied
there should be no variety between our present reading and the Talmudists, upon
supposition they knew not the use of Points, I know not. Is it possible, on
this supposition, there should be such a Coincidence between their and our
present punctation; whereon the same principle, it seems, there are so many
variations by the 70 and the Chaldee Paraphrast?

Sect: 9. 5. Of the (...) which are pleaded in the next place to this purpose,
I shall speak afterward. The difference in them is in the Consonants, not in
the Vowels, which yet argues not that there were no vowels, when they were
collected, or disposed as now we find them. Yea that there were no vowels in
the Copies from whence they were collected (if they were so Collected) may be
true; but that that Collection was made any later for the maine of it, then the
days of Ezra, does not appear. Now whatever was done about the Scripture in
the Judaicall Church, before the times of our Savior, is manifest to have been
done by Divine Authority, in that it is no where by him reproved: but rather
the integrity of every word is by him confirmed. But of these things distinctly
by themselves afterward we are to speak.

Sect. 10. A sixth Argument for the novelty of the Points is taken from their
number; for whereas it is said all kinds of sounds may be expressed by 5
vowels, we are in the present Hebrew punctation supplied with 14 or 15: which
as it is affirmed, manifests abundantly that they are not Coaevous or
Connaturall to the language it self, but the Arbitrary, artificial invention
of men, who have not assigned a sufficient difference in their force and sound
to distinguish them in pronunciation. But this objection seems of small
importance. The ground of it is an Apprehension, that we still retain exactly
the true pronuntiation of the Hebrew Tongue, which is evidently false. It is
now near 2000 years, since that Tongue was vulgarly spoken in its purity by any
people or nation. To imagine that the True, exact, distinct pronunciation of
every Tittle and syllable in it, as it was used by them, to whom it was vulgar
and natural, is communicated unto us, or is attainable by us, is to dream
pleasantly whilst we are awake. Aben Ezra makes it no small matter that men of
old knew aright how to pronounce Camets Gadol. Says he (...) The men of
Tiberias, also the wise men of Egypt and Africa knew how to read Camets Gadol.
2 Even the distinct force of one Consonant, and that always radical (...) is
utterly lost, so that the present Jews know nothing of its pronuntiation. 3 Nor
can we distinguish now between (...) and (...) between (...) and (...). Though
the Jews tell us that the wise men of Tiberias could do so 1200 years ago; as
also between (...) and (...) and (...) and (...) Nor is the distinct sound of
(...) so obvious unto us. The variety of Consonants among many nations, and
their Ability to distinguish them in pronuntiation, makes this of little
Consideration. The whole nation of the Germans distinguish not between the
force and sound of T and D, whereas the Arabic Dal and Dhsal, Dad, Ta and Da
manifest how they can distinguish those ^ounds. Nor are the Jews (...) answered
distinctly in any other language; to distinguish some of which, Good old
Hjerome had his Teeth filed by the direction of his Veni rursum Hieros^lymam,
and Bethlehem ubi labor pretii Bartemium Judaeum nocturnum habut praeceptorem,
timehat enim Judaeos, and exhibebat se mibi, alium Nicodemum. Hieron: Epist. ad
Oceanum.
Nicodemus. 6. The truth is, the Hebrews have but 10 vowels, 5 long, and 5
short, or 5 great and 5 less; Sheva is but a servant to all the rest; and its
addition to Segol and Patha makes no new vowels. To distinguish between Camets
Hateph, and Hateph Camets there is no Color. Seven only of them, as Morinus
has manifested out of R. Jehuda Chiug, one of the first Grammarians among the
Jews, namely, (...) they called (of old) Kings, or the chief Rulers of all the
motions of the letters. So that indeed they have not so many figures to
distinguish sounds by, with all their vowels, as have the Greeks. Besides the 7
vowels they have twelve dipthongs, and three of them as to any peculiar sound
as mute as Sheva. Literas semper arbitror Assyrias fuisse, sed alii apud
Aegyptio^ a Mercur^o, ut Gelbus; alii apud Tyros repertas volunt: utique in
Graeciam intulesse e Phoenice Cadmum ^exdecem numero, quibus ^rojano bello
adjecisse quatuor ha^c figura (...). Palimedem totidem, post eum Simonidem
Melicum (...), quarum omnium vis in nostris cognoscitur; Plinius Not. Hist.
lib. 7. cap. 56. quae quis in vita ^nvenerit.
It is true, Pliny tells us that Simonides Melicus found out two of the vowels,
(...) and (...), as he did also two Consonants (...) and (...): but surely he
did so, because he found them needful to answer the distinct sounds used in
that language, or he had deserved little thanks for his invention. Speaking
lately with a worthy learned friend, about an universal Character, which has
been mentioned by many, attempted by diverse, Dr. Walkins Ward: of Wad. Col.
and by him brought to that perfection, as will doubtless yield much, if not
universal satisfaction unto learned and prudent men, when he shall be pleased
to communicate his thoughts upon it to the world; we fell occasionally on the
difference of apert sounds or vowells, which when I heard him with good Reason
affirm to be 8 or 9, remembering this Argument about the Hebrew points, I
desired him to give his thoughts in a few words the next day, which he did
accordingly; now because his discourse seems evidently to discover the vanity
of this pretense, that the Hebrew vowels are an arbitrary invention from their
number, I have here inserted it.

Apert sounds are either Simple. Vowels. Double. Dipthongs.
1 Apert simple sounds are distinguishable Formally. Acccidentally.
1 The Formal difference is that which does constitute several letters, and
must depend upon the various Apertion, required to the making of them, together
with the Gravity or Acuteness of the tone which is made by them. According to
which there are at least eight simple vowels, that are by us easily
distinguishable. viz. 1 2 E magis Acutum, as in He, me, she, ye, etc. minus
Acutum, as the English, The: the Latin, me, te, se, etc.

3 I or Y, which are both to be accounted of one power and sound. Shi, di: Thy
my: 4 5 A magis Apertum. All, tall, gall, wall. minus Apertum. Ale, tale, gale,
well.

6 7 O Rotundu^, minus grave, as the English. Go. so. no. the Latin. De. magis
grave and pingue. as the English. Do. to. who.

8 U as in Tu. use, us etc.
So many apert simple sounds there are evidently distinguishable, I would be
loath to say that there neither are, nor can be any more; for who knows, how
many other minute differences of Apertion, and Gravity, may be now used, or
hereafter found out by others, which practice and custom, may make as easy to
them as these are to us. 2 But besides this formal difference, they are some
of them Accidentally distinguishable from one another, with reference to the
quantity of time required to their prolation, whereby the same Vowell becomes
sometimes Long Short
So E. min. Acute. Long Short mete steme met stem


I L alive, Give, Drive, title, Thine. S Live, give, Driven, -- ie tittle, Thin.
A L Bate, A, min. Apert.
hate, cate, same, dame -- ae S Bat, hat, cat -- Sam. dam.
O. Rotund. L. one, none, note etc. ^oe veloa S. one (non Lat.) not.
U L. use, Tune, pule, acute. -- ue S. us, Tun. pull, cut.

The other remaining vowels. viz. E. magis Acut. A. magis Apert. and O. magis
grave, do not change their Quantities but are always long. 2 Dipthongs are
made of the Complexion of two Vowels in one Syllable, where the sounds of both
are heard. These are, 1 Ei. Ey. -- Hei Lat. They. 2 Ea. eat, meat, seat,
Teate, yea, plea. 3 Eu, ew. Few, Dew. Heu. Lat. 4 Ai, Ay. Aid, said, pay,
day. 5 Au, Aw. Audience, Author, Law, Draw. 6 Oi, Oy. Point, soil, Boy, Toy. 7
Ou, Ow. Rout, stout. How, now. 8 Ui, Uy. Bui, juice. 9 Eo, Yeoman, People. How
other dipthongs (which have been used may be significant for the expression of
long Vowels, see noted above.
There is then very little weight to be ventred upon the strength of this
Objection

Proleg. 8. 46. Sect. 11. 7: It is further pleaded that the ancient
translations the Greek, the Caldee and the Syriack, do manifest that at the
time of their Composing the points were not invented; And that because in
sundry places it is evident that they read otherwise, or the words with other
points (I mean as to the force and sound, not figure of them) than those now
affixed. For this purpose very many instances are given us out of the Seventy
especially by Capellus: Grotius also takes the same course. But neither is the
Objection of any force to turn the Scale in the matter under Consideration.
Somewhat will in the close of this disourse be spoken of those Translations.
The differences that may be observed in them especially the former, would as
well prove, that they had other Consonants, that is that the Copies they used
had other letters and words then ours, as other vowels. Yea if we must suppose
where they differ from our present Reading, they had other and better Copies,
it is most Certain that we must grant ours to be very Corrupt. Hoc Ithacus
vellet; nor can this inference be avoided, as shall God willing be further
manifested if Occasion be administered. The truth is, the present Copies that we
have of the Seventy do in many places so vary from the Original, that it is
beyond all Conjecture what should occasion it. I wish some would try their
skill upon some part of Job, the Psalms and the Prophets, to see if by all
their inquiries of extracting various lections, they can find out how they read
in their Books, if they rendered as they read; and we enjoy what they rendered.
Symeon de Muys tells us a very pretty story of himself to this purpose; Assert.
Heb. Vind. Sect. 1: as also how ridiculous he was in his attempt. But I shall
recall that desire; The scripture indeed is not so to be dealt withal; we have
had too much of that work already. The Rabbinicall (...) is not to be Compared,
with some of our Critics Temura and Notaricon. Of the Chaldee Paraphrase I
shall speak afterward. It seems not to be of the Antiquity pretended. It is
not mentioned by Josephus, nor Origin, nor Hierome; but this will not impeach
its Antiquity. But whereas it is most certain that it was in high esteem and
reverence among all the Jews before the time assigned for the punctation of
the points, it seems strange that they should in disposing of them, differ
from it voluntarily in so many places.

2ly. Besides, though these Translatours or any of them, might use Copies
without vowels, as it is confessed that always some such there were, as still
there are, yet it does not follow at all, that therefore the points were not
found out nor in use. But more of this, when we come to speak distinctly of
these Translations.

Sect. 12. 8 Of the same importance is that which is in the last place insisted
on, from the silence of Hierome and others of the Ancients, as to the use of
the points among the Hebrews. But Hierome saw not all things, not the Chaldee
Paraphrase, which our Authors suppose to have been extant at least 400 years
before him; So it cannot be made Evident that he mentioned all that he saw. To
speak expressly of the Vowels he had no Occasion, there was then no Controversy
about them. Nor were they then distinctly known by the names whereby they are
now called. The whole Current of his Translation argues that he had the Bible
as now pointed. Yea, Learned men have manifested by instances that seem of
irrefragable evidence, that he had the use of them. Or it may be he could not
obtain a pointed Copy, but was instructed by his Jew in the right
pronuntiation of words. Copies were then scarce, and the Jews full of envy:
all these things are uncertain. See Munster: Praefat. ad Bib. The Truth is,
either I cannot understand his words, or he does positively affirm, that the
Hebrew had the use of Vowels; in his Epistle to Evagrius, Epist. 126: nec
refert utrum Salem an Salim nominetur, cu^ vocalibus in medio litteris perraro
utantur hebraei; if they did it perraro, they did it; and then they had them;
though in those days to keep up their credit in teaching, they did not much
use them; nor can this be spoken of the sound of the Vowels, but of their
figures. for surely they did not seldom use the sounds of Vewels, if they
spoke often: And many other Testimonies from him may be produced to the same
purpose.

Sect. 13. Morinus in his late Opuscula Hebraea Samaritica, in his Digression
against the Hebrew points and Accents the first part page: 209: brings in a new
Argument to prove that the puncta vocalia were invented by the Jewish
Gramarians, however the distinction of sections might be before. This he
attempts out of a discourse of Aben Ezra concerning the successive means of
the preservation of the Scripture: first by the men of the great Synagogue,
then by the Massorites, then by the Grammarians. As he assigns all these their
several works, so to the Grammarians the skill of Knowing the progresses of
the holy tongue, the generation of the Kingly points and of Sheva, as he is by
him there cited at large. After he labors to prove by sundry instances, that
the Puncta vocalia are by him called Reges, and not the Accents as is now the
use. And in the Addenda to his book praefixed to it, he triumphs upon a
discovery that the vowels are so called by Rabbi Jehuda Chiug the most Ancient
of the Jewish Grammarians. The business is now it seems quite finished; and he
cries out; Oculis aliorum non egemus amplius, (...) nunc sumus. A sacrifice is
doubtless due to this dragge of Morinus. But quid dignum tanto.

Sect. 14. 1 The place insisted on by him out of Aben Ezra, was some years
before produced, weighed and explained by Buxtorfe out of his (...) or the
standard of the holy tongue, De punct. Orig. Part. 1. page 13. 14. cap. 3: and
it is not unlikely, from Morinus his Praeface to his Consideration of that
place, that he fixed on it some years ago, that he learned it from
Buxtorfius, by the provision that he lays in against such thoughts; for what
is it to the Reader when Morinus made his Observations; The manner of the men
of that society in other things gives sufficient grounds for this suspicion.
And Simeon de Muys intimates that he had dealt before with the Father as he now
deals with the Son. Censur. in Excercitat. 4. cap. 7. page 17: himself with
great and rare ingenuity acknowledging what he received of him. Ass. Text. Heb.
ver. cap. 5. Dicesve me haec omnia mutuatum a Buxtorfio? quidni vero mutuor, si
necesse erit. But what is the great discovery here made? That the puncta
vocalia are some of them called Reges; The accents have now got that
Appellation; some of them are Reges, and some ministri: So that the present
state of Things, in reference to Vowels and Accents is but Novell. 2ly. That
the Grammarians invented these regia puncta as Aben Ezra says.

Sect. 15. But I pray what cause of Triumph or boasting is in all this goodly
discovery? was it ever denied by any, that the casting of the names of the
vowels and accents, with the Titles was the work of the Grammarians; was it
not long since observed by many that the 5 long Vowels with (...) and (...)
were called of old Reges? And that the distinction of the Vowels into long and
short was an invention of the Christians rather than Jewish Grammarians; the
Jews calling them some absolutely reges, some great and small, some matres and
filias. But then says he, the Grammarians were the Inventours of these points,
why so? Aben Ezra refers this unto the work of the Grammarians, to know the
progresses of the holy tongue, the generation of those things, etc: but can any
thing be more evident against his design than his own testimony? It was the
work of the Grammarians to know these things, therefore not to invent them;
Did they invent the Radical and servile Letters? Surely they also then
invented the tongue; for it consists of letters Radical and Servile, of points
and accents; and yet this is also ascribed to them by Aben-Ezra. But it is well
that Morinus has at length lighted upon R. Jehuda Chiug: His Opinion before
was collected out of Kimchi, Ephodius, Muscatus and others. But what says he
now himself? for ought appears by what we have quoted by Morinus, he is like
to prove a Notable witness of the Antiquity of the points. It may be well
supposed that Morinus writing on set purpose against their Antiquity would
produce that Testimony which in his whole Author was most to his purpose; And
yet he fixes on one, wherein this Ancient Grammarian who lived about the years
of Christ. 1150, or 1200; gives us an account of the points with their names
without the least intimation of any thing to the impeachment of their Divine
Original; So also the same Aben Ezra on Psalm. 9. verse. 7: tells us, of one
Adonim Ben-lafrad who long before this R. Jehuda found (...) for (...) in an
ancient Copy. And therefore when Morinus comes to make the Conclusion of his
Argument, discovering it seems himself the folly of the pretense, that the
points were invented by the Grammarians, the last sort of men mentioned by Aben
Ezra, he says, procul omni dubio est, and luce meridiana clarius Aben Ezram
sensisse omnium Vocalium punctationem a Massorithis Tiberiensibus, and
Grammaticis, qui hos sequuti sunt Originem ducere. But of these Massorites
there is not one word in the premises, nor is any such thing assigned unto them
by Aben Ezra; But quite another employment, of making an hedge about the Law by
their observations on all the words of it; And had he dreamed of their
inventing the points, he would sure enough have assigned that work to them;
and for the Grammarians, his own Testimony lies full to the Contrary.

Sect. 16. And these are the heads of the Arguments insisted on by Capellus and
others, and by these Prolegomena, to prove the Hebrew punctation to be an
invention of the Jews of Tiberias 500 years or more after the incarnation of
Christ. Brevis Cantilena, sed longum Epiphonema. As I have not here designed to
answer them at large, with the various instances produced to give Countenance
unto them, (Nor is it needful for any so to do, until the Answer already
given to them be removed) so by the specimen given of their nature and kind,
the sober and pious Reader may easily judge whether there be any force in them,
to evert the persuasion opposed by them; Grounded on the Catholic tradition
and consent of the Jews, The uncontradicted reception of them absolutely,
without the least Opposition all the world over by Jews and Christians, the
very nature of the punctation it self following the Genius of the language not
arising or flowing from any Artificial Rules, the impossibility of assigning
any Author to it since the days of Ezra, but only by such loose conjectures
and imaginations as ought not to be admitted to any plea and place in this
weighty Cause; All attended with that great uncertainty, which without their
owning of these points to be of divine Original we shall be left unto, in all
Translations and expositions of the Scripture. It is true; whilst the Hebrew
language was the Vulgar tongue of the nation, and was spoken by every one
uniformely every where, It had been possible, that upon a supposition that
there were no points, men without infallible guidance and direction might
possibly affix notes and figures, which might with some exactness answer the
Common pronuntiation of the Language, and so consequently exhibit the true and
proper sense and meaning of the words themselves. But when there had been an
interruption of a 1000 years in the Vulgar use of the language, it being
preserved pure only in one Book; to suppose that the true and exact
proauntiation of every letter, tittle and syllable was preserved alive by or
all Tradition, not written any where, not Commonly spoken by any, is to build
Towns and Castles of imaginations, which may be as easily cast down as they
are erected, Yet unless this be supposed, (which with no Color of reason can
be supposed, which is yet so, by Capellus and the learned Author of the
Prolegomena) it must be granted, that the great Rule of all present
Translations, expositions, and Comments, that have been made in the Church of
God for some 100d. of years, is the Arbitrary invention of some few Jews,
living in an obscure Corner of the world under the Curse of God, in their
unbelief and blindness. The only Relief in the Prolegomena, against this
amazing inference, is, as was said, that the Massorites affixed not the present
punctation arbitrarily, (so also Capellus) but according to the Tradition they
had received. What weight is to be laid upon such a Tradition for near a
Thousand years (above according to Morinus) is easily to be imagined. Nor let
men please themselves with the pretended facility of learning the Hebrew
language without Points and Accents, and not only the language, but the true
and proper reading and distinction of it in the Bible. Let the Points and
Accents be wholly removed, and all Apprehensions of the sense arising, by the
restraint and distinction of the words as now pointed; and then turn in the
drove of the Learned Critics of this Age upon the noted Consonants, and we
shall quickly see what woeful work, yea Havocke of sacred Truth will be made
amongst them. Were they shut up in several Cells, I should scarcely expect the
Harmony and agreement amongst the^, which is fabulously reported to have been
in the like case among the 70. The Jews say, and that truly (...) No man can
lift up his tongue to read without punctation. And, si rationi in his and
similibus dominium concedamus, toti mutabuntur libri, in literis, vocibus, and
sententiis, and sic res ipsa quoque mutabitur. lib. Cosri. 1. Par. 3. page 28.
And thus have I with all possible brevity vindicated the position formerly
insisted on, from this grand exception, which might be justly feared from the
principles laid down in the Prolegomena.

CHAP. VI.
1 Of the (...) 2. Their nature and Original. The difference is in the
Consonants. 3. Morinus vain Charge on Arias Montanus. 4. The senses of both
Consistent. 5. Of the great Congregation. The spring and rise of these various
Readings. 6. The judgment of the Prolegomena about them, their order twice over
in the Appendix. 7. The rise assigned to them. 8. Considerd. 9. Of Capellus his
Opinion and the danger of it.

Sect. 1. WE are not as yet come to a Close. There is another thing agitated
in these Prolegomena, and represented in the Appendix, that may seem to
derogate from the Universality of my Assertion, concerning the entire
preservation of the Original Copies of the Scripture. The (...) or the
seriptio and lectio, or scriptum and lectum, is that which I intend. The
general nature of these things is known to all them that have looked into the
Bible. One word is placed in the line, and another in the margin; the Word in
the line having not the Points or Vowels affixed to it that are its own, but
those that belong to the Word in the Margin; Of this sort there are in the
Bible 840, or thereabouts; for some of the late Editions by mistake or
oversight, do differ in the precise number. All men that have wrote any
Considerations on the Hebrew Text have spoken of their nature in General; So
has the Author of these Prolegomena. As to our present Concernment, namely to
manifest that from them no Argument can tie us to the corruption of the
Original, the ensuing Observation concerning them may suffice.

Sect. 2 1. All the difference in these words is in the Consonants, not at all
in the Vowels. The Word in the margin ownes the Vowels in the line, as proper
to it; and the Vowels in the line seem to be placed to the Word whereunto they
do not belong, because there is no other meet place for them in the line where
they are to be continued as belonging to the Integrity of the Scripture.

Sect. 3. Morinus to manifest his rage against the Hebrew Text, takes from
hence Occasion to quarrel with Arias Montanus, and to accuse him of ignorance
and false dealing; De Heb. Text. sincer. Excer. 1. cap. 4. page 40.

The pretense of his quarrel he makes to be, that Arias affirms the greatest
part of these Various lections to consist in some differences of the points;
for which purpose he cites his words out of his preface to his Collection of
Various lections. Maxima in his lectionibus Varietatis pars in hujusmodi
punctorum discrepantia Consistit, ut toto hujus Mazzoreth sive variarum
lectionum volumine demonstratur. Whereunto he subjoines, mira assertio ne una
quidem in punctis sita est. Catalogum plurimorum ipse ad finem praefationis
adtexuit. Et Varietates omnes sunt in literis, nulla in punctis. Confidentius
scribo omnium variarum lectionum quas Judaei appellant (...) Keri and Ketib: de
quibus agit Arias nulla prorsus ad puncta pertinet. Iteru^ confidentius, etc.
Would not any man think but that the man had made here some great discovery,
both as to the nature of the (...) as also to the ignorance of Arias, whom he
goes on to reproach as a Person unacquainted with the Massora, and with the
Various lections of Ben-Asher, and Ben-Nepthali, of the East and Western
Jews, at the end of the Venetian Bibles; which Bibles he chiefly used in the
printing of his own. And yet on the other hand, men acquainted with the Ability
and great deserving of Arias, will be hardly persuaded, that he was so blind
and ignorant as to affirm the greatest part of the variety he spoke of
consisted in the changing of Vowels, and immediately to give instances, wherein
all he mentions consists in the change of Consonants only. But what if all this
should prove the ignorance and prejudice of Morinus? First to his redoubled
Assertion about the difference of the Keri and Ketib in the Consonants only,
wherein he speaks as though he were blessing the world with a new and strange
discovery, it is a thing known lippis and Tonsoribus, and has been so since
the days of Elias Levita; What then intended Arias Montanus to affirm the
Contrary; hic nigri succus loliginis, haec est aerugo mera; he speaks not at
all of the (...), but merely of the anomalous pointing of words, in a various
way from the Genius of the tongue, as they are observed and reckoned up in the
Massora, of other Varieties he speaks afterward; giving a particular account
of the Keri Uketib, which whether he esteemed Various lections nor no, I know
not. Non si te superis aeques. But all are ignorant, who are not of the mind of
an aspiring Jesuit.

Sect. 4. That the difference in the sense taking in the whole context, is upon
the matter very little or none at all; at least each word, both that in the
line and that in the margin, yield a sense agreeable to the Anology of faith.

Of all the Varieties that are found of this kind, that of two words, the same
in sound but of most distinct significations, seems of the greatest
importance; Namely (...) and (...) v. 14 or 15 times where (...) not, is in the
Text; the margin notes (...) to him, or his, to be read. But yet though these
seem Contrary one to the other, yet where ever this falls out, a sense
agreeable to the Analogy of faith arises fairly from either word. As to give
one or two instances: Psalm: 100. verse 3. (...) he has made us, and not we our
selves, The Keri in the margin is (...) his, giving this sense; he has made
us, and his we are; The verb Substantive being included in the pronounce. So
Isa. 63. 9. (...) in their afflictions or straights, no straightness; So the
(...) the (...) straightness or affliction was to him, or he was straightened
or afflicted: In the first way, God signifies that when they were in their
outward straights, yet he was not straightned from their relief; in the other,
that he had Compassion for them, was afflicted with them, which upon the matter
is the same; And the like may be showed of the rest.

Sect. 5. I confess I am not able fully to satisfy my self in the Original
and spring of all this Variety, being not willing merely to depend on the
Testimony of the Jews, much less on the conjectures of late innovators. To
the uttermost length of my view, to give a full account of this thing, is a
matter of no small difficulty. Their Venerable Antiquity, and unquestionable
Reception by all Translatours gives them sanctuary from being cast down from
the place they hold by any man's bare Conjecture. That which to me is of the
greatest importance, is, that they appear most of them to have been in the
Bibles, then, when the Oracles of God were Committed to the Jews, during which
time we find them not blamed for adding or altering one word or Tittle. Hence
the Caldee Paraphrast often follows the (...) which never was in the Line
whatever some boastingly conjecture to the contrary: and sometimes the (...).
That which seems to me most probable is, that they were Collected for the most
part of them, by that (...) the men of the Great Congregation. Some indeed I
find of late (I hope not out of a design to bring all things to a further
Confusion about the Original) to question whether ever there were any such
thing as the great congregation. Morinus calls it a Judaicall figment. Our
Prolegomena question it. Prol. 8. Sect. 22. But this is only to question,
whether Ezra, Nehemiah, Josua, Zachary, Haggai and the rest of the leaders of
the people in their return from the Captivity, did set a Sanydrym according to
the institution of God, and labor to reform the Church and all the
Corruptions that were crept either into the Word or worship of God. I see not
how this can reasonably be called into question, if we had not to confirm it
the Catholic tradition of Jews and Christians. Neither is it called the great
Congregation from its number, but eminency of persons. Now on this supposition
it may be granted that the (...) on the books of these men themselves Ezra and
the rest, were collected by the succeeding Churches. Unless we shall suppose
with Anisworth, that the Word was so received from God, as to make both
necessary. And if we know not the true Cause of its being so given, we have
nothing to blame but our own ignorance, this not being the Only Case wherein
we have reason so to do. Our last Translation generally renders the word in
the Margent noteing also the Word in the line where there is any Considerable
difference. Those who have leisure for such a work, may observe what choice is
used in this Case by old and Modern Translatours. And if they had not believed
them to have had an Authoritative original beyond the impeachment of any man
in these days, they could not fairly and honestly have used both line and
margin as they have done.

Sect. 6. What says now our Prolegomena, with the Appendix unto these things.

1. We have them in the Appendix represented unto us in their own order
according as they are found in the books of the Scriptures; And then over
again, in the order and under the heads that they are drawn and driven unto
by Capellus; A task, that learned man took upon himself, that he might in
the performance of it, give some Countenance to his Opinion, that they are for
the most part Critical Emendations of the Text, made by some late Massorites,
that came no man knows whence; that lived no man knows where, nor when. Thus
whereas these Keri Uketib, have the only face and appearance upon the matter,
of Various lections upon the old Testament, (for the Jews Collections of the
Various Readings of Ben Asher and Ben Nepthali, of the Oriental and
Occidentall Jews, are of no Value, nor ever had place in their Bible and may
be rejected) the unwary Viewer of the Appendix is presented with a great Bulk
of them, their whole Army being mustered twice over in this service.

Sect. 7. But this inconvenience may be easily amended, nor am I concerned in
it. Wherefore 3dly for the rise of them it is said that some of them are the
amendments of the Massorites or Rabbis, others, Various lections out of
diverse Copies. That they are all, or the most part of them Critical
amendments of the Rabbis is not allowed; for which latter part of his
determination, we thank the learned Author; and take leave to say that in the
former we are not satisfied, Prol. 8. 23, 24, 25: the Arguments that are
produced to prove them not to have been from Ezra, but the most part from
postalmudicall Rabbis are capable of a very easy solution which also another
occasion may discover; at present I am gone already too far beyond my
intention, so that I cannot allow my self any farther digression.

Sect. 8. To Answer briefly. Ezra and his Companions might be the Collectours
of all those in the Bible, but their own Books; and those in their own books
might be added by the succeeding Church. The Oriental and Occidentall Jews,
differ about other things as well as the Keri and ketib. The Rule of the Jews,
that the Keri is always to be followed, is novell; and therefore the old
Translators might read either, or both, as they saw cause. There was no
occasion at all why these things should be mentioned by Josephus, Philo,
Origin: Hjerome says indeed on Isa. 49. 5. that Aquila rendered that word, to
him, which is written with (...) and (...) not (...) and (...). But he makes it
not appear that Aquila read not as he translated, that is by the (...). And for
what is urged of the Caldee and 70, making use of the keri and ketib, it is not
intended that they knew the difference under these names, but that these
differences were in their days. That the word now in the margin was in the
line until the days of the pretended Masorites, is not to be said nakedly but
proved, if such a novell fancy expect any Credit in the world. That the
Judaicall Rabbis have made some alterations in the Text of their own accord,
at least placed words in the margin, as to their Consonants, supplying their
Vowells in the line, where they ought not to have place; that there were
various lections in the Copies after the Talmud, which have been gathered by
some obscure Jews, no mention being made of those collections in the Masora, or
any of their Grammarians, is the sum of the discourse under Consideration.
When all this, or any part of it is proved by Testimony, or evident Reason, we
shall further attend unto it.

Sect. 9. In the mean time I cannot but rejoice, that Capellus his fancy about
these things, then which I know nothing more pernicious to the truth of God, is
rejected. If these 100ds of words were the Critical conjectures and amendments
of the Jews, what security have we of the mind of God as truly represented
unto us, seeing that it is supposed also, that some of the words in the margin
were sometimes in the line; and if it be supposed, as it is, that there are
innumerable other places of the like nature, standing in need of such
amendments, what a door would be opened unto Curious Pragmaticall wits, to
overturne all the certainty of the Truth of the Scripture, every one may see.
Give once this liberty to the audacious curiosity of men, priding themselves in
their Critical Abilities, and we shall quickly find out what woeful state and
condition the Truth of the Scripture will be brought unto. If the Jews have
made such amendments and Corrections of the Text, and that to so good purpose,
and if so much worth of the like kind yet remain, can any man possibly better
employ himself, then with his uttermost diligence to put his hand to this
plow. But he that pulls down an Hedge, a Serpent shall bite him.

CAAP. VII.
1 Of gathering various lections by the help of Translations. 2 The proper use
and benefit of Translations. Their new pretended use. 3 The state of the
Originalls on this new pretense. 4 Of the Remedy tendered to the relief of that
state. 5 No copies of old differing in the least from those we now enjoy, from
the Testimony of our Savior. 6 No Testimony new or old to that purpose. 7
Requisites unto Good Translations. 8 Of the Translations in the Biblia
Polyglotta: of the Arabic. 9 Of the Syriack. 10 Of the Samaritan Pentateuch.
11 Of the Chaldee Paraphrase. 12 Of the Vulgar Latin. 13 Of the Seventy. 14 Of
the Translation of the New Testament: of the Persian. 15 Of the Ethiopian. 16
The value of these Translations as to the work in hand. 17 Of the supposition
of Gross corruption in the Originals. 18 Of various lections out of Grotius.
19 Of the Appendix in General.

Sect. 5. BEcause it is the judgment of some, that yet other objections may be
raised against the Thesis pleaded for, from what is affirmed in the Prolegomena
about gathering various lections by the help of Translations, and the instances
of that good work given us in the Appendix, I shall close this discourse with
the consideration of that Pretense.

Sect. 2. The great and signal use of various Translations, which hitherto we
have esteemed them for, was the help afforded by them in Expositions of the
Scripture. To have represented unto us in one view the several Apprehensions
and judgments of so many worthy and learned men, as were the Authors of these
Translations, upon the Original words of the Scripture, is a signal help and
Advantage unto men enquiring into the mind and will of God in his Word. That
Translations were of any other use formerly, was not apprehended. They are of
late presented unto us under another notion: namely, as means and helps of
correcting the Original, and finding out the Corruptions that are in our
present copies, showing that the Copies which their Authors used, did really
differ from those which we now enjoy, and use. For this rare Invention we are,
as for the former, chiefly beholding to the learned and most diligent Capellus,
who is followed, as in sundry instances himself declares, by the no less
learned Grotius. To this purpose the scene is thus laid. It is supposed of old
there were sundry Copies of the old Testament differing in many things, words,
sentences, from those we now enjoy. Out of these Copies some of the Ancient
Translations have been made. In their Translations they express the sense and
meaning of the Copies they made use of. Hence by considering what they deliver,
where they differ from our present copies, we may find out, (that is, learned
men who are expert at Conjectures may do so) how they read in theirs. Thus may
we come to a further discovery of the Various Corruptions that are crept into
the Hebrew Text, and by the help of those Translations amend them. Thus
Capellus. The learned Author of our Prolegomena handles this business Prol. 6.
I do not remember that he expressly any where affirms, that they had other
Copies then those we now enjoy; But whereas (besides the keri and ketib, the
various readings of Ben Asher, and Ben Napthali, of the East and Western Jews)
there are through the neglect, oscitancy, and frailty of the Transcribers, many
things befallen the Text, not such failings as happening in one Copy, may be
easily rectified by others, which are not to be regarded as various lections,
nor such as may be Collected out of any Ancient Copies, but faults, or mistakes
in all the Copies we enjoy, or have ever been known, by the help and use of
Translations, conjecturing how they read in their books, either with other
words, or letters, Consonants or Points, we may collect Various lections, as
out of the Original; What this Opinion upon the matter differs from that of
Capellus I see not; for the difference between our Copies, and those of old,
are by him assigned to no other Original; nor does Capellus say that the Jews
have voluntarily corrupted the Text; but only that alterations are befallen it,
by the means and ways recounted in the Prolegomena. To make this evident by
Instances! we have a great number of such Various Lections gathered by Grotius
in the Appendix. The truth is, how the Volume should come under that name, at
first View I much wondered. The greatest part of it, gives us no Various
Lections of the Hebrew Text as is pretended; but Various interpretations of
others from the Hebrew. But the Prolegomena salve that seeming difficulty. The
particulars assigned as Various Lections, are not differing readings collected
out of any Copies extant, or ever known to have been extant, but Critical
conjectures of his own for the amendment of the Text, or at most Conjectures
upon the reading of the words by Translatours, especially the 70 and Vulgar
latin.

Sect. 3. Let us now Consider our disease intimated, and the Remedy
praescribed; together with the improbability of the one, and the
unsuitablenesse of the other as to the removeall of it; being once supposed.
The distemper pretended is dreadful, and such, as it may well prove mortal to
the Sacred truth of the Scripture. The sum of it as was declared before, is
that there were of old sundry Copies extant, differing in many things from
those we now enjoy, according to which, the ancient Translations were made;
whence it is come to pass, that in so many places they differ from our present
Bibles even all that are extant in the world; So Capellus; or that there are
Corruptions befallen the Text (Varieties from the (...)) that may be found by
the help of Translations, as our Prolegomena.

Sect. 4. Now whereas the first Translation that ever was, as is pretended, is
that of the 70, and that of all others, excepting only those which have been
translated out of it, does most vary and differ from our Bible, as may be made
good by some 1000ds of instances, we cannot but be exceedinly uncertain in
finding out wherein those Copies, which as it is said, were used by them, did
differ from ours, or wherein ours are Corrupted; but are left unto endless
uncertain Conjectures. What sense others may have of this distemper I know
not; for my own part I am sollicitous for the Arc; or the Sacred truth of the
Original; And that because I am fully persuaded that the Remedy and relief of
this evil, provided in the Translations, is unfitted to the Cure, yea fitted
to increase the disease. Some other Course then must be taken. And seeing the
Remedy, is notoriously insufficient to effect the Cure, let us try whether the
whole distemper be not a mere fancy, and and so do what in us lie to prevent
that Horrible and outrageous violence, which will undoubtedly be offered to the
Sacred Hebrew verity, if every Learned Mountibanke may be allowed to practice
upon it, with his Conjectures from Translations.

Sect. 5. It is well known that the Translation of the Seventy, if it have the
Original pretended, and which alone makes it considerable, was made and
finished 300 years or nere thereabout, before the Incarnation of our Savior,
that was, in that time and season wherein the Oracles of God were committed to
the Jews whilst that Church and people were the only people of God, accepted
with him, designed by him keepers of his Word for the use of the whole Church
of Christ to come, as the great and blessed foundation of truth. A time when
there was an Authentic Copy of the whole Scripture, as the Rule of all others
kept in the Temple; now can it be once imagined that there should be at that
time such notorious varieties in the Copies of the Scripture through the
negligence of that Church, and yet afterward neither our Savior nor his
Apostles take the least notice of it; yea does not our Savior himself affirm
of the word that the^ was among the Jews, that not (...) or (...) of it, should
pass away or perish, where let not the points but the Consonants themselves
with their Apices be intended or alluded unto in that expression; yet of that
word which was translated by the Seventy, according to this hypothesis, and
which assuredly they then had if ever, not only letters and Tittles, but words,
and that many, are concluded to be lost. But that no Jew believes the figment
we are in the consideration of, I could say, credat Apella.

Sect. 6. 2. Waveing the consideration of our refuge in these cases, namely the
good providence and care of God in the preservation of his word, let the
Authors of this Insinuation prove the assertion; namely that there was ever in
the world any other Copy of the Bible, differing in any one word from those
that we now enjoy; let them produce one Testimony, one Author of credit, Jew
or Christian, that can, or does, or ever did, speak one word to this purpose.
Let them direct us to any relick, any monument, any kind of Remembrance of
them, and not put us off with weak conjectures, upon the signification of one
or two words, and it shall be of weight with us? Is it meet that a matter of so
huge importance, called into Question by none but themselves should be cast and
determined by their conjectures? do they think that men will part with the
possession of Truth upon so easy terms? that they will be cast from their
inheritance by divination? but they will say is it not evident that the old
Translatours did make use of other Copies, in that we see how they have
translated many Words, and places, so as it was not possible they should have
done, had they rendered our Copy according to what we now read; But will indeed
this be pleaded? may it not be extended to all places, as well as to any? and
may not men plead so for every variation made by the Seaventy from the
Original; they had other Copies then any now are extant; better all old
Translations should be consumed out of the Earth, then such a figment should be
admitted. That there are innumerable other Reasons to be assigned of the
Variations from the Original; as the Translatours own inadvertency,
negligence, Ignorance, (for the wisest see not all,) desire to expound and
clear the sense, and, as it was likely, of altering and varying many things
from the Original, with the innumerable corruptions and Interpolations that
have befallen that Translation, indifferently well witnessed unto by the
various lections exhibited in the Appendix, it were easy to manifest; seeing
then, that neither the care of God over his Truth, nor the fidelity of the
Judaicall Church whilst the Oracles of God were committed thereunto, will
permit us to entertain the least suspicion, that there was ever in the world
any Copy of the Bible differing in the least from that which we enjoy, or that
those we have are corrupted as is pretended; and seeing that the Authors of
that insinuation cannot produce the least testimony to make it good (...)
through the mercy and goodness of God in the entire unquestionable possession
of his Oracles once committed to the Jews, and the faith therein once
committed to the Saints.

But now to suppose, that such indeed has been the condition of the holy Bible
in it is Originalls as is pretended let us consider whether any relief in this
case be to be expected from the Translations exhibited unto us with much
pains, care, and diligence in these Biblia-Polyglotta, and so at once
determine that Question, whether this be any part of the use of Translations,
be they never so ancient, namely to correct the Originals by, leaving further
discussion of sundry things in and about them to other Exercitations.

Sect. 7 1. That all, or any Translation, may be esteemed useful for this
purpose, I suppose without any contention it will be granted. (1.) That we be
certain concerning them, that they are translated out of the Originalls
themselves, and not out of the Interpretations of them that went before them;
for if that appear, all their Authority as to the business enquired after,
falls to the ground, or is at best resolved into that former, whence they are
taken, if they are at agreement therewith; otherwise they are a thing of
naught; and this one consideration, will be found to lay hold of one moiety of
these Translations:

2ly That they be of venerable Antiquity, so as to be made when there were
other Copies of the Original in the world besides that which we now enjoy.

3ly. That they be known to be made by men of ability and integrity, found in
the faith, and conscientiously careful not to add or detract from the
Originalls they made the Translation out of; If all these things at least,
concur not in a Translation, it is most undenyably evident that it can be of
no use, as to assist in the finding out what corruptions have befallen our
Copies; and what is the true Lection of any place about which any differences
do arise. Let us then, as without any prejudice in our selves, so without (I
hope) any offense to others, very briefly consider the state and condition of
the Translations given us in the Biblia Polyglotta as to the Qualifications
laid down.

Sect. 8. Let us then take a view of some of the chiefest of them without
observing any order; seeing there is no more Reason for that which is laid down
in this Appendix then for any other that may be fixed on; I shall begin with
the Arabic, for the honor I bear to the renounedly learned publisher of it
and the various lections of the several Copies thereof; and the rather because
he has dealt herein with his wonted candor, giving in a clear and learned
account of the Original and Nature of that Translation, which I had for the
substance of it, received from him in a discourse before, wherein also he gave
me a satisfactory account concerning some other translations, which I shall not
need now to mention; though I shall only say his judgment in such things is to
be esteemed at least equal, with any now alive.

Then he tells us upon the matter that this Translation is a Cento made up of
many ill suited pieces, there being no Translation in that Language extant; I
speak of the old Testament; 2ly. For the Antiquity of the most ancient part of
it was made about the year 4700 of the Jews account, that is of Christ 950.
3ly. It was as to the Pentateuch translated by R: Saadias Haggaon. 4ly. That it
is interpreted and changed in sundry things by some other person. 5ly. That he
who made these cha^ges seemed to have so done that he might the better thereby
(...) as to some particular Opinion of his own, whereof sundry instances are
given. 6ly. That he seems to have been a Mahumetan, or at least much to have
favored them, as appears from other Evidences, so from the inscription of his
work with that soleme motto taken out of the Alcoran, in nomine Dei
miseratoris, misericordis. 6ly. It may be thought also that some other, a Jew,
or a Samaritan had his hand in corrupting the last Translation. 7ly. Who
thought to stamp a divine Authority upon his particular Opinions. 8ly. That the
foundation of this Translation now printed bein that of Saadias, it is
observable that he professes, that he did both add and detract according as
he thought meet, that so he might set out, the hidden ( Cabbalisticall)
understanding of the Scripture. 9ly. That the other Arabic Translations that
are extant, are out of the Seventy: either immediately, or by the Syriack which
was Translated out of it: on these and the like heads does that Oracle of the
Eastern learning, who has not only (as some) learned the words of some of
those Languages, but searched with great diligence and judgment into the nature
of the learning extant in them, and the importance of the Books we have,
discourse in that preface. It is the way of Sciolists when they have obtained a
little skill in any language or science to persuade the World that all worth
and wisdom lies therein; men thoroughly learned, and whose learning is
regulated by a sound Judgment, know that the true use of their abilities
consists in the true suiting of men to a clear acquaintance with truth. In
that kind, not only in this particular are we beholding to this Worthy learned
Person. I suppose there will not need much arguing, to prove that this
Translation though exceeding useful in its own place, and kind, yet is not in
the least a fit remedy to relieve us, against any pretended corruption in the
Original, or to gather various lections different from our present Copy by;
Well may it exercise the ability of learned men, to consider wherein and how
often it goes, off from the Rule of faith; But Rule in in its self, and upon
its own account, coming short of all the necessary Qualifications laid down
before, it is none.

Should I now go to gather instances of the failings of this Translation, open
and gross, and so proceed with the rest, I think I might make a Volume near
as big as that of various lections, now afforded us: but I have another
manner of account to give of my hours then so to spend them.

Sect. 9. Whether the Syriack Translation be any fitter for this use, any one
who shall be pleased to consider and weigh it, will easily discover. It seems
indeed to have been made out of the Original, at least for some part of it; or
that the Translation of the 70 has been in many things changed since this was
made, which I rather suppose. But when, where, or by whom, it does not appear;
nor does it in many things seem to have any respect at all unto the Hebrew;
the note at the close of the Prophets I suppose to proceed rather from the
Scribe of that Individual Copy, than the Translatour; but that the Reader may
see what hands it has passed through, he may take it as its rendered by the
learned Author of the Annotations on that Translation; Explicit Malachias sive
libri 12 Prophetarum, quorum oration perpetuo nobis adsit, Amen; precibusque
ipsorum, precibusque omnium sanctorum, sodalium ipsorum praesertim virginis,
quae Deum peperit, omnium Sanctorum matris quae pro genere Adami intercedit,
propitius sit Deus Lectori and Scriptori Peccatori, and omnibus sive verbo sive
opere, ipsis participantibus; but this good Conclusion is as I suppose from the
Scribe, the usual negligence of whom in his work is frequently Taxed in the
collection of various readings, as page 8. and alibi.

Now though I confess this Translation to be very useful in many things, and
to follow the Original for the most part, yet being made as yet I know neither
when nor by whom, in sundry places evidently following another Corrupt
Translation, having passed through the hands of men ignorant and suspicious,
against whose frauds and folly, by the reason of the paucity of Copies we have
no relief, I question whether it may be esteemed of any great use of
importance, as to the End enquired after.

Sect. 10. Of the Samaritan Pentateuch both Original and Translation we shall
not need to add much; What the people from whom it has its denomination were,
is known; nor have the Enquiries of Scaliger, or Morinus, added any thing to
what is vulgarly known of them from the Scripture, and Josephus; In a word, an
Idolatrous, Superstitious, wicked people they were, before they were subdued by
Hyrcanus; afterward they continued in the Separation from the true Church of
God; and upon the Testimony of our Savior had not Salvation among them. When
they received their Pentateuch is uncertain; Uncertain also how long they
kept it; that they corrupted it whilst they had it, is notuncertaine; They are
charged to have done so by the Jews in the Talmud, and the instance they give
abides to this day; Deuteronomy. 11. 30. They have added Sichem to the Text, to give
Countenance to their abominations. And openly in Deuteronomy. 27. 4: where God gives a
command that an Altar should be set up on mount Ebal, they have wickedly and
nefariously corrupted the Text and put in Gerizim. Now one such voluntary
corruption made on set purpose to countenance a sin, and false worship, is
enough to lay low the Authority of any Copy whatever. The Copy here printed was
brought out of the East from Damascus not long since. It appears to have been
230 years old says Morinus in the account of it, Opusc. Samar. praefat: ad
Translat Samarat: As I said before, that any Samaritans do as yet remain is
uncertain; some few Jews there are that walk in that way, here and there a
few families. Now that this Pentateuch which was never as such committed to the
Church of God, that had its rise no man knows by whom, and that has been
preserved no man knows how, known by few, used by none of the ancient
Christians, that has been voluntarily corrupted by men of corrupt minds to
countenance them in their folly, should be of any Authority upon its own single
account to any end or purpose, especially to vye with the Hebrew Text, men that
have not some design that they publicly own not, will scarce contend. The
places instanced in by Morinus to prove its integrity above the Hebrew Copy,
Morin: Cap. 1. Exercit: 4.
as to the solution of difficulties by it, in Gen: 11. 29, 31. Exodus 12. 40;
do evedently prove it corrupt; any man that will consider them will find the
alterations purposely made to avoid the difficulties in those places, which is
one common evidence of Corruption, in Genesis 11. 31: 60 years are cut off from
the life of Tera to make the Chronology agree; and that of Exodus 12. the
dwelling of the Children of Israel and their Fathers, when they dwelt in the
land of Canaan, and in the land of Egypt, was 430 years, is a plain Comment
or Exposition on the Text, nor would Hierome, who had this Copy, make any use
of it, in these difficulties. Might I go over the rest of Morinus his
instances whereby he seeks to credit his Samaritan Copy, which we have in
these Biblia Polyglotta, I could manifest that there is scarce one of them, but
yields a clear Argument of Corruption in it, upon some of the best grounds
that we have to judge of the sincerity or corruption of any Copy; and if this
Pentateuch had been of any credit of old, it would not have been omitted, yea
as it seems utterly rejected as a thing of naught, by Origin in his diligent
collection of the Original and Versions.

But we are in a way and business, wherein all things are carried to and fro by
conjectures; and it were no hard task to manifest the utter uncertainty of
what is fixed on as the Original of this Pentateuch, by the Author of the
Prolegomena, or to reinforce those conjectures which he opposes; but that is
not my present work; nor do I know that ever it will be so. But I must for the
present say; That I could have been glad, that he had refrained the close of
his discourse, Sect. 2: wherein from the occasional mention of the Samaritan
liturgy, and the pretended antiquity of it, he falls not without some
bitterness of spirit on those who have laid aside the English service book; It
were not (in the Judgment of some) imprudently done, to reserve a triumph over
the Sectaries; to some more considerable Victory, then any is to be hoped from
the Example of the Samaritans: Were they all Barbars, and Porters, and
Alehousekeepers, yet they might easily discern, that the example and president
of a wicked people, forsaken of God, and forsaking of him, to whom the promise
of the Spirit of Supplications, was never made, nor he bestowed upon them, is
not Cogent unto the people of Christ under the new Testament; who have the
promise made good unto them. And much more unto the same purpose will some of
them be found to say, when men of wisdom and learning who are able to instruct
them, shall condescend personally so to do. But I shall forbear, what might
farther be spoken.

The Chaldee Paraphrase is a Cento also. The Targum of Jonathan is ancient, so
also is that of Onkelos; they are supposed to have been made before, or about
the time of our Savior. Some of the Jews would have Jonathan to have lived
not long after Ezra. Others that he was the chief Disciple of Hillel about an
100 years before Christ's Incarnation; some are otherwise minded, and will not
own it to be much older than the Talmud: but as yet I see no grounds sufficient
to overthrow the received opinion. The other parts, of the Scripture were
Paraphrased at several times, some above 500 years after our Savior, and are
full of Talmudicall fancies, if not fables; as that on the Canticles. That all
these Targums are of excelent use is confessed, and we are beholding to the
Biblia Polyglotta for representing them in so handsome an order and place, that
with great facility they may be compared with the Original. But as to the end
under Consideration, how little Advantage is from hence to be obtained these
few ensuing observations will evince. 1. It was never the aim of those
Paraphrasts to render the Original Text exactly verbum de verbo; but to
represent the sense of the Text, according as it appeared to their judgment;
Hence it is impossible to give any true account how they read in any place,
wherein they dissent from our present Copies, since their endeavor was to give
us the sense as they thought rather than the bare and naked importance of the
words themselves; hence Elias says of them (...) behold the Targumists
observed not sometimes the way of Grammar. 2ly It is evident, that all the
Targums agreed to give us often mystical senses, especially the latter, and so
were necessitated to go off from the letter of the Text. 3ly. It is evident
that they have often made additions of whole sentences to the Scripture, even
the best of them, from their own Apprehensions or corrupt Traditions, whereof
there is not one tittle or Syllable in the Scripture nor ever was. 4ly. What
careful hands it has passed through, the bulky collection of various lections
given in this Appendix does abundantly manifest; and seeing it has not lain
under any peculiar care and merciful providence of God, whether innumerable
other faults and Errors, not to be discovered by any variety of Copies, as it
is happened with the Septuagint, may not be got into it who call tell. Of these
and the like things we shall have a fuller account when the Babylonia of
Buxtorfe the Father, (promised some while since by the Son to be published,
Vindic. veritat. Heb. p. 2. chap. 10. page 337; and as we are informed by the
learned Annotator on this paraphrase in his Preface in the Appendix, lately
sent to the publishers of this Bible (shall be put out; so that we have not as
yet arrived at the remedy provided for the supposed distemper.

Sect. 12. Of the vulgar latin, its uncertain Original, its Corruptions and
Barbarismes, its abuse, so much has been spoken, and by so many already, that
it were to no purpose to repeat it over again: For my part I esteem it much
the best in the whole Collection exhibited unto us, excepting the Interlineary
of Arias; but not to be compared to sundry modern Translations, and very unfit
to yield the relief sought after.

Sect. 13. The 70 is that which must bear the weight of the whole. And good
Reason it is indeed, that it should answer for the most of the rest; they being
evidently taken out of it, and so they are oftentimes worse, yet they are now
better the^ that is. But here again all things are exceedingly uncertain,
nothing almost is manifest concerning it, but that it is woefully corrupt; Its
rise is uncertain; some call the whole story of that Translation into question
as though there had never been any such persons in rerum natura, the
Circumstances that are reported about the^ and their works, are certainly
fabulous; That they should be sent for upon the advice of Demetrius Phalereus,
who was dead before, that they should be put into 72 Cells or private Chambers;
that there should be 12 of each tribe, fit for that work, are all of them
incredible. See Scal. ad Eusebius. fol. 123. Wouwer Syntag. cap. 11.

Some of the Jews say that they made the Translation out of a corrupt Chaldee
Paraphrase, and to me this seems not unlikely. Josephus, Austin, Philo,
Hierome, Zonaras affirm that they translated the Law or Pentateuch only;
Josephus affirms this expressly, (...) (says he) (...): Proem. ad Antiquit:
and this is a received Opinion: whence we have the rest is unknown. Take to
this purpose the ensuing Chapter out of Drusius, Observat, lib. 6. chap. 9.

Vulgatam Translationem Graecam non esse LXX Interpretum, contra quam olim
existimatum fuit.

Translatio ea quae vulgo apud Graecos habetur, quin LXX Interpretum non sit,
nemini hodie dubium esse arbitror nam si nihilaliud, inumeri in ea loci sunt,
qui arguunt magnam Imperitiam sermonis Ebraici; sed and negligentiam singularem
in legendo, and oscitantiam tantis Viris indignam qui in ca editione non videt,
nihil videt; etsi Eusebius, Hieron^mus passim in monumentis suis eam
septuaginta interpretibus attribuere videtur. Nos quoque cu^ aliquid inde
proferimus usitato magis quam vero nomine utimur, exemplo videlicet Hieronymi,
quem suspicamur, licet crederet Interpretationem eam a Viris illis elaboratam
minime fuisse, ne offenderet Graecos voluisse tamen recepto nomine semper
appellare. Certe quin dubetaverit super iisdem Authoribus, nihil dubitamus, nam
vel hoc nos in ea opinione confirmat, quod scribit Josephum, omnemque adeo
Scholam Judaeorum quinque tantum libros Mosis a septuaginta interpretibus
translatos esse asserere, scribit autem hoc non semel, sed saepius, ut Ezech.
5. page 343, and page 301, and 372, and Mich. 2. page, 150. Libris Antuerpiae
vulgatis. Drus. observat. lib. 6. Cap. 9.

Let it be granted that such a Translation was made, and that of the whole
Bible, by some Alexandrian Jews, as is most probable; yet it is certain, that
the (...) of it, if left in the Library of Alexandria, was consumed to ashes in
Caesar's wars; though Chrysostom tells us, that the Prophets were placed in
the Temple of Serapis, (...): ad Judaeos: and they abide there, says he, unto
this day; How unlikely this is, any man may guess, by what Hierome, who made
another manner of Enquiry after those things than Chrysostom, affirms
concerning the incurable various Copies of that Translation wanting an Umpire
of their differences. We know also what little exactness men in those days,
before the use of Grammar attained in the knowledge of Languages, in their
relation to one another; and some learned men do much Question even the skill
of those interpreters, so Munster. Praefat: ad Biblia; Videbat Hieronymus Vir
pius and doctus, Latinos vera and genuina legis atque Prophetarum destitutos
lectione, nam LXX Interpretum editio, quae tunc ubique locorum receptissima
erat apud Graecos and Latinos nedum perperam plerique in locis versa fuit,
verum per Scriptores atque Scribas plurimum corrupta, id quod and hodie facile
patet conferenti editionem illam juxta Hebraicam, veritatem, ut interim fatear
illos non admodum peritos fuisse linguae Hebraicae id vel quod inviti cogimur
fateri, alioquin in plurimis locis non tam foede lapsi fuissent.

If moreover the ability be granted, what security have we of their principles
and honesty. Cardinal Ximenius in his preface to the edition of the
Complutensian Bibles, tells us, (that which is most true, if the Translation we
have be theirs) that on sundry accounts they took liberty in Translating
according to their own mind; and thence conclude, Unde Translatio septuaginta
duum, quandeque est superflua, quandoque diminuta; it is sometimes superfluous,
sometimes wanting; but suppose all these uncertainties might be overlooked, yet
the intolerable Corruptions, that (as it is on all hands confessed) have crept
into the translation, makes it altogether useless as to the end we are
enquiring after; this Hierome in his Epistle to Chromat: at large declares, and
shows from thence the necessity of a new Translation. Yea Bellarmine himself
says, that though he believes the Translation of the Septuagint to be still
extant, yet it is so corrupt and vitiated, that it plainly appears to be
another, lib. 2, de Verbo Dei, Cap. 6.

He that shall read and consider what Hierome has written of this Translation
even then when he was excusing himself, and condescended to the utmost to wave
the envy that was comeing one him, upon his new Translation, in the second
Book of his Apology against Ruffinus, Cap. 8. 9; repeating and mollifying
what he had spoken of it in an other place, will be enabled in some measure to
guess of what account it ought to be with us. In brief he tells us, it is
corrupt, interpolated; mingled by Origin with that of Theodotion marked with
Asterisks and Obelisks; that there were so many Copies of it, and they so
varying, that no man knew what to follow; tells us of a learned man who on that
account interpreted all the Errors he could light on for Scripture; that in
the Book of Job take away what was added to it by Origin, or is marked by him,
and little will be left; his discourse is too long to transcribe; see also his
Epistle to Chromatius at large to this purpose. Let the Reader also consult the
learned Masius in his Preface to his most learned Comment on Joshua.

Sect. 14. For the Translations of the new Testament that are here afforded us,
little need be spoken; of the Antiquity, usefullnesse, and means of bringing
the Syriack into Europe, an account has been given by many, and we willingly
acquiesce in it: the Ethiopian and Persian are novell things, of little use or
value, yea I suppose it may safely be said they are the worst and most corrupt
that are extant in the world; The Persian was not translated out of the Greek,
as is confessed by the learned Annotator upon it: Praesens locus satis arguit,
Persam Graecum codicem haud consuluisse; in Luc. 10. and 41. Yea in how many
things he goes off from the Greek, Syriack, Arabic, yea goes directly
contrary to the truth; is both acknowledged by its Publisher, and is manifest
from the thing it self; I know no use of it, but only to show that such a
useless thing is in the world.

Sect. 15. Nor is the Ethiopian one whit better; a novell endeavor of an
illiterate person: he tells us that John when he wrote the Revelation was
Archbishop, of Constantia, or Constantinople, etc: It is to no purpose to go
over the like observations that might be made on these Translations; if any man
has a mind to be led out of the way, he may do well to attend unto them.
Whether some of them be in use now in the world I know not, I am sure it is
well if they be not; had I not seen them, I could not have imagined any had
been so bad: would I make it my business to give instances of the mistakes,
Ignorance, falsifications, Errors and corruptions of these Translatours, who
ere they were (Jews or Christians) for I am not without some ground of thinking
that Jews have had their hands in them for money) my discourse, as I said
before, would swell into a Volume, and unless necessitated, I shall avoid it.

Sect. 16. From what has been spoken it (...) abundantly appear, that if
there are indeed such corruptions, mistakes, and (...) crept into the
Original; as some have pretended, there is no relief in the least provided
for the security of Truth, by any of the Translations exhibited unto us in
these late editions of the Bible; themselves being of an uncertain Original,
corrupt, and indeed of no authority from themselves, but merely from their
Relation to that whose credit is called in Question; for my own part as I said
before, I allow them the proper use, and place; and am thankful to them by
whose Care and pains we are made (...) of them; but to endeavor by them to
correct the Scripture, to gather various lections out of the Original as say
others, for my part I abhor the thoughts of it, let others do as seem good
unto them. And if ever I be necessitated to speak in particular of these
Translations, there are yet in readiness further discoveries to be made of
them.

Sect. 17. There remains only as to my purpose in hand that some brief
account be taken of what is yet further insinuated, of the liberty to observe
Various lections in the Bible upon supposition of gross corruptions that may
be crept into it, as also of the specimen of various lections gathered out of
Grotius his annotations, and somewhat of the whole bulk of them, as presented
unto us in the Appendix.

For the Corruptions supposed, I could heartily wish that learned men would
abstain from such insinuations unless they are able to give them some
pretense by instances; It is not spoken of this or that Copy, which by the
Error of the Scribes or Printers may have important mistakes found in it.
There is no need of men's critical abilities to rectify such mistakes, other
Copies are at hand for their relief. It is of the Text without such
suppositions, that this insinuation is made; now to cast scruples into the
minds of men, about the integrity and sincerity of that, without sufficient
ground or warrant, is surely not allowable. It is not good to deal so with men
or their writings, much less with the Word of God* Should any man write that
in case of such a man's theft, or murder, who is a man of unspotted reputation,
it were good to take such or such a course with him, and publish it to the
world, would their stirring of such rumors be looked on as an honest,
Christian, and candid course of proceeding? And is it safe to deal so with the
Scripture? I speak of Protestants; for Papists, who are grown bold in the
opposition to the Originalls of the Scripture, I must needs say, that I look
upon them as effectually manageing a design of Satan to draw men into
Atheism. Nor in particular do I account of Morinus his Exercitations one whit
better. It is readily acknowledged, that there are many difficult places in the
Scripture, especially in the Historical Books of the old Testament. Some of
them have by some been looked at as (...). The industry of learned men of old,
and of late Jews and Christians, have been well excercised in the
Interpretation and reconciliation of them: by one, or other, a fair and
probable account is given of them all. Where we cannot reach the utmost depth
of truth, it has been thought meet, that poor worms should captivate their
understandings to the truth and Authority of God in his word. If there be this
liberty once given that they may be looked on as corruptions, and amended at
the pleasure of men, how we shall be able to stay before we come to the bottom
of questioning the whole Scripture, I know not. That then which yet we insist
upon, is, that according to all Rules of equal procedure, men are to prove
such Corruptions, before they entertain us with their provision of means for
remedy.

Sect. 18. For the Specimen of various lections gathered out of Grotius his
Annotations, I shall not much concern my self therein; they are nothing less
then various lections of that learned man's own observations; set aside; 1. The
various lections of the 70, and vulgar latin of Symmachus, Aquila, and
Theodotion, wherein we are not concerned. 2ly. The Keri and Cethib which we
have often times over and over in this Volume. 3ly. The various readings of the
Oriental and Occidentall Jews which we have also elsewhere. 4ly. Conjectures
how the 70, or vulgar latin read, by altering letters only. 5ly. Conjectures of
his own how the Text may be mended, and a very little room will take up what
remains; By that cursory view I have taken of them, I see not one word that
can pretend to be a various lection; unless it belong to the Keri and Cethib,
or the difference between the Oriental and the Occidentall Jews: so that as I
said before, as to my present design I am not at all concerned in that
collection; those that are may further consider it.

Sect. 19. As short an account will seem for the general consideration of the
whole bulkie collection of various lections that we have here presented unto
us; for those of the several Translations we are not at all concerned in them:
where any or all of them fail, or are corrupted, we have a Rule blessed be
God, preserved to rectify them by. For those of the Originalls I have spoken to
them in particular; I shall only add, that we have some of them both from the
old and new Testament given us thrice over at least, many of the Keri and
Cethib, after a double service done by them, are given us again, the third
time by Grotius, so also are those of the new Testament by the same Grotius,
and Lucas Brugensis.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page lin. 11 9 (...) lege (...) 20 13 for to read too. 24 8 for (...) r. (...)
30 22 for (...) r. (...) 37 7 after 8 add 20 38 19 for (...) r. (...) 41 ult.
for (...) r. (...). 44 11 for Rationa^ll. r. rational. ib. l. 14. r. Eternal.
45 16 dele Au. 54 20 for as r. us. 72 6 for pertaker. r. partaker. 84. 11 r.
(...). 39 1 for (...). r. (...). 116 pen: for de r. he. 117 8 for no. r. on.
135 3. undrtaking. r. undertaking. 186 2 for Posittion. r. Position. l. ult.
for (...) r. (...) 209 2 for Zimenius r. Ximenius. 213 8 for tho r. the 219 13
for (...). r. a. (...) 221 4. f. is yet. r. is not yet. 226 18 on wards. r.
onwards. 263 15 f. to r. too. 256 10 f. or r. as. 257 9 f. his r. is 271 12 f.
miskna r. mishna. 21 f. punctat. r. puritat. 272 2. speaks. r. speak. 11
word. r. words. 275 15 (...) r. (...). 288 24 things r. Kings. 294 11 noted r.
naked. 296 23 tie us, r. arise. 299 23 nor r. or. 24 superis. r. capuis. 308 22
worth. r. work 313 11 the volume, r. that volume. 316 7 that was r. it was.

Dr. OWEN Of the Divine Orig. of the Scriptures.


