THE PRACTICE OF THE EXCHEQUER COURT, With its several OFFICES and OFFICERS.

Being a short Narration of the Power and Duty of each single Person in his
several Place.

Written at the request of the Lord Buckhurst sometime Lord Treasurer of
England.

By Sr. T. F.

Whereunto are added the Rules and Orders of Proceedings by English Bill.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Tim. Twyford and W. Place, and are to be sold at
their Shops within the Inner Temple gate, and at Grays Inn gate in Holborne.
1658.

To the Reader,
I Have neglected ordinary flatteries, least I might seem to beg an applause,
not merit it. Let it not seem a work of supererrogation to publish this Tract
since it is hoped the Work it self is bonum and utile, else had not that great
and wise Lord Buckhurst taken such care to command it to writing, had he not
known that bonum quo communius eo melius; And therefore I hope my self very
worthy of excuse from blame by any, inasmuch as hereby present generations may
learn past Polity, and by the Rule thereof square their actions. And if any
thing herein fall short of expectation, it is my request, That you will rather
look at it as an escape then a crime; since the whole aim is both thy pleasure
and profit, which if you attain, I have the accomplishment of my hope;
otherwise, -- Si quid noristi rectiusistis,
Candidus imperti, si non his uters mecum.


Farewell.
What every of the Officers of the EXCHEQUER usually do by virtue of his Office
in England.
The Lord Treasurer.
Questions concerning the Lord Treasurers Office, with several Answers to
every Question, made by Mr. F. Or rather a Declaration of his Opinion touching
the same; written at the Request of the Lord Buckhurst.

I. Question.
THE Lord Treasurer is sworn and admitted in open Court by the Lord Chancellor
or Lord Keeper for the time being.

Answer. Sir, I have seen the Records of the like Admittance, and yet the Lord
Treasurer that was last, was sworn in the Chancery.

II. Question.
He is appointed by Statute co be at the election of the Sheriff yearly, In
Cr. Animarum.

Answer. By the Statute of Anno 14 Ed. 3. cap. 6. The Chancellor, Treasurer,
and chief Baron, calling others to them, are to name Sheriffs in Cr. Animarum
yearly, and by the Act 12 R 2. cap. 2. they must be sworn to do as is there
limited.

III. Question.
He nominateth after the Sheriffs be chosen, all the Escheators in England.

Answer. Escheators ought to be nominated by virtue of the said Statute of Anno
14 E. 3. cap. 8. but by what reason he does it alone, I know not.

IV. Question.
He gives by Statute all the Offices of the Customers, Conmptrollers, and
Searchers through England during pleasure, by his Warrant under his hand,
directed to the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper for the time being.

Answer. This he does by virtue of a Statute made 31 H. 6. cap. 5.

V. Question.
He grants by Statute and Custom, for the accustomed Rent, Custodiam of the
ancient Crown Lands, and Escheated Lands, and Firman ulnagij, in all the shires
in England, etc.

Answer. I cannot speak certainly of this, I know not how to inform my self
so as I would, saving that I think the Alnage is let to Farm by the Statute
of Anno 4 H. 4. cap. 13. and 4. E. 4. cap. 5.

VI. Question.
He grants, Firman terrarum seis. pro Domino Rege quamdiu in manu dicti
Domini Regis fore contigerint, to any that sue for it, by his Warrant made of
late to the Clarke of the Pipe, and in old time directed to the Lord Chancellor
or Lord Keeper for the time being.

Answer. Neither do I know this certainly, but I have been told, that the
Leases made under the Exchequer seal be not good.

VII. Question.
He sits in Court or in the Exchequer Chamber, and orders with the
Chancellor, under Treasurer, and the Barons of the Court, the matters offered
before them, to the Princes most benefit as they can by the law course, or
equity, but the Judgment is only, Per considerationem Baronum.

Answer. He sits in the Court, and orders with others, as is declared in
this Article, when it pleases him, and the oftener the better, for the profit
and service of the King, and the dispatching of suits and suitors.

VIII. Question.
He may call upon the Kings learned Council and the Officers of the Court, to
consider by the law and Presidents any matter sore pressed against his Majesty
at the Bar, and desire the Court to stay proceedings in it while they may be
better informed.

Answer. There is no doubt but he may and will do all this, when he shall see
others negligent or any other good causes so to do.

XI Question.
He and the Barons may by Statute shall debts of three hundred pound and under
to be paid at days.

Answer. This they may do by the Statute of 1 vel 2 E. 3. cap. 4.

X Question:
The Treasurer, the Chancellor, the Vice-Treasurer, and Barons of the Court,
may and do use to make Orders and Decrees, of Allowances of Pensions, Portions,
Rents, Payments, Fees, and Considerations thought good by the Court, and upon
intricate matters, and matters of equity in the Court between the King and the
party to bring them to a final end as best for all parts and not well able to
be determined by the ordinary pleading, or otherwise of the Court.

Answer. They may and do use to make Orders and Decrees as is there declared,
and for that purpose do sit both in the Court, and often in the Exchequer
Chamber, to hear English suits, which they do by virtue of the Statute, 33 H.
8. cap. 39. See the Statute book at alrge. fol. 92. H. 4.

XI Question
He in giving judgment with the assistance of the Court, does order, stay,
examine, hear, debate, prolong, and end, all causes of the Exchequer, either
by Judgment, order; or decree, by privy seal from his Majesty, when otherwise
it will not be done.

Answer. It is certain that he and the Court, or to say more plainly the
Court (whereof he is chief) may do all lawful things that are there to be
done, either by virtue of Law, or of the Kings Warrant, which I take to be the
meaning of this Article.

XII Question.
He alone punishes, reformeth, directs, and orders all the Officers of the
same, that by Law are not to be brought into the Court of Exchequer.

Answer. All the punishments which I have found in any Record, have been done
as by the Court, and all their Accounts and Concealments, Informations; and
sundry other things, have been taken, examined, and ordered, as by the Court:
And yet his Lordship has great Authority over them by the Statute of 17 R. 2.
cap. 5. where it is enacted, that those Offices should remain in the Kings
hands under the governance of the Lord Treasurer for the time being, with the
assent of the Counsel where need shall be.

XIII Question.
He directs his Warrants to all the remembrancers (as the case lies on any
of all their sides) for all manner of Commissions, Processes, and Injunctions
needful in the matters of the Court, and when the case requires speed, he
writes first his Letters therein, and if he think it good, he sends
Commissions, Processes, and Injunctions after them, and sometimes by the same,
does undo and stay that the Barons have commanded, Judgment being not given.

Answer. He directs Warrants for Commissions and process, and so do others,
but they be taken and used as Acts of the Court and allowed and disallowed, as
they stand with Justice. He sometimes makes Warrants for injunctions to stay
spoils of houses, woods, and such like, etc. But for alterations of
possessions from one to another, Non auditis partibus, or out of Court very
seldom or never. As for writing of Letters and after process, I think they
have been few of late years, and found almost fruitless. For, Super debile
fundamentum cadit opus. And of the undoing and staying of the Barons
Commandments, he has given sometimes stay for a time upon better information
then they had, but undone nothing but upon conference with them, and with their
Consents to my remembrance, I have only seen these things done, but not found
them in any Record that I rember.

XIV. Question.
He sends his Sergeant at Arms for all such as do disobediently set,
neglect, or devise to disappoint the Kings Process, and sometimes he sends
him otherwise after his discretion for persons that are skipping aside, erneed
so to be stayed, or to be sent for.

Answer.

I have not seen any Record that he has sent a Sergeant at Arms for any man
before the Lord Marquess his time, and that was done when ordinary process
would not be obeyed, and that also very seldom. But in the Lord Burleighs
time, the sending grew common against Sheriffs and Collectors, etc. as I
remember I have seen in ancient Records, that Sergeants at Arms have been
sometimes, and yet seldom authorized by commission to do sundry services.

XV Question.
He alone gives the Warrant to all men to have their Wine free of impost.

Answer He alone (for any thing I know) has given all the Warrants for
freeing the impost of French Wines, yet I find in Anno 1571. the impost was
rated by writing under her Majesty's hand, wherein it was ordered, that if any
of reputation (being good housekeepers) were left out of the rates, then it
should be lawful for the Treasurer and Chancellor to give allowance, but how
this authority has been put in ure I know not.

XVI Question.
He, the Chancellor, and Vice-Treasurer, make all Warrants for wood sales.

Answer. I have not seen or found any Record, or otherwise, that he or any
other of the Exchequer, has had any authority to make sale of the Kings Woods,
but by Writ or Commission under the great Seal, and that also very rarely, but
by Article, amongst the Articles for annexing of the Court of augmentations to
the Exchequer viz. Article 27. there is a prohibition concerning the Woods of
the Lands in the survey of the augmentation Court of this Tenor, viz. No Wood
sales to be made without a Commission from the Lord Treasurer, and to such
other of the Court as he shall call unto him, and in his absence, the under
Treasurer calling unto him two of the same Court, and other Authority then this
I have not seen, but to the Court of general surveyors, which (as I take it)
is since dissolved by the statute, 7 E. 6 cap. 2.

XVII. Question.
He, the Chancellor and Vice-Treasurer make all Warrants for money to the
Receivor, of the shire, for reparations of houses, Sea-Bancks, and water works,
where the same be. And commonly he directs his Warrant for a Commission to go
out to enquire of the said needful reparations, and the charges of the same.

Answer. All the general Authority that I have seen to give warrant for
reparations, is by the Articles of annexing the said courts before mentioned,
Article, 20.

XVIII Question.
He directs Warrants sometimes to make Commissions to some to be Receivors,
Surveyors and such Officers of the Revennues, during pleasure under the
Exchequer seal, after any be dead, or put out for any misdemeanors whilst the
Kings Majesty be moved for the Bill assigned, and to stay others from suing.

Answer. He sometimes alone, and sometimes with others, has made such warrants
as is alleged, and not without good cause as is there mentioned.

XIX. Question.
He chiefly protecteth the Jurisdiction of the Court, the Officers, and all the
matters of the same.

Answer. The Jurisdiction, Officers, and matters of the Court be protected by
the law, and by the Authority of the Court, and this Lord being the chief, does
chiefly work in that matter, like as in all other wherein he deals.

XX. Question.
He Commands and restrains all the Officers and Ministers of the Courts,
and all others in the Kings Majegisty Causes, and matters, belonging to the
same.

Answer. He commands all to do their duties diligently, justly, and truly,
and restrains all to do the contrary.

XXI Question.
He alone and the Chancellor Vicetreasuror and Barrons of the Court, after his
and their discretions, do punish all the misdemeanors of the other Officers,
and Ministers, of the Court, and of all others that abuse the Court, the
Causes, the process, and appendance of the same.

Answer. I have seen by Records that the Court has done punishments after
diverse manners upon the Officers and diverse others, but I remember none on
Record to be done by him alone.

XXII. Question.
He until the late uniting of the Court of Augmentations, and the first fruits
and Tenths, did use to sit, and deal very little in the Court of Exchecquer,
but left all there belonging to him, to be ordered by the Chancellor,
Vice-treasuror, and Barons.

Answer. I think this to be true, but I have not seen any Record of it.

XXIII Question.
He alone, or he, the Chancellor and Vice-Treasurer, do allow at the Liberate
every Hillary and Trinity Term, such sums of money out of the Exchequer, as
to them seems good for any bodies considerations, about the service and charges
of the court or Revenue of the same, as by the leiger privy Seal in the
receipt he and they are authorized so to do.

Answer. He and the under treasuror, or one of them alone without the
Chancellor, do give these allowances in such term or time as they see cause,
by virtue of the privy Seal in the Article mentioned and for this purpose,
the Articles of the annexing of the Augmentation Court, Article, 20 may be
considered.

XXII. Question.
He alone by the Articles of the late court of Augmentation, and the first
fruit and Tenths annexed to the Exchequer may do something alone, and
something he with the Chancellor, and under-treasuror, the Chamberlaines and
Barrons of the Exchecquer or three of them and some things he with the Court,
and some things he with such persons as he shall call to him, which are here
too long to set down particularly, and therefore are referred to the said
Articles.

Answer. The certainty whereof may be known by the Articles themselves.

XXV. Question.
He has used before the uniting of the said Court of augmentation:, and the
first fruits and tenths in all great matters of the Courts, sometimes to confer
with the Chancellor and under Treasurer alone, and some times with them and the
Barons, and sometimes with them and the Kings learned Council, and some times
with them all, and the two Remembrancers and Clerk of the Pipe about the same,
what were best to be done. But since the uniting of the said Court, according
to the Articles of uniting the same, he has used much to confer and join
with the Chancellor and Vice-Treasurer, upon all foreign matters, Causes and
Actions of the Court, that stand not in plea, Suits or Judgment before the
Court, but come in question, order, and determination by the said union, and
shall call such Officers as shall please them to consider and determine upon
the same.

Answer. I have seen no written direction for this course, but undoubtedly he
may and will call any Officer unto him to conferr with for his Majesty's
service, and determine of matters according to Justice.

XXVI Question.
He alone, and he, and the under Treasurer by his discretion (as I take it) do
survey and order all the Receipts, and all the Officers and matters thereof, and
of the Treasury, and do direct payments, and stays of payments by their
discretion, and do examine all receipts coming in, and going out of the receipt,
but can suffer no penny to go out but by privy Seal or great Seal from the
Prince, or by decree, or Writ from the Court, that sometime comes so about by
the Judgment of the same. He has diverse other authorities by old and new
Statutes both alone and with others, which are referred to be found out by
learned Counsel that have abridged the same.

Answer. I have not much experience in the Receipt, but I do hold it for
certainty, that none of the Treasure may be paid out, without good warrant
from the King. And I have seen by record, and otherwise, that some misdemeanors
there committed, have examined and ordered in Superiori S.

Here I was required (as I understood by the Messenger, to set down by what
Warrant and authority, the things before specified were done. I have
endeavored to perform that according to my best understanding, as before
appears. And where I was required also to set down, what other authorityes be
in this Lord; so it is, that I Authorities in the Lord Treasurer.
have observed by reading of the Records of all Kings times, that he has been
taken for a very great Officer, and chief of the Exchequer, amongst which
concerning his ancient general Authority and Duty, I find these words written
of him, Adquem spectat de commodis domini Regis curare, and ut ejus disdendia
viteut prospicere, By which, and by his oath, his general duty and authority,
may be conveniently and reasonably conceived and gathered. And touching his
other authorities that be not before mentioned, I think there be some by
Statutes and some by Commissions or privy seals, concerning his Office in the
Exchequer, which I do not take upon me to set down least I by forgetfullnesse,
should omit some of these I know, and might omit diverse others, having not
been made acquainted with them, and to my best remembrance, they be most of
them joint with others, and am of opinion, that if (when any thing shall be
offered unto him, or required of him to be done) It will please him first to
require the sight and understanding of his Warrant, in that behalf his
Lordship shall in short time find and know his authorityes that he will
require in such cases, whether it be by Act of Parliament, or any other way;
and I for my part will be ready to declare my simple knowledge and experience
in every case.

And what has been done by the two last Lord Treasurers, I suppose that the
next has seen either already, or heard himself, or shall by some other hear
of it. And if his Lordship shall find just cause to understand by what
Warrants and Authority they did so, he may easily understand of it by some of
his Majesty's Officers.

The Chancellor.
HE is an Officer thought by many to have been placed in the Exchequer, to
have qualified all matters of extremity and rigor between the Prince, the
Subject, and the party, with Conscience and equity, But yet I never saw nor
have heard of any Record ever made in the Exchequer in that case, by order,
direction, or qualification.

He has in Court the proper place of the Bench above the Lord Treasurer. He
(in the Lord Treasurers absence) does in Court in the Exchecquer Chamber all
things to the Kings most benefit and furtherance.

He in the Lord Treasurers absence, if the Barrons and learned Counsel of the
suitor do much press any matter against the King, or that he finds there is
some learning in the case, does pray that it may stay until the Lord Treasurer
be made privy, and the Kings learned Council may be conferred with, and the
presidents of the Court may be showed upon the same.

He makes warrants to any of the remembrancers to make all manner of
commissions process, and injunctions, as the case requires, as well as the
Lord Treasuror does.

He by the late Lord Treasuror, and Sir Richard Sackvills order and agreement,
had referred unto him the oversight and rule of the Court of first fruits and
Tenth of all compositions, bonds, mattes and canses of the same.

He in the Lord Treasurors absence for orders and Commandments in Court for
the benefit of the Prince, and case of the Subject and suitors, has ever done
commonly that the Lord Treasuror uses to do.

He has ever used in great causes of the Court, to make the Lord Treasuror
privy, and to confer with his Lordship about the same.

He being Vice-treasuror also, after the death of the Lord Treasuror, and while
a new Lord Treasuror be made, does all things which the Lord Treasuror both in
the Exchequer and Receipt does use to do

Under-Treasurer.
IS an Office erected of late in the time of King H. 7. And whether it was of
the Kings nomination first, or of any Lord Treasuror, it is not known. But it
is said that Sir. Robert Mitton Knight, that was then the Lord Treasurers
Remembrancer, was the first Vice-treasuror that was ever made, and had no
patent thereof; but Sir. John Baker when Thomas Duke of Norfolk was made Lord
Treasuror in H. 8. time, being nominated Vice-treasuror after Sir. Robert
Mitton did procure a Patent thereof under the great Seal of England and was
the first that had a Patent of the same office.

He in King H. 7. time (as I have heard say, the report of the remain of the
Treasure in the receipt being brought then to the King at the end of every
Term) did chest the same up, and did Content every Chest what sum and sorts
of money was in it, intitleing it B. or C. as in course it fell out, and carried
it to the Kings Treasuror in the Tower, and entered the same in the Kings Book
which he kept in his deske, leaving ever in that receipt sufficient money to pay
ordinary Fees, and sums of money it was charged with between that and the next
Term. And hereupon I think the Vice-treasurer was made to see this done, both
of trust and ease of the Lord Treasurer, as being too mean a thing for his
Lordship to be troubled with, and yet fit to be done by some meaner person of
trust, and great secrecy.

He being Chancellor of the Court in the late Lord Treasurers time and absence,
and before the uniting of the said Courts of Augmentation, and the first fruits
and Tenths, did order and command all things as the Lord Treasuror in the Court
of the Exchequer, and in the receipt, saving that which was done Per
Considerationem Baronum, upon Pleas, Informations, Judgments etc.

He before the uniting of the said Courts, and since the Lord Treasurors death,
did make the two Praisors of all wares, and Marchandizes seized by any
Informer, as taken up uncustomed, and informed against in the Court of
Exchecquer, whereof they make him a Bill of Praisement, and he gives order
whether the owners shall have the goods again as they are praised; or whether
part or all shall be otherwise sold, wherein the late Lord Treasurer would
sometimes deal and intermeddle with his privity.

The Lord Chief Baron.
HE is sworn by the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper for the time being, or the
Lord Treasurer, and the other Barons, and is the chief Judge of the Court, and
in matters of Law. Information and plea, he answers the Bar and all suitors.

He gives all days for bringing of Pleas, Informations, Answers, Replications,
Rejoynders, and amending of the same, as occasion is offered at the Bar.

He makes all the Orders of the Court that touch or concern the matters at
the Bar, or the Suite depending in Court, or is moved by learned Counsel, and
yet with great orderly consent of the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor, the
Vice Chancellor, Vice-Treasurer, the other Barons, and the Kings learned
Council, or such as are present of them, as the case shall require.

He in the absence of the Kings learned Council, answers the Bar most
diligently in the Kings Majesty's behalf, and when the Kings learned Council
be there, he suffers them to speak and answer to the Bar for his Majesty
all that come, and joyneth with them my speech and conference, to satisfy the
Bar, to alter or mend the matter or words of the plea, for the furtherance of
his Majesty's side, in all causes the Law will bear him.

He, before he proceed to Judgment in Causes against the King, either he
asks or wills the Officer on whose side the matter is, to ask the Kings
Attorney what he can or will say more for the King in such a matter, that the
Court may be informed of it. And even so does he for the party, if the Kings
Majesty be to have Judgment for him.

He and his fellows confer together in all difficult matters and judgments
of the Court, and when they have resolved the Law therein, they use to impart
the same to the Lord Treasurer, Mr. Chancellor, Mr, Vice-Treasurer, and to the
Kings learned Counsel, and if they cannot satisfy the Barons, the Law to be
otherwise, they proceed to Judgment. The Court being called upon therefore at
the Bar, although the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, Vice-Treasurer, and the
Kings learned Council, would feign have it go otherwise, which they do with
great circumspection, and feeling sometimes the opinion of the Judges therein,
and ever after long and often deliberation had first thereupon.

He ever gives Judgment in the Term time only, and speaks in this wise to
the Remembrancer, on whose side the matter is. If the Kings Attorney say
nothing for the King between this and such a day, for such a matter, enter
Judgment for I. S. or if the party say nothing for such a matter, enter
Judgment for the King.

He in open Court awardeth Commissions Processes, Injunctions, and all manner
of Writs, and commands stay and Supersedeas of the same, and such his Award
is set down in the book of orders on the Remembrancers side where they issue
out. and such his Award is set down in the book of Orders, on the Remembrancers
side where they issue out.

He out of Court makes Warrants and Fines, as the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor,
and Vice-Treasurer does to any the Remembrancers whom it concerns to make out
any manner of Commission, Process, Injunctions, Supersedeas, Writs of
privilege, and such like.

He in open Court does set Amerciaments and Fines upon all Sheriffs, Coroners,
Escheators; Commissioners, pursivants, makers and ayders of Rescues, that do
not execute, serve, return, deliver, or obey the Kings Commissions, Processes,
Injunctions and Writs, as to every of them appertains.

He commits to ward in open Court, and in the Exchequer Chamber, all that be
indebted to the King, that misbehave themselves in the Court, that disobey the
Kings Process, that keep not their days or the order of the Court, or
otherwise, be worthy to be committed as the case shall require.

He alone in the afternoones in the Term time, does sit upon all Nisi prius in
London in the Guildhall, that came out of the Remembrancers Office, or the
Clarke of the Pleas Office, concerning any matter or trial there by the Jury
of London, which cannot be dispatched at Westminster for lack of time and
leisure.

He appoints the days and Terms when all Demurrers in Law shall be argued
at the Bar, and likewise in the Court to show their opinions upon the same.

He commands all the Officers under the Bench to make searches for the King,
and the Court to give their attendance on the Barons in the afternoones at
Westminster, to set Fines and Amerciaments on the Sheriffs, and to inform the
Court of that is meet, or otherwise to confer with them. And sometimes he
commands the said Officers to attend at his Chamber upon him and his
fellows, for conference or information about some special matters appointed
there to be heard or considered upon.

He and his fellows take without Fee in open Court, all manner of
Recognizances for the Kings debt, for appearances, for observing orders, for
keeping the decrees of the Court, and such like and for every Recognizance
taken out of the Court, he has six shillings eight pence.

He takes the presentation of all Officers in the Court, that are under
himself and of the Mayors and Sheriffs of London, and gives such exhortation
and oration as to himself shall seem meet, and Commands their Oaths to be
read unto them by the Kings Remembrancer, and sees them take the same.

He takes the Declarations of the engrossed Accounts of the late
Augmentatition Revenue in the Counties of Northumberland, Richmond, Durham,
Receivers of Nottingham and Derby, Lincoln. etc. Receivors of Chester,
Lancaster, Westmerland and Cumberland.

Receivers of Northton and Rutland.

Receivers of Leicester and Warwick.

Receivers of Salop, Wigor, Stafford, and Hereford.

And made before him by the Auditors of the same Shires,

He with the Kings Attorney Promissis Parcandis, does set all the Fines of
Composition upon any that is informed against in that Court by any popular
Action, or penal Statute, which Fine does bring the defendant to an end
thereof, and is set down from the Roll of the Kings Remembrancers side, and
charged in the Pipe, where he has his Quietus est, upon his Fine paid by
tallie and allowed there.

The second Baron
IS he that is next in place, and Ancientie to the Lord Chief Baron, and in
his absence does Answer the Bar in matters of orders, and course, as the case
offers, and in matters of law, difficulty, or importance, He refers all
suitors until the Lord Chief Barons comeing, and that the Court be fuller.
He, and his fellows in the Lord Chief Barons absence, in mean Causes and
matters of Course, do take order with all suitors, and matters offered at the
Bar, as in days of Apparances, Recognizances, Receiving and mending of Pleas,
informations, lycense to depart, and some Judgments the Causes being not great,
and the Lord chief Barons mind being somewhat fore-known therein, And in every
thing he uses more Authority in the dispatch of matters in the Court, which
are called on at the bar when the Chancellor, the Vice-treasurer, the Kings
Attorney, or Solicitor, or some or most of them are present in Court, wherein
he and his fellows have the more consent and agreement of the chief Officers
of the Court.

He and his fellows in my Lord chief Barons absence, may do all in Court
that my Lord chief Baron may do, and is good in law Per Considerationem
Baronum, though there be but two of them, yet in most matters, and especially
of any weight, they take a respit, and put over the same, and will be advised
thereof until such a day.

He gives yearly the morrow after Simon and Judes day, the Oath to the Lord
Mayor and Escheatour of London, that he shall make a true Account of the
Escheatorship, and ask no petition or Allowance, but that which is good and
true.

He in the Lord chief barons absence does take all manner of Recognizance in
Court, and out of Court, as the Lord chief Baron does, and has for his Fee of
every one taken out of Court six shillings eight pence as aforesaid.

He takes the Declaration of engrossed Accounts of the Receivors of the late
Augmentation Revenue in the County of Kent, Surry, and Sussex. Receivers of
London Middlesex. Hertford and Essex. Receivers of Norfold and Huntington.
Receivers of Suffolk and Cambridge. Receivers, and made before him by the
Auditors of the same Shires.

He examineth the letters, and casts up the sums of such Sheriffs foreign
Accounts, Escheators Accounts, Collectors Accounts, of Customs, Subsedies, and
Fifteens, as are brought unto him by any of the Auditors of the Court, in the
head of which accounts, the Barons name is set that examined them, And his
addition thereunto is Auditor, And then the Auditors name that did take and
ingrosse them, is set under the Barons name, and his addition thereunto is
Clericus; So as it seems, the old course of Exchequer accounted the three
under Barons the Auditors of the court, and those we now call Auditors, but as
their Clerks. And in this wise the old account of the Ward Robe, the Victuals,
the Ships, the Works, the Provisions, the Wars, and such like, were heretofore
taken and examined, which be now taken by the Auditors of the Prests, and are
declared by them, and they account before the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and
Vice-Treasurer only, except they please to call some of the Barons to them, as
they use so metimes, when the most of them cannot attend the hearing of the
same accounts.

The third Baron.
IS he that is third in place and Anceintie to the two Barons, and may do all
things in Court, in their two absences as the two Barons, and their fellows
might do before; but in both their absences, the third is very circumspect to
do or meddle with anything, but that which is ordinary, and refers over all
suitors as before.

He may take Recognizances in Court to the Kings use, as the other did before,
and has his fee also of six shillings eight pence for the same, that are taken
out of the Court, as the other had before.

He gives every Simon and Judes day the Oath to the Lord Mayor, and Gaugers of
London, that he shall make a true account of the same, and ask noe petition or
allowance but what is good and true.

He takes the declaration of the engrossed accounts of the Receivers of the
late Augmentation Revenue in the Counties of Somerset and Dorset.

Receivers of Cornwall, and Devon Receivers.

He likewise as the second Baron did before, examineth the letters: and casts
up the sums of such Sheriffs foreign accounts, Escheatours accounts,
Collectors accounts, of Customs Subsidies and Fifteens, as are brought to him
by any of the Auditors of the Court as aforesaid.

The fourth Baron
IS always a Cursistor of the Court, and has been chosen of some one of the
Clerks in both the Remembrancers offices, but most usually he is, and has been
chosen of some one of the Clerks of both the Remembrancers office, or of the
Clerk of the Pipes office.

He takes Oath every Simon and Judes day of the two Attorneys, the new Lord
Mayor then puts in, ad recipiendum mandatum Curiae, And likewise of the
Deputy Escheator and Gauger of the late Lord Mayor, Elcheator and Gauger of
London, that they shall make a true account of the said Offices, and ask noe
petition or Allowance, but that which is good and true.

He if he present in Court at days of prefixion, takes the Oath of all high
Sheriffs there, under-sheriffs, or Attorneys, and of all Escheators, that they
shall make a true account of the said Offices, and ask noe petition or
allowance but that is good and true.

He takes the Oath of all Collectours, Countrollors, Surveyors, and Searchers,
of all the Custom houses in England, that they have made true Entries in their
Books without concealment, or leaving oat any parcel of wares, or
merchandises, to the Kings hinderance or prejudice.

He takes before the Court commonly begin to sit, or when it has little to
do, or my Lord chief Baron is absent, the opposals of the Shiriffs, of their
summons that come in, and are sworn to account as before, which is nothing
else but opposing of every Sheriff, what he will say to every summons, which is
written to him out of the Pipe, who upon the said opposalls answers unto such
sums as he will pay and charge himself with, confessing so much due or
received. And to the other sums he will answer, O. Ni. as confessing, On^retur
nist exoneretur, and so the said Baron goes on in this manner, questioning and
asking of every Sheriff, what he says to every sum in his summons, until he
has gone through every one of them.

He informs the Bench and the Kings learned Council from time to time, both
in Court and out of Court, what the course of Exchequer is, and stays the
rest of the Barons, and the Kings learned Council, from ordering any thing
they go about contrary to the said course, for the preservation of the same,
and to save the Kings Prerogative and benefit, which the course of the Court
most commonly maintains and respects.

He takes the declaration of the engrossed accounts of the Receivors of the
late augmentation of the Revenue of the counties of York,

Receivers of Oxon and Berks,

Receivers of Buckingham and Bedford.

He likewise (as the two other Barons) examineth the Letters, and casts up
the sums of such Sheriffs foreign Accounts. Collectors accounts, of Subsidies
and Fifteens, as are brought unto him by any of the auditors of the Court, and
causes his name, and the auditors name that ingrosseth it, to be set with
additions of the auditors, and Clericus as aforesaid.

He takes the Bayles of all Sheriffs, Bailiffs of Liberties, and Escheators
that keep not their days of prefixions, but come into the Court by
attachments, which is nothing else but with sureties to be sworn to account,
and then assesseth the Fines of all such Bayliffes. Pro liberate
reprehendenda, and of all such Escheators for their contempts which be very
small, and never above five shillings, but rather under, as twelve pence, two
shillings, and three shillings four pence. And for the Sheriffs Fines, in is
ever five pounds a day for his four next days after his day of prefixion that
he fails to come and to be sworn to his account.

The two Chamberlaines
HAve their place next in Court to the four Barons, and may sit and keep
their places daily in Court if they like to attend and hearken to the causes of
the Court, without any intermedling therein. But at the election of the
Sheriffs yearly, (In Cr. Animarum) they are ordinarily to be there, and keep
still their place, and may say their opinions for preferment or stay of men to
be Sheriffs, as the Barons and Justices do, but other dealings in the Court of
Exchequer at this day, I know not that they have.

They have in old time had great authority in the Receipt (as I have heard say)
and have kept certain keys of the Treasury Coffers, and were ever privy to
the Pells of Receipt, and to the Pells of Exitus, of the which each of them kept
a controller, as at this day they do of the pell of receipts, and no money issued
out of the Receipt without their privity, as is manifestly proved, because at
this day every privy seal for the payment of any money out of the Receipt is
directed The saurarijs and Camerarijs.

They have the charge of the Treasury with the Lord Treasurer, and keep the
keys thereof, where all the ancient leagues between the Kings Progenitors,
and other Princes and States, either do or should lie, and where the book of
Doomsday and the ancient Records and Pleas, De Justiciarijs itinerant. and De
forest is, and of diverse other matters do remain; into which Treasury,
neither they nor their Deputies can come with their keys, until the auditors
of the Receipt come with the Lord Treasurers key to the same that remains in
his keeping to my Lords use.

The Kings Attorney
IS the special Officer of the Court that is made privy to all manner of pleas
that be not ordinary and of course, that rise upon the process of the Court,
and to the Replications and Rejoynders growing upon the same on any of the
Remembrancers sides.

He puts into the Court of his own name for the King, all informations of
concealments of Customs, Subsides, Seisures, Receipts, and of Intrusions, Wars,
Spoils, Encroachments, and Anoyances, done upon any of his Majesty's Lands,
Tenements, Woods, Rents, Rights, and Hereditaments, and upon any popular
Actions, penal Statutes, Forfeitures, or breach of Covenants.

The Kings Remembrancer.
THE Kings Remembrancer of the Exchequer, who at certain days prefixed in the
Term, calls to account in open Court by his book yearly made, and commonly
called Statutus magnorum computantium, etc. all the great accountants, as the
Cofferer, the Master of the Wardrobe, the Master of the Horses, the Keeper of
the Scudry, the Master of the Revells, the Clarke of the Hamper, the Butler of
England, the Treasurer of the Mynt, the Lieftenant of the Tower, the Constable
of the Tower, the Lieftnant of the Ordnance, the Receiver of the Ships, the
Victualler of the Ships, the Master of the work, and such like; and by the
same book, should call the Vulgars to account, that are now reduced to a fee
farm certain by my Lord Treasurers Bill made therefore to them for one and
twenty years or more, and so they answer yearly their fee farm in the Pipe.

And by the same book he calls (as before) at days prefixed, all searchers,
Ad respondendum Domino Regi medietatem omnium foris fact urarum in Officio suo
contingent. etc. And all collectors of Customs, and Subsidies, Ad computandum,
which book of States has all the said Officers christen names, and surnames,
with the addition of their Offices that be full and given, and being not given
nor full, nor account at this day, it has only the Office name in the same.

He inrolleth, and after writes out the same, according to the course of the
court, against all the said accountants that come not in at their days
prefixed, and account for their said Office, except such as be not now
accountants before the said Barons.

He calls to account in open court by his like book called the States of the
collectors of Subsidies and Fifteens, all manner of high collectors thereof
granted by Act of parliament in every shire, city, Borough, Town corporate,
and place whatsoever through England, as they are appointed and certified by
the commissioners every where for the assessing and levying of them, and
according to their days of payment appointed them by the Statute.

He inrolleth and makes out process against such of the said Collectors for
their Bodies, Goods, and Tenements that come not in to account, and pay their
money according to the grants of the same.

He takes Recognizances to the Princes use before the Barons in open Court, or
out of Court before some one of them, of all such persons, for most causes,
with sureties and seldom without sureties, as by occasion of any of the
premises, or from time to time for any debt day of Appearance, or other
commandment of Court, are forced to be bound any manner of way.

He upon the breach and not keeping of these Recognizances, inrolleth process,
and makes out the same against all such persons as were bound therein,
according to the course of his Office.

He as the Returns of the said process by course of the Court do offer
occasion of some change of Writs in manner and form by the Returns of
Sheriffs, as Non sunt inventi, Nihil habent, mortui sunt, languidi sunt in
Prisona, and such like without number, does by and by on the back side of the
Writ so returned and indorsed what is to be done, or leaves it to the Clarke
of his Office to do it, whose charge it is to write the process of the shire
where it runs, that of course can tell what to do, and all the said
processes be still current every Term until they that are bound, or their
Executors, Administrators, Heirs, or Ter-Tenants come in and pay the money, or
take order therefore, or plead in discharge of them.

He hereupon informs the Lord Treasurer, and in his absence, or by his order
the Chancellor or Vice-Treasurer of the Court, every Term when he is
commanded, of all manner of debts and arrerages of any the said Accountants, or
upon any other person depending in his Office, by reason of any the said
Recognizances, or of Bonds taken, or delivered in his Office by any other
occasion, and due with them to his Majesty.

He according to their Order stays or sets forth processes for the said
debts and arrerages, and admits any person vexed with process from time to
time to plead in discharge thereof, or of any part of the same, unto which plea
the Kings Attorney is made privy, who refers the same over to the Court, if
he think not good to confess it.

He has all manner of Informations upon penal Statutes, Intrusions,
Councealments and such like, put in and sued in his Office only, with all
matters, Recognizances and Bonds depending or proceeding upon the same.

He by calling on, and remembering the Court and the Kings Attorney of the same
and other Pleas depending in his Office, does drive them to be ended, either by
the Attorney generals confession, or Judgment of the Court, upon Jury,
Demurrer, Privy seal, or composition, Pro misis Parcandis, being upon popular
actions.

He only on his side makes the Bill Roll of compositions, Promisis Parcandis,
upon penal Laws; and Statutes, and gets the Lord chief Barons, the Kings
Attorney, and the other Barons hands to them, and makes up the Records of the
same.

He takes the stallment of all debts by Recognizances after the ancient
course, and sometimes now by Obligation, because the parties (bound upon their
payments) would have out their Bonds again, which else be as Statutes of the
Staple to the Prince by Act of Parliament, which stallments should be forthwith
sent down into the Pipe, that they might be so moved out there for time to
time against the day that any payment shall grow due, and so is the ancient
course of the Court.

He only takes Bonds and Recognizances in the Court, and all to the Kings
use, of all Sheriffs, Customers, Controllers, Receivers, Bailiffs and of all
other persons whatsoever, that are bound in the Exchequer, and does all things
proceeding upon the same.

He inrolleth all the said Bonds and Recognizances in remembrance of the year,
that are taken there or brought in, and delivered in Court for the Prince his
better safety, if the same should miscarry by fire imbezeling, or otherwise.

He sometimes by Warrant of the Lord Treasurer and in his absence the
Chancelcellor, the Vice-treasurer, the Kings Attorney, and the Court, makes
out Commissions in the Country to certain Commissioners by Dedimus Potestatem
to take Bonds to the Kings use when the party is to be bound with Suretyes,
and cannot conveniently come up, or bring his Sureties hither to be bound for
him, of the Return whereof he makes Record, and fileth the Commission, and
the Certificate and the lands besides,

He by like writ changes bonds and Recognizances of the first parties that
were bound and takes others in other places, that the Lord Treasurer the
Chancellor and the Vice-treasuror allows of.

He makes all process, Commissions, Decrees, orders, Awards, and Entries
proceeding, or growing of any matter, cause, plea, or original depending, or
to be sued on his side, that the whole Course of the matter may appear and
remain on Record in any place ever together.

He makes a Record in his office of all the Certificates delivered unto him by
the Clerk of the Star chamber under his hand, of such fines as be felt upon
any person by the Lords there, and causes the same fines to be sent down from
his Record into the Pipe to ^e sumoned out there, to be written from thence by
the Treasurors Remembrancer when they be put in his Book called Cedula Pipe.

He makes up the Record of every Bishops death, of his multure of his best
horse, Ring, and cup of gold, and silver, seized to the Kings use, or of fine
made thereof by every of their executors or the administrators of their goods
and Chattells.

He takes the Proffers every Easter, and Michaelmas Term, in the Receipt
before the Barons, of all the Sheriffs, Bailiff, and Eschearours and marketh
the default of every of them that does not appear there by his Attorney, as well
as the Treasurors Remembrancer does.

He reads in open Court the Oaths and the Usher gives the Book at the
Election of Sheriffs yearly every C. Animarum, in French, and offers the
Book to be kissed by them that chose them.

He reads in open Court the Oaths and the Usher gives them the Book to
kiss, that all the grand Officers of the Court of Exchequer do take either
before the Lord Chancellor for the time being, and the Barons, and likewise
the Oaths that all the under Officers Ministers and servitors of the said
Court, do take before the Lord Treasuror, the Chancellor the Vice-treasuror,
and the Barons of the Court, or some of them.

He only makes the great Prerogative Writ of the Court, for all Officers,
Ministers and Servitors of the Exchequer, and Receipt, and for their men that
be sued elsewhere in any Court of Record or place to remove such plaint before
the Barons such a day to surcease the suite.

He has delivered into his office to keep, all manner of Judgments, Fines
Recoveries, deeds, Releases, writings, Charters, and Evidences whatsoever, that
are brought into the Court by the Lord Treasuror, the Kings Attorney, or any
other person, either for the Assurance of lands and Tenements to the Crown, or
for the better Recoverie and enjoying lands, and tenement that ought to come or
be in the Crown.

He makes by warrant of the Lord treasuror, the Chancellor, the
Vice-treasurer, the Kings attroney, and by the Award of the Barrons in open
Court, all manner of process, writts, Injunctions, and conditions whatsoever,
that be to be made on his side, besides the ordinary process and writ of
every Term, whereof he likewise makes stay, and Supersedeas, by Warrant and
Award of the Barons as aforesaid.

He enters Judgment, according as the Lord chief Baron and Barons of the
Court Commands him, of all Pleas dependingon his side both for the king and
the party, though the Kings learned Council would willingly have the
Judgment go otherwise.

He enters Judgment of his own Authority by the Ancient Course of the Court
of Pleas of Course, and whereof there are daily Presidents which were not able
otherwise to be overcome if they should be read and followed openly in the
Court.

He sends the red Book by one of his Clerks with the fourth Baron most
Commonly, and in his absence, with the next Baron into the Kings Bench, and
Common Pleas in the Term time, to remove any matter sued there against any
Officer, Minister, Servitor, or any of their men, or any Accomptant there, that
prays his privilege in time of any of the same Court, upon which said red
Book showed, and the parties so testified by the Baron to be of the Court as
aforesaid, his Privilege is ordinarily allowed.

He receives into his Office all the Certificates of the Subsides, Fifteens,
and Tenths, granted to the Prince by Parliament, and certifieth unto the
Exchequer, whereupon he makes his two Books called The States of Subsidies,
and the State of Fisteens, in which is entered the Collectors names, and for
what places, with the sum total of every Certificate, as they do come in
with their payments agreeable thereunto, so are they trossed and entered
clear, that otherwise stand open while the money is paid, and discharged.

He sends every Hillary and Trinity T^r^e, several parchment Books, to all
the Customers, Controllers, Survaiors and Searchers of the Parts and Creekes
through England, to make the first and second half years Entries in the same
of the Kings Majesty's Customs and Subsides, and the Cocketts thereof,
according to certain late orders in the late Queens time sent unto them
thereof. And likewise every Michelmas and Easter Term he receives the same by
the Oath again of the said Officers in open Court, or before some one of the
Barons out of the Court, that they have made all true Entries in the same, and
as they ought to have done.

He receives, from some one of the three Barons, and of the Auditors of the
Court Attending on them, all Sheriff, foreign accounts, Collectors accounts of
Subsidies and Fifteens, and the Cofferers accounts, which he takes, and the
Accomptants name with his addition of account, and the sum total and the
debts of the same, and so puts every of them ever by himself, or one of the
Clerks of his Office to the Treasurors Remembrancers side to be entered there in
like sort; both which Remembrancers should likewise receive all the great
accounts taken now before the Auditors of the Prests and the Receivours and
Ministers accounts of the late Augmentation Revenue, taken before the Auditors
of the Shires to make like Entries thereof in both their Offices, and to be
conveyed in the viewes of every years Remembrance, and that he to whom it did
appertain, might make process upon the same, where any cause should so fall
out, and so noe Super, or debt thereupon, by that means should be behind, and
to be out of Process every Term while they were discharged.

He sends commission of Nisi prius by the kings Attorneys Warrant only, upon
trial of any matters within his office at the Assizes in the country
Adtenorem Recordi under the Exchequer Seal with it, But at the Nisi Prius in
London, at Guildhall, he has the very Record of his Office brought thither,
and it is without commission, because my Lord chief Baron sits thereon, and
the Kings Attorney and his Majesty's learned Council either be, or appoint to
be there for his Highness.

He has other special Authorities, preheminences, and matters, appointed to
his Office by the Articles of the uniting of the said Court of Augmentations to
the Exchequer, which are referred thither for breifeness and for more
certainty at large of the same.

The Lord Treasurors Remembrancer
IS the second Remembrancer of the Exchequer and belike of old time was so
called, for that it was then in the Lord Treasurors gift, or that he had some
special service appointed to him by the Lord Treasuror to remember him of, or
to be kept in Record.

He has his Office chiefly established upon the execution of the original,
save for the great accounts, the Customers, controllers and searchers, that is
yearly streated to him out of the Chancerie, and is otherwise called Extractus
Cancellarioe, being the yearly streate Verbatim, as they passed under the
great Seal of England, from time to time of all Sheriffs, and Escheators
Pattents, of all Customers, Controllers, and Searchers Patents, of all
Receivers, Reeves, Beadles, Bailiffs, Collectors, and Stewards Pattents of all
grants of lands, and Tenements for life, in see simple, see tail general, or
special, of all denizonships, Creations of Arch bishops, and Bishops,
erections of any Abbeys, Priories, Colleges, Chauntries, Hospitalls, Schools,
and Corporations, of all custodies of any Honers Castles, Lordships, Manors
Chaces, Forests. Parkes special, and general, after the Course of the
Chancerie, and ouste^lemanes, of all Licenses of Alinations going over sea,
transportations, Introductions, Retains, imparkings, and Enclosures, of all
pardons, Alienations, intrusions, trespasses, utlegaries, felonies, murders,
misprisions, treasons, and forfeitures, of all restitutions of blood, goods,
and Chattells, lands and Tenements, of all leases for Term of life, or for
years, of all Fines gross and small, of all Writts of restitutions of
Temporalities, of any Abbey, Priorie, Archbishopprick, wards and seized lands
and Tenements, of all Di^m Cl. Extremum, Mandamus, Melius inquirendum, et qu.
plura.

He out of the said Original, makes his Book called the Roll of Prossers,
which is a record, and a part of the remembrance of every year of the coming
of every Cro, Michalis, and Cro' Claus. pasch. into the receipt of all
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Farmers, Escheators, and men of certain Towns within the
realm, and of putting in a Warrant of their proffer made of the issues of their
Offices, at which if any of the Sheriffs made default by himself or their
Attorneys, or pay not into the receipt there by Tallie infra mens^m following,
they forfeit their recognizance, and the Bailiff, Farmers, and Escheators that
come not then to appear either by themselves or their Attorneys, are amerced
at half their proffer, And if they pay not their proffer infra mensem
following, then do they loose their proffer and pay it unto the receipt
without having any Allowance of the same upon their account.

He when the said proffers are done makes Proclamation in the receipt before
they arise That all Sheriffs, Bailiffs of liberties, and Escheators, do pay
their proffers as they are accustomed infra mensem, and keep their days of
prefixion for their Accounts in the Exchequer according as by the Court they
are appointed upon pain and peril that shall fall thereof.

He thereupon by his book called the scroule of accounts made out of the
Rolls of profers, and out of any other part of the yearly remembrance, called
Dies datus vicecom, et Escaet. ad Computand. post profra every Michelmas Term,
does call all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and Escheators of the year last past to
account, some Cr. Sc. Michis, some tres septiman Sc. Micahis, some Mense
Micahis; some Cr. Simon et Jude, some Cr. annimarum, some Cr. Martini, some
Octabis Hillarii, some Cr. Hillarii some Quinden. Hillarii, some Cr. Purific.
and some Quinden. Pas. as every of these several days of prefixion of ancient
have been set by the Court, and as they thought they should be able to
overcome, and finish their Accounts.

He out of the Original of the Chancery the Roll of proffers, Dies dat.
Viceom. and Escaet. the scroule of Accountants, and other Records, both
preceding and following thereupon, does make a yearly Book called the Roll of
Writs, that is a part also of the yearly Remembrance made in his Office, in
which he enrolleth all Briareturnabil. de Term. Hillar. Pascae sectae
Trinitatis, and sectae Michaelis, every year some from the Original, some from
all the parts of the yearly Remembrance that is made with him, some from the
transcript of Offices, yearly streated into his Office out of the Chancery,
some from Offices found before the Escheator, Virtute officij, and certified to
him from the debts of the Pipe, put in his book called Nomine Escaet. and
ceduta Pipae, and some from the streat of Common Pleas, called the Fynes.

He out of the Original from all Receivers, Bailiffs, Reeves, Collectors, and
Beadles Patents of any the Kings Lands or Tenements, does inroll and write,
Venire facias ad computand. or distringas ad reddend. compotum, from all grants
of Honors, Castles, Lordships, Manors, Lands, and Tenements granted by the
Prince to any for life, in fee simple, fee tail general or special. he does
inroll and write Distringas ad faciend fidelitatem and ad faciend. homag. and
fidelitatem, or a Writ of Reversion when the tail is spent, and otherwise as
the case requires, from all Denizenships he makes a Distring as ad faciend
homag. from all custodies of Lands and Tenements, or Farms, he does inroll
and write, Distringas ad faciend, fidelitatem, or homag. and fidelitatem, or ad
respondend. de velevijs, from all pardons of Outlawries, Attainders, Felonies,
Murders, Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons.

He does inroll and write Distringas ad respondend. de omnieo quod ad Regem
pertinet, etc. velcertiorari quae bona and catalla A. B. habuit, etc. From all
licenses of alienations, he does inroll and write, Distringas ad faciend.
fidelitatem, or ad audiend and terminand.

He does inroll and write Writs of Restitution of any Temporalties.

He does inroll and write, Distringas ad reddend. comp. de exitibus temporal.
etc. and Cercioraries, sometimes, Quis recepit exitus et profit. temporal. etc.

He from the said Roll of proffers, does inroll and write against such as pay
not their profers, Infra mensem. etc. capias pro contemptu, with a Fierifacias
pro proffera.

He from the said scroule of Accounts grounded upon Dies datus aforesaid,
every Michaelmas Term against Sheriffs that make default at their days of
prefixion, does make a Record of five pounds for every day of payment, after
he makes default while four days next be past, which is set down in the Pipe
to be charged upon them, or is levied upon a Fierifacias except the Princes
Letter come aforesaid for the discharge of such Amerciament, and then he does
inroll and write out an attachment for his Body, Goods, Chattells, Lands
Tenements, while he comes into account, and puts in Bail to end and finish
the same, and against all Bailiffs of Liberties that make like default, he
enrolleth and writes out like Attachment as he did before against the
Sheriffs.

He from Commissions that is a part of the yearly Remembrance laid in his
Office, and made by Warrant or commandment of the Court, or upon some other
dependency of Record, Ad inquirend. Ad faciend. Ad Exequend. Ad perinplend. Ad
recipiend. or Ad certificand. does enroll process and Writs out of the same
against the Commissioners thereof, Ad liberand. Inquisitiones, ad certificand.
ad comput and or alia faciend. as the matter offers.

He upon the Communia, that is the several Records of all the pleas put in
every Term within his Office, and another part of the said yearly Remembrance,
does inroll process, and does write the same against the parties whom they
concern, Adfaciend. sidelitatem homag. and sidelitatem magn. Serjantians, et
parvam Serjantians, et ad respondend. etc. as the several Statutes and
judgments of the same does require.

He even so does inroll process and writ out of the same from all other parts
and titles of their Remembrance, and from all other Records rising in his
Office, are brought into the same of such kind, and mature, as the matter in
them by the course in the Court does require.

He upon all these processes that do thus issue out of his Office, does admit
every man to plead in discharge of any of them that has cause, and matter, and
by the course of the Court is bound thereunto, but no first Patent of Lands or
Tenements, or he that sueth a license of alienation, or a pardon of Alienation,
or Livery special or general, or an Ousterlemaine, or after the course of the
Chancery, that is streated as before in the yearly original is compelled or
suffered to plead upon any such first process enrolled upon the same, and
written out by every of them are admitted to do their fealty, or to pay their
fine for a respit of homage, at any Term they come in after the same sent
forth, and so keeping still the payment of the same Fine every fifth Term,
they have process made out against the same Land their fine is made for, but
their fifth term homage written to put them in Remembrance of the payment of
their fine, while either they be returned dead, or Nihil habet in the same Land.

He upon all such Returns of Mortuus, or Nihil habet from the Original, or of
like service of Writs from pleas, or any other Record in his Office, does
strait write out the next Term after such Return, a Dic. tenants of the same
Land, the Tenant is returned Mortuns est, or Nihil habet, etc. for the
answering of the which the party that is returned the now tenant of the said
land, must show he has therefore a license of Alienation, or a pardon of
Alienation, or a livery general, or special, or an Ousterlemaine, or after
the course of the Chancery by which he entered, and he must plead either the
same or some general pardon that will serve for his discharge, or otherwise,
with the Nec non ad ostendend. goes current still every Term, while he come
in and plead as aforesaid.

He admits any such person that has any such Land whereof the Tenant is
returned Mortuns est, or Nihil habet before the Dic. Tenement. goes forth
thereof, with a Nec non ad ostendend. upon the said return to come into his
Office, and inroll there his license or pardon of Alienation of the same Land,
and to show his conveyance thereof, and likewise to enroll his Livery special
and general, the Ousterlemain, or after the course of the Chancery, and upon
the same enrollment, and show he does admit such person to do his fealty, and
to pay his Fine upon a Writ made from the said enrollment, and show of his
evidences to agree therewith, without any manner of pleading, because all such
Writs be like the first writts enrolled from the original, and written out as
aforesaid against the first tennant only of the land by good matter of Record.

He upon all pleas put into his Office where the Kings Attorney may make an
Averrment contrary to the plea of the party, and where the party pleads
any foreign matter then is of record in that Court, and allowed of, or would
discharge any Claim, title, or Interest of the King by the same plea, save in
the said ordinary Writts for fealty and Homage sealtie, and such like, does
by himself or some Clerk of his, make the Kings Attorney ever privy to all
such pleas, their replications, and rejoynders, who does respect them and
consider them, and at length either does confess them, or refers them, or
gives his Warrant out under his hand to have them tried in the Country at the
Assizes of Nisi prius.

He according to the Ancient order of the Court, upon all other ordinary Pleas
examined by him with one of the Clerks of his office concerning Writts of
service, and such like, does enter Judgment alone without making the kings
Attorney or the Court privy thereto, which ever in this wise were dispatched
as agreeable to the President of the Court.

He either upon the first writ from the original. or upon the writts written
from the said Pleas, or upon distresses from the Streat of the fines of the
Commission pleas, or from writts upon such like records in his office, does set
over persons fines for respit of Homage payable every fifth Term according to
a rate given him by the Court at his first comeing into his office whereof a
record was then made, and is as follows.

the Fines for respit of Homage, every fifth Term of lands and Tenements.
s Three pounds per Annum downwards 0 4 Five pounds per Annum, downwards 0 8
Six pounds thirteen shillings four pence per annum downwards 1 0 Ten pounds
per annum downwards 1 8 Eighteen pounds per annum downwards 2 0 Twenty pounds
per annum downwards 3 4 Thirty pounds per annum downwards 5 0 Forty pounds per
annum, downwards 6 8 Sixty pounds per annum downwards 10 0

And noe such fines are set higher but upon Noblemen which according to the
greatness, or meanness of their lands, are set some at thirteen shillings
fourpence some at twenty shillings some twentiesix shillings eight pence some
at thirty shillings and some at forte shillings, to be paid every fifth
Term, and none above, nor so high but for Dukes.

He has set down in his Book called nomina Vic. by the Clerk of the Pipe
every year, the debts of all Sheriffs, Bailiffs of liberties, and men of
certain Towns that are found, and cast upon their accounts entered in the Pipe,
and in another of his Books called Nomina Ecaetor, he has every year the
like debts of Escheators set down by the same Clerk of the Pipe; for all the
which, he makes Attachment and other ordinary process of the Court for the
levying of the same, as the case does require.

He has in a third Book in his Office called Schedula Pipe, All debts set
down by the Clark of the Pipe, of such persons as upon the opposalls of the
Sherift of their summons, be said by them to be dead, to the end he should make
a Diem clausit Extremum, after the death of such debtors to the Sherift, which
is the award of the Court, and of purpose to enquire what day and year they
died, and what goods and Chattells, and of what value they had at the day of
their death, and to whose hands the same came, and now be, and to seize the
same in whose hands soever they be, and to leavy the same debt, and have them
before the Barons such a day.

And if their goods and Chattells be not sufficient to pay the said debt then
to enquire what lands and Tenements, and to what yearly value they had at the
day of their deaths, or when they became debtors, or ever since, and to whose
hands and possession the same came after their decease and in whose hands they
now be, and the same to seize in whose hands soever they be and keep safe, and
to Answer the issues and profits thereof until the said debt be fully
satisfied and paid, or that he otherwise is Commanded, and to distraine all
the Executors of the Testament of the said debtors, as Administrators of the
goods and Chattells that were his, and also the heirs, and Ter Tenants of the
same debtors, if they have not Executors to Answer the same debt, and all to
the intent the same might this way be paid that could not by the summons of
the Pipe be so levied. And likewise he has put in his said Book of Schedula
Pipe, by the Clerk of the Pipe, other great and special debts that the Court
will have spedeier and sharper process made for them by the said summons, to
the intent the Debtors should be either quickly Attached and brought into the
Court, or the money paid and Answered to the Sheriffs, or into the Reccit, as
should best fall out for the ease and dispatch of the debtors.

He takes into his Office, all Streats of Fines, issues, and Amerciaments,
sent into the Court from the Kings Bench, the common pleas, the Justices of
Assize, and all Justices of the Peace, through England, which are by him
delivered over by the Rolls of streats into his Office to the Clark of the
Streats to write out, who sets his hand thereto for the Receipt of the same.

He takes on his side also (as the Kings Remembrancer does before) all Sheriffs
for reign accounts, Bailiffs accounts, Escheators accounts, Customers
accounts, Collectors accounts, of Subsidies and fifteens, and the Cofferers
accounts (as before is declared) in the point amongst the matters of the Kings
Remembrancers side.

He rules the ordinary petitions that any of the said Accountants do make or
pray upon their said accounts to be allowed them without the privity of the
Court, being matter of Record and President in Court for the discharge of the
same, and other their new and first petitions, are allowed from time to time by
the Judgment of the Court, and so he rules them under his hand accordingly,
and there entered either in the Venos or the postscript of the years, wherein
they should lie, that be part of the Remembrance for that year.

He by the Lord Treasurers Warrant, the Chancellors Warrant, the
Vice-Treasurers Warrant, the Lord chief Barons Warrant, the Kings Attorneyes
Warrant, out of the Court, and in the Court by the Order of the Barons, does
make all manner of process, Writs, Commissions, and Injunctions for matters on
his side, and makes stays, and Supersede as of them, as he is by them willed
and commanded.

He writes once a year the issues of his Office returned by the Sheriff every
Term, and last upon all manner of distresses in the same, which being bound up
and examined by the Clerks of his Office, are delivered over by the Roll of
Estreates to the Clerk of streats to write out, who sets his hand to the
said Roll for receiving of the same.

He lays every Lent yearly a Remembrance of the 5 year before, and
dothregister and make up clear all the Records of the same, or discontinueth
them that cannot be made perfect, and inrolleth process anew of those matters,
and so receives the same by new writing them out again. In which time also of
Lent, he enters also every Writ in that Roll of Writs of that years
Remembrance that is Law, and all the Homage Writs of the same, and likewise all
the fylances of his Office of every Term since that Remembrance, then he does
lay to see if they all be still current in course and every Term as they ought
to be, and such as are found wanting by falling off, or otherwise, are then new
enrolled in the Roll of Writs, of that year, and so are received and set
current anew, that the least Writ of his Office, whereby the King is to have
any right or profit is not suffered to be lost, nor yet left to be uncurrent.

He has other special Anthorityes, Assignments, and matters appointed to his
Office by the Articles of the uniting of the late Court of augmentations to the
Exchequer, which are referred thither for breifnesse, and for more certainty at
large of the same.

Sheriffs Accounts.
HE, if the Sheriffs do account by improvement, and have no tally of Reward
after the Secondary has cast up every Sheriffs first sum, does examine it;
and sees that the same be made only of Sheriffs vicommells, upon which he
gives him allowance, first of his profers paid by tally, and then of all such
allowances, as are given him by Act of Parliament. Then after his said
Secondary has made up the Sheriffs second sum upon his De debitis plurimum,
which be his Tots and upon his De pluribus debit is charge which be his green
Wax, and his whole as before, or so many of them as he is charged with, he
causes the Sheriffs foreign accounts to be cast up, and charge first to
the same second sum, the old seizures thereof, which be Lands and Tenements
seized before by his predecessors, upon the process of the Court, and then
charge the Sheriffs own seizures to the same, which be of lands and Tenements
seized in his own time by Process of the Court, and so adds to these such
Fellons goods as he has seized himself, After which things done, he gives
him allowance of all his payments, deductions, annual Charges, and so
brings the Quietus est: And if the Sheriff do not account by Improvement but
has a Tally of reward, then the said Secundary does make up but one sum to
such Sheriff of his whole Charge aforesaid.

Escheators Account
HE conveyeth yearly into the great Roll briefly, the Escheators accounts of
every Sheire into the pipe of the same Shire where he is Escheator, he enters
the same and makes his allowance both of his proffers and of all his petitions
he makes in the Treasurors Remembrancers office, in discharge of his debt, and
so is the Escheator brought down also to Quietus est.

Roll of Accounts
HE does every Lent make up a great Roll of all the said accounts, as the Kings
and Treasurors Remembrancers do lay every lent a Remembrance in either of
their Offices, and such debts and Remains as be not, or cannot be made quit and
clear in the said great Roll made up every Lent, are Conveyed into the Pipe of
the great Roll that should be made up for the year following.

Customers Accounts
HE has for all the Customers accounts yearly a Book called the Customers Roll
into which every Customers Charge and Allowance is Conveyed yearly and the
debts and the remains in them are from thence conveyed over from time to time
in the great Roll, and are summoned out, or Written for the process from
Schedula Pipa, where they are entered also to be the ground of the Treasurors
Remembrancer to make the process by.

Rolls of Subsidies and Fifteenes
HE has even so special Rolls for all such Subsidies and Fifteenes granted to
the Prince by act of Parliament, called the Subsidy Roll of the Clergy, and
the Subsidy Roll of the Laity, and the Roll of Fifteens of such a king, or of
two or three Kings together as it falls out, or may be continued, Into which
he enters the several accounts of the several Collectors, and of such debts
as remain unpayed upon any of them, are conveied likewise into the great
Roll, most meet for the same to be Charged in, and so are summoned out also,
or written for by process from Schedula Pipe, by the Treasurors Remembrancer
as aforesaid.

Rolls of the Wardrobe and Coffers
HE has likewise a special Roll for the Wardrobe and Coffers accounts
together called Magna Guardrobe Roll, and the cofferers Roll, into which their
accounts are engrossed, and the debts in the same are Conveied over as before
into the great Roll, save that the Cofferers yearly Remain stands still into
his next years accounts do pass to be examined and Charged, and so is still on
from year to year.

Rotulus examinatus
HE is an Officer that makes a yearly account in his Office of all the Ancient
Revenues in the Exchequer that was there before the uniting of the late Court
of augmentations and the first fruit and Tenthes to the same.

He puts in Charge yearly into his Book called the great Roll, all Sheriffs
accounts Escheators accounts, Bailiffs accounts, and men of certain Towns
accounts that are called to account by the Treasurors Remembrancer.

He makes therein the Charge of the said accounts for the Counties, Cities,
and Towns of the Realm, as they be and lie in the order of letters by the
Alphabet, end so the first Pipe thereof begins with the Charge of the
Sheriffs of Bedford, and Buckingham, and Towns as it falls out by order of
the letter.

He makes the first Charge of every Sheriff to be his vicommells, which be
under the second titles Post tras dat. et Profic: comitat: as they call them.
The first whereof seems to be lands and Tenements in the Conquerors hands
after he had given away as much as pleased him at his Entry. The second seems
to be those lands, tenements, Rents, services, and profitts which came to the
Crown afterward by Attainders, Forfeitures, and seizures, most of which where
they be are not known to the Sheriffs of the Realm, but yet many of them are
gathered up in rents by their Bailiffs, as known to them by tradition and
succession and so are either paid or made up by them to so much as he is
charged with yearly in the Pipe.

Farm Rents and services.
HE after this, does Charge him with the Fee farm Rents and services of the
shire, but are reserved there, and drawn down into the great Roll out of the
yearly original of the Chancerie streated as before into the Treasurors
Remembrancers office, which Clerk of the Pipes Secondarie is bound from time to
time, and from Roll to Roll to peruse, and finding in the same any yearly
Revenue, Reservation, profit, Remainder or Revertions reserved to the Crown,
he draws them down into the great Roll, and makes Charge thereof in the
Shire where they be, so as ever after where they be payable, they be yearly
summoned out before by the Controller of the Pipe to the Sheriff of that
County. And all the said Remains and Reversions, are conveyed into the Roll
of the Reversions, that is another Book in the Pipe, and made from time to
time, that when any of them do revert a gain into the Crown, are to be put
into Schedula Pi. that is mentioned, before the Treasurors Remembrancer make
out the Writ of Reversion to enquire thereof; and to seize the same.

Oblata or old Debts
HE makes oblata the next title of the Charge of the Sheriff, with the old
debts brought as it were together from precedent years, and be written from
other Rolls to the Sheriffs of that year, and after that title, he sets to
his Charge Nova oblata, which be as it were new debts brought together, and
drawn down from Customers accounts, or Escheators accounts, or recovered and
set down from some one of the Remembrancers sides, or other Records or grounds
of the Court, and have their names belike of Oblata upon the same that are so
brought together.

He after the foreign Opposer has made up the scroule, and sum of the
green wax of every Sheriff in the several titles the same does arise, and it
is delivered into the Pipe, does make up the next Charge of the Sheriff Viridi
Cera, which rises out of the streats of the Fines, issues, and Amerciaments
that came from the Kings Bench, the Common pleas, the Justice of the Peace, the
King, or Treasurors Remembrancers side.

He straight after this, does Charge every Sheriff with his Casualties, which
are all manner of Debts of Casualties, and Releifes, Fines, Amerciaments upon
the Sheriffs, debts recovered and such like as are drawn down either from
any Record of any of the Remembrancers of the Eschequer, or from any other
ground, matter or seizure of the Court, and be so brought together.

And the Sheriff Answers as he has Cause to every sum, viz. such a sum
within liberties, and shows whose they be Then the foreign Opposer sets
against that sum, the name of the Owner of the liberties, and if he have the
same in Claim by Ancient President either known or certified to the sorraine
Opposor out of the Pipe, he gives the Bailiffs of the liberties allowance
thereof, and makes Clamen in the margent in the original Record against the
sum, otherwise he makes special tot. against the same sum thus: or or: in
which pricks, and by which pricks of use, he knows whose liberties the same
pricks do mean, Then the Sheriff going on, and saying to another sum tot. the
foreign Opposor marketh it in the margent in the original thus without
pricks, and so that is a Charge to the Sheriff only And after the Sheriff
saying to another Summa nihil, the foreign opposor does mark also against the
Summa in the Margent in Rottulo. 21, or 13 as the Streate is of the year of
the King Whereof the opposall is. and he goes through that original record,
his whole liberty of the rest of the Sheriffs green wax streated unto him,
and marketh every sum in such wise as before.

He afterward makes the Sheriffs scronle in parchment of all the totalls,
with pricks, and casts up the several total sums if they be in severali
natures, and where any D' with pricks is wthin any such total sums, as for
example, A. B. Vicecom. pred. oneratur minit. exitus twenty pounds to pull off
the 'D, with pricks from the Sheriff, he says immediately after, that total
Summa C. quibus C. D. ball. libertat. C. F. venit per G. H. Attorn. suum et V.
inde 51. et sic debit, fifteen pounds, and so every Bailiff from the said
scroule is charged in the great Roll, with the 'D, with pricks where it
concerns, and the other without pricks is charged in the same Roll to the
Sheriff himself only.

He says that he leaves the Nihils that be marked in the Margent of the
Original Record in Rotulo 12. or 13. as aforesaid, for the Clarke of the
Nihils to write out by his said marks in R when they be delivered again into
the Clerk of the Streats Office.

He allows to the Sheriffs the Justices of Peace wages of his Shire out of
the Fines and Forfeitures before the Justices of the peace thereof if the
Streat will bear them, laid out before the Sheriffs for the Justices wages,
according to the Statute, of the which allowance, and of the particular names
of the Justices, the said foreign opposer does deliver a Roll into the Pipe
for the Clarke of the Pipes Warrant to allow the same wages to the Sheriff.

Clarke of the Streats.
IS the Officer that receives yearly out of the Treasurers Remembrancers
Office, all the Streats of the Kings Bench, the Common pleas, the Justices of
Assize, the Justices of the Peace, the Kings Remembrancers side, his hand from
time to time made in the said Roll of the Streats, there restifying the
receiving of the same.

He writeh out yearly all the said Streats to every Sheriff of England, as they
in every shire at the two Liberates of the Exchequer, that be every Hillary
Term and Trinity Term, for to levy and to answer all the sums of the same.

He makes Schedules in parchment under his hand agreeable with his Streats,
sent out as before with the sums of the same truly totalled, when any Sheriff
will make petition to be discharged of any sum in the same by good matter
offered.

The Auditors of the Prests
BE they that take the old great accounts of the Exchequer, as Ireland,
Barwick, the Mynt, the Loan, the Wars, the Ships, the Provisions, the Hamper,
the Ordnance the Clerk of the Works, and such like remembered before, who now
declared the same before the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor and under Treasurer
only, and be never entered in the Court of Exchequer, nor examined nor written
upon there as they had wont to be.

That upon many years so moving out, and writing process forth, sound merely
desperate and illeviable upon the parties, that owe them, either alive or being
dead, upon their heirs, Executors, Administrators, their Goods, Chattells,
Lands, Tenements or Ter Tenants, which desperate debts of theirs that be alive,
be by and by conveyed back again into the great Roll, and summoned out of the
Chancery, afterward to be sufficient to answer either the whole, or some part
of the debt.

They have other special Authorityes, Assigments, and matters appointed to
this Office, by the Articles of the uniting of the late Court of Augmentations
to the Exchequer, which are referred thither for breifnesse, and for more
certainty at large of the same.

Remembrancer of the first Fruits and Tenths.
Has his Office wholly established by Articles of the unyting of the late Court
of the fist Fruits and Tenths, unto the Exchequer, and by a late decree of our
Court, concerning the altering thereof from the first erection, which for
breifne^ here are referred over to the same.

The Comptroller of the Pipe.
IS an Office that was first devised to keep a Control of the Pipe, that
should write and keep every year a like great Roll in every matter of charge
and discharge, as the Clark of the pipe does, and should lay every Lent such a
one, as well as he, but (as I learn) no such Roll has been made up by him for
many years, and yet (as I hear) he writes yearly now all the pipes of the
great Roll, the Clerk of the Pipe does keep, but he does not yearly make them
up into a great Roll.

He only writes out twice a year the two summons of every shire of the Realm
viz. his first sumuons every Hillary term, where in he writes only the
Sheriffs Vicondeles, his fee farms, and sometimes his Oblata, and likewise the
second summons every Trinity Term, wherein he writes his Nova oblata, and
casualties, and so upon the opposalls of every Sheriff, he may if he list see
how every of them do O. Ni. or rot. every Term of the same.

The Clerk of the Pleas.
IS the Officer in whose Office, all the Offices in the Court of the Exchequer,
their Clerks and servants, all the Kings Majesty's Tenants and Farmers of any
of his Lands, and Tenements, and all manner of accountants of the Court of the
Exchequer, during the time of their bar, so should be sued in, or may implead
another, or any stranger in any Action upon the case, or of trespass, debt, De
Ejectione firmoe, of Detinue, or such like, as are sued in the Kings Bench,

He has every suit prosecuted in his Office between party and party, that is
removed out of any Court at Westminster by the red book, or out of any Court of
Record elsewhere in England, by any Writ of proviledge for any of the said
persons that are privileged as before to sue and to be sued only there in the
said actions and no where else, if they will in time claim and sue their
privilege.

He in his Office brings all matters to an end, and either upon Nihil dicit
or by Demurrers argued, or by verdict tried in Court or by Nisi prius at the
Gaild Hall in London, or at the Assizes in the County before the Justices of
Assize, and so by the Judgment given upon every of the same, whereupon the
party with whom Judgment is given for his Execution, has against the party
condemned a Capias, an Alias, or Plures, and Fieri facias.

The Foreign Apposer
IS an Officer to whom all sheriffs after they are apposed of their sums out
of the Pipe, do repair to be apposed by him of their green wax, who appoints
them a day certain for the same, and so the sheriff pays for the Clark of the
streats against that day to bring to Westminster, the Original Books and
Records of their green Wax.

He at the day of the said apposall appointed, takes the sheriffs streats, and
causes his Clark to look upon it, and he himself reads the Origin all
Record, and apposeth the Sheriff, what he says to every sum therein, and the
Clark sees the sheriffs streats, if the Original do agree with the Wax.

The Kings Attorney General.
HE is made privy to all the Answers put in upon the said nformations, and
either demurreth thereupon, or replyeth as he will, to bring the matter to an
issue, and at his pleasure to the King, all advantages of pleading, given to
his highness by the Defendant, and sometimes presses the Court to hold and
keep still the same, and otherwise he yeildeth and suffers the party to amend
his plea, answer, and Rejoinder, and so proceeds to the joining of an issue.

He is made privy to all Replications drawn from the Kings side, and alters
and amendeth the same after his own liking and so is he likewise to the parties
Rejoinder against the King, and either confesses the plea, or the party
Defendant, upon the same, either suffers it to come to a trial by Jury at
the Bar, or by Nisi prius in London, or in the County where the matter lies,
and so come all matters of plea to judgment, and an end, either upon the Kings
Attorneyes confession, or by trial of Verdict, or by Demurrer, or by Judgment
of the Court alone, or upon a Nihil dicit by the Kings Attorney.

He in some cases will not confess the plea for the party rising upon the
process of the Court, though it were reasonable he should without the Kings
Majesty's Warrant, as when the party should have his Right by way of Petition
to the Prince, or that there is some Color for him though not evident Right to
stand against the party for the Prince, and so refers him to the Court.

He maintains his Informations, Replications, the Kings Right and process of
the Court, against all Counselors, sollicitors and Witnesses at the Bar, both
in the Court, and in the Exchequer Chamber for the party, and upon the opening
and avowing of the Law, he either offers the Defendant an issue, or to demur
in Law with him upon the point, and so prays the Court he may do, and that
the party may be enforced according to the Law to join issue, or demur in Law
with the Defendant as he thinks will serve best for the Kings Title.

He oftentimes, when the issue upon the Plea comes to trial by the Jury, and
that they are suspected, or seem labored does sometimes by exception quash the
whole Jury, or so many of them as the matter cannot proceed to trial, and
sometimes fearing the partiality of the whole pannell and suborned Witnesses,
he brings the matter to a Demurrer in Law upon the opening of the Evidence,
and so saves the Kings case politickly.

He devises all the Assurances the Kings Majesty has of any Lands and
Tenements either sold to his Highness for any debt, or assured unto his Majesty
for any debt to be paid at days, or else to be forfeited, which Indentures,
Deeds, Fines, Recoveries, and other such Writings, he delivers now into the
Kings Remembrancers Office that were wont to be kept in the Treasury to be put
in charge before the Auditors of the Counties, where the same Lands and
Tenements do lie according to the assurance.

He suffers sometimes the Informers upon popular Actions, to put in their
Information in their own name, when it is better the party Defendant be so
prosecuted, or that he is of some fort an acquaintance, and so more meet that
way to be sued.

He commands all the Remembrancers that there be no proceedings in certain
matters depending in their Office, when he thinks it best for the King, and
Copies and Books to be made thereof, both for the judges, the Barons, and the
Kings learned Counsel, as the case shall fall out.

He suffers sometimes the Demurrers for the King to be argued, by other
learned Counsel, then the King retains by the party that follows the Kings
suit or his Tenant, or for his commodity, or for some other respect,

He suffers so the parties sometimes that follow the suite for the King, to
bring other Counsel to the Bar then the Kings, to open, plead, and defend the
Kings Title when he is in Court, and guides them for the King.

He makes Warrants to all the Remembrancers to make all manner of Commissions,
Process, writs and Injunctions, as the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor, the
Vice-Treasurer, and the Lord Chief Baron does.

He, when he understands, or is complained unto, that any stay, lingering, or
Supersedeas is of any process or execution for the King, does call straight
upon the Officers where it lies, and asks why such a process or matter
stays, and being informed of the cause, and it is by the Lord Treasurers,
Master Chancellor, Vice-Treasurer, or the Courts order, he says, stay them for
a time, and I will move in it, but otherwise the matter proceeds by his order
with all expedition.

He very seldom, or never of himself stays any process matter or cause of the
King but being moved there of by the chief Officers of the Court, he will seem
for a time content, and leaves the same to their order, yet he is content to
give all suitors days to appear to show their Rights, and bring in their
Answers, Rejoynders, Writings, Evidences, and Patents.

He with the Lord chief Baron and the Court Pro misis parcandis, does set
Fines for Compositions upon any Information depending in the Court by any
special Statute, and thereupon the party defendant is discharged, and the
record made up to show how he has Compounded, And so is drawn and set down
from the Roll of the Kings Remembrancers side and is charged and discharged in
the Pipe as is aforesaid.

He certifieth into the Clerk of the Streate office yearly in the Exchequer,
all the Kings moities recovered, and fines for Impositions made in the Kings
Bench upon all penal sums or penal Statutes, and pay the same yearly into
the Receipt by tail, and being set down into the Pipe by the Clerk of the
Streate, he has his Quiet us est, for the same

The Kings Solicitor
Sits next to the Kings Attorney in place, and sometimes Answers the Bar,
or the Court on the Kings behalf, both in the absence of the Kings Attorney,
and when he is present, but otherwise he medleth not any way with the Kings
Attorneys office.

He ceusidereth with the Kings Attorney all the Kings Majesty's hard and
doubtful cases depending in Court, and shows his opinion of the same both in
Court and out of Court in the Exchequer Chamber.

He waits on the Judges to know when they shall be able to Attend the Kings
Causes that he and the Kings Attorney has for matters depending in the
Exchequer to inform them of, and both gives every of them the case, and the
Copies of all Books and Presideats concerning the same.

He argues before the Kings Attorney all the Demurres that be in the Court for
the King, and sometimes alone without the Attorney with other learned Council
out of the Kings fee, that are retianed with him on the Kings side by the
party that follows the suite for the King.

The Auditors of the Exchequer
BE they, That before the late united Courts to the Exchequer, did take and
make all the accounts of the Ancient Revenue there, and now they take also the
accounts of the receivers of the late Augmentation Revenue, as was allotted to
every of them at the first coming thereof into one Court, and of the Ministers
of the same.

They never take accounts of any Sheriff, Escheator, customer, Collector of
Subsidies, or Fifteens, or the cofferers accounts, but by Assignement in open
Court by the Marshall, and so entered in his Book, to the intent no accomptant
shall seek an Auditor of his Choice.

They wait on some of the three younger Barons with every such account when it
is engrossed who examineth the particulars, and the totalls of the same, and
sees if then the same account be straight and true, and then it is set upon
the head of such Account examined, to know by whom it passed thus, or as it
falls out indeed.

AB: Auditor CD: Clericus
AND so it is deliveered by the Baron or Anditor first into the Kings
Remembrancers Office, and so from time to time to the Lord Treasurors
Remembrancers Office and so from him to the Clerk of the Pipes Office to be
entered as aforesaid in the Roll as it should be after his nature as aforesaid.

They cast out all Sheriffs in open Court, viz. two or three of them lay the
sums and charge of their accounts as they be read to them in open Court by
the Clerk of the Pipe, and then they allow out of the same, their Annual
Deductions, and such petitions as they make and be, read them in sums in open
Court, and so try them either Aeque, or surplusage, and if both or all the
Auditors casting do agree, then be the Sheriffs delivered out of the Court by
Proclamation of some one of the Ushers.

They ride every Michaelmas Term to their Audite, kept at the Kings Court in
every shire as they are allotted especially unto them, where they take the
Ministers accounts of the late Augumentation Revenue, at places certain
appointed before by their precept, and sent out to the Bailiffs, Reeves,
Collectors etc. and there by order from my Lord Treasuror, Master Chancellor,
and the Vice-treasuror, they have Authority to give certain Allowances of
reparations not exceeding the sum of where the kings is no bound thereunto
and to do the ordinary things of their Audit.

They make a breife declaration of every of their Receivers accounts every Lent
before my Lord Treasuror, master Chancellor, and Vice-treasuror, and show
their last years Arrerages, and what every of them have paid in liverie money
as in debt upon the same. He is then ordered to pay into the Receipt according
to the Statute upon the determination of his accounts, or is respited by the
said chief, Officers, as they see cause for the same.

The Receivers
BE only of the late Augumentation Revenue united of late unto the Exchequer
who receive by Statute of all tenements the Rents reserved upon any the said
late lands and likewise the Rents of the Farmers and all such moneys as the
Collectors, Recyes, Bailiffs, Ministers of the said Revenue, do gather up
within their Schedule receipts as either payable half yearly or found due upon
account.

They pay all Pentions within every of their receipts, and are bound to pay all
their money found due upon the determination of their accounts according to the
Statutes in that hehalfe made, or they forefeit their office, and they and
their Sureties are extended besides.

The Surveyours
BE only of the said Augmentation Revenues and now are commonly put into
Commission for the king that go into these Shires where their Offices do lie,
and besides, are ordinarily appointed (if they have any skill) to survey such
Manors lands, and Tenements, as the Court has occasion, and does think meet
from time to time for any cause to be surveyed.

The Attorneys and Clerks of the Kings Remembrancers Office.
ALL those that are conmmonly retained by the parties in all suits and matters
of the Office to appear and Answer the Court for them and to follow all things
in Court belonging thereto, but yet in such order, that according to their Oath
they do nothing uncomely, or secretly, in perjudice of the kings Majesty's
right, and title, but that which is orderly, usual, and justifiable in open
Court, and besides every of them does from time to time that which belongs to
his place and senioritie in the Office aforesaid.

The Attorneys and Clerks of the Pipe
HAve assigned unto them and every of them special, certain Shires of the
Realm by the order of their Office, according to every of their Seniorities,
to the which every of them are toward, and likewise to all the Accomptants of
their own Shires, and to every matter in the same, whereby one of them medleth
not with another Shires but every one of them are retained for the Clyents
discharge and to bring every of them his Quietus est, but yet as he does
nothing uncomely or untruly to hinder the Kings right, and then besides, every
of them does in the Office what to his place Anciently appertains.

The Attorneys and Clerks of the Clarks of the Pleas Office
BE they that be retained between party and party in all suits commenced or
depending there, who are in all orderly wise to follow their Clyents Causes,
and to make their Pleas, Answers, Replications, and Rejoynders upon the same
for learned Council to Consider, and to do nothing therein but what is
lawful, comely and usual in the Court, and every of them does besides that as
belongs to their place in the same Office.

The joyners of the tallies
BE the second Deputies of the Chamberlaines for that purpose, and are sworn
at their Admittance to serve truly, who from time to time receive out of the
receipt the Foiles of all Tallies stricken there for any manner of person, and
file them straight upon a string, which so filed, are kept under both their
keys in their Chests, and when any man brings any stock of those to be
joined that must be first done, ere they can be allowed in the Pipe.

The said two Joyners seek straight out the file of the same where it is filed,
and taking it off, do see if the stock and the file do agree in hand, letter,
and joining, and be without suspicion, and then do they prick them both usually
with such marks with their marking Iron, as usually shows the stock to be
joined then with the same tallie, and the day of the joining thereof is entered
in a Book with the letter and sum thereof, and afterward that tallie ie
filed anew in the Term, that it is joined and so kept, And then one of the
said two Joyners delivers over the stock that is joined into the Office of
the Pipe, and that party never handles it after, and so it comes to
allowance.

The two parcel makers
BE the Officers that gather out, and make the parcells of all the Escheators
accounts and be appointed to receive under their hands out of the Treasurors
Remembrancers office set down in the Roll of Streats there, all Transcripts
of Offices sent yearly thither out of the Chancerie that be found by any
Escheator through the Realm,

Then they are to make the parcells of any Escheators accounts in any shire,
they do call for the precedent account of the Escheator that was the year
before of that Shire, out of which they gather first the parcells Veterum
Escaetorum, that were in the said last years account, and continued still
undischarged, and set them down in long Rolls of parchment of fullness of
letter, yearly value, tenure, and state, as they be in the precedent account,
and came from the Office out of which they were drawn first, then they gather
the parcells of the new Escheators own Offices he found in his time, and set
them down in the same Roll in like fulness of letter, yearly vaue, tenure,
and State, as they appear in the same offices, which roll is incituled thus,
Particular account A. B. Escaetor Com. Canc. and Middlesex etc. from such a day
etc. And then in the margent of the Roll where the parcells do begin, there is
Veterum Escaetorum, and so be these parcells still Conveied down, and being
ended, then is set in the margent of the Roll again Nova Escaet. against the
first parcel, beginning with, going down, and ended, there is set in the
margent of the same roll, Ter. and tenem. and catal. attinct. utlegat. felon.
and fugitivors. whereof the parcells be conveied if there be any, but commonly
is set against that title eleven pound and they be Veter. Escaet. and nova
Escaet: totalled up by themselves by the parcell-makers, which be the whole
Charge of the Escheator, And they delivered those parcells so summed up to the
Auditor to whom such Escheator is assigned, and by the Marshall; and he
Verbatim, accordingly does ingrosse up his account, which passes further on in
the Court, as before is declared.

The Clerk of the Nichills
IS the Officer that repaireth to the Clerk of the Estreate every year, and
sees what Nihills be marked in Rottulo, in the whole Liberate, of the green
wax sent out that year, which Nihills be issues, that the Sheriff that is
apposed does say be nothing worth, and illeviable for the insufficiency of the
parties that should pay them, whereupon the Clerk of the Nihills does write
them out in a roll of parchment, and sets them in the Court where they lie
and under the titles of those Streats from whence they come, and where they are
marked as before in Rottulo, which Roll he delivers into the Treasurors
Remembrancers office, and upon the same there be so many Fieri fac: enrolled
against such Sheriffs as have their issues marked in Rottulo, and Nihills which
they returned, to know why they should not Answer the kings Majesty's the same
Nihills which they did return for good issues, and leviable upon the parties
on whose head they were set, which Sheriffs so summoned, must either come in
and justify them leviable, and prove them, and then he that Nihill'd them, or
else the Sheriff that cannot so justify them, must pay the same himself,
whereby it appears, the Court and law provideth, that the Kings Majesty
shall loose nothing that he has right to.

The Seal of the Court
IS the Officer that keeps the Seal of the Court all term time under every
Chanceller, and is bound to Attend and seal all process, Commissions,
Injunctions, Exemplifications, and writts whatsoever, that be brought to him in
Court, 'or out of Court, from any of the Officers that have Authority to make
the same (except he have contrary Commandment, or his masters, or some of the
chief Officers of the Court do make stay sometimes of some of them for some
special matter thought meet and expedient) who in many cases has Fees for
sundry of them whem they be sealed for the party, and not for the King, but
upon allowance at the liberate.

The Chief Usher
IS he that by inheritance has the keeping of the Court, the Exchequer
Chamber, and the house with all the Appertenance where the Court dines, when
they sit about the Kings business, who makes provision for all the
necessaries both of the Exchequer and of the receipt, and has allowance at
every liberate thereof again, and sees to all places of the Court, that all
doors, chests, Records, and things be in safty from fire, water, or spoil,
and gives knowledge of them accordingly, and as it needs, and has the
oversight of the residue of the Ushers, and the six ordinary Messengers of the
Court, that they deliver truly from time to time to the Sheriffs and all others
the Kings process; and bring the Sheriffs Bills subscribed from time to time
for the receipt of the same, which he does exammine by his Book that he keeps
of the liberate of all the Kings process every term, wherein is set and
totalled up the number of writts and process that goes out every term, and
to what Sheriff they be sent, and out of what Office in the Court.

The Marshall of the Court
IS an Officer to whom the Court Commits sometime the Custody of such a one
as they will not for the time send to the Fleet and yet is thought meet in
that wise for some Cause to be Committed.

He assigns in open Court, all Sheriffs, Escheators, Customers, Collectors of
Subsidies and Fifteens, and such like Accountants when they have taken their
oath to the Auditor, before whom every of them shall account, whereof he
keeps an ordinary book, and devises so by the Court that the Accountants
should never choose his own Auditor, to practice or help himself by it.

He receives all Offices that Escheators do find (Virtute Officij) and
delivers them in Court whereof he should keep a Book, and so deliver the
Original into the Treasurers Remembrancers Office to be delivered by the Roll
of Streats, there to the parcel makers to charge the same in such Escheators
parcells when he comes in to account.

The Four Ordinary Ushers
BE such as with their stick, attend upon the chief Officers and Barons of the
Court, at their coming to, or their going from Westminster, and call all
Juries, and all persons appointed them in open Court, and fetch them; they are
appointed out of Court, and use to make in open Court, all noises, silence, and
proclamations, calling of witnesses, returns, and of all cacountants, both at
and after their days of prefixion, and times appointed them by Law, and the
course of the Court, and to do all other things that are commanded.

The Praysors of the Court
BE cercain Officers of late made first by Sir John Bacon, when he was
Under-Treasurer, without see of the Prince, and they praise all Wares and
Merchandise, that information is put against in the Exchequer, as seiled here
in the Port of London, or in any other Ports of the Realm, as Custom and
Subsidy thereof not paid, which Praisors of old time were chosen here of
Merchants of the City, as it fell out, and as they were taken up by the Sheriff
to prize the said Wares, whereof they had skill, and now by the use of time,
the said standing Praysors, that are appointed by the Vice Treasurer to be
certain, have a certain small fee a piece, of and upon every appraisement.

The four Tellers of the Receipt
ARe Officers of the Receipt, that receive to the Kings Majesty's use, all
monyes paid in there, and do make new dated parchment bills, under their hands
with such Counties names, letters, words, and sum in the same Bills, as serves
briefly to make it to appear for what cause, and by whom, every such sum of
money to them is paid, and many years since they were in the Receipt,
Ponderatores, and Fusores, at which time it seems the money was so well kept,
that the tale fell out even with the waights, and Fusores were then melters of
the money, to make assay of it into the Balance, that it might be weighed.

These now deliver their parchment Bills to the party that pays the money, but
cast the same down out of the Office by a hole made for that purpose, upon the
Board of the Receipt, whither the party repaireth, and prays a Tally to be
stricken for him according to his Bill cast down, which Bills heretofore were
oftentimes carried away by the parties that thought the same only a sufficient
discharge for their money, and were yet afterward much vexed for the same with
process.

They may receive all men's money that are to pay any into the Receipt, save the
general Receivers, and the Bishops Collectors money, who are assigned to each
of them specially by name, that their payments and arrerages may even appear at
the eye, because they use much to be behind hand, and are for the Non-payments
to be charged by the Statute. They cannot now pay any money for fees, or upon
any privy seal or Warrant, without a Debenter first sent from the Auditor of
the Receipt, whereby is known still most certainly what money is paid, and what
remains in every of their hands from time to time.

They keep every of them a rough book of every days receipts, as they fall out
in every kind of payment made unto them, and they title their said books into
half years receipts, as thus, Michaelmas receipt to Easter, and Pasch. Receipt,
for all moneys Paid from Easter to Michaelmas, and their weekly Certificates by
the same to the Lord Treasurer and others, as they are commanded, what every of
them has received.

They make every half year out of this their rough book, a fair paper book of
every of their said half years receipts, and from their rough books they do
sort out in the same, all Receipts of Revenues together, which be of payments
only of ancient Revenue of the Exchequer, and of the late Augmentation Court,
and not of any money granted the Crown by Parliament.

Then next to the Revenue, they sort in the same fair book all Receipts of money
granted to the Crown by Act of Parliament, or of Subsides of the late Subsidies
of the Clergy, the fifteens, the yearly Tenths of the Clergy etc. and title
every of them after their Nature, and as they fall out by the first and second
payment, and in this fair book, every of them does sum up very perfectly all
the said several kinds of Receipts, and does total up thereupon their whole
years receipt with the remainder in their hands of their last half years
accounts before.

By which fair book every of them do make their count books, they deliver half
yearly to the Auditor of the receipt to take their accounts which Counter books
be of whole skins of parchment written on both sides, and on the top of the
first skin thereof, is set as it were Comp. A. B. Term. Michaelis octave Regis
Jacobi finium ad nonum incipiente tempore C. Domini Thesauri Angliae. Then is
there a great down right line, and drawn in the midst of every the said skins
on the left hand of every such line, which receipts and payments be never
totalled up by the Tellers, but are left to their auditors to do, who casts
up the total of their Receipts, with their said last half years Remainder, so
makes their full charge, and then does he total up their payments in the
other side, and in the end does make clear remain of that half years accounts.

The Clerk of the Pelle.
IS called by the ancient Records (as I learn) Clericus Dm. Thesauri, who
keeps the Pell in parchment called Pellis Recepti, wherein he enters every
Tellers said parchment Bill with his name on it, and writes under every such
parchment Bill that is entered Recordatur, which first Entry (as I learn) now is
made in a paper book, and has been begun but of late days to keep the Pelle
fair, and from razing as they say, when men are forced a little to mend the
Letter of their Tallyes, but even before the first Entry of every Tellers Bill
was made in the Pell it self in Parchment, and done in open Court, and so it is
now afterward engrossed up by the said book at leisure.

He also in old time kept the parcel of issues in parchment, which were
called, Pellis Exitus, wherein was entered every days issuing of any of the
said monyes, and by whom, what Warrant, Privy seal, or Bill it was paid, which
of late was received to be kept by him in the old Treasurers time, and thought
then very neecssary, but now since (as I learn) it is laid down again, as
thought not so necessary, the Receipt being ordered as it is at this day.

The Cutter of the Tallyes.
IS the Officer that provideth a seasoned and proportionable hasell for the
Tallies, and cutteth the same to fit length for the purpose, and does somewhat
thwite every stick thereof into four square sides, that they may be better
cloven and written upon, and he casts them into the Court from time to time,
when any of them be called for, and receives his fee of the party that sueth
it out.

The Comptrollers of the Pell
BE the two Chamberlains Clarks that should either of them keep a Controlment
of the Pell, and make forth in onp Court, like entries of every Tellers bill
into like Pells of Parchment, as the Clark of the Pell does, and that Verbatim,
which now here be sometimes kept, and sometimes not, the sees thereof are so
small, and the Pell by process of time is grown so great, that no man would
willingly Write the Controllment for the sea.

They were wont also in ancient time, either of them to keep a like
controllment of the said Pell of Issues, and to make both theirs Verbatim,
agreeing with the Pell of issues as before, kept by the Clark of the Pell, which
these many years was not kept by them.

The Auditor of the Receipt.
IS the Officer that takes up straight every Tellers Bill after it is marked
Recordatur, by the Clark of the Pell, and entered by the controllers of the Pell
likewise, and syleth it straight upon a fyle, then h^s Clark called Scriptor
Talliar. and contratalliaram, for whom his Master has a see, writes double
upon every Tally the whole Letter of the Tellers, that where it is cloven, both
the Tally and the stock thereof may have like Letter upon it, being dry, does
deliver the same second to the under Chamberlaines to cleave.

He the said Auditor does enter all the said parchment bills again in a fair
book that is to him as Pellis Recepti, and by those same he does see what
monyes every Teller receives weekly, and of whom, and what every half year in
his Michaelmas Receipt and his Pasch. Receipt, whereby he certifieth weekly to
the Lord Treasurer, and others as he is commanded, how all the money of the
Receipt particularly is paid, and received. By which certificate it is seen and
examined, whether every of the Tellers Certificates weekly be true and
justifiable.

He makes now to every of the Tellers a Debentur, before any of them can pay
any money out of the receipt, be it upon Fines, Privy Seal, or Warrants that they
pay, which is to be made, and is very consideratly done, that upon any
restraint of payment given by the Lord Treasure or his order, his Lordship may
be sure to have his Majesty's money kept still undefrayed, while the same be set
again a^ Liberty.

He receives every of the Tellers Counter books in parchment, every half year,
and takes every of their accounts by the same, and causes the Tellers to
reform his Titles, and divisions in them if they be not orderly and plain
enough for their nature, and then does he cast up every of their said parchment
bills of the half year, their Counter book before, and sees the total of them;
after, he casts up the total of every of their Counter books to see if the
total of every of them does agree with the total of their parchment bills, and
so does make up fair the total sum of every of their Counter books, that be
agreeable with their bills, and they that have any error be rejected, and
examined while the same may be sound and made to agree with their half years
Bills, and thereupon are totalled up as the rest. To which total, he caseth
every Tellers half years remain, and makes his whole charge, and so allowing
every of them their payments and deduc^ ons, he makes every of their clear
remains upon their Counter books for that half year also, as he had done
before, and so declares all the said Counter books half yearly before my
Lord Treasuror, when it is his pleasure.

He keeps the black book of the Receipt, and the Lord Treasurors key of the
Treasury both where the ancient leagues of the Realm, and all the
Perambulations of the Forests, and the Records of Justice Itinerant, and
diverse other Records do lie, Both in the old Court of wards, and in the old
Parliament house in the Cloister at Westminister, where no search can be made
without that key come, with both the Chamberlaines keys thereof.

He does (now of late) se every Tellers money locked, and sealed up in the new
Treasury, made for that purpose, when it is my Lord Treasurers pleasure, or
order so to have it to be; and keeps or delivers the key as he Commands.

The two under Chamberlains
BE both the Chamberlaines deputies for the Receipt, and when the Tallies are
written upon as before is declared unto them, one of them does Cleeve the same
even in the midst between the double letter of the Tallie mentioned before,
and then the Cleever taking the stick, and the other foil, and the Clerk of
the Pell and his controller the Book where the said Tellers bills were
recorded, the Cleever says Examinatur, and reads the stock aloud, and so his
fellow The Clerk of the Pell and his two Comptrollers seeing the stock to agree
with them all, the same is by and by delivered to the party, and the foil
straight cast into the Chamberlaines Chest, where they keep all their foiles,
together with their knives, and the Book of Doomesday, while the Joyners fetch
them away from time to time as they be occupied.

In which Chest also, be kept the keys of the Treasury under three locks,
whereof the auditor of the Receipt has one key, and the two Chamberlaines
another key, and the Usher of the Receipt that is in the Kings gift another
key, who does now attend by his deputy, and is to do all things there besides
that, that other Ushers use to do, and keeps the Receipt as the Usher by
Inheritance does the Exchequer.

They make all searches in the Treasury for any Record at the suite of the
parties, and Exemplifications of the same, whereof the Fees are divided
between them, and the keeper of my Lord Treasurors key as of long time has
been accustomed.

The Four ordinary Messengers of the Receipt
BE the Pursevants only Attendant upon my Lord Treasuror to carry his Lordships
letters and percepts to all the Customers, Controllers, and Searchers through
England, and to ride and go where it is his Lordships pleasure to Command.

The Articles of the late Court of Augmentations and Revenues of the Crown
annexed to the Court of Exchequer at Westminster
The Lord Treasuror.
1 FIrst all Honers, lands, tenements, possessions, amd all other hereditaments
which are within the survey, rule, and order of the Augmentations of the
Crown, and the Arrerage, of the same, shall be received, leavied, and gathered
form hence forth by the Sheriffs of every Shire and County within the Realm
of England, where the said Honers, Castles, Manors, lands, Tenements and other
heredizaments do lie, or by any other person or persons that shall be appointed
by the Lord Treasurer and the Court thereafter, which Receipt the said Sheriff
of every county, or other accountant so appointed, shall content and pay the
Revenue thereof at the Receipt of the Exchequer in manner and form as hereafter
shall be declared.

2 Item, the Revenues in wales, shall be yearly received by the Chamberlain
there, or by any other person or persons that shall be appointed by the said
Lord Treasuror and the Court as is aforesaid, the same to pay at the receipt
aforesaid, and to be bound by Recognizances for the payments thereof according
to the direction of the Court.

3 Item, the said Sheriffs or other accomptants to have a tallie of reward
yearly according to the Rule of their several charges if it shall be thought
fit by the Lord Treasuror, Chancellor, Chamberlaines, and Barons or by three of
them whereof the Lord Treasuror to be one.

4 Item, that every Sheriff of England, or other accomptant shall be charged
with the Revenues aforesaid in his account from Michalmas, to Michelmas,
according to the Ancient laws and Customs of the said Exchequer.

5 Item, all such sums of money as shall be due at the Feasts of the birth of
our Lord, The annunciation of our Lady, or at the Feast of Easter, for the said
Revenues, with the Arrearage depending upon all former accounts, shall be
charged in to the said Sheriff, or other Accomptants in their views, and shall
make the said view before the Feast of the Ascension of our Lord yearly, and to
pay all such sums of money as shall be found due upon the same before the Feast
of Penticost then next ensueing, and where they be payable at Penticost, those
rents to be paid before the Nativitie of Saint John the Baptist then next
following.

6. Item, if any former accomptant or debtor has paid any sums of money at
the receipt aforesaid, before the making of the view aforesaid, that then the
said Sheriff or other accomptant shall be discharged by the payment thereof
being of Record without any further suite or Charge in the said view of account.

7. Item, that all such sums as shall be due for the said Revenue at the Feast
of Michaelmas and Saint Martin, with the Arrerages due upon all former
accounts, shall be paid at the receipt of the Exchequer by the Sheriffs or other
receivers, or accomptants (that is to say) as much as shall be due at
Michaelnsas, before the Feast of the Nativitie of our Lord God, And as much as
shall be due at Saint Martin, to be paid into the receipt before the twentieth day
of February, then next insueing, or otherwise make declaration unto the said
Court of Exchequer of the payment thereof by virtue of sufficient Warrant.

8. Item, that every Sheriff, and other Accomptant shall appear to his account
in his own proper person, or by his sufficient Deputy Authorized in writing
under his hand and seal in Hillary Term, and there to take an Oath according
to an Ancient usage of the said Exchequer, and the same Warrant in writing to
be delivered into the Treasurors Remembrancers office and there shall be filed,
and entered of record, without taking any Fee, or reward for the same.

9. Item, the said Sheriff or other accomptant, or Accomptants, or his, or
their lawful Deputy or Attorney after his or their Appearances, to make their
accounts for the said Revenues before the twenty fourth of February then next
after, and the Auditor taking the said accounts shall deliver the same accounts
engrossed in parchment Authorized and allowed by the hands subseribed of the
Lord Treasuror, Chancellor, Vice-treasuror, and Barons of the said Exchequer,
or by three of them at the least, whereof the Lord Treasuror or Vice-treasuror
to be one, And with the hand of the said Auditor likewise subscribed into the
office of the Pipe within the said Court of Exchequer before the twentieth day
of March, then next following, as further process thereupon may be made if
cause shall so require.

10. Item, that the Lord Treasuror, Chancellor, Chamberlaines, Under-treasuror,
and Barons, or three of them whereof the Lord Treasuror to be one, and in his
absence, the Under treasuror shall have full power and Authority by their
discretions from time to time, to give Allowances as well to the Farmors and
Accomptant for the yearly reparations and other Allowances, as also to every
person and persons that shall be hereafter appointed by them or by the more part
of them, for the doing and executing of any process or other thing concerning
the premises.

11. Item, all Records of the said Court of the Augmentations that does
concern exemtion of any process for Indentures, Recognizances, obligations,
and all records of Books of orders and decrees concerning the premises. shall
remain in the Charge of the Kings Remembrancer of the said Exchequer in such
place or places, as by the Lord Treasuror and the Court shall be from time to
time appointed

12. Item, that all Commissions for woodsales, and Commissions for survey of
any part or parcel of the premises, shall be made hereafter by the Treasurors
Remembrancer of the Exchequer.

13. Item, all records and Books of the said Court of the Augmentations of the
Inrollment of Leases, and the Counterpaines of the said Leases and Warrants for
making of the same, and all accounts that shall remain in the said Court
concerning any thing or matter within their old order and survey of the same
shall be and remain in the Charge of the Clerk of the Pipe of the said
Exchequer in such place as the said Lord Treasuror and Court shall a ward, so
that process may be made upon them Unde superius, as long as the case shall
require.

14. Item, that all sealed Evidences, Rentalls, Court rolls, and other
writings, and miniments whatsoever, touching the said Revenues, be placed in
the Treasury house that shall be appointed for that purpose by the Lord
Treasurer and others the head Officers of that Court.

15. Item, Accounts to be taken every year and the Ingrossments in form as
aforesaid to remain in the Charge of the Clerk of the Pipe in such place as
shall be appointed by the Lord Treasuror and other the head Officers of that
Court amongst the Evidences and the records of the Revenue of the land, severed
from the Ancient records of the Exchequer.

16. Item, that all Stewards of Leets and Courts, shall yearly double their
Court Rolls in parchment, and certify one part thereof subscribed with the
hand of the Receivors before the Audit into the Court of Exchequer wherein
should be contained the Fines made among the Customary Tennements, the
Heriotts, the Amerciaments, the woodsales, and other Casualties with a
declaration of needful reparations presented by the Homage making thereof a
Streat to the Sheriffs of the Shire, or to such other Accomptant, as shall be
appointed to the receipt thereof as he may thereupon make his receipt and payment
upon the end of his account, and that noe reparations be made at any time but
by Warrant from the Court under three of the Officers hands, whereof the Lord
Treasuror or Under-treasuror to be one, And the other part of the double of the
said Court Rolls to remain in the Lordship, where the said Courts be kept.

17. Item, no woodsales shall be made without a Commission from my Lord
Treasuror, and two such others of the Court as he shall call to have at that
time and in his absence the Under treasuror calling to him two of the said
Court.

18. Item, that noe Steward, Bailiff, or Woodward be admitted, but only by the
Lord Treasuror, Chancellor, and Chamberlaines, Vice-treasuror, and Barons of
the said Exchequer, or three of them at the least, whereof the Lord Treasuror
or Under-treasuror to be one of the same Officers to pass under the Seal of
the Exchequer by the Lord Treasurors Assignement under his hand, and the same
Bill or Bills to be made in the Office of the Pipe there to be entered of
Record, filed, and kept, for the yearly Allowance of the Fees, wages; and
rewards of any person or persons, as hereafter shall be appointed to any of the
said Offices.

19. Item, the Accounts of Hamper, the Butierage, the Staple of Callis, and the
Revenues of the Courts there, the Prises, the Mints, the great Guardrobe, the
Customs of the Ports of Chester, Barwick, and Callice, to be yearly taken and
engrossed by the Audi, tors of the said Exchequer according to the Ancient
laws of the said Court, and as heretofore they have been accustomed before
the Erection of the Court of survey and Augmentation of the Revenue.

20. Item, where in times past there has been continually 6. Auditors serving
in the said Court of Exchequer, whereof at this day and of long time has been
remaineing but 5 having ten pounds for every year for his fee, it is now
ordered, that there shall be seven to have yearly twenty pounds for his and
their fees, and that every of the said Auditors be personally resident upon his
Office.

21. Item, That every Teller of the Receipt be likewise attendant upon his
Office, to execute the same in his own person, and not by Deputy upon the loss
of his Office, and fee.

22. Item, For that the order, establishment and uniting of this Court be
perfectly established with exercise, proof, and experience of the same, the
Kings Highness is pleased, that the Lord Treasurer, and the said Court of
Exchequer, should have full power and authority from time to time to amend,
reform, and correct, any clause or Article aforesaid, and to add to, or
diminish any thing that shall be found necessary for the amendment of the same,
and to make such further orders from time to time, as to the Court shall be
thought expedient.

23. Item, That all Rents and services reserved be answered in the said Court
of Excheequer, and paid in the said Receipt, and likewise all debts, arrerages
of accounts, and other duties and sums of money which have been answered in the
said Exchequer, be paid in the said receipt.

24. Item; To call into the Court of Exchequer, all persons accountable in such
manner and form, as they ought to have been called in the said Court of
augmentation.

25. Item, That all Records of late being in the said Court dissolved, and
belonging to the same Court shall be recorded of the same court of Exchequer,
and of the same force and strength, as they were in the said late Court
dissolved.

26. Item, A Leagure to be made of all specialties brought into the said Court.

27. Item, That all Letters Patents, Grants, Leafes, and other Assurances, made
by the said late Courts dissolved, shall be of the same force and strength, as
they were in the said late Courts dissolved.

The Articles of the uniting of the late Court of uniting of first Fruits and
Tenths, to the Court of Exchequer at Westminster.
1 FIrst, Her Highness does ordain, that all the Records of the said Court, of
the first Fruits and Tenths, shall be hereafter placed in the said Exchequer,
and shall be of the same force and strength, as they were in the said Courts of
the said first fruits and Tenths.

Item, her highness is pleased and ordains that there shall be in the said
Exchequer, a certain Office, called the Office of the Remembrancer of the first
Fruits and Tenths which Office, for diverse and sundry great considerations for
and at the first erection only, shall be exercised by two persons by her highness
to be nominated, which shall jointly exercise the same office during their
lives, and after the death of the Survivor of them, the said office to be
exercised by one of them.

Item, That all Records belonging to the same court of the first Fruits and
Tenths, shall be in the charge and keeping of the said Officer.

Item, That the said Officer shall make and deliver the true values of all
spiritual promotions, dignities, and benefits within the Realm of England and
Wales, and other the Queens Dominions to such persons as shall sue for them,
taking for the same like fees as were wont to be paid before the dissolution of
the first fruits and Tenths.

Item, The same Officer shall take composiions of the first Fruits of every
Arch Bishop prick, Arch-Desconry, Deanery, Prebendary, Parsonage, Vicaridge, and
of every other dignity, office, benefice, promotion spiritual aforesaid.

6. Item, The same officer to make all writings obligatory, Indentures, and all
other writings concerning the same first fruits and tenths, and shall see the
same sealed and delivered, by the parties to the Queens highness use, and also
shall make Acquittances and other discharges to such as shall pay their money in
hand without making bonds for the same, taking fees accustomed of the parties
for the same.

Lord Treasurer.
7. Item, The said Lord Treasuror to call such persons as shall please him to
his assistance at the declaration of the foresaid accounts, or any officer or
auditor of the same Court, that to them shall be thought meet for the passing of
the same accounts.

8. Item, The accountant or accountants that shall not come to determine his or
their accounts in form aforesaid, his or their goods and lands shall be seized
to the Queens use, nomine districtionis, and shall loose the benefit thereof,
and that shall have the allowance of the same in discharge of his debt
according to the ancient custom of the Exchequer.

9. Item, all Sci. fac. attachments, and writs of distresses for debts, or
accounts concerning the premises, shall be made by the Treasurers Remembrancer
from time to time, as to the discretion of the Court in that be half shall be
thought meet and convenient, according to the ancient custom and course of the
Court.

10. Item, All Letters Patents of any Manors, land, tenements, or other
hereditaments or concerning any annuities, pardons, or other such like, shall be
enrolled in such office of the said Exchequer, as by the discretion of the Lord
Treasurer and the said Court shall be appointed, the parties to pay fines
according to the ordinance and statute in that behalf provided.

11. Item, All recognizances of payments of any farm, or any debt, of or for
any part of the premises, to be enrolled in the Remembrancers office, and to
be taken in the open Court, when the Term is open, and if the Term be not open,
then by the chief Baron, and in his ablence, by any of the Barons, and by force
of a Dedim. Potestat. if necessity shall require, taking for every such
recognizince, taken out of the court, 6 s. 8 d. only whatsoever number of
persons be bound in the same, and for the entry of the same recognizance, the
said Remembrancer shall have, and take for his fee of and for every
Recognizance of 41. and upwards, 3 s. 4 d and no other or more Fees to be taken
for a Recognizance, whatsoever number of persons be bound in the same.

12 Item, that the said Sheriffs or other accomptants shall yearly pay all such
sums of money, as shall be due to any person or persons for any Annuities,
Fees, pensions issueing or going out of any of the premises according to their
grants allowed and enrolled, unless they shall have special Commandment by
the Court to the contrary.

13. Item, that the Farmors, and Lesses shall be bound to the Queen, and by
Recognizance to perform their Covenants in their Leases in such form, as by
the Court shall be ordered.

14. Item, all Warrants for leases to pass by the Lord Treasuror, and if the
yearly rent of the land to be letten, shall be above the sum of forty
shillings by the year, then the same lease to pass under the great Seal of
England, and if the rent be above the value of 71. 13 s. 4 d. then every such
lessee to pay the Fees of the Signet and privy Seal, as hereto fore in like
Cases has been accustomed; And if the land to be letten, do pass not the
yearly rent of 40 s. then the Lease to pass the seal of the same Court of
Exchequer paying 6 s. 8 d. to the Queens use, 3 s. 4 d. to the Chancellor of
the said Court, and 4 d. to one appointed to Attend the seal for his
Attendance, and wax. And the said Leases under the value of 40 s. to be always
made by the Clark of the Pipe, and filed together for every year by
themselves, and there to be enrolled within the said Office, as the said Clark
of the Pipe may report the Indentures for the more surety of the parties,
taking for the inrollment as shall be ordered by the Court.

15. Item, the said Lord Treasuror shall not have any Authority to make any
lease in Reversion of any part or parcel of the premises, or of any woods, or
any Manors in gross for the term of certain years without the Queens
highness special Warrant to him to be directed in that behalf, and then
Warrant to be made by the Lord Treasuror of England in form aforesaid.

16. Item, the Lord Treasuror taking to him the Advice of the Chancellor,
under-treasuror, and chief Baron or two of them, shall have Authority to
assesse Fines for any Leases of any part or parcel of the premises to be made
by the said Lord Treasuror in form aforesaid.

17. Item, the same Officer to write, and make all manner of process,
Commissions, Entries, Books, Judgments, and decrees of the Court, with all
other writings and miniments whatsoever, as well for the arrerages of such first
fruits as for all Tenths, and Subsidies of the Clergy due to her highness
heirs, and Successors by such special persons their Sureties, Farmers, and
occupiers, taking therefore such Fees of the parties, as were used before the
dissolution of the same Court of first fruits and Tenthes.

18. Item, all Certificats returned upon any Commission issueing out of the
said Court of Exchequer concerning any first fruits, Tenths, or Subsidies
aforesaid the valuation of any Ben^fice, or promotion spiritual omitted in the
first Taxation or otherwise, for any matter accustomed to be determined in the
said Court of the Exchequer in the charge of the said Office, and there to be
ordered.

19. Item, all such Certificats as the Archbishops and other Collectors of the
Tenths, and Subsides of the Clergy, made against the Incumbents resusing to
pay their Tenths and Subsides being exhibited before the Court of Exchequer,
and by them allowed, shall remain in the Charge of the said office of the
Remembrancer of the first fruits, and Tenths, in the place to be appointed for
the same, to the end that process may be made against such Incumbents as be in
them contained.

20. Item, that the same Officer shall yearly make a Ledger of all Compositions
of first fruits taken, and to be taken, wherein shall be contained the name and
shire of the Benefice so compounded for, the samm, and name of the Incumbent.

Of English Bills and the proceedinges thereupon in the Exchequer.
AN English bil is a petition in English exhibited by the plaintiff to the Lord
Treasurer Chanceller and Barons of the exchequer in case where the plaintiff
supposes he has right to recover the possession of lands or goods detained
from him or debts due to him or to have remedy for some other wrong done to him
by the defendant that he has noe evidence nor specialty to show forth nor can
make any such proof as is required by the strict course of the Common Law to
recover or have remedy for the same, but supposes that it lies in the
defendants own knowledge and that he will confess the same in his answer.
And in case where the plaintiffs sued at Common Law for the possession of any
lands or for any goods, chattells, Debts or other things against which he can
make noe sufficient defense by strict course of the Common Law but in equity
and good conscience ought to be releived and get either wholly discharged or
the extremity mitigated and moderated and supposes that the defendant will
confess in his answer the truth of the matter by him alleged.

Every plaintiff that shall exhibit any such bill ought to be privileged
either in person as an Officer or Clerk of the Court or servant to some of them
or an accomptant or Debtor to the king or otherwise or else in the cause as if
that concern the king in the inheritance, possession or intrest of any lands,
tithes, offices, goods, chattels or Debts wherein the plaintiff likewise
pretends to have Interest in right of the King. or if the plaintiff besued by
English bill or action or extent or other process in the same Court for the same
matter.

The Kings Attorney also may exhibit English Bills in the Exchequer for any
matter concerning the King in inheritance or profits and in like manner any
person that finds himself greived in any cause prosecuted against him for
and on the behalf of the King or any patent by grant of the King may exhibit
his English bill against the Kings Attorney and such others as are interested
in the cause to be releived in equity. In which case the plaintiff must Attend
the Kings Attorney with a Copy of his bill and procures him to answer the
same and the Kings Attorney may call any that are interested in the Cause or
any officer or others to instruct him herein touching the making his answer so
as the King be not prejudiced thereby and his answer is to be put in without
oath.

The parties in every such bill between party and party must serve the
defendant with process of Snbpena or if the defendant be a Baron of Parliament
spiritual or Temporal with aletter under the hands of the Lord Treasurer
Chancellor Barons or some of them whereby he must berequired to appear at a
day certain contained in the writ or letter process of Subpena may be sued forth
either before or after the Bill exhibited And if the Defendant do not appear at
the day of return of the writ then upon Affidav. made of the servinge thereof
an Atachment is made of course against him for his contempts and after an al.
pl. atachment an attachment with exclamation and after that either a writ of
attachment of rebellion directed to the sheriff or a Commission of rebellion
directed to such Commissioners as the plaintiff will name for which Commission
there must be warrant of the court but when aletter is made to be sent to any
Baron or Bishopps for appearance before the Bill be in and if he will not appear
upon that then process of Sub-pena must be served and upon default then process
of Contempt as aforesaid And the like course of process is to be persued against
the defendant at the suite of the Kings Attorney.

When the defendant does appear if the Bill be not put in he may move to be
dismissed with costs, whereupon the Court does usually give three or four days
to the plaintiff to put in his English bill or the Defendant to be dismissed
with costs upon a bill of costs to be Tendered by him to one of the Barons to be
taxed.

And if the defendant do appear upon process of contempt he must pay costs such
as the Court shall think fit according to the number of the process that has
been prosecuted against him but the ordinary Costs in ten shillings upon each
Attachment.

After the defendant has appeared he has eight days of course to make his
answer to the bill and if he do that not with in that time a Rule is given of
course in the Book of appearance for an Attachment within four days, the
defendants Attorney being called thereunto.

If the defendant do Demur upon the Bill for that neither the plaintiff nor the
cause is privileged for want of sufficient matter of the bill or put in a plea
in Bar of the proceeding upon the Bill, The plaintiff if he will maintain his
Bil must move the Court for a day to hear the Counsel of both sides and the
Bill and Demurrer (if need be) if the Counsel do not agree in opening the
matter.

If the defendant do plead any matter to bar the proceedings upon the bill
(other Then matter of Record of the same Court) he must be sworn to his plea
as he likewise must be sworn to his answer if he answer in the chief of what
quality soever the defendant be Except it be the Kings Attorney who answers a
bill against the King or a Corporatition who are sued by the name of their
Corporation.

Also if the defendant do make an insufficient answer the plaintiff must put
in his exceptions in writing and move the Court to give the defendant a day to
amend or maintain his answer in which case if the defendant be in Town he is
to take notice by the Order and to perform the same. But if he be gone before
he is to be served with a Subpoena ad faciendum meliorem responsionem if his
answer be over ruled upon heareing or an attachment made against him or an
insufficient answer is to answer.

The defendant that has days aforesaid either upon demurer, plea, or
insufficient answer if he cannot maintain the same but that the Court does
order him to make a better answer, he must pay such costs to the plaintiff as
the Court shall think fit, if he do maintain his demurer he is to be dismissed
with costs.

If the defendant put in plea where in he pleads matter of record to disable
the person of the plaintiff as outlawry or the like which is no bar to the
matter but a delay of proceeding until the plaintiff be enabled, to sue he
must together with his plea produce the record which warranteth the same.

If the Defendant after he has appeared and taken a copy of the Bill, finds
that he can not make answer to the same without sight of his evidence, which
are in the country far off or if there be more then one defendant, and, one or
more appear, and the rest do not appear, and the defendants that do appear
cannot answer without conference with the rest that are in the country upon
Affidavit made upon such or the like allegations, he may have time to answer,
until the beginning of the next Term, either in person, or by commission, as
the court shall think fit.

Or if Affidavit be made, that the Defendant is aged, impotent or sick, and not
able to travel, he may have a commission to take his answer, and sometimes
when the Defendants dwell far off, the court, in favor does grant a commission
without any Affidavit, to take their answer in the country, in all which cases
where a commission is granted for the defendant, the plaintiff may name one or
two commissioners, to see the defendant sworn to his answer, and a promise must
be in the commission, that the Plaintiff or his commissioners shall have notice
of the day and place of execution thereof certain days before.

If the Defendant have matter to plead to an English bill, and be not able to
come to put that in upon oath, he may by special order of the Court, have a
commission to take his plea and the plaintiff may proceed upon plea, as upon
answer, if he think good, but if the Defendant have the favor to take his
answer or plea, he may not after put in a demurrer.

If the matter of the bill be releived against a suit, at or in the
Ecclesiastical court, and the Defendant stand in contempt, either for not
appearing or not answering, or if he desire to have a commission to take his
answer, the court upon the motion of the plaintiff, does usual stay the
Defendants proceedings until he have answered another order thereupon taken
either by injunction or order of the court.

If the Defendant be served with process to appear to a bill and be in prison,
and will not appear, or if he do appear and be in prison, and will not answer,
the court does usually order, that he shall be kept close prisoner until he
yield obedience to the Court.

Quoere in the cause whether the Defendant has appeared and will not answer
(as in the Chancery and Star Chamber) the Court will decree the matter against
him for confessed, that were to be seen if here be any order therefore made to
the contrary in any argument or debate in the matter, and what reason there
should be of a contrary course in this Court.

After the Defendant has answered (or before if there be good cause) the Court
does grant injunctions, either by quieting of possessionor, stay of suits at
the common Law, and the Ecclesiastical courts until the hearing of the cause,
also there be presidents for staying of suits in the star chamber and Chaneery
and other courts of equity.

If the Defendant put in a demurrer with an answer over to the matter of the
bill, the plaintiff may proceed upon that to bring the cause to hearing, and
the Defendant at the hearing, may stand upon the demurrer, until the Court do
over rule that, but after the answer put in, the Court will allow no exception
to the Jurisdiction.

When the Defendant has fully answered, the plaintiff may if he will go to
hearing upon bill, and answer, and may move the Court to have a day of hearing
appointed, and serve the defendant with process to attend the hearing. In
which case he must admit the Defendants answer to be true in all things, as
well in that which is denied, as that which is confessed.

If the Plaintiff do not find matter confessed by the Defendant in his answer
whereupon he may proceed to hearing, without proofs, then he must reply to the
same, maintaining his bil and denying and traversing the material points of
the answer, wherein he may also add such further matter as shall be pertinent
and necessary for him to prefer for the strengthening of his bill, and avoiding
the Defendants answer, and must serve the Defendant with process of Subpoena to
rejoyn to the said replication, except the Defendant be ordered to rejoyn
gratis, as sometimes that is ordered when the Defendant has the favor to have
a commission to take his answer.

When the cause comes to hearing upon bill and answer, and the court sees no
sufficient matter confessed in the answer to proceed upon, the Plaintiff may
desire, that he may reply and proceed to process, and the court allow him to
do so, especially where the Kings Attorney is plaintiff for the King.

If there be more defendants then one, and they put in several answers, the
plaintiff may reply to them all in one replication, but if the cause of suit be
joint, and some of them answer, and others do delay their answers, the
plaintiff may not reply till all have answered, for if he do, he shall wave his
proceedings against the rest, and he cannot have a decree against some without
the others. Nevertheless if the causes of suit be several the plaintiff may
reply and proceed to hearing with some, and after return to proceed with the
rest.

When the defendant comes to rejoyn, if here be no new matter in the
replication, he is to make his rejoinder of course to maintain his answer, and
it is not necessary that he should rejoin but for formality, but if here be new
matter in the replication, he must rejoin specially to that, and likewise if
there arise new matter in the defendants rejoinder, the Plaintiff must surjoyn,
and so as long as new matter does pertinently arise in the pleading, they must
proceed with Rebutter, and sur-rebutter, until every point material be put in
perfect issue.

After they are at issue, the plaintiff if he will may proceed to hearing, upon
Records, and without examination of witnesses, and the Defendant nevertheless,
may examine witnesses if he will in convenient time, or if there have been any
former examinations in the same cause, either between the same parties, or any
other under whom they claim, either in the same Court or any other, the
plaintiff or the defendant may move the Court and desire to have them allowed,
to be used for evidence at the hearing, in which case, the Court does give a
day to the other side, and upon hearing of both sides, do allow or disallow
them, as is then thought fit and accordingly they may prepare themselves for
proofs more or less.

When the defendant is served with process to rejoyn, and does not appear, the
plaintiff upon Affidavit made in the Term time of serving the process (if there
be no new matter in the replication) may have a commission alone if the
defendant will not join within a certain time, and then the plaintiff may have
a commission to such as he shall nominate to examine his witness.

If both parties join in commission, then either side is to name indifferent
commissioners and each party to choose two of the four named by the other, and
the commission is to be directed to those four agreed upon, and the plaintiff
is to have the carriage of the commission, and is to give fourteen days
warning (or such other warning as is agreed upon) of the day and place of
execution thereof, except there be day and place appointed in the commission,
which sometimes is done by agreement of the parties or by order of the Court.
If the one side will examine witnesses by commission, and the other will not, yet
he that will not examine may join in commission to see an indifferent
examination if he will, and to that end shall have warning of a day and place.

If the Defendant make default, and do not join in commission at the first, yet
if he come afterward, and can show any reasonable cause, why he did not join
before, the Court will allow him to examine his witnesses in reasonable time, or
if a commission be taken out by one or both sides, and not executed, but in
part executed, where there is no wilful default in the parties, but by some
other accident the execution is prevented, the Court upon motion and proof of
the allegations will grant a new commission, but if either party will wilfully
neglect to examine for delay, and to gain time, or to hearken and learn what
has been examined and proved on the other side, that he may the better prepare
his witnesses, and interrogatories for a cross examination, in such cases the
Court will give no favor to the party that shall so willingly or purposely be
negligent.

In such case where the one side has examined all his witnesses, and the other
has not, but has the favor to have a new Commission, that party that
examined, may join in a new commission without charges, to see the Examination.

As the parties may examine their witnesses before Commissioners, so they may
likewise examine before the Barons in Court, such witnesses as they have in town
at any time before publication. and they may have process of Subpoena to bring
their witnesses before the Barons to be examined, and the like process or the
Commissioners Warrant to bring their witnesses before the Commissioners the
names of such witnesses as are examined in Court, must be delivered by either
side, to the parties or their Attornyes in Court before their examination, to
the end that either side may exmin him if they will.

The partys that will examine witnesses, must prepare their interrogatories
engrossed in parchment to be exhibited before the Commissioners, the Baron
before whom they will examine before any examination can be had, which
interrogatories must be drawn according to points in issue, by the bill and
answer, and other pleadings, and they must not examine upon any thing that is
not in the pleadings, if they do, that is to be surpressed, and there must be
no alteration of any interrogatories, nor addition of any, after the first
examination, but if there be further examination that must be upon the same
Interrogatories that were first exhibited, and if any examination be taken
otherwise, it must be suppressed whether it be by commission or in Court,
except it be so appointed by some special order of the Court.

If a witness be examined of one side, and after be served with process to be
examined on the other side, and do refuse to be examined, the Court will not
allow his depositions to be used, because he has showed himself to be partial.

After the witnesses be examined, there must be order for publication of their
depositions, either by consent of both sides, or by motion of the one side, and
a day given to the other side to show cause why they should not be published,
and the cause heard, at which day if nothing be said to the contrary, they are
published, and the cause is to be set down afterward for the hearing, at such
time as the Lord Treasurer and the Barons shall appoint.

After the day of hearing is set down, the Plaintiss must serve the Defendant
with process of Subpana, Ad audiendum judicium, returnable at a day and place
appointed for the hearing, and in the mean time either party is to prepare his
breviates, of his pleading and proofs to instruct his counsel.

At which day the bill of causes is to be made ready and delivered to the Lord
Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons in Court, wherein the causes are to be set
down in order as they were appointed, and so the Court does call for them, as
they lie in the bill, and if both sides be ready to proceed to hearing, the
Plaintiffs counsel opening the material parts of the bill, and the Defendants
counsel opening his answer, and after debating thereof on both sides, for the
full opening to the matter in question the plaintiff is to make his proofs.
which are to be read by his Attorney in court, and the defendant is to do the
like, whereupon the Court does judge, Secundum allegata and probata, as if
there be good matter alleged, and set forth in the bill and replication, and
sufficiently proved there by confession of the defendant in his answer, or by
witnesses, Records, or other evidence which cannot be disapproved by the
Defendant, the Court does make a decree for the plaintiff, but if there be good
matter set forth, and not proved, or good matter proved, but not set forth in
the pleadings, the Defendant and the cause is dismissed.

Sometimes the cause is dismissed upon opening, for want of sufficient matter,
or for that it is merely tryable at the Common Law, and sometimes when there is
both matter of Law and Equity, the matter of Law is referred to a trial at the
Exchequer bar, and the equity of the cause is retained until the hearing, and
sometimes when the question is touching accounts and reckonings which are
intricate, the cause is referred to auditors or Merchants by Commission to
examine and try the same, and to mediate and end and determine if they can, or
else to certfie the Court of their doing, whereupon the Court may further
proceed) or if the question be concerning the possession of any lands demanded
by the plaintiff which ly intermingled and dispersed with and amongst the
Defendants lands, and by reason of a long and joint occupation cannot well be
known or distinguished, the one from the other, in such case when that it
appears to the Court that the plaintiff has and ought to have Land so
intermingled, the Court does award a commission to the Gentry of that County
where the Land lies, to enquire the certainty thereof, and to set out, and the
metes and bounds of the same, and to certify the Court thereof, and in such
like cases References and Commissions are awarded.

If at the day of hearing the plaintiff be ready, and the Defendant makes
default affidavit is to be made of the serving, the Defendant with process, ad
audiendum judicium, and the Court will proceed to hearing, and after the
plaintiffs bill be opened, the Defendants answer is to be read, and the
plaintiffs proofs, whereupon the Court will decree or dismiss the cause, or
otherwise order that as shall seem fit but in such case the Court does not use
to make a decree absolute, but to give a day to the Defendant to show what he
can against that, at which day if he do come and endeavor to show cause to
stay the Decree, and thereupon the Court does proceed, and further hearing the
plaintiff may require costs for his double attendance, by reason of the
Defendants default.

If the Defendant be ready at the day of hearing, and the plaintiff make
default, the Court does dismiss the Defendant with costs, except some good
cause be showed to stay that, and if that be put over till another day, the
plaintiff is to pay costs to the Defendant, such as the Court shall think fit.

When the Defendant is once served with process, Ad audiendum judicium,
although the cause cannot be heard at that time, or in that Term, he must
attend without any more process, until the cause be heard, so long as the
cause be continued in the bill of causes; but if the plaintiff be negligent,
and will not endure to procure a hearing, but desire to continue that in the
bill, to keep an injunction on foot, or to stay the Defendants course at the
common Law, or in any other Court, the Defendant may move for a dismission of
the cause, and the injunction may be dissolved, and that he may have costs.

Also if the plaintiff after answer put into his bill will delay the
prosecution thereof, the Defendant may move to be dismissed with costs,
whereupon the Court will find a day to show cause.

When a cause is ready for hearing, if the plaintiff delay the prosecution, or
be negligent to procure a hearing, the Defendant may if he will, procure the
cause to be set for hearing, and serve the plaintiff with process, ad audiendum
judicium, At which day, if the plaintiff will appear, he may proceed to
hearing, but if he will not, the Defendant may be dismissed with costs, and
left at Liberty, if there were any injunction or order to restrain him.

If a Defendant dye after answer put in, and before the cause be determined,
the plaintiff may put in a bill of Revivor against the heir, or Executor, or
Administrator of the Defendant, as the case shall require, and the Defendant in
such bill of Revivor, shall answer without oath, because his answer is to no
other end but to submit himself to the former proceedings and upon his answer
the former proceedings are revived, and shall stand in the same case as they
did against the first Defendant that dyed, and the plaintiff and Defendant may
proceed further to bring the cause to hearing, in that same manner as that
should have been proceeded in, if the first Defendant had lived, and in like,
when the plaintiff dies pendent like.

After a decree is made and past against the Defendant, if he has other matter
which was not in issue in the cause decreed, which he supposes will be
sufficient to overthrow the decree, he may exhibit a bill of Review upon that
new matter, to reverse the decree, but he must perform the decree, and yield
obedience to that, and if the bill of Review do not contain good and sufficient
matter, the Defendant may plead the former matter, decreed in bar, of the
proceedings upon the new bill, and that is not sufficient for the plaintiff in
the bill of Review to produce new proofs though never so good, that were not
produced before, but the matter must not be such matter as was not in the issue
before, and he may likewise exhibit his bill of Review of error in the former
proceedings.

Sometimes the principal question between the parties is such, as admitting
the truth of both sides, yet it is doubtful in Law to whom the Right
belongs, so as the Court cannot make a decree until the matter in Law be
determined, whereupon a case in Law is to be drawn and agreed upon of both
sides, and if there be any matter of fact necessary to be proved for the making
of the case, witnesses may be examined upon Interrogatories for that purpose,
and when the case is agreed upon, several Copies must be delivered to the Lord
Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons, and is to be argued on both sides, when, and
as often as the Court shall think fit, and so be determined by decree or
otherwise.

Sometimes when publication is over hastily gotten by the plaintiff before the
Defendant has fully examined his witnesses, the Court upon affidavit by the
Defendant, that neither he nor any for him has seen the depositions of the
witnesses, does admit him to examine such witnesses, as he has to examine.

Upon hearing of a cause, the Court does allow Bills and answers, and other
pleadings and orders and decrees of the Chancery, and other Courts, to be read
for evidence, without any order of allowance, but no depositions of witnesses
taken in any other Court, nor in another cause in the same Court, without
special order.

And sometimes (but very rarely) after publication of both sides, the Court does
allow them to examine witnesses (ad informandum conscientiam) in which case the
depositions that be taken, are not to be published but only seen by the Court.

After a Decree is entered, that may be enrolled and exemplified at the instance
of either party, or of any else that desire that

If the possession of any Land be decreed against the Defendant, the plaintiff
may have an Injunction directed to him, and all that claim under him,
commanding him and them to remove from the possession, and to yield the same to
the plaintiff and his Assigns, and if the Defendants disobey that, the Court
upon affidavit made thereof does usually grant an injunction directed to the
Sheriff to remove him, and to put the plaintiff in possession.

If a decree be in any thing disobeyed, either by the plaintiff or Defendant,
or any other by their procurement, upon affidavit thereof made, an attachment
is granted against such as have disobeyed, another process of contempt until
he be brought into Court to answer his contempt, and when he does appear, if he
deny the contempt alleged against him in the affid. he must be examined upon
Interrogatories, to be exhibited by the prosecutor of the contempt, before one
of the Barons, which must be upon the points mentioned in the affidavit, and he
must be enjoined by the Court, to attend and appear from day to day until he
be examined, and not to depart without license of the Court, or if the Court
think fit he is to be bound by Recognizance to the same purpose. After he is
examined, if he have confessed sufficient matter of contempt, the prosecutor
must move the court to appoint a day to hear his examinations, at which day,
both sides are to attend, and such of the examinations to be read as are
material, whereupon if that appear to the Court, that he has ommitted any
contempt worthy to be punished, the Court does commit him to the Fleet and may
impose a fine upon him, or not, as the case requires, where he is to remain
during the pleasure of the Court, and until he yield obedience, and submit
himself to the Court to perform the decree, or enter into Recognizance to
perform the same, if the Court so think fit, and he is to pay such costs to the
prosecutor, as the Court shall tax.

If the Defendant upon his examination deny the contempt supposed against him,
he may move the Court to be discharged with costs, whereupon the prosecutor may
desire to examine witnesses to prove the contempt, either in court, or by
commission. In which case if the prosecutor take a commission, the defendant
may desire to join in commission, to see a due examination of witnesses, but
not to examine any witnesses except the Court does specially order it so, after
which examination the Court does appoint a day of hearing, at the motion of the
prosecutor, or of the Defendant, to convict or discharge the defendant as the
case shall then appear

And the like course is held for punishing or discharging of contempts,
supposed against the process of the court, if the case so require.

A Bill may be amended by order of the Court, after the Defendant has answered
that upon payment of costs.

In all cases that are ordinary, the Court does use to have the counsel of
both sides, and thereupon to make such order as the case requires.

In every long vacation all the bills, answers, Replications, Rejoynders, and
other pleadings are to be taken from the common files, and all the pleadings in
one cause are to be filed together with the Bill, by him that is toward the
Bill, and to be entered in a book kept for that purpose, in the title of that
County, where the matter of suit arises, and to be numbered, and then filed,
according to the number on the file for the same County.

In cases of extraordinary contempts, the Court does sometimes send a Messenger
or a Sergeant at Arms to apprehend and bring in the Offender.

THE TABLE, Augmentation,
ARticles of the Court of augmentations, 119 ad 129 When united to the
Exchequer, 120 Lord Treasurers power thereby, 15 The Chief Barons power
thereby, 28 Attorney, The Kings Attorney, his office place and power 39 63 88
ad 94 Accounts, Scroul of accounts, what and by whom kept 56 73 Forfeitures
thereupon 59 Auditors of the Exchequer, their office and duty 95 Attorneyes and
Clarks in the Kings Remembrancers office, 95 In the Pipe 96 In the office of
pleas 97 Attachment in the Exchequer, and when 139 Answer, What time to answer
in the Exchequer 140
B.
LOrd chief Baron of the Exchequer, his office and power 23 24 26 27 How and
where he gives judgment 25 What he may do out of Court 26 Second Baron, his
office place and power 29 30 What accounts he may take, 31 Third Baron, his
office, place and power 32 What accounts he takes, 33 Fourth Baron, his office,
place, and power, 34 35 What accounts he takes 36 37
C.
CHancellor of the Exchequer, his office and place 19 20 Commissions awarded in
open Court 25 Chamberlains, two, their office place and power, 37 38 Communia,
what it is 60 Customer, their a^counts where to be entered 73 Controller of the
Pipe his office 85 Chamberlain, Under Chamberlains two, their Office and power
117 Crown, Court of Revenues, Sheriffs articles annexed to the Court of
Exchequer at Westminster, 119 Content of the said articles 119 120 and 129
Costs, when, and for what payable 139
D.
DEcree, who may make decrees in the Exchequer 567 Dies datus, what 5658 De
debitis plurimum, what 71 De pluribus debitis, what Ibid.
E.
EScheator, Nomina Escaetor. what 65 Their account, where entered 72 English
Bills in Exchequer, and the proceedings thereupon 136 ad fin. What may be sued
for there, and by, and against whom 137
F.
FInes upon informations, by whom set, and where it is chargeable. 28 29 Who may
be fined and when, 61 Fifteens, how to be accounted for, and where, 74 Fee-farm
Rents, upon whom chargeable 77 First fruits and Tenths, the Remembrancer
thereof 84 The Court thereof united to the Exchequer, 129 The Articles of
uniting 129 ad 136
H.
HOmage, respit of homage, what 64 Fines for it, and by whom payable, 64 65
I.
JUstices of Peace, their wages, how, and by whom payable 81 82
M.
MOney, warrants for money, by whom made and to whom, and for what, 10 11 13 16
Marshall of the Exchequer, his office and duty, 104 105 Messengers of the
receipt, their office 118
N
NEC non ad ostendendum, what, and the progress therein 62 Admittance
thereupon, by whom 62 Nomina Vic. What 65 Nihil, Clerks of the Nihils, his
office 81: 101
O
O Blata, what and upon whom chargeable 78 Opposer, Foreign Opposer, what, and
his office 80. 87
P
PRoffers in the exchequer, what, to whom made, and when forfeited 54. 55. 58.
Rolls of proffers, by whom kept 54. Pipe, Schedula pipe, what 66. Clerk of the
pipe, his office 66 67 Prests, Auditor of the prests, what, and his office 83
84 Pleas, Clerk of the pleas, his office 86 87 Parcellmakers 2. their office
and duty 99 Praysors of the Court, who, their office 106 Pelle, Clerk thereof,
his office and duty 111 Pellis recepti, and pellis exitus, What 111 Controller
thereof, his office 112
R.
REmembrancer, Kings Remembrancer, his office duty and power, 40 443 244 45 ad
53 Who are accountable before him 41 Treasurers Remembrancer, his office,
place, duty and power, 53 ad 70 Records, when to be made up clear 69 Rotulus
examinatus, who 75 76 His office and duty 76 Receivers, their office and duty
94 Receipt, Auditor thereof his office 113 ad 116
S.
STreats, by whom receivable 68 Clark of the Streats, his office ibid. 69 82
Sheriff, for what he is chargeable, as to himself or predecessor upon account,
71 72 79 81 Subsidies how to be accounted for, and where 74 Solicitor, Kings
Solicitor, his office, place and power; 94 Surveyors their office and duty 95
Seal of the Court, what 102 103
T
TReasurer, Lord Treasurer his office 217 How made 12 How far, and to what his
power extends in several things 3 4 6 7 8 9 1 2 Tallyes, joyners thereof,
their office and duty, and cutters thereof 98 112 Tellers of the Exchequer
four, their offices and duties 107 108 109 110
U
UNder Treasurer, his office and power 21 22 When first made, and who 21 Usher,
chief Usher his office and duty 103 104 Ordinary Ushers, their office and
duties 105
W
WOod Sales, who may make them 10 Roll of Writs, what and by whom kept, 56
Wardrobe, Magna guardrobe roll, what 75


FINIS.
June 19th. 1658.
HAving perused this discourse of the Scripture's inviolable Authority,
Certainty and Truth, I find it (in its proportion) as the Scripture it self is,
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness; and therefore Judge it very useful, to confront the Blasphemy of
bold Antiscripturists, to confirm the weak in Faith, and to raise the value of
(which cannot be overvalued) the Holy Scripture in the hearts of all true
Believers.

Joseph Caril.

Unto this attestation, given by my Reverend Brother, I willingly subscribe.
EDM. CALAMY.


