OF Temptation, The nature and Power of it. The Danger of entering into it. AND
The means of preventing that danger. WITH A Resolution of sundry cases
thereunto belonging,

BY JOHN OWEN. D. D.

Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I will also keep thee from the
hour of Temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell
upon the earth. Revel. 3. 10. OXFORD. Printed by H. HALL, Printer to the
University, for T. ROBINSON. 1658.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IF thou art in any measure awake in these days wherein we live, and have
taken notice of the manifold, great, and various Temptations wherewith all
sorts of persons that know the Lord, and profess his name are beset, and
whereunto they are continually exposed; with what success those Temptations
have obtained to the unspeakable scandal of the Gospel, with the wounding and
ruin of innumerable souls: I suppose thou will not inquire any farther after
other Reasons of the publishing of the ensuing warnings and directions, being
suited to the times that pass over us, and thine own concernment in them. This
I shall only say to those who think meet to persist in any such enquiry, that
though my first engagement for the exposing of these meditations unto public
view, did arise from the desires of some, whose avouching the interest of
Christ in the world by personal holiness, and constant adhering to every thing
that is made precious by its Relation to him, have given them power over me, to
require at any time services of greater importance, yet I dare not lay my doing
of it so upon that account, as in the least, to intimate, that with respect to
the general state of things mentioned, I did not my self esteem it
seasonable and necessary. The variety of outward Providence and Dispensations,
wherewith I have my self been exercised in this world, with the inward trials
they have been attended withal, added to the observation that I have had
advantages to make of the ways and walkings of others, their beginnings,
progresses, and endings, their risings and falls in profession, and
conversation, in darkness and light, have left such a constant sense and
impression of the Power and danger of Temptations upon my mind and spirit, that
without other pleas and pretenses, I cannot but own a serious call unto me^ to
bewar, with a discovery of some of the most eminent ways and means of the
prevalency of present temptations, to have been in my own judgment, in this
season, needful. But now Reader, if thou art amongst them, who take no
notice of these things, or carest not for them, who have no sense of the
efficacy and dangers of Temptations in thine own walking and profession, nor
have observed the power of them upon others; who discernest not the manifold
advantages that they have got in these days, wherein all things are shaken,
nor have been troubled or moved for the sad successes they have had amongst
professors, but supposest that all things are well within door, and without,
and would be better, could thou obtain fuller satisfaction to some of thy
Lusts, in the pleasures or profits of the world, I desire thee to know, that I
write not for thee, nor do esteem thee a fit Reader, or judge of what is here
written. Whilst all the issues of Providentiall dispensations, in reference to
the public concernements of these nations are perplexed and entangled, the
footsteps of God lying in the deep, where his paths are not known; whilst in
particular, unparalleled distresses, and strange prosperities are measured out
to men, yea to Professors; whilst a spirit of error, giddiness, and delusion
goes forth with such strength and efficacy, as it seems to have received a
Commission to go and prosper; whilst there are such divisions strifes,
emulations, attended with such evil surmises, wrath, and revenge, found amongst
brethren; whilst the desperate issues and products of men's temptations are
seen day^ in partial, and total apostasy, in the decay of love, the overthrow
of faith; our days being filled with fearful examples of back sliding, such as
former Ages never knew whilst there is a visible declension from Reformation
seizing upon the professing party of these nations, both as to personal
holiness, and zele for the interest of Christ; He that understands not that
there is an hour of temptation come upon the world to try them that dwell in
the earth is doubtless either himself at present captivated under the power
of some woeful lust, corruption, or Temptation, or is indeed stark blind, and
knows not at all what it is to serve God in temptations: With such then I have
not at present to do; for those who have in general a sense of these things,
who also in some measure are able to consider that the Plague is begun, that
they may be farther awakened to look about the^, lest the infection have
approached nearer to them, by some secret and imperceptible ways, than they
did apprehend; or lest they should be surprised at unawares hereafter by any of
those temptations that in these days either wast at noone, or else walk in
darkness, is the ensuing warning intended; and for the sake of them that
mourn in secret, for all the Abominations that are found among, and upon them
that profess the Gospel; and who are under the conduct of the Captain of
their salvation fighting and resisting the power of Temptations, from what
spring soever they rise, in themselves, are the ensuing directions proposed to
consideration. That our faithful and merciful High Priest, who both suffered
and was tempted, and is on that account touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, would accompany this small discourse with seasonable supplies of
his spirit, and suitable mercy to them that shall consider it, that it may be
useful to his servants for the ends whereunto it is designed, is the prayer of
him, who received this handful of see from his Storehouse, and treasure,

JOH: OWN
Errata.
Page 8. l. 9. f. body r. Bowels. p. 11. l. 18. note r. not. p. 12. l. 1^ that
r. it. p. 16. l. 3. a fire; how, r. what. p. 17. l. 6. dele coin p. 25. l. 15.
it. r. we, p. 32. l. last dele as. p. 33. l. 14. add a those. p. 42. l. 17. ad
is* p. 46. l. 4. turfe r. trifle. p. 49. l. nor r. (...) p. 51. l. 17. even, ad
of. page 52. l. 3. Laodicea. p. 53. l. 7. notwithstanding. p. 60. carriing. r.
concerning. p. 63. l. 4. them. p. 65. 10. leads p. 66. l. last dele succor. p.
68. l. 1. that the things. ^* 73. l. 7. it have, r. what has. l. 15. dele
which objections. l. 1. 16. renounced. r. removed. p. 80. l. 16. detestation.
p. 84. l. 1* this, r. their. p. 86. l. 4. left r. let. l. 13. lest r. lesser.
l. 19. dele The p. 88. l. 12. dele and so. p. 89. 11. with r. is. p. 93. l. 7.
returns. returners. p. 100. l. 13. a one. p. 101. l. 22. those r. these. p.
10. l. 4. those r. these. p. 111. l. 5. a sin: will r. with. p. 119. l. 13.
and how then are they. p. 122. l. 3. not? p. 126. l. 7. killd, r. skill. p. 127.
l. 1. sixth r. sixth. l. 14. sanctity r. facility. p. 142. l. ^ flesh r. self.
p. 143. l. 10. success. It is. p. 149. l. 20. that. r. it. 151. l. 3. that r.
it. l. 16. that r. it.

CHAP. I.
The words of the Text, that are the foundation of the ensuing discourse. The
occasion of the words, with their dependence; the things specially aimed at in
them. Things considerable in the words as to the general purpose in hand. Of
the General nature of Temptation wherein it consists. The special nature of
temptation. Temptation taken actively and passively. How God tempts any. His
ends in so doing. The way whereby he does it: of Temptation in its special
nature: of the actions of it. The true nature of Temptation stated.
Matthew. 26. 41. Watch and pray that you enter not into temptation.
THESE words of our Savior are repeated with very little alteration in three
Evangelists; only whereas Matthew and Mark have recorded them as above written,
Luke reports them thus; arise and pray, that you enter not into temptation;
so that the whole of his caution seems to have been; arise, watch and pray
that you enter not into temptation.

Solomon tells us of some, that lie down on the top of a mast in the midst
of the sea, Prove. 23. 34. Men overborne by security in the mouth of
destruction. If ever poor souls lay down on the top of a mast in the midst
of the sea, these disciples with our Savior in the Garden did so. Their Master
at a little distance from them, was offering up prayers and supplications with
strong cries, and tears; Heb. 5. 4. being then taking into his hand, and
beginning to Heb. 2. 9. Gal. 3. 13. 2 (...). 5. 21.
taste that cup that was filled with the curse and wrath due to their sins.
The Jews armed for his* and their destruction, being but a little more distant
from them, on the other hand. Our Savior had a little before, informed them,
that, that night he should be betrayed, and be delivered up to be slain; They
saw that he was sorrowful, and very heavy verse. 37. Nay he told them plainly,
that his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death: verse. 38. and
therefore entreated them to tarry, and watch with him, now he was dying, and
that for them. In this condition, leaving them but a little space like men
forsaken of all love toward him, or care of themselves, they fall fast
asleep. Even the best of Saints, being left to themselves, will quickly
appear to be less then men, to be nothing. All our own strength is
weakness, and all our Wisdom, folly. Peter being one of them, who but a little
before, had with so much selfe-confidence, affirmed, that though all men
forsook him, yet he never would so do; our Savior expostulates the matter in
particular with him, verse. 40. He says unto Peter, could you not watch with me
one hour: as if he should have said; Art thou he Peter who but now boasted'st
of thy Resolution, never to forsake me? Is it likely that thou should hold
out therein, when thou can not watch with me one hour? is this thy dying for
me; to be dead in security, when I am dying for thee? And indeed it would be an
amazing thing, to consider, that Peter should make so high a promise, and be
immediately so careless and remiss in the pursuit of it; but that we find the
root of the same treachery abiding and working in our own hearts, and do see
the fruit of it brought forth every day. The most noble engagements unto
obedience, quickly ending in deplorable negligence, Romans 7. 18.

In this estate our Savior admonishes them of their condition, their
weakness, their danger, and stirs them up to a prevention of that ruin,
which lay at the door; says he, arise, watch, and pray, etc.

I shall not insist on the particular aimed at here by our Savior in this
Caution to them that were then present with him, the great Temptation that was
coming on them, from the scandal of the Cross, was doubtless in his eye; but
I shall consider the words as containing a general direction to all the
disciples of Christ in their following of him throughout all generations.

There are three things in the words;

1. The evil cautioned against: Temptation.

2. The means of its prevalency; by our entering into it.

3. The way of preventing it, watch and pray.

It is not in my thoughts to handle the common place of Temptations, but only
the danger of them in General, with the means of preventing that danger. Yet
that we may know what we affirm, and whereof we speak, some concernements of
the General nature of Temptation, may be premised.

For the General nature of tempting and Temptation, it lies among things
indifferent; to try, to experiment, to prove, to pierce a vessel, that the
liquor that is in it may be known, is as much as is signified by it.

Hence God is said sometimes to tempt; and we are commanded as our duty to
tempt or try or search our selves, to know what is in us; and to pray that God
would do so also. So Temptation is like a knife, that may either cut the meat,
or the throat of a man; it may be his food, or his poison, his exercise, or his
destruction.

Temptation in its special nature: as it denotes any evil, is considered,
either actively, as it leads to evil, or passively as it has an evil and
suffering in it, so Temptation is taken for affliction, Jam. 1. 2. For in that
sense, we are to count it all joy when we fall into temptation, in the other,
that we enter not into it.

Again actively considered, it either denotes in the Tempter, a design for
the bringing about of the special end of temptation, namely a leading into
evil; so it is said, that God tempts no man, Jam. 1. 13. with a design for
sin, as such: or the General nature, and end of Temptation which is Trial;
so God tempted Abraham, Gen: 21. 1. And he proves, or tempts by false
prophets, Deuteronomy. 13. 3.

Now as to Gods tempting of any, two things are to be considered.

1. The end why he does it.

2. The way whereby he does it.

For the first, his General Ends are two.

1. He does it to show unto man what is in him, that is the man himself: and
that either as to his grace, or to his Corruption. (I speak not now of it, as
it may have a place and bear a part in judiciary obduration.) Grace and
corruption lie deep in the heart, men oftentimes deceive themselves in the
search after the one, or the other of them. When we give vent to the soul, to
try what grace is there, Corruption comes out: and when we search for
corruption, Grace appears; so is the soul kept in uncertainty; we fail in
our trialls. God comes with a Gage, that goes to the bottom. He sends his
instruments of trial into the body, and the inmost parts of the soul, and
lets man see what is in him, of what metal he is constituted.

Thus he tempted Abraham, to show him his faith. Abraham knew not what faith he
had; (I mean what power and vigor was in his faith) until God drew it out by
that great trial and Temptation; Genesis 22. 12.
when God says he knew it, He made Abraham know it.

So he tried Hezekiah, to discover his pride: God left him that he might see
what was in his heart, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. He knew not that he had such a proud
heart, so apt to be lifted up, as he appeared to have, until God tried him,
and so let out his filth, and powered it out before his face. The issues of such
discoveries to the Saints in thankfulness, humiliation, and treasuring up of
experiences, I shall not treat of.

2. God does it to show himself unto man, and that

1. In a way of preventing Grace; A man shall see that it is God alone who
keeps from all sin. Until we are tempted, we think we live on our own
strength. Though all men do this or that, we will not. When the trial comes,
we quickly see, whence is our preservation by standing, or falling. So was it
in the case of Abimeleck, Genesis 20. 6. I withheld thee.

2. In a way of renewing Grace. He would have the Temptation continue with
Paul, that he might reveal himself to him, in the sufficiency of his renewing
grace, 2 Cor. 12. 9. We know not the power and strength, that God puts forth in
our behalf, nor what is the sufficiency of his Grace, until comparing the
Temptation with our own weakness it appears unto us. The efficacy of an
Antidote is found when poison has been taken, and the pretiousnesse of
medicines is made known by diseases. We shall never know what strength there
is in Grace, if we know not what strength there is in Temptation. We must be
tried, that we may be made sensible of being preserved.

And many other good and gracious ends He has, which He accomplisheth toward
his Saints by his trialls and temptations, not now to be insisted on.

2. For the ways whereby God accomplisheth this his search, trial, or
temptation, these are some of them.

1. He puts men on Great Duties, such as they cannot apprehend that they have
any strength for, nor indeed have. So he tempted Abraham, by calling him to
that Duty of sacrificing his son; a thing absurd to Reason, bitter to nature,
and grievous to him on all accounts whatever. Many men know not what is in
them, or rather what is ready for them, until they are put upon what seems
utterly above their strength, Indeed upon what is really above their strength.
The duties that God in an ordinary way requires at our hands, are not
proportioned to what strength we have in our selves, but to what help and
relief is laid up for us in Christ; And we are to address our selves to the
greatest performances, with a settled persuasion that we have not ability for
the least. This is the law of Grace; But yet when any duty is required, that is
extraordinary, that is a secret note often discovered, in the yoke of Christ;
it is a trial, a temptation.

2. By putting them upon great sufferings. How many have unexpectedly found
strength, to dye at a stake, to endure tortures for Christ. Yet their call to
it was a trial. This Peter tells us is one way whereby we are brought into
trying temptations, 1 Pe. 1. 6, 7. Our temptations arise from the fiery trial,
and yet the end is but the trial of our faith.

3. By his providentiall disposing of things so, as that occasions unto sin
will be administered unto men, which is the case mentioned, Dent. 13. 3. and
innumerable other instances may be adjoined.

Now they are not properly the Temptations of God, as coming from him, with his
end upon them that are here intended: and therefore I shall set these apart
from our present consideration, that is then Temptation in its special nature,
as it denotes an active Efficiency toward sinning (as it is managed with
evil, unto evil) that I intend.

In this sense, Temptation may proceed either singly from Satan, or the world,
or other men in the world, or from our selves, or jointly from all, or some of
them, in their several Combinations.

Satan tempts sometimes singly by himself, without taking advantage from the
world, the things, or persons of it, or our selves. So he deals in his
injection of evil and blasphemous thoughts of God, into the hearts of the
Saints; which is his own work alone, without any advantage from the world or
our own hearts. For nature will contribute nothing thereunto, nor any thing
that is in the world, nor any man of the world; for none can conceive a God,
and conceive evil of him.

Herein Satan is alone in the sin* and shall be so in the punishment. These
fiery darts are prepared in the forge of his own malice, and shall with all
their venom and poison, be turned into his own heart for ever.

2 Sometimes he makes use of the world, and joines forces against us, without
any helps from within. So he Tempted our Savior, by showing him the kingdoms
of the world, Mat. 4. 8*
and the glory of them. And the variety of the Assistances he finds from the
world, in persons, and things which I must not insist on, the innumerable
instruments and weapons he takes from thence of all sorts, and at all seasons,
are inexpressible.

3. Sometimes he takes in Assistance from our selves also. It is not with us,
as it was with Christ, when Satan came to tempt him, he declares that he had
nothing in him, Joh. 14. 30. It is otherwise with us: He has, for the
compassing of most of his ends, a sure party within our own breasts, Jam. 1.
14, 15. Thus he tempted Judas; He was at work himself; he put it into his
heart, to betray Christ, Luk* 22. 3; he entered into him for that purpose, and
he sets the world at work, the things of it, providing for him 30 pieces of
silver, verse. 5. they covenanted to give him money; and the men of it: even the
Priests and Pharisees; and calls in the assistance of his own corruption; he
was coveteous, a theife, and had the bag.

I might also show, how the world and our own Corruptions do act singly by
themselves, and jointly in conjunction with Satan, and one another in this
business of Temptation.

But the Truth is; the principles, ways and means of Temptations, the kinds,
degrees, efficacy, and causes of them, are so inexpressibly large, and various,
the circumstances of them, from providence, Natures, conditions, spiritual,
and natural, with the particular cases thence arising, so innumerable, and
impossible to be comprised, within any bound or order, that to attempt the
giving an account of them, would be to undertake that, which would be endless.
I shall content my self to give a description of the general nature of that
which we are to watch against; which will make way for what I aim at.

Temptation then in General! is any Thing, state, way, condition, that upon
any account whatever, has a force or efficacy to seduce, to draw the mind, and
heart of a man from that obedience which God requires of him, into any sin,
in any degree of it whatever.

In particular, that is a Temptation to any man, which causes, or occasions him
to sin, or in any thing to go off from his duty, either by bringing evil
into his heart, or drawing out that evil, that is in his heart, or any other
way, diverting him from communion with God, and that constant, equal,
universal obedience, in matter, and manner, that is required of him.

For the clearing of this description, I shall only observe that, Though
temptation seems to be of a more active importance, and so to denote only the
power of seduction to sin it self, yet in the Scripture it is commonly taken
in a neuter sense, and denotes the matter of the Temptation, or the thing
whereby we are tempted.

And this is a Ground of the description I have given of it; be it how it will,
that from any thing whatever, within us, or without us, has advantage to
hinder in duty, or to provoke unto, or in any way to occasion sin, that is a
Temptation, and so to be looked on; Be it business, employment, course of
life, company, Affections, nature, or corrupt design, coin, Relations,
delights, name, Reputation, Esteem, Abilities, parts or excellencies of body,
or mind, place, dignity, art, so far as they further, or occasion the
promotion of the Ends before mentioned they are all of them, no less truly
Temptations, than the most violent solicitations of Satan or allurements of
the world; and that soul lies at the brink of ruin, who discernes it not; and
this will be farther discovered in our process.

CHAP. 2.
What it is to enter into temptation. Not barely being tempted. Not to be
conquered by it. To fall into it. The force of that Expression. Things required
unto entering into temptation. Satan or lust more than ordinarily importunate.
The souls entanglement. Seasons of such entanglements discovered. Of the hour
of Temptation, Rev. 3. 18. what it is. How any Temptation comes to its hour.
How it may be known when it is so come. The means of Prevention prescribed by
our Savior. Of watching and what is intended thereby. Of Prayer.
HAving showed what Temptation is, I come in the next place to manifest what it
is to enter into Temptation:

1. This is not merely to be tempted: It is impossible that we should be so
freed from temptation, as not to be at all tempted. Whilst Satan continues in
his power and malice, whilst the world and lust are in being, we shall be
tempted: Christ (says one,) was made like unto us, that he might be tempted;
and we are tempted that we may be made like unto Christ: Temptation in
general, is comprehensive of our whole warfare; as our Savior calls the time
of his ministry, the time of his Temptation, Luke 22. 28. We have no promise
that we shall not be tempted at all, nor are to pray for an absolute freedom
from temptations, because we have no such promise of being heard therein.

The direction we have for our prayers is, lead us not into temptation, Mat. 6.
9. it is entering into temptation, that we are to pray against: We may be
tempted, and yet not enter into temptation: so that,

2. Something more is intended by this expression, then the ordinary work of
Satan, and our own lusts, which will be sure to tempt us every day. There is
something signal, in this entering into Temptation, that is, not the Saints
every days work: It is something that befalls them peculiarly in reference to
seduction unto sin, on one account or other, by the way of allurement, or
affrightment.

3. It is not to be conquered by a temptation; to fall down under it; to
commit the sin or evil that we are tempted to, or to omit the duties that
are opposed. A man may enter into temptation, and yet not fall under
Temptation. God can make a way for a man to escape, when he is in, he can
break the snare, tread down Satan, and make the soul more than a Conqueror,
though it have entered into temptation: Christ entered into it, but was not in
the least foiled by it, but

4. It is, as the Apostle expresses it. 1 Timothy 6. 9. (...); to fall into
Temptation; as a man falls into a pit, or a deep place, where are gins, and
snares, wherewith he is entangled. The man is not presently killed, and
destroyed, but he is entangled and detained: He knows not how to get free, or
be at liberty: so it is expressed again to the same purpose, 1 Cor. 10. 13. no
temptation has taken you: it is to be taken by a temptation, and to be
entangled with it, held in its cords, not finding at present a way to escape.
Thence says Peter 2 Ep. 2. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of
temptations: They are entangled with them, God knows how to deliver them out
of them. When we suffer a temptation to enter into us, then we enter into
temptation. Whilst it knocks at the door, we are at liberty; but when any
Temptation comes in, and parlies with the heart, Reasons with the mind, entices
and allures the affections, be it a long or a short time, do it thus
insensibly and imperceptibly, or do the soul take notice of it, we enter into
Temptation;

So then; unto our entering into Temptation is required;

1: That by some Advantage, or on some Occasion, Satan be more earnest than
ordinary in his solicitations to sin, by affrightments, or allurements, by
persecutions, or seductions, by himself or others; or that some lust or
corruption by his instigation, and advantages of outward objects provoking, as
in prosperity, or terrifying, as in trouble, do tumultuate more than ordinary
within us: There is a special acting of the Author, and principles of
Temptation, required thereunto.

2. That the heart be so far entangled with it, as to be put to dispute, and
argue in its own defense, and yet not to be able wholly to eject or cast out
the poison, and leaven that has been injected; but is surprised, if it be
never so little off its watch, into an intanglement not easy to be avoided; so
that the soul may cry, and pray, and cry again, and yet not be delivered; as
Paul sought the Lord thrice for the departure of his temptation, and prevailed
not. The entanglement continues. And this usually falls out in one of these two
seasons.

1. When Satan by the permission of God, for ends best known to himself, has
got some peculiar Advantage against the soul. As in the case of Peter: he
sought to winnow him, and prevailed.

2. When a man's lusts and corruptions, meet with peculiarly provoking objects,
and occasions, through the condition of life, that a man is in, with the
Circumstances of it: as it was with David: of both which afterward.

In this state of things, a man is entered into Temptation; and this is called
the hour of Temptation, Rev. 3. 10. The season wherein it grows to a head;
the discovery whereof will give farther light into the present enquiry, about
what it is to enter into Temptation; for when the hour of Temptation is come
upon us, we are entered into it.

Every great and pressing temptation has its hour, a season wherein it grows
to a head, wherein it is most vigorous, active, operative and prevalent. It may
be long in rising, it may be long urging more or less; but it has a season,
wherein from the conjunction of other occurrences, such as those mentioned,
outward or inward, it has a dangerous hour, and then for the most part, men
enter into it.

Hence that very temptation which at one time, has little or no power on a
man, he can despise it, scorn the motions of it, easily resist it; at another,
bears him away quite before it. It has from other circumstances and
occurrences, got new strength and efficacy; or the man is enervated and
weakened, the hour is come, he is entered into it, and it prevails. David
probably had Temptations before in his younger days to Adultery or murder, as
he had in the case of Nabal; but the hour of temptation was not come, it had
not got its advantages aabout it, and so he escaped, until afterward. Let men
look for it, that are exposed unto temptations, as who is not: They will have
a season wherein their solicitations will be more urgent, their Reasonings more
plausible, pretenses more glorious, hopes of Recovery more appearing,
opportunities more broad and open, the doors of evil made more beautiful
than ever they have been: Blessed is he who is prepared for such a season,
without which there is no escaping. This as I said is the first thing required
to entering into Temptation; if it stay here, we are safe.

Before I descend to other particulars, having now entered hereon I shall show
in general.

1. How, or by what means, commonly any Temptation attaines its hour.

2. How we may know when any temptation is come to its high noone, and is in
its hour.

1. It does the first by several ways.

1. By long solicitations, causing the mind frequently to converse with the
evil solicited unto, it begets extenuating thoughts of it. If it make this
process, it is coming toward its hour. It may be when first it began to
press upon the soul, the soul was amazed with the ugly appearance of what it
aimed at, and cried, am I a dog? if this indignation be not daily heightened,
but the soul by conversing with the evil, begins to grow as it were familiar
with it, not to be startled as formerly, but rather enclines to cry, is it not
a little one? then the Temptation is coming toward its high noone, Lust has
then entised and entangled, and is ready to conceive, Jam, 1. 14. of which more
at large afterward, in our enquiry, how we may know, whether we are entered
into temptation, or no: our present inquest is after the hour and power of
Temptation its self.

2. When it has prevailed on others, and the soul is not filled with dislike
and abhorrency of them and their ways, nor with pity and prayer for their
deliverance. This proves an advantage unto it, and rayses it toward its
height. When that Temptation sets upon any one, which at the same time, has
possessed and prevailed with many, it has so great, and so many Advantages
thereby, that it is surely growing toward its hour. Its prevailing with
others, is a means to give it its hour against us. The falling off of
Hymeneus and Philetus, is said to overthrow the faith of some, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18.

3. By complicating its self with many considerations, that perhaps are not
absolutely evil. So did the Temptation of the Galathians to fall from the
purity of the Gospel, freedom from persecution, union and consent with the
Jews: things in themselves good, were pleaded in it, and gave life to the
Temptation it self. But I shall not now insist on the several advantages, that
any temptation has to heighten and greaten its self, to make its self
prevalent and effectual, with the contribution that it receives to this
purpose, from various circumstances, opportunities, specious pleas and
pretenses, necessities for the doing that, which cannot be done without
answering the Temptation, and the like; because I must speak unto some of them
afterward.

2. For the second, it may be known,

1. By its restless urgency, and arguing. When a Temptation is in its hour it
is restless: it is the time of battle, and it gives the soul no rest. Satan
sees his Advantage, considers his conjunction of forces, and knows that he
must now prevail, or be hopeless for ever. Here are Opportunities, here are
advantages, here are specious pleas and pretenses; some ground is already got
by former arguings, here are extenuations of the evil, hopes of pardon, by
after endeavors, all in a readiness; if he can do nothing now, he must sit
down lost in his undertakings. So when he had got all things in a readiness
against Christ, he made it the hour of darkness. When a temptation discovers
mill nocendi arts, presses within doors by imaginations and reasonings,
without, by solicitatious, Advantages and Opportunities, let the soul know,
that the hour of it is come, and the Glory of God, with its own welfare,
depends on its behavior in this trial: as we shall see in the particular
cases following.

2. When it makes a Conjunction of Affrightments and Allurements. These two
comprize the whole forces of temptation. When both are brought together,
Temptation is in its hour. They were both in David's case, as to the murder of
Uriah; there was the fear of his revenge on his wife, and possibly on
himself; and fear of the publication of his sin, at least; and there was
the allurement of his present enjoyment of her, whom he lusted after. Men
sometimes are carried into sin by love to it, and are continued in it by
fear of what will ensue upon it. But in any case, where these two meet,
something allures us, something affrights us, and the reasonings that run
between them are ready to entangle us, then is the hour of temptation.

This then it is to enter into Temptation, this is the hour of it, of which
more in the process of our discourse.

3. There is the means of prevention prescribed by our Savior, they are two.

1. Watch. 2. Pray.

1. The first is a general expression, by no means to be limited to its
native signification, of waking from sleep: to watch is as much as to be on
our guard, to take heed, to consider all ways, and means whereby an enemy may
approach to us. So the Apostle 1 Cor. 16. 13. This it is to watch in this
business, to stand fast in the faith, as good soldiers, to quit our selves
like men. It is as much as (...), to take heed, or look to our selves, as the
same thing is by our Savior often expressed. So Rev. 3. 2. An universal
carfulness, and diligence, exercising its self in, and by all ways and
means, prescribed by God, over our hearts and ways, the baits and methods of
Satan, the occasions and advantages of sin in the world, that we be not
entangled, is that which in this word is pressed on us.

2. For the second direction of prayer, I need not speak to it. The duty and
its concernments are known to all: I shall only add, that these two comprize
the whole endeavor of faith for the souls preservation from temptation.

CHAP. III.
The Doctrine. Grounds of it; our Saviors direction in this Case. His promise
of preservation. Issues of man entering into temptation. 1. Of ungrounded
professors. 2. Of the choycest Saints, Adam, Abraham, David. Self
consideration as to our own weakness. The power of a man's heart to withstand
temptation considered. The considerations that uses for that purpose. The
power of Temptation, it darkens the mind. The several ways whereby it does
so. 1. By fixing the imaginations. 2. By intangleing the affections. 3.
Temptations give fuel to lust. 4. The End of Temptation considered, with the
issue of former temptations: some objections answered.
HAving thus opened the words as in the foregoing Chapter, so far as is
necessary to discover the foundation of the truth to be insisted on, and
improved, I shall lay it down in the ensuing observation.

It is the great duty of all believers to use all diligence in the ways of
Christ's appointment, that they fall not into temptation.

I know God is able to deliver the Godly out of temptation. I know he is
faithful, not to suffer us to be tempted above what we are able, but will make
a way for our escape; yet I dare say I shall convince, who will attend unto
what is delivered, and written, that it is our great duty and concernment to
use all diligence, watchfulness and care, that we enter not into Temptation;
and I shall evince it by the ensuing considerations.

1. In that compendious instruction given us by our Savior, concerning what we
ought to pray for, this of not entering into temptation, is expressly one
head. Our Savior knew of what concernment it was to us, not to enter into
Temptation, when he gave us this, as one special subject of our daily dealing
with God, Matthew. 6. 13. And the order of the words shows us, of what
importance it is, lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. If we
are lead into temptation, Evil will befall us, more or less. How God may be
said to tempt us, or to lead us into Temptation I showed before. In this
direction, it is not so much the not giveing us up to it, as the powerful
keeping us from it, that is intended.

The last words are as it were exegeticall, or expository of the former; lead
us not into temptation, (...): but deliver us from the evil: so deal with us,
that we may be powerfully delivered from that evil which attends our entering
into temptation.

Our blessed Savior knows full well our state and condition; he knows the
power of Temptations, having had experience of it; Heb. 2. 52.
he knows our vain confidence, and the reserves we have concerning our
ability to deal with Temptations, as he found it in Peter; but he knows our
weakness and folly, and how soon we are cast to the ground; and therefore
does he lay in this provision for instruction, at the Entrance of his ministry,
to make us heedfull, if possible, in that which is of so great concernment to
us. If then we will repose any confidence in the Wisdom, Love, and Care of
Jesus Christ toward us, we must grant the truth pleaded for.

2. Christ promises this freedom and deliverance as a great Reward, of most
acceptable obedience, Rev. 3. 10. This is the great promise made to the Church
of Philadelphia, wherein Christ found nothing that he would blame. Thou shall
be kept from the hour of temptation; not thou shall be preserved in it, but he
goes higher, thou shall be kept from it. There is, says our Savior, an hour
of Temptation coming: a season that will make havoke in the world; multitudes
shall then fall from the faith, deny and blaspheme me! Oh how few will be able
to stand and hold out? Some will be utterly destroyed and perish for ever, some
will get wounds to their souls that shall never be well healed, whilst they
live in this world, and have their bones broken, so as to go halting all their
days. But says he, because thou have kept the word of my patience, I will be
tender toward thee, and keep thee from this hour of temptation. Certainly
that which Christ thus promises to his beloved Church, as a Reward of her
service, Love, and Obedience, is no light thing; whatever Christ promises to
his spouse, is a fruit of unspeakable Love; that is so in an especial manner,
which is promised as a Reward of special obedience.

3. Let us to this purpose consider the General issues of men's entering into
temptation; and that of bad and good men, of ungrounded professors, and of the
choysest Saints.

For the first I shall offer but one or two Texts of Scripture, Luke 8. 13.
They on the rock, are they which, when they hear, receive the word with joy,
and have no root, but for a while believe: well! how long do they believe?
they are affected with the preaching of the word, and believe thereon: make
profession, bring forth some fruits: but until when do they abide? says he,
in the time of temptation they fall away: when once they enter into temptation
they are gone for ever: Temptation withers all their profession, and slaies
their souls. We see this accomplished every day; men who have attended on the
preaching of the Gospel, been affected and delighted with it, and have been
looked on, it may be, as believers, and thus have continued for some years; no
sooner does a temptation befall them, that has vigor and permanency in it, but
they are turned out of the way, and are gone for ever: They fall to hate the
word they have delighted in, despise the professors of it, and are hardened by
sin. So Matthew. 7. 26. He that hears these words of mine, and does them not,
is like a man that built his house upon the sand: but what does this house of
profession do? it shelters him, keeps him warm, and stands for a while; but
says he, verse. 27. when the rain descendes, when Temptation comes, it falls
utterly, and its fall is great. Judas follows our Savior three years, and
all goes well with him; He no sooner enters into temptation, Satan has got
him, and winnowed him, but he is gone. Demas will preach the Gospel, until
the love of the world befall him, and he is utterly turned aside, It were
endless to give instances of this; Entrance into temptation, is with this sort
of men an entrance into Apostasy, more or less, in part or in whole, it
fails not.

2. For the saints of God themselves, let us see by some instances, what issue
they have had of their entering int. Temptation. I shall name a fevv; Adam, was
the son of God, Luke 3. created in the image of God: full of that integrity,
rightousnesse and holiness which might be and was an eminent Resemblance of
the Holiness of God. He had a far greater inherent stock of Ability then we;
and had nothing in him to entice or seduce him, yet this Adam no sooner enters
into temptation, but he is gone, lost, and ruined, he and all his posterity
with him. What can we expect in the like condition, that have not only in our
temptations, as he had, a cunning devil to deal withal, but a cursed world,
and a corrupt heart also.

Abraham was the father of the faithful; Genesis 12. 12, 13.
whose faith is proposed as a pattern to all them that shall believe, yet he
entering twice into the same temptation, Genesis 20. 2
namely that of fear about his wife, was twice over powered by it, to the
dishonor of God, and no doubt the disquietment of his own soul.

David is called a man after Gods own heart by God himself; yet what a
dreadful thing is the story of his entering into temptation: He is no sooner
entangled, but he is plunged into Adultery; thence seeking deliverance by his
own invention, like a poor creature in toil he is entangled more and more,
until he lies as one dead, under the power of sin and folly.

I might mention Noah, Lot, Hezekiah, Peter, and the rest whose temptations,
and falls therein, are on record for our instruction. Certainly be that has
any heart in these things, cannot but say as the inhabitants of Samaria upon
the letter of Jehu; behold two Kings stood not before him, how shall we stand?
Oh Lord! if such mighty pillars have been cast to the ground, such Cedars
blown down, how shall I stand before temptations? Oh keep me that I enter not
in; vestigia terrent, behold the footsteps of them that have gone in; whom do
you see retiring without a wound? a blemish at least? On this account would the
Apostle have us to exercise tenderness toward them that are fallen into
sin, Gal. 6. 1. considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted: he does not
say, lest thou also sin, or fall, or be overtaken with a fault; but lest thou
also be tempted; thou see the power of temptation in others, and know not
how soon thou may be tempted, nor what will be the state and condition, of
thy soul thereupon. Assuredly he that has seen so many better, stronger men
than himself fail, and cast down in the trial, will think it incumbent on
him to remember the battle, and if it be possible, to come there no more. Is
it not a madness for a man that can scarce crawle up and down, he is so
weak, (which is the case of most of us) if he avoid not what he has seen
Giants foiled in the undertaking of? Thou art yet whole and sound, take heed of
temptation, lest it be with thee as it was with Abraham, David, Lot, Peter,
Hezekiah, the Galathians who fell all in the time of trial.

In nothing does the folly of the hearts of men show it self more openly in
the days wherein we live, than in this cursed boldness, after so many
warnings from God, and so many sad experiences every day under their eyes, of
running into, and putting themselves upon Temptations. Any society, any
company, any conditions of outward advantages without once weighing what their
strength, or what the concernment of their poor souls, they are ready for,
Though they go over the dead, and the slain, that in those ways and paths,
but even now, fell down before them, yet they will go on without regard or
trembling. At this door are gone out hundreds, thousands of Professors within
a few years. But

4. Let us, consider our selves; what our weakness is, and what Temptation is;
its power and efficacy, with what it leads unto.

1. For our selves, we are weakness it self. We have no strength, no power to
withstand. Confidence of any strength in us, is one great part of our
weakness. It was so in Peter. He that says he can do any thing, can do
nothing as he should. And which is worse, it is the worst kind of weakness
that is in us: a weakness from treachery; a weakness arising from that party
which every Temptation has in us. If a castle or fort be never so strong and
well fortified, yet if there be a treacherous party within, that is ready to
betray it on every opportunity, there is no preserving it from the Enemy. There
are Traitors in our hearts, ready to take part, to close, and side with every
Temptation, and to give up all to them; yea to solicit and bribe temptations
to do the work; as Traitors incite an enemy. Do not flatter your selves that
you shall hold out; there are secret lusts that lie lurking in your hearts,
which perhaps now stir not, which as soon as any temptation befalls you, will
rise, tumultuate, cry, disquiet, seduce, and never give over, until they are
either killed, or satisfied. He that promises himself, that the frame of his
heart will be the same under a Temptation, as it is before, will be woefully
mistaken: Am I a dog, that I should do this thing? says Hazael; yea! thou will be such a dog, if ever thou be King of Syria: Temptation from thy interest
will unman thee: He that now abhors the thoughts of such and such a thing, if
he once enters into temptation, will find his heart enflamed toward it, and
all contrary reasonings overborne and silenced. He will deride his former
fears, cast out his scruples, and contemn the consideration that he lived
upon. Little did Peter think he should deny and forswear his master, so soon
as ever he was questioned whether he knew him or no; it was no better when the
hour of Temptation came; All resolutions were forgotten, all love to Christ
buried, the present Temptation closing with his carnal fear carried all
before it.

To handle this a little more distinctly; I shall consider the means of safety
from the power of Temptation, if we enter therein, that may be expected from
our selves; and that in general as to the spring and rise of them; and in
particular, as to the ways of exerting that strength we have, or seem to have.

1. In general, all we can look for is from our hearts; what a man's heart is
that is, He; but now what is the heart of a man in such a season?

1. Suppose a man is not a Believer, but only a Professor of the Gospel, what
can the heart of such an one do? Prove. 10. 20. The heart of the wicked is
little worth; and surely that which is little worth in any thing, is not much
worth in this. A wicked man, may in outward things be of great use; but come
to his heart; that is false and a thing of naught. Now withstanding of
Temptation is heart work; and when it comes like a flood, can such a rotten
turfe as a wicked man's heart, stand before it? but of these before; entering
into Temptation, and Apostasy is the same with them.

2. Let it be whose heart it will; Prove. 28. 26. He that trusts in his own
heart is a fool; He that does so, be he what he will, in that he is foolish:
Peter did so in his Temptation; he trusted in his own heart; though all men
forsake thee I will not; it was his folly; but why was is it his folly? He
shall not be delivered; It will not preserve him in snares; it will not deliver
him in temptations. The Heart of a man will promise him very fair before a
Temptation comes; am I a dog, says Hazael, that I should do this thing?
though all men should deny thee I will not: shall I do this evil? it cannot
be; All the Arguments that are suited to give check to the heart in such a
condition, are mustered up; did not Peter think you do so? What, deny my
master, the Son of God; my Redeemer; who loves me? Can such ingratitude,
unbelief, rebellion, befall me? I will not do it; shall then a man rest in
it, that his heart will be steadfast? let the wiseman answer, he that trusts
in his own heart is a fool. The heart is deceitful, Jer. 17. 9. We would not
willingly trust any thing wherein there is any deceit or guile; Here is that
which is deceitful above all things. It has a thousand shifts and
treacheries, that it will deal withal, when it comes to the trial, every
temptation will steal it away; Hos* 4. 11. Generally men's hearts deceive them
no oftener then they do trust in them, and then they never fail so to do.

2. Consider the particular ways and means, that such an heart has, or can
use to safeguard its self, in the hour of Temptation, and their insufficiency
to that purpose will quickly appear. I shall instance in some few only.

1. Love of honor in the world; Reputation and esteem in the Church, obtained
by former profession and walking, is one of the hearts own weapons to defend
its self in the hour of Temptation. Shall such an one as I fly? I who have
had such a Reputation in the Church of God, shall I now lose it by giving way
to this lust? to this temptation? by closing with this, or that public evil?
This Consideration has such an influence on the spirits of some, that they
think it will be a shield and buckler, against any assaults that may befall
them. They will dye a thousand times before they will forfeit that repute they
have in the Church of God. But alas, this is but a which, or a new cord, to
bind a Giant temptation withal: What think you of the third part of the
stars of heaven? Revel. 12. 4. Had they not shone in the firmament of the
Church? Were they not sensible more then enough of their own honor, height,
usefulness, and reputation? but when the Dragon comes with his temptations, he
casts them down to the earth. Yea great temptations will make men, who have
not a better defense, insensibly fortify themselves against that dishonor, and
disreputation that their vvayes are attended vvithall: populus sibilet, nec
mihi plaudo; do we not know instances yet living, of some, who have
ventured on compliances with wicked men, after the Glory of a long and
useful profession, and within a while finding themselves cast down thereby
from their Reputation with the Saints, have hardened themselves against it,
and ended in Apostasy? as Joh. 15. 6. This kept not Judas, it kept not Hymeneus
nor Philetus, it kept not the stars of heaven, nor will it keep thee.

2. There is on the other side, the consideration of shame, reproach, loss,
and the like. This also men may put their trust in, as a defense against
temptations; and do not fear but to be safeguarded and preserved by it. They
would not for the world bring that shame and reproach upon themselves, that
such and such miscarriages are attended withal.

Now besides that this consideration extends it self only to open sins, such
as the world takes notice of, and abhorres, and so is of no use at all in such
cases, as wherein pretenses and colors may be invented and used, nor in
public temptations to loose and careless walking, like those of our days,
nor in cases that may be disputable in themselves, though expressly sinful to
the consciences of persons under temptations, nor in heart sins, in all which,
and most other cases of temptation, there are innumerable reliefes ready to be
tendered unto the heart against this consideration; besides all this I say we
see by experience, how easily this coord is broken when once the heart begins
to be entangled: each corner of the land is full of examples to this purpose.
But

3. They have yet that which outweighes these lesser considerations; namely
that they will not wound their own consciences, and disturb their peace; and
bring themselves in danger of hell fire. This surely, if any thing, will
preserve men in the hour of temptation. They will not lavish away their peace,
nor venture their souls, by running on God, and the thick bosses of his
buckler. What can be of more efficacy and prevalency? I confess this is of
great importance; and oh that it were more pondered than it is; that we laid
more weight upon the preservation of our peace with God, than we do, yet I say
that even this consideration in him who is otherwhere off from his watch, and
does not make it his work to follow the other rules insisted on; it will not
preserve him: For

1. The peace of such an one, may be false peace, or security; made up of
presumption and false hopes, yea though he be a Believer, it may be so; such
was David's peace after his sin, before Nathan came to him; such was
Laodicha's peace, when ready to perish; and Sardis her peace, when dying. What
should secure a soul that it is otherwise; seeing it is supposed, that it does
not universally labor to keep the word of Christ's patience, and to be
watchful in all things? think you that the peace of many in these days, will
be found to be true peace at last? nothing less; they go alive down to hell,
and death will have dominion over them in the morning. Now if a man's peace be
such, do you think that can preserve him, which cannot preserve its self? It
will give way at the first vigorous assault of a Temptation in its hight and
hour. Like a broken reed, it will run into the hand of him that leans on
it: But

2. Suppose the peace cared for, and proposed to safeguard the soul, be true
and good; yet when all is laid up in this one bottom, when the hour of
temptation comes, so many reliefs will be tendered against this consideration,
as will make it useless. This evil is small, it is questionable, it falls not
openly and dovvnright upon conscience; I do but fear consequences, it may be
I may keep my peace notvvithstanding others of the people of God, have fallen
and yet kept, or recovered their peace: if it be lost for a season, it may be
obtained again; I will not solicit its station any more; or though peace be
lost, safty may remain; and a thousand such pleas there are, which are all
planted as batteries against this fort, So that it cannot long hold out.

3. The fixing on this particular only; is to make good one passage or
entrance, vvhilest the Enemy assaults us round about. It is true, a little
armor would serve to defend a man, if he might choose where his enemy should
strike him; but we are commanded to take the whole armor of God if we intend
to resist and stand, Ephesians. 6. This we speak of is but one piece, and when
our eye is only to that, Temptation may enter and prevail twenty other ways.
For instance! a man may be tempted to wordlinesse, unjust gain, revenge, vain
glory or the like; if he fortify himself alone with this consideration, he
will not do this thing, and wound his conscience, and loose his peace; fixing
his eye on this particular, and counting himself safe, whilst he is not
overcome on that hand; it may be neglect of private Communion with God,
sensuality and the like do creep in and he is not one jot in a better
condition, then if he had fallen under the power of that part of the
temptation, which was most visibly pressing on him.

4. Experience gives to see that this does and will fail also. There is no
Saint of God, but puts a valuation on the peace he has: yet how many of them
fail in the day of temptation? but yet

4. They have another consideration also, and that is, the vileness of sinning
against God? how shall they do this thing and sin against God the God of their
mercies, of their salvation. How shall they wound Jesus Christ who dyed for
them? This surely cannot but preserve them.

Ans. 1. We see every day this consideration failing also. There is no child of
God that is overcome of temptation, but overcomes this consideration. It is not
then a sure and infallible defensative.

2. This consideration is twofold; either it expresses the thoughts of the
soul with particular reference to the Temptation contended withal; and then
it will not preserve it: Or it expresses the universal habitual frame of
heart that is in us, upon all accounts, and then it falls in with what I
shall tender as the universal medicine and remedy, in this case, in the
process of this discourse; whereof afterward.

2. Consider the power of Temptation partly from what was showed before, from
the effects and fruits of it, in the Saints of old; partly from such other
effects in General as we find ascribed to it: as

1. It will darken the mind, that a man shall not be able to make a right
Judgment of things, so as he did before he entered into it. As in the men of
the world, the God of this world blindes their minds, that they should not see
the Glory of Christ in the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and whore dome, wine, and new
wine take away their hearts, Ho. 4. 11. So it is in the nature of every
temptation more or less, to take away the heart, or to darken the
understanding of the person tempted.

And this it does diverse ways:

1. By fixing the imagination, and the thoughts, upon the object whereto it
tends, so that the mind shall be diverted from the consideration of the things
that would relief and succor it in the state wherein it is. A man is tempted
to apprehend that he is forsaken of God, that he is an object of his hatred,
that he has no interest in Christ; by the craft of Satan, the mind shall be so
fixed to the consideration of this state and condition, with the distress of
it, that he shall not be able to manage any of the reliefes suggested, and
tendered to him against it; but following the fulness of his own thoughts,
shall walk on in darkness, and have no light. I say a Temptation will so
possess and fill the mind with thoughtfullnesse of its self; and the matter
of it, that it will take off from that clear consideration of things which
otherwise it might, and would have. And those things whereof the mind was wont
to have a vigorous sense, to keep it from sin, will by this means come to
have no force nor efficacy with it: Nay it will commonly bring men to that
state and condition, that when others to whom their estate is known, are
speaking to them the things that concern their deliverance and peace, their
minds will be so possessed with the matter of their temptation, as not at all
to understand, scarce to hear one word that is spoken to them.

2. By woeful intangling of the Affections, which when they are engaged, what
influence they have in blinding the mind, and darkening the understanding, is
known: if any know it not, let him but open his eyes, in these days, and he
will quickly learn it. By what ways and means it is, that engaged Affections
will becloude the mind and darken it, I shall not now declare. Only I say; give
me a man engaged in hope, love, fear, in reference to any particulars, wherein
he ought not, and I shall quickly show you, wherein he is darkened and blinded.
This then you will fail in, if you enter into temptation: The present Judgment
you have of things, will not be utterly altered, but darkened, and rendered
infirm, to influence the will, and master the Affections; These being set at
liberty by Temptation, will run on in madness. Forthwith detestation of
sin, abhorring of it, terrors of the Lord, sense of love, presence of Christ
crucified all depart and leave the heart a prey to its enemy.

3. Temptation will give oil and fuel to our lusts, incite, provoke, and make
them tumultuate, and rage beyond measure; Tendering a lust, a corruption, a
suitable object, advantage, occasion, it heightens and exaspertes it, makes it
for a season wholly predominant; so dealt it with carnal fear in Peter, with
pride in Hezekiah, with Coveteousnesse in Achan, with uncleanesse in David,
with worldliness in Demas, with Ambition in Diotrephes; it will lay the reins
on the neck of a Lust, and put spurs to the sides of it, that it may rush
forward, like an horse into the battle. A man knows not the pride, fury,
madness of a corruption, until it meet with a suitable temptation. And what
now will a poor soul think to do! His Mind is darkened, his Affections
entangled, his lusts enflamed, and provoked, his relief is defeated, and what
will be the issue of such a Condition?

3. Consider that Temptations are either public or private; and let us a little
view the efficacy, and power of them apart.

1. There are public temptations; such as that mentioned, Revel. 3. 10. that
was to come upon the world to try them that dwell upon the earth; or a
combination of persecution and seduction for the trial of a Careless
Generation of professors: now carrying such a Temptation; consider, that

1. It has an Efficacy in respect of God, who sends it to revenge the neglect
and contempt of the Gospel on the one hand; and treachery of false professors
on the other. Hence it shall certainly accomplish what it receives Commission
from him to do. When Satan offers his service to go forth and seduce Ahab, that
he might fall; God says to him thou shall persuade him and prevail also, go
forth and do so, 1 King. 22. 22, he is permitted as to his wickedness, and
Commissionated as to the event, and punishment intended. When the Christian
world, was to be given up to folly and false worship, for their neglect of the
truth, and their naked, barren, fruitless, Christ-dishonouring profession; it
is said of the Temptation that fell upon them; that God sent them strong
delusions, that they should believe a lie, 2. These. 2. 11. That, that comes so
from God in a judiciary manner, has a power with it, and shall prevail; That
selfish, spiritually slothful, careless and worldly frame of spirit, which in
these days has infected almost the body of professors, if it have a
Commission from God, to kill hypocrities, to wound negligent saints, to break
their bones, and make them scandalous, that they may be ashamed, shall it not
have a power and efficacy so to do? What work has the spirit of error made
amongst us? is it not from hence; that as some men delighted not to retain God
in their hearts so he has given them up to a reprobate mind, Romans 1. 28. A man
would think it strange, yea it is matter of amazement, to see persons of a
sober spirit, pretending to great things in the ways of God, overcome,
captivated, ensnared, destroyed, by weak means, sottish opinions, foolish
imaginations, such as a man would think it impossible that they should ever lay
hold on sensible or rational men, much less on professors of the Gospel. But
that which God will have to be strong, let us not think weak? no strength but
the strength of God, can stand in the way of the weakest things of the world,
that are commissionated from God, for any end or purpose whatever.

2. There is in such Temptations, the secret insinuation of Examples in those
that are accounted Godly, and are professors, Matthew. 24. 12. Because iniquity
shall abound the love of many shall wax cold, etc. the abounding of iniquity in
some will insensibly cast water on the zeal and love of others, that by little
and little it shall wax cold. Some begin to grow negligent, careless, worldly,
wanton; they break the ice toward the pleasing of the flesh; at first others
blame, judge them, perhaps reprove them in a short space their love also waxes
cold, and the brunt being over, they also conform to them, and are cast into
the same mould with them. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, Paul
repeates this saying twice; 1 Cor. 5. 6. and Gal. 5. 9. He would have us take
notice of it, and it is of the danger of the infection of the whole body from
the ill examples of some, whereof he speaks. We know how insensibly a leaven
proceeds to give a savor to the whole: So it is termed a root of
bitterness that springs up, and defiles many: Heb. 12. 15. If one little
piece of leaven, if one bitter root may endanger the whole, how much more when
there are many roots of that nature, and much leaven is scattered abroad. It is
easy following a multitude to do evil; and saying a conspiracy to them to whom
the people say a conspiracy. Would any one have thought it possible, that such
and such professors in our days, should have fallen into ways of self, of
flesh, of the world? to play at cards, dice, revell, dance? to neglect family,
closet duties, to be proud, haughty, ambitious, worldly, covetous, oppressive?
or that they should be turned away after foolish, vain, ridiculous opinions,
diserting the Gospel of Christ? in which two, lies the great temptation that
is come on us the inhabitants of this world to try us: but does not every man
see, that this is come to pass? and may we not see how it is come to pass?
Some loose empty professors, that had never more then a form of Godliness,
when they had served their turn of that, began the way to them; then others
began a little to comply, and to please the flesh in so doing; this by little and
little has reached even the top boughs and branches of our profession; until
almost all flesh has corrupted its ways; and he that departs from these
iniquities, makes his name a prey, if not his person.

3. Public Temptations are usually accompanied with strong reasonings and
pretenses, that are too hard for men, or at least insensibly prevail upon
them, to an undervaluation of the evil whereunto the Temptation leads, to give
strength to that complicated temptation which in these days has even cast
down the People of God, from their excellency, has cut their locks, and made
them become like other men; how full is the world of specious pretenses and
pleadings! As there is the liberty and freedom of Christians, delivered from a
bondage frame; This is a door that in my own observation, I have seen sundry
going out at, into sensuality and Apostasy; beginning at a light conversation,
proceeding to a neglect of the sabbath, public and private duties, ending in
dissoluteness and profaneness; and then there is leaving of public things to
providence, being contented with what is; things Good in themselves, but
disputed into wretched carnal complyances, and the utter ruin of all zeal
for God, the interest of Christ, or his people in the world. These and the like
considerations, joined with the ease, and plenty, the greatness and promotion
of professors, have so brought things about, that whereas we have by providence
shifted places with the men of the world, we have by sin, shifted spirits
with them also: We are like a plantation of men, carried into a foreign
country: in a short space they degenerate from the manners of the people from
whence they came, and fall into that of the country whereunto they are brought;
as if there were something in the soil and the air that transformed them.
Give me leave a little to follow my similitude; He that should see the
prevailing party of these nations, many of those in Rule, power, favor with
all their adherents, and remember that they were a colony of Puritans, whose
habitation was in a low place, as the prophet speaks of the city of God,
translated by an high hand to the mountains, they now possess; cannot but
wonder, how soon they have forgot the customs, manners, ways, of their own
old people, and are cast into the mould of them that went before them, in the
places whereunto they are translated. I speak of us all; especially of us, who
are amongst the lowest of the people; where perhaps this iniquity does most
abound. What were those before us, that we are not? What did they, we do not?
Prosperity has slain the foolish, and wounded the wise.

2. Suppose the Temptation is private; this has been spoken to before; I shall
add two things,

1. Its Union and incorporation with lust, whereby it gets within the soul,
and lies at the bottom of its actings. John tells us: 1 Epist. 2. 16. that
things that are in the world, are the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
the pride of life. Now it is evident that all these things, are principally in
the subject, not in the object; in the heart, not in the world. But they are
said to be in the world, because the world gets into them; mixes its self with
them, unites, incorporates. As faith and the promises are said to be mixed,
Heb. 4. 2. So are lust and Temptation mixed; they twine together, receive
mutual improvement from one another; grow each of them higher and higher by
the mutual strength, they administer to one another. Now by this means
temptation gets so deep in the heart, that no contrary reasonings can reach
unto it; nothing but what can kill the lust, can conquer the Temptation. Like
leprosy that has mingled it self with the wall; the wall its self must be
pulled down, or the leprosy will not be cured. Like a Gangreen that mixes
poison with the blood and spirits, and cannot be separated from the place
where it is; but both must be cut off together. For instance, in David's
Temptation to uncleanness: Ten thousand considerations might have been taken
in, to stop the mouth of the Temptation; but it had united its self with his
lust, and nothing but the killing of that, could destroy it, or get him the
conquest. This deceives many a one: they have some pressing Temptation, that
having got some advantages is urgent upon them: they pray against it, oppose it
with all powerful considerations; such, as whereof every one seems
sufficient to conquer and destroy it, at least to overpovver it, that it should
never be troublesome any more but no good is done, no ground is got or
obtained, yea it grows upon them more and more: what is the Reason of it? it
has incorporated and united its self with the Lust, and is safe from all the
opposition they make. If they would make work indeed, they are to set upon the
whole of the lust its self; their ambition, pride, worldliness, sensuality,
or what ever it be, that the Temptation is united with. All other dealings with
it are like Temperings with a prevailing gangreen; the part or whole may be
preserved a little while, in great torment; Excision or death must come at last.
The soul may cruciate its self for a season, with such a procedure; but it
must come to this, its lust must dye, or the soul must dye.

2. In what part soever of the soul the Lust be seated wherewith the
Temptation is united, it draws after it the whole soul, by one means or
other, and so prevents or anticipates any opposition. Suppose it be a lust of
the mind; as there are lusts of the mind, and uncleanesse of the spirit; such
as Ambition, vain glory, and the like; what a world of ways has the
understanding to bridle the Affections, that they should not so tenaciously
cleave to God, seeing in what it aims at, there is so much to give them
contentment and satisfaction. It will not only prevent all the Reasonings of
the mind, which it does necessarily, being like a bloody infirmity in the eyes,
presenting all things to the common sense and perception in that hue and
color; but it will draw the whole soul on other accounts, and collateral
considerations, into the same frame. It promises the whole a share in the
spoil aimed at; as Judas his money, that he first desired from covetousness,
was to be shared among all his lusts. Or be it in the more sensual part, and
first possesses the Affections; what prejudices they will bring upon the
understanding, how they will bribe it to an acquiescency, what Arguments, what
hopes they will supply it withal cannot easily be expressed; as was before
showed. In brief there is no particular Temptation, but, when it is in its
hour, it has such a contribution of assistance from things Good, evil,
indifferent, is fed by so many considerations, that seem to be most alien and
foreign to it, in some cases has such specious pleas and pretenses, that its
strength will easily be acknowledged.

5. Consider the End of any Temptation; This is Satan's end, and sins end; that
is, the dishonor of God, and the ruin of our souls.

6. Consider what has been the issue of any former Temptations that thou have
had; have they not defiled thy conscience, disquieted thy peace, weakened thee
in thy obedience, clouded the face of God? though thou wast not prevailed on to
the outward evil or utmost issue of thy temptation; yet have thou not been
foiled, has not thy soul been sullied and greviously perplexed with it? yea
did thou ever in thy life come fairly of without sensible, loss from any
temptation almost that thou had to deal withal? And And would thou
willingly be entangled again? if thou art at Liberty, take heed, enter no more
if it be possible, lest a worse thing happen to thee.

These I say are some of those many considerations, that might be insisted on,
to manifest the importance of the truth proposed, and the fullness of our
concernment, in taking care that we enter not into temptation.

Against it have been spoken, some objections that secretly insinuate
themselves into the souls of men, and have an efficacy to make them negligent
and careless, in this thing which is of such importance to them; a duty of
such indispensable necessity to them who intend to walk with God, in any
peace, or with any faithfulness: which objections are to be considered and
rennounced: and they are these that follow.

Obj: 1. Why should we so fear, and labor to avoid temptation? Jam. 1. 2. we
are commanded to count it all joy when we fall into diverse temptations: now
certainly I need not solicitously avoid the falling into that, which when I am
fallen into, I am to count it all joy.

Ans 1. You will not hold by this Rule in all things: namely, that a man need
not seek to avoid that, which when he cannot but fall into, it is his duty to
rejoice therein. The same Apostle bids the rich rejoice that they are made low,
Chap. 1. 10. And without doubt to him who is acquainted with the Goodness and
wisdom, and Love of God in his dispensations in every condition that is
needful for him, it will be a matter of rejoicing to him; but yet how few rich
Godly men can you persuade not to take heed, and use all lawful means that
they be not made poor and low; and in most cases, the truth is it were their
sin, not to do so. It is our business to make good our stations, and to
secure our selves as we can; if God alter our condition, we are to rejoice in
it: if the Temptations here mentioned befall us, we may have cause to rejoice;
but not if by a neglect of duty we fall into them.

2. Temptations are taken two ways;

1. Passively and merely materially, for such things, as are, or in some cases
may be temptations; or 2. actively for such as do entise to sin: James
speaks of temptations in the first sense only: for having said, count it all
joy, when you fall into manifold temptations, v. 2. he adds v. 12. blessed is
the man that endures Temptation; for when he is tried he shall receive the
crown of life. But now whereas a man might say, if this be so, then
Temptations are good, and from God; no says James; Take Temptation in such a
sense, as that it is a thing enticing and leading to sin so God tempts none;
but every man is tempted of his own lust. v. 13. 14. To have such temptations,
to be tempted to sin, that is not the blessed thing I intend; but the
enduring of Afflictions that God sends, for the trial of our faith: that is a
blessed thing: so that though I must count it all joy, when through the will of
God I fall into diverse Afflictions, for my trial, which yet have the matter of
temptation in them, yet I am to use all care and diligence, that my Lust have
no occasions or advantages given unto it, to tempt me to sin.

Obj. 2. But was not our Savior Christ himself tempted; and is it evil to be
brought into the same state and condition with him? Yea it is not only said,
that he was tempted: but his being so, is expressed as a thing advantageous,
and conducing to his mercifullnesse as our high Priest, Heb. 2. 17, 18. in that
himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. And he makes it a ground of a great promise, to his disciples, that
they had abode with him in his temptations, Luke 22. 28.

Ans. It is true! our Savior was tempted; but yet his temptations, are
reckoned among the evils that befell him in the days of his flesh; things
that came on him through the malice of the world, and the Prince thereof. He
did not wilfully cast himself into temptation, which he said was to tempt the
Lord our God, Math. 4. 7. as indeed willingly to enter into any temptation is
highly to tempt God. Now our condition is so, that use the greatest diligence
and watchfulness that we can, yet we shall be sure to be tempted, and be made
like to Christ therein.

This hinders not, but that it is our duty to the utmost to prevent our falling
into them; and that namely on this account. Christ had only the suffering part
of temptation, when he entered into it, we have also the sinning part of it.
When the Prince of this world came to Christ he had no part in him, but when he
comes to us, he has so, in us; so that though in one effect of Temptations;
namely, trialls and disquietnesse; we are made like to Christ and so are to
rejoice, as far as by any means that is produced; yet by another, we are made
unlike to him, which is our being defiled and entangled, and are therefore to
seek by all means to avoid them, we never come of like Christ: who of us enter
into temptation and are not defiled?

3. Obj: But what need this great endeavor and carfulness? is it not said
that God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape? 1 Cor. 10. 13.
and he knows how to deliver the Godly out of temptation, 2 Pet. 2. 9: what
need we then be solticious that we enter not into them?

Ans. I much question what Assistance he will have from God in his Temptation,
who willingly enters into it, because he supposes God has promised to deliver
him out of it. The Lord knows, that through the craft of Satan, the subtility
and malice of the world, the deceitfulness of sin that does so easily beset
us, when we have done our utmost, yet we shall enter into diverse temptations;
in his Love, Care, Tenderness, and faithfulness, he has provided such a
sufficiency of Grace for us, that they shall not utterly prevail to make an
everlasting separation between him and our souls: yet I have 3. things to say
to this objection.

1. He that wilfully or negligently enters into Temptation, has no reason in
the world to promise himself any assistance from God, or any deliverance from
the Temptation wherinto he is entered.

The promise is made to them whom temptations do befall in their way, whether
they will or no; not them that wilfully fall into them, that run out of their
way to meet with them. And therefore the Devil (as is usually observed) when
he tempted our Savior, left out that expression of the Text of Scripture,
which he wrested to his purpose, all thy ways: The promise of deliverance is
to them who are in their ways; whereof this is one principal, to beware of
Temptation.

2. Though there be a sufficiency of Grace provided for all the Elect, that
they shall by no temptation fall utterly from God; yet it would make any
gracious heart to tremble; to think what dishonor to God, what scandal to
the Gospel, what woeful darkness, and disquietnesse they may bring upon their
own souls, though they perish not. And they who are scared by nothing but
fear of Hell, on whom other considerations short thereof, have no influence,
in my apprehension, have more reason to fear it, then perhaps they are aware
of.

3. To enter on temptation on this account, is to venture on sin (which is
the same with continuing in sin) that Grace may abound; which the Apostle
rejects the thoughts of; with greatest detestation is it not a madness for a
man willingly to suffer the ship wherein he is to split it self on a rock,
Romans 6. 1, 2.
to the irrecoverable loss of his merchandise because he supposes he shall in
his own person swim safely to shore on a planke? Is it less in him, who will
hazard the shipwreck of all his comfort, peace, joy, and so much of the Glory
of God, and honor of the Gospel as he is entrusted with, merely on
supposition that his soul shall yet escape? these things a man would think
did not deserve to be mentioned; and yet with such as these, do poor souls
sometimes delude themselves.

CHAP. 4.
Particular cases proposed to consideration: the first its Restitution in
sundry particulars; several discoveries of the state of a soul entering into
Temptation.
THESE things being premised in General, I preceed to the Consideration of 3
particular Cases arising from the truth proposed, the first whereof relates
unto the thing it self; the second unto the time or season thereof; and the
last unto our deportment in reference unto the prevention of the evil treated
of.

First then it may be enquired,

1. How a man may know, when he is entered into temptation.

2. What seasons there are wherein a man may, and ought to fear, that an hour
of temptation is at hand.

3* What Directions are to be given, for the preventing of our entering into
Temptation.

How shall a man know whether he be entered into temptation or no, is our first
enquiry: I say then,

1. When a man is drawn into any sin, he may be sure that he has entered
into temptation. All sin is from Temptation, James. 1. 14. Sin is a fruit,
that comes only from that Root. Though a man be never so suddenly, or violently
surprised in, or with any sin, yet it is from some Temptation or other, that
he has been so surprised: so the Apostle, Gal. 6. 1. If a man be surprised,
overtaken with a fault, yet he was tempted to it: for says He, consider thy
self lest thou also be tempted, that is, as he was, when he was so surprised,
as it were at unawares. This men sometimes take no notice of, to their great
disadvantage; When they are overtaken with a sin, they set themselves to
repent of that sin, but do not consider the temptation that was the cause of
it, to set themselves against that also; to take care that they enter no more
into it; Hence are they quickly again entangled by it; though they have the
greatest detestation of the sin it self, that can be expressed. He that
would indeed get the Conquest over any sin, must consider his Temptations to
it, and strike at that root; Without deliverance from thence, he will not be
healed.

This is a folly that possesses many, who have yet a quick and living sense of
sin: They are sensible of their sins, not of their temptations; are
displeased with the bitter fruit, but cherish the poisonous root: Hence in the
midst of their humiliations for sin, they will continue in those ways,
those societies, in the pursuit of those ends, which have occasioned that sin;
of which more afterward.

2. Temptations have several degrees: Some arise to such an height, do so
press on the soul, so cruciate and disquiet it, so fight against all
opposition that is made to it, that it must needs be past all doubt to him who
is so assaulted, that it is a peculiar power of temptation that he is to
wrestle withal. When a feavour rages, a man knovves he is sick, unless his
distemper have made him mad. The lusts of men as James tells us, entise, draw
away, and seduce them to sin; but this they do of themselves without peculiar
instigation, in a more quiet, even, and sedate manner; if they grow violent, if
they hurry the soul up and down, give it no rest, the soul may know that
they have got the help of temptation to this assisistance.

Take an empty vessel, and put it into some stream, that is in its course to
the sea; it will infallibly be carried thither, according to the course and
speed of the stream; But let strong winds arise upon it, it will be driven
with violence on every bank and rock, until being broken in pieces, it is
swallowed up of the ocean. Men's lusts will infallibly (if not mortified in the
death of Christ) carry them into eternal ruin; but oftentimes without much
noise, according to the course of the stream of their corruptions. But let the
wind of strong temptations befall them, they are hurried into innumerable
scandalous sins, and so broken upon all accounts, are swallowed up in eternity;
so is it in general with men; so in particular.

Hezekiah had the root of pride in him always, yet it did not make him run
up and down to show his treasure, and his riches, until he fell into
Temptation, by the Ambassadors of the King off Babylon; so had David! yet
could he keep of from numbering the people, until Satan stood up and provoked
him, and solicited him to do it. Judas was covetous from the beginning, yet he
did not contrive to satisfy it, by selling of his Master, until the Devil
entered into him, and he thereby into Temptation. The like may be said of
Abraham, Jonah, Peter and the rest. So that when any lust or corruption
whatever, tumultuates and disquieteth the soul, puts it with violence on
sin; lest the soul know that it has got the advantage of some outward
temptation, though as yet, it perceives not wherein, or at least is become its
self a peculiar temptation, by some incitation or provocation that has
befallen it and is to be looked to, more then ordinarily.

3. Entering into temptation may be seen in the lest degrees of it. As for
instance when the heart begins secretly to like the matter of the temptation,
and is content to feed it, and increase it by any ways that it may, without
downright sin.

1. Then, in particular, a man begins to be in repute for piety, wisdom,
learning or the like: He is spoken of much to that purpose. His heart is
tickled to hear of it, and his pride and Ambition affected with it. If this
man now with all his strength, ply the things from whence his repute and
esteem and glory amongst men do spring, with a secret eye to have it
increased, he is entering into temptation, which if he take not heed will
quickly render him a slave of lust. So was it with Jehu, He perceived that his
repute for zeal began to grow abroad, and he got honor by it; Jonadab comes
in his way; a good and holy man; now thinks Jehu, I have an opportunity to grow
in the honor of my zeal: so he calls Jonadab to him, and to work he goes most
seriously: The things he did, were good in themselves, but he was entered into
Temptation, and served his lust in all that he did. So is it with many
Scholars; they find themselves esteemed and favored for their learning; this
takes hold of the pride and ambition of their hearts; hence they set themselves
to study with all diligence day and night; a thing good in it self; but they
do it, that they may satisfy the thoughts and words of men wherein they
delight, and so in all they do, they make provision for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts thereof.

It is true! God oftentimes brings light out of this darkness; and turns
things to a better issue. After it may be a man has studied sundry years,
with an eye upon his lusts; his ambitition, pride, and vain glory; rising
early, and going to bed late to give them satisfaction; God comes in with his
Grace; turns the soul to himself; and so robbes those Egyptian lusts, and
so consecrates that to the use of the Tabernacle, which was provided for Idols.

Men may be thus entangled in better things than learning; even in the
profession of piety, in their labor in the ministry, and the like.

Some men's profession is a snare to them; they are in reputation, and are much
honored on the account of their profession and strict walking; This often falls
out in the days wherein we live, wherein all things are carried by parties;
some find themselves on the accounts mentioned perhaps to be the darlings, and
ingentia decora, or glory of their party; if thoughts hereof secretly insinuate
themselves into their hearts, and influence them into more then ordinary
diligence, and activity in their way and profession, they are entangled; and
instead of aiming at more glory, had need lie in the dust, in a sense of their
own vileness; and so close with this temptation; that oftentimes it requires
no food to feed upon, but that he who is entangled with it, do avoid all means
and ways of honor and reputation; so that it can but whisper in the heart,
that, that avoidance is honorable; The same may be the condition with men, as
was said, in preaching the Gospel, in the work of the Ministry; many things in
that work may yield them esteem, their Ability, their plainness, their
frequency, their success; and all in this sense may be fuel unto temptations.
Let then a man know, that when he likes that which feeds his lust, and keeps it
up, by ways either good in themselves, or not down right sinful, he is
entered into Temptation.

4. When by a man's state or condition of life, or any means whatever, it comes
to pass, that his Lust, and any Temptation meet with Occasions and
Opportunities for its provocation and stirring up; Let that man know, whether
he perceive it or not, that he is certainly entered into Temptation. I told you
before, that to enter into temptation, is not merely to be tempted, but so to
be under the power of it, as to be entangled by it. Now it is impossible
almost, for a man to have Opportunities, Occasions, Advantages suited to his
Lust and corruption, but he will be entangled. If Ambassadors come from the
King of Babylon, Hezekiahs pride will cast him into temptation. If Hazael be
King of Syria, his cruelty and Ambition will make him to rage savagely against
Israel; if the Priests come with their pieces of silver, Judas his
covetousness will instantly be at work to sell his Master; and many instances
of the like kind may in the days wherein we live be given. Some men think to
play on the hole of the aspe, and not be stung, to touch pitch, and not be
defiled; to take fire in their clothes, and not be burnt; but they will be
mistaken. If thy business, course of life, societies, (or what ever else it be
of the like kind,) do cast thee on such Things, Ways, Persons, as suit thy
Lust or corruption; know that thou art entered into Temptation; how thou will
come out, God only knows: let us suppose a man that has any seeds of
filthiness in his heart, engaged in the course of his life, in society, light,
vain, and foolish; what notice soever, little, great, or none at all, it be,
that he takes of it; he is undoubtedly entered into temptation; so is it with
ambition in high places; passion in a multitude of perplexing affairs;
polluted, corrupt fancy in vain societies, and the perusal of idle books, or
Treatises of vanity and folly; fire and things combustible may more easily be
induced to lie together without affecting each other, then peculiar lusts and
suitable objects or occasions for their exercise.

5. When a man is weakened, made negligent, or formal in duty, when he can
omit duties, or content himself with a careless, lifelesse performance of
them, without delight, joy, or satisfaction to his soul, who had another frame
formerly; let him know, that though he may not be acquainted with the
particular distemper, wherein it consists; yet in something or other, he is
entered into Temptation, which at the length he will find evident to his trouble
and peril. How many have we seen, and known in our days, who from a warm
profession, have fallen to be negligent, careless, indifferent in Praying,
Reading, Hearing and the like? give an instance of one who has come off
without a wound, and I dare say you may find out an hundred for him that have
manifested themselves to have been a sleep on the top of the mast; that they
were in the jaws of some vile Temptation or other, that afterward brought
forth bitter fruit in their lives and ways: from some few Returns, from
folly, we have every day these doleful complaints made. Oh I neglected private
prayer, I did not meditate on the Word, nor attend to hearing; but rather
despised these things, and yet said I was rich, and wanted nothing: little did I
consider, that this unclean lust was ripening in my heart, this Atheism,
these Abominations were fomenting there. This is a certain rule; if his heart
grow cold, negligent, or formal in duties of the worship of God, and that
either as to the matter, or manner of them, who has had another frame, one
Temptation or other, has laid hold upon him. World, or pride, or uncleanesse,
or self seeking, or malice and envy, or one thing or other, has possessed his
spirit; gray hairs are here and there upon him, though he perceive it not. And
this is to be observed as to the manner of duties, as well as to the matter.
Men may upon many sinister accounts, especially for the satisfaction of their
consciences, keep up, and frequent duties of Religion, as to the substance and
matter of them; when they have no heart to them, no life in them, as to the
spirituality required in their performance. Sardis kept up the performance of
duties, and had therefore a name to live; but it wanted spiritual life in
their performance and was therefore dead, Rev. 3. 1. As it is in distempers of
the body; if a man find his spirits faint, his Heart oppressed, his Head heavy,
the whole person indisposed, though he do not yet actually burn, nor rave; yet
he will cry, I fear I am entering into a fever; I am so out of order and
indisposed. A man may do so in this sickness of the soul, If he find his
pulse not beat aright, and evenly toward duties of worship, and communion with
God, if his spirit be low, and his heart faint in them, let him conclude,
though his lust does not yet burn nor rage, that he is entered into
Temptation, and it is high time for him to consider the particular Causes of
his distemper. If the head be heavy, and slumber in the things of Grace, if the
heart be cold in duties, evil lies at the door. And if such a soul do escape
a great Temptation unto sin, yet it shall not escape a great temptation by
desertion. The spouse cries, I sleep, Cant. 5. 2. and that she had put off her
coat, and could not put it on; had an indisposition to duties, and Communion
with Christ. What is the next news, you have of her verse. 6. her beloved had
withdrawn himself; Christ was gone, and she seeks him long and finds him
not. There is such a suitableness between the new nature that is wrought and
created in believers, and the duties of the worship of God, that they will not
be parted nor kept asunder, unless it be by the interposition of some
disturbing diste^per. The new creature feeds upon them, is strengthened and
increased by them, finds sweetness in them, yea meets in them with its God and
Father; so that it cannot but of its self, unless made sick by some
temptation, but delight in them, and desire to be in the exercise of them; This
frame is described in the 119th Psalm throughout. It is not I say cast out of
this frame and temper, unless it be oppressed, and disordered, by one secret
Temptation or other. Sundry other evidences there are of a souls entering into
temptation, which upon enquiry it may discover.

I propose this to take off the security that we are apt to fall into; and to
manifest what is the peculiar duty that we are to apply our selves unto in the
special seasons of Temptation. For he that is already entered into temptation
is to apply himself unto means for disintanglement, not to labor to prevent
his entering in. How this may be done I shall afterward declare.

CHAP. V.
The second case proposed, or enquiries resolved. What are the best directions,
to prevent entering into temptation; Those directions laid down. The
directions given by our Savior; Watch and Pray. What is included therein. 1.
Sense of the danger of Temptation. 2. That it is not in our power to keep our
selves. 3. faith in promises of preservation. Of Prayer in particular. Of
Watching.
HAving seen the danger of entering into temptation, and also discovered, the
ways and seasons, whereby, and wherein men usually do so.

Our second enquiry is; what general directions may be given to preserve a
soul from that condition that has been spoken of. And we see our Saviors
direction in the place spoken of before, Matthew. 26. 41. He sums up all in these
two words Watch, and Pray; I shall a little labor to unfold them, and show
what is enwrapped and contained in them: and that both jointly, and severally.

1. There is included in them, a clear abiding Apprehension of the great evil
that there is in entering into Temptation. That which a man watches, and prays
against. He looks upon as evil to him, and by all means to be avoided.

This then is the first direction; Always bear in mind, the great danger that
it is, for any soul to enter into Temptation. It is a woeful thing to
consider what slight thoughts the most have of this thing: so men can keep
themselves from sin it self, in open action, they are content, they scarce
aim at more; on any Temptation in the world, all sorts of men will venture at
any time.

How will young men put themselves on any company, any society; at first being
delighted with evil company, then with the evil of the company. How vain are
all Admonitions, and Exhortations to them, to take heed of such, or such
persons, debauched in themselves, corrupters of others, destroyers of souls?
at first they will venture on the company, abhorring the thoughts of
practicing; their lewdness: but what is the issue? unless it be here or there
one, whom God snatches with a mighty hand, from the jaws of destruction, they
are all lost, and become after a while in love with the evil, which at first
they abhorred. This open door, to the ruin of souls, is too evident; and
woeful experience makes it no less evident, that it is almost impossible to
fasten upon many poor creatures, any fear or dread of Temptation, who yet
will profess a fear, and abhorrency of sin. Would it were only thus with
young men; such as are unaccustomed to the yoke of the Lord. What sort of man
is free from this folly in one thing or other?

How many professors have I known that would plead for their Liberty as they
called it. They could hear any thing, all things; all sorts of men, all men;
they would try all things, whither they come to them, in the way of God or no;
and on that account would run to hear and to attend to every broacher of
false and abominable opinions; every seducer though stigmatized by the
generality of the Saints, for such a one they had their liberty, they could do
it; but the opinions they hated as much as any; what has been the issue? I
scarce ever knew any come off without a wound; the most have had their faith
overthrown: Let no man then pretend to fear sin, that does not fear
temptation to it. They are too nearely allied, to be separated. Satan has put
them so together that it is very hard, for any man to put them asunder: He
hates not the fruit, who delights in the root.

When men see, that such ways, such companies, such courses, such businesses,
such studdies and aims do entangle them, make them cold, careless, are
quenchcoles to them, indispose them to even, universal, and constant
obedience, if they adventure on them, sin lies at the door. It is a tender
frame of spirit, sensible of its own weakness, and corruption, of the craft
of Satan, of the evil of sin, of the efficacy of Temptation, that can perform
this duty. And yet until we bring our hearts to this frame, upon the
considerations before mentioned, or the like that may be proposed we shall
never free our selves from sinful intanglements.

Boldness upon temptation, springing from several pretenses; has as is
known ruined innumerable professors in those days; and still continues to
cast many down from their Excellency; nor have I the least hope of a more
fruitful profession amongst us, until I see more fear of Temptation. Sin
will not long seem great or heavy unto any, to whom temptations seem light or
small.

This is the first thing enwrapped in this General direction; The daily
exercise of our thoughts with an apprehension of the great danger that lies in
entering into Temptation is required of us. Grief of the spirit of God,
disquietment of our own souls, loss of peace, Hazard of eternal welfare,
lies at the door: If the soul be not prevailed withal, to the observation of
this direction, all that ensues, will be of no value; Temptation despised, will
conquer: and if the heart be made tender and watchful here, half the work of
securing a Good Conversation is over. And let not him go any farther, who
resolves not to improve this direction in a daily Conscientious observation of
it.

2. There is this in it also, That it is not a thing in our own power to keep
and preserve our selves from entering into temptation. Therefore are we to pray
that we may be preserved from it, because we cannot save our selves. This is
another means of preservation; As we have no strength, to resist a Temptation
when it does come, when we are entered into it, but shall fall under it, without
a supply of sufficiency of Grace from God, so to reckon that we have no power
or wisdom to keep our selves from entering into temptation, but must be kept by
the power and wisdom of God, is a preserving principle, 1 Pet. 1. 5. We are in
all things kept by the power of God. This our Savior instructs us in, not only
by directing us to pray that we be not lead into temptation; but also by his
own praying for us, that we may be kept from it. Joh. 17. 15. I pray not that
thou should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them
from the evil: That is the Temptations of the world, unto evil, unto sin,
(...), out of the evil that is in the world, that is Temptation, which is all
that is evil in the world; or from the evil one, who in the world, makes use
of the world, unto Temptation. Christ prays his Father to keep us; and
instructs us to pray that we be so kept; it is not then a thing in our own
power. The ways of our entering into temptation are so many, various, and
imperceptible; the means of it, so efficacious and powerful, the entrances of
it so deceitful, subtle, insensible, and plausible; our weakness, our
unwatchfulnesse so unspeakable, that we cannot in the least keep or preserve
our selves from it: we fail both in wisdom and power for this work.

Let the heart then commune with its self and say, I am poor and weak, Satan
is subtle, cunning, powerful, watching constantly for Advantages against my
soul; the world earnest, pressing, and full of specious pleas, innumerable
pretenses, and ways of deceit; my own corruption violent and tumultuating,
enticing, entangling, conceiving sin, and warring in me, against me.
Occasions and advantages of Temptation innumerable in all things, I have, done,
or suffer, in all businesses and persons with whom I converse.

The first beginnings of Temptation insensible and plausible; so that left unto
my self I shall not know that I am ensnared, until my bonds be made strong,
and sin has got ground in my heart; therefore on God alone will I rely for
preservation, and continually will I look up to him, on that account; This will
make the soul be always committing its self to the care of God, resting its
self on him; and to do nothing, undertake nothing etc: without asking counsel
of him. So that a double Advantage will arise from the Observation of this
direction, both of singular use for the souls preservation from the evil
feared.

First, The engagement of the grace and compassion of God, who has called the
Fatherless, and helpless to rest upon him; nor did ever soul fail of
supplys who in a sense of want, rolled its self on him, on the account of his
gracious invitation.

Secondly, the keeping of it in such a frame, as on various accounts, is
useful for its preservation; He that looks to God for assistance, in a due
manner, is both sensible of his danger, and conscientiously careful in the use
of means to preserve himself, which two, of what importance they are in
this case, may easily be apprehended, by them who have their hearts exercised
in these things.

3. This also is in it, Act, Faith on the promise of God for preservation: To
believe that he will preserve us, is a means of preservation. For this God
will certainly do, or make away for us, to escape out of Temptation if we
fall into it, under such a believing frame. We are to pray for what God has
promised. Our requests are to be regulated by his promises, and commands,
which are of the same extent, faith closes with the promises, and so finds
relief in this case. This James instructs us in, Chapter 1. 5, 7. What we want
we must ask of God: but we must ask it in faith, for otherwise we must
not think that we shall receive any thing of the Lord. This then also is in
this direction of our Savior; that we act Faith on the promises of God, for
our preservation out of Temptation. He has promised that he will keep us in
all our ways; that we shall be directed in a way, that though we are fools,
we shall not err in it, Isa. 55. 8. that he will lead us, guide us, and
deliver us from the evil one. Set faith on work on these promises of God, and
expect a good and comfortable issue. It is not easily conceived what a train
of Graces, faith is attended withal, Mortification of sin in Believer.
when it goes forth to meet Christ in the promises: nor what a power for the
preservation of the soul, lies in this thing: But I have spoken to this
elsewhere.

4. Weigh these things severally, and 1. take prayer into consideration, to
pray that we enter not into Temptation, is a means to preserve us from it.
Glorious things are by all men, that know ought of those things spoken of this
duty; and yet the truth is, not one half of its Excellency, power, and
efficacy is known. It is not my business, to speak of it in General; but
this I say as to my present purpose; he that would be little in temptation, let
him be much in prayer. This calls in the suitable help and succor that is laid
up in Christ for us, Heb. 4. 16. This casts our souls into a frame of
opposition to every Temptation. When Paul had given instruction for the taking
to our selves the whole armor of God, that we may resist and stand in a time
of Temptation, he adds this general close of the whole, Ep. 6. 18. praying
always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto,
with all perseverance, and supplication.

Without this all the rest will be of no efficacy for the end proposed. And
therefore consider what weight he lays on it: praying always! that is at all
times and seasons, or be always ready and prepared for the discharge of that
duty, Luke 18. 1. 1 These. 5. 14. with all prayer and supplications in the
spirit; putting forth all kinds of desires unto God, that are suited to our
condition, according to his will, and which we are assisted in by the Spirit,
and watching thereunto, lest we be diverted, by any thing what ever; and that
not for a little while, but with all perseverance; continuance lengthned out to
the utmost so shall we stand. The soul so framed, is in a sure posture; and
this is one of the means without which this work will not be done. If we do
not abide in prayer, we shall abide in cursed Temptations. Let this then be
another direction. Abide in prayer! and that expressly to this purpose; that we
enter not into Temptations: Let this be one part of our daily contending with
God: that he would preserve our souls; and keep our hearts, and our ways,
that we be not entangled; that his good and wise providence will order our
ways, and affairs that no pressing temptation befall us, that he would give
us diligence, carfulness, watchfulness, over our own ways: so shall we be
delivered, when others are held with the cords of their own folly.

CHAP. 6.
Of watching that we enter not into Temptation: the nature and efficacy of that
duty. The first of it, as to the special seasons of Temptation. The first
season; in unusual prosperity. The second; in a slumber of Grace 3. A season
of great spiritual enjoyments. 4. A season of self confidence.
THE other part of our Saviors direction, namely to watch is more general,
and extends it self to many particulars; I shall fix on some things that are
contained therein.

1. VVatch the Seasons wherein men usually do enter into Temptation. There are
sundry seasons, wherein an hour of Temptation is commonly at hand; and will
unavoidably seize upon the soul, unless it be delivered by mercy in the use
of watchfulness. When we are under such a season, then are we peculiarly to be
upon our guard, that we enter not into, that we fall not under the power of
Temptation. Some of those seasons may be named.

1. A season of unusual outward prosperity is usually accompanied with an
hour of Temptation. Prosperity and temptation go together; yea prosperity is
a temptation; many temptations; and that because without eminent supplies of
Grace, it is apt to cast a soul into a frame and temper exposed to any
Temptation, and provides it will fuel and food for all; it has provision for
lust; and darts for Satan.

The wise man tells us, that the prosperity of fools destroys them, Prove. 1.
31. it hardens them in their way, makes them despise instruction, and put the
evil day (whose terror should influence them into amendment) far from them.
Without a special assistance, it has an inconceivably malignant influence on
Believers themselves. Hence Agur prays against Riches, because of the
Temptation that attends them, lest says he, I be full and deny thee, and say,
who is the Lord, Prove. 30. 8, 9. Lest, being filled with them he should forget
the Lord; as God complains that his people did, Hos. 13. 6. We know how David
was mistaken in this case, Psalm. 30. 6. I said in my prosperity I shall never
be moved: all is well, and will be well, but what was at hand, what lay at the
door, that David thought not of? verse. 7. Thou did hide thy face, and I
was troubled: God was ready to hide his face, and David to enter into a
temptation of desertion, and he knew it not.

As then unto a prosperous condition. I shall not run cross to Solomon's
counsel, in the day of prosperity rejoice, Eccles. 7. 14. Rejoice in the God
of thy mercies, who does thee good in his patience and forbearance,
notvvithstanding all thy unworthiness: Yet I may add to it from the same
fountain of wisdom, consider also, lest evil lie at the door. A man in that
state is in the midst of snares; Satan has many advantages against him, He
forgeth darts out of all his enjoyments, and if he watch not, he will be
entangled before he is aware.

Thou want that which should poyse and ballast thy heart. Formality in
Religion will be apt to creep upon thee, and that lays the soul open to all
Temptations in their full power and strength. Satisfaction and delight in
creature comforts, the poison of the soul will be apt to grow upon thee. In
such a time, be vigilant, be circumspect, or thou will be surprised. Job says,
that in his Affliction God made his heart soft, Chapter 23. 16. There is an
hardness, an insensible want of spiritual sense, gathered in prosperity, that
if not watched against, will expose the heart to the deceits of sin and baits
of Satan: Watch and pray in this season: Many men's negligence in it, has cost
them dear, their woeful experience cries out, to take heed. Blessed is he
that fears always; but especially in a time of prosperity.

2. As in part was manifested before, A Time of the slumber of Grace, of
neglect in Communion with God, of formality in duty is a season to be watched
in, as that which has certainly some other temptation attending it. Let a
soul in such an estate awake, and look about him; his enemy is at hand, and
he is ready to fall into such a condition as may cost him dear all the days
of his life: His present estate is bad enough in its self; but it is an
indication of that which is worse, that lies at the door.

The Disciples that were with Christ; in the mount, had not only a bodily, but
a spiritual drowzinesse upon them.

What says our Savior to them? arise, watch and pray, that you enter not into
temptation. We know, how near one of them was to a bitter hour of temptation;
and not watching as he ought, he immediately entered into it.

I mentioned before the case of the spouse, Cant. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. she slept, and
was drowsy, and unwilling to gird up her self to a vigorous performance of
duties, in a way of quick active communion with Christ. Before she is aware,
she has lost her beloved; then she means, enquires, cries, endures woundings,
reproaches, and all, before she obtaines him again. Consider then O poor
soul, thy state and condition! does thy light burn dim? or though it give
to others as great a blaze, as formerly, yet thou see not so clearly the face
of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
by it as thou have done? is thy zeal cold? or if it do the same works as
formerly, yet thy heart is not warmed with the Love of God, and to God, in them
as formerly, but only thou proceedest in the course thou have been in? art thou
negligent in duties of praying or hearing? or if thou do observe them, thou
do it not with that life and vigor as formerly? Do thou flagge in thy
profession? or if thou keep it up, yet thy wheels are oyled by some sinister
respects from within or without? does thy delight in the people of God faint
and grow cold? or is thy love to them changing from that which is purely
spiritual, into that which is very carnal, upon the account of sutablenesse
of principles, and natural spirits, if not worse foundations? if thou art
drowsing in such a condition as this; take heed! thou art falling into some
woeful temptation, that will break all thy bones, and give thee wounds that
shall stick by thee all the days of thy life. Yea when thou awakest thou will
find, that it has indeed laid hold of thee already, though thou perceivedst it
not; it has smitten and wounded thee, though thou have not complained, nor
sought for relief or healing.

Such was the state of the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 2. the things that
remained were ready to dye: be watchful says our Savior and strengthen them,
or a worse thing will befall thee: if any that reads the word of this direction
be in this condition, if he has any regard of his poor soul, let him now
awake, before he be entangled beyond recovery. Take this warning from God;
despise it not.

3. A season of great spiritual enjoyments, is often by the malice of Satan,
and the weakness of our hearts, turned into a season of danger: as to this
business of Temptation.

We know how the case stood with Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. he had glorious spiritual
Revelations of God, and Jesus Christ; instantly Satan falls upon him; a
messenger from him buffets him, so that he earnestly begges its departure; but
yet is left to struggle with it. God is pleased sometimes to give us especial
discoveries of himself and his love; to fill the heart with his kindness:
Christ takes us into the banqueting house, and gives our hearts their fills of
love; and this by some signal work of his spirit, overpowering us with a
sense of Love, in the unspeakable privilege of Adoption, and so fills our
souls with joy unspeakable and glorious; A man would think, this was the
securest condition in the world: what soul does not cry with Peter in the
mount; it is Good for me to be here, to abide here for ever: But yet very
frequently, some bitter temptation is now at hand. Satan sees, that being
possessed by the Joy before us, we quickly neglect many ways of approach to our
souls, wherein he seeks, and finds advantages against us. Is this then our
state and condition? does God at any time give us to drink of the rivers of
pleasure, that are at his right hand, and satisfy our souls with his kindness
as with marrow and fatness?

Let us not say, we shall never be moved; we know not how soon God may hide
his face, or a messenger from Satan may buffet us.

Besides, there lies oftentimes a greater, and worse deceit in this business*
men cheat their souls with their own fancies, in stead of a sense of Gods love
by the Holy Ghost; and when they are lifted up, with their imaginations, it is
not expressible how fearfully they are exposed to all manner of Temptations;
and how they are able to find relief against their consciences, from their own
foolish fancies, and deceivings wherewith they sport themselves: may we not see
such every day? persons walking in the vanities and ways of this world, yet
boasting of their sense of the love of God; shall we believe them? we must not
then believe truth its self; and how woeful then, must their condition needs
be?

4. A 4th season, is a season of self confidence; then usually Temptation is
at hand. The case of Peter is clear unto this: I will not deny thee; though
all men should deny thee, I will not: though I were to dye for it, I would
not do it. This said the poor man, when he stood on the very brinke of that
temptation, that cost him in the issue, such bitter tears. And this taught him
so far to know himself all his days, and gave him such acquaintance with the
state of all Believers, that when he had received more of the spirit and of
power, yet he had less of confidence, and saw it was fit that others should
have so also; And therefore persuades all men to pass the time of their
sojurning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Not to be confident and high, as he was,
lest, as he did, they fall. At the first trial he compares himself with
others, and vaunts himself above them; though all men should forsake thee, yet
I will not; he fears every man more than himself: But when our Savior
afterward comes to him and puts him directly upon the comparison, Simon Peter
love thou me, more than these, Joh. 21. 15. he has done comparing himself
with others, and only cries Lord thou know that I love thee: He will lift
up himself above others no more. Such a season oftentimes falls out.
Temptations are abroad in the world, false doctrines, with innumerable other
allurements and provocations; we are ready every one to be very confident, that
we shall not be surprised with them: though all men should fall into these
follies, yet we would not: surely we shall never go off from our walking with
God; it is impossible our hearts should be so sottish: But says the Apostle,
be not high minded but fear; let him that stands take heed lest he fall.
Would thou think that Peter, who had walked on the sea with Christ,
confessed him to be the Son of God, been with him on the mount when he heard
the voice from the excellent Glory, should at the word of a servant girl, when
there was no legal inquisition after him, no process against him, nor any one
in his condition, instantly fall a cursing and sweareing that he knew him not,
let them take heed of selfe-confidence who have any mind to take heed of sin.
And this is the first thing in our watching, to consider well the seasons
wherein temptation usually makes its approaches to the soul, and be armed
against them. And these are some of the seasons, wherein Temptations are nigh
at hand.

CHAP. VII.
Several acts of Watchfulness against Temptation proposed. Watch the heart.
What it is to be watched in and about. Of the snares lying in man's natural
tempers. Of peculiar lusts. Of occasions suited to them. Watching to lay in
provision against Temptation. Directions for watchfulness in the first
approaches of Temptation. Directions after entering into Temptation.
THat part of watchfulness against Temptation which we have considered,
regards the outward means, occasions, and advantages of Temptation; proceed we
now to that which respects the heart its self, which is wrought upon, and
entangled by Temptation: watching or keeping of the heart, which above all
keepings we are obliged unto, comes within the compass of this duty also; for
the right performance whereof, take these ensuing directions.

1. Let him that would not enter into Temptation labor to know his own heart,
to be acquainted with his own spirit, his natural frame, and temper, his
Lusts and Corruptions, his natural, sinful, or spiritual weaknesses, that
finding where his weakness lies, he may be careful to keep at a distance from
all occasions of sin. Our Savior tells the disciples that they knew not what
Spirit they were of, which under a pretense of zeal betrayed them into ambition
and desire of Revenge. Had they known it, they would have watched over
themselves. David tells us, Psalm. 18. 23. that he considered his ways, and
kept himself from his iniquity, which he was particularly prone unto.

There are Advantages for temptations lying oftentimes in men's natural tempers
and constitution: some are naturally gentle, facile, easy to be entreated,
pliable, which though it be the noblest temper of nature, and the best and
choysest ground when well broken up and fallowed for grace to grow in, yet if
not watched over, will be a means of innumerable surprizalls, and
entanglements in Temptation. Others are earthy, froward, morose; so that envy,
malice, selfishnesse, peevishness, harsh thoughts of others, repinings, lie at
the very door of their natures, and they can scarce step out, but they are in
the snare of one or other of them: Others are passionate and the like. Now he
that would watch, that he enter not into temptation, had need be acquainted
with his own natural temper: that he may watch over the treacheries that lie
in it continually; Take heed lest you have a Jehu in you, that shall make you
drive furiously, or a Jonah in you, that will make you ready to repine; or a
David, that will make you hasty in your determinations as he was often in the
warmth and goodness of his natural temper. He who watches not this thoroughly,
who is not exactly killed in the knowledge of himself, will never be
disintangled from one Temptation or another, all his days.

Again! as men have peculiar natural tempers, which according as they are
attended or managed, prove a great Fomes of sin, or advantage to the
exercise of Grace; so men may have peculiar lusts or corruptions, which either
by their natural constitution or education and other prejudices, have got deep
rooting and strength in them. This also is to be found out by him, who would
not enter into temptation. Unless, he know it, unless his eye be always on
it, unless he observe its actings, motions, advantages, it will continually be
intangling and insnaring of him. This then is our fixed direction in this kind;
labor to know thine own frame and temper, what spirit thou art of; what
associates in thy heart Satan has, where Corruption is strong, where Grace is
weak; what strong hold lust has in thy natural constitution and the like. How
many have all their comforts blasted, and peace disturbed, by their natural
passion and peevishness? How many are rendered useless in the world, by their
frowardness and discontent? how many are disquieted even by their own
gentleness and sanctity? be acquainted then with thine own heart, though it
be deep, search it: though it be dark, enquire into it: though it give all its
distempers other names then what are their due believe it not. Were not men
utter strangers to themselves, did they not give flattering titles to their
natural distempers, did they not strive rather to justify palliate or excuse
the evils of their hearts, that are suited to their natural tempers and
constitutions, then to destroy them, and by these means keep themselves off
from taking a clear and distinct view of them; it were impossible that they
should all their days hang in the same briers without attempt for deliverance;
uselessenesse and scandal in professors, are branches growing constantly on
this root of unacquaintednesse with their own frame and temper; and how few
are there, who will either study them themselves; or bear with those who would
acquaint them with them.

2. When thou know the state and condition of thy heart as to the
particulars mentioned, watch against all such Occasions, Opportunities,
Employments, societies, retirements, businesses, as are apt to entangle thy
natural temper, or provoke thy corruption. It may be there are some ways,
some societies, some businesses, that thou never in thy life escaped'st them,
but suffered'st by them, more or less through their sutablenesse to tice, or
provoke thy Corruption. It may be, thou art in a state and condition of life,
that insnares thee day by day, on the account of thy ambition, passion,
discontent or the like; if thou have any love to thy soul, it is time for thee
to awake, and to deliver thy self as a bird from the evil snare. Peter will
not come again in have to the Highpriests hall, nor would David walk again
in the top of his house, when he should have been in the high places of the
field. But the particulars of this instance are so various, and of such
several natures in respect of several persons, that it is impossible to
enumerate them, Prove. 4. 14, 15. Herein lies no small part of that Wisdom,
which consists in our ordering our Conversation aright. Seeing we have so little
power over our hearts, when once they meet with suitable provocations, we are
to keep them asunder, as a man would do fire and the combustible parts of the
house wherein he dwells.

3. Be sure to lay in provision in store, against the approaching of any
Temptation. This also belongs to our watchfulness over our hearts. You will
say, what provision is intended, and where is it to be laid up? Our hearts, (as
our Savior speaks are our Treasury. There we lay up whatever we have, Good or
bad; and thence do we draw it, for our use, Matthew. 12. 35. It is the heart then
wherein provision is to be laid up against Temptation. When an Enemy draws
nigh to a fort, or Castle to beseige and take it; oftentimes if he find it well
manned, and furnished with provision for a seige, and so able to hold out, he
withdrawes and assaults it not. If Satan the Prince of this world come, and
find our hearts fortified against his batteries, and provided to hold out, he
not only departs, but as James says, he flies; he will fly from us, Jam. 4. 7.
for the provision to be laid up, it is that which is provided in the Gospel
for us, Gospel provisions will do this work; that is, keep the heart full of a
sense of the love of God in Christ: this is the greatest preservative against
the power of temptation in the world. Joseph had this; and therefore on the
first appearance of a temptation, he cries out; how can I do this great evil,
and sin against God? and there is an end of the temptation, as to him, it
lays no hold on him, but departs. He was furnished with such a ready sense of
the love of God; as Temptation could not stand before, Genesis 39. 9. The love of
Christ constraines us, says the Apostle, to live to him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. and so
consequently, to withstand Temptation. A man may, nay he ought to lay in
provisions of the Law also; fear of death, hell punishment, with the terror of
the Lord in them. But these are far more easily conquered then the other: Nay
they will never stand alone against a vigorous assault. They are conquered in
convinced persons every day: hearts stored with them, will struggle for a
while, but quickly give over: But store the heart with a sense of the Love of
God in Christ; with the eternal design of his grace, with a taste of the blood
of Christ, and his Love in the shedding of it; get a relish of the privileges
we have thereby; our Adoption, Justification, Acceptance with God, fill the
heart with thoughts of the beauty of holiness as it is designed by Christ for
the End, Issue, and effect of his death, and thou will in an ordinary course of
walking with God, have great peace and security as to the disturbance of
temptations. When men can live and plod on, in their profession, and not be
able to say, when they had any living sense of the Love of God, or of the
privileges which we have in the blood of Christ; I know not what they can have
to keep them from falling into snares. The Apostle tells us, that the peace of
God (...) Phi. 4. 7. shall keep our hearts; (...), is a military word a
garrison: and so (...), is, shall keep as in a Garrison: Now a Garrison has
two things attending it. 1. That it is exposed to the assaaults of its enemies.
2. That safety lies in it from their attempts. It is so with our souls: They
are exposed to Temptations, assaulted continually: but if there be a garrison
in them, or if they be kept as in a garrison, temptation shall not enter, and
consequently we shall not enter into temptation. Now how is this done? says
he, the peace of God shall do it: what is this peace of God? a sense of his
love and favor in Jesus Christ. Let this abide in you, and it shall garrison
you, against all assaults whatever: Besides, there is that in an especial
manner, which is also in all the rest of the directions; namely that the thing
its self lies in a direct opposition to all the ways and means that
Temptation can make use of to approach unto our souls. Contending to obtain,
and keep, a sense of the love of God in Christ, in the nature of it, obviates
all the workings and insinuations of Temptation. Let this be a third direction
then in our watching against Temptation: Lay in store of Gospel provisions,
that may make the soul a defenced place, against all the assaults thereof.

4. In the first approach of any Temptation, (as we are all tempted) these
directions following are also suited to carry on the work of watching which we
are in the pursuit of.

1. Be always awake, that thou may have an early discovery of thy
Temptation; that thou may know it so to be. Most men perceive not their
enemy, until they are wounded by him. Yea others may sometimes see them deeply
engaged, whilst themselves are utterly insensible; They sleep without any
sense of danger, until others come and awake them, by telling them that their
house is on fire. Temptation in a neuter sense is not easily discoverable:
namely as it denotes, such a way, or thing, or matter, as is, or may be made
use of, for the ends of Temptation; few take notice of it, until it is too
late; and they find themselves entangled, if not wounded. Watch then to
understand betimes, the snares that are laid for thee; to understand the
advantages thy enemies have against thee, before they get strength and power;
before they are incorporated with thy lusts, and have distilled poison into thy
soul.

2. Consider the aim and tendency of the Temptation, whatever it be, and of
all that are concerned in it. Those who have an active concurrence into thy
Temptation, are Satan, and thy own lusts. For thine own lust I have
manifested elsewhere what it aims at in all its actings and enticings. It
never rises up, but its intendment is the worst of evils. Every acting of it,
would be a formed Enmity against God. Hence look upon it, in its first
attempts, what pretenses soever may be made, as thy mortal enemy; I hate it,
says the Apostle, Romans 7. 15. that is the working of Lust in me, I hate it; it
is the greatest enemy I have. Oh that it were killed and destroyed: Oh that I
were delivered out of the power of it. Know then that in the first attempt or
assault in any temptation, thy most cursed sworn enemy is at hand, is setting
on thee, and that for thy utter ruin; so that it were the greatest madness in
the world, to throw thy self into his arms, to be destroyed. But of this I
have spoken in my discourse of Mortification.

Has Satan any more friendly aim and intention toward thee, who is a sharer
in every Temptation? To beguile thee as a serpent, to devour thee as a Lion,
is the friendship that he owes thee. I shall only add that the sin he tempts
thee to against the Law, is not the thing he aims at; his design lies against
thy interest in the Gospel. He would make sin, but a bridge to get over to a
better ground to assault thee, as to thy interest in Christ. He who perhaps
will say to day thou may venture on sin, because thou have an interest in
Christ; will to morrow tell thee to the purpose, that thou have none, because
thou have done so.

3. Meet thy temptation in its entrance with thoughts of faith concerning
Christ on the Cross: This will make it sink before thee. Entertain no parley,
no dispute with it, if thou would not enter into it. Say it is Christ that
dyed, that dyed for such sins as these. This is called taking the shield of
Faith to quench the fiery darts of Satan, Ep. 6. 16. Faith does it, by laying
hold on Christ crucified, his Love therein, and what from thence he suffered
for sin. Let thy temptation be what it will; be it unto sin, to fear or
doubting for sin, or about thy state and condition, its not able to stand
before faith lifting up the standard of the Cross. We know what means the
Papists, who have lost the power of faith, use to keep up the form. They will
sign themselves with the sign of the cross; or make aeriall Crosses, and by
virtue of that work done think to scare away the Devil. To act faith on
Christ crucified, is really to sign our selves with the sign of the Cross;
and thereby shall we overcome that wicked one, 1 Pe. 5. 9

4. Suppose the soul has been surprised by temptation and entangled at
unavvares, so that now it is too late to resist the first entrances of it;
what shall such a soul do, that it be not plunged into it, and carried away
with the power thereof?

1. Do as Paul did; beseech God again and again, that it may depart from
thee, 2 Cor. 12. 7. and if thou abidest therein, thou shall certainly either
be specedily deliverd out of it, or receive a sufficiency of Grace not to be
foiled utterly by it. Only! as I said in part before, do not so much employ thy
thoughts about the things whereunto thou art tempted, which oftentimes
raises further intanglements; but set thy self against the Temptation it
self. Pray against the temptation that it may depart; and when that is taken
away, the things themselves may be more calmely considered.

2: Fly to Christ, in a peculiar manner, as he was tempted; and beg of him to
give thee succor in this needful time of trouble, Heb. 2. 18. the Apostle
instructs us herein: in that he has been tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted: this is the meanining of it; when you are tempted, and are
ready to faint, when you want succor, you must have it or you dye; act faith
peculiarly on Christ, as he was tempted. That is! consider that he was
tempted himself, that he suffered thereby, that he conquered all temptations,
and that not merely on his own account, seeing for our sakes he submitted to
be tempted; but for us: (he conquered in, and by himself, but for us) and
draw, yea expect succor from him, Heb. 4. 15, 16. lie down at his feet, make
thy complaint known to him, beg his assistance, and it will not be in
vain.

3. Look to him who has promised deliverance: Consider that he is faithful,
and will not suffer thee to be tempted above what thou art able. Consider that
he has promised a comfortable issue of these trialls and temptations. Call all
the promises to mind, of Assistance and deliverance that he has made: ponder
them in thy heart, and rest upon it, that God has innumerable ways that thou
know not of, to give thee in deliverance: as,

1 He can send an Affliction, that shall mortify thy heart unto the matter of
the Temptation, whatever it be: That that which was before a sweet morsel
under the tongue, shall neither have taste, or relish in it unto thee; thy
desire to it shall be killed: as was the case with David: or

2. He can by some providence alter that whole state of things, from whence thy
temptation does arise; so taking fuel from the fire, causing it to go out of
it self; as it was with the same David in the day of Battle: or,

3. He can tread down Satan under thy feet, that he shall not dare to suggest
any thing any more to thy disadvantage (the God of peace shall do it;) that
thou shall hear of him no more: or

4. He can give thee such supply of Grace, as that thou may be freed, though
not from the temptation it self, yet from the tendency and danger of it, as
was the case with Paul: or

5. He can give thee such a comfortable persuasion of Good success in the
issue, as that thou shall have refreshment in thy trialls, and be kept from the
trouble of the temptation: As was the case with the same Paul: or

6. He can utterly remove it, and make thee a complete Conqueror: And
innumerable other ways he has, of keeping thee from entering into temptation,
so as to be foiled by it.

4. Consider where the Temptation wherevvith thou art surprised, has made its
entrance, and by what means, and with all speed make up that breach: stop
that passage which the waters have made to enter in at.

Deal with thy soul like a wise Physician; inquire when, how by what
means thou fellest into this distempet: and if thou find negligence,
Carelessnesse, want of keeping vvatch over thy flesh, to have lain at the
bottom of it, fix thy soul there; bewail that before the Lord; make up that
breach, and then proceed to the work that lies before thee.

CHAP. 8.
The last General Direction, Revel. 3. 10. Watch against Temptation by
constant keeping the word of Christ's patience what that word is: how it is
kept: how the keeping of it will keep us from the power of Temptation.
The Directions insisted on, in the former chapters are such as are partly
given us, in their several particulars, up and down the Scripture; partly
arise from the nature of the thing it self; There is one General direction
remains, which is comprehensive of all that went before, and also adds many
more particulars unto them; This contains an approved antidote against the
poison of Temptation; a Remedy, that Christ himself has marked with a note of
efficacy and success that is given us, Revel. 3. 10. in the words of our
savior himself to the Church of Philadelphia. Because (says he) thou have
kept the word of my patience, I will also keep thee from the hour of
temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell in the
earth; Christ is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever; as he dealt with
the Church of Philadelphia, so will he deal with us; if we keep the word of
his patience, he will keep us from the hour of Temptation. This then being a
way of rolling the whole care of this weighty affair on him who is able to
bear it, it requires our peculiar consideration. And therefore, I shall first
show what it is to keep the word of Christ's patience, that we may know how to
perform our duty; then how this will be a means of our preservation, which
will establish us in the faith of Christ's promise.

The word of Christ, is the word of the Gospel; The word by him revealed from
the bosom of the Father. The word of the word; the word spoken in time by the
eternal word. So it is called, the word of Christ. Col. 3. 16. or the Gospel
of Christ. Romans 1. 16. 1. Cor. 9. 12. And the doctrine of Christ. Heb. 6. 1. of
Christ, that is, as its Author, Heb. 1. 1, 2. and of him, as the chief
subject or matter of it, 1 Cor. 1. 20. Now this word, is called the word of
Christ's patience, or tolerance, and forbearance, upon the account of that
patience, and long suffering which in the dispensation of it, the Lord Christ
exercises toward the world, and all persons in it; and that both actively,
and passively; in his bearing with men, and enduring from them.

1. He is patient toward his Saints, he bears with them, suffers from them.
He is patient to usward, 2. Pet. 3. 9, that is, that believe. The Gospel is
the word of Christ's patience even to Believers. A soul acquainted with the
Gospel, knows that there is no Property of Christ rendered more glorious
therein, than that of his patience; That he should bear with so many
unkindnesses, so many causeless breaches, so many neglects of his love, so
many affronts done to his Grace, so many violations of engagements, as he does;
it manifests his Gospel to be not only the word of his Grace, but also of his
patience. He suffers also from them, in all the reproaches, they bring upon his
name and ways: and he suffers in them; for in all their Afflictions, he is
afflicted.

2. Toward his Elect, not yet effectually called. Revel. 3. 20. He stands
waiting at the door of their hearts, and knocks for an entrance. He deals
with them by all means, and yet stands and waits, until, his head is filled
with the dew, and his locks with the drops of the night, Cant. 5. 2. as
enduring the cold and inconvenencies of the night, that when his morning is
come; he may have entrance. Oftentimes for a long season, he is by them scorned
in his person, persecuted in his Saints and ways, reviled in his word, whilst
he stands at the door, in the word of his patience, with his heart full of
love toward their poor rebellious souls.

3. To the perishing world; Hence the time of his Kingdom, in this world is
called the time of his patience. Revel. 1. 9. he endures the vessels of wrath
with much long suffering. Romans 9. 22. Whilst the Gospel is administered in the
world, He is patient toward the men thereof, until the Saints in heaven and
earth are astonished, and cry out, how long? Psalm. 13. 1, 2. Psalm. 35. 17.
Revel. 6. 10; and themselves do mock at him as if he were an Idol, 2. Pet.
3. 4. He endures from them bitter things; in his name, ways, worship, saints,
promises, threats, all his interest of honor and love; and yet passes by
them, lets them alone, does them Good; nor will he cut this way of proceeding
short, until the Gospel shall be preached no more; patience must accompany
the Gospel.

Now this is the Word that is to be kept, that we may be kept from the hour of
Temptation. Three things are employed in the keeping of this Word, 1. Knowledge.
2. Valuation. 3. Obedience.


1. Knowledge, He that will keep this Word must know it, be acquainted with it;
under a four fold Notion,

1. As a word of Grace and Mercy to save him.

2. As a word of Holiness and Purity to sancitfy him.

3. As a word of Liberty and Power to enoble him, and set him free.

4. As a word of Consolation to support him in every Condition.

1. As a word of Grace, and Mercy able to save us: It is the power of God unto
salvation, Romans 1. 16. The Grace of God that brings salvation, Titus, 2. 11.
The word of Grace, that is able to build us up, and to give us an inheritance
among all them that are sanctified, Act. 20. 32. The word that is able to save
our souls, Jam. 1. 21. When the word of the Gospel is known, as a word of
mercy, Grace, and pardon, as the sole evidence for life, as the conveyance of
an eternal inheritance; when the soul finds it such to it self, it will
strive to keep it.

2. As a word of Holiness and Purity able to sanctify him; Ye are clean
through the word I have spoken unto you, says our Savior, Joh. 15. 3. To that
purpose is his prayer, Joh. 17. 17. He that knows not the word of Christ's
patience, as a sanctifying cleansing word, in the power of it, upon his own
soul; neither knows it, nor keeps it. The empty profession of our days,
knows not one step toward this duty; and thence it is, that the most are so
overborne under the power of Temptations: men full of self, of the world, of
Fury, Ambition, and almost all unclean lusts, do yet talk of keeping the word
of Christ, See 1. Pet. 1. 22. 2. Tim. 2. 19.

3. As a word of Liberty and Power, to enoble him, and set him free; and this,
not only from the guilt of sin and wrath, for that it does, as it is a word
of Grace and mercy; nor only from the power of sin, for that it does as it is
a word of Holiness; but also from all outward respects of men, or the world,
that might entangle him, or enslave him, that declares us to be Christ's
freemen, and in bondage unto none, Joh. 8. 32. 1. Cor. 7. 23. we are not by it,
freed from due subjection unto superiors, not from any duty, not unto any
sin, 1. Pet. 2. 16. but in two respects, it is a word of freedom, liberty,
largeness of mind, power, and deliverance from Bondage.

1. In respect of Conscience, as to the worship of God, Gal. 5. 1.

2. In respect of ignoble slavish respects, unto the men, or things of the
world, in the Course of our pilgrimage; The Gospel gives a free, large, and
noble Spirit in subjection to God, and none else; There is administered in it, a
spirit not of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.
7. A mind in nothing terrified, Phil. 1. 28. not swayed with any by respect
whatever; There is nothing more unworthy of the Gospel, then a mind in bondage
to persons, or things prostituting its self to the lusts of men, or
affrightments of the world. And he that thus knows the word of Christ's
patience, really and in power, is even thereby freed from innumerable, from
unspeakable Temptations.

4. As a word of Consolation to support him in every condition; and to be a
full portion in the want of all, that is a word attended with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory; it gives supportment, relief, refreshment, satisfaction,
peace, consolation, joy, boasting, Glory, in every Condition whatever; Thus to
know the word of Christ's patience, thus to know the Gospel, is the first part,
and it is a great part of this condition of our preservation from the hour,
and power of Temptation.

2. Valuation of what is thus known, belongs to the keeping of this word, that
is to be kept as a Treasure, 2 Timothy 1. 14. (...), that excellent depositum
(that is the word of the Gospel) keep it, (says the Apostle) by the Holy
Ghost; And, hold fast the faithful word, Tit. 1. 9. It is a Good Treasure, a
faithful word, hold it fast. It is a word that comprizes the whole interest of
Christ in the world. To value that as our chiefest treasure, is to keep the
word of Christ's patience. They that will have a regard from Christ in the time
of Temptation, are not to be regardlesse, of his Concernments.

3. Obedience, personal Obedience, in the Universal observation of all the
commands of Christ, is the keeping of his Word, Joh. 14. 15. Close adherence
unto Christ, in Holiness, and universal Obedience, then when the opposition,
that the Gospel of Christ does meet withal in the world, does render it
signally the word of his patience, is the life and soul of the Duty required.

Now all these are to be so managed, with that intention of mind and spirit,
that care of heart, and diligence of the whole person, as to make up a keeping
of this word; which evidently includes all those Considerations.

We are arrived then to the sum of this safeguarding Duty; of this Condition
of freedom from the power of Temptation; He that having a due acquaintance
with the Gospel, in its Excellencies, as to him, a word of Mercy, Holiness,
Liberty and Consolation, values it, in all its Concernments as his choicest and
only Treasure; makes it his business, and the work of his life, to give
himself up unto it in universal obedience, then especially, when Opposition,
and Apostasy put the patience of Christ to the utmost, he shall be preserved
from the hour of Temptation.

This is that which is comprehensive of all that went before; and is exclusive
of all other ways for the obtaining of the End proposed; nor let any man think
without this, to be kept one hour from entering into Temptation; where ever he
fails there Temptation enters. That this will be a sure preservative may
appear, from the ensuing Considerations.

1. It has the Promise of Preservation, and this alone has so. It is solemnly
promised in the place mentioned to the Church of Philadelphia on this account.
When a great trial and Temptation was to come on the world, at the opening of
the seventh seal, Rev. 7. 3. a caution is given for the preservation of Gods
sealed ones, which are described to be those, who keep the word of Christ: for
the promise is, that it should be so. Now in every promise there are three
things to be considered.

1. The faithfulness of the Father who gives it.

2. The Grace of the Son which is the matter of it.

3. The power and efficacy of the Holy Ghost which puts the promise in
Execution. And all these are engaged for the preservation of such persons from
the hour of Temptation.

1. The faithfulness of God, accompanyeth the promise. On this account is our
deliverance laid, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Though we be tempted, yet we shall be kept
from the hour of Temptation; it shall not grow too strong for us. What comes
on us, we shall be able to bear; and what would be too hard for us, we shall
escape. But what security have we hereof? even the faithfulness of God; God is
faithful who will not suffer you etc. And wherein is God's faithfulness seen
and exercised? He is faithful that promised, Heb. 10. 23. His faithfulness
consists in his discharge of his promises. He abides faithful, he cannot deny
himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. so that by being under the promise, we have the
faithfulness of God engaged for our preservation.

2. There is in every promise of the Covenant the Grace of the Son; that is the
subject matter of all promises. I will keep thee, how? by my Grace with thee:
so that what Assistance the Grace of Christ can give to a soul that has a
right in this promise, in the hour of Temptation, it shall enjoy it. Paul's
Temptation grew very high; it was likely to have come to its prevalent hour:
He beseeches the Lord, (that is the Lord Jesus Christ) for help, 2 Cor. 12. 8.
and receives that answer from him, my Grace is sufficient for thee; verse. 9:
That it was the Lord Christ and his Grace, with whom he had peculiarly to do,
is evident from the close of that verse; I will glory in my infirmity, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me; or the efficacy of the Grace of Christ in my
preservation, be made evident, So Heb. 2. 18.

3. The Efficacy of the spirit, accompanyeth the promises. He is called the
Holy Spirit of promise; not only, because he is promised by Christ, but also,
because he effectually makes Good the promise, and gives it accomplishment in
our souls. He also then is engaged to preserve the soul walking according to
the rule laid down: See Isai. 59. the last. Thus where the promise is, there
is all this assistance; the faithfulness of the father, the Grace of the Son,
the power of the Spirit; all are engaged in our preservation.

2. This constant universal keeping of Christ's word of Patience, will keep the
heart and soul in such a frame as wherein no prevalent Temptation, by virtue
of any advantages whatever, can seize upon it, so as totally to prevail
against it. So David prays, Ps. 25. 21. Let integrity preserve me. This
integrity and uprightness, is the old-Testament-keeping the word of Christ,
universal close walking with God. Now how can they preserve a man? why by
keeping his heart in such a frame, so defended on every side, that no evil can
approach or take hold on him. Fail a man in his integrity, he has an open
place for temptation to enter, Isa. 57. 21. To keep the word of Christ, is to
do it universally, as has been showed; This exercises Grace in all the
faculties of the soul; and compasses it with the whole armor of God: The
understanding is full of light, the Affections of Love and holiness; let the
Wind blow from what quarter it will, the soul is fenced and fortified; Let the
enemy assault when, or by what means he pleases, all things in the soul of
such an one are upon the guard: How can I do this thing and sin against God,
is at hand, Especially, upon a twofold account, does deliverance and security
arise from this hand.

1. By the Mortification of the heart unto the matter of Temptations. The
prevalency of any Temptation arises from hence; that the heart is ready to
close with the matter of it. There are Lusts within, suited to the proposalls
of the world or Satan without. Hence James resolves all Temptations into our
own lusts. Chapter 1. 14. because either they proceed from, or are made effectual
by them as has been declared. Why does terror, or threats turn us aside,
from a due constancy in the performance of our duty? is it not because there is
unmortified carnal fear abiding in us, that tumultuates in such a season? why
is it that the Allurements of the world, and compliances with men entangle us?
is it not because our affections are entangled with the things and
considerations proposed unto us? Now keeping the word of Christ's patience, in
the manner declared, keeps the heart mortified to these things, and so it is
not easily entangled by them. Says the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified
with Christ, he that keeps close to Christ, is crucified with him; and is dead
to all the desires of the flesh and the world: as more fully; Chap. 6. 14. Here
the match is broken, and all love, entangling love dissolved.

1. The heart is crucified to the world, and all things in it. Now the matter
of all temptations almost is taken out of the world; the men of it, or the
things of it make them up. As to these things says the Apostle I am crucified
to them: (And it is so with every one, that keeps the word of Christ, my heart
is mortified unto them; I have no desire after them; nor affection to them, nor
delight in them: and they are crucified unto me. The Crowns, Glories, Thrones,
pleasures, profits, of the world, I see nothing desirable in them; the lusts,
sensual pleasures, Love, respects, honors of men, name and reputation among
them, they are all as a thing of naught; I have no value, nor estimation of
them. This soul is safeguarded from assaults of manifold Temptations. When
Achan saw the Goodly Babilonish garment, and two hundred shekells of silver,
and a wedge of Gold; first he coveted them, then he took them, Joh. 7. 21.
Temptation subtly spreads the Babilonish garment of favor, praise, peace,
the silver of pleasure, or profit, with the golden Contentmens of the flesh,
before the eyes of men; if now there be that in them alive, unmortified, that
will presently fall a coveting, let what fear of punishment will ensue, the
heart or hand, will be put forth unto iniquity.

Herein then lies the security of such a frame, as that described; it is
always accompanied with a mortified heart; crucified unto the things that are
the matter of our Temptations; without which it is utterly impossible, that we
should be preserved one moment when any temptation does befall us. If liking,
and love of the things proposed, insinuated, commended in the temptation, be
living and active in us, we shall not be able to resist and stand.

2. In this frame the heart is filled with better things, and their Excellency;
so far as to be fortified against the matter of any Temptation. See what
Resolution this puts Paul upon: Phil. 3. 8. All is loss and dung to him. Who
would go out of his way, to have his arms full of loss and dung? and whence
is it, that he has this estimation of the most desirable things in the world?
it is from that dear estimation he had of the Excellency of Christ; so verse.
10. When the soul is exercised to Communion with Christ, and to walking with
him: he drinks new wine, and cannot desire the old things of the world, for he
says the new is better. He tastes every day how gracious the Lord is, and
therefore longs not after the sweetness of forbidden things, which indeed have
none. He that makes it his business to eat daily of the tree of life, will
have no appetite unto other fruit, though the Tree that bare them seem to
stand in the midst of Paradise. This the spouse makes the means of her
preservation; even the Excellency which by daily Communion, she found in
Christ and his Graces, above all other desirable things. Let a soul exercise
it self to Communion with Christ, in the good things of the Gospel, pardon of
sin, fruits of holiness, hope of Glory, peace with God, joy in the Holy
Ghost, dominion over sin, and he shall have a mighty preservative against all
Temptations. As the full soul loatheth the honey comb; a soul filled with
carnal, earthly, sensual contentments finds no relish nor savor in the
sweetest spiritual things; so he that is satisfied with the kindness of God,
as with marrow and fatness, that is every day entertained at the banquet of
wine, wine upon the lees, and well refined, has an holy contempt of the baits
and allurements that lie in prevailing temptations, and is safe.

3. He that so keeps the word of Christ's patience, is always furnished with
preserving Considerations and preserving Principles: moral and real
advantages of preservation.

1. He is furnished with preserving Considerations, that powerfully influence
his soul in his walking diligently with Christ: Besides the sense of duty
which is always upon him, he considers,

1. The concernment of Christ, whom his soul loves in him and his careful
walking. He considers that the presence of Christ is with him, his eye upon
him, that he ponders his heart and ways, as one greatly concerned in his
deportment of himself, in a time of trial. So Christ manifests himself to
do, Revel. 2. 19, 20. I consider all; what is acceptable, what to be rejected:
He knows that Christ is concerned in his honor, that his name be not evil
spoken of by reason of him; that he is concerned in love to his soul; having
that design upon him to present him holy and unblameable and unreproveable in
his sight, Col. 1. 22. and his spirit is grieved where he is interrupted in
this work; concerned on the account of his Gospel, the progress and
acceptance of it in the world; its beauty would be slurred, its good things
reviled, its progress stopped, if such an one be prevailed against; concerned
in his love to others, who are grieveously scandalized, and perhaps ruined by
the miscarriages of such. When Hymeneus and Philetus fall, they overthrow the
faith of some, and says such a soul then, who is exercised to keep the word
of Christ's patience, when intricate, perplexed, intangling temptations,
public, private, personal, do arise? shall I now be careless, shall I be
negligent, shall I comply with the world, and the ways of it? oh what thoughts
of heart has he concerning me, whose eye is upon me? shall I contemn his
honor, despise his love, trample his Gospel in the mire under the feet of
men, turn aside others from his ways? shall such a man as I fly, give over
resisting? it cannot be. There is no man who keeps the word of the patience of
Christ, but is full of this soul pressing consideration; it dwells on his heart
and spirit, and the love of Christ constraines him so to keep his heart and
ways, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

2. The great consideration of the Temptations of Christ in his behalf, and
the conquest he made in all assaults for his sake, and his Good, dwell also on
his spirit. The Prince of this world came upon him, the Glory of this world was
showed unto him, every thing in earth or hell, that has either allurement or
affrightment in it, was proposed to him, to divert him from the work of
mediation, which for us he had undertaken: this whole life he calls the time of
his temptation: but he resisted all, conquered all, and is become a captain of
Salvation to them that obey him. And, says the Soul, shall this Temptation,
these arguings, this plausible pretense, this sloth, this self love, this
sensuality, this bait of the world, turn me aside, prevail over me, to
desert him who went before me, in the ways of all temptations that his holy
nature was obnoxious unto, for my Good?

3. Dismal thoughts of the loss of love, of the smiles of the countenance of
Christ, do also frequently exercise such a soul. He knows what it is to enjoy
the favor of Christ, to have a sense of his Love, to be accepted in his
approaches to him, to converse with him; and perhaps has been sometimes at
some loss in this thing, and so knows also, what it is to be in the dark,
distanced from him. See the deportment of the spouse in such a case, Cant. 3.
4. when she had once found him again; she holds him, she will not let him go,
she will loose him no more.

2 He that keeps the word of Christ's patience, has preserving principles,
whereby he is acted. Some of them may be mentioned.

1 First, In all things he lives by faith, and is acted by it in all his ways.
Gal. 2. 20. Now upon a twofold account has faith, when improved, the power of
preservation from Temptation annexed unto it.

1 Because it empties the soul of its own wisdom, understanding and fullness,
that it may act in the wisdom and fullness of Christ. The only advice for
preservation in trials and temptations lies in that of the wise man: Prove. 3.
5. Trust in the Lord with all Thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding. This is the work of faith: it is faith; it is to live by faith.
The great failing of men in trialls, is their leaning to, or leaning upon,
their own understanding and counsel. What is the issue of it, Job. 18. 7. The
steps of his strength shall be straightned, and his own Counsel shall cast
him down. First he shall be entangled, and then cast down; and all by his own
counsel, until he come to be ashamed of it, as Ephraim was, Hos. 10. 6. When
ever in our trials, we consult our own understandings, hearken to self
reasonings, though they seem to be good and tending to our preservation, yet
the principle of living by faith is stifled, and we shall in the issue be cast
down by our own counsels; Now nothing can empty the heart of this
selfefullnesse, but Faith, but living by it, but, not living our selves, but
having Christ live in us, by our living by Faith on him.

2. Faith making the soul poor, empty, helpless, destitute in its self,
ingages the heart, will, and power of Jesus Christ, for Assistance, of which I
have spoken more at large elsewhere.

2. Love to the Saints, with care that they suffer not upon our account, is a
great preserving principle in a time of Temptations and trialls. How powerful
this was in David, he declares in that earnest prayer, Psalm. 69. 6. Let not
them that wait on thee, O Lord God of Hosts, be ashamed for my sake, let not
those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel.

O let not me so miscarry, that those for whom I would lay down my life,
should be put to shame, be evil spoken of, dishonored, reviled, contemned, on
my account, for my failings. A selfish soul, whose love is turned wholly
inwards, will never abide in a time of trial.

Many other Considerations and Principles, that those who keep the word of
Christ's patience in the way and manner before described are attended withal,
might be enumerated, but I shall content my self to have pointed at these
mentioned. And will it now be easy to determine, whence it is that so many in
our days, are prevailed on, in the time of trial: that the hour of temptation
comes upon them, and bears them down, more or less before it? is it not
because amongst the great multitude of Professors, that we have, there are few
that keep the word of the patience of Christ? if we wilfully neglect, or cast
away our interest in the promise of preservation, is it any wonder, if we be
not preserved? There is an hour of Temptation come upon the world, to try them
that dwell therein: it variously exerts its power and efficacy; there is not
any way, nor Thing, wherein it may not be seen acting and putting forth it
self, in worldliness, in sensuality, in looseness of conversation, in
neglect of spiritual duties, private, public, in foolish, loose, diabolical
opinions, in haughtiness and ambition; in envy and wrath, in strife and
debate, revenge, selfishnesse, in Atheism and contempt of God, does it
appear. They are but branches of the same root, bitter streams of the same
fountain, cherished by peace, prosperity, security, apostasies of Professors
and the like; and alas how many do daily fall under the power of this
Temptation, in general? how few keep their garments girt about them, and
undefiled? and if any urging particular Temptation, befall any, what instances
almost have we of any that escape? may we not describe our condition, as the
Apostle that of the Corinthians in respect of an outward visitation; some are
sick, and some are weak, and many sleep; some are wounded, some defiled, many
utterly lost* What is the spring and fountain of this sad condition of things?
is it not, as has been said; we do not keep the word of Christ's patience in
universal close walking with him; and so lose the benefit of the promise given
and annexed thereunto. Should I go about to give instances of this thing; of
Professors coming short of keeping the word of Christ, it would be a long
work. These 4 heads would comprise the most of them. 1. Conformity to the
world, which Christ has redeemed us from, almost in all things, with joy and
delight; in promiscuous compliances with the men of the world. 2. Neglect of
duties which Christ has enjoined, from close meditation to public ordinances.
3. Strife, variance, and debate among our selves, woeful judging and despising
one another, upon account of things foreign to the bond of Communion that is
between the Saints. 4. Selfe-fulnesse as to principles, and selfishness as to
ends. Now where these things are, are not men carnal? is the word of Christ's
patience effectual in them? shall they be preserved? they shall not. Would you
then be preserved, and kept from the hour of temptation; would you watch
against entering into it, as deductions from what has been delivered in this
Chapter: take the ensuing Cautions.

1 Take heed of leaning on deceitful assistances; as 1 your own Counsels,
understandings, reasonings, though you argue in them never so plausibly in your
own defense, they will leave you, betray you; when the temptation comes to any
height, they will all turn about, and take part with your enemy, and plead as
much for the matter of the temptation whatever it be, as they pleaded against
the end and issue of it before.

2 The most vigorous actings by prayer, fasting, and other such means against
that particular lust, corruption, temptation, wherewith you are exercised, and
have to do. This will not avail you, if in the mean time there be neglects, on
other accounts. To hear a man wrestle, cry, contend as to any particular of
Temptation, and immediately fall into wordly ways, worldly compliances,
looseness, and negligence in other things; it is righteous with Jesus Christ
to leave such an one to the hour of temptation.

3 The general security of Saints perseverance, and preservation from total
Apostasy. Every security that God gives us, is good in its kind, and for the
purpose for which it is given to us; but when it is given for one end, to use
it for another, that is not good or profitable. To make use of the general
assurance of preservation from total Apostasy, to support the spirit in
respect of a particular temptation, will not in the issue advantage the soul;
because notwithstanding that, this or that temptation may prevail. Many
relieve themselves with this, until they find themselves in the depth of
perplexities.

1 Apply your selves to this great preservation of faithful keeping the word
of Christ's patience in the midst of all trialls and temptations.

2 In particular, wisely consider wherein the word of Christ's patience is most
likely to suffer in the days wherein we live, and the seasons that pass over
us, and so vigorously set your selves to keep it in that particular,
peculiarly. You will say, how shall we know wherein the word of Christ's
patience in any season is like to suffer? I answer: consider what works he
peculiarly performs in any season, and neglect of his word in reference to
them, is that wherein his word is like to suffer. For instance; the works of
Christ, wherein he has been peculiarly engaged in our days and seasons, seem
to be these.

1 The pouring of contempt upon the great men and great things of the world,
with all the enjoyments of it. He has discovered the nakedness of all earthly
Things, in overturning, overturning, overturning both men, and things, to make
way for the things that cannot be shaken. 2. The owning of the Lot of his own
inheritance in a distinguishing manner, putting a difference between the
precious and the vile, and causing his people to dwell alone, as not reckoned
with the nations. 3. In being nigh to faith and prayer, honoring them above
all the strength and counsels of the sons of men. 4. In recovering his
Ordinances and institutions from the carnal administrations that they were in
bondage under by the lusts of men, bringing them forth in the beauty and the
power of the spirit. Wherein then in such a season must lie the peculiar
neglect of the word of Christ's patience? is it not in setting a value on the
world and the things of it, which he has stained and trampled under foot? is
it not in the slighting of his peculiar lot, his people, and casting them into
the same considerations with the men of the world? is it not in leaning to our
own counsels and understandings? is it not in the defilement of his ordinances,
by giving the outward court of the Temple to be trod upon by unsanctified
persons. Let us then be watchful, and in these things keep the word of the
patience of Christ, if we love our own preservation. 5. In this frame urge the
Lord Jesus Christ with his blessed promises, with all the considerations that
may be apt to take and hold the king in his galleries, that may work on the
heart of our blessed and merciful High Priest, to give suitable succor at time
of need.

CHAP. IX.
A General exhortation to the Duty prescribed.
HAving thus passed through the Consideration of the duty of watching, that we
enter not into temptation, I suppose I need not add motives to the observance
of it. Those who are not moved by their own sad experiences, nor the importance
of the duty, as laid down in the entrance of this discourse, must be left by me
to the farther patience of God. I shall only shut up the whole with a general
Exhortation to them, who are in any measure prepared for it, by the
Consideration of what has been spoken. Should you go into an hospital, and
see many persons lying sick and weak, sore and wounded, with many filthy
diseases and distempers, and should enquire of them, how they fell into this
condition, and they should all agree to tell you, such, or such a thing was the
occasion of it; by that I got my wound says one, and my disease says another;
would it not make you a little careful how, or what you had to do with that
thing or place? surely it would. Should you go to a dungeon, and see many
miserable creatures bound in chains for an approaching day of execution, and
inquire the way and means whereby they were brought into that condition, and
they should all fix on one and the same thing, would you not take care to avoid
it? The case is so with entering into temptation: ah! how many poor, miserably,
spiritually, wounded souls have we every where? one wounded by one sin,
another by another; one falling into filthiness of the flesh, another of the
spirit: ask them nowhow they cameinto this state and condition; they must all
answer, alas! we entered into temptation, we fell into cursed snares and
intanglements, and that has brought us into the woeful condition you see. Nay
if a man could look into the dungeons of hell, and see the poor damned souls
that lie bound in chains of darkness, and hear their cries: what would he be
taught? what do they say? are they not cursing their Tempters, and the
Temptations that they entered in? and shall we be negligent in this thing?
Solomon tells us, that the simple one that follows the strange woman, knows
not that the dead are there, that her house inclines to death, and her paths
to the dead: (which he repeats 3 times) and that is the reason, that he
ventures on her snares. If you knew what has been done by entering into
temptation, perhaps you would be more watchful and careful. Men may think
that they shall do well enough notwithstanding; but can a man take fire in his
bosom, and his clothes not be burnt, can one go upon hot coals, and his
feet not be burnt, Prove. 7. 27. 28. No such thing: men come not off their
temptation without wounds, burnings, and scars. I know not any place in the
world where there is more need of pressing this exhortation than in this place:
Go to our several Colleges, enquire for such and such young men; what is the
answer in respect of many? ah! such an one was very hopeful for a season, but
he fell into ill company and he is quite lost. Such an one had some good
beginning of Religion, we were in great expectation of him, but he is fallen
into temptation: And so in other places; such an one was useful and humble,
adorned the Gospel, but now he is so woefully entangled with the world, that he
is grown all self, has no sap nor favor; such an one was humble and zealous,
but he is advanced and has lost his first love and ways: oh how full is the
world, how full is this place, of these woeful examples: to say nothing of
those innumerable poor creatures who are fallen into temptation by delusions
in Religion. And is it not time for us to awake, before it be too late; to
watch against the first risings of sin, the first attempts of Satan, and all
ways whereby he has made his approaches to us, be they never so harmless in
themselves.

Have we not experience of our weakness, our folly, the invincible power of
temptation when once it is gotten within us. As for this duty that I have
insisted on, take these considerations:

1. If you neglect it, it being the only means prescribed by our Savior, you
will certainly enter into temptation, and as certainly fall into sin: flatter
not your selves; some of you are old Disciples, have a great abhorrency of
sin; you think it impossible you should ever be seduced so, and so: but, let
him (who ever he be) that stands take heed lest he fall: it is not any grace
received, it is not any experience obtained, it is not any resolution improved,
that will preserve you from any evil, unless you stand upon your watch: what
I say to you, says Christ, I say to all; watch. Perhaps you may have had some
good success for a time, in your careless frame: but awake, admire God's
tenderness and patience, or evil lies at the door. If you will not perform
this duty, who ever you are, one way or other, in one thing or other, spiritual
or carnal wickedness, you will be tempted, you will be defiled, and what will
be the end thereof? Remember Peter.

2. Consider that you are always under the eye of Christ, the great Captain
of our salvation, who has enjoined us to watch thus, and pray that we enter
not. What think you are the thoughts, and what the heart of Christ, when he
sees a Temptation hastening toward us, a storm rising about us, and we are
fast asleep? does it not grieve him, to see us expose our selves so to danger,
after he has given us warning upon warning? Whilst he was in the days of his
flesh, he considered his temptation whilst it was yet coming and armed
himself against it: the Prince of this world comes, says he, but he has no
part in me. And shall we be negligent under his eye? do but think that thou
see him coming to thee, as he did to Peter when he was asleep in the garden,
with the same reproof, what! can thou not watch one hour? would it not be a
grief to thee to be so reproved, or to hear him thundering against thy neglect
from heaven, as against the Church of Sardis, Revel. 3. 2.

3. Consider that if thou neglect this duty, and so fall into temptation, which
assuredly thou will do, that when thou art entangled, God may withal bring
some heavy affliction or judgment upon thee, which by reason of thy
intanglement, thou shall not be able to look on any otherwise, than as an
evidence of his anger and hatred: and than what will thou do with thy
temptation and affliction together? All thy bones will be broken, and thy peace
and strength will be gone in a moment. This may seem but as a noise of words
for the present, but if ever it be thy condition, thou will find it to be full
of woe and bitterness. Oh then let us strive to keep our spirits unintangled,
avoiding all appearance of evil, and all ways leading thereunto: especially
all ways, businesses, societies, and employments that we have already found
disadvantageous to us.

FINIS.

