God's Work in Founding Zion, AND His Peoples Duty thereupon. A SERMON PREACHED
IN THE Abbey Church at Westminster, at the opening of the PARLIAMENT September.
17th 1656. By JOHN OWEN: a Servant of Jesus Christ in the Work of the Gospel.

Walk about Sion, and go round about her, tell the Towers thereof. Mark ye
well her Bulwarks, consider her places, that ye may tell it to the Generation
following.

For this God is our God for ever and ever; He will be our guide even unto
death.

Psalm. 48. 12, 13, 14. OXFORD, Printed by LEON: LICHFIELD Printer to the
University, for THO: ROBINSON 1656.

Wednesday the 17 of September 1656.
ORdered by the Parliament, That Mr Maidston, and the Lieutenant of the Tower,
do give the hearty Thanks of the House to Doctor Owen, Deane of
Christ-Church, and Vice Chancellor of the University of Oxford, for his great
pains taken in his Sermon Preached this day in the Abbey Church at Westminster,
before His Highness the Lord Protector, and the Members Elected to Sit this
present Parliament. And that he be desired to print his Sermon. And that no man
presume to print it without his Leave.

Hen: Scobell Clerk
of the Parliament.
TO HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR, And To The PARLIAMENT Of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland etc.
ALthough I need plead no other Reason for the publishing of the ensuing
discourse, but your Order and Command for my so doing, yet because I know that
your peculiar Interest, as Governors of this Commonwealth, in the several
stations wherein you are placed of God, is truly stated therein, in the
pursuit whereof, your Peace, and the Peace of these Nations will be found to
lie; I crave leave to add that consideration also. Being fully acquainted, in,
and with what weakness it was composed and delivered, I cannot but conclude,
that it was merely for the truths sake therein contained which is of God, and
its suetablenesse through his wise providence, to the present state of things,
in these Nations, that it found acceptance and entertainment with you, which
also makes me willing to be therein your Remembrancer a second time. From the
day wherein I received a command and call unto the service of Preaching unto
you, unto this issue of it, wherein it is clothed anew with obedience to your
Order, I found mercy with God to have that caution, of the great Apostle
abiding in my heart and thoughts, if I yet please man, I am not a servant of
God; Hence I can with boldness profess, that influenced in some measure with
the power of that direction, I studiously avoided what ever might be suggested,
with the least unsuitablenesse thereunto, with respect either to my self or
others.

It was for Sions sake, that I was willing to undertake this duty, and service:
rejoicing that I had once more an opportunity to give public Testimony to the
great concernment of the great God, and our dear Lord Jesus Christ, in all the
concussions of the Nations in the World, and peculiarly in his wonderful
providentiall dispensations, in these wherein we live. And here as the sum of
all, touse plainness and liberty of speech, I say, If there be any thing, in
any person whatever, in these Nations, that cannot stand with, that can stand
without the general interest of the people of God pleaded for, let it fall and
rise no more: And the Lord I know will send his blessing out of Sion, on what
ever in singleness of heart, is done in a tendency to the establishment
thereof.

Farther I shall not need to suggest any thing of the design of the ensuing
discourse: they who take themselves to be concerned therein, will acquaint
themselves with it, by its perusal* I shall only add, if the general
principles asserted therein be in your hearts, if in pursuit thereof you
endeavor, that in no corner of this Nation it may be said, this is Sion that
no man cares for, but that those who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity,
and are by faith and obedience separated from the perishing world, following
the Lamb, according to the light which he is graciously pleased to impart unto
them and engaged by the providence of God, in that work which he has
undertaken to accomplish amongst us; be not overborne by a spirit of
profaneness, and contempt of the power of Godliness, raging in the Earth;
that they may be preserved and secured, from the return of a hand of violence,
and encouraged in the Testimony they have to bear to the Kingdom of Christ, in
opposition to the World and all the ways which the men thereof have received by
Tradition from their Fathers, that are not according to his mind, you will
undoubtedly in your several conditions receive blessing from God; which also
that you may in all your concernments, is the daily prayer of

Your humblest Servant in the work of our dear Lord Jesus JOHN OWEN.

ISAIAH. 14. 32. What shall one then answer the Messengers of the Nation? That
the Lord has founded Zion and the poor of his people shall trust in it.
THe Head of the Prophetie, whereof these words are the close, lies in. v. 28.
(in the year that King Ahaz died was this burden) which gives us the season,
and just time of its Revelation and delivery.

The Kingdom of Judah was at that season low, and broken. Foreign invasions,
and intestine divisions had made it so; An account hereof is given us. 2 Chronicles.
cap. 28. throughout; as it is especially summed up. v. 19. of that Chap. For
the Lord brought Judah low, because of Ahaz King of Israel, for he made Judah
naked, and transgressed sore against the Lord.

Amongst their oppressing Neighbors that took advantage at their low and
divided condition, their old enemies the Philistines, the posterity of Cham in
Canaan, had no small share, as v. 18. of that Chapter.

The Philistines also had invaded the Cities of the low Country, and of the
south of Judah, and had taken Beth-shemesh, and Aialon, and Gederoth, and Shoco
with the Villages thereof, and Timnah with the Villages thereof, Gimzo also and
the Villages thereof, and they dwelt there.

In this state of things, God takes notice of the joy, and triumphing of the
whole land of Palestina, that is, the Country of the Philistines. In that the
rod of him that smote them was broken: that is the power of the Kings and
Kingdom of Judah, which for many generations had prevailed against them,
especially in the days of David, 2 Samuel 5. and of Vzziah 2 Chronicles. 26. 6. and
kept them under, was made weak and insufficient for that purpose, v. 29.
Rejoice not thou whole land of Palestina, because the rod of him that smote
thee is broken.

It is no wonder, if Palestina, that was to be smitten, and broken by the rod
of God among his people, rejoice at their perplexities and distresses, when we
have seen men so to do, who pretend to dwell in Judah.

To take them off from their pride and boasting, their triumph and rejoicing,
the Lord lets them know, that from the people whom they despised, and that
broken rod they trampled upon, their desolation was at hand, though they seemed
to be perplexed, and forsaken for a season, v. 29, 30, 31. Rejoice not thou
whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thee is broken, for out of
the serpents root, shall come forth a Cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a
fiery flying Serpent, and the first borne of the poor shall feed, and the
needy shall ly down in safety, and I will kill thy root with Famine, and he
shall slay thy remnant. Howl O Gate, Cry O City, thou whole Palestina art
dissolved, for there shall come from the North a smoke, and none shall be alone
in his appointed times. That it is Hezekiah who is principally intended in
these lofty Allegorical expressions, that was then rising up from the broken
rod of Judah, is evident. He is termed a cockatrice, and a fiery flying
serpent, not from his own nature, which was tender, meek, and Gentle, wherein
the comparison does not at all ly, nor hold; but in respect of the mischief
that he should do unto, and irrecoverable destruction that he should bring on
the land of Palestina: which accordingly he performed, 2 Kings 18. 8. He smote
the Philistines, even unto Gaza, and the borders thereof, from the tower of the
Watchmen to the fenced Cities: That is he wasted and destroyed the whole land,
from one end, even to the other.

It is it seems, no new thing, that the season of the Enemies rejoicing, built
upon the outward appearance, and state of things among the people of God, is
the beginning of their disappointment and desolation; The Lord make it so in
this day of England's Expectation, that the rod of it may be strengthened
again, yet to smite the whole land of Palestina.

The words of my Text, are the result of things, upon Gods dealings and
dispensations before mentioned. Uncertain it is, whether they ought to be
restrained, to the immediate prophetie before going concerning Palestina, or
whether they relate not also, to that in the beginning of the Chapter,
concerning the destruction of the Assyrian, which is summed up. v. 24, 25, 26.
The Lord of Hosts has sworn, saying, as I have thought so shall it come to
pass, and as I have purposed it shall stand: That I will break the Assyrian in
my Land, and upon my Mountain tread him under foot: then shall his yoke depart
from off them, and his burden from off their shoulders. It is the ruining of
Sennacharib and his army in the days of Hezekiah, that is foretold. Yea and
this seems to claim a peculiar share and influence into this (...), or
triumphant close; because eminently and signally, not long after, messengers
were thus sent from Babylon, to enquire of the health, and congratulate the
good success of Hezekiah. And well had it been for him, and his posterity, had
he given those messengers the return to their inquiry* which was here prepared
for him, some years before. His mistake herein, was the fatal ruin of Judah's
prosperity.

Let not then that consideration be excluded, though the other insisted on, be
principally intended.

The words you see have in them, an Enquiry and a Resolution thereof. I shall
open them briefly as they ly, in the Text.

1. What SHALL one: what shall, or what ought? what is it their duty to do or
to say? or what shall they, upon the evidence of the things done, so do or
say: either their duty, or the event is denoted, or both, as in such
predictions it often falls out.

2. What shall ONE? that is any one, or every one; the answer spoken of is
either the duty of every one to give, or it will be so evident that any one
shall be able to give it. The word one, I confess is not expressly in the
original, but is evidently included in the verb (...): what shall be
answered, that is, by any one what ever. There is no more in the translation,
then is eminently infolded in the Original expression of this thing.

3. What shall one THEN? that is, in the season when God has disappointed the
hopes and expectations of the enemies of his people, and has strengthened their
rod to bruise them again more then ever. That is a season wherein great inquiry
will be made about those things; what shall one then answer? This word also, is
includded in the interrogation; and much of the emphasis of it, consists
therein.

4. Answer the Messengers: That is men coming on set purpose to make inquiry
after the State of affairs among Gods people; Ambassadors, Agents, Spies,
Messengers, Enquirers of any sort; or the word may be taken more largly, for
any stranger that came to Jerusalem. The septuagint render these words, (...);
the Kings of the Nations, what shall they say? in this case, (...); what shall
they answer, or say? so that word is sometimes used: some think, that sor, (...)
which they should have rendered (...), or messengers, they read (...), or Kings,
by an evident mistake: but all things are clear in the Original.

5. Of the NATIONS: That is of this, or that Nation, of any Nation that shall
send to make inquiry: (...), of the heathen say some; those commonly so called,
or the Nations estranged from God, are usually denoted by this word in the
plural number: yet not always under that consideration: so that there may be
an enallagy of number, the nation for the nations, which is usual.

What shall one answer them? they come to make enquiry after the work of God
among his people, and it is fit that an answer be given to them: Two things are
observable in this interrogation.

1. Ob. 1.
The Nations about will be diligently enquiring after Gods dispensations among
his people; besides what reports they receive at home, they will have
Messengers, Agents, or Spies to make enquiry. Ob. 2.


2. The issues of Gods dispensations amongst his people shall be so evident and
glorious, that every one, any one though never so weak, if not blinded by
prejudice, shall be able to give a convincing answer concerning them, to the
enquiries of men.

Something shall be spoken to these propositions in the process of our
discourse.

2. There is the resolution given of the enquiry made in this interrogation,
hereof are 2. parts.

1. What God has done. 2. What his people shall, or ought to do.
Wrap up at any time, the work of God, and the duty of his people together, and
they will be a sufficient answer to any man's enquiry after the state of things
amongst them. As to our wisdom in reference unto providentiall dispensations,
this is the whole of man.

1. The first thing in the Answer to be given in, is the work of God, the Lord
has founded Sion. Sion; that is his Church, his people his chosen ones, called
Sion from the place of their solemn worship in the days of David, The figure
and type of the Gospel Church. Heb. 12. 22. Yea are come unto Mount Sion, and
unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem.

It is generally used not for the whole body of that people unless as they were
typically considred in which respect they were all holy. But for the secret
covenanted ones of that people, as is evident from all the promises made
thereunto, yet with special regard to the Ordinances of worship.

2. This God has founded: founded, or Established, strengthened, that it shall
not be removed, Psalm. 87. is a comment on these words: He has founded it; that
is in faithful promises, and powerful performances, sufficient for its
preservation and establishment.

Now this expression, [The Lord has founded Sion] as it is an Answer to the
enquiries of the Messengers of the Nations, may be taken two ways.

1. As giving an account of the work it self done; or what it is that God has
done, in and amongst his people. What is the work that is so famed abroad, and
spoken of throughout the World? That being attempted in many places, and
proveing abortive, is here accomplished? This is it, shall one say: God has
established his people and their interest; it is no such thing as you suppose,
that some are set up, and some pulled down; that new Fabrics of Government or
Ruling are erected for their own sakes, or their sakes, who are interested in
them. But this is the thing that God has done; he has founded Sion,
established his people and their interest, in despite of all opposition.

2. As giving a Reason of the work done; whence is it that the Lord has
wrought so mightily for you, amongst you, in your behalf, praeserved you,
recovered you, supported you, given you success and Victory, When all Nations
conspired your ruin? why this is the Reason of it. God has founded Sion, He
bore it goodwill, has taken care of the interest of his Church and people.

The words may be taken in either sense; the issue of their intendment as to
our instruction, will be the same. This is the Answer to be given to the
messengers of the nations, who perhaps expected to have heard of their strength
and policy, of their Counselors and Armies, of their wealth and their Riches,
of their triumphs and enjoyments; no! God has founded Sion. And well had it
been for Hezekiah, had he given this answer prepared for him so long before, to
the Messengers of Babylon.

3. The great design of God in his mighty works, and dispensations in the
world; is the establishment of his people, and their proper interest in their
several generations.

Give me leave to say; it is not for this, or that form of government, or
civil administration of humane affairs; it is not for these, or those
Governors, much less for the advantage of one or other sort of men: for the
Enthroning of any one, or other persuasion, gainful, or helpful to some few,
or more, that God has wrought his mighty works amongst us. But it is that
Sion may be founded, and the general interest of all the Sons and Daughters of
Sion be preserved; and so far as any thing lies in a subserviency thereunto, so
far, and no farther is it with him accepted. And what ever, on what account
soever sets up against it, shall be broken in pieces.

What answer then should we give to Enquirers? that the Lord has founded Sion.
This is that, and that alone, which we should insist upon, and take notice of,
as the peculiar work of God amongst us. Let the reports from other Nations be
what they will, let them acquaint the Messengers of one another, with their
Glory, Triumphs, Enlarging of their empires and dominions.

When it is inquired what he has done in England, let us say, he has founded
Sion. And he will not leave until every man concerned in the work shall be
able to say, we have busied our selves about things of no moment; and consumed
our days, and strength, in setting up sheaves that most bow hereunto. This is
the main of Gods intendment, and whilst it is safe, he has the Glory and end
of his dispensations.

2. The other part of the Answer relates to the people; the poor of his people
shall trust in it.

The words contain either their duty, they ought to do so, or the event, they
shall do so; or both jointly.

1. The poor of his people. v. 30. they are called the first borne of the poor
and needy: That is, those who are very poor. Now this expression may denote
either the people in general, who had been poor and afflicted; and so the
poor of his people, is as much, as his poor people: or some in particular,
that partly upon the account of their Low outward condition, partly on the
account of their lowliness of mind, are called the poor of his people: and
so the words are excellently paraphrased. Zeph. 3. 12, 13. I will also leave in
the midst of thee an afflicted, and poor people; and they shall trust in the
name of the Lord: The remnant of Israel shall not do Iniquity, nor speak
lies: neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth, and none shall
make them afraid. We may take the words in a sense comprizing both these:
namely for the poor preserved remnant, carried through the fiery trial, and
preserved to see some comfortable issue of Gods dealing with them, though yet
wrestling with difficulties and perplexities.

2. What shall they do? they shall trust in it; (...) and in it they shall
trust; that is, being in it, they shall trust, confide, acquiess, namely in the
Lord, who has wrought this work: or in it, that is, either in the work of God,
or in Sion so established by God.

The word here used for trusting, is sometimes taken for to repair, or to
retreat to any thing, and not properly to put trust, affiance or confidence,
and so it is rendered in the margin of your books: they shall betake themselves
to it. So is the word used Judges. 9. 15. Psalm. 36. 7.

So the intendment is, that the poor preserved people of God, seeing his
design to found Sion, and to establish the interest of his chosen, shall leave
of all other designs, aims and contrivances, and wind up all on the same
bottom; They shall not, at least they ought not (for I told you the words
might denote either their duty, what they ought to do, or the event what they
shall do) set up designs, and aims of their own, and contend about other
things! but betake their hopes to that which is the main intendment of God, the
Establishment of the interest of his people, and cast all other things in a
subserviency thereunto. The sum is,

It is the duty of Gods poor preserved remnant laying aside all other aims
and contrivances, Ob* 4.
to betake themselves to the work of God, founding Sion and preserving the
common interest of his people.

Of the Propositions thus drawn from the words, I shall Treat severally, so
far, as they may be foundations of the inferences intended.

The First is this: The Nations about, will be diligently enquiring concerning
Gods dispensations among his people; Their eyes are upon them, and they will be
enquiring after them.

In the handling of this, and all that follows, I humbly desire, that you
would consider in what capacity, as to the discharge of this work, I look upon
my self, and You. As you are hearers of the Word of God, (in which state alone
at present, though with reference to your designed employment, I look upon you)
as you are not at all distinguished from others, or among your selves: but as
you are Believers, or not; Regenerate Persons, or coming short thereof. And on
this account, as I shall not speak of my Rulers without Reverence, so I shall
endeavor to speak to my hearers with Authority. I say then,

1. There are certain Affections, and Principles, that are active in the
Nations, that will make them restless, and always put them upon this enquiry.
The people of God, on one account or other, shall be in all seasons a separated
people. Number. 23. 9. Lo the People shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned
among the Nation; yea they are separated from them, whilst they are in their
bowels, and dwell in the midst of them: Micha 5. 7, 8. whether they are
amongst them, as the spring of their mercies, or the rise of their destruction,
(one of which they will always be) yet they are not of them. No sooner then is
any People, or portion of them, thus dedicated to God; but all the Nations
about, and those amongst them not engaged in the same way with them, instantly
look on them, as utterly severed from them: having other ways, ends, and
interests then they, being built up wholly on another account and foundation:
They reckon not of them as a people and a nation. The Conclusion they make
concerning them, is that of Haman: Esther 3. 8. There is a certain people
scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of thy
Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all people. Not their Moral and
judicial Laws, which were the sum of that perfection, which all Nations
aimed at; on which account they said of them, Surely this great Nation is a
wise and understanding People. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. and the keeping of those Laws was
their wisdom and understanding among all Nations: nor yet merely the Laws of
their Religious worship: but the whole way, interest, design, profession of
that people, is comprised in this expression, they are diverse from all people.
Looking on them in this state, they have principles (as I said) that will carry
them out to an enquiry into their state and condition.

1. They are full of Envy against them; They shall be ashamed of their envy at
thy people. Isaiah. 26. 11. looking on them, as wholly separated from them, and
standing on another account then they do, they are full of envy at them. Envy
is a restless passion, full of enquiries and jealousies; the more it finds of
poison, the more it swells and feeds. It will search into the bottom of that
which its eye is fixed on. The transaction of the whole business between
Nehemiah and Sanballat, gives light to this consideration. See Neh. Chapter 4. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

And ever the nearer any nation is to this people, the greater is their Envy.
It was Edom, and Moab, and Ammon, the nations round about, that were most
filled with wrath and Envy against Israel. Yea when that People was divided
among themselves, and the true worship of God remained with Judah, and they
became the separated people, Ephraim was instantly filled with Envy against
them. Isaiah. 11. 13. The Envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the
adversaries of Judah shall be cut off. Ephraim shall not envy Judah: For there
must be a desire of the same thing, as something answering it (which befalls in
proximity of habitation) that a man is envied for, in him that envy's him. This
is one fountain of the nations enquiry after your affairs.

Through the providence of God, you dwell alone; that is, as to your main
design and interest. You are not reckoned among the nations, as to the state
of being the people of God; so far, and under that consideration, They count
you not worthy to be reckoned or esteemed a Nation. They envy to see the men of
their contempt exalted, blessed. The same is the condition of Ephraim amongst
us; men not engaged in the same Cause, and way with you, they are full of envy.
Wherefore do they enquire of your wellfaire, of your state and condition, of
your affairs? is it that they love you, that they desire your prosperity, that
they would have you an established Nation? No, only their envy makes them
restless. And as it is in general: so no sooner does any man upon a private
account separate himself from the public interest of the people of God, but
he is instantly filled with envy against the managers of it. And
notwithstanding all our animosities, if this has not befallen us, in our
differences and divisions; I no way doubt a peaceable composure, and blessed
issue of the whole. If Envy be not at work, we shall have establishment.

2. A second principle, whereby they are put upon their enquiries, is Fear.
They fear them, and therefore will know how things stand with them, and what
are the works of God amongst them. Hab. 3. 7. I saw the tents of Cushan in
affliction, and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble; I saw it; when
God was doing the great work described in that Chapter with many lofty
allegorical expressions, of bringing his people out of bondage, to settle them
in a new state and condition; the nations round about, that looked on them,
were filled with affliction, fear and trembling. They were afraid whither
these things would grow. Psalm. 48* 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Great is the Lord, and
greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the mountain of his holiness;
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is mount Sion, on the
sides of the north, the City of the great King; God is known in her palaces
for a refuge. For lo, the Kings were assembled, they passed by together; They
saw it and so they marvelled, they were troubled and so they hasted away; For
fear took hold upon them there, and pain as of a woman in travail. The close
of all the considerations of these Kings, and their attendants, is, that fear
took hold upon them. Fear is sollicitous and enquiring; it will leave nothing
unsearched, unlooked into, it would find the inside and bottom of every thing
wherein it is concerned. Though the more it finds, the more it is increased,
yet the greater still are its enquiries; fearing more what it know's not, then
what it know's, what is behind, then what appears. This put's the nations upon
their inquiry, they are afraid what these things will grow to. Psalm. 126. 2.
Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing, then said
they among the heathen, the Lord has done great things for them: They are the
words of men pondering their affairs, and filled with fear at the issue: If
God do such things as these for them, what think you will be the issue? I dare
say of the proudest adversaries of the people of God at this day;
notwithstanding all their anger they are more afraid then angry. The like also
may be said concerning their wrath, revenge, and curiosity, all pressing them
to such Enquiries.

This is the issue of this proposal. If we are not a separated people unto
God, if our portion be as the portion of the men of the world, and We are also
as they, reckoned among the nations, if we have had only national works, in
the execution of wrath on men fitted thereunto amongst us; woe unto us that we
were ever engaged in the whole affair that for some years we have been
interested in. It will be bitterness and disappointment in the latter end. If
we be the Lords peculiar Lot, separate unto him, the Nations about, and many
amongst our selves, on the manifold accounts before mentioned, will be
enquiring into our state and condition, and the work of God amongst us. Let us
consider what we shall answer them, what we shall say unto them, what is the
account we give of Gods dealings with us, and of his mighty works amongst us?
What is the profession we make? If we seek our selves, if we are full of
complaints and repinings one against another: If every one has his own aims,
his own designs, (for what we do, not what we say is the Answer we make) if
we measure the work of God by its suitableness to our private interests; If
this be the issue of all the dealings of God amongst us, we shall not have
wherein to rejoice: but of these things afterward, The second Proposition is

Ob. 2. The issue of Gods dealing with, and dispensations among his people,
shall be so perspicuous and glorious, that one, any one, every one, shall be
able to give an answer to them that make enquiries about them. What shall one
then say; whether it be for judgment, or mercy, all is one: He will make the
event to be evident and glorious. He is our Rock and his work is perfect; and
he will have his works so known, as that they may all praise him. Be it in
judgment; see what issue he will bring his work unto. Deuteronomy. 29. 24, 25. Even
all nations shall say, wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this Land? What
means the heat of this great anger; Then men shall say, because they have
forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, which he made with
them, when be brought them forth out of the land of Egypt. MEN shall say,
ordinary men shall be able to give this sad account of the Reason of the works
of God, and his dealings with his people. So also as to his dispensations in
mercy. Isaiah. 26. 11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but
they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people, yea, the fire of
thine enemies shall devour them. He will not leave the work of his favor
toward his people, until those who are willing to shut their eyes against it,
do see and acknowledge his hand and council therein.

I do not say this will hold in every dispensation of God, in all seasons, from
the beginning to the ending of them. In many works of his power and
righteousness, he will have us bow our souls to the Law of his providence, and
his Sovereignty, Wisdom, and goodness therein when his footsteps are in the
deep, and his paths are not known; which is the reasonablest thing in the
world.

But this generally is the way of his proceedings; especially in the common
concernments of his people, and in the disposal of their public interests;
his Work his Will and Counsels therein shall be eminent and glorious.

It is chiefly from our selves, and our own follies that we come short of such
an acquaintance with the works of God, as to be able to give an Answer to every
one that shall demand an account of them. When David was staggar'd at the works
of God, he gives this reason of it, I was foolish and as a beast before him.
Psalm. 73. 22. That thoughtfulness and wisdom which keeps us in darkness, is
our folly.

There are sundry things that are apt to cloud our apprehensions, as to the
mind of God in his dealing with his people. As,

1. Selfefulnesse of our own private Apprehensions and designs; a private
design and aim, in the works of providence, is like a private by-opinion in
matters of Religion.

You seldom see a man take up a by-opinion, (if I may so speak) but he
instantly lays more weight upon it, then upon all Religion besides. If that be
not enthroned, be it a matter of never so small importance, he scarce cares
what becomes of all other Truths which he does embrace. When men have fixed to
themselves, that this, or that particular, must be the product of Gods
providentiall dispensations, That alone fills their aims and desires, and
leaves no room for any other Apprehension. Have we not seen persons in the days
wherein we live, so fixed on a Reign, a Kingdom, I know not what, that they
would scarce allow God himself to be wise, if their minds were not satisfied.
Give me this Child or I dye. Now is it probable, that when men's whole Souls,
are possessed with a design and desire of their own, so fully, that they are
cast into the mould of it, are transformed into the image and likeness of it,
they can see, hear, think, talk, dream nothing else; That they shall be able
to discern aright, and acquiesse in the general issue of Gods dispensations,
or be able to answer the Messengers of the Nations, making enquiry concerning
them. Fear, hope, wrath, anger, coffeehouse, with a rabble of the like
mind-darkning affections, are the attendants of such a frame. He who knows any
thing of the power of prejudices in diverting the minds of men, from passing a
right judgment on things proposed to them, and the efficacy of disordered
affections, for the creating and confirming of such prejudices; will discern
the power of thus darkning disturbance.

2. Private Enmities, private disapointments, Private prejudices, are things of
the same consideration; Let a man of a free and large heart and Spirit,
abstract his thoughts from the differences that are among the people of God in
this Nation, and keep himself from an engagement into any particular design
and desire: it is almost impossible that he should wink so hard, but that the
issue and Reason of Gods dealing with us, will shine in upon his understanding;
so that he shall be able to give an account of them, to them that shall make
enquiry. Will he not be able to say to the Messengers of the Nations; and all
other observers of the providentiall alterations of the late times that have
passed over us: the people of God in this Nation were despised, but are now in
esteem; they were under subjection to cruel taske-Masters, some in prisons,
some banished to the ends of the earth, merely on the accont of the worship of
their God; the consciences of all enthralled, and of many defiled and broken on
the scandalls laid before them, whilst iniqui^y and superstition were
established by Law. But this is that which God has now done and accomplished:
the imprisoned are at Liberty, the banished are recalled, they that have lain
among the Pots have got doves whings, Conscience is no more enthralled, their
sacrifices are not mixed with their blood, nor do they meet with trembling in
the worship of God. O ye messengers of the nation this is that which the Lord
has done! Who (J say) not entangled with one prejudicate engagement or other,
may not se this with half an eye? But such is our state and condition, such
our frame and temper, so full are we of our own desires, and so perplexed with
our own disapointments, that we can see nothing, know nothing nor are able to
give any word of accont, that may tend to the Glory of our God, to them that
enquire of us; But every one vents his own discontentments, his own fears,
his own perplexities. The Lord look down in mercy, and let us not be found
dis^isers of the work of his power and goodness. Ah! how many glorious
Appearances have I seen, of which I said under the shadow hereof, shall we live
among the heathen? but in a short space they have passed away. Shall we
therefore choose us a Captain, and go down again into Egypt? The Third
proposition ensues.

The great design of God in his mighty works and dispensations, Ob. 3.
is the establishment of his people and their proper interest, in their
several generations.

To make this clear, some few things are previously to be considered, as:

1. The proper interest of the people of God, is to glorify him in their
several places, stations and Generations; none of us are to live unto our
selves. It is for this end that God has taken a peculiar people to himself in
this world, that he might be glorified by them, that his name may be borne
forth by them, and upon them. This is the great end whereunto they are
designed, and that which they ought to aim at only, even to glorify God.

If this be not done, they fall of from, and are besides their proper interest.
Besides innumerable Testimonies to this purpose I might give evidence to this
Assertion, from Gods Eternal electing love toward them, with his intendment
therein; from their Redemption out of every Kindred, tribe and family under
heaven, by the blood of Christ, from their separation from the world by their
effectual calling, and the like considerations; But I have the consenting
voice of them all in general, and of every individual in particular, crying
out, this is our, this is my proper interest, that we may glorify God; fail
we, and come short in this, we come short, and fail in the whole: so that I
shall not need further to confirm it.

2. God is the only proper and infallible judge in what state and condition his
people will best, and most glorify his name, in their several generations. I
think I need not insist on the proof of this Assertion; should it be according
to thy mind, says he in Job. Cap. 33. 34. or according to the mind of God?
should the disposal of things be according to his will, or ours? whose End is
to be obtained in the issue of all? is it not his Glory? who has the most
wisdom to order things aright, he or we? who has the chiefest interest in,
and right unto the things contended about? who sees what will be the event of
all things, he or we? might men be judges would they not universally
practically conclude, that the Condition wherein they might best glorify God
would be, that they might have peace and rest from their Enemies, union and a
good understanding among themselves: that they might dwell peaceably in the
world, without control, and have the necks of their Adversary's under their
feet. This in general. In particular: that this, or that persuasion that they
are peculiarly engaged in, might be always enthroned, that their proper sheafe
might stand upright and all others bow thereunto, and that nothing is contrary
to the Glory of God, but what disturbs this Condition of affairs. I know not
what may be accomplished before the End of the world, from the beginning of it
hitherto for the most part the thoughts of God, have not bin as these thoughts
of ours: He has judged otherwise as to the condition wherein his people should
glorify him. God is judge himself, Let us I pray you leave the determination
of this difference to him; and if it be so, as to our general condition, much
more is it so, as to our peculiar designs and aims, wherein we are divided.

3. Providentiall dispensations are discoveries of the wisdom of God in
disposing of the condition of his people soas, they may best glorify him. To
dispute against the condition wherein at any time we are cast by his providence,
is to rise up against his wisdom in disposing of things to his own Glory.

These things being premised, it is easy to give light and evidence to the
Assertion laid down.

I might go through the story's of Gods dealings with the Nations of the
world, and his own people amongst them, and manifest in each particular, that
still His design was, the establishment of his peoples proper interest. But
instead of instances take two or three Testimonies that occure. Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
When the most high divided to the Nations their inheritance, when he separated
the Sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of
the children of Israel. From the beginning God has so ordered all the Nations
of the world that they may bear a proportion to what he has to do with his
people; that he may so order and dispose of them, as that his design toward
his own may be accomplished. Amos. 9. 9. For lo I will command and will fifth
the house of Israel among all Nations like as corn is sifted in a sive, yet
shall not the least grain fall upon the earth; All the stir's and commotions
that are in the world, are but Gods siftings of the Nations, that his chosen
ones may be fitted for himself, and not lost in the chafe, and rubbish.

Heb. 12. 26, 27. Whose voice then shook the earth, but now he has promised
saying, yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven; And this
word, yet once more, signifies the removing of those things that are shaken,
as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may
remain: All the shakings of the Nations are, that the unshaken interest of the
Saints may be established: Isai. 51. 15, 16. But I am the Lord thy God that
divided the sea whose waves roared, the Lord of hosts is his name. And I have
put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand,
that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say
unto Zion thou art my people. Heaven, and earth, and all things therein, are
disposed of, that Sion may be built and established. All Gods works in this
world, lie in a subserviency to this end and purpose.

Does God at any time prosper an evil or a wicked Nation? an Antichristian
Nation? is it for their own sakes? does God take care for Oxen? has he
delight in the prosperity of his Enemies? No: it is only that they may be a Rod
in his hand for a little moment, and a staff for his indignation against the
miscariages of his people. Isai. 10. 5, 12. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger,
and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. This in such a season is their
proper interest, to glorify God in distress. Does he break, ruin and destroy
them, as sooner or latter he will leave them, neither root nor branch? all
that he does to them, is a Recompense for the controversy of Sion. Isai. 34. 9.
for it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the
controversy of Sion.

We see not perhaps at this day, wherein the concernments of the remnant of
Gods people does lie, in the great concussions of the Nations in the World; we
know not what design in reference to them, may lie therein: Alas! we are poor
short sighted creatures, we know nothing that is before us, much less can we
make a judgment of the work of God, in the midst of the darkness and
confusion, that is in the world, until he has brought it to perfection. All
lies open and naked to his Eye; and the beauty of all his works will one day
appear. The true and proper interest of his people, so as they may best
glorify him in the world, is that, which he is pursueing in all these
dispensations.

The Grounds, Reasons, and foundations of this Truth, in the Counsel, from the
Love, and Attributes of God, the Redemption in the blood of Jesus, I must not
now pursue, this one thing I shall only offer.

The state of Sion, of the people of God, being much to depend upon the
disposalls of them, whom God by his providence raises up to rule and
Government among the Nations; though sometimes he sets up men, whose hearts and
minds are upright with himself, yet he will not trust his own to their mercy,
and the variableness of their Wills in general: But will so dispose, alter,
weaken and strengthen them, so set them up, and pull down, that it shall be
their interest, to which they will always abide faithful, so to deal with
his people, as he will have them dealt with, that they may best glorify him in
their generations.

If it be in the infinite wise counsel of God, to give his Saints in this
nation peace and tranquillity, they shall not have it precariously upon the
wills of men; For he will not leave moulding and disposing of the affairs of
the nation, until it find, that it is its proper interest to give, and measure
out unto them, what is to the mind of God. All that has been done amongst us,
all that we are in expectation of, turns on this hinge alone. But lastly,

Ob. 4. It is the duty of Gods preserved remnant, laying aside all other aims
and contrivances, to betake themselves to the work of God, founding Sion, and
preserving the common interest of his people.

God has founded Sion, and the poor of the people shall trust therein, or
betake themselves unto it.

We are apt to wander on hills and mountains, every one walking in the
imagination of his own heart, forgetting our resting place.

When God was bringing the power of the Babylonian upon his people, the Prophet
Jeremiah could neither persuade the whole nation to submit to his Government,
nor many individualls among them, to fall to him in particular. And when the
time of their deliverance from that Captivity was accomplished, how hardly were
they persuaded to embrace the Liberty tendered; notwithstanding all
encouragements and advantages, the greatest part of them abide in that place of
their bondage to this day. So hardly are we brought to close with Gods peculiar
work, and our own proper interest, although his glory, and our own safety lie
therein. The Reasons of this frame, I have in part touched before, I shall add
but two more.

1. Coffeehouse with our peculiar lot and portion, in the work of the Lord,
and common interest of his people. It is with us, in our civil affairs, as
the Apostle says it is not in the natural body, nor ought to be in the
spiritual, or Church body: The foot does not say, because I am not the head, I
am not of the body; no, it does not; but is content with its own place and
usefulness. It is so with the rest of the members that are more noble, and yet
are not the head neither. It is otherwise with us: I enterpose not my thoughts,
as to your present constitution, and the order of things amongst us. I speak no
more then I have sundry years since, sundry times complained of, to a
Parliament of this Commonwealth. Every one, if not personally, yet in
Association with them, of some peculiar persuasion with himself, would be the
head; and because they are not, they conclude they are not of the body, nor
will care for the body, but rather endeavor its ruin. Because their peculiar
interest does not reign, the common interest shall be despised; and this has
been the temper or rather distemper, of the people of God in this Nation now
for sundry years; and what it may yet produce I know not. Only for the present
the work of God in founding Sion, in purseuing his peoples common interest, is
despised, thought light of, and all the pleasant things thereof trodden under
foot. Unless God end this frame, my expectations, I confess, of an happy
issue of the great work of God amongst us, will wither day by day.

2. The suffering of our Wills and Judgments, as to the products of
providence, to run before the Will of God. This, the Experience of these days
has taught us. Those who have a forwardness in prescribing to God what he
should do, as to the modus, or manner of the work, which at any time he has
to accomplish, Are stubbornly backward, in closing with what he does actually
produce. These and the like things, which might be in large Catalogues reckoned
up, one after another, detain the minds of men, from acquiescing in the common
interest of Sion, whose preservation is the whole peculiar design of the great
work of God, in any place or season. These foundations being laid in the words
of the Text, let us now see what inferences from them may be made, for our
advantage and instruction.

Us. 1. Let us then consider diligently what we shall answer the Messengers of
the Nations; some think that by the Nation, is peculiarly intended the Nation
of the Jews themselves, Whose messengers from all parts came to Jerusalem to
enquire of the work of God, and to advise about the Affairs of the whole. In
this fense you are the Messengers of this Nation, to whom an Answer is to be
returned: and because the Text says, ONE shall do it, that is, anyone, I
shall make bold before we close, to give an Answer to your Enquirys; and
endeavor to satisfy your Expectations: In the mean time as the words seem more
directly to respect the enquiries of other Nations: So it is in a special
manner incumbent on you, who will be especially inquired of, to return an
Answer to them. Be provided then I pray in your own hearts, to give an Answer
in this buisiness; and Oh that you could do it with one heart and lip, with
one consent, and judgment. On whom are the eyes of this Nation and of those
round about? from whom are the Expectations of men? to whom should we go to
enquire what God has done in this Nation, what he is doing, what are the
effects of his power, if not of you? Some of you have been engaged in this
work, with the Lord from the beginning: And I hope none of you have been
engaged in heart or hand against it; and you speak still with living
affections, to the old and common cause. If you will be able to steer your
course aright, If yon would take one straight step, have in a readiness an
acquaintance with the work of God, what it is that he aims at, by which you
may be guided in all your undertakings. Suppose now a man, or men, should come
and ask of you, what God has done in these Nations? what he has wrought, and
effected? what is brought forth? Have you an Answer in readiness? certainly
God has done so much as that he expects you should be able to give an account
of it. Take heed that every one of you be not ready to speak the disquietments
of your own Spirits, and so cast contempt on the work of God. Something else is
required of you. I have sometimes in darkness and under temptations my self,
begun to think, that what has been, is the thing that is, and there is no new
thing under the Sun. As it has been among the heathen of old, so it has been
amongst us; or as it was with Israel. 1 Kings 16. 22, 22. then were the people
of Israel divided into two parts, half of the people followed Tibni the son of
Ginath to make him King: and half followed Omri: But the people that followed
Omri prevailed against the people that followed Tibni the son of Ginah, so
Tibni died and Omri reigned: That a common thing and frequent in the world had
befallen us, wherein God had no hand, but that of common providence, in dashing
one sort of men against another. So foolish have I been, and as a beast, so
ready to condemn the generation of the righteous, so unbelieving and ready to
cast away the faith and prayer of ten thousand Saints; one of whose sighs shall
not be lost. But such fearful effects, sometimes trouble disquietment,
disappointment, and carnal fear will produce. But certain it is, none of the
many cries of the people of God shall be lost, nor their faith be disappointed.
God has a peculiar design in hand, and we are to find it out, that we may be
able to answer them that make enquiries. If you lay not this foundation of your
procedures, I shall not wonder if you err in your ways; It is your Pole-starre
and will be so, by which your whole course is to be steered; your shield, which
whilst it is safe, though you dye, your glory abides.

But you will say! what then is this great design of God among his people: Let
the Holy one of Israel bring nigh his work that we may know it; what is that
true and General interest of Zion that he has founded; let us know it, that
we may be able to give an answer to them that enquire after it.

1. Ask themselves, those who have prayed for it, waited for it, expected it,
are made partakers of it, do enjoy it, live upon it, probably they will be
able to give you an account what is their peculiar and only interest, as to
these providentiall dispensations; surely they cannot but know that which they
enjoy, and live upon.

But you will say of all others, this is the most unlikely, and irrational
course, a way to perplex and entangle, not to inform us at all. Is it not
clear, that they are divided among themselves? Is not their language, is not
their voice, like that of the Jews at the building of the second Temple; some
shouted for joy, and some wept at the remembrance of the former Temple are not
their desires rather like that, and those of theirs, who built Babell, then of
those who cry grace grace, whilst God is founding Sion? Do not many of them
utterly deny any work or design of God, (I mean what is peculiar) in the
affairs of this Nation; and utterly fall away from the society of them, who
are otherwise persuaded? And is it likely that we can gather any Resolution
from them? does not the greatest danger of our own miscarriage lie in this?
that we may be apt to attend to their peculiar desires, and so to divide
amongst our selves, as they are divided.

And is this the return that indeed is to be made! O that mine eyes might run
down with water day and night on this account, that my heart might be moved
within me, for the folly of my people. Ah foolish people and unwise, do we
thus require the Lord?

It is true, many at all times have desired the day of the Lord, who when it
has come, have not been able to abide it, it has consumed them, and all the
principles, whereon they have acted, and upon which they did desire it; But
that those who have their share in it indeed, should be thus broken among
themselves, should bite one another, devour one another, and scarce allow one
another to be sharers in the common interest of the Saints, in that day, this
is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

But yet something may be farther pressed on them in this business. When one
went to demand of the Philosophers of the several Sects, which was the best of
them, every one named his own Sect and party in the first place; but all of
them in the second place, granted that of Plato to be the most eminent. The
enquirer knew quickly what to conclude; setting aside prejudicate Affections,
self love, and by interests, he saw that the judgment of all, run on that of
Plato, as the best and most eminent Sect, and which thereupon he preferred
before the rest.

May not some enquiry of the like nature be made of the people of God amongst
us? Ask them what is the common interest of Sion, that God takes care of, that
he has founded in the days wherein we live, in the great transactions of
providence that have passed over us. Say some: that such a form of Church
worship and discipline be established, such a rule of doctrine confirmed, and
all men whatever compelled to submit unto them: herein lies that Kingdom of
Christ which he takes care of, this is that which God will have founded and
established: And what this Form, what this Rule is, we are to declare.

That that Discipline be eradicated, the Ministers provision destroyed, and the
men of such a persuasion Enthroned, to rule all the rest at their pleasure,
seeing, that notwithstanding all their pretended Reformation, they are yet
Antichristian, say others.

Say some: that a Kingdom and Rule be set up in our hands, to be exercised in
the name and Authority of Jesus Christ, taking away all Law and Magistracy
already established, to bring forth the Law of Righteousness conceived in our
minds and therein to be preserved; all uniting only in this, that a sovereignty
as unto administration of the things of God is to be theirs.

Say others lastly, that the people of God be delivered from the hands of their
cruel enemies, that they may serve the Lord without fear all the days of
their lives, in righteousness and holiness, that notwithstanding their
present differences, they may live peacably one with, or at least one by
another, enjoying Rule and promotion, as they are fitted for employments, and
as he gives promotion, in whose hand it is, that Godliness, and the love of
the Lord Jesus Christ be preserved, protected, and secured, from a return of
the hand of violence upon it; Herein say some lies the common interest of the
people of God; this he has wrought out for them, herein he has founded Sion.
Ask now the people of God in this nation, I say or any of them, one, or more,
at any time? What he, or they, look upon as the chief thing aimed at in the
mighty dispensations of God amongst us; will they not every one answer in the
first place, that is aimed at, that is to be enthroned, that so doing is the
will of God, the End of his works among them, wherein their, or his particular
engagement and interest lies. But ask them now again, in the second place,
which of the remaining persuasions concerning the work of God, and the common
interest of his people, they would prefer next to their own: will they not
all unanimously fix on that mentioned in the last place, rather then any of the
other. Is it not then evident that setting aside prejudicate affections, and
such determinations, as may reasonably be supposed to arise from them, laying
away all private animosities, and desire of Rule and pre-eminence, with other
worldly and selfish designs; the universality of the people of God, do answer
to them that enquire, that in the last persuasion lies the aim, and work of
God in our generation. For my own part, on this and other considerations
hereafter to be mentioned, I shall dare freely to give this Answer to the
messengers of this, or any Nation in the World, who shall make inquisition
after the work of God amongst us, and his design in reference to his people;
and it is no other then my heart has been fixed upon for many years, and which
I have several times, on one account or other intimated, or pressed unto the
Parliament, which first undertook to manage, and succesfully carried on that
Cause, in whose protection you are now engaged.

This I say then; God has founded Sion, he has taken care of the generation
of the righteous, the children of Sion, however differenced among themselves;
has broken the yoke of their Oppressors, given them peace, ordered the
affairs of this Nation so, that they do, or may, all of them enjoy quietness,
one not envying the other, nor they vexing the^, but serving God according to
the light, which he is graciously pleased to afford them, they wait for
farther manifestations of the glorious Gospel; and that God has broken, and
will break, every design, that either openly, and professedly, or upon
specious pretenses of crying, lo here is Christ, or lo there, has sought, or
shall seek and endeavor to subvert this his work, to the preservation whereof,
he will certainly mould the Government, and interest of this Nation, ordering
its affairs in a peculiar manner on that account only: and not that he
delights in one way or form, wherein to it has been cast, more then another.
And what ever high minded men, full of their own apprehensions and wisdom,
may do, to this work of God, the poor of his people shall repair. And for
my insisting on this Answer, and this only, I have these further Reasons to
add for my justification.

1. This is an interest comprehensive of all the Son's of Sion, whose founding
God intends; it excludes none that can claim a share in the City of the living
God. God takes equal care of all the dwelling places of Sion; Every dwelling
place of Sion, has its beauty, has it is Glory. Isa. 4 5. The Glory of one,
may be as the Glory of the Sun, of another as the Moon, of others as the
Stars, and those differing from one another in Glory; yet each has its Glory;
and upon it, there shall be a defense, a coveringe, a protection. This is the
Promise; this has been the Work of God.

2. This compriseth all them, who have lived by faith, and abode in
supplications in reference to Gods late disspensations amongst us. Who dare
despise any one of those little ones, and say, God has heard me, not you,
regarded me, not you, you have no share or portion in the returns of
supplications which we enjoy.

3. This alone preserves the dwellers of Sion from offering violence one to
another; from taking the work of Babylon out of its hands, and devouring one
another. Let any other apprehension what ever, of the work of God be embraced,
and the first work that thereby men will be engaged in, is the oppressing,
persecuting, ruining of their brethren, which whether it be the founding of
Sion, or no, the day of Judgment shall determine.

4. This is that which the common enemy seeks to destroy. It is not this, or
that party that he would devour; it is not this or that persuasion he would
cast down; his hatred (...), against the whole race and kind; this is that
which he would accomplish, that all the children of God, how ever differenced
among themselves, might be ruined destroyed cast down, and rooted out for ever:
that the name of Israel might no more be had in remembrance: This then is that
which God, in their dissapointment, aims to establish.

5. Because the founding of Sion, does not consist in this or that form of the
civil Administration of humane affairs, there being nothing promised, nor
designed concerning them, but that they be laid in an orderly subserviency, to
the common interest of the Saints; which let men do what they will, yea what
they can, all Government shall at last be brought unto. And who is there
amongst us, that in singleness of heart dares make such an answer to the
Messengers of the Nations enquiting after the peculiar work of God amongst us;
namely, that it consists in the establishment of this or that form of civil
Administrations, though much of the work of God lies therein in Relation to
this General end. This then is the Answer which I shall give to the Messengers
of the Nations, and of it there are these three parts.

1. God has broken, destroyed, ruined them and their contrivances, who made it
their buisnesse to overthrow Sion. And to root out the generation of the
righteous, not under this, or that way or form, whereby they are differenced
among themselves, bnt as such, as the Saints of the holy one, and will continue
so to do.

2. He has given to them, to the poor of his people, peace, liberty, freedom
from impositions on their consciences, with much glorious light in several
degrees, in his worship and service.

3. He has cast (as he has promised) the power of the Nation, into a
subserviency to this common interest of Christ and his people in this world,
and has made, or will make them to understand, that as the peace of Sion, lies
in their peace, so their peace lies in the peace of Sion, and what to say more
to the Messengers of the Nation, I know not.

Us. 2. If this then be the work of God, let us repair to it; the poor of
the people shall trust therein, or join themselves thereunto. That you may do
this in judgment, be pleased to take these directions, which with all humility
I offer to you, and I hope from the Lord.

1. Engage in no way, no Counsels, be the reasonings and pretenses for them
never so Specious, which have an inconsistency with this common interest of
Sion, in this generation. If instead of repairing to the work of God, you
should be found contending against it, and setting up your own wisdom, in the
place of the wisdom of God, it would not be to your advantage. I know many
things will be suggested unto you. Settling of Religion, establishing a
discipline in the Church, not to tolerate errors, and the like: from which
discourses, I know what Conclusions some men are apt to draw, if no otherwise,
yet from what they have been doing for many years; do we then plead for
Errors and unsetlement? God forbid! God has undertaken to found and establish
Sion, to setle it, and he will do it, and I pray God you may be isntrumental
therein according to his mind. He will also give his people one heart and one
way, And I pray that you by your Example of union in love, and by all other
good means may be isntrumental toward the accomplishment of that promise
amongst us.

It is only the Liberty and Protection of the people of God as such, that is
pleaded for, and he that shall set up any thing inconsistent there with as so
set up, will lay the foundation of his building in the firstborne of his peace,
and set up the gate of it in the utmost and last of his welfaire. In a word;
the people of God may possibly in this Nation devour one another, and wash
their hands in the blood of one another, by widening the breaches that are
among them; and woe be to them that shall be isntrumental herein: but if ever
they come to a coalescency in love and truth, it must be by their mutual
forbearance of one another, until the Spirit be powered down from on high, and
the fruits of peace be brought forth thereby; and herein the Lord make you as
the mountains that bring forth righteousness, and the little hills that bring
forth peace unto his people.

There are some things that I am afraid of, that ly contrary to what I am
exhorting you unto! I wish the event manifest that I am afraid without cause;
However give me leave to caution you of them, Because I cannot be faithful to
my call, if I do not.

1. Take heed, least that evil be still abiding upon any of our Spirits, that
we should be crying out and calling for Reformation, without a due
consideration of what it is, and how it is to be brought about. I wish one of
many of them, who have prayed for it, and complained for want of it, had
endeavored to carry it on as they might; would you have a Reformation; be you
more humble, more holy, more zealous, delight more in the ways, worship,
Ordinances of God: reform your persons in your lives, Relations, families,
parishes, as to Gospel obedience, and you will see a glorious Reformation
indeed: what mean you by a Reformation, is it the hurting of others, or doing
good to our selves? is it a power over other men's persons, or our own lusts?
God has now for sundry years tried us, whether indeed we love Reformation or
no; have any provoked us, or compelled us to defile the worship of God, with
ceremonies or superstitions, and our own consciences therewith all? have we
been imposed on in the ways of God, by men ignorant of them? has not God said
to us! you that have prayed under persecution for Reformation, you that have
fought in the high places of the field for Reformation, you that have
covenanted and sworn for Reformation, go now, reform your selves; you
Ministers, preach as often as you will, as freely as you please, no man shall
control you, live as holily as you can, pray as often, fast as often as you
will; be full of bounty and good works, giving examples to your flock, none
shall trouble you; be instant in season, out of season, preach the whole
counsel of God without control; you people be holy, serve God in holiness,
keep close to his worship and ordinances, love them, delight in them, bring
forth such fruits as men may glorify God on your account, condemn the world,
justify the cause of God, by a Gospel Conversation; Take seven years peace
and plenty, and see what you can do. If after all this, we still cry out,
give us a Reformation, and complain not of our own negligence, folly and
hatred of personal Reformation, to be the only cause of that want, it is easy
to judge what we would have, had we our desires.

2. Take heed least any who have formerly desired the day of the Lord,
considering the purity and holiness wherewith it will be attended, grow weary
of it and its work, as not being able to abide it; and so lay aside all
thoughts of growing up with it in the will of God: least any say, is this the
day of the Lord, that Holiness, Godliness, exact obedience, should be prized,
exalted, esteemed; that profaneness, pride, selfishnesse, formallity should be
despised, consumed, devoured, we will have none of this day.

3. Take heed, that there rise not up a Generation that knew not Joseph; that
knew us not in the days of our distress, and contending with those who would
have destroyed us; who were not engaged with us, in praying, fasting, fighting,
in England, Scotland, and Ireland, but were unconcerned in all our affairs;
who know nothing of the cry's, tears, trembling, and fears, wherewith this
cause has been managed; can we expect that they should be acted by the Spirit
of it, or have a due sense of what they must be engaged in: what know they of
the Communion we have had with God in this buisnesse all along, what Answers he
has given us, what Obligations he has put upon us thereby; the whole
buisnesse is to them as a story only of that which is past, wherein they are not
concerned: There are such abiding impressions left on the Souls of as many as
have been engaged in the work of God in this Nation from the beginning to the
end, as will never be blotted out. If a Spirit not sensible of former ways
should arise amongst us, and prevail, it would be sad with the interest of
Christ, and his people in this Nation: To return to my directions.

2. Make this work of God your pole star, that you may steer and guide your
course by it? in all your consultations and actions, what ever is proposed,
what ever is to be done, let this consideration attend it; but how will it
suite the design of God in establishing Sion; men speaking of a thing of
manifest evidence, say that it is written with the beams of the Sun. Give me
leave to tell you of a thing, that is written in the prayers of the Saints, the
fears of your enemies, the condition of this nation, the councels of Princes
of the, earth the Affairs of the Nations abroad in the world, all the issues
of the providence of God in these days, all which concurring, I suppose will
give as good an evidence as any thing in the like kind is capable of. What is
this you will say? It is in brief, Let the work of God as stated, be your guide
in all your consultations, and it will direct you to aim at these two Ends.

1. To preserve Peace, to compose Differences, to make up Breaches, to avoid
all occasions of divisions at home.

2 To make up, unite, gather into one common interest, the Protestant Nations
abroad in the World, that we may stand or fall tegether, and not be devoured
one after another. That these are the things which God calls you to mind, and
do, if you will bear any regard to his present work, is, I say, written with
all the beams of providence before mentioned. If the Lord should suffer you to
be regardlesse either to the one or the other, know you not that it would be
bitterness in the latter end. Ask your friends what they desire, your enemies
what they fear, the Nations abroad what they are doing: Consider Babylon,
consider Sion, and if one and the same voice come from them all; not to attend
unto it, would be, not to attend to the voice of God. It is indeed, an easy
thing for you, to gratify Satan, satiate the desires of your enemies, lay a
foundation of troubles; it is but attending to the clamours of men without, and
the tumultuating of lusts, and carnal wisdom within and the whole work is
done. But to carry on the work of God in the particulars mentioned, this is not
so easy a task: self must be denied, many glorious pretenses laid aside,
contrary reasonings answered, men's weaknesses, miscarriages, failings borne
withal, because they are men; and which is more then all, our own particular
darling desires it may be let go unsatisfied, though molded into contrivances
for many years. The truth is, the combinations of the Antichristian party in
the world, are so evident, their successes so notorious, their designs so
fixed, their Advantages to carry them on, so many; that to persuade with them,
who have power for that end and purpose, to make it their business to keep
union amongst our selves, on all good and honest terms, and to endeavor the
union of all that call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and
ours in the world; were to cast a reproach upon their Wisdom, foresight and
zeal; so that it suffices me to have mentioned these things.

Use 4. Encourage all things that lie in a tendency and subserviency to the
work of God, unfolded and insisted on. For instance.

1. Where ever you see any work of real reformation, tending to the
advancement of the Gospel, discarding of old useless forms, received by
Tradition from our Fathers, separating the precious from the vile, according to
the several measures of light, which God in his infinite wisdom, has
graciously imparted; Let not needless objections and hindrances lie in the
way, but give in all due encouragements, to the men of such engagements.
Perhaps the business of carrying on Reformation is grievous to some, who in
their anger and wrath, revenge and disappointment, may make complaints of it to
you, in private or in public; The Lord give you Wisdom, that you may never
weaken the hands or sadden the hearts, of men who are willing to join hearts
and hands with you, to save a poor Nation, and to keep life in the work of God
in the midst thereof.

2. What you find established already in this kind, encourage, preserve,
improve, that the work fail not.

3. Find out what is wanting, and pursue it, as God gives you advantage and
opportunity.

4. Where men under pretense of Religion, make it their business to defile
themselves, or disturb the civil peace, and quiet of others, let them know,
that the Sword is not borne in vain. I can but name these things.

Honorable: my hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, that you may be the
repairers of breaches, and the restorers of paths for men to walk in; that you
may be the preservers of the good old Cause of England, according to the growth
it received in, and under several providentiall dispensations. Many
particulars ly in my heart, to propose unto you, but on very many
considerations, I shall name none at present of them; but close all with some
few General Directions.

1. Secure your Spirits, that in sincerity you seek the public good of the
Nations, and the prosperity of the good people therein, who have adhered to the
good cause of Liberty, and Religion; if this be in your eye, as that which is
principally intended, as you may pray in faith, for the presence of God with
you, and have a comfortable expectation of his protection and favor; so if in
the pursuit of it, through humane frailty you should err, or mistake in the
choice of means, paths, ways tending to that end, God will guide you, and lead
you, and not leave you until he has made strait paths for your feet: But if
at the bottom, there ly secret animosities, self-will, desire of obtaining
greatness or Power, on the one hand, or other; if every such thing be not on
all hands subdued unto public good, Prayers will be weakened, carnal wisdom
increased, the Counsel of God rejected, and you will wander in all your ways
without success.

2. Keep alive this principle, (which whether any will hear, or whether any
will forbear, I know not; but this I am sure of, in the latter end it will be
found to be true:) according as you regard, cleave to, promote, protect, on the
one side, or despise, contemn, and oppose on the other, the common interest of
Sion, the people of God before laid down, so will your affairs either
flourish, prosper, and succeed on the one hand; or wither, decay, and be
fruitless, on the other. In all other things that shall fall under your
consideration, that relate to the civil government of the Nations, prudence,
conjecture, probability, consideration of circumstances, and the present
posture of things may take place. This is capable of no framing to the one hand
or other, upon any pretense what ever.

3. If it be possible, keep up a spirit of Love, and forbearance among your
selves, love thinks none evil; do not impose designs on one another, and
then interpret every thing that is spoken, though in never so much sincerity,
and simplicity of Spirit, in a proportion to that design; this will turn
judgment into wormwood, and Truth into Hemlock.

FINIS.

