AN OUTCRY After the late Lieutenant General Fleetwood
BE it known unto all People both in City and Country, That there is lately
strayed from Wallingford House a certain pious Lieutenant General, whose
Description take as follows, and what you are to do with him, you shall hear
anon.

He has a head like to the head of a certain beast, which Adam, for certain
Reasons best known to himself, did call an Ass. His Hair came off with being
much stroak'd on the head by old Oliver for good Boys tricks, so that he wears
a Perrywig. This Perrywig was made of the Locks which Dalilah cut from Samsons
shoulders; from whence you may observe that he is no more a Nazarite than he is
a Small-coal-man; nor indeed so much, for he can never be a Nazarite, but he
may in time be a Small-coal-man. Had he not been knocked in the Cradle, he would
never have been knocked in his life, for he always kept out of danger; but he
had a sound knock in his Cradle, which has caused an extraordinary soft place
in his head; which bred such a debility of his animal Faculties, that had not
the Lord assisted him, he could never have held out so long. His Eyes are like
those of Solomon's Mistress, that is to say, like the Fish-pooles of Heshbon. At
each corner he has two Sluices, and he can drown his Cheeks with as much ease,
as they can drown the Lands about Hull. Had he lived in the time of Noah, he
could not have bin one of the eight, for that his tears would have gone near to
have drowned the Ark it self. Though he be much given to grunting, yet his Nose
is not so good as a Hogs, for that he never could smell which way the Wind
intended to blow in his life. He has lately got a Mark in his forehead,
occasioned by the slimy moisture which the Rebuking-Angel spit so fiercely in
his face. He has a Tongue that can tell a world of Knavery, if he pleases, and
is famous for many particular and secret Conferences with God Almighty:
however, it is for all that as double as a great Marygold, and his heart and it
are professed enemies, for there is a perpetual spirit of contradiction between
them one toward another: I confess it is none of the Eloquentest that ever made
Harangues, therefore let no man strive for it, as the several Cities did for
the Birth of Homer; If it had as many blisters upon it, as it has told lies,
't would look like a piece of Red Satin embroidered with white Beads. His head
is boar'd directly through from one ear to another, so that you may shoot Pease
through his head, as through a Trunk. And this is done with great policy, that
what ever he hears may with more convenience pass in at one ear, and out at
the other. Truly by his hearing and seeing, he should be a kind of Mole; for he
hears every thing with much attention, and very exactly; but when he comes to
the politic Mazes, and crafty Underminings of Government, there is no Mole so
blind; so that it is to be wondered at, that he did not make use of a Dog and a
Bell, to lead him through those kind of Intricacies. His Beard is not much,
but if it were ten times more, 't would never make him a Philosopher. The
bigness of his Heart will never give him the Surname of Ceur de Lion, for it is
no bigger than a Pigeons Egg, yet it is as full of chinks and crannies as an
old forsaken Appleloft; and I Will warrant ye you may find many a sixpence, and
many a shilling swallowed up in it. He has a very obedient will, and, as if
the first curse of women were upon him, his desire was always toward those that
ruled over him: He fulfils one part of Christ's Commandment, but not the other;
for he is as meek as a Dove, but not so subtle as a Serpent. He has a broad
Back, and a great Saddle upon it, which he never left off since the Protector
put it on, that was when he first managed him; which he did so well, that the
gentle Beast would not afterward refuse any man that pleased to get up into
the Stirrup. His Fingers are not half so learned as David's, for God never
taught them to fight; but on his Heels he has wings, as you find Mercury
pictured, and he has an excellent faculty of using them: for all the world is
to know that he has left off his boyish custom of Crying and Fighting. This
man was once our devout Lieutenant General, and he had two Sentinels standing
at his door, but now the Scene's altered, and contrary to the usual way, he
has left his Guard, to secure himself. If any man can bring tidings where he
is, he may; if he will not, he may let it alone.

London, Printed by Hen. Mason, in the year of Restoration. 1660.


