OURANIA: The High and Mighty Lady the Princess Royal OF AURANGE CONGRATULATED
On Her Most Happy ARRIVAL September the 25th. M.DC.LX.
SUre Darling Fortune humored thy sweet mind
In thy most safe Recesse, 'twas hugely kind
To take thee from our black tempestuous Times,
And place thee in Serener quiet Climes.
Bright Guardian Angel, since you fled from hence
W' have lost our Virtue and our Innocence;
We Have lost our peace, we have lost your father too,
And all is imputed to our want of You.
Nay, while You staid to Complement the State
Death rudely parts Your Dear Triumvirate;
And being angry he might snatch no more,
He raved and Stormed to keep you from our Shore,
But Neptune felt our sighs more then the weather
Who'd bear your greatness and our grief together.
Welcome Halcyon Lady as the Dove
That the Old Worlds recovery did prove,
But where is the Branch the Royal Orange Sprig
To give assurance that the Plant does live;
(Since wars hot beams scorcht not that deluged
Not a ripe Orange can again be found. (ground,)
Thrice welcome to our tossed shattered Ark
Thou Star that lightst thy Brothers in the dark:
Castor and Pollux borrowed Leda's rays,
Her lustrous lightning made their night be days.
What did they suffer not! what she not do!
Hard hearted Fate does love and fain would woe!
Oh such Widow such a Turtle Mate
Would put robbed Nature to a new Create;
Set the great pair together, Her and Mother,
No Name or Glory will be left another:
Go seek in vain for such a Loyal Love,
It Is gone to Heaven and interchang'd above.
Yet like a kindly vapor drawn from Earth,
That gratefully discends to ripe her Birth,
So her affections Mounted upwards, run
Fruitfully down upon the Prince her Son;
Here Love like Janus has a double Face
One would not serve Great Mary full of Grace.
So many great relations never met
Proportioned wisdom and a mind so fit.
Now the Happy Constellation appears
The gladdest light e're blessed the English Spheres,
We have forgot the miseries are past
Since your sweet Influ'nce overtook the last.
Disquiet dare not stir nor Rebel hand
Move but a finger, You secure the Land.
It Is the Kings peace we keep, and to him due,
But our Tranquillity we owe to you.
O Land of Wonders, what is yet to be seen!
Your Princely Sister and your Mother Queen.
LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid. 1660.


