A SERMON PREACHED TO The Parliament, October. 13. 1652. A DAY Of Solemn
Humiliation. Concerning the Kingdom of Christ, AND The Power of the Civil
Magistrate about the things of the Worship of God. By JOHN OWEN.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University, for Thomas
Robinson. Anno Dom. 1652.

DAN. 7. 15. 16. I Daniel was grieved in my Spirit, in the midst of my body,
and the Visions of my head troubled me.

I came near to one of them that stood by, and asked him the Truth of all
this: so he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things.


WHAT there is of concernment for the right understanding of these words, in
that part of the Chapter which goes before, may be considered in the opening of
the words themselves, and therefore I shall immediately attend thereunto.

There are in them 4 things considerable.

1. The State and condition which Daniel the penman of this Prophecy,
expresses himself to be in, wherein he has companions in the days wherein
we live: He was grieved in his spirit in the midst of his body. 2. The cause
and means whereby he was brought into this perplexed frame of spirit: The
Visions of his head troubled him. 3. The Remedy he used for his delivery from
that entangled condition of spirit wherein he was: He went nigh to one of them
that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this. 4. The Issue of that
application, he made to that one that stood by for redress: He told him, and
made him know the interpretation of the things.
All these I shall briefly open unto you, that I may lay a foundation for the
truth which the Lord has furnished me with, to hold out unto you this day.

In the first, the person spoken of is Daniel himself. I Daniel; he bears
this Testimony concerning himself, and his condition was, that he was greived
in his spirit.

The person himself was a man highly favored of God, above all in his
Generation: so richly furnished with Gifts and Graces, that he is once and
again brought forth as an Example, and instanced in by God himself, upon the
account of eminence in Wisdom and Piety. Yet all this preserves him not, from
falling into this perplexed condition. Dan. 1. 17. 20. Ez. 9. 24. Chapter 28. 3.

Now as the principal work of all the holy Prophets, which have been since
the world began. (Luke 1. 70. 1. Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12.) was to Preach, set forth
and declare the Lord Jesus Christ, the Messiah, who was for to come, so some
especial concernments of his Person, Righteousness and Kingdom, were in
especial manner committed unto them respectively. His Passion and
Righteousness to Isaiah, the Covenant of Grace in him to Jeremiah, and to this
Daniel most eminently the great works of the Providence of God, in the shaking
and overturning of Kingdoms and Nations, in a subserviency to his Kingdom;
with the Revelation hereof for the consolation of the Church in all ages, did
the Lord honor him of whom we speak.

For the present he describes himself in somewhat a perplexed condition. His
spirit, (mind and soul) was greived, sick, troubled, or disquieted in the
midst of his body; that is, deeply, nearly, closely: it sets out the
greatness of his Trouble, the anxiety of his Thoughts within him: like David
when he expostulated with his soul about it. Ps. 43. 5. why art thou so sad my
soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me: he knew not what to say, what
to do, nor wherewith to relieve himself. He was filled with sad thoughts, sad
Apprehensions of what was to come to pass, and what might be the Issue of the
things that had been discovered unto him. This I say is the frame and temper he
describes himself to be in: a man under sad Apprehensions of the Issues and
events of things, and the dispensations of God, as many are at this day: and
upon that account closly, and nearly perplexed.

2. The cause of this perturbation of mind, and spirit was from the visions of
his head: The visions of his head troubled him. He calls them visions of the
head, because that is the seat of the internal senses, and fantasy whereby
visions are received. So he calls them a dream, v. 1. and visions of his head
upon his Bed: yet such visions, such a dream it was, as being immediately from
God, and containing a no less certain discovery of his Will, and mind, then
if the things mentioned in them, had been spoken face to face, he writes them
by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, v. 2. for the use of the Church.

I shall not take the advantage of going forth unto any discourse, of dreams,
visions, Oracles, and those other diverse ways and manners (Heb. 1. 1.) of
revealing his mind and will, which God was pleased to use with his Prophets of
old: (Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8.) My aim lies another way: it suffices only to take
notice, that God gave him in his sleep a representation of the things here
expressed, which he was to give over, for the use of the Church in following
Ages. The matter of these visions which did so much trouble him, falls more
directly under our consideration.

Now the subject of these perplexing visions, is a representation of the four
great Empires of the World, which had, and were to have Dominion, in and over
the places of the Churches greatest concernments, and were all to receive their
period, and destruction by the Lord Christ, and his revenging hand: And these
three things he mentions of them therein.

1. Rise. 2. Nature. 3. Destruction.

1. V. 2. he describes their Rise and Original: it was from the strivings of
the four Winds of the Heavens, upon the great Sea; he compares them to the
most violent, uncontroleable, and tumultuating things in the whole Creation:
Winds and Seas! what waves, what horrible storms, what mixing of heaven and
earth, what confusion, and destruction must needs ensue the fierce contest of
all contrary Winds upon the great sea? Such are the Springs of Empires, and
Governments for the most part amongst men, such their Entrances and
Advancements. In particular, such were the beginnings of the four Empires here
spoken of. Wars, Tumults, Confusions, Blood, Destruction, Desolation, were the
seeds of their greatness (vastitiem ubi-fecerunt, pacem vocant Galgac. apud
Tacit.) Seas and great Waters do in the Scripture represent people, and
nations. Rev. 17. 15. The waters which thou saw, where the Whore sits,
are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues; as Waters, they are
unstable, fierce, restless, tumultuating, and when God mingleth his judgments
amongst them, they are as a sea of glass mingled with fire; britle,
uncertain, devouring and implacable.

It is a demonstration of the sovereignty of God, that he is above them: Psalm.
93. 3, 4. The floods have lifted up o Lord, the floods have lifted up their
voice, the floods lift up their waves. The Lord on high is mightier then the
noise of many waters, yea then the mighty waves of the Sea. Now from these,
tossed with the winds of Commotions, Seditions, Oppressions, Passions, do
flow the Governments of the World, the spirit of God moving upon the face of
those Waters, to bring forth those forms and frames of Rule, which he will
make use of.

2. Unto v. 9. he describes them in order, as to their nature and kind: one of
them being then ready to be destroyed, and the other to succeed, until the
utter desolation of them all, and all power rising in their spirit and
principle.

I shall not pass through their particular description, nor stay to prove that
the fourth Beast, without name or special form, is the Roman Empire, Sermon
on Heb: 12. 27, 28.
which I have elsewhere demonstrated; and it is something else which at this
time I aim at. This is that which troubles and grieves the spirit of Daniel in
the midst of his body. He saw what worldly powers should arise, by what
horrible tumults, shakings, confusions, and violence they should spring up,
with what fierceness, cruelty, and persecution, they should rule in the World,
and stamp all under their feet.

3. Their end and destruction is revealed unto him, from v. 10. unto 12, 13.
And this by the appearance of the Ancient of days, the eternal God in
judgment against them: which he sets out with that solemnity and glory, as if
it were the great judgment of the last day: God indeed thereby giving a pledge
unto the World, of that universal judgment he will one day exercise toward
all, by the man whom he has ordained. (Act. 17. 31.) And this increases the
terror of the vision, to have such a representation of the glory of God, as no
creature is able to bear: God also manifests hereby his immediate actings, in
the setting up, and pulling down the powers of this World, which he does as
fully and effectually, as if he sat upon a Throne of judgment, calling them
all by name to appear in his presence, and upon the evidence of their ways,
cruelties and oppression, pronouncing sentence against them: Psalm. 2. 11, 12.
Be wise therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth: serve
the Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling; He changes the times and
seasons: Dan. 2. 21. He rules in the Kingdom of men, and sets over it whom
he pleases. cap. 5. 21. And this is the first thing in this vision, at which
the Prophet was perplexed.

2. There is the approach of the Lord Christ unto the Father, with his entrance
into his Kingdom, and Dominion which is everlasting, and passes not away. v.
14. This being the end of the vision, I must a little insist upon it; not that
I intend purposely to handle the Kingdom of Christ as Mediator, but only a
little to consider it, as it lies here in the vision, and is needful for the
right bottoming of the Truth in our intendment.

Various have been the thoughts of men about the Kingdom of Christ in all
Ages. That the Messiah was to be a King, a Prince, a Ruler, that he was to have
a Kingdom, and that the Government was to be on his shoulders, is evident from
the Old Testament. That all this was, and is accomplished in Jesus of Nazareth,
whom God exalted, made a Prince and a Savior, is no less evident in the New.

But about the nature of this Kingdom, its Rise, and manner of Government,
have been and are the contests of men.

The Jews to this very day expect it, as a thing carnal, and temporal,
visible, outwardly glorious, wherein, in all manner of pleasure, they shall
bear rule over the nations, at their will; such another thing of all the
world, as the Popedom, which the Gentile or Idolatrous worshippers of Christ
set up for his Kingdom: And of some such thing it may be supposed, the
Apostles themselves were not without thoughts, until they had conversed with
the Lord after the resurrection. (Luke 9. 46. Act. 2. 6.) Neither are all
amongst us free from them at this day.

Those who with any simplicity profess the name of Christ, do generally
agree, that there are three parts of it.

First and Principally; in that which is internal and spiritual, in and over
the souls of men, over spirits both good and bad, in reference unto the ends
which he has to accomplish upon them: of that which is direct and immediate
upon the hearts and souls of men, there are two parts.

1. That which he exercises toward his Elect, who are given unto him of his
Father, converting, ruling, preserving them, under and through great variety of
dispensations internal and external, until he brings them unto himself: he
stands and feeds them in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the name
of the Lord his God. Mich. 5. 4. Even he who is the ruler of Israel. v. 2. He
is exalted and made a Prince, and a Savior to give repentance to Israel, for
the forgiveness of sins, Act. 5. 31. He makes his people a willing people in
the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. Sending out his holy spirit to lead them
into all truth, and making his word, and Ordinances mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds in their hearts, casting down imaginations, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of himself. 2 Cor. 10.
4, 5. He takes possession of their hearts by his power, dwelling in them by his
spirit, making them Kings in his Kingdom, and bringing them infallibly into
glory: Oh that this Rule, this Kingdom of his, might be carried on in our
hearts! we busy our selves about many things, we shall find at length, this one
thing necessary: this is that part of the Kingdom of Christ, which we are
principally to aim at in the Preaching of the Gospel: We Preach Christ Jesus
the Lord, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Him to be Lord and King, though others have had Dominion
over us: They are the grains of Israel which the Lord seeks for in his sifting
the Nations by his word, as well as by his providence, and we are in the work
of the Gospel to endure all things for the Elects sake: 2 Cor. 2. 10.

2. In the power which he exercises toward others, to whom the word of the
Gospel does come, calling, convincing, enlightening, hardening many, who yet
being not his sheep, nor of his fold, he will never take to him self: but
leaves to themselves, under aggravations of condemnation, which they pull upon
themselves by the contempt of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Heb. 10. 29. He sends
his spirit to convince even the perishing world of sin, righteousness, and
judgment, Ioh. 16. 8. He sends sharp Arrows into the very hearts of his
enemies, Psalm. 45. 5. making them stoop, bow, and fall under him: so bounding
their rage, overbearing their lusts, leaving them without excuse in themselves,
and his people, oftentimes not without profit from them: with some dealing even
in this life more severely, causing the witnesses of the Gospel, to torment
them by the Preaching of the word, Revel. 11. 10. Yet giving them up to strong
delusions, rhat they may believe lies, and be damned. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. etc.

3. In carrying on of this work toward the one and the other, he puts forth
the Power, Rule, and Dominion, which he has of his Father over Spirits, both
good and bad: being made head of Principalities, and Powers, and exalted far
above every name in Heaven or Earth, being made the first borne of every
creature, and all the Angels of God, being commanded to worship him, Heb. 1.
6. and put in subjection under his feet; he sends them forth, and uses them as
ministering spirits for them who shall be heirs of salvation, v. 14. appoynting
them to behold the face of his Father, ready for his command on their behalf,
Math. 18. 10. Attending in their Assemblies, 1 Cor. 11. 10. And to give them
their assistance in the time of danger and trouble, Act. 12. 9. Destroying
their adversaries, v. 23. With innumerable other advantageous Administrations,
which he has not thought good to acquaint us withal in particular, that our
dependence might be on our King himself, and not on any of our fellow
servants, though never so glorious and excellent. Rev. 22. 9.

2. For Satan as he came to bind the strong man armed, and to spoil his goods,
Mat. 12. 29. To destroy him that had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. And being
made manifest to this end, that he might destroy his works, 1 Ioh. 3. 8. In the
souls of men in this World, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. So having in his own person
conquered these Principalities and Powers of darkness, making an open show of
them in his cross, and triumphing over them, Col. 2. 15. He continues
overruleing and judging him and them, in their opposition to his Church, and
will do so until he bring them to a full conquest and subjection, that they
shall be judged and sentenced by the poor creatures, whom in this world they
continually pursue with all manner of enmity: 1 Cor. 6. 3.

And this looks to the inward substance of the Kingdom of Christ, which is
given him of his Father, and is not of this world, though he exercise it in the
World to the last day: a Kingdom, which can never be shaken, nor removed: the
Government of it is upon his shoulders, and of the increase of it, there shall
be no end.

2. That Rule or Government, which in his word he has appointed and ordained,
for all his Saints and chosen ones to walk in, to testify their inward
subjection to him, and to be fitted for usefulness one to another. Now of this
part the Administration is wrapped up in the Laws, Ordinances, Institutions, and
appoyntments of the Gospel, and it is frequently called the Kingdom of God.
That Jesus Christ does not rule in these things, and is not to be obeyed as a
King in them, is but a late darkness, which though it should spread as a cloud
over the face of the heavens, and power forth some showers and tempests, yet it
would be as a cloud still, which will speedily scatter and vanish into nothing.

And this is that, whose propagation, as the means of carrying on the former
spiritual ends of Christ, which you desire strength and direction for, this
day, etc.

Men may gather together unto Christ and say, with heads full of hopes poor
soul, and eyes fixed on right hand and left, Lord will thou at this time
restore the Kingdom to Israel? Take you his answer and be contented with it;
It is not for you to know the times and seasons, Acts 1. 6, 7.
which the Father has put in his own power, but do you ask work faithfully.

I know in this thing, it is far easier to complain of you for not doing,
then to direct you what to do; the Lord be your guide, and give you straw
where ever Bricks are required of you.

3. In the universal judgment, which the Father has committed to him over
all: which he will most eminently exercise at the last day; rewarding,
crowning, receiving some to himself, judging, condemning, casting others into
utterdarknesse: (Ioh. 5. 22, 27. Act. 2. 36. Romans 14. 9. Act. 17. 31.)

And of this universal righteous judgment, he gives many warnings unto the
world, by pouring forth sundry vialls of his wrath, upon great Nimrods and
oppressors. (Psalm. 110. 6. Mich. 4. 3. Rev. 19. 11, 12, 13. And in the holding
forth these three parts of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, does the Scripture
abound.

But now whether over and beyond all these, the Lord Christ shall not bear an
outward, visible, glorious rule? Setting up a Kingdom like those of the World,
to be ruled by strength and power? and if so; When, or how it shall be brought
in, into whose hands the Administration of it shall be committed, and upon what
account, whether he will personally walk therein or no, whether it shall be
clearly distinct from the Rule he now bears in the world, or only differenced
by more glorious degrees and manifestations of his power? Endless and
irreconcilable, are the contests of those that profess his name: This we find
by woeful experience, that all who from the spirituality of the Rule of Christ,
and delight therein, have degenerated into carnal apprehensions of the beauty
and glory of it, have for the most part, been given up to carnal actings,
suited to such apprehensions, and have been so dazeled, with gazing after
temporal glory, that the Kingdom which comes not by observation, has been
vile in their eyes.

Now because it is here fallen in my way, and is part of the vision, at which
the Prophet was so much troubled, I shall give you some brief observations, of
what is clear and certain from Scripture relating hereunto, and so pass on:
It is then certain;

1. That the Interest of particular men as to this Kingdom of Christ, is to
look where the universal concernment of all Saints, in all ages does lie: This
undoubtedly they may attain, and it does belong to them: now certainly this is
in that part of it, which comes not by observation, Luke 17. 20. But is within
us, which is Righteousness, Peace, and joy in the Holy* Ghost, Romans 14. 17.
This may be possessed in a dungeon, as well as on a Throne. What outward glory
soever may be brought in, it is but a shadow of this: this is the Kingdom that
cannot be moved, which requires grace in us to serve God acceptably, with
reverence and Godly fear, Heb. 12. 28. Many have failed in gasping after
outward appearances: never any failed of blessedness, who made this their
portion: Oh that this were more pursued and followed after! Let not any think
to set up the Kingdom of Christ in the World, while they pull it down in their
own hearts, by sin and folly: in this let the lines fall to me, and let my
Inheritance be among those that are sanctified: yet,

2. This is certain, that all Nations whatever, which in their present state
and Government, have given their power to the Dragon and the Beast to oppose
the Lord Christ withal, shall be shaken, broken, translated, and turned off
their old foundations, and constitutions, into which the Antichristian interest
has been woven for a long season. God will shake the Heavens and the Earth of
the Nations round about, until all the Babylonish rubbish, all their original
engagements to the man of sin be taken away.

This I have fully demonstrated elsewhere. All those great Wars which you
have foretold, Sermon. on Heb. 12. 28
wherein the Saints of God shall be eminently engaged, are upon this account.

3. That the civil powers of the World after fearful shakings and desolations
shall be disposed of, into an useful subserviency to the Interest, Power, and
Kingdom of Jesus Christ: hence they are said to be his Kingdoms. Rev. 11. 15.

That is, to be disposed of, for the behoof of his interest, rule, and
Dominion: of this you have plentiful promises Isai 60. and elsewhere; when the
nations are broken in opposition to Syon, their gain must be consecrated to the
Lord, and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth, Mich. 4. 15. Even
Judges and Rulers, (as such) must Kiss the Son, and own his Scepter, and
advance his ways: some think, if you were well settled, you ought not in any
thing, as Rulers of the Nations, to put forth your power, for the interest of
Christ: the good Lord keep your hearts from that apprehension. Have you ever in
your Affairs, received any encouragement from the promises of God, have you in
times of greatest distress been refreshed with the testimony of a good
conscience, that in Godly simplicity, you have sought the advancement of the
Lord Christ; do you believe that he ever owned the cause as the head of his
Church? Do not now profess you have nothing to do with him: had he so
professed of you and your affairs, what had been your portion long since!

4. Look what Kingdom soever, the Lord Christ will advance in the World, and
exercise amongst his holy Ones, the beginning of it must be with the Jews;
they are to be caput Imperii, the head and seat of this Empire must be amongst
them; these are the Saints of the most High, mentioned by Daniell: and
therefore in that part of his Prophesy, which he wrote in the Chaldean Tongue,
then commonly known and spoken in the East, being the language of the
Babylonish Empire, he speaks of them obscurely, and under borrowed
expressions; but coming to those visions which he wrote in Hebrew, for the sole
use of the Church, he is much more express, concerning the people of whom he
spoke. The Rod of Christ's strength goes out of Syon, and thence he proceeds to
rule those that were his enemies, Psalm. 110. 2. All the promises of the
glorious Kingdom of Christ, are to be accomplished in the gathering of the
Gentiles, with the glory of the Jews. The Redeemer comes to Syon, and to them
that turn from transgression (that great transgression of unbelief) in Jacob:
Isai. 59. 20. Then shall the Lord rise upon them, and his glory shall be seen
upon them, the Gentiles shall come to their light, and Kings to the brightness
of their rising: Isai: 60. 2, 3. I dare say there is not any promise any where
of raising up a Kingdom unto the Lord Christ in this World, but it is either
expressed or clearly intimated, that the beginning of it must be with the
Jews, and that in contradistinction to the Nations: so eminently in that
glorious description of it, Mich. 4. 7, 8. I will make her that halted a
remnant, and her that was cast a far off a strong Nation, and the Lord shall
reign over them in Mount Syon, from hence forth even for ever: and thou O
Tower of the flock, the strong hold of the Daughter of Syon, unto thee shall it
come even the first Dominion, the Kingdom shall come to the Daughter of
Jerusalem. When the great hunter Nimrod set up a Kingdom, the beginning of it
was Babell. Genesis 10. 10. and when the great Shepherd sets up his Kingdom, the
beginning of it shall be Syon: so farther it is at large expressed, Mich. 5. 7,
8. Nothing is more clear to any, who, being not carried away with weak,
carnal apprehensions of things present, have once seriously weighed the
promises of God to this purpose: what the Lord Christ will do with them, and
by them, is not so clear, this is certain, that their return shall be
marvelous, glorious, as life from the dead. When then Euphrates shall be dried
up, Turkish power, and Popish Idolatry be taken out of the world, and these
Kings of the East are come, when the seed of Abraham, being multiplied like the
stars of Heaven, and the sands of the Sea shore, shall possess the gates of
their enemies, and shall have peace in their borders, we may lift up our heads
toward the fullness of our redemption: but whilst these things are or may be,
(for any thing we know,) a far off, to dream of setting up an outward,
glorious, visible kingdom of Christ, which he must bear rule in, and over the
world, be it in Germany, or in England, is but an ungrounded presumption. The
Jews not called, Antichrist not destroyed, the Nations of the World generally
wrapped up in Idolatry and false-worship, little dreaming of their deliverance:
will the Lord Christ leave the world in this state, and set up his Kingdom here
on a mole-hil?

5. This is a perpetual Antithesis, and opposition that is put between the
Kingdoms of the World, and the Kingdom of Christ; that they rise out of the
strivings of the winds upon the Sea, he comes with the clouds of Heaven: They
are brought in by commotions, tumults, wars, desolations, and so shall all
the shakings of the Nations be, to punish them for their old opposition, and to
translate them into a subserviency to his interest: The coming in of the
kingdom of Christ, shall not be by the Arm of flesh, nor shall it be the
product of the strifes and contests of men which are in the world: it is not to
be done by might or power, but by the spirit of the Lord of Hosts: 2. Zech. 4.
6. great Wars, desolations, alterations, shall precede it: but it is not the
sons of men that by outward force, shall build the new Jerusalem: that comes
down from heaven adorned as a Bride from Christ, fitted and prepared by
himself: certainly the strivings of men about this business shall have no
influence into it. It shall be by the glorious manifestation of his own power,
and that by his spirit subduing the souls of men unto it; not by the sword of
man setting up a few to rule over others. Hence it is every where called a
creating of a new heaven and a new earth: Isa: 65. 17. a work doublesse to
difficult for the worms of the earth to undertake. There is nothing more
opposite to the spirit of the Gospel, then to suppose that Jesus Christ will
take to himself a kingdom by the carnal sword and bow of the sons of men.
The raising of the Tabernacle of David which is fallen down, and the setting up
the decayed places of it, Act: 15. 16. is done by his visiting the people with
his spirit and word, v. 14. It is by the pouring out of his Spirit in a
covenant of mercy: Isai: 59. 21.

Thus the Lord sets up one Shepherd of his people, and he shall feed them,
even (says he) my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepherd, and the Lord will be their God, and my servant David a Prince among
them: Ezekiel: 34. 24, 25. he brings in the kingdom of his son, by making the
children of Israel seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and to fear
the Lord and his goodness. Hos: 3. 5. Who now can fathom the counsails of the
Almighty, who has searched his bosom, and can by computation tell us, when he
shall power out his spirit for the accomplishment of these things?

This then is the last thing in this vision, whose consideration brought the
Prophet, into so great perplexity and distress of spirit.

3. There is the means that Daniel used for redress, in that sad condition
where unto he was brought by the consideration of this vision: He drew near to
one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this.

This also was done in vision: There is no mention of his waking before his
making this address: but the vision continuing, he draws nigh in the same
manner to one of them that stood by; one of those Angels or holy ones, that
stood ministering before the throne of God, who was commissionated to acquaint
him with the mind and will of God in the things represented to him. This then
is the remedy he applies himself unto: He labors to know the mind and will of
God, in the things that were to be done: this it seems he pitched on, as the
only way for quieting his greived and troubled spirit; and hereupon,

4. He is told and made to know the interpretation of the things; so far at
least as might quiet his spirit in the will of God: not that he is clearly
instructed in every particular, for he tells them in the close of the chapter,
that he had troublesome thoughts about the whole; his cogitations troubled him,
and his countenance changed, v. 28. but having received what light God was
willing to communicate to him, he enquires no farther, but addresses himself
to his own duty.

Take then from the words thus opened these propositions, some whereof I shall
do little more then name unto you.

Observe 1. In the consideration of Gods mavelous actings in the world, in
order to the carrying on of the Gospel, and interest of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the hearts of his Saints are oftentimes filled with perplexity and trouhle.
They know not what will be the Issue, nor some times what well to do. Daniel
receives a vision of the things which in part we live under: and if they fill
his heart with Astonishment, is it any wonder if they come close to us, and
fill us with anxious perplexing thoughts, upon whom the things themselves are
fallen?

2. Observe: the only way to deliver and extricate our spirits from under such
perplexities, and entanglements, is to draw nigh to God in Christ, for
discovery of his will; so did Daniel here: he went to one of them that
ministered before the Lord to be acquainted with his will, otherwise thoughts
and contrivances will but farther perplex you; like men in the mire, whilst
they pluck one leg out, the other sticks faster in: whilst you relieve
your selves in one thing, you will be more hampered in another.

Yea he that increases wisdom, increases sorrow, the larger the visions are,
the greater will be their troubles; until being consumed in your own fears,
cares and contrivances, you grow useless in your Generation: those who see
only the outside of your affairs, sleep securely: those who come neigher to
look into the spirits of men, Rest is taken from them: and many are not quiet,
because they will not: the great healing of all is in God.

Observe 3. When God makes known the interpretations of things, it will quiet
your spirits in your walking before him, and actings with him. This was that
which brought the spirit of Daniel into a settlement. How God reveals his mind
in these things, by what means, how it may be known by individual persons, for
their quiet and settlement, how all Gods Revelations are quieting, and tend to
the calming of men's spirits, not making them foame like the waves of the Sea,
should be handled on this observation, but I begin with the first.

When John received his book of visions in reference to the great things that
were to be done, and the alterations that were to be brought about, though it
were sweet in his mouth, and he rejoiced in his employment, yet it made his
belly bitter: Rev. 10. 9, 10. it filled him with perplexity, as our Prophet
speaks, in the midst of his body; he saw blood and confusion, strife and
violence; it made his very belly bitter.

Poor Jeremiah, upon the same account, is so oppressed, that it makes him
break out of all bounds of faith and patience, to curse the day of his birth,
to wax quite weary of his employment; chap. 15.

Our Savior describing such a season Luke 21. 26. tells us, that men's hearts
shall fail them for fear, and for looking after those things that are coming
upon the earth: they will be thinking what will become of them, and what will
be the Issue of Gods dispensations; fearing that the whole frame of things will
be wrapped up in darkness, and confusion. Hence our Savior bids his Disciples
not be troubled when they hear of these things, Math. 24. 6. intimating that
they will be very apt, so to be.

Now the Causes and occasions (which are the Reasons of the point) arise,
First, from the greatness and astonishablenesse of the things themselves which
God will do: even great and terrible things which men looked not for. Isai.
64. 2, 3. when he coms to make his name known to the nations, that his
Adversaries may tremble at his presence, and does terrible things quite above
and beyond the expectation of me^, which they never once looked for; no wonder
if their hearts be surprised with amazement. It has of late been so with this
Nation: all professors at the beginning of these days, joined earnestly in
that prayer Isai. 63. 17, 18, 19. Chap. 64. 1. God in answer hereunto, comes
down and rents the heaven, and the mountains flow down at his presence,
according to the desire of their souls: yet withal he does terrible things,
things that we looked not for; How mapoor creatures are turned back with
Astonishment, and know not how to abide with him? When our Savior Christ came
in the flesh, who had been the desire of all Nations, for 4000 years, and most
importunately sought after by the men of that generation, where in he came, yet
doing great and unexpected things at his coming, who who was able to abide it?
This, says Simeon, will be the Issue of it. Luke 2. 34, 35. He shall be for
the fall and rise of many; and the thoughts of many hearts shall be revealed.
Hence is that exclamation. Mal. 3. 2. Who may abide the day of his coming, and
who shall stand when he appears: his coming is desired indeed, but few can
bear it: his day will burn as an oven, as a furnace, chapter 4. 1. some are over
heated by it, some consume in it, blessed are they that abide: this is one
cause of the perplexing of the spirits of men: The consideration of the things
themselves that are done, being above and beyond their expectations; and this
even many of the Saints of God are born down under, at this day: They little
looked for the blood and banishment of Kings, change of Government, Alteration
of Nations, such shakings of Heaven and Earth, as have insued; not considering
that he who does these things, weighs all the nations in a balance, and the
Rulers of them are as the dust thereof before him.

2. From the manner whereby God will do these things: many perplexing, killing
circumstances attend his dispensations: I shall instance only in one: and that
is darkness and obscurity, whereby he holds the minds of men in uncertainty,
and suspense, for his own glorious ends: such he tells us shall his day, and the
works thereof, be. Zech. 14. 6, 7. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the light shall not be clear, nor dark. But it shall be one day which
shall be known to the Lord, not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass that
at evening-time it shall be light. Men shall not know what to make of it, nor
what to judge: he brings not forth his work all at once, but by degrees, and
sometimes sets it backward, and leads it up and down, as he did his people of
old in the wilderness, that none might know where they should fall or settle:
and he that believes will not make have. When God is doing great things, he
delights to wrap them up in the clouds, to keep the minds of men in
uncertainties, that he may set on work all that is in them* and try them to the
utmost, whether they can live upon his care and wisdom, when they see their
own care and wisdom will do no good.

Men would feign come to some certainty, and commonly by the thoughts and ways
whereby they press unto it, they put all things into more uncertainty then
ever, and so promote the design of God, which they so studiously endeavor to
decline: Hence is that description of the presence of the Lord in his mighty
works, Psalm: 18. 9, 11. darkness was under his feet; men could not see his
paths, etc. He has Ends of surprisall, hardening, and destruction toward
some, for which they must be left unto their own spirits, and led into many
snares and by-pathes, for their Trial, and the Exercise of others, which could
not be accomplished, did he not come in the clouds, and were not darkness his
Pavilion, and his secret place: on this Account, is that cry of men of profane
and hardened spirits: Isai: 5. 19. Let him make speed and hasten his work that
we may see it, and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel draw nigh that we
may know it. They know not what to make, of what they see; of all that as is
yet done or accomplished, they would have the whole work out, that they might
once see the end of it, and so know what to judge: they would be at a point
with him, and not always kept at those perplexing uncertainties: and this is
another cause of the trouble of men's spirits, in consideration of the
dispensations of God: God still keeps a cloud hanging over, and they know not
when it will fall, nor what will be done in the issue of things; this makes
some weary of waiting on him, and with the profane King of Israel to cry, this
evil is of the Lord, there is no end, confusion will be the issue of all, why
should I abide any longer.

3. The Lusts of men, do commonly under such dispensations, fearfully and
desperately tumultuate, to the disturbance of the most settled and weighed
spirits: Satan takes advantage to draw them out in such a season to the utmost,
both in spiritualls and Civills. What will be the constant deportment of men of
corrupt minds in such a time, our Savior sets forth, Math. 24. 8. They shall
come in the name of Christ to deceive, Obad. 12. 13.
and shall deceive many, Isa. 6.
and cause iniquity to abound. In such a day Edom will appear an enemy, and
Ephraim with the son of Remeliah will join with Syriah for the vexing of
Judah: hence are perplexities, and swords piercing through the very souls of
men. Take an instance in the days wherein we live. From the beginning of the
contests in this Nation, when God had caused your spirits to resolve, that the
Liberties, Privileges, and Rights of this Nation wherewith you were entrusted,
should not (by his assistance) be wrested out of your hands by violence,
oppression and injustice; this he also put upon your hearts, to vindicate and
assert the Gospel of Jesus Christ, his ways and his Ordinances, against all
opposition, though you were but inquiring the way to Syon, with your faces
thitherward: God secretly entwining the Interest of Christ with yours, wrapped up
with you the whole Generation of the^ that seek his face, and prospered your
affairs on that account: so that whereas causes of as clear a righteousness
among the sons of men as yours, have come to nothing, yet your undertaking
has bin like the sheaf of Joseph, in the midst of the Nations, which has
stood up, when all the others have bowed to the ground: being then convinced,
that your affairs have fallen under his promises, and have come up to an
acceptance before him, solely upon the account of their subserviency to the
Interest of Christ; God has put it into your hearts, to seek the propagation
of his Gospel. What now by the lusts of men is the state of things? Say some,
there is no Gospel at all: say others, if there be, you have nothing to do
with it: some say, lo here is Christ; others lo there: some make Religion a
color for one thing; some for another: say some, the Magistrate must not
support the Gospel; say others, the Gospel must subvert the Magistrate: say
some, your rule is only for men, as men, you have nothing to do with the
interest of Christ and the Church: say others you have nothing to do to rule
men, but upon the account of being Saints. If you will have the Gospel, say
some, down with the Ministers of it, Chemarims, Locusts, etc. and if you will
have light, take care that you may have ignorance and darkness: things being
carried on as if it were the care of men, that there might be no trouble in the
World, but what the name of Religion might lie in the bottom of. Now those
that ponder these things, their spirits are grieved in the midst of their
bodies; the visions of their heads trouble them, they looked for other things
from them that professed Christ; but the summer is ended, and the harvest is
past, and we are not refreshed. Again; God had so stated your affairs, that
you were the mark of the Antichristian World to shoot at, in the beginning; and
their terror in the close: and when you thought only to have pursued Sheba the
son of Bichri, the man of your first warfare, behold one Abel after another,
undertakes the quarrel against you: yea such Abels as Scotland and Holland; of
whom we said in old times, we will enquire of them, and so ended the matter:
and there is not a wise man or woman among them, that can dissuade them:
Strange! that Ephraim should join with Syria to vex Judah their brother: that
the Netherlands, whose being is founded merely upon the Interest you have
undertaken, should join with the great Antichristian interest, which cannot
possible be set up again, without their inevitable ruin. Hence also are deep
thoughts of heart, men are perplexed, disquieted, and know not what to do.

I could mention other lusts, and tumultuatings of the spirits of men, that
have an influence into the disturbance of the hearts of the most precious in
this Nation, but I forbear.

4. Men's own Lusts disquiet their spirits in such a season as this: I could
instance in many, I shall name only four.

1. Unstableness of mind. 2. Carnal fears. 3. Love of the World. 4. Desire
of pre-eminence.

1. Unstablenesse of mind, which makes men like the Waves of the Sea that
cannot rest: the scripture calls it (...), tumultuatingnesse of spirit: there
is something of that which Jude speaks of, in better persons then those he
describes, raging like waves of the Sea, and foaming out their own shame, v.
13. If God give men up to a restless spirit, no condition imaginable can quiet
them, still they think they see something beyond it, that is desirable.
Annibal said of Marcellus, that he could never be quiet Conqueror nor
Conquered; Some men's desires are so enlarged, that nothing can satiate them.
Wise men that look upon sundry Godly persons in this Nation, and beholding how
every yoke of the oppressor is broken from off their necks, that no man makes
them afraid, that they are looked on as the head, not as the tail, enjoying
the Ordinances of God according to the light of their minds, and desires of
their hearts, no man forbidding them, are ready to wonder, (I speak of private
persons) what they can find to do in their several places and callings, but
to serve the Lord in righteousness and holiness, being without fear all the
days of their lives. But alas when poor creatures are given up, to the
power of an unquiet, and unstable mind, they think scarce any thing vile, but
being wise unto sobriety: nothing desirable, but what is without their proper
bounds, and what leads to that confusion, which themselves in the issue are
least able of many to undergo. It is impossible but that men's hearts should be
pierced with disquietnesse and trouble, that are given up to this frame.

2. Carnal fears: these even devour and eat up the hearts of men: what shall
we do, what shall become of us; Ephraim is confederate with Syria, and the
hearts of men are shaken, as the trees of the wood, that are moved with the
wind: what new troubles still, new unsetlements? This storm will not be
avoided, this will be worse then all, that has befallen us from the youth of
our undertakings. God has not yet won upon men's spirits to trust him in
shakings, perplexities, alterations: they remember not the manifestations of
his wisdom, power, and goodness in former days; and how tender hitherto he
has been of the interest of Christ, that their hearts might be established.
Could we but do our duty, and trust the Lord, with the performance of his
promises, what quietness, what sweetness might we have? I shall not instance
in the other particulars: it is too manifest, that many of our piercing and
perplexing thoughts, are from the tumultuating and disorder of our own lusts.
So that what remains of the time allotted to me, I shall spend only in the use
of this point, and proceed no farther.

Use 1. Of Instruction; to direct you into ways and means of quietness, in
reference unto all these causes and occasions of piercing, dividing thoughts,
in such a season as this. The good Lord seal up instruction to your souls,
that you may know the things that belong to your Peace, and what Israel ought
to do at this, even at this time: for my brethrens and companions sake, I wish
you prosperity: though my own portion should be in the dust, for the true
spiritual, not imaginary, carnal Interest of the Church of God in this
Nation, and the Nations about, I wish you prosperity.

1. First then, in reference to the Things that God is doing, both as to their
Greatness, and their Manner of doing; whose consideration fills men with
thoughts, that grieve their spirits in the midst of their bodies! Would you
have your hearts quieted in this respect? Take my second observation for your
direction; The only way to exstricate and deliver our spirits from under such
perplexities, and intanglements, is to draw nigh to God in Christ, for the
discovery of his will. So did Daniel here in my Text, I fear this is too much
neglected. You take counsel with your own hearts, you advise with one another,
hearken unto men under a repute of wisdom; and all this does but increase your
trouble, you do but more and more entangle and disquiet your own spirits. God
stands by and says, I am wise also; and little notice is taken of him: we
think we are grown wise our selves, and do not remember, that we never
prospered, but only when we went unto God, and told him plainly we knew not
what to do. Public fastings are neglected, despised, spoken against; and
when appointed, practiced according as men's hearts are principled to such a
duty, coldly, deadly, unacceptably: Life, heat, warmth is gone; and shall not
blood and all go after? the Lord prevent it: private meetings are used, to
show our selves wise in the debate of things, with a form of Godly words;
sometimes for strife, tumult, division, disorder; and shall we think there is
much closet inquiring after God, when all other actings of that principle,
which should carry us out thereunto, are opposed and slighted? when we do
sometimes wait upon God, Do not many seem to ask amiss, to spend it on
their lusts; not waiting on him, poor, hungry, empty, to know his will, to
receive direction from him: but rather going full, fixed, resolved, settled on
thoughts, perhaps prejudices of our own, almost taking upon us to prescribe
unto the Almighty, and to impose our poor, low, carnal thoughts upon his
wisdom and care of his Church? Oh where is that holy, and that humble frame,
wherewith at first, we followed our God into the Wilderness, where we have
been fed, and clothed, preserved and protected for so many years. Hence is it
that the works of God are become strange, and terrible, and dark uuto us: and
of necessity, some of us, many of us, must shut up all with disappoyntment and
sorrow: We fill our souls boldly, confidently, with cross and contrary
apprehensions, of the Intendments of God, and of the mediums whereby he will
accomplish his ends; and do not consider, that this is not a frame of men, who
had given up themselves to the Alsufficiency of God. Some perhaps will say,
this belongs not unto them, they have waited upon God, and they do know his
mind, and what are the things he will do, and are not blind also, nor in the
dark as other men. But if it be so, what means this bleating of Sheep and Oxen
in mine ears? yea; what means that roaring and foaming of unquiet Waves which
we hear and see: hard speeches, passionate reproaches, sharp revilings of
their brethren, in boundless confidence, endless enmity, causing evil
surmises, biteing, taring, devouring terms, and expressions, casting out the
names of men upright in their Generations, saying, the Lord be praised. When
the Lord discovers his mind, and will, it setleth the heart, composeth the
mind, fills the soul with reverence and Godly fear, conformes the heart unto
it self, fills it with Peace, Love, Meekness, Gentleness, etc. and shall we
be thought to have received the mind, the will of God, when our hearts, words,
ways, are full of contrary qualities? Let it be called what it will, I shall
not desire to share in that, which would bring my heart into such a frame; well
then, beloved, take this for your first direction: Be more abundant with God in
Faith and Prayer: deal with him in public, and private, take counsel of him,
bend your hearts through his grace, to your old frame, when it was your joy to
meet in this place, which now I fear to many is their burden: seek the Lord
and his Face, seek him while he may be found: and hereby;

1. You will empty your hearts, of many perplexing contrivances of your own,
and you will find faith in this communion with God, by little and little
working out, killing, slaying, these prejudices, and presumptions which you may
be strong in, that are not according to the will of God; so you be sure to come
not to have your own Lusts, and carnal conceptions answered, but to have the
will of God fulfilled. When men come unto the Lord to have their own visions
fulfilled, it is Righteous with God to answer them according to those visions,
and confirm them in them, to their own disturbance, and the disturbance of
others.

2. You shall certainly have peace in your own hearts in the Alsufficiency of
God: this he will give in upon your spirits, that what ere he does, all his
ways shall be to you, mercy, truth, faithfulness, and peace, yea the
discoveries which you shall have of his own fullness, sweetness,
suitableness, and the excelleny of things which are not seen, will work your
hearts to such a frame, that you shall attend to the things here below, merely
upon the account of duty, with the greatest calmnesse, and quietness of mind
imaginable.

3. You shall surely know your own particular paths, wherein you ought to
walk, in serving God in your Generation, those that wait upon him he will
guide in judgment: he will not leave them in the dark, nor to distracted,
divided, piercing thoughts: but what ere others do, you shall be guided into
ways of peace: this you shall have when the lusts of men will let neither
themselves, nor others be at quiet. Oh, then return to your rest, look to him
from whom you have gone astray: take no more disturbing Counsel with your
selves, or others; renew your old frame of humble dependence on God, and
earnest seeking his face; you have certainly backsliden in this thing.

Is not the Lord the God of Counsel and Wisdom, as well as the God of force
and power, that you run to him when in a straight in your Actions, but when
your counsels seem sometimes to be mixed with a spirit of difficulty and
trouble, he is neglected: only come with humble depending hearts, not every one
to bring the Devises, Imaginations, Opinions, Prejudices, and Lust of their own
hearts before him:

2. For the troubles that arise from the Lusts of other men: and that first,
about the Gospel and the propagation thereof: the tumultuating of the Lusts of
men in reference hereunto, I gave you an account of formerly: there are many
peircing thoughts of heart. What Extremes, I had almost said extravigancies,
men have in this matter run out into, I shall now not insist upon: only I shall
give you a few directions, for your own practice.

1. If it once it comes to that, that you shall say, you have nothing to do
with Religion as Rulers of the Nation, God will quickly manifest that he has
nothing to do with you as Rulers of the Nation: the great promise of Christ
is, that in these latter days of the world, he will lay the nations in a
subserviency to him, the kingdoms of the world shall become his; that is, act
as kingdoms and Governments no longer against him, but for him: Surely those
promises will scarsly be accomplished in bringing Commonwealths, of men
professing his name, to be of Gallio's frame, to care for none of those things:
Or as the Turk, in an absolute indifferency what any profess: I mean that are
not his own, for in respect of them he changes not his God: not that I would
you should go and set up forms of Government, to compel men to come under
the line of them, or to thrust in your sword to cut the lesser differences of
brethren; not that I think Truth ever the more the Truth, or to have any thing
the more of Authority upon the conscience, for having the stamp of your
Authority annexed to it, for its allowance to pass in these Nations. Nor do I
speak a word of what is, may, or may not be incumbent on you, in respect of the
most profligate opposers of the Truths of the Gospel: but only this, that, not
being such as are always learning, never coming to the knowledge of the
truth, but being fully persuaded in your own minds, certainly it is incumbent
on you, to take care that the faith, which you have received, which was once
delivered to the Saints, in all the necessary concernments of it, may be
protected, preserved, propagated to and among the people which God has set you
over. If a father as a father is bound to do what answers this in his family,
unto his children; a master as a master to his servants; if you will justify
your selves as Fathers, or Rulers of your Country, you will find in your account
this to be incumbent on you.

2 Take heed, of the^ that would temper clay and iron, things that will not
mingle, that would compound carnal and fleshly things, with heavenly things
and spiritual, that they may not entangle your Spirits: the great disigne of
grasping temporal power, upon a spiritual account, will prove at last to be
the greatest badge of Antichrist: hitherto God has appeared against it, and
will no doubt to the end; if either you, by the Authority God has given you in
the world, shall take upon you to rule the house of God, as formally such, as
his house, though you rule the persons, whereof ir it made up, or those who
are, or pretend to be of that house, to rule the world on that account, your
day and theirs will be nigh at hand.

4. Now because you wait on God for direction in reference to the propagation
of the Gospel, and the preventing that which is contrary to sound doctrine and
godliness, I shall very briefly give you to this end, some Principles whereon
you may rest in your actings; and some rules, for your diectiron, and so draw
to a close.

1. Take in the first place what God has promised concerning Magistrates,
Kings, Rulers, Judges, and Nations, and their subserviency to the Church; what
God has promised they shall do, that is their duty to do: he has not
measured out an Inheritance for his people, out of the sins of other men: let
us a little view some of these promises, and then consider their application to
the truth we have in hand, and what is cleared out unto us by them: they are
many; I shall instance in some of the most obvious and eminent. Esai. 1. 26. I
will restore their Judges and Priests and Councillors as at the beginning: it
is to Syon redeemed, purged, washed in the blood of Christ, that this promise
is made.

Esai. 49. 7. Kings shall see and arise, and Princes shall bow down themselves.
The Jews being for the greatest part of them rejected upon the coming of
Christ, this promise is made unto him upon his pouring out of the spirit, for
the bringing in of the Gentiles: as it is farther enlarged: v. 22, 23. Kings
shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers.

Isai: 60. looks wholly this way: taste of the nature and intendment of the
whole; And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness
of thy rising. Therefore thy gates shall be open continually, they shall not be
shut day nor night, that me^ may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles,
and that their kings may be brought. Thou shall also suck the milk of the
Gentiles, and shall suck the breast of kings, and thou shall know that I the
Lord am thy savior and thy redeemer, the mighone of Jacob. For brass I will
bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for
stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, and thine exactours
righteousness. v. 3. and the 11. and the 16. 17. to which add the
accomplishment of all those promises mentioned Revel. 11 15. and 21. 24.

You see here are glorious promises, in the literal Expression looking
directly to what we assert concerning the subserviency of Rulers to the
Gospel, and the duty of Magistrates in supporting the interest of the Church:
let us concerning them observe these three things as 1. to whom they are made:
2. on what occasion they are given: 3. what is the subject or matter of them in
general.

1. Then they are all given and made to the Church of Christ after his coming
in the flesh, and his putting an end to all ceremonial typical carnal
Institutions; for,

1, They are every where attended with the circumstances of calling the
Gentiles, and their flowing in to the Church; which were not accomplished till
after the destruction of the Jewish Church: etc.

So is the case in that which you have Isai: 49: v, 20. The children which thou
shall have, after thou have lost the other, shall say again in thine ears The
place is too straight for me: give place to me that I may dwell. It shall be
when the Church shall have received the new Children of the Gentiles, having
lost the other of the Jews: which he expresses mgre at larg, v, 22. Thus
says the Lord God, Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set
up my standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms
and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. So also are the rest.
When God gives the Nations to be the inheritance of Christ, the Holy Ghost
cautions Rulers, and Judges to kiss the son, and pay the homage due to him in
his Kingdom: Psalm: 2: 10: 11:

2: Because these promises are pointed unto, as accomplished to the Christian
Church in that place in the Revelation, before mentioned, And the seventh
angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of
this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord* and of his Christ, and he
shall reign for ever and ever. Chap: 11: 15: And the nations of them which are
saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the Kings of the earth do bring
their glory and honor into it: Chap: 21: 24: So that there are plainly
promises of Kings and Princes, Judges, and Rulers to be given to the Church,
and to be made useful thereunto, and Kingdoms and Nations, people in their
Rules and Governments to be isntrumental to the good thereof: so that these
promises belong directly to us, and our Rulers, if under any notion, we belong
to the Church of Christ.

2. Fot the Occasion of these promises; it is well known what a trust by Gods
own appointment there was invested in the Rulers, Judges, Kings, and
Magistrates of the judaicall State and Church under the old Testament, in
reference unto the ways and worship of God: the prosecution and execution of
the Laws of God, concerning his house and service being committed to them;
further when they faithfully discharged their trust, promoting the worship of
God according to his Institutions, encouraging, supporting, directing,
reproving others, to whom the immediate and peculiar administration of things
sacred were committed, destroying, removing what ever was an abomination unto
the Lord, it was well with the whole people and Church, they flourished in
Peace, and the Lord delighted in them, and rejoiced over them to do them good:
and on the other side, their neglect in the discharg of their duty, was then
commonly attended with the Apostasy of the Church, and great breakings forth of
the Indignation of the Lord: this the Church found in those days and bewailed.
To hold out therefore the happy state of his people, that he would bring in, he
promises them such Rulers, and Judges as he gave at first, who faithfully
discharged the trust committed to them* not that I suppose them bound to the
Mosaicall rules of penalties in reference to transgressions and offenses
against Gospel institutions, but only that a duty in general is incumbent on
them in reference to the Church and truth of God, which they should faithfully
discharge; of which afterward.

This then being the occasion of those promises, and their accomplishment being
as before, in a peculiar manner poynted at, upon the shaking, calling, and new
moulding of the Kingdoms and Nations of the World, which had given their power
to the Beast, and thereupon framed a new into a due subserviency to the
interest of Christ, here is not the least shadow or color left, for the
turning off, and rejecting the sweetness of all these promises, upon an
account of their being merely metaphorical, and shadowing out spiritual
glories: neither their beginning nor ending, neither their rise, or fall, will
bear any such gloss or corrupting interpretation.

3. As to the matter of these promises, I shall only assert this in general:
that the Lord ingageth, that Judges, Rulers, Magistrates; and such like, shall
put forth their power, and act clearly for the good, welfare, and prosperity of
the Church; This is plainly held out in every one of them: hence the Kingdoms
are said to serve the Church; that is all Kingdoms, they must do so, or be
broken in pieces, and cease to be Kingdoms: and how can a Kingdom as a
Kingdom, (for it is taken formally, and not materially, merely for the
individualls of it, as appears by the threatening of its being broken in
pieces,) serve the Church, but by putting forth its power and strength in her
behalf, Isai 60. 12. and therefore upon the accomplishment of that promise,
they are said to become the Kingdoms of the Lord Christ, Rev. 11. 15. because,
as Kingdoms, they serve him with their Power and Authority; having before, as
such, and by their power, opposed him to the utmost. They must nurse the Church
not with dry breasts, nor feed it with stones and Scorpions, but with the good
things committed to them. Their Power and substance in protection and
supportment, are to be engaged in the behalf thereof: hence God is said to
give these Judges, Rulers, Princes, Kings, Queens to the Church, not setting
them in the Church, as Officers thereof, but ordering their state in the world,
(Rev: 11. 15.) to its behoof. In sum, there is not any one of the promises
recited, but holds forth the utmost of what I intend to assert from them all;
viz. that the Lord has promised, That the Magistrates whom he will give, own
and bless, shall put forth their power, and act in that capacity, wherein he
has placed them in the World, for the good, furtherance, and prosperity of the
truth and Church of Christ: they shall protect them with their Power, feed them
with their substance, adorn them with their favor, and the privileges
wherewith they are entrusted: they shall break their forcibly oppressing
adversaries, and take care, that those who walk in the truth of the Lord, may
lead a peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty. If then you are such
Magistrates as God has promised, (as, woe be unto you if you are not) know
that he has undertaken for you, that you shall perform this part of your
duty, and I pray that you may rule with him therein, and be found faithful.

2. The Second ground that I would point unto, as a bottom of your actings in
this thing arises from sundry undoubted principles, which I shall briefly
mention: and the First is:

That the Gospel of Jesus Christ has a right to be Preached and propagated in
every Nation, and to every creature under Heaven. Jesus Christ is the Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings: Rev. 17. 14. The Nations are given to be his
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth to be his possession Ps. 2. 8,
9. He is appointed the Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. God has set him over the
works of his hands, and put all things in subjection under his feet: Ps. 8. 7.
And upon this account he gives commission to his messengers, to Preach the
Gospel to all Nations, Math. 28. 19. Or, to every creature under Heaven: Mark.
16. 17. The Nations of the World, being of the Father given to him, he may
deal with them as he pleases, and either, bruise them with a rod of Iron, and
break them in pieces as a Potters vessel, Ps. 2. 9. He may fill the places of
the Earth with their dead bodies, and strike in pieces the heads of the
Countries. Ps. 110. 6. Or he may make them his own, and bring them in
subjection unto himself; which toward some of them he will effect. Rev. 11.
19. Now the Gospel being the rod of his power, and the Scepter of his
Kingdom, the grand instrument whereby he accomplisheth all his designs in the
world, whether they be for life or for death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. he has given that
a right to take possession in his name, and authority, of all that he will own
in any Nation under Heaven. (And indeed, he has in all of them, some that are
his peculiar purchase. Rev. 5. 9. Whom in despite of all the World, he will
bring in unto himself.) To have free passage into all Nations, is the
undoubted right of the Gospel; and the Persons of Christ's goodwill, have such
a right to it, and interest in it, that look from whomsoever they may claim
protection in reference unto any other of their most undoubted concernments
amongst men, of them may they claim protection in respect of their quiet
enjoyment, and possession of the Gospel.

2. That where ever the Gospel is by any Nation owned, received, embraced, it
is the blessing, benefit, prosperity and advantage of that Nation: They that
love Syon shall prosper, Psalm. 122. 6. Godliness has the promise of this
life, and is profitable unto all: 1 Timothy 4. 8. The reception of the word of
truth, and subjection to Christ therein, causing a people to become willing in
the day of his power, entitleth that people to all the promises, that ever God
made to his Church: they shall be established in righteousness, they shall be
far from oppression, and for fear and terror, they shall not draw nigh unto
them; whosoever contends against such a people, shall fall thereby: no weapon
that is formed against them shall prosper, every tongue that shall rise against
them in judgment, they shall condemn, for this is the inheritance of the
servants of the Lord: Isai. 14. 14, 15, 17. To the prosperity of a Nation, two
things are required.

1. That they be freed from oppression, injustice, cruelty, disorder, confusion
in themselves, from their rulers, or others.

2. That they be protected from the sword and violence, of them that seek their
ruin from without. And both these do a people receive, by receiving the
Gospel.

1. For the first, they have the promise of God, that they shall have Judges as
at the first: Isa: 1. 26. Such as in justice and judgment shall bear rule
over them and among them* as the first Judges whom he stirred up, and gave to
his ancient people: Their Officers shall be Peace, and their Exactors
righteousness: Isai. 60. 17. even the very Gospel which they do receive, is
only able to instruct them to be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord, for
that only effectually teaches the sons of men, to live righteously, soberly,
and Godly in this present World: Tit: 2. 12.

2. And for the second, innumerable are the promises, that are given to such a
people; whence the Psalmist concludes upon the consideration of the mercies,
they do and shall enjoy, happy is the People whose God is the Lord: Psalm: 144.
15. The glorious God will be to them a place of rivers and broad waters, in
which no Gally with oars, nor gallant Ship shall pass by, the Lord will be
their redeemer, Lawgiver, King, and Savior: Isai: 33. 21. It will interest
any people in all the promises, that are made for the using of the Church, to
thresh, break, destroy, burden, fire, consume, and slay the enemies thereof:
so far shall a people be from suffering under the hands of oppressors, that
the Lord will use them for the breaking and destruction of the Nimrods of the
Earth, and this blessing of the Nations do they receive by the faith of
Abraham.

3. The rejection of the Gospel by any people or Nation to whom it is tendered,
is always attended with the certain and inevitable destruction of that people
or Nation, which sooner or later, shall without any help or deliverance be
brought upon them, by the revenging hand of Christ.

When the word of Grace was rejected and despised by the Jews, the messengers
of it professedly turning to the Gentiles: Act: 13. 46. and chap. 28. v. 28.
God removing it from them, unto a Nation that would bring forth fruit: Math.
21. 43. As it did in all the World, or among all Nations, for a season: Col: 1.
6, With what a fearful and tremendous desolation he quickly wasted that
people, is known to all: he quickly slew, and destroyed those Husbandmen, that
spoiled his vineyard, and let it forth unto others, that might bring him his
fruit in due season.

Hence, when Christ is tendered in the Gospel, the Judges and Rulers of the
Nations, are exhorted to obedience to him, upon pain of being destroyed upon
the refusal thereof: Psalm: 2. 12. And we have the experience of all Ages, ever
since the day, that the Gospel began to be propagated in the World: The
quarrel of it was revenged on the Jews by the Romans, upon the Romans by the
Goths, Vandalls, and innumerable barbarous Nations; and the vengeance due to
the Antichristian World is at hand, even at the door. The Lord will certainly
make good his promise to the utmost, that the Kingdoms and Nations, which will
not serve the Church, even that Kingdom and those Nations shall utterly
perish: Isai. 60. 12.

4. That it is the duty of Magistrates to seek the good, peace, and prosperity
of the people committed to their charge, and to prevent, obviate, remove, take
away every thing, that will bring confusion, destruction, desolation upon them:
as Mordecai procured good things for his people, and prosperity to his kindred:
Esther. 10. 4. And David describes himself with all earnestness, pursuing the
same design, Ps: 101. Magistrates are the Ministers of God for the good,
(universal good) of them to whom they are given, Romans 13. 14. and they are to
watch and apply themselves to this very thing: v. 6. And the reason the Apostle
gives to stir up the Saints of God to pray amongst all sorts of men, in
special for Kings, and those that are in Authority, to wit, that they may in
general, come to the knowledge of the faith, and be saved, and in particular
discharge the duty and trust committed to them (for on that account are they to
pray for them, as Kings and men in Authority) is, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty: 1 Timothy: 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. It being
incumbent on them, to act even as Kings and men in Authority, that we may so
do: they are to feed the people committed to their charge with all their
might, unto universal peace, and welfare: now the things that are opposite to
the good of any Nation or people, are of two sorts. First; such as are really,
directly, and immediately opposed to that state and condition, wherein they
close together, and find prosperity. In general, seditions, tumults,
disorders; In particular, violent, or fraudulent breakings in upon the
respective designed bounds, privileges, and enjoyments of singular persons,
without any consideration of him who rules all things, are of this kind: If
Nations and rulers might be supposed to be Atheists, yet such evils as these,
tending to their dissolution, and not being, they would with all their strength
labor to prevent, either by watching against their commission, or inflicting
vengeance on them that commit them, that others may hear, and fear, and do
so no more.

2. Such as are morally and meritoriously opposed to their good and welfare;
in that they will certainly pluck down the judgments and wrath of God upon
that Nation or people, where they are practiced, and allowed: there are sins
for which the wrath of God will be assuredly revealed from heaven, against the
children of disobedience: Sodom and Gomorrah are set forth as examples of his
righteous judgment in this kind. And shall he be thought a Magistrate, to
bear out the name, authority, and presence of God to men, that so he, and his
people, have present peace, like a heard of Swine, cares not, though such
things as will certainly, first eat and devour their strength, and then
utterly consume them, do pass for current: seeing that they that rule over
men, must be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord, the sole reason why they
sheath the sword of justice in the bowels of Thieves, Murderers, Adulterers,
is not because their outward peace is actually disturbed by them, and therefore
they must give example of terror to others, who being like minded, yet are not
yet actually given up to the practice of the like abomination, but also, yea
principally, because he in whose stead they stand and minister to the World, is
provoked by such wickedness to destroy both the one and the other: And if
there be the same reason to be evidenced concerning other things, they also
call for the same procedure.

To gather up now what has been spoken: considering the Gospells right and
title, to be propagated with all its concernments, in every Nation under
heaven, the blessing, peace, prosperity, and protection wherewith it is
attended, when, and where received, and the certain destruction, and
desolation, which accompanies the rejection and contempt thereof, considering
the duty that by Gods appointment, is incumbent on them that rule over men,
that in the fear of the Lord they ought to seek the good, peace, and welfare,
and prosperity of them committed to their charge; to prevent, obviate, remove,
revenge that which tends to their hurt, perturbation, dissolution, destruction,
immediate from heaven, or from the hand of men, and in the whole administration
to take care, that the worshippers of God in Christ, may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, let any one, who has the least
sense upon his spirit, of the account which he must one day make to the great
King and Judge of all the World, of the Authority and power wherewith he was
entrusted, determine, whether it be not incumbent on him by all the protection,
he can afford, by all the privileges he can indulge, the supportment that he
can grant, by all that encouragement, which upon the highest account
imaginable, he is required or allowed to give to any person whatsoever, to
further the propagation of the Gospel, which upon the matter is the only thing
of concernment, as well unto this life, as that which is to come. And if any
thing be allowed in a Nation, which in Gods esteem may amount to a contempt
and despising thereof, men may be taught by sad experience, what will be the
issue of such allowance.

3. I shall only propose one thing more to your consideration. Although the
Institutions and Examples of the old Testament, of the duty of Magistrates, in
the things and about the worship of God, are not in their whole latitude and
extent to be drawn into rules, that should be obligatory to all Magistrates now
under the administration of the Gospel; and that because the Magistrate then
was custos, vindex, and administrator legis judicialis, and politiae Mosaicae,
from which as most think we are freed; yet doubtless there is something moral
in those Institutions, which being uncloathed of their judaicall form, is
still binding to all in the like kind, as to some Analogy and proportion:
subduct from those Administrations, what was proper to, and lies upon the
account of the Church and Nation of the Jews, and what remains, upon the
general notion of a Church and Nation, must be everlastingly binding: and this
amounts thus far at least, that Judges, Rulers, and Magistrates, which are
promised under the New Testament, to be given in mercy, and to be of singular
usefulness, as the Judges were under the Old, are to take care that the
Gospel Church, may in its concernment as such, be supported and promoted, and
the truth propagated, wherewith they are entrusted; as the others took care,
that it might be well with the Judaicall Church, as such. And on these and such
like principles as these are, may you safely bottom your selves in that
undertaking, wherein you seek for direction from God this day.

For the rules which I intimated I shall but name them, Disc. of Toleration.
having some years since delivered my thoughts to the World at large in this
subject; and I see no cause as yet to recede from any thing then so delivered.
Take only then for the present, these brief directions following.

1. Labor to be fully persuaded in your own minds, that you be not carried up
and down with every wind of Doctrine, and be tempted to harken after every
spirit, as though you had received no truth, as it is in Jesus. It is a sad
condition, when men have no zeal for truth, nor against that which is opposite
to it, what ever they seem to profess; because indeed having not taken in any
truth in the power and principle of it, they are upon sad thoughts, wholly at a
loss, whether there be any truth or no: this is an unhappy frame indeed, the
proper condition of them whom God will spew out of his mouth.

2. Know that error and falsehood have no Right or Title, either from God, or
man, unto any privilege, protection, advantage, liberty, or any good thing,
you are entrusted withal: to dispose that unto a lie, which is the right of
and due to truth, is to deal treacherously with him by whom you are employed:
all the tenderness, and forbearance unto such persons as are infected with
such abominations, is soly upon a civil account, and that plea which they have
for tranquillity, whilst neither directly nor morally they are a disturbance
unto others.

3. Know that in things of practice, so of persuasion, that are impious and
wicked, either in themselves or in their natural and unconstrained
consequences, the plea of Conscience is an Aggravation of the crime: if men's
consciences are seared, and themselves given up to a reprobate mind, to do
those things that are not convenient, there is no doubt but they ought to
suffer such things, as to such practices are assigned and appointed.

Should I now descend unto particulars, in all the things mentioned, and insist
on them, time would wholly fail me, neither is it a work for a single Sermon:
and therefore in one word I shall wind up the whole matter and end.

Know them then, that are faithful and quiet in the Land, regard the truth of
the Gospel: remember the days of old, what has done you good, quieted your
hearts in distress, crowned your undertakings with sweetness: loose not your
first love: draw not out your own thoughts for the counsel of God: seek not
great things for your selves: be not moved at the lusts of men, keep Peace what
in you lies, with all that fear the Lord: let the glory of Christ, be the end
of all your undertakings. etc.

FINIS.

