THE NATIVITY OF Sir JOHN PRESBYTER. Compared with the Rhodulphine and
Lansberges TABLE. VERIFIED BY HIS CONCEPTION, From the CYCLOPS, Brontes,
Steropes and Pyrackmon, as they were making Thunder and Lightning in Mount
Aetna. COMPARED WITH THE JVDGEMENTS OF Ptolomey, Haly, Hermes, Albumazar,
Sconor, Tasnier, Regiomontanus, Guido, Bonatus, Keplar; Galileus, with other
learned Mathematicians, as well Ancient as Modern. Calculated by CHRISTOPHER
SCALE-SKY, Mathematitian in chief to the Ass-embly of Divines.

Licensed by Rowland Rattle-Priest, a terrible IMPRIMATVR,

AND Entered according to Order.



Printed on the backside of the Cyclopian Mountains. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, THE Ass: Of DIVINES assembled at Westminster.
Right Worshipful,
TAking into serious consideration, the depth of your Learning, the accutenesse
of your wits, to get money by all trades, my thoughts were ravished, and I in
a maze, when I saw, how you could make Laws, to serve God, to stuff your
gutts, to persecute your enemies, and pull Christ out of his Throne, at one and
the same time; truly, I had not thought it had been in you, when I see how
far your Wisdom transcends the Papists, (who supposing (as well as you)
that Heretics should be whipped, first whip themselves) but you being Armed
Cap a pied, with your Armor of folly, viz. self-confidence and rage, (which
first armed your Predecessors to prosecute, when Persecution first began, by an
Ass. of Divines, in the Laterane Palace in Rome) first make Heretics of
those, whose Tenants of Truth you cannot answer, and then Persecute them; O
profound Wisdom, surpassing the wisdom of the Ancient; Besides,
considering your extreme need, and want of necessaries, having but 24. Pounds
a day, besides some pretty Livings of a Hundred or two or three a year, (that
for very hunger, you were forced to eat up 26. Bishops in one day) yet you
should hate idleness, so as that rather then you will be idle, you will sit
still and sleep: yea, at that very time you have invented a Religion, without
either Scripture or reason to prove it; and lastly, when I see (how you excel
all Laymen that are your friends) how like men you can lay about you with your
Classical Club, beating your Antagonists small as dust (one thump with your
Club being worth all Mr. Prinnes Subitane Apprehensions) how willing you are to
hang them, if you could catch them; I must needs confess, that Christ and his
Apostles either could not, or would not do it: considering this you zeal, I
was imboldned to present you this my Calculation of the Nativity of your own
child, which is as like the Mother as ever it can looke-out of it is eyes, and
not much unlike his The Devil.
Grandsire, only as yet he wants horns; go on Reverend Assembly, your
works already praise you on the Gates, make your Son horns of Iron, that he
may push the Saints while none of them be left, that when you have ended these
days of sinning, you may be elevated something nearer the Skies, which is the
daily Prayer of

Your nimble and learned Servant, CHRISTOPHER SCALE-SKY.

To his Celestial Brother, Christopher Scale-skie.
REverend Assembly, up, arise and jogge,
For you have fairly fish't, and caught a frogge:
Now you have sit two years, pray can you tell
A man the way that Christ went down to Hell?
In these Two years, what can a wise man think
That you have done, ought else but eat and drink:
Presbytry (climbed up to the top of Fame:)
Directory and all, from Scotland came,
Oh, Monstrous Idleness! alack and welly,
Our Learned Rabbis, mind naught but their belly,
Fall to my masters, eat, and dish about,
But yet my Brother Kit will find you out;
On Brother Kit, once more, and none can mend thee,
The Sun and Moon, and all the Stars attend thee.
By Rowland Rattle-Priest, Brother to Chapter Scale-sky, and Cozen Germany to
MARTIN MAR-PRIEST.

astrological horoscope diagram THE NATIVITY Of Sir JOHN PRESBYTER Verified
From his Conception.


THE length of his Life is like to be neither long nor good; not not long. 1.
Because the Lord of life is not in the House of death, which being Saturn,
(says Haly) causes him to be deformed, ill-favored, ill-conditioned, short
of life, death by taking away other men's goods, yet while he lives, he shall
domineere over his brethren.

2. Because he is unfortunate by the Lord of Death, which being the the Sun
in the House of Substance, riches, etc. opposite to the royal Star, cor
Leonis, will manifest and bring to light, his disloyalty to the State, his
cheating of the rich, his robbing of the poor, and bring him to a sudden
untimely end, (perhaps hanging.)

3. Because the Moon is unfortunate in the very cuspis of the horoscope, which
position yields him very short life, unconstant, meddling with what he has
nothing to do; and yet while he lives, he shall be numbered among great persons.

2. Secondly, not good, because all the Planets are evil seated, and convey
all their mischefs to him, so that he seems to a judicious eye, not to be a
creature compounded of the 4. Elements, fire, air, earth and water, of which
(being miraculously commixed) God made man, but of exaltation above Christ,
Tyranny over the Conscience, imprisoning the body, extorting the Estate, which
being mixed with the ladle of Pride, in the Caldron of presumption, the devil
made the Urchin called Sir John Presbyter.

His mischiefs are so many, that they cannot well be noted in the bulk,
therefore we will take them assunder, and see particularly, what God has done
for him by permission, the Devil by Act, and the Planets by influence.

1. Saturn makes him an abject, a fugitive (newly come out of Scotland)
base-minded, a vile man, negligent, fearful, sad, pensive, covetous, a witch,
stubborn, a Rogue, suspicious, superstitious, a deceiver, a railer, and sends
his evil Spirit, called in Hebrew Zazell, to wait upon him, and in apparel,
makes him delight in black like his father the Devil, and to oppose the
glorious light of the Gospel, and the Saints that walk in white, he makes him
incline toward the laws of the Jews, exacting Tithes, observing days; and
denying the Lord that bought him, crucifying Christ in his members.

2. Jupiter makes him a lover of himself, high-minded, proud, superstitious,
fearful, faint-hearted, careless, negligent, prodigal and Imperious, given
to adultery and whoring, and sends his evil Spirit, called in Hebrew Hismaell,
to acompany him; Also he makes him turn his Fathers the Bishops out of their
Spiritualties, that he may share their inheritance, and change the Age of Gods
people from better to worse.

3. Mars makes him quarrelsome, cruel, angry, Tyrannical, Unjust,
Unfaithful, a Blood-succer, theevish, a makebate, rash, heady, high-minded, a
Boaster, very proud, a persecuter of good Men, a murderer, furious, desperate,
seditious, and an Adulterer, and sends his Devil, called in Hebrew,
Barzabell, to concommitate him.

4. The Sun makes him very Tyrannical, proud, Ambitious, doing mischief
without end committing the Government of the Church into the hands of
Ignoramus, ambitious Phaetons, with their doctrine to set the World on fire,
and being checked by a superior Power, he will deny the Light of the Gospel
to the World, and sends his Devil, called in Hebrew, Sorath, the Number of the
Letters of whose Name, is 666. and signifies the Prince of Darkness, to keep
him company.

5. Venus makes him womanish, fearful, weak in parts, weaker in judgment,
but weakest of all in honesty, sloathfull, lecherous, a slanderer, not caring
for his good Name, a lover of vile persons, given to filthy lucre, liquor and
lust: Sodomiticall, Papal, Prelaticall, whorish, and sends his evil Angel
called in Hebrew, Kedemel to be his companion.

6. Mercury makes him unstable, malicious, a grievous Liar, an abominable
thief, a slanderer, forgetful, foolish, privily sowing deceit, full of wicked
Counsel and malice, and sends his infortune, called in Hebrew, Taphihartharah,
to bear him company.

7. The Moon makes him fitter to be a weathercock then a Divine, make the
place where he dwells, and all that dwell in the place unfortunate, and at last
drives him out of his native Country, without either fulfilling or filling full
his desires, and sends him the infortune of all infortunes, called in Hebrew,
Schedbarschemoth Schartatham, to concommitate him.

But yet unfortunate and unlucky Jupiter being in the profection and horoscope
of his Nativity, will product his life a year in all this mischief, (for
directions, profections, revolutions, etc. I cannot note for sorrow; I could no
sooner think of the miseries he would bring upon this Kingdom, but his actions
were ready to prevent my thoughts; alas poor England! Religio peperit filiam,
and filia devoravit matrem,) and therefore I will only speak briefly of the
12. Houses, the significations of, and Planets in them, usually observed by
Mathematicians in Nativities, in those Houses in which in this Nativity they
happen; Calculated exactly, according to Art.

Of the first House.
In the Cuspis of which is the second degree of Capricorn, a sign of the
triplicity of the (...), nocturnall, foeminine, Meridionall, cold, dry,
melancholy, Bestiall, with horns on his head, subtle, quick, moveable, the
House of Saturn, the exaltation of Mars, the triplicity of Venus, the term of
Mercury, the face of Jupiter, the detriment of the Moon, and fall of Jupiter,
Saturn is Lord of the place by house, and Mars by exaltation, who also is Lord
Paramount of the Nativity.

This considered, he will be of Complexion chollerick, His Complexion.
conjoined with melancholy, the last making him deep in speculation to study
mischief, the former quick in Invention to act it: His Conditions will be
furious, fighting against heaven, ( Saturn and Mars opposing Sol and Jupiter,
of which, Condition.
more hereafter in its due place) so that had he power answerable to his
ambitious heart, he would grasp the North Pole with one hand, and the South
Pole with the other; nay, he would tear God out of his Throne, and rule the
creation himself: He will fight furiously against Jesus Christ, with tooth and
nail laying about him in the Pulpit, as though he were felling Oaks, that so
he may get him a good stomach to his victuals, crying out, That Christ and
his Apostles lived in the Infancy of the Church, and therefore suffered
themselves to be kept under, but now the Church is come to perfection, and
Christ has committed the Scepter to him, to rule the Church till he come, and
St. Peter has given him his keys, and if they speedily do not bring him fat
Capons, Pigges and Geese, yea, and the Tenth of all they enjoy, though their
Landlords want their rents, and their children bread, be will lock them out of
heaven; also St. Paul has given his Sword to him, that has more wit to use
it, with which he will chap his opposers as small as herbs to the pot; and
this he darts out of his mouth with such fury, as though he would eat up his
Auditors. For his Nourishment, Nourishment.
he thirsts after blood, raving after it, like a starven child after a dug,
he was fed with Bishops blood, all the time he was in his mothers belly; to
conclude, He is nder-taught, and over-sed,
A little wit, and a great head.


In this first House also is the Moon unfortunate, and infortunately seated in
the ascendent, in opposition to Mars, and sextile to Mercury, makes him
unconstant, a vagabond, meddling with things he has nothing to do withal,
sloathfull, both he and his Mother of evil estimation with good men, short
life, yet while he lives, he shall be reckoned among great Persons.

In it also is Jupiter, in direct opposition to Mars, which aspect makes him an
enemy to such as have been his friends, and although his position in the
Horoscope, promise him long life, and much goods of the Church; yet his
position in Capricorn in opposition to Mars, makes him spend it as fast as he
gets it, and in the end die poor; In general, his position makes him cloak
all his villainies with show of virtue, in form of an evil hypocrite, and stand
highly on his pedigree, fetching his descent from Titus, who has newly left
the Bishopric of Creta, to turn Presbyter, to be rich without labor, living
by the sweat of other men's brows, admirable proud and domineering, tyrannical,
Lording it over the Conscience, despising and dispraising his betters, and
disdaining to be left to the good will of the Uulgar.

Of the second House.
If the Cuspis. of which is the 13 degree of Aquarius, a sign of the
triplicity of the air, diurnall, masculine, fixed, hot and moist, humane, the
house of Saturn, the detriment of the Sun, and Saturn Lord thereof, is
opposite to it, and therefore an enemy thereof, which he shall have some
estate, but shall spend it, and so much the sooner, because Saturn is
retrograde.

In it is part of fortune in the 24. degree of Aquarius, which agravates the
former judgment, and yields him to die miserable poor.

In it is the Sun in the 25. degree of Aquarius, unhappily placed in his
detriment, and in direct opposition to Saturn and the Dragons tail; by
himself, the Sun makes him an honorable, Great man, that shall spend his
goods in Magnificense, his aspect to Saturn makes him sickly, sad, full of
distracted thoughts, subitane witless apprehensions, great loss of goods,
violent death, perhaps hanging; his position in Aquarius, and in the sixth
House from the ninth, causes him to have inseparable diseases in his eyes,
whereby he shall not be able to discern between Truth and falsehood, evil
Servants, death of small beasts.

In it is the Dragons-head, which though in it self it promise no harm, yet
being in opposition to its dispositor, which is Saturn, stupid Saturn, in the
Eighth House, and with the Dragons-Taile, makes him (being retrograde) quickly
spend his goods, die a sudden death by suffocation.

In it is Mercury retrograde, with debilities enough, who in himself would (by
this position) make him grow rich by all trades, but his debillities, will make
him such a busie-body and medler with other men's matters, that he will get the
ill opinion of the rabble rout, whose folly was his first rise, and bring such
a disgrace, and ignominy on the Clergy, which they will never claw off again
to their dying day, which God send may quickly come.

Of the third House.
In the cuspis of which is the sixth degree of Aries, a sign oriental, fiery,
of the regal triplicity, masculine, of the day, chollerick, movable, fickle;
but what do I spy! Mars Lord thereof, in a quarrelling angle, occidentall,
retrograde, and in a square to it?

Hei mihi qui strepitus, quique tumultus adest; He shall set all his brethren
sisters and kindred together by the ears, all the world shall be the worse for
him, and are bound to curse the day that ever he was borne, he shall have many
fearful dreams, and many times shall dream waking, he shall fetch a little
petty journey Westward, perhaps to Hide-parke corner, to take the air in a
Coach with two wheels.

In it is Venus in the eight degree of Aries, retrograde, and in her detriment,
in square to Mars, making him whoorish, committing Incest with his kindred,
etc. but being in the seventh house from the nineth, he shall scarcly ever
marry, but shall have great quarrels and contentions about his whores, etc.

Of the fourth House.
In the Cuspis of which is the seventh degree of Taurus.

Of the fifth House.
In the Cuspis of which is the 22. degree of Taurus, Venus Lady of then both,
therefore I will treat of them both together; a sign of the earth nocturnall,
cold, cry, melancholy, bestiall, Venus retrograde, flying back from the fourth
House, shall make his friends forsake him, and call him (...) for an abortive,
her position in the third House, makes him possess much treasure, and goods
immovable, which he shall tear out of the very throats of his brethren, and
when he dies, he shall leave an inextinctible name behind him, which shall be
famous for its baseness, so long as the World indures.

As for the fifth House, the almuten is in a barren Sign, and therefore he is
never like to have a child. Tu sanguinis vultimus ordo, although the Devil lay
with the Whore of Babylon, and begat Episcopacy, and Episcopacy begat
Presbytry; yet Rejoice O heavens, sing aloud O earth, clap thy hands for joy, O
England, post nubula soles, thou shall have a time of Quietness, of Peace, of
content, for Presbytry will have never a child to vex thee, to Imprison thy
free Denizens, to suck up thy fat, devour thy good things, and eat thy bread
out of thy childrens mouths, and himself is not long lived, as I showed
before, and then farewell Persecution for Conscience, farewell Ordinance for
Tithes, farewell Ecclesiastical Supremacy, farewell Pontifical Revenue,
farewell Assembly of Divines, dissembled at Westminster, you shall constult
together no more, farewell Sir Simon Synod, and his Son Presbyter Jack.

Gens antiqua ruit, multos dominata per annos, and therefore O England;
Inter pone tuis, interdum, gaudia curis.
Of the sixth House.
In the Cuspis of which is the eleventh degree of Gemini, a sign of the air,
diurnall, masculine, hot and moist, and Mercury Lord thereof in pisces, in a
square to it, I fear he will be troubled with the Iliaque Passion, a disease
which causes men to vomit up their excrements, and so much the more, because
of that Scripture, His meat in his bowels is turned, It is as the gall of
aspes within him, Job. 20.14.15.
he has swallowed down riches, he shall vomit them up again, the Lord shall
cast them out of his belly. Certainly his Infirmities are many, great and
lasting, If you view all the Planets, you shall see them all in their
detriments or falls. The Learned say, if 4. Planets at a Nativity be in their
detriments or falls, it threatens mischeife and misery to the native, as it
happened at the Nativity of John Duke of Saxony, who was taken prisoner by the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, this good Duke had at his Nativity three Planets in
their detriments, and one in perigrination, but here in this Nativity, they are
all in their detriments or falls, and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and sinner appear.

Mercury Lord of the place, that should have made him a Shepherd over the
Lambs and sheep of Christ, looks asquint upon the place, with a hateful
square, and flies backward; only the evil spirit of Mercury, whom we mentioned
before, preferred him to be the Devils Goat-heard, having possessed his noddle
with a persuasion of an unerring Spirit, that he may persecute all his
opposers, even to the death.

Of the seventh House.
In the Cuspe of which is the second degree of Cancer, a watery, fickle,
moveable, feminine, nocturnall sign and the Moon Lady of it, opposite to it,
and therefore an enemy to it, making him fickle, quarrelsome to have many
wives, though the Spowse of CHRIST be but one.

In it is Mars the Lord Paramount of the Sheame, unhappily seated in his fall,
in Direct opposition to benevolent but dejected Jupiter, and to the ascendent:
which is his own exaltation, which worse then the worst of all infortunes,
brings heavy sufferings to the native, Haly says, if Mars be in a watery sign,
as now he is, this mischief and misery shall come from the Presbytry came from
Scotland.
North, the Aphorism may carry credit, for you see it verrified:

To be brief, his position in a quarrelling angle, will cause him to fill the
Kingdom full of strife, debate, and to embrew whole Nations in blood, to
satisfy his own ambitious aspiring thoughts, mak's him violent to do
mischief, to be an enemy to God, Goodness and Good people, domineering over
his Superiors, equals and inferiors, his throat an open Sepulcher, with his
tongue he uses deceit, the poison of Aspes is under his lips, and the way of
Truth has he not known, his mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, his feet
are swift to shed blood, destruction and misery are in his ways, there is no
fear of God before his eyes: I can write no more of this for weeping.

Yet being in the Eleventh House from the Ninth, he makes him have great
friends at first, and those no small fools neither, notwithstanding spying him
Lord both of the Tenth and Eleventh House; he shall domineere over the State,
swaying them at his pleasure, Witness Manchester against Cromwell.
moving them to contention and quarrelling one with another, and making mere
slaves of them, of which more in its due place.

Of the Eight House.
In the Cuspis of which is the Thirteenth degree of the regal sign Leo, a
sign of the fiery triplicity, the Sun Lord thereof, just opposite to it, his
death will be violent, like as when a millstone is hurled into the sea, which
is adjuvated by the presence of Saturn in the house with the poysonsome tail
of the Dragon, which being seated in that house, would have made him dye in
prison, but the Dragons-head in the second House in opposition, has provided a
sweeter air, though a more Ignominious death for him.

Saturn is partner with his fellow Nature-killing Mars in his Nativity, (which
I let slip before) being dispositor of the Ascendent, and both the Luminaries,
viz. the Sun and Moon, if the Lord of the Nativity behold the Sun, and
both unfortunate, the Native shall be an enemy both to King and People, in this
Nativity it is so, for both are in their detriments, both opposite; but here is
all our comfort, this Position threatens short life, he shall live but a small
time to do mischief, and then the common people, which now admire him, will
begin to sing, Hey Toss, the Devils dead, also, his disease will be dangerous
to his Mother and Father, for says Taismer, if one of the ill fortunes be in
Cancer at a Nativity; It signifies short life to the Mother, if one of them be
in Leo in a Nativity, it signifies short life of the Father; therefore, though
sorrow continue all night, joy shall come in the morning, Presbytry will
quickly die, the Synod be dissolved, and the Devil chained up, and therefore
follow the advice of old Cato, Spemretine, etc.

Of the Ninth House.
Now for his Religion, which one would think should be balanced by reason;
the Sixth degree of Libra in the Cuspe, he will be a Divine, but Venus is
opposite to it, and she, and all the rest of the Planets are mad, and
therefore he will be a mad one, establish a mad Religion, and he will be
as fickle as the wind, a fat Benifice will change him, ab equis ad afinos,
Venus in Quadrat, to Jupiter, Luna and Mars, and Trine to Saturn, make him
incline to the law of the Jews, as I mentioned before, etc.

Of the tenth house and eleventh.
Both which the most malevolent and martial sign Scorpio, irradiates with his
poysonsome beam, and Mars Lord of them both, He shall set the Kings or Rulers
against the people, and the people against their Rulers, causes all the
Rulers, Officers, Magistrates, yea the Parliament it self, to sit whole weeks
in consultation which way to sit the Beast on horseback, that he may ride to
the Devil, this causes all our Wars, bloodshed, murders, robberies, etc.
viz. to advance Presbytry over Church and States O profound Divinity! Oh
baseness beyond comparison.

Of the Twelfth House.
In the Cuspis of which is the Eleventh degree of Sagittarius, and Jupiter Lord
thereof in the first house, causes him to suffer, even in his youth, to have
many hidden enemies, and some so cunning, that he shall never find them while
his eyes are open, It also foretells to him anger, sadness, enmity and
conspiracy, prison, captivity, Lamentation, mourning and woe, which always
follows continuance in evil doing; for great Beasts I might say something,
Sagitarius being in the Cuspe, but I will only conclude with a caution, let
him beware of a horse that walks Westward with a Car at's tail and so
farewell child, as full of subtilty and mischief, as an egg is full of
goodness. Ego in calum migro.

FINIS.

