Overton's DEFYANCE OF THE ACT of PARDON: OR, The Copy of a Letter to the
Citizens usually meeting at the WHALE-BONE in Lothbury behind the Royal
Exchange; And others commonly (though unjustly) STYLED LEVELLERS.

Written by Richard Overton Close prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.

MATTHEW. 16. 24, 25. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me.

For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever shall lose his
life for my sake, shall find it.

July.4th. Imprinted at London, 1649.

OVERTON'S DEFYANCE OF THE ACT of PARDON.
Honored Friends,
I Understand, that at the silence of my pen since my close imprisonment many
have wondered, and some even amongst you (though tacitly) been ready to draw
my integrity into suspicion, but could such as well un^old the riddle of my
silence, as in other things, judge of what is visible and ^^vious to the eye,
their thoughts sure would be far from such jealous sur^ises of me, neither
would they (I suppose) so much as tax me of impru^^nce or negligence in the
matter, though my silence indeed had been as ^^ep as is suspected, and let it
be so taken for granted, and also taken in the ^orst sense, I care not much how
I am judged; yet I must needs confess, is no pleasure unto me, to be misjudged,
or condemned before my time, hen my deeds are apostate or contradictory to what
I have begun in be^^lf of the public, then is the time of my condemnation, and
before that ^^y patient endurance in bonds (one would think) were a guard
sufficient a^^inst misconceptions in that kind, especially with my friends.

But knowing, that even the suspicion of any one of us four; yea, though the
unworthyest, My Self, is an arrow of so pearcing a kind, that it e^^n wounds
through the sides of that person* the righteous cause of the ^^ople, which
never more needed indulgence, watchfulness, and help ^^en now, it being (by
perfidious usu^pers and hypocrites, now clothed (...) Angels of light with the
radiant beams of Majesty and Sainship, that no English mortal is able to peep
ir to their glory and live) become like the man that traveled from Jerusalem
to Jerico, and fell among thiefs, stripped of his raiment (an Agreement of the
people, and it faithful Asserters) wounded and beaten, deserted and left half
(if not altogether) dead, spurned, trampled and trod under foot, and the Priest
and the L^vite, and (which is most to my grief and confusion of face) my very
brethren the Churchmen pass by on the other side, yea, and which is worse, are
not ashamed with their invenomed invectives, lies, calumnies, and bitter
persecutions, (and yet all forfooth in the name of God, of Jesus Christ, of
Reliligion and the like) to stab and wound it afresh; having forked stings like
Serpents to sting every hand that touches, swollen with venom like Toads to
spit at every person that owneth, and like Vipers ready at all times to fasten
on every man that shall dare to be an asserter thereof; that now none so
persecute as they, enough to affright me from Church ship, to renounce and
abominate it for ever; did not I know its institution to be holy and good, and
the ways of those men no natural product or fruit of Church constitutions.

I tell you (my dearest friends, and fellow asserters of the public cause)
knowing how circumspect, tender and careful we ought to be; now especially to
show our affections, our truth and fidelity to our persecuted wounded,
forsaken, and almost murdered cause, when none there is scarce that dare own
it or indulge it in public, and to approve our selves like the good Samaritan
indeed to bind up its wounds, to pour in our wine and oil, and have a care
of it; I shall therefore (least your jelousie over me should take too deep an
impression upon your spirits, and so work an in confidence in you, in any
future asserters of our cause, to the extreme damage and prejudice of the
cause it self) unbosome the present disposition of my heart and resolutions
concerning the same, although to give you the particular reasons for the late
obscurity or silence of my pen, at present I judge not convenient.

My Friends, of this therefore be ye confident, that my silence has not
proceeded from any degeneration or instability in me to that Righteous Cause
(summed up in our draught of an Agreement of the people, subscribed, published
and offered by us four as a peace offering, to the consideration of the people
of England, 1. May. 1649,) that Paper, (or rather the contents or premises
thereof) is the price, glory and end of my endurance, neither life, liberty on
reparation, or any thing that man or earth affords is valuable with me in
comparison thereof, that is my all in all; I desire neither life liberty, or
reparation (seeing God has called me to the work) but as may stand in
subordination to that Agreement; while I have life or breath it shall never
want a true asserter to uphold and promote the same to the utmost of my power,
let the hazard and danger to my self be what it will.

Although I have sat thus long in the shadow of silence, yet let not my friends
suspect me, nor mine enemies vaunt over me, for though my person is their
captive, yet have I so much spirit and fidelity left, to scorn their tyrannyes,
and dare them to their teethes to do their worst; let them find Gallows,
Gybbets, Prisons, Halters, etc. I Will find carcass to encounter, till I have
encountered out my life, I fear none of their Treason traps, I scorn and defy
them; for that Agreement I will have, or else I Will dye at their feet; I Will have
no accord or peace with them at all till they have yielded that: whether at
liberty or in prison, it is all one to me.

It is neither my own life, liberty, nor reparation that I stand for, as the
proper end of my Engagement; I have set my hand to the plow, and that paper
has proclaimed it, and bears testimony thereof, and shall I look back for my
own advantage, God forbid; rather let me die, then live the life of Den (that
accursed English Judas;) The bread of Apostasy, Lord, never let it enter into
my lips; to drink the blood, and eat the flesh of my Countries Cause; yea, of
the children that are yet unborn, as that Viper, that wretched Traitor has
done, or be clothed with the garments of such abhorred abomination; far,
far be it from me and mine, rather let us be clothed in Rags, and let me
linger out my days, fettered and mannacl'd in some of their noisome murdering
Dungeons to bear testimony against them, for that Righteous Agreeement: God
has given me the heart, and filled it with power and patience for the work;
life, liberty and reparations, that golden ball and bait of Apostasy shall not
satisfy me, it is not for such flattering pictures, that I am at variance with
them, although my condition might invite me to such worldly acceptances; no, I
first set my hand to the work out of integrity and simplicity of heart, without
all self or by-ends, God is my record, and I trust, he that began that good
work in me, will bear me out in it, to the end; and that is my earnest and
hearty prayer.

Therefore, my friends, be not you fearful or jealous of my integrity, I wish
none of your heads may ache till I turn apostate, sure I shall first turn into
the dust: and for the truth of this my professed integrity, I refer you for
proof to my future actings, if they there with commensurate, let me be
justified, if not condemned, by the fruit let the tree be judged: other
judgings I need not much vallew, for such judgments ever betray an evil spirit
in the Judgers.

But now my dear friends, you especially, which have provoked me thus at this
time, to unbosome the secret resolves of my heart, (who perhaps by some, not
duly weighing the occasion and necessity, may be ascribed to vain glory and
arrogance) you I desire, to rub up your wits, consider and tell me, whether
instead of those jealous surmises of me, your time had not better been spent in
considering some way wherein you might equally discharge your duties with us,
that are so close immured in the Tower; think you, that we are able to remove
mountains; we are but men, and no more but four men: Imagine you, that there
are no more hands required to the work, or that it is possible for us to do
all the drudgery, and perfect the same, while you stretch your selves upon your
beds and take your ease, leaving all at fixes and sevens, and the cause to sink
or; swim, to stand or fall, if we look not after to bear it up: My friends,
the Cause is as much yours as ours, and your duties with ours are of equal
extent; but how comes your practice so short, so dull, and remiss; upon all
occasions you expect vigerous actings from us, while you look over your selves:
I cannot see, but that a Prison, the Gallows, or halter would become the best
of you as well as any of us, to vindicate or assert that Agreement of the
people.

But you spit in our mouths, and clap us on the backs like Dogs, and cry, ha
looe a-looe, and turn us loose upon all the Bulls, Bears, Wolves, Lions and
Dragons of the times, which are thousands to one, (I confess I love the sport)
while you shrink, and skulk into you holes: Come out for shame, come out, and
catch me the great Bull of Basin by the NOSE, and make him roar.

Whu -- all my brave Levelling Bull dogs and Bear Dogs, where are you? Siz
--,ha -- looe -- ha -- looe -- all fly at him at once: There at him, at him; O
brave Jockey with the Seagreen ribbond in his ear! that Dog and his fellow
for forty shillings a Dog: Hold, hold, he has caught him by the Gennitals,
stave him off, give the Bull fair play. -- A pox -- they have burnt my Dogs
mouth.

Ha -- looe -- ha -- looe -- all at him again, and bate him out of England
into Ireland, and there the brave Royal Bandogs will tug him and tear him to
some purpose: But stay, first let me clap this nettle under his Tail, and tell
him, we will never leave biting and bating, if all the lusty levelling Masties in
England will do it, till we have worryed, or broke the Bulls neck, or else
gained our Agreement.

Martin can sing no other tune since he was cag^d up in the Tower, but The
Agreement of the People, The Agreement of the People; and is resolved to sing
no other note but that: all his airy Canto's and sweet roundelayes must all be
to the good English tune, of The Agreement of the people.

But (my friends) to return. Be not ye luld asleep with none of their
blandishments: They now talk much indeed of Reparatious for Colonel Martins
great losses, of our Liberties, of Mr Lilburns and Mr Princes money, and of
such like rattles and toys, but you may remember their old tricks and
delusions and understand the mystery of those gilded motions; when at the
general risings in Essex, Kent, invasion of the Scots etc. they wanted help, O
how honest would they be to the just interest of the people! when the House was
to be broken in pieces, then no way but we must have an Agreement of the
People Se^ (...) Col. (...) Lega^ (...) Fund^ (...) men^ (...) Libe^ (...) page
(...) 30. 3^ 32, (...) 34. (...) 36, and (...)
; when the King was to come to the Block, and a bloody High Court of injustice,
and a Council of State erected, then what a white Boy was Colonel Martin? A
Regiment of horse was voted for him by the House, to keep the pertty Baby at
play with that fine tan-ta-rararah tan tarra, while their work was over: when
our friends were up about Burford, then a Committee must be appointed to
consider of Electons for a New Representative in all haste. And now think you,
what is at the bottom of their new smiling Aspects toward us? quicquid id est,
timeo Danaos and Dona terrentes: I Will trust them no further then I can ^l^ng
their great Bull of Basin by the tail; their smiles are but on purpose to
slay. The Prince, the Scots and Irish have prepared them more fish then they
are well able to fry, that they are so forward to fetch a col^ from our Altar
to augment their fire.

Therefore while it is day consider what you have to do, strike now if you mean
to speed, up with your Agreement of the People again, and believe nothing that
they say or do, till you be real possessors thereof, and a new free
Representative in being: and then let them do their worst, we will make them
honest in despite of their teeths, and till then, and not before can I reckon
of my real deliverance from these bonds. Come, who strikes the first stroke?
what says old Mother Harry? reach him there an Agreement of the People, it will
become him better then his reparations in consideration. And where is my little
Gray of Grooby, what is he in a Mousehole? and my old fellow Rebel Iohnee
Wildman Mount Atlas stand on tiptoes where art thee? and behold a mighty stone
fell from the skies into the bottom of the Sea, and gave a mighty plump, and
great was the fall of that stone, and so farewell Iohnee Wildman. What my
Seagreen gallants, where are you all, what neither hot nor cold, neither fish
nor flesh nor good Red-herring? Is your spirits sunk into your heels, or your
wits into the napes of your necks? rouse up for shame and show your selves in
your kind, or else out amongst you flies the little whisking mischievous bird,
Primate and Metropolitan of all the Swallows and Martins in England; and then
look to your selves.

But now to make up the jest, an Act of Grace forsooth is cast into the forge,
under which they are pleased to report, that the four arch-Levelling Rebels in
the Tower shall be comprised: Smile O Heavens, and clap thy hands O earth, ha,
ha, ha. And must all our sins and trespasses be forgiven us now? but first what
is our trespass? The Agreement of the People! Sure there is great need of
forgiveness of so high an offense, if it be considered, who they are that
therewith can be offended; indeed vice is a virtue, and only virtue a vice with
hells Cabinet Juncto, and so comes to pass the trick of forgiveness for us:
but tell them (my friends) that little brisk Levilling Dick in the Tower has
not his integrity yet (as merry as is his worship) at so low an esteem, to
desire his Liberty upon so dishonorable and base an account: what have I set my
hand to the glorious cause of the free people of England, and engaged my
carcass in the controversy, and shall I now hang down mine head like a
Bulrush and yield up my self for a little dirty liberty, to be turned out as an
Evil doer to the everlasting dishonor of my cause: no, I Will dye first.

Therefore know all men by these presents, that I Richard Overton, now close
prisoner in the Tower of London, out of a tender regard that I have to the
Libertyes of my Country, and credit of that honorable cause, do hereby defy,
renounce, abhor, detest and scorn that Act of Pardon as to my Liberty thereby,
and do rather choose continuance and increase of Bonds, then condtionall
submission or assent thereunto in the least: And hitherto as I have scorned any
clandestine or open compliance with them for any selfish end whatsoever, so let
this (my friends) be a witness betwixt you and me, and to the whole world,
that I am so far from submission to their corrupt and wicked interest, that I
will first eat the flesh off from my bones; first rot and perish in Goal,
before I will so far bow to them, as in the least to woo them or any of their
creatures, either directly or indirectly in person or by proxy for my liberty:
my cause is not so bad, but with patience I can suffer till I be justly
delivered without blemish or speck of infamy to the same; the honor of it, I
honor above my life or liberty.

Now were I already upon the dishonorable terms of that act thrust out, it
were a thousand to one, I should not keep a month out of Prison: To what end
therefore should I trouble my head about my liberty, till I can be at peace,
and rest when I am abroad, for without the Agreement or sufficient security for
the same, I can have none. I am more at content where I am, then to be with you
upon unequal terms.

Thus my truly dear, and worthy friends, I hope as concerning my integrity and
constant faithfulness to what I have undertaken in behalf of the public; I
have given you clear and full satisfaction, to the utter removal I suppose of
those late jealous incoms aamongst you: And so with my entire love and respects
unto you all, with inward joy, comfort and gladness of heart in bonds for my
Countries sake, rejoicing, I rest.

Yours, and every English man's for the Agreement of the people faithful to the
death. RICHARD OVERTON.
From my close imprisonment in the Tower of London, July 2. 1649.
FINIS.

