PVRITANO-IESVITISMVS, THE PURITAN TVRN'D JESUIT; OR RATHER, OVT-VYING HIM IN
those Diabolical and dangerous Positions, of the Deposition of KINGS; from the
year, 1536. until this present time; extracted out of the most ancient and
authentic Authors.

By that Reverend Divine, Doctor OWN, Batchelour of Divinity.

Showing their concord in the matter, their discord in the manner of their
sedition.

August in Psalm. 36. Conc. 2. Tunc inter se concordant cum in perniciem justi
conspirant, non quia se amant, sed quia cum qui amandus erat simul oderunt.

Printed for William Sheares, at the sign of the Bible in Covent Garden, 1643.

To the dutiful Subject.
THe Puritan-Church-Policy, and Jesuitical Society began together: See M.
Hockers preface. And the preface of Chemnic. before his examen. against the
first part of the Council of Trent.
the one in Geneva, 1536 and the other in Rome, 1537. since their beginning,
they have bestirred themselves busily ( as he that compasses the Job 1.7.
earth, or they that coasted Mat. 23.15,
sea and land,) each one in his order. The Puritan to break down the wall of
Sion, by disturbing the peace of the reformed Church: the Jesuit to build up
the ruins of Babylon, by maintaining the abomination of the deformed
Synagogne. These (though brethren in sedition and heady) are head-severed, the
one staring to the Presbytery, and the other to the Papacy, but they are so
fast linked behind, and tayle-tied together with firebrands between them, that
if they be not quenched by the power of Majesty, they cannot those (when the
means are fitted to their plot) but set the Church on fire, and the state in
an uprore. Their many and long Prayers, their much vehement preaching, and
stout opposition against orders established; their show of austerity in their
conversation, and of singular learning in their profession, (as the evil fiend
transformed into an angel of light) brought them first to admiration. Whereby
they have not only robbed widows houses, under pretense of prayer, and
ransacked their seduced disciples by show of devotion, but also battered the
courts of Princes, by animating the Peers against Kings, and the people
against the Peers, for pretended reformation. And whereas, God has
inseparably annexed to the crown of earthly Majesty, a supreme ecclesiastical
sovereignty for the protection of piety; and an absolute immunitie from the
judicial sentence, and Martial violence, for the preservation of policy:
These sectaries bereave Kings of both these their Princely prerogatives,
exalting themselves (as the son of perdition) above all that is called God: 2 Thessalonians. 3.4.
Lest they might seem, sine ratione insanire, to sow the seeds of sedition
without show of reason, Caedem faciunt scripturarum (as the heretics in
Tertullians time were wont to do) in materiam suam; they kill the Scripture to
serve their turns: and pervert the holy word of the eternal God, by strange
interpretation, and wicked application, against the meaning of the Spirit, by
whom it was penned; the doctrine of the Church, to whom it was delivered; and
the practice of all the Godly, (as well under the Law as the Gospel) that did
believe, understand, and obey it; to maintain their late, and lewd opinions. I
have in my hand above forty several places of the old and New Testament, which
both the brethren of the enraged opposite faction do indifferently quote, and
seditiously apply, in defense of their dangerous opposition, and damnable
error, against the Ecclesiastical supremacy, and the indeleble character of
Royal inunction. Unto the which places, falsely expounded, perverted, and
applied, I haved added the interpretation of the learned Protestants since the
time of Martin Luther, who began to discover the nakedness of the Romish
Church, 1517. More especially insisting in the K. Henry 8. K. James. Th Cranmer
Io. Whitgift. Ric. Bancroft Arch. of Cant Henry Earl of Northam. Robert Earl
of Salisbury. The L. Burleigh. L. Tresurer of England. The L. Elsmere Lord
Chancellor of England. The L. Stafford. The L Cook B Jewel. B Horn. B
Pilkington B Elsmere. B Couper. B Bilson. B Babington. B Amirewes. B Barlow. B
Bridges. D Ackworth. D Saravia. D Cosens. D Sutcliffe. D Prythergh D Wilkes. D
Morton. D Tocker. M Bekinsaw. M Fox. M Nowell. M Hooker, and many others.
most mighty Kings, the most reverend Prelates, honorable Lords, loyal
Clergy, and other worthy men, that have in the Church of England, learnedly
defended the Princely right, against disloyal, and undutifull opponents: which
by Gods help I mean to publish, when I have added the exposition of the
Fathers, to confute the falsehood of the Puritan popish-faction, and to confirm
the truth of the Protestants Doctrine in each particular quotation. I protest
in all sincerity, that I neither have in this treatise, nor mean in the other,
hereafter to be published, to detort any thing, to make either the cause it
self, or the favorers of it more odious, then their own words, (published
with the general approbation of their several favorites) do truly infer,
and necessarily enforce. I hope the loyal subject and Godly affected, we
accept in good part my endeavor, and industry, intended for the glory of God,
the honor of the King, and the discovery of the seditious. The displeasure of
the male contented factions (which can no more abide the truth, then the Owls
can light, or the Frantic the Physician) I neither regard nor care for.
Farewell.

The Table of the Book.
The duty of Prelates, Peers, People, by Scripture, Chap. 1. page 1. Fathers
of the first 300 years. cap. 2 page 3 second 300 years. cap. 3 page 7 third
300 years. cap. 4 page 18 fourth 300 years. cap. 5 page 21 fifth 300 years.
cap. 6 page 26


sedition of Puritans Papists Concord in the matter, of sedition. cap. 7. p. 31
Discord in the manner of sedition. cap. 7. p. 31 Danger of their Doctrine to
Prince, Peopl cap 8. p. 37. Puritan-Jesuitisme, or the general consent of the
principal Puritans and Jesuits, against Kings, from the year 1536. until
the year 1602. out of the most authenticke Authors. cap 8. p. 40.



THE FIRST CHAPTER Proves by the testimony of Scripture, that Kings are not
punishable by man, but reserved to the judgment of God.
KIngs have their authority from God Romans 13.1.
and are his Vicegerents in earth, Prove. 8.15.
to execute justice and judgment for him amongst the Sons of men 2 Chronicles.
19.6.
. All subjects (as well Prelates and Nobles, as the inferior people) are
forbidden with the tongue, to revile Kings, Exodus 22.28.
, with the heart, to think ill of them Eccl. 10.20.
, or with the hand, to resist them Romans 13.2.
. The great King of Heaven does impart his own name unto his Lievetenants the
Kings of the Earth: and calls them Gods, with an ego dixi Psalm. 82.6.
, whose word is Yea and Amen: with this only difference, that these Gods shall
dye like men Psalm. 82.7.
, and fall like other Princes. Wherefore Nathan the man of God, must reprove
David 2 Samuel 12.7.
, that he may repent, and be saved. And the Sages, Judges, and Nobles,
(without fear or flattery) must advise and direct Roboam 1 Reg. 12.7.
. Other attempts against Kings, the King of Kings has neither commanded in his
law, Apolog. David cap. 10.
nor permitted in his Gospel. David (says Ambrose) nullis legibus tenebatur,
etc. David though he were an adulterer, and an homicide, was tied to no law:
for Kings are free from bonds, and can by no compulsion of law, be drawn to
punishment, being freed by the power of Government. Thus far Ambr.

Saul the first King of Israel was rather a monster, then a man: after the
Spirit of God had forsaken him, and the evil Spirit was come upon him 1 Samuel
16.14.
. There were not many sins against God, Man, or Nature, wherein he
trangressed not; yet his excess was punished, neither by the Sacerdotall
Synod, nor the secular Senate: Who can lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and
be guiltless 1 Samuel 16.9.
? The very Annointment was the cause of Saul's immunity from all humane
coercion: as Augustine affirms, Aug. contr. lit. Petil. l. 2. (...) 48.
Quaero si non habebat, Saul sacramenti sanctitatem; quid in eo David
venerabatur? If Saul had not the holiness of the Sacrament, I ask what it was
that David reverenced in him? he honored Saul for the sacred and holy
unction, while he lived: and revenged his death. Yea, he was troubled and
trembled at the heart, because he had cut off a lap of Saul's garment. Lo,
Saul had no innocence, and yet he had holiness: not of life, but of unction.
So far Augustine.

Who questioned David for his murder and adultery? who censured Solomon for
his idolatry? though their crimes were capital by the law of God. After that
Kingdom was divided, all the Kings of Israel, and most of the Kings of Judah,
were notorious Idolaters: yet during those Kingdoms, which endured above 200.
years, no Priest did challenge, no Statesmen did claim power from the
highest, to punish or depose their Princes. And the Prophets persuaded all men
to obey, and endure those idolatrous Princes, whose impiety they reproved with
the loss of their lives.

Christ fled when the people would have made him a King Joh. 6.15.
. He paid tribute for himself and Peter Matthew. 17.27.
. When the question was propounded concerning the Emperors subsidy, he
concluded for Caesar Matthew. 22.21.
. And standing to receive the judgment of death before Pilate, he
acknowledged his power to be of God Ioh. 19.15.
. This Savior of Mankind, whose actions should be our instruction, did never
attempt to change that Government, or to displace those Governors, which were
directly repugnant to the scope of Information that he aimed at.

John Baptist did indeed reprove King Herod with a Non licet Mark. 6.18.
, but he taught not the soldiers to leave his service, or by strife and
impatience, to wind themselves out of the band of allegiance, wherein the law
had left them, and the Gospel found them Luke 3.14.
.

The Apostle delivered unto the Church the doctrine of obedience and patience,
which they had learned by the precept, and observed by the practice of our Lord
CHRIST. Peter commands obedience to all manner of men in authority 1 Pet.
2.15.
. Paul forbids resistance against any power Romans 13.1.2.3.4. Iudc 8.
. And Saint Jude makes it blasphemy, to revile government, or to speak evil
of Governors i. If therefore an Angel from heaven preach otherwise, then they
have delivered, let him be accursed Gal. 1.8.
.

The second Chapter proves the same by the Fathers of the first 300. years.
THe true Church, which had the Spirit of understanding, to discern the voice
of Christ, from the voice of a stranger, never taught, never practiced, never
used or approved other weapons, then salt tears, and humble prayers against
the Paganism, Heresy, Apostasy, and Tyranny of earthly Kings.

Justinius Martyr, Tertullian, and Cyprian shall bear witness for 300. years,
wherein the Kings and Potentates of the earth, bathed themselves in the blood
of innocents, and professed enmity against Christ and his servants.

Ad inquisitionem vestram, Christianos nos esse profitemur, etc. At your
inquisition, we profess our selves to be Christians, though we know death to
be the guerdon of our profession (says Iustine Martyr to the Emperor
Antoninus, Secund. Apolog. ad Ant. Imp. p. 113.
) did we expect an earthly Kingdom, we would deny our religion, that
escaping death, we might in time attain our expectation: But we fear not
persecution, which have not our hope fixed on the things of this life, because
we are certainly persuaded, that we must die. As for the preservation of
public peace, we Christians yield to you (O Emperor) more help and
assistance, then other men. For we teach, that no evil doer, no covetous man,
nor seditious, that lies in wait for blood, can have access to God: And that
every man does pass to life or death, according to the merit of his deeds:
Thus far he.

We (says Tertullian to^ Scapula the Viceroy of Carthage) are defamed,
Tertull. lib. ad Scap.
for seditious against the Imperial Majesty: Yet were the Christians never
found to be Albinians, Nigrians: or Cassians, (Albinus, Niger, and Cassius were
Traitors against Marcus Antonius, Commodus, Pertinax, and Severus the
Emperors) but they that swear by the Emperors diety, the very day before:
they that vowed and offered sacrifice for the Emperors health, are found to be
the Emperors enemies. A Christian is enemy to no man, much less to the
Emperor: knowing, that the Imperial Majesty, is ordained of God, and
therefore necessarily to be loved, reverenced, and honored, whose prosperity,
together with the welfare of all the Roman Empire they desire so long as the
world stands. We do therefore honor the Emperor, in such sort, as is
lawful for us, and expedient for him: we reverence him as a mortal man, next
unto God, of whom he holds all his authority, only subject to God, and so
we make him, sovereign overall, in that, we make him subject, but to God
alone: So far Tertullian.

Saint Cyprian shows many good reasons, for the patience of the Saints, in
his book against Demetrianus. God (says he) is the revenger of his servants,
when they are annoyed. Wherefore no Christian when he is apprehended, does
resist or revenge himself against your unjust violence, though the number of
our people be very great. The confidence we have, that God will reward, does
confirm our Patience, the guiltless give way to the guilty, the innocent rest
content with their undeserved punishment, and tortures, being certainly assured
that the wrong done to us, shall not be unrewarded. The more injury we suffer,
the more just and grievous shall Gods vengeance be on them that persecute us.
It is therefore clear and manifest, that the plagues which come down from
Gods indignation, do not come through us poor persecuted Christians, but from
him whom we serve, for the wrong done unto us. So far Cyprian.

As many as lived according to Christ's institution, did never revile the
Government of Tyrants, much less by force resist their violence, following the
patience of Christ, who could by his own power, the might of his Angels, or
the strength of his creatures, have at the first withstood; or, at the last
revenged, the injury of the people, the buffet of the Priests servant, the
scorn of Herod, the judgment of Pilate, Ioh. 19.15. Ioh. 18.22. Luk 23.11.
Mark. 15.15. Matthew. 27. 27.28.29.
and the violence of the soldiers. He yielded himself patiently to death, to
teach all his Disciples, that an injury done by authority, is patiently to be
endured, not forcibly to be repelled. As soon also as Paul became a
Christian, his seditious and bloody Spirit, which he had learned of the
Pharisees, was changed into a desire of peace, and quietness. He honored the
Heathen Magistrates, as Agrippa, Faelix, and Lisias, ratifying his Doctrine, by
the practice of his life. I know that Cardinal Alane, Cardinal Bellarmine,
Ficlerus, Simancha, and other upholders of the Papal tyranny, that Stephanus
Junius, Franciscus Hottomanus, Georgius Buchananus, and other pillars of the
Puritan anarchy, do answer, that the Church then, as it were swathed in the
bonds of weakness, had not strength sufficient to make powerful resistance.
But these Fathers that then lived, do convince them, and all other sectaries
of falsehood, by making demonstration, of the strength and potency of the godly
Christians, in case they would have put their forces to the strongest proof.
Seeing that all public places as Courts, Camps, Consistories, Cities, and
Country villages, were stored and furnished with men of that profession and
quality, as does most evidently appear by the words of Tertullian, in his
Apologeticall defense of the Christians: Vna nox pauculis faculis, etc. One
night with a few firebrands, wound yield us sufficient revenge, if it were
lawful for us to req^ite evil for evil. But God forbid, that Christians
should either revenge themselves with humane fire, or be grieved to suffer that
wherewith they are tried. Were we disposed, not to practice secret revenge, but
to profess open hostility, should we want number of men, or force of arms?
Are the Moors, or the Parthians, or any one Nation whatsoever, more in number
then we, that are spread over all the World? We are not of you, and yet we
have filled all the places and rooms which you have. Your Cities, Islands,
Castles, Towns, Assemblies, your Tents, Tribes, and Wards; yea, the Imperial
Palace, Senate, and seats of judgment. For what war, were not we, able and
ready, though we were fewer in number then you, that go to our Martyrdom so
willingly? if it were not more lawful in our religion to be slain, then to
slay? we could without armor, not by rebelling against you, but by departing
from you, do you displeasure enough, even with our separation. For if so great
a multitude, as we are, should break out from you, as in any other corner of
the World, the loss of so many Citizens would shame and punish you. You would
fear, to see your selves left solitary, even amazed, as among the dead. You
should then see, silence and desolation every where. You would have many more
enemies, then inhabitants. Whereas now, you have fewer enemies, because of the
multitude of your Citizens, that are almost all Christians. Haec Tertullian.
We see by these three witnesses, that the Church of God, in the first 300.
years wanted, neither number of men, strength, nor courage to resist
persecution, and to have established the Christian faith, if that course had
been lawful: but because their Lord had given them no sword to strike
withal, they chose rather to be crowned Martyrs, for their Religion, then to
be punished as Traitors for rebellion. What number of men, what strength of
arms had the Church (think you) the next 300. years after it had been
backed by Princes, defended by laws, provoked by honorable favors, to
profess Christianity? Yet all that while, the servants of God, neither did nor
would resist Apostasy Heresy, or Tyranny: but yielded their lives, with all
submission, though they wanted neither means nor multitude, convenient for any
wars, as the next chapter by impregnable demonstration, shall show.

The third Chapter proves by the Fathers, of the second 300. years that the
pleasure of Princes, must be endured with patence, when their decrees cannot
be obeyed with a good Conscience.
THe next 300. years, the Christians did as patiently endure Heresy,
Apostasy, and Tyranny to the glorious trial of their faith, and the eternal
reward of their patience. Whereof we have a cloud of witnesses, namely, Hosius
Liberius Athanasius, Hilarious, Basilius Magnus, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Lucifer
Calaritanus, Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Optatus Milevitanus, Ambrosius, Augustinus,
Chrysostomus, Leo the first, and Gregory the great.

Hosius was a famous Confessor in the Church, before Constantine the great, a
worthy Bishop during that Emperors reign, and after his death greatly
esteemed of all good men, yea even of Constantius the Arrian Emperor himself,
for his old age, great experience, excellent learning, and good conversation.
When this worthy Prelate, was commanded by the Emperor, to subscribe to the
condemnation of Athanasius, he returned to the Imperial Majesty, this stout,
constant, Christian, and dutiful answer; Ego confessionis munus implevi
primum, cum persecutio moveretur, ab avo tus Maximiniano: I was then a
Confessor, when your Grandfather Maximinian persecuted the Church. Obsequere
and scribe contra Athanasium qui enim contra illum scribit ille plane nobiscum,
etc.
And if you do now raise persecution, I am ready to endure any thing, rather
then betray the truth and shed innocent blood. I do not like your manner of
writing against Athanasius: Cease from it, be not of the Arrian opinion: Give
no care to the Eastern Bishops: believe me rather, that for age might be
your Grandfather. Leave off I beseech you, and call to mind, that you are a
mortal man. Fear that dreadful day of judgment. Interpose not your self (O
Emperor) into the Ecclesiastical service, neither command us in this kind, to
condemn the innocent: but learn rather of us. God has entrusted your Majesty
with the Empire, and committed unto us, the service of the Church: he that
with an envious eye, maligneth your imperial Sovereignty, contradicts the
ordinance of God. Take heed (O Prince) least drawing to your self the right of
the Church, you become guilty of grievous transgression. It is written, Give
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, Hosius apud Athan. ad solitariam
virans agentes.
and to God the things that appertain to God; it is therefore, neither lawful
for us Priests, to usurp your Kingdom: not for you Princes, to meddle with
the sacred service, and sacrifices of the Church. Thus far Hosius. You see
the grounds, that this good Bishop stood upon: rather resolved to suffer any
death or torture, then by his consent to betray the truth, or to condemn the
guiltless. He admonishes freely, and reproves sharply, he offreth his life
to the Princes pleasure: It was far from his meaning, to revile the sacred
Majesty, or to stir up any rebellion, against this Heretical Emperor, which
infringed the Canons of the Church, without all regard of truth or equity, to
serve the humors of the Arrians, and to wreck his anger on them all, which
yielded not to that heresy.

Liberius a Bishop of Rome, did neither excommunicate nor depose this wicked
Emperor Constantius, but appeared at his command, and endured his pleasure, to
the admiration of the Arrians, and the confirmation of the Christians, as we
find in Athanasius, Trahitur Liberius ad Imperatorem, etc. Liberius was haled
to the Emperor, when he came to his presence he spoke freely, Cease (said
he) O Emperor, to persecute the Christians, go not about, Liberius quo supra
apud Athanas.
by any means, to bring Heretical impiety into the Church of God. We are
ready, rather to endure any torture, then to be called Arrians. Compel us not
to become enemies unto Christ. Eight not against him (we beseech you) that
has bestowed the Empire upon you. Render not impiety to him for his grace,
persecute them not which believe in him, least you hear, It is hard for thee
to kick against the prick. Act. 9.5.
Oh would to God you did so hear it that you might (as Paul did) believe it.
Lo we are at hand, and come to your presence, before our enemies the Arrians
can invent any thing to inform against us, we hastened to come at your
command, though we were assured of banishment: that we might abide our
punishment, before any crime could be objected, much less proved against us.
Whereby it may appear, that all Christians are (as we now be) undeservedly
punished, and the crimes laid to their charge not true but fained by sycophancy
or deceitful subtilty. Thus spoke Liberius, and every man admired his
resolution; but the Emperor for answer commanded him to banishment. Thus ^^e
he.

Pope Liberius had not learned the language of his Suceesfour Pins Quintus,
when he bellowed against our late Queen, nor that principle of the Puritans,
that the inscriour Officer may use force of arms against the chief Magistrate
that shall become a Tyrant (Whereof every seditious Sectary will he judge) and
not only defend himself, and his own people, but also any other that shall
fly unto him. Which opinion Lambertus Danaus avoucheth, Polit. Christ. l. 6. c.
3.
contrary to the Law, the Gospel, and the general consent of all Orthodoxall
Fathers.

Hilarious, a Bishop of France, wrote the same time to this same Emperor in
most humble manner, Hilarious ad Imper. Constant.
Banefica natura tua Domine beatissime Auguste: Your mild nature, most blessed
Emperor, agreeing with your gracious disposition, and the mercy which flows
abundantly, from the fountain of your Fatherly godliness, do assure us,
that we shall obtain our desire. We beseech you, not only with words, but
also with tears, that the Catholic Churches, be no longer oppressed with
grievous injuries, and endure intolerable persecutions, and contumelies, and
that (which is most shameful) even of our brethren. Let your Clemency provide,
etc.

Surely, if it had then been known, that the Pope, by his absolute power or
indirect authority, could have punished or deposed Kings, which the Papists
avouch, or for the Peers or the people to have done it, which the Puritans
affirm, some of these old Bishops, would have pressed that point against this
Heretical Prince, which abused his sword, to the blaspheming of Christ, the
murdering of the Saints, the seducing of many thousand souls: by
strengthening, maintaining, and establishing the Arrian error. But they took
it to be no Christian man's part, to bear armor (no not desensive) against
his Prince, though never so wicked, cruel or ungodly.

Holy Athanasius confesses the power of Kings to be of God, and their impiety
not to be punished by man. Sicut in toto mundo Deus Rex est Imperator and
potestatent exercet in omnibus: As God is King and Emperor over all the World,
and exercises his power in all creatures: so the King and Prince is over all
earthly men, and does by his absolute power, what he will, even as God
himself. Ad Antioch. quest. 55.
Haec ille.

When it was objected against this reverend Father Athanasius, that he had
incensed Constance the Religious Emperor of the West, against Constantius,
Apolog. Athan. ad Constant.
in the behalf of the persecuted Christians: he cleared himself from that
accusation, in an Apology to the said Emperor Constantius. The Lord (says
he) is my record, and his anointed your brother, that I never made mention of
your Majesty for any evil, before your brother of blessed memory, that
religious Emperor Constance. I did never incite him against you, as these
Arrians do stander me, but whenever I had access unto him. I recounted
your gracious inclination. God knows, what mention I made of your godly
disposition. Give me leave and pardon (most courteous Emperor) to speak the
truth. The servant of God Constance, was not easily drawn to give care to any
man in this kind. I was never in such credit with him, that I durst speak of
any such matter, or derogate from one brother before another, or talk
reprochfully of one Emperor, in the hearing of another. I am not so mad,
neither have I forgotten the voice of God, which says, Carse not the King in
thine heart, and backbite not the mighty in the secrets of thy Chamber: for the
birds of the air shall tell it, and the winged foul shall bewray thee: If
then the things that be spoken in secret against Princes, cannot be hid: is
there any likelihood, that I in the Emperors presence, and before so many, as
continually attended his person, would say any thing otherwise then well of
your Majesty: Thus far Athanasius. This is sounder and seemelier doctrine for
subjects, then that which Henry Garnet and Robert Tesmond, caught some Romish
Catholic Gentlemen of England, who employed Thomas Winter into Spain, in the
Month of December, Ann. Dom. 1601. to make request to the Spanish King, in the
behalf and names of the English Pope-catholikes, L. Cook in his speech at
Garnets arraignment.
that he would send an army hither into England, for the advancement of their
Catholic cause; and to promise, that the forces of the Papists here should
be ready to do him service against the late Queen.

The self same Doctrine of sedition, was published in the year after, viz.
Ann. Dom. 1602. by Gulielmus Bucauus, a man of no mean esteem among the
Puritans, and that, at the earnest request of Beza and Goulartius, the chiefest
Ministers of the Church of Geneva, (if the Author himself belly them not,)
whose words are as follows: Subditis si fit publica and manifesta savitia,
licet fieri supplices, implorare auxilia ab aliis, and suscipere little defensi
nem aliis regibus licet: Loc. ^om. Theol. loco: 77. p. 845.
Subjects, when they endure public and manifest wrong, may lawfully become
suppliants to foreign states, and crave their aid against their Princes: and
other Kings ought to take upon them their defense and protection. So far
Bucan.

Subjects must square their subjection, according to the rule of Gods word, not
after the affection and fancies of men. 1 Samuel 22.18.
Saul commanded Doeg to murder 85. Priests, to destroy their City, Men, Women,
and Children with the edge of the sword. Did David, for whom they were slain,
when he had Saul in his power, take revenge, or suffer his servants to do it,
when they were ready and offered themselves to slay Saul? David 2 Samuel 11.4.17.
defiled Vrias his bed, and caused him to be killed: Did Absolon well to
conspire against him, that was both a Murderer and an Adulterer? Solomon 2
Reg. 12.8.
brought into the land many strange Wives, and as many different Religions into
the Church: Did the high Priest, the Peers, the Prophets, or the people, offer
to chastise or depose him? Achab 1 Reg. 21.8.9.
suffered Jezabel to put Naboth to death, and to kill the Lords Prophets: Did
Elias depose him, entice his subjects to rebel against him, or implore
foreign aid to destroy him? Herod Mark. 6.27. Act. 12.24.
beheaded John Baptist, killed James, imprisoned Peter, and would have slain
him also, if he had not been delivered by an Angel: Did Peter take vengeance
on Herod, which he might have done with a word, as well as on Act. 5.5.
Ananiae? No: he did leave him to the Lord, whose judgment insued in most Act.
12.23.
fearful manner. In a word, wicked Princes have never been lawfully punished
by Prelates, Potentates, or people of their Kingdom, as the Papists and
Puritans aver: but must be reserved to the judgment of God, as the
Protestants affirm.

Gregory Nazianzen in his oration at the funeral of Saint Basil, reports,
that the Emperors Deputy in Pontus, commanded Saint Basil to put out a widow,
Basilius Magnus.
that had taken sanctuary to save her self from forced marriage. The Bishop
(not willing to violate the Ecclesiastical laws granted by the Imperial
Majesty) refused so to do. The Governor called the Bishop before him,
threatened to whip him, and to tear his flesh with iron hooks: the people
hearing that indignity offered to the Bishop, fell to an uprore, and would have
slain the Lieutenant, Had not that innocent man of God, with much ado,
stayed that furious tumult, Monodia Nazian. inter opuscula Basil. fol. 95.
and delivered his persecutour from that peril, to whose pleasure he did
afterward submit himself.

The same Nazianzen, for his admirable learning called the Divine, writes of
Julian the Apostata-Emperours death: Julian was punished by the mercy of God,
through the tears of Christian men: which tears were many, and shed of many,
for that they had no other remedy, against that persecutour. Thus far
Nazianzen. 2 Or^t. cont-Julian.
This godly Father lived under five Emperors. Constantius, Iulianus, Valene,
Valentinianus, and Theodosius, in all which time, he could find no remedy
against the Tyranny, Heresy, ^^d Apostasy of Princes, beside prayers and
tears: The Devil of Hell had not as yet hatched the distinctions of proprie
and improprie, direct and indirecte, simpliciter and secundum quid, absolute
and in ordine ad spiritualia, wherewith the Jesuits do fill the schools with
clamorous evasions, the Church with erroneous superstition, and many Christian
states with tragical sedition.

Lucifer Calaritanus in sundry books against Constantius, uses many immodest
and disloiall speeches: but he persuaded not the Pope to depose him, the state
to punish him, the people to rebel against him, or foreign aid to suppress
him, but threatened him with the dreadful punishment of God. He that (in the
fervency of zeal) durst call so cruel an Emperor, Thief, Church-robber,
Murderer, Beast, Hangman, Heretic, postata, Idolator, the Forerunner of
Antichrist, and Antichrist himself, would surely have encouraged the Pope, the
Peers or the people, to have removed that evil King, and placed a better in
his stead: if there had been any such opinion in those days, as our modern
Jesuits and Puritans bear now the World in hand. As this Father, in his
writings, kept not the modesty of the other Fathers, which lived in that age
under Constantius: so he did not continue in the unity of the Catholic
Church. Orat. in obit. fratris Satir.
Lucifer (says Ambrose) divided himself from our communion, though he were
banished with us for our Religion.

When Ambrose was commanded, to deliver up his Church in Millaine to Maxentius
an Arrian Bishop, he declared his resolution in a Sermon to the people: which
were very sorry for his departure; Quid turbamini? Orat. Ambrosi ad populum
inter Epist. 31.33.
volens nunquam vos deseram: Why are you troubled? I will never willingly
depart from you. If I be compelled, I have no way to resist: I can sorrow, I
can weep, I can sigh, my tears are my weapons against Soldiers, Armor,
Goths: such is the munition of a Priest: by any other means, then tears, I
neither ought nor can resist: so far Ambrose. Not disability but duty, not
want of strength and ma^tiall forces, but a reverend regard of the Emperor
Majesty, commanded by the law of God, kept this blessed Ambrose from resisting.
For he might easily have wrought the Churches liberty, his own safety, and
the Arrians calamity by the overthrow of the Emperor, through the force of the
Garrison in that City, which refused, to attend the Prince to any other Church,
then that wherein Ambrose was. The stout and peremptory answer of the Captains
and Soldiers, is thus reported by Ambrose in an Epistle to to Marcellina, a
Religious woman; Si prodire vellet baberet copiam se praesto futures; Epist. 35.
The Emperor may go at his pleasure, they would be ready to attend him, if
he would go to the Catholic assemblies: or otherwise, they would keep on
their way to that Congregation, wherein Ambrose was: Thus far the Soldiers.
They refused (as you see) to obey, and preserved Gods true service, before the
Emperors favor: they reviled not his sacred person, they resisted not his
sovereign power; but yielded themselves to his mercy and pleasure, to save
their Souls from Gods wrath and displeasure, as we find in the same Epistle;
Vnum Job miraturus ascend^ram, I went to Church to extol the patience of Job,
where I found everyone of my hearers, Epist. cadem.
a Job, worthy to be extolled. In every one of you Job is revived, in each of
you his patience, and virtue shined, what could be said better by Christian
men, then that which the holy Ghost this day spoke in you? We beseech (O
Emperor,) we offer not to fight, we fear not to die, we entreat your
clemency. Oh it was seemly for Christian soldiers, to desire the tranquillity
of peace and faith, and to be constant in truth, even unto death. Thus far
Ambrose.

Saint Augustine relates the same of the Christian soldiers, under Julian the
Apo^tate-Emperour: Iulianus extitit Imperator infidelis, Julian was an
unbeleeving Emperor, was he not an Apostata, an Oppressor* and an Idolater?
Christian soldiers served that unbeleeving Emperor. When they came to the
cause of Christ, they would acknowledge no Lord but him that was in Heaven:
when they were commanded to adore Idols, and to offer sacrifice, they
preferred God before their Prince. But when he called upon them to war, and
bad them invade any nation, they presently obeyed. They did distinguish their
eternal Lord, from the temporal King, yet they submitted themselves to their
temporal Lord, August. in Psalm. 124.
for his sake that was their eternal King: So far he.

Optatus Milevitanus, is another pregnant witness: Cum super Imperatorem nemo
sit nisi solus Deus. Seeing there is no man above the Emperor, beside God
alone, which made the Emperor; De schism. Donatist. l. 3.
Donatus, by advancing himself above the Emperor, does exceed the bounds of
humanity, and makeeh himself a God rather then man, in that he fears and
reverenceth him not, whom all men should honor, next after God. So far
Optatus.

Saint Cyril is of the same judgment. Com. in Evang. Ioh l. 12. c. 36.
Cuilegis prevaricatores liberare licet nisi legis ipsius authori? Who can
acquit them that break the law, from transgression, beside the Lawgiver? as
we see by experience, in all humane states, no man can without danger, break
the law, but Kings themselves, in whom the crime of prevarication has no
place. For it was wisely said of one, that it is a wicked presumption, to say
to a King, Thou do amiss. So far he.

And also Saint Chrysostom. In 1. epist. ad Timoth. c. 2 v. 1.
What means the Apostle (says he) to require prayers and supplications,
inter cessions, and thansgiving, to be made for all men? he requires this to
be done in the daily service of the Church, and the perpetual rite of Divine
religion. For all the faithful do know, in what manner prayers are powered out
before the Lord morning and evening, for all the world* even for Kings, and
every man in authority. Some man will (peradventure) say, that, for all, must
be understood of all the faithful. Which cannot be the Apostles meaning, as
may appear by the words following, viz. for Kings: seeing that Kings neither
did then, nor in many ages after, serve the living God: but continued
obstinately in infidelity, which by course of succession they had received:
Thus far Chrysostom. Our Modern Reformers teach us that which Paul and
Chrysostom neither knew nor believed, See the preface before Basilic. Dor.
that wicked Princes are not to be prayed for, but to be resisted, etc.

When the faction of Eutiches had prevailed against the Catholics, Leo the
first, had no other remedy then prayers to God, sighs, tears, and Petitions
to the Emperor: Epist. 24. ad Theod. Imper.
Omnes partium nostrarum Ecclesiae, etc. All the Churches of these parts, all
we Priests, even with sighs, and tears, beseech your Majesty, to command a
general Synod to be held in Italy, that all offenses being removed, there may
remain, neither error in faith, nor division in love. Favor the Catholics,
grant liberty to protect the faith against Heretics, defend the state of the
Church from ruin, that Christ his right hand may support your Empire: Thus
far Leo.

When Gregory the great was accused for the Murder of a Bishop in prison, he
wrote to one Sabinianus, to clear him to the Emperor and Empress. Epist.
lib. 7. epist. 1.
Breviter suggeras serenissimis Dominis meis: You may briefly inform my
sovereign Lord and Lady, that if I their servant, would have busied my self
with the death of the Lombards, that nation would by this time have had neither
Kings, nor Dukes, nor Earls, and should have been in great confusion and
division: but because I stood in aw of God, I was ever afraid, to meddle with
the shedding of any man's blood: so far Gregory. These Lombards were Pagans,
Invaders of the Country, Ransackers of the City, Persecutours of the Saints,
Robbers of the Church, Oppressors of the poor: whom Gregory the first, might,
and would not destroy, Quia Deum timuit, because he feared God. It is very
like, that his Successor Gregory the seventh, feared either God nor man, when
he erected the Papal Croisier against the regal scepter, and read the
sentence of deprivation, against the Emperor Henry: Ego authoritate
Apostelica, etc. I by my power Apostolical, do bereave Henry of the Germane
Kingdom, and do deprive him of all subjection of Christian men, absolving all
men, from the allegiance, which they have sworn unto him. And that Rodolph,
whom the Peers of the Empire have elected, may govern the Kingdom: I grant
all men, that shall serve him against the Emperor, Carol. Sigon. de Regno
Ital. lib. 9. in vita Hen. 3.
forgiveness of their sins, in this life and in the life to come. As I have
for his pride dejected Henry from the Royal dignity, so I do exalt Rodolph
for his humility, to that place of authority: Thus far Gregory the seventh.

It is no wonder, Benno Card. in vit. Gregor. 7.
that Gregory his chair clave asunder, as some Writers affirm, at the giving
of this sentence; because the proud Pope, and his wicked sentence, were too
heavy a burden for Peter's stool of humility to bear.

The fourth Chapter proves the Immunity of Kings by the Fathers of the third
300. years.
AFter the death of Gregory the great, which was about the year of our Lord
604. Sabinianus did succeed him, who lived but one year, after whom came
Boniface the third, which obtained of Phocas to be called Universal Bishop;
since that time Periit virtus Imperatorum and pietas Pontificum, the Emperors
waxed weak, and the Bishops wicked. What the judgment of those Fathers then
was, concerning subjection to wicked Kings, I will make evident by the
testimony of Gregorius Turonensis, Isidorus, Damascenus, Beda, Fulgentius, Leo
4. and the Fathers assembled in a Council at Toledo in Spain.

Gregory Turonensis acknowledges such an absolute power in Childerick, a most
wicked King of France, as was free from all control of man. Histor. l. 5. c. 1.
Si quis de nobis (Rex) justitiae limits transcendere vol^erit, etc. If any
one of us (O King) do pass the bounds of justice, you have power to correct
him, but if you exceed your limit, who shall chastise you? We may speak unto
you; if you list not to hearken, who can condemn you, but that Great God, who
has pronounced himself to be righteousness? Hactenus ille.

Isidorus says no less for the immunity of the Kings of Spain. Let all
earthly Princes know, that they shall give account of the Church, which Christ
has committed to their protection. Yea, whether the peace and discipline
Ecclesiastical be advanced, by faithful Kings, or dissolved by the
unfaithful, he will require a reckoning at their hands, which has left his
Church in their power. So far Isidorus.

John Damascene pleads not only for the exemption of wicked Kings
themselves, but also of their Deputies. The Governors (says he) which Kings
create, Parallel. l. 1. c. 21.
though they be wicked, though they be thieves, though they be unjust, or
otherwise tainted with any crime, must be regarded. We may not contemn them,
for their impiety: but must reverence them, because of their authority, by whom
they were appointed our Governors. So far he.

Fulgentius says, that no kind of sedition can stand with religion Cum pro
nostra fide libere respondemus, etc. When we answer freely for our profession,
we ought not to be taxed with the least suspicion of disobedience or
contumely, seeing we are not unmindfull of the Regal dignity, and do know,
that we must fear God, and honor the King, according to the Doctrine of the
Apostle, Fulgent. ad Thrasim reg.
Give to each one his due, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor
appertains Of the which fear and honor, 1 Pet. 2.17.
Saint Peter has delivered unto us the manifest knowledge, saying, As the
servants of God, honor all men, love brotherly fellowship, fear God, honor
the King. Thus far Fulgentius.

Our Countreyman Beda, for his great learning called Venerable, Lib 4. exposit.
in Samuel.
is of the same mind. David (says he) for two causes spared Saul, who had
persecuted him most maliciously. First, 1 Samuel 21.6.
for that he was his Lord, anointed with holy oil. And secondly, to instruct
us by moral precepts, that we ought not to strike our Governors, (though
they unjustly oppress us) with the sword of our lips: nor presume
slanderously, to tear the hemme of their superfluous actions. So far he.

Leo the fourth about the year 846. agnised all subjection to Lotharius the
Emperor: I do profess and promise (says Leo) to observe and keep
unviolably, Cap. de capit. did. 15.
as much as lies in me, for the time present and to come, your Imperial
ordinances and commandments: together with the decrees of your Bishops, my
Predecessors: If any man inform your Majesty otherwise, know certainly, that
he is a lier. So far Leo.

The Bishops of Spain assembled in a national Council at Toledo, Council.
Tol. 5. Can. 2. circa annum Dom. 636.
made this decree against perjury and treason. Quicunque amodo ex nobis:
Whosoever among us shall from this time forward, violate the oath which he
has taken for the safeguard of this Country, the state of the Gothish nation,
and the preservation of the Kings Majesty: whosoever shall attempt the Kings
death, or deposition: whosoever shall by tyrannical presumption aspire to the
regal throne, let him be accursed before the holy Spirit, before the blessed
Saints, let him be cast out of the Catholic Church, which he has polluted
by perjury, let him have no communion with Christian men, nor portion with the
just, but let him be condemned with the Devil and his Angels eternally,
together with his accomplices, that they may be tied in the bond of damnation,
which were joined in the society of sedition. Thus far the Fathers in that
Synod.

I conclude therefore with these learned Fathers, that it is not for the
people, otherwise then with humility and obedience, to control the actions of
their Governors: but their duty is only to call upon the God of Heaven, and
so submit themselves to his mercy, by whose ordinance the Scepter is fallen
into his hand and power, that enjoys the Crown, whether he be good or bad.
A right of deposing, must be either in him that has an higher power, which is
only God: or in him, that has better right to the Crown: which the Pope
cannot have, because he is a stranger: nor the Peers, or people, because they
are subjects. Be the King for his Religion impious, for his Government unjust,
for his life licentious, the subject must endure him, the Bishop must reprove
him, the Counselor must advise him, all must pray for him, and no mortal man
has authority to disturb or displace him, as may evidently be seen by the
Chapter following.

The fifth Chapter confirms this Doctrine by the Fathers of the fourth 300.
years.
IN this age of the Church, the Popes exalted themselves above all that is
called God, and upon private displeasures and quarrels, did curse and banne
Princes, incensing their Neighbour-nations, and persuading their own subjects,
to make war against them, as if Christ, had ordained his Sacraments, not to
be seals of grace, and helps of our faith, but hooks to catch Kingdoms, and
rods to scourge such Potentates as would not, or could not procure the Popes
favor. How far these Popish practices, did displease the godly and learned,
I will show by Saint Bernard, Walthramus Bishop of Nanumberg, the Epistle
Apolegeticall of the Church of Liege against Paschalis the Pope, and the
Author of Henry the fourth his life.

Saint Bernard, in one of his Sermons upon the words of CHRIST; I am the vine,
commends the answer of a certain King, Been quidam Rex, cum percussus humana
sagitta, etc. It was well said of a King when he was shot into the body with
an arrow, and they that were about him, desired him to be bound until the
arrows head were cut out, for that the least motion of his body would endanger
his life: no (quoth he) it does not beseem a King to be bound, let the Kings
power be ever safe and at liberty. And the same Father in an Epistle to
Ludovicus Crassus the King of France teaches subjects, how to rebel and fight
against their Princes; Quicquid vobis de Regno vestro, de Anima and Corona
vestra facere placuerit: Whatsoever you please to do with your Kingdom,
Bernard. Epist. 221.
your Soul, or your Crown, we that are the Children of the Church cannot
endure or dissemble the injuries, contempt, and conculcation of our Mother.
Questionless we will stand and fight even unto death in our Mothers behalf,
and use such weapons, as we may lawfully, I mean not swords and spears, but
prayers and tears to God.

When Gregory the seventh had deposed Henry the fourth, he gave away the
Empire to one Rodolphus Duke of Saxony, that was a sworn subject to that
distressed Emperor; which Rodolp, in a battle against his Sovereign Lord,
lost his right hand, and gained a deadly wound. After his death, the Pope made
one Hermanus King of Germany, who enjoyed his Kingdom but a little time, for
he was slain with a stone, which a woman threw upon him from a turret, as he
made an assault (in sport) against his own Castle, to try the valor of his
soldiers. Ex vita Henr. quanti quae bibotur in fasciculo rerum sciendarum
Coloniae impresso.
Then did Egbertus, by the Popes encouragement ascend the Imperial throne,
whereon he sat but a while: for as he stepped aside from his army into a
mill, to rest himself in the heat of the day, he was discovered by the miller
to the Emperors friends, and lost his life for his labor. During this
hurly-burly in that state Walthramus a godly Bishop, wrote to one Ludovicus an
Earl of the Empire, diswading him from partaking with the seditious against
that good Emperor, whom the Pope had deposed. Walthram by the grace of God,
that he is, to Jews the noble Prince, with instance of prayer, offreth
himself in all things serviceable. Concord is profitable to every Realm, and
justice much to be desired: these virtues are the Mother of devotion, and the
consecration of all honesty. But whosoever seeks after civil dissension, and
incenseth other to the effusion of blood, he is a murderer, and partaketh
with him, who gaping for blood, goes about seeking whom he may devour: The
worthy vessel of election, that was taken up to the third Heaven, protests,
saying. Let every Soul submit himself to the higher power, there is no power
but from God. He that resists power, resists the ordinance of God. If that
be true (which some men prate among women and the vulgar sort) that we ought
not to be subdued to the Kingly power, Then it is false which the Apostle
teaches, that every Soul must submit himself under power and superiority.
Can the truth lie? did not Christ the Lord speak by the Apostle? Epist Wald.
quae habetur in appendice Marian. Scot.
Why do we provoke the Lord? are we stronger then he? Does not he think
himself stronger then the Lord, that resists the ordinance of God? seeing
there is no power but of God: what says the Prophet? Confounded be they that
strive against the Lord, and they that resist him shall perish. Rodolphus,
Hermanus, Egbertus, with many other Princes, resisted the ordinance of God, in
Henry the Emperor, but for they are confounded, as though they had never
been, for as their end was ill, their beginning could not be good, etc, Haec
ille.

Pope Paschalis seeing the bad success of those seditious subjects, which his
Predecessors Gregory and Vrbanus had armed against Henry, that worthy
Emperor: did persuade the Emperors own Son, against all Law of God,
Nature, and Nations, to rebel against his Father. The Bishop of Liege took
the Emperors part, against this young Prince, for the which he was
excommunicate, his Church interdicted, and Robert Earl of Flanders commanded
by the Pope, as he hoped to have the forgiveness of his sins, and the
favor of the Church of Rome, to destroy that Bishop and his false Priests.

The Churchmen of Liege terrified with the Popes excommunication, and fearing
the Earls oppression, wrote an Apology for themselves about the year 1106.
We are excommunicate (say they) because we obey our Bishop, Epistol.
Leodiensium apud Simonem Scard.
who has taken part with his Lord the Emperor. These are the beginnings of
sorrow: for Satan being loosed, compasses the earth, and has made a
division between the Prince and the Priest: who can justly blame the Bishop
that takes his Lords part, to whom he has sworn allegiance? perjury is a
great sin, whereof they cannot be ignorant, that by new Schism and novell
tradition, do promise to absolve subjects from the guilt of perjury, that
forswear themselves to their Lord the King, etc.

In the progress of their Apology they determine three great questions:
First, whether the Pope has power to excommunicate Kings? Secondly, to whom it
belongs to inflict temporal punishment, when Churchmen offend against
faith, unity, or good manners? And thirdly, what remedy subjects have against
their Kings, that are impious or tyrannous? Si quis respectu sancti Spiritus,
etc. If any man having respect to the Spirit of God, shall turn over the old
and new Testament, he shall plainly find that Kings, ought not at all or very
hardly be excommunicate, whether we consider the Etimologie of their names, or
the nature of their excommunication. Even till this day has this point been
questioned, and never determined. Kings may be admonished and reproved, by
such as be discreet and sober men, for Christ the King of Kings in earth, who
has placed them in his own stead, has reserved them to his own judgment,
etc.

Their answer to the second question, is grounded on the testimony of Saint
Augustine, the practice of Princes, and the authority of Paul. Kings (say they)
and Emperors by their public Laws, have forbidden Heretics, to enjoy any
Worldly possession. Wherefore seeing we are no Heretics, and that it
belongs not to the Pope, but to Kings and Emperors to punish Heresies, why
does our Lord Paschalis, send Robert, his Armor-bearer, to destroy the
possessions and to overthrow the Villages of the Churches, which in case they
deserved destruction, ought to be destroyed by the edict of Kings and
Emperors, which carry the sword not without good cause? etc.

For answer to the third question, they show by sundry places of Scripture,
that there is no other help against evil Princes, then prayer and patience.
Nihil modo pro Imperatore nostro dicimus, etc. We will for the present say
nothing in defense of our Emperor, but this we say, though he were as bad as
you report him to be, we would endure his government, because our sins have
deserved such a Governor. Be it: we must needs grant against our will, that
the Emperor is an Arch-heretike, an invader of the Kingdom, a worshipper of
the Simonaicall Idol, and accursed by the Apostles and Apostolic men, as you
say of him: even such a Prince ought not to be resisted by violence, but
endured by patience and prayer. Moses brought many plagues upon Pharaoh, whose
heart God had hardened, but it was by prayer and the lifting up his hands to
Heaven. And Saint Paul requires prayers to be made for all men, for Kings and
such as are in authority: which Kings were neither Catholics nor Christians.
Baruch also from the mouth of the Prophet Jeremy, wrote unto the Jews, which
were captives unto the King of Babylon, that they must pray for the life of
Nabuchodonoser the King of Babylon, and Balthazar his Son, that their days
in earth may be as the days of Heaven, Epist. Leod.
etc. Saint Paul teaches why we ought to pray for evil Kings, namely, that
under them we may lead a quiet life. It would become an Apostolic man, to
follow the Apostles Doctrine: it were prophetical to follow the Prophet, etc.
Thus far they in their Epistle Apologeticall.

He that wrote the life of this Emperor Henry the fourth, Vita Henr. 4. quo
supra.
an ancient, a modest, and an impartial Relatour of such occurrents as
happened in his time, declares his dislike of the Popes practices, and the
Germans tumults against their said sovereign Lord. Magnum Mundo documentum
datum est: A great instruction was given to the World that no man should rise
against his Master. For the hand of Rodolph being cut off, showed a most just
punishment of perjury; he feared not to violete his fidelity sworn to the
King, and his right hand was punished, as if other wounds had not been
sufficient to bring him to his death, that by the plague of the rebellious, the
fault of rebellion might be perceived: Thus far he.

The sixth Chapter proves the same by the testimony of the Writers from the
12. hundred years downward.
I Will for conclusion produce Otho Frinsingensis, Thomas Aquinas, Gratianus,
Philip the fair King of France, the Parliament of England in the time of
Edward the first, Vincentius, and Aeneas Silvius that afterward was Pope, by
the name of Pius secundus.

Otho Frising. in his Epistle Dedicatory before his Chronicle.
Otho Frisingensis has an excellent saying in his Epistle Dedicatory to
Frederick Barbarossa; Cum nulla persona mundialis inveniatur quae mundi legibus
non subjaceat, etc. Although no earthly man can be found, that is not subject
to the Laws of the World, and in respect of subjection, liable to correction:
Kings as it were placed over Laws, are not restrained by them, but reserved to
the examination of God, according to the words of the King and Prophet, Against
thee only have I sinned. It becomes therefore a King, both in respect of the
noble disposition of his mind, Psalm. 51.5.
and the spiritual illumination of his soul, to have God, the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, ever in his mind, and by all means possible, to take heed,
that he fall not into the hands of God, seeing it is (as the Apostle says) a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. It is more fearful
for Kings, then for any other; because Kings have none but God himself above
them, whom they need fear. It shall be so much more horrible for them, by how
much they may offend more freely then other men. So far Otho.

Thomas Aquinas, (if the Tractate De regimine Principum be his) makes three
sorts of Kings: Aquin. de regimine Princ. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Kings by election, Kings by subordination, and Kings by succession. For the
first he says, that they which did establish, may abolish: for the second,
we must have our recourse to him that did surrogate the subordinate King: as
the Jews did to Caesar against Herod: for the last, his resolution is
Recurrendum esse ad omnium Regem Deum, that we must fly to God, the King of
all Kings, in whose only power it is, to mollify the cruel heart of a
Tyrant. And that men, may obtain this at the hands of God, they must cease
from sin; for wicked Princes, by Divine permission are exalted to punish the
sins of the people, Tollenda est igitur culpa ut cessat Tyrannorum plaga; We
must therefore remove our sins, that God may take away his punishment: Thus
far Thomas.

Gratianus, which compiled the decrees, is very peremptory, that the Bishop of
Rome, ought not to meddle with the temporal sword, the state of
Commonwealths, or the change of Princes. He says nothing indeed De Regni
ordinibus, which in his time, and a 100. years after him, never dreamed of any
such authority. Cum Petrus qui primus Apostolorum a Domino fuerat electus,
materialem gladium exerceret: When Peter whom the Lord had first chosen of all
the Apostles, drew the material sword, to defend his Master from the injuries
of the Jews, he was commanded to sheath his sword: Math. 26.52.
For all that take the sword, shall perish by the sword. As if Christ should
have said, Hitherto it was lawful for thee a thine Ancestors to persecute
Gods enemies with the temporal sword, hereafter thou must put up that sword
into his place, and draw the sword of the Spirit, Cause. 23. quest. 8. parag. 1.
which is the word of God, to slay the old man: whosoever beside the Prince,
and without his authority, that has lawful power, and as the Apostle
teaches, Romans 13.4.
Bears not the sword in vain, to whom every soul must be subject,
whosoever (I say) without or beside the Princes authority, bears the sword,
shall perish by the sword: Thus far Gratian.

About the year a 1300. began a quarrel between Boniface the eight, and
Philippus Pulcher the French King, about the collation of benefices, Prebends,
and other Ecclesiastical promotions. Whereupon the Pope wrote unto the said
King, as follows: Boniface Bishop, the servant of Gods servants, to his
wel-beloved Son Philip, by Gods grace King of France, Greeting, and blessing
Apostolical. Fear God and keep his law: We give thee to understand that
thou art subject to us both in spiritual things, and temporal, and that no
gift of benefices or Prebends belongs to thee. If thou have in thy hand any
vacant, keep the profits of them to the Successors, and if thou have bestowed
any, we decree the collation void, and recall it, how far soever it has
proceeded. Whosoever believes otherwise, we account him a fool: Dated at
Lateran the fourth of the Calends of December, and in the sixth year of our
Papacy. King Philip returned his haughtiness, a correspondent answer, viz.
Philip by tho grace of God, King of France, to Boniface bearing himself for
Pope, Salutem modicam sive nullam. Sciat tua maxima fatuitas. Little health or
none at all. Philip. Pulcher.
Let thy great fooleship know, that in temporal things we are subject to no
man. And that the gifts of Prebends and Ecclesiastical promotions, made, and
to be made by us, were and shall be lawful, both in time past and in time to
come. For such collations belong to us in the right of our Crown: wherefore,
we will manfully defend the Possessours of the said dignities, and do judge
them that think otherwise fools and mad men; Given at Paris the Wednesday
after Candlemasse, 1301. Questionless this King that did so scornefully reject
the Popes challenge pretended from Christ, would little regard the claim of the
Nobles, derived but from the people.

The same busy Boniface, of whom some write, that he came in like a Fox
craftily, reigned like a Lion cruelly, and died like a Dog miserably, would
take upon him the decision of a controversy between the Kings of England and
Scotland, and commanded King Edward of England either to cease his claim, or
to send his Procuratours to the Apostolic sea, to show his right, and to
receive such order from the Pope, as justice and equity would require. The
Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament at Lincoln sent Boniface this
answer in the Kings behalf. Whereas our most dread Lord Edward by the grace of
God, the Noble King of England, caused your Letters to be read openly before
us, touching certain occurrents of state between him and the King of
Scotland, we did not a little marvel at the contents thereof, so strange and
wonderful, as the like has never been heard of. We know (most Holy Father)
and it is well known in this Realm, and also to other Nations, that the King
of England ought not to make answer for his right before any Judge
Ecclesiastical or secular: Parliament at Lincolr c quoted by M. ekenshaw.
by reason of the free estate of his Royal dignity and custom, without breach
at all times unviolably observed: Wherefore after treaty had and diligent
deliberation, this was our resolution, that our said King ought not to answer
in judgment, nor send Procuratours or Messengers to your Court: seeing that
tends manifestly to the disinheriting of the right of the Crown, the
overthrow of the state of the Kingdom, and the breach of the liberties,
customs, and laws of our Fathers, for the keeping whereof, we are bound by
the duty of an oath, and will (by Gods help) maintain and defend with all our
power and strength, etc. Dated at Lincoln Ann. Dom. 1301. and Anno Edwardi
primi 29. This was then the resolution of the State of this Land: if our late
Sectaries Popish or Puritan, bring in any other Doctrine, we may not leave the
cawsey of truth and obedience, whereon our Forefathers walked to their
commendation, to follow these new guides, in their bypaths of pride,
disobedience, and contempt of authority, to our destruction.

Vincentius in his Speculo Historiali has a notable place to dissuade from
sedition and perjury. Lib. 15. c. 84.
Vt pace omnium bonorum dixerim, haec sola novitas (ne dicam Haeresis) nec dum
e Mundo emerserat. That I may speak with the favor of all good men, this
mere novelty (if not Heresy) was not sprung up in the World, that Priests
should teach subjects, that they owe no subjection to wicked Kings, and albeit
they have given an oath of fidelity unto them, they are not bound to keep it:
Nay, they that obey an evil Prince, are to be held as excommunicated, and all
such as rebel against him, are free from the guilt of the crime of perjury. So
far he.

I will end this Chapter with Aeneas Silvius, Pius 2. de ortu and author.
Imperii c. 23.
who died in the year 1464. Sit tandem finis litium, Let there be an end of
contention, and one principal head to determine all temporal matters: let the
occasion of perpetual debate be taken away, let men acknowledge themselves
subject to their Prince, and give reverence to him, whom God has made his
vicegerent on Earth. As that which God commands must be obeyed without
contradiction, so the temporal Commandments of Caesar, may not be resisted.
But let the Kings themselves beware that they oppress no man unjustly, nor
give their people cause to cry to God against them, for the Earth is the Lords
and the fullness thereof: he will not forget the cry of the poor: and for
the sin of the Prince he translateth the Government from one Nation to
another. There is nothing more offensive to the greatest God, the King and
Creator of Heaven and Earth, then the neglect of justice, and the oppression
of the poor: as the Psalmist says, The poor shall not always be forgotten,
and the patient abiding of the needy shall not perish for ever. So far
Silvius.

The seventh Chapter shows the concord of Papist and Puritan for the
deposition of Kings, and their discord about the means and persons to be
employed in the execution of their designements.
CHilderick was deposed, and Pipine crowned King of France about the year 750.
The truth of which History is this. Childerick void of all princely gravity,
gave himself over to pleasure and wantonness, leaving the burden of the
state to Pipinus, that was his Lord Marshall: Who conspired with the Nobles, to
advance himself, by the deposition of the King his Master. To set a better
color on the matter, Pipine sent his Chaplain to Pope Zachary, to have his
answer to this Question: Whether should be King, he that bare the name and
did nothing, or he that governed the Kingdom? The Pope gave sentence with the
Marshall against the King, whereupon, Childerick was made a shorn Monk, and
Pipine a crowned King.

It is a wonder to see how these opposite Sectaries, do insist upon this fact
of the Frenchmen, to justify their dangerous doctrine, and seditious
conspiracies against Princes. As Cardinal Bellarmine de Pontif. lib. 2. cap.
17. Thomas Harding against the Apology of the Church of England, fol. 181.
Franc. Fevardentius in his Commentaries on Hester, page 85. Boucher alias
Raynolds de justa abdicatione Henrici 3. lib. 3. cap. 14. Ficklerus de jure
Magistratuumfol. 30. Alexander Carerius patavinus de potestate Papae, lib. 2.
cap. 3. D. Marta de temporali and spirituali Pontificis potestate, lib. 1. c.
23. and Doleman in his conference touching succession part. 1. cap. 3. page 48.
And also these Puritans, Christopher Goodman in his treatise of obedience, page
53. George Buchanan de jure Regni apud Scotos. page 47. Danaens de politia
Christiana lib. 3. cap. 6. page 221. Brutus Celta dejure Magistratuum, page
286. Phyladelphus dialogo 2. page 65. Franc. Hottomanus in his Francogallia
cap. 12. and Speculum tyrannidis Philipi Regis page 27. The Papists which
ascribe this deposing power to the Pope, endeavor by tooth and nail, to
disprove that interest which the Puritans grant the Peers, or the people.
First, this example served Gregory the seventh to excuse his presumptous
practices against Henry the fourth. Quidam Romanus Pontifex: A certain Bishop
of Rome deposed a King of France, not so much for his ill life, as for that he
was not fit for government, Lib. de unit. Eccles. apud Scard. page 3.
and placed Pipine, which was Father to Charles the great in his place:
absolving all the Frenchmen from the oath of allegiance, which they had sworn
to their King. Thus far Gregory in an Epistle to one Herimanus, that was
Bishop of Metz in France.

Thomas Harding concludes from this fact, a Divine power in the Pope. Consut.
of the Apolog. fol. 181.
Can you not see (says Harding) what strength and power is in the Pope, which
is able with a word, to place and displace the mightiest King in Europe? with a
word, I say, for I am sure you can show us of no army, that he sent to execute
his will. Is it in the power of man (think you) to appoint Kingdoms? can the
Devil himself, at his pleasure set up and depose Kings? no surely. Much less
can any member of his do the same. Remember you what CHRIST said, when the
Jews objected, that he did cast out Devils in the name of the Prince of
Devils? beware you sin not against the holy Ghost, who confess that the Pope
has pulled down and set up Kings. Which thing undoubtedly he could never do
profitably and peaceably, but by the great power of God, etc. So far Harding.

Cardinal Bellarmine the Grand-master of Controversies, De Pontif. lib. 2.
cap. 17.
cannot endure to hear that this deposition was done by any other then the
Papal authority. The Pope (says he) Iudicavit licere Francis, regnum
Childerici in Pipinum transfer. The Pope gave judgment that the Frenchmen
might lawfully transfer Childericks Kingdom to Pipin: and did absolve them
from the oath which they had sworn unto him. No man that has his right wit
can deny this to be lawful. For the very event has proved, that change to be
most fortunate: seeing the Kingdom of France, was never more potent, nor
Religion more flourishing, then under Pipin and Charles his Son. Thus far
Bellarmine.

This Cardinals reason from the success to the approbation of the fact, will
conclude well for the Turk, who has longer continued, more flourished and
enlarged his state, then the House of Pipin. Hear in a word the true success
of Pipins posterity out of Beneventus Imolensis and Paulus Beneventus,
Imolensis.
Aemilius. The first of that line was Charles the great in whose time the
Empire was divided. The second was Ludovicus Pius, against whom Lotharius, an
unnatural Son, did conspire: who thrust his Father to a Cloister, and placed
himself in the Throne, where he sat like a Tyrant, till he was also
deposed. The fourth was Ludovicus secundus, a man unfortunate in all his
doings. The fifth was Ludovicus tertius, whom they call Ludovicus nihili, or
Jews nobody. Paulus Acmilius.
The sixth was Charles the Bald, a very Coward. The seventh was Carolus
Crassus, as very a Fool. Arnulphus the eight of that progeny was eaten with
lice. The ninth was Ludovicus quartus, in whom that race ended.

Alexander Carerius infers the absolute sovereignty of the Pope over all
Kings, even to depose them, and to transpose their Realms, from the
insufficiency of the Nobles and People. De potest. Pontif. lib. 2. cap. 3. number.
6.
Esto quod verum sit Papam, non deposuisse Regem Franciae: Be it true that the
Pope did not depose the King of France, but gave consent to the Peers and
People to depose him, this is a most manifest proof of our intent: that Kings
have one, if not many superiors, viz. the Barons and people of their Kingdom:
and over throws their position and conclusion, That Kings have in temporal
things no superior, no, not the Bishop of Rome. But seeing the Barons and
People could neither judge nor deprive him, because they wanted coactive power,
which Vassals or Subjects have not over their Sovereign, it follows
necessarily, that the Pope by his Princely power, as superior to the King in
temporalties, might lawfully depose him. Thus far Carerius.

D. Marta, is as peremptory for the Pope, against the pretended claim of the
Peers, or the People. Childericus privatus est Regno Francia ob stupiditatem
and ineptitudinem in administrando: Childerick was deprived of the Kingdom of
France, for his stupidity and unfitness to govern. They that say he was not
deprived by the Pope alone, but by them that desired another King, do not
answer the reasons alleged for the Popes Sovereign power in temporalties:
nay, they confirm the Popes power. Baldus asks this question, when the
Emperor is unprofitable, or mad, or a drunkard, may the people depose him, or
assign him a Coadjutor? No, says he, the Pope must do it, De temp. and
spir. Pontif. potest. part. 1. cap. 23. number. 15.16.17.
for the Pope is the crown and brain of the people. And we have proved
before, that God did give no jurisdiction to the people, but to Moses and his
Successors. Wherefore the Vassals or Peers which represent the people, have
no power common with the Pope, in the deposing of Princes. And in that they
say, that the Frenchmen desired another King, it is a great confirmation, that
the Pope has right to dispose of Kingodmes. He uses to desire, who has not
of his own: or cannot of himself effect that, which he would have done: Thus
far Marta.

They that plead for the state of the Laity, are as confident against the Pope
and Clergy. Vt paucis dicam (says Iunius) hoc secit Zacharias ut Dominus aut
ut mandatarius, authoritate instructus a Domino, that I may use few words, the
Pope deposed Childerick either as his Lord, or as a mandatary having authority
from the Lord; but he did it neither way. Not as Lord, how could he be Lord
in France, that in those days had no Lordship in Rome? he did it not as
mandatary, for then he ought to have showed his authority, which he neither
did, nor could show. CHRIST would not divide a private inheritance, shall
Zachary then presume to depose Kings, or transpose Kingdoms. Thus far Junius.

Caeterum quod Monachus iste (says Lambertus Danaeus) whereas this Monk
Bellarmine contendeth, that Childerick was lawfully deposed by Pope Zacharias,
a stranger, a Priest, no Magistrate, but (in this respect) a private person,
though he were Bishop of Rome. Resp. Danae. ad Bellar. l. 2. cap. 17. page, 316.
Will he ever be able to prove or defend his assertion? Can Zachary have
authority in France, being a stranger? can he depose the public Magistrate,
being but a private person? or transfer that principality to Pipin that he
has no right unto? and commit so many sacriledges and impieties, stealing from
Childerick, and giving to Pipin another man's right? authorizing subjects to
violate their oaths, which they had sworn to their King? transposing Kingdoms
from one man to another, whereas it does only belong to God to depose Kings,
and dispose of Kingdoms? thou may see (Bellarmine) how many outrages this
thy Zachary has committed, beside that he did thrust his sickle into an other
man's harvest, and meddled with the cobbler beyond his last, in that, being but a
Priest he took upon him the decision of the right of Kingdoms. Thus far
Danaeus, who is not so violent against the Pope, Danaeus pol. Christ. l. 6. c.
3. page 414.
as he is virulent for the deposing power of Peers, or States of the
Kingdom. The Kings (says he) of Lacedemonia had the Ephori to control them.
The Statesmen of the Roman Commonwealth, deposed the Emperors, which were
Tyrants, and abused their authority. The French-state has often dethroned
their Kings: The Nobles of Spain may do it by their Law: And the History of
the Scottish affairs (excellently well written by Mulus mulum scabit.
Buchanan) does report that the Statesmen of that Country, have many times
deprived the Kings of Scotland. Finally, natural reason, and the practice of
all nations does confirm, that the Statesmen in every Kingdom, may depose
Kings, that are peccant. Cap. 13.
So far he. Hottoman in his Franco Gallia, has a long Chapter to prove that
this might be done lawfully, by the Peers, or the People, but in no case by
the Pope or the Clergy.

Men cannot say (as it is in the proverb) Nimium altercando veritas amittitur,
seeing that in this opposition, the truth is not lost, but divided among them.
For their premises, brought together, will unadvoidably conclude, that this
deposing power, is neither in the Pope, the Peers, nor the People. Though it
were, the reason of the seditious Papists and Puritans, a facto ad jus, is
sophistical in the Schools, where nothing can be concluded Ex meris
particularibus, of mere particular instances. Absurd in law, Quia legibus non
exemplis vivitur, for men must do as the law requires, not as other men
practice. Erroneous in Divinity, Non ideo quia factum credimus, faciendu^
credamus, ne violemus praeceptu^, dum sectamur exemplum. We may not do that,
August. ad Consen. de mendac. cap. 9.
which has bin done by other men, least we break the law of God, in following
the example of man. And dangerous in policy, as my Lord of Northampton, the
ornament of learning, observes. The fly (says that noble Earl) setting on
the cart wheel, might as well wonder at the dust raised in the way, as Gregory
or Zachary, draw counsel to power, and make that fact their own, which was
hammered in the forge of ambition, countenanced with the color of necessity,
and executed by Pipin, a Minister, that being weary of subordination, resolved
by this trick, when the means were fitted and prepared to the plot, to make
himself absolute. The case of Kings were pitiful, if Ex factis singularibus,
it were lawful to draw leaden rules in their disgrace. Thus far the Earl.

The eight Chapter shows the danger of this Doctrine, and the original of
the Puritan position, concerning the power of Statesmen to punish and depose
Princes in Monarchies.
THese desperate attempts, suggested by the Devil, executed by the people,
encouraged by the state, and approved by the Pope, must serve as admonitions to
Princes, to humble themselves before God: Qui non dabit sanctos suos in
captionent dentibus little; Who will not give his Saints for a prey to their
teeth. For it is not heard (as our great King remembers) That any Prince
forgeteth himself in his duty to God, Law of Monarch. p. 60
or in his vocation? But God with the greatness of the plague revengeth the
greatness of his ingratitude.

These practices therefore must be no president for Peers, or People to
follow, because God has forbidden Christian subjects to resist, though Kings
reign as Tyrants; and commanded them to endure with patience, though they
suffer as Innocents. And also, because that in stead of relecving the
Commonwealth out of distress, which is ever the pretense of seditious
practitioners, they shall heap mischief on it, and desolation on themselves:
as (Aquinas) if he be the Author of the Book De Regimine Principum, shows
manifestly. Esset multitudini periculosum and ejus rectoribus: De reg. Princ.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
It were dangerous to Subjects and Governors, that any should attempt to take
away the life of Princes, though they were Tyrants: for commonly, not the well
disposed, but the ill affected men, do thrust themselves into that danger. And
the Government of good Kings, is as odious to bad men, as the rule of Tyrants
to good people. Wherefore the Kingdom, by this presumption would be rather in
danger to forgo a good Prince, then a wicked Tyrant. So far Thomas.

They that are the Authors or abettors of sedition, can neither avoid shame in
earth, nor escape eternal damnation. Though God the great Judge do sometime
permit rebels, in his Justice to prevail against Kings, for their contempt of
the law of the highest, and the neglect of their own duty; The reward of
rebellion shall be no better then the recompense of Satan, who is the
instrument of the Lords wrath for the punishment of all disobedience.
Chrysostom:
It is most true that as sick men, near their death, have many idle fancies,
so the World before the end thereof shall be troubled with many errors. In
these declining days of the World, many Countries, Cities, and Cantons,
renounced their old Government, and submitted themselves to such a new regiment
as they best liked: for confirmation of which practices, there wanted not
politic Divines, (what wine is so sourc that some hedge grapes will not yield)
to invest the people and Nobles with the power over Kings, to dispose of their
Kingdoms. The Heathen Politicians from whom this politic Divinity is derived,
knowing not the true God, and having no rule to direct them, but natural
reason, thought him no murderer, but a Defender of his Country that killed
Tyrants. But this pagan principle, being a plant that CHRIST has not planted,
must be plucked up by the roots. I can find no ground of this lend learning,
beyond 220. years in the Christian World: The first Authors of it being
Johannes de Parisiis, Iacobus Almain, Job. de Paris de potest. Regia and
Papali. cap. 14.
and Marsilius Patavinus: Vbi peccat Rex in temporalibus, says Johannes de
Parisiis, Papa non habet ipsum corrigere: When the King offended in the
temporal Government, the Pope has no authority to correct him, but the Barons
or Peers of the Realm, and if they either cannot, or dare not meddle with
him, they may crave the Churches aid to suppress him: so far John of Paris.

Tota communitas (says Jacob Almain) potestatem habet Principem deponere.
Jacob Almain de potest. Eccl. cap. 1.
All the communalty, has power to depose their Prince, which power the
communalty of France used, when they deprived their King, not so much for his
impiety, as for his disability to manage so great a charge: so far Almain.
Regis depositio and alterius institutio (says Marsilius Patavinus) the
deposition of a King, Marsil. Patave. de transl. Imperii cap 6.
and the institution of another in his place, belongs not to the Bishop of
Rome, to any Priest, or to the College of Priests, but to the universal
multitude of the Subjects. So far he.

From these, the Puritans have learned their error of the power of Statesmen
over Kings, then which, no opinion can be more dangerous: where the Nobility
are as ready to practice, as the Puritan Preachers are to prescribe. What
presumption is it in men, to pass the bounds which God has set them, to
control the wisdom of the Lord, and his unspeakable goodness, when he
makes trial of the patience of his Saints, by the outrage and tyranny of
cruel Kings, that they which are found patient in trouble, constant in truth,
and loyal in subjection, may be crowned with glory. Were we persuaded, that
the hearts of Kings are in Gods hand, that the hairs of our head are numbered,
and that no affliction can befall us, which God does not dispose to the
exercise of our faith, the trial of our constancy, or the punishment of our
sin, we would as well admire the justice of God, in permitting Tyrants, that
our sins may be judged, and punished in this World, as praise his mercy and
favor, in giving rest to his servants, under the protection of godly and
gracious Princes.

The ninth Chapter shows the general consent of the Modern Puritans
touching the coercion, deposition, and killing of Kings whom they call Tyrants.
THe Citizens of Geneva, changed the Government from a Monarchy to a Democrity
in the year of Christ, 1536. In the which year, John Calvin came into that
City, to visit his friend Farellus; And was chosen the public reader of
Divinity. At his first coming thither, he published his Theological
institutions. Wherein he does very learnedly, and Christianly entreat of the
authority of Princes, and the duty of subjects. One only place is harsh, and
dangerous: delivered in obscure, and doubtful terms, to excuse (as I
conceive) the outrage of the Citizens, against their Prince, whom they had not
many weeks before expelled: not to authorize other men to attempt the like
against their sovereign Magistrates. His words are these, Si qui sunt
populares Magistratus, ad moderandam regum libidinem constituti. If there be
any popular Magistrates, to restrain the licentiousness of Kings, of which
kind were the Ephori opposed against the Lacedemonian Kings, Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 20. Sect. 31.
the Tribunes of the people, which curbed the Roman Consuls, and the Demarchy
which brideled the Senate of Athens; And such peradventure as things now stand
are the three states in every Kingdom, assembled in Parliament. I do not
deny, but these in regard of their duty, stand bound to repress the
unrulinesse of licentious Kings: Nay, I affirm, that if they do but wink at
those Kings, which peevishly make havoc of their people, and insult against
their communalty, that they want not the guilt of heinous treachery, because
they betray the liberty of the people, whose guardians they know themselves to
be appointed. Thus far Calvin. Since which time all Puritans have turned his
conjunction conditional, into an illative, his adverb of doubting to an
affirmative, and his permissive, Non veto, into a verb of the imperative mode,
in their books of regiment secular, and Discipline Ecclesiastical.

Christopher Goodman, published a treatise of obedience at Geneva, not without
the very good liking and approbation of the best learned in that City, 1557.
wherein he affirms. Page 119.
That if Magistrates trangresse Gods law themselves, and command others to do
the like, they loose that honor, and obedience which otherwise is due unto
them: and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates: but to be examined and
punished as private Transgressors: So far Goodman.

Much about the same time was Knoxe his appellation printed in the same place,
wherein he fears not to affirm, Geneva fol. 56.
That it had been the duty of the Nobility, Judges, Rulers, and people of
England not only to have resisted Mary, that Jezabel whom they call their
Queen, but also to have punished her to the death, with all such as should
have assisted her, what time that she openly began to suppress Christ's
Gospel, to shed the blood of the Saints, and to erect that most Devilish
Idolatry, the Papisticall abominations, and his usurped tyranny. Thus far
Knox.

Ann. 1560. Theodore Beza printed his Confessions, wherein he avoucheth, That
there are vices inherent in the Persons of Princes, though they be lawfully
established, by succession, Page 216.
or election, viz. Ungodliness, convetousnesse, ambition, cruelty, luxury,
lechery, and such like sins which Tyrants delight in. What shall be done in
this case to these Princes? I answer (says he) that it belongs to the
superior powers, such as are the seven Electours in the Empire, and the
Statesmen of the Kingdom almost in every Monarchy, to restrain the fury of
Tyrants, which if they do not, they are Traitors to their Countries, and
shall before the Lord give an account of their treachery. Thus far Beza.

1561. The very year after, there was a contention between the Nobility and
Clergy of Scotland about this matter, Rerum Scot. lib. 17. page 590.
(as Buchanan reports:) let him tell his own tale. Calendis November. Regina
ad Missam: The Queen upon the Feast of All Saints, added to her private Mass
all the solemnities and superstitious Ceremonies of the Papists; The Ministers
of the Gospel took it very ill, complained thereof to the people, in their
public congregations, and admonished the Nobility of their duty in that
behalf: whereupon rose a controversy in a house of private meeting, between
the Nobles and Preachers, whether the Nobles may restrain Idolatry, that is
like to break out to a general destruction: and by rigor of law, compel the
chief Magistrate to his duty, Note how basely the Puritans esteem the
Nobility when they towart them.
when he exceeded his bounds? The Ministers of the Church stood steadfast in
opinion, as they had formerly done, that the chief Magistrate may be
compelled even by forcible means to live according to law: but the Noble men
because of the Queens favor, hope of honor, or love of lucre, did a little
waver, and thought otherwise then the Ministers: and so in the end judgment
passed with the Nobles, because they were more in number and of better esteem
and reputation. Thus far Buchanan.

1568. The outlandish Churches in London concluded this Canon in a classical
Synod, Bezae epist. 24.
Si quisquam repugnantibus legibus Patriae: If any man usurp Lordship, or
Magistracy, against the laws and privileges of the Country, or if he that
is a lawful Magistrate, do unjustly bereave his subjects of the privileges,
and liberties which he has sworn to perform unto them, or oppress them by
manifest tyranny, the inferior officers must oppose themselves against him,
for they are in duty bound before God, to defend their people, as well from a
Domestical, as a foreign Tyrant. Thus far they.

1574. We had swarms of caterpillars: namely, Fol. 105.
Disciplina Ecclesiastica from Rochel, to teach us, that the Senate
Ecclesiastical has the chief moderation of the Christian society, and ought
to provide that no Magistrate be defective in his charge, and by common care,
counsel, and authority to oversee, that every Governor carry himself
faithfully in his Magistracy. Thus far that author.

Franco Gallia from Colen, Page 48.
wherein we find that the people has power to dethrone their Princes.

Iunius de jure Magistratuum (as some think from Geneva, Page 306.
) wherein it is said, that the people have the same right to depose Kings that
are Tyrants, which a general counsel has to displace a Pope that is an
Heretic.

Eusebius Phyladelphus from Edenborough, Dialog. 2. page 57.
wherein we read, that it was as lawful for his Brethren of France, to defend
themselves against the tyranny of Charles the ninth King of that name in
France, as for wayfairing men to resist and repel thieves, cutthroats, and
wolves: nay further, I am (says he) of opinion with the old people of Rome,
that of all good actions the murder of a Tyrant is most commendable. Thus
far he.

1577. Came forth the Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Page 206.
with this resolution, That Princes are chosen by God, established by the
people: every private man is subject to the Prince: the Multitude and the
Officers of State which represent the Multitude, are Superiors to the Prince:
yea they may judge his actions, and if he make resistance, punish him by
forcible means. So far he.

1584. Danaeus finished his book of Christian policy, wherein among many other
he propounds, and answers a Noble question, Lib. 3. cap. 6.
as he terms it. Nobilis quaestio sequitur. A noble question follows,
whether it be lawful for subjects to change and alter their Government? Yea,
whether it may be done by godly men with a good conscience? his answer is. The
chief Magistrate, that notoriously and wilfully violateth the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, may be displaced by godly subjects, with a good
conscience. And this is his reason, Reges summique Magistratus, Kings and
chief Magistrates are the Vassals of the Kingdom, and of the Commonwealth
where they rule: Wherefore, they may be dispossessed and dejected when they
shall obstinatly attempt any thing, against the feudall Laws of the Kingdom
where they govern, as Kings and chief Magistrates. And it is truly said, that
as a general Council, is above the Pope, so the Kingdom or the Peers of the
Land, are above the King. Thus far Danaeus.

1585: De jure Reg. page 31.
George Buchanan proclaimed Rewards as well for murdering Kings as killing
Tigers: If I (says he) had power to make a Law, I would command Tyrants to
be transported from the society of men into some solitary place, or else to
be drowned in the bottom of the Sea, that the evil savor of dead Tyrants
should not annoy living men. Further more I would award recompense to be given
for the slaughter of Tyrants, not only of all in general, but of every one in
particular, as men use to reward them for their pains which kill Wolves or
Bears, and destroy their young ones. Haec ille.

The same year Thomas Cartwright commended Dudley Fenners his Sacra Theologia
(as they call his book) to the World, wherein men are warranted by sundry
Texts of Scripture, most miserably abused, to destroy Tyrants. Therein he
(following the Common opinion of the Puritans) makes two sorts of Tyrants,
Tirannus sine titulo, Lib. 5. cap. 13. page 185.
and Tirannus exercitio. For the Tyrant without title: He is confident, that
any man may cut his throat. Huic quisque privatus resistet, etiam si potest e
medio tollat, Let every private man resist him, and if he can, take away his
life. For the Tyrant exercent: having described him to be a Prince, that does
wilfully dissolve all, or the chiefest compacts of the Commonwealth, he
concludes against him, Hunc tollant, vel Pacifice vel cum Bello, qui ea
potestate donati sunt, ut Regni Ephori vel omnium ordinum conventus publicus:
The Peers of the Kingdom or the public assembly of States, ought to destroy
him, either by peaceable practices, or open war. Haecille.

Anno. 1588. Hermanus Renecherus published observations upon the first Psalm,
wherein he investeth the Presbitery with all the Popes Prerogatives.
Concerning the Presbiterian power over Kings, this is his notable annotation:
God (says he) has ordained the Civil Magistrate for the good of the
Ecclesiastical order, Page 72.
therefore the Ecclesiastical State is the highest throne of Gods earthly
Kingdom, the supreme seat of all excellency, and the chiefest Court wherein
God himself is president, to distribute eternal gifts to his servants.
Whereas the political Empire is but as it were an inferior bench, wherein
justice is administered according to the prescription of the Ecclesiastical
sovereignty: Thus far Renecherus.

Robert Rollocke, a man otherwise very learned, is carried with the current of
this error, and borrowed his affertion of Master Fenner, whose words he
expounds by way of paraphrasis, In Daniel. cap. 5. page 150.
in his commentaries on Daniel printed at Edenborough, 1591. Though the chief
lawful Magistrate (says Master Rollock,) do many things unjustly and
tyrannously, he may not rashly be violated, by them especially which have not
authority: but the Nobles or the public assembly of States, must reduce him to
his duty by reproof and all other lawful means, 1 Samuel 14.46. If he do
still persist in open and desperate tyranny, wilfully dissolving all or the
chiefest compacts of the Commonwealth, private men must not yet meddle with
him, only the Peers, or the public assembly of all States to whom that
charge belongs, must provide that the Church and Commonwealth come not to
desolation: though it cannot otherwise be done, then by the death and
destruction of the tyrant. Better it is that an evil King be destroyed, then
the Church and State together ruined. Thus far Rollock, For proof he
refers his Reader first to the 1 Samuel 14.46. viz. Then Saul came up from the
Philistims, and the Philistims went to their own place: ergo Kings that are
wicked may be reduced to their duty by the Peers, or assembly of States
according to the rules of the new Puritan logic. Secondly, for the killing
and destroying of Kings, he refers his Readers to the 2. Reg. cap. 11.
verse 4.5.6.7. which place I think he never vouchsafed to look upon, but set
it down as he found it quoted in Fenners Divinity, from whom he has taken
all the rest.

I will make an end with William Bucanus, whose Book was published at the
request, and with the approbation of Beza and Goulartius, maine pillars of the
Church of Geneva. 1602. Loco 76. page 844.
They (says Bucanus) which have any part of office in the public
administration of the Commonwealth, as the Overseers, Senators, Consuls,
Peers, or Tribunes, may restrain the insolency of evil Kings. Thus far he.

This Puritan dangerous error is directly repugnant to the Law, the Gospel,
the Precepts of the Apostles, the practice of Martyrs, and the Doctrine of the
Fathers, Co^uncels, and other classical Writers, as I have proved in the six
former Chapters: and will more directly show (by the grace of God) in my other
Book: wherein the holy texts of Scripture, which the Papists and Puritans do
damnably abuse against the Ecclesiastical and Civil authority of Kings, shall
be answered by the godly Protestants: whose labor God used to reform his
Church since the year of our Lord, 1517. and by the ancient Fathers and
Orthodoxall Writers in every age of the Church. This Puritan position, which
authoriseth Nobles and assemblies of States against wicked Kings, is the very
assertion of the most seditious Jesuits, that have lived in our age, as I will
demonstrate by two or three: Johannes Mariana, De Regis instit. l. 1. c. 6^.
whose Book seems to be written in defense of Clement the Friar, who
stabbed Henry the third King of France. The faults and licentiousness of Kings
(says Mariana) whether they reign by consent of the people, or right of
inheritance, are to be borne and endured, so long as the Laws of
shamefastness and honesty, whereto all men be bound, are not violated: for
Princes should not rashly be disturbed, least the Commonwealth fall into
greater misery and calamity. But if the Prince make havoc of the
Commonwealth, and expose the private fortunes of his subjects for a pray to
other men, if he despise Law, and contemn Religion, this course must be
taken against him. Let him be admonished and recalled to his duty: if he
repent, satisfy the Weale-publike, and amend his faults, there ought (as I
think) to be no further proceeding against him. But if there be no hope of
his amendment, the Commonwealth may take away his Kingdom. And because that
cannot be done (in all likelihoode) without war, they may levy power,
brandish their blades against their King, and exact money of the people, for
the maintenance of their war: for when there is no other help, the Peers of
the Commonwealth, having proclaimed their King a public enemy, may take away
his life. Thus far Mariana.

The Statesmen of the Kingdom (says Franciscus Fevardentius) have a
sovereign power over their Kings: In Hester c. 1. page 88.
for Kings are not absolutely established, but stand bound to observe laws,
conditions, and compacts, to their subjects* the which, if they violate, they
are no lawful Kings, but Thieves and Tyrants, punishable by the States. Thus
far Fevardentius.

Inferior Magistrates (says Johannes Baptista Ficklerus) are the Defenders
and Protectours of the Laws and rights of the State, De jure Magist. fol. 18.
and have authority (if need require) to correct and punish the supreme King.
So far Ficklerus.

An English fugitive, which was the Author of the book De justa abdicatione
Henrici tertii, affirms, That all the Majesty of the Kingdom, is in the
assembly of Statesmen, to whom it belongs to make covenants with God, to
dispose of the affairs of the Kingdom, to appoint matters pertaining to war
and peace, Lib. 3. cap. 8.
to bridle the Kingly power, and to settle all things that belong to public
Government. So far he.

And the most seditious Dolemon says, Part. 1. cap. 4. page 72.
that all humane Law and order Natural, National, and positive, does teach,
that the Commonwealth, which gave Kings their authority for the Common good,
may restrain or take the same from them if they abuse it to the Common ill: So
far Dolemon: and of this opinion are many other as may appear by Doctor
Morton by whom they are discovered and refuted.

How far this gangrene will extend, I know not. The Kings of Christendom are
daily crucisied, (as CHRIST their Lord was) between two Thieves; I mean the
Papist and Puritan, which have prepared this deadly poison for Princes, whom
they in their own irreligious and traiterous hearts, shall condemn for
tyranny. I hope neither Peers nor people will be so fond to believe them, or
wicked to follow them, which pretend the Reformation of Religion, and defend
the subversion of Christian States. If inferior Officers, or the public
assembly of all States, will claim this power, it stands them upon, (as they
will avoid everlasting damnation) not to derive a title from Rome, Lacedemon,
or Athens, (as Calvin does, whom the rest follow) but from the Hill of Sion,
and to plead their interest from the Law or the Gospel. Si mandatum non est
praesumptio, August. in quest. mixed.
and ad paenam proficiet, non ad praemium: quia ad contumeliam pertinet
conditoris, ut contempto Domino colantur servi, and spreto Imperatore,
adorentur Comites. If their opposition against Kings be not commanded of God,
it is presumption against God: for it is a contumely against God the Creator
of all States, to despise Lords and honor servants, to contemn the sovereign
Emperor, and to reverence the Peers of the Empire. So far Augustine. Prove.
24.21.
My son (says Solomon) fear God and the King, and meddle not with the
seditious: for their destruction shall come suddenly, and who knows the end
of them? The conclusion of all is, That Kings have supreme and absolute
authority under God on earth, not because all things are subject to their
pleasure, which were plain tyranny, not Christian sovereignty: but because all
persons, within their Dominions, stand bound in Law, allegiance, and
conscience, to obey their pleasure, or to abide their punishment. And Kings
themselves, are no way subject to the controwle, censure, or punishment, of any
earthly man, but reserved by special prerogative to the most fearful and
righteous judgment of God, with whom there is no respect of persons. He whole
servants they are, Will beat them with a rod of iron, and break them in
pieces like a potters vessel, If they abuse that great, and sovereign power,
(which God had endued them withal,) to support error, to suppress truth, and
to oppress the innocent. God, of his great mercy, grant us the Spirit of
truth, to direct us in all loyalty, that we being not seduced by these
seditious Sectaries, may grow in grace, stand fast in obedience, embrace love,
follow peace, and increase more and more in the knowledge of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. To whom be all praise, power, and dominion now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

