OVERTURES For Promoting the Trade of this Nation: Humbly Offered to the
SERIOVS CONSIDERATION Of the Ensuing Session of Parliament, By a Well-wisher to
his Country.
THAT the Government may, conform to the prudent Practice of most Nations,
Regulate with other Countries the Balance of Trade, which now, to our great
Loss, lies strongly every where against us.

To which purpose, it is humbly conceived, That such Foreign Commodities, as may
be conveniently spared, be Prohibited.

That such unwrought Commodities from Abroad, as may be Manufactured at Home,
be encouraged to be Imported; not only to keep our People and Money Virtuously
Employed at Home, but also to send Abroad for such Necessaries thence, as
cannot be wanted.

Therefore, the following Particulars of Trade with Foreign Countries, are
humbly tendered. viz.

Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and all the Baltic Sea,
Take our Commodities, and we want theirs; As Timber, Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Flax,
Potashes, Iron, Copper, Brass-Wire, etc. And if our Manufactures were
encouraged, the Balance would be on our side.

Hamburgh, and Bremen
Affords us few Things necessary.

Holland
Furnishes us with many Commodities, but few of them are absolutely necessary,
and the Balance is now on their side; whereas, before our Wool was exported,
we yearly drew much Money thence by Woollen Manufactures, exported chiefly from
Aberdeen; as may appear by the great quantity of Dollers and Ducatoons, still
current among us.

England
Takes but few of our Commodities, except Cattle; yet our Merchants bring in
considerable Quantities of such Goods, as might well be wanted: So that, what
by the Expense of our Nobility and Gentry at Court, and the unnecessary
Commodities imported thence, the Exchange is raised so high, that vast Sums of
Gold and Silver in specie, are carried thither.

France
Tends much to our Disadvantage in Trade: For they prohibit, under Forfeiture
of Ship and Cargo, the Importing our Herring, and all our Manufactures: And we
expend vastly for their Salt, Wine, Brandy, etc. The two last take above 30000
l. Sterline per annum; whereas we may be sufficiently provided from other
Countries with Liquors, by our own Product.

Portugal, Spain, and all the Straits,
Whose Product is Silk, Wool, Brasile-Sugar, several sorts of Wine and Fruits.
Rice and Oil: They allow us the Freedom of Trading with them, not so much to
our Loss: And, were our Manufactures duly improved, it might more likely
contribute to our Profit. So that, if we be fond of Wines, it were more
reasonable to have them from thence; tho Care must be taken, that, under color
thereof, French Wines be not imported; and that neither Wines nor Fruits be
brought, but directly from the Place of their own growth; because Bad of both
sorts come often from Holland.

IT is also humbly Offered, That the Exportation and Importation of the
following Goods may be prohibited, under severe Penalties, as highly
Prejudicial to the Interest of the Nation.

Exportation of Goods to be prohibited, as
Wool, all sorts of Yarn, Skins and Hides, of our own Growth Unmanufactured;
But that all Foreign Wool may be imported, free of any Duty: The benefit of
which, the Practice of our Neighboring Nations, making the Offenses Capital,
may fully Convince us of. The great Industry of Sweden, Denmark, etc. tho they
have very little Wool, as well as France and Holland, who have not much, to
promote their Manufactures; are sufficient Demonstrations of the Benefit of
Importing, and the Damage by Exporting Wool.

Linseed, as being a Material for Oil. Talow, a Material for Soap. Wax, for
Candles and Flambeaus. Brass and old Copper may be Re-manufactur'd. Lead-Ore.
Importation of Goods to be Prohibited, as
Hats, being very well Manufactured at Home. Stockings, in the like manner.
Powder and Firearms, which are made as good here as any from Abroad. Cabinets,
and all other Pieces of Wrights Work. Points and Laces: But fine Thread for
that purpose to be free of all Duty imported. Earthen and Glass Ware, of all
sorts. Iron Work of all sorts, except Sword-blades, till we recover again the
Making of them. Soap White or Black, French Barley, and Starch. Cheese and
Butter. Tapestry, and Hangings of all sorts; which may be made here upon due
encouragement. Flannel, and all sorts of Woolen Manufacture, in like manner.
Mum-Beer. All East India Goods, unless imported directly from thence. That no
Goods, but of the Growth and Manufacture of the Places they directly come from,
be Imported.
Encouragements for promoting what is above said.
All Tacksmen and Collectors of Customs, that shall pass any thing so
prohibited, shall incur a certain Penalty toties quoties, the one half to the
King, and the other to the Informer; and that those belonging to Manufactures,
have Liberty to enter into Ships, Vessels, Shops, or other Places, the better
to discover the Goods so prohibited.

That all Foreign Tradesmen and Artificers, who Excel in their Professions, may
be Enfranchised, and have Liberty to Set-up in any Town or Incorporation, and
that free from all public Burdens and Impositions, for a certain number of
Years: Which being duly observed, will not only further encourage skilful
Artificers to come and inhabit amongst us, but strongly invite many Masters to
import their Stocks also, to the great Advantage of this Country.

That the Law or Custom, obliging Strangers and Un-freemen to make the first
Offer of their Goods to the Dean of Guild, be taken away, and in lieu thereof,
the Strangers to pay them only Two per Cent. and Natives but One per Cent. more
than Burghers, and this Money to be given to New Manufactures. And all Towns
and Shires that set not up Manufactures to employ their own able Poor, may be
obliged, according to their valued Rents, to pay to others who do employ their
Poor, as much as may amount to One Shilling Scots per day for each Head for
some Years, commencing from the time they shall be received; which will greatly
encourage Manufactures, and yet be more Ease to People, than what is used to be
Collected for the Poor, and given at Doors: Besides the Benefit that the
Public will receive, by having all Hands Virtuously employed: Which Numbers of
Poor, will more than Manufacture all the Wool of this Nation. And this will
remove the great Scandal of so many Beggars going about, many of whom, within
these few Years have Starved for Want. Indeed these who are unable to work,
should be reasonably provided for in the Place where they have lived, like the
Prudence of Holland, where not one Beggar is to be seen.

That further Laws be made for encouraging our Herring and other Fishings, that
Trade being of great Consequence for the Good of the Nation.

That neither Silk, Woollen, nor Linen, but what is Manufactured here, be made
use of in this Kingdom; and therefore Raw Silk be imported free of all Duty.

I shall not mention what is fit to be offered concerning the African and
Indian Company, that being proper to come from the Directors thereof.

These Overtures being seriously Considered by His MAJESTY's High Commissioner,
and the Honorable Estates of Parliament, I am persuaded they, in their Wisdom,
will find them necessary to make the Nation Happy: And however this may seem to
cross the Interest of some; yet it is always known, that a Public Good, will,
in a short time, Recompense a present Loss.


