MAN'S MORTALITY: OR, A TREATISE Wherein it is proved, both Theologically and
Philosophically, that whole Man (as a rational Creature) is a Compound wholly
mortal, contrary to that common distinction of Soul and Body: And that the
present going of the Soul into Heaven or Hell is a mere Fiction: And that at
the Resurrection is the beginning of our immortality, and then Actual
Condemnation, and Salvation, and not before.

With all doubts and Objections Answered, and resolved, both by Scripture and
Reason; discovering the multitude of Blasphemies, and Absurdities that arise
from the fancy of the Soul.

Also diverse other Mysteries, as, of Heaven, Hell, Christ's humane residence,
the extent of the Resurrection, the New Creation, etc. opened, and presented to
the trial of better judgments.

By R. O.

That which befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts; even one thing
befalls them all: as the one dies, so dies the other; yea they have all one
breath, so that man has no pre-eminence above a beast; for all is vanity.
Ecclesiastes 3. 19. AMSTERDAM, Printed by John Can. Anno Dom. 1644.

To the Reader.
Judicious Reader,
THy serious perusal, but the scorn and derision of the multitude hereof, is
my expectation: Startle not thou, be patient, read, ponder, and Berean like try
whether these things be so or no: If any thing in it be worth thy owning, take
it, it is thine as well as mine, and I have my end, thy benefit: I wish it well
to all, but I fear it will be a Parable to most; however, I have unbosom'd my
duty, freely as I have received, I give it freely to the World; it is my faith,
as I believe, so have I spoken. I expect an Answer; if it be such as will not
hold trial, it is likely I shall vindicate my self; but if by force of
Argument it shall convince, I shall be ready and free thankfully to embrace it,
and renounce my error, whether it be in part or in whole, though in the maine
I am nothing jealous, had I therein doubted, my weakness had not been thus
visible to the World. Whereas in several places scattered through the Book,
the use of the word Soul may seem to some, to imply that, which I deny; let
such know, it is for Argument sake, not intending in the least any self
distinct Being by it. Thus desiring my endeavors may have a fair and equal
trial by Scripture and sollid Reason, I commit thee to the blessing of God in
the perusal thereof, and rest

Thine in the love of the Truth, R. O.

To his worthy friend the Author upon his Book.
THe Hell hatched Doctrine of the immortal Soul
Discovered, makes the hungry Furies houle,
And tear their snakey hair with grief appal'd,
To see their Errour-leading Doctrine quail'd,
Hell undermined, and Purgatory blown
Up in the air, and all the spirits flowne,
Pluto undone, thus forced for to yield
The frightened Souls from the Elizian Field.
And squallid Charon now may leave his Trade,
To see all Souls made subject to the spade,
And Cerberus his dismal fate deplore,
To think that he shall scare the Souls no more.
But joy'd at this, Minerva she does run
T'imbrace her Nurse Child great Apollo's Son:
The Heavens triumph in the wane of The World to see
Such light break out on its Posterity:
They sue Mnesichole, and so do I
To register this Man's Mortality.
N. C.

Would you a young Man see for to control
The Ancient sure you would think he had no soul.
But God has promised, and still reveals
To Babes, what he from prudent men conceales.
Heavens bless thee Man, for bringing that to light,
Which Envy raked up in the dust for spite:
And may thy Book be as a passing Bell
To dying Man to toll his fatal knell.
S. R.

MAN'S MORTALITY. OR, A Treatise proving MAN (quatenus Animal rationale) a
Compound wholly Mortal.
CHAP. I.
Of Man's Creation, Fall, Restitution, and Resurrection, how they disprove the
Opinion of the Soul, imagining the better part of Man immortal: And proves
him (quatenus homo) wholly mortal.

TO omit tedious introductory Circumstances, which are as commonly vselesse as
prolix: Observe: That when God had molded, formed, and completely
proportionated Adam of the Dust of the ground, he breathed in his face the
breath of Lives Orig.
, and Man became a living Soul: Genesis 2. 7. That is, he gave that life-lesse
Body a communicative rational Faculty or property of life, in his kind: And so
it became a living Creature, or complete (...), of whom was the Woman, both
innocent and free from sin, and so from Death and mortality: For the wages of
Sin is Death, Romans 5. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 56. Thus Man was gloriously immortal, yet
no longer a Creature incorruptible, then during innocent: For (Genesis 2. 17.) God
said, of the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it,
for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye: that is, thy
immortality shall be changed for mortality: Immortal Adam shall be made
mortal, not a part of thee, but Thou shall surely dye, even whole man, without
the least exception of any, the worst or noblest part of him, unless God had a
mental reservation; but even the same Thou that live, Thou shall surely dye:
that must dye wherein was life: then surely if he had an immortal Soul, which
is the life of the body, that must be made mortal. The result of all which, is
this:

That what of Adam was immortal through Innocence, was to be mortalized by
Transgression:

But whole Adam (quatenus Animal rationale) was in Innocence immortal:

Ergo, all, and every part, even whole Man was liable to Death by Sin: And so
consequently, if Adam had then such an indefinable thing in him, and of him,
without which he was not Man, (as is vulgarly supposed, but simply maintained
by the Church of Rome, England etc.) as an Angelical Spirit, that neither
could, nor can be subject to mortality: Then he had that he had not: which made
him be what he was not: he 1. Absur.
sinned with that, with which he could not; which made him Fall 2. Absur.
when he did not: which Bo-peepe is impossible: For if Adam was martalized, and
That not, It was no part of him, this they must confess, or else the other
follows.

This being thus cleared, and proved from Adams Creation and Innocence: let us
proceed to his Fall, Restitution, and Resurrection, who eating of the forbidden
fruit, (whose nature was, as was supposed by Nemesius the Philosopher, to
mortalize him, as Mala insana are to destroy and reduce rationality to
madness) God fulfilled his threatened Curse upon him, saying, (Genesis 3. 19.) In
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the Ground;
for out of it wast thou taken: for Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall
return. Here he is plainly disrobed of all his immortality, he must to Dust,
without the least mention of any Being Man had died without resur^ection, ^ad
not Christ redeemed it: therefore, as well may we say, that all shall not rise,
as that Christ died not for all; for if one* be, needs must the other. 1 Cor.
15. 21. 22.
thereafter, either of part or whole; till this Promise of Christ, The seed of
the woman shall break the Serpents Head, which is not completed till the
Resurrection: for then, and not before, Man's immortality is in Actual Being,
whose beatitude and infelicity comes through Faith and infidelity. So that
Death reduces this productio Entis ex Non-ente ad Non-entem, returns Man to
what he was before he was; that is, not to Be: Psalm. 115. 47. the Dead praise
not the Lord, neither they that go down into silence: And Psalm. 116. 4. His
breath goes forth, he returns to the Earth, in that very Day his thoughts
perish. (see more page 5. 6. 7. 8.) But the Resurrection restores this
nonented Entitie to an everlasting Being, 1 Cor. 15. 42. It is sown in
corruption, it is raised in incorruption.

Thus Mortality is derivated to all Adams posterity: The first Man (quatenus
homo) is of the Earth earthly, as is the earthly, such are they that are earth:
(1 Cor. 15. 47. 48.) But the Earth of which Man is, is corruptible, and shallbe
burnt up with fire: 2 Pet. 3. 10. Therefore whole Man is corruptible: for as in
Adam all dye, (1 Cor. 15. 22) even so in Christ shall all be made alive; what
fell in Adam shall be raised by Christ; what was mortalized by the earthly Man
shall be immortalized by the Heavenly man: wherefore All, not a part of Man was
mortalized by Adam; or else only the fallen 3. Absur.
part must be redeemed, and not the whole man: for no more of man then fell was
redeemed, and if the body only fell, and his formal part (his soul) continued
immortal, then that part of man (his body only) was purchased, not his
constitutive or better part, his Soul: So that the bodies 4. Abs^
only of the Reprobate according to this fancy shall be damned: for nothing of
Adam, but what fell of Adam, can be made liable to condemnation; and what of
him stood, shall stand, as well as the Angels that never fell: But in Christ we
are complete, Coll. 2. 10. Therefore in Adam totally fallen.

Further: If Adams fall was not a complete change of his whole manhood, from
immortality to absolute mortality of the whole; then 5. Absu^
in the day that he did eat (the forbidden Fruit,) He did not surely dye; for
He implies his Manhood; (and my very Opposites confess the Soul the very
Essence and Being of Manhood:) and [in the Day] and [surely dye] imply,
Execution as well as Transgression to be then; for both have equally relation
to the Day: In the Day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye: so as
well may we say, he did not eat, as did not dye That Day.

And if nothing dyed, that is, became mortal, but his Body; then 6. Absu^
that dyed, and his Soul lived; that is, must be as it was at first, before God
breathed life into it; that is, a dead corpse, and indeed was never other, if
the Soul were a distinct Being of it self, and all life in it self, and the
Body but an Instrument to it, whereby it performs all motion and action (as
Nemesius on Man's Nature p. 266. with others maintain:) And thus it must needs
follow, that this Death threatened was a mere 7. Absur^
Scar-crow, even nothing at all; for He, that is, his constitutive part (his
Soul) continued immortal, and unchanged, and used his body instrumentally, as
it did before the Transgression: and if it be Answered; it became sinful and
subject to sin, and so of final Condemnation in Hell at the length. I Reply;
That before he sinned he was subject to sin, or else he could not have sinned,
for quicquid est in actu, prius fuit in potentia; and if the wages of sin be
death, then he must be of necessity subject to death the effect, as well as sin
the cause at the same time: And so consequently, the Souls possibility of
sinning being producted into Actual sin, the Soul must have its wages, Actual
mortality. Further, if the Souls Death be only that of Hell; then the
principal or efficient cause deepest in the Transgression was 8. Absur^
less punished, then the isntrumental, the Body being but the Souls
instrument whereby it acts and moves: as if a Magistrate should hang the
Hatchet, and spare the Man that beat a man's brains out with it: and so the
Soul suffer the last death and scapethe first: which is as preposterous, as, if
this Death 9. Absurd.
should be received before this Life. Moreover: Condemnation in Hell is not
properly, but remotely the reward of Adams Fall; For properly Condemnation is
the wages of* Infidelity, or unbeleife in Christ, as Salvation is of Belief:
So that none can be condemned into Hell, Joh. 3. 3. 19. 36.
but such as are actually guilty of refusing of Christ, because immortality or
the Resurrection cannot be by Propagation or Succession, as mortality from Adam
to his Issue; and so the Child though temporally, yet shall it not eternally be
punished for his Fathers sin, but his Condemnation shall be of himself.

Having thus from the Creation, Fall, Restitution, and Resurrection laid a
groundwork for this mortality, let us see how it commensurates with the
universality of Scripture and Reason.

CHAP. II.
Scriptures to prove this Mortality.

JOb 4. 19, 21. How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose
foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth, does not their
excellency which is in them go away? they die even without Wisdom.

Job 14. 1, 2. Man that is born of a woman is of few daiies, and full of
trouble, he comes up like a flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a
shadow, and continues not: (and ver. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. and 12.) For there is
hope of a Tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again; and that the
under-branch thereof will not cease: though the root thereof wax old in the
ground, and the stock thereof dry in the earth; Yet through the sent of water
it will bud, and bring forth branches like a plant. But man dies, and wastes
away: yea man gives up the ghost, and where is he? As the waters fail from
the sea, and the flood decays and dries up: So man lies down and rises
not, till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake out of their sleep.

Psalm. 103. 15. 16. As for man, his days are as grass, as a flower of the
field, so he flourishes; for the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the
place thereof shall know it no more.

From these two places compared we may see, that man (not his flesh only, for
that makes not man; but flesh and spirit sensu conjuncto make Man) is not as a
Tree, when he is cut down, whose spirit lives, and sprouteth forth, and
continues: but as the flower of the field, (not the stalk, but the bare
flower) which totally fades and perishes: Therefore Man is wholly mortal: He
shall die, and the Son of Man shall be made as grass, Isa. 51. 12.

2 Cor. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4. there our Being after death is called A building of an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: with this the Apostle
desires to be clothed: and what it is he defines, viz. mortality swallowed up
of life: whence it is most evident, that all his hope of future life was
grounded upon the Resurrection, and that his hope was altogether grounded
thereon, he confirms, 1 Cor. 15. arguing, If Christ be not risen, the dead
should not rise: and (ver. 18.) They which are fallen asleep in Christ are
perished, and (ver. 14.) Then is our faith also in vain; whose end (1 Pet. 1.
9.) is the salvation of our souls. How should then all be in vain, if our
souls as soon as breath is out of the 10. Abs.
body enter into glory and salvation? For by that, though there were no
Resurrection of the flesh, we should receive the end of our Faith, the
Salvation of our Souls: Nay further, he makes all our hope to be in this
life, if there be no Resurrection; for ver. 19. having shown the evils that
follow the denial of the Resurrection, says; If in this life only we have
hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable: whence plainly appears, that
the denial of the Resurrection confines all our hopes within this life, and so
all our sufferings, persecutions, prayers, faith, etc. were to no purpose:
which could not be by this Soulary fancy of present reward of beatitude after
this life.

1 King. 2. 2. David says to Solomon, I go the way of all the earth: that is,
as all the earth must see corruption, so must he; and if his Soul were part of
him, yea, himself, so must it; 11. Abs.
else should he not go the way of all the earth.

And the expression in Josh. 2. 13. Deliver our lives from death, imports
absolute mortality: for if Death be not dissolution of life, or its
depravation, how can it be said to suffer death? not by a bodily separation,
for that is but as the laying down of a burden, wherewith it was clogged and
tired, whereby it is made more lively ten thousand times; (as my Opposites
confess;) and so, can no more be said to be dead, then a 12. Abs.
Porter when he is disburthened of his Load.

Job. 34. 15. All flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again unto
dust.

Eccl. 3. 19. That which befalls the Sons of Men befalls Beasts; even one
thing befalls them; as one dies, so dies the other: they have all one
breath, so that they have no pre-eminence above a Beast: for all is vanity.

Wherefore if their Breath be all one, then God breathed no other Breath, (that
is, life or soul,) into Man, then he gave to Beasts: So that if Man be Fallen,
and the Beasts be cursed for his sake, Man must (...) equally mortal with them.

1 Timothy 4. 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kep^
the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at THAT DAY, and not to me only, but
to all them that love his love his appearing. Here from the finishing of his
course a Crown being laid up, (which is even the same which Peter Epist. 1.
cap. 1. 9. makes the end of our faith, the Salvation of our souls) to be
given at THAT DAY, concludes an intermission to him and us till then.

1 Timothy 6. 14. 16. Keep this Commandment until the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who only has immortality dwelling in light, which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see.

Whence appears, that none ever entered into Heaven since the Creation: And it
is in vain for my Opposites to say it is meant of the corpulent matter only,
for they make the Soul the very manhood: and none that enter therein, enter by
halfes and peecemeal: and this is confirmed by Ioh. 3 13. And no man has
ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man,
which is in Heaven.

Psalm. 6. 5. For in death there is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who
shall give thee thanks?

Psalm. 89 11. 12. Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy
faithfulness in destruction? shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy
righteousness in the Land of forget fulness:

Isa. 38. 18. 19. For the grave cannot praise thee: death cannot celebrate
thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the
living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day: the Father to the Children
shall make known thy truth.

Hence it is plain that during this Death Man is void of actual Being: for had
he then an incorruptible or present actual Being in glory; he should be more
capable of the praise and remembrance of the Lord, then he was before he died.

Job. 3. from the 11. to 20. Why died I not from the womb? etc. for now should
I have lain still, and been quiet, I should have slept, and then I should have
been at rest; as a hidden untimely birth, I had not been; as Infants that never
saw light: there the Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
Oppressor.

Hence follows, that during this Death there is no more present Being to man,
then to an hidden abortive Embrio in this life; and no more capability, then
light to unborne Infants; nor more oppression or torment, then where there is
none to oppress: which is to say, He absolutely IS NOT: Answerable to that of
Jacob, me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not,
Genesis 42. 36.

Job. 4. 17. 19. 20. 21. Whose foundation is in the dust, they perish for ever:
that is, cease to Be till the Resurrection.

Luke 20. 37. 38. Now that the dead are raised etc. relating to Exodus 3. 6. I
am the God of Abraham, etc. From whence Christ proves the resurrection: But if
Abraham, Isaac, etc. had then lived in their souls, it had been no Argument to
prove the resurrection; for he had been the God of living souls Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, though there had been no resurrection. Besides, he says all
live unto him: and this saying is ascribed unto the dead: therefore, as well
may we argue from thence, that they lived in their bodies, as say, they were
dead in body, but alive in soul unto God: for it is impossible to be
potentially and actually living at the same time.

Psalm. 89. 48. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.

Act. 1. 31. He seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that
his soul was not left in Hell, neither his flesh did see corruption: whence is
clear, that spirit, life, breath, or soul are subject to the grave, as well as
body or flesh; for Christ's soul as well as his flesh was in Hell, that is, the
grave or bonds of death: so that he wholly and thoroughly died for us.

Eccl. 4. 1. 2. 3. does show, that the living suffer oppression, but to the
dead is none: and cap. 9. 45. they know not any thing; for a living Dog is
better then a dead Lion: therefore, Psalm. 146. 2. David says, I will sing
praises unto my God while I have any being; implying that in death is there is
none: And I am. 4. 14. Our life is even a vapor that appears for a little
time, and then vanishes away. And Rev. 16. 3. every living soul in the Sea
dyed: and cap. 30. 4. 5. dead souls lived again. And Psalm. 39. 5. man at his
best estate is altogether vanity; compared with Romans 8. 19. the creature was
made subject to vanity; that is corruption, all which declare man's total
death. And Act. 23. 6. and 24. 21. and 26. 6. 7. most clearly show that all
hope of future life and Being is in the Resurrection.

Thus much of Scripture, now to Natural Reason.

CHAP. III.
Natural Reasons to prove it: with Objections Answered.

IF we will rationally argue concerning the Soul, it is necessary to define
what that is, to which it is ascribed: But since it is defined by some one way,
by some another way, I shall produce some Opinions about it; and then bring the
most rational to trial, omitting the more frivolous: viz.

The Stoics held it A certain blast hot and fiery: or the vital spirit of
the blood: The Cretians, Blood: Gallen, a certain exhalation of the purest
blood: Zeno, Cleanthes, Antipater, and Possiodonius, a hot complexion, or
corporeal quality diffused through the whole body: Democritus, Fire, and his
opinion was, the round Attomes being incorporated by air and fire do make up
the Soul: Pythagoras, opinionated it a Number moving of it self: Plato, a
substance to be conceived in the mind, that received motion from it self,
according to number and Harmony: Aristotle, the first continual motion of a
body natural, having in it those isntrumental parts, wherein was possibility
of life: Dinarchus, an Harmony of the four Elements: Nemesius divides it into
Fantasy, Judgment, Memory: Aristotle in his Physics, into vegetative,
sensitive, motive, appetetive, intellective: And Ambrose Parey, page 895.
says, the soul is the inward Entelechia, or the primative cause of all
motions and functions both natural and animal, and the true Form of a man:
It sees, hears, smells, touches, tastes, imagines, judges, etc. And
more exactly page 83. lib. 3. cap. 1. he says, the soul is commonly
distinguished into three Faculties: Animal, Vital, Natural: The Animal,
into Principal, Sensetive, Motive: The Principal, into Imaginative, (seated
in the upper part of the brain) Reasonable, (the middle part of the brain,)
Memorative, (Cerebellum) or after-braine. The Sensetive, into Seeing, (the
eyes) Hearing, (the ears) Smelling, (the nose) Tasting, (the tongue, pallat)
Touching, (the body) The Motive, into Progressive, (legs) Apprehensive, (hands.)

The Vital, into Dilative, or parts for respiration, (weason, lungs)
Concoctive, or parts for vital motion, (heart and arteries, understood by the
Pulsificke Faculty.

The Natural, into Nutrative, Active, Generative: which three are performed by
the help of the Attractive, (the gullet) Retentive, (lower passage or the
stomach) Concoctive, (body of the ventricle) Assimulative, (three small guts)
Expulsive, (three great guts.)

Augustine and Athanasius say, it is a substance created, a spirit intelligent,
invisible, immortal, incorporeall like the Angels.

And there be several Opinions of its Body: Lucippus and Hipparchus say, it
has a fiery Body: Critias and Anaxemines, Woolnor and others an aeriall body:
Hesiod, an earthly: Epicurius, fiery and airie: Zenophon, watery and earthly:
Drone, a middle betwixt the spirit and the body: Didimus and Origin, a third
substance.

Diverse other conceptions and fancies there be, to uphold this ridiculous
invention of the Soul traducted from the Heathens, who by the Book of Nature
understood an immortality after Death; but through their ignorance how, or
which way; this invention (reported to be Platoes) was occasioned, and begat a
general belief: and so they, and after them the Christians have thus strained
their wits to such miserable shifts, to define what it is, but neither conclude
any certainty, or give satisfaction therein. Yet since it is generally
concluded to be in man, and of man; but what, where, or how no man knows,
though such several opinions be, if but examined: I Will pitch upon those which
afford most conceptory definition: that is, that of Aristotle, Nemesius, or
Ambrose Parey, which make the Soul to be all the internal and external
Faculties of Man jointly considered: or Man Anatomized: and thereto Reply thus.

All the Faculties of Man (sensu diviso or conjuncto) are all, and each of them
mortal; as well those that are peculiar to man, as those that are common to
Beasts: and if all those, with his corpulent matter completing Man, be proved
mortal; then the invention of the Soul upon that ground vanishes: which I
thus prove.

All elementary compositions or Temperatures are mortal, and transitory:

But Man's Faculties a minore ad majus are Temperatures:

Ergo, Mortal.

The Minor is thus proved.

That which is subject to intention and remission is a Temperature:

But all Man's Faculties, yea those of Reason, Consideration, Science, etc. all
that distinguish Man from a Beast, are augmented by Learning, Education, etc.
lessened by Negligence, Idleness, etc. and quite nullified by Madness: Ergo.

That those Faculties are Temperatures, I further prove thus:

A Temperature is a Quality; and a Quality may be in the Subject, or absent
from it, without the destruction of the same subject.

But Reason, Understanding, etc. may be absent from the Body their Subject, and
yet the Body living: as, in mad men, and persons in the Falling Sickness; and
none will deny they are men at that same time: Ergo.

Object. Qualities of the Body are subject to sense: But Understanding, etc.
subject to none: Ergo.

Answ. A hot and dry brain is quick-witted, which by moisture and coldness
is altered: and so we are disposed according to the present constitution of our
Bodies.

If this suffice not, I add: that, an effect is by passion from the cause, as
motion cannot be without passion from that which moves: for take away the
cause, and the motion cease: toll causam tollitur effectus: Therefore
quickness of wit cannot be without passion from heat and dryness: for
overpower that hot and dry brain with moisture and coldness, as may be with
Opium, and the hotnesse and dryness thereof cease, and dullness follows.

Further, even from my Opposites Assertions I prove this Soul they so talk on,
to be elementall, as Woolnor and others, who ascribe unto it an Aeriall Body:
For whatsoever is Aeriall is elementall, else could it not be Aeriall:

Ergo, this Soul is elementall, and so finite.

If this immortal spirit have an Aeriall Body; I wonder what would become of
it, if a living man were closed up in a Vessel, which were so sollid every
where, that the Air could not possibly evacuate, and there the man dye; either
it must perish with the man, or else remain there, through which there is no
passage for its Aeriall Body: So that he 13. Abs.
so martyred has an ill-favored Paradise for his Soul.

And further, experience tells us, If the former Brain-pan be hurt, the Senses
are hindered, but the Cogitation remains found.

If only the Middle-pan be harmed, the Cogitation is maimed; but the Seat of
Sense keeps all the five Senses whole: If any hurt befall both to the Former
and Middle-pan, both Sense and Cogitation decay.

If the Hinder-pan be disordered only, the Memory alone, and neither Sense nor
Cogitation receive harm.

So that in verity, Man is but a creature whose several parts and members are
endowed with proper natures of Faculties, each subservient to other, to make
him a living Rational Creature; whose degrees or excellencies of natural
Faculties make him in his kind more excellent then the Beasts: So that though
Parey and others do so excellently set forth his several endowments or
properties of his several members, it does not follow, that those Faculties
together are a Being of themselves immortal: For as the members cannot be
perfect members without them, so they cannot be faculties without their
members; and separation cannot be without destruction of both: As attraction or
heat is the property of fire, which cannot be, if fire cease; nor fire be, if
it cease: and as well may we say the heat of the fire 14. Ab^
continues, after the fire is dead out, as those Faculties when their Body is
dead: for spoil one, spoil both; kill one, kill both; this is in that, and
that is in this: The Form is so in the Matter, and the Matter so in the Form;
as thereby, and not else, is an Existence, or Humane Entity: And their Being is
in this Union, and their Union is in this Being: So that, take away Form, and
Matter cease; take away Matter and Form cease: destruction vnius est
interritum alterius. The Form is the Form of the Matter, and the Matter the
Matter of the Form; neither of themselves but each by other, and both together
make one Being: therefore if one Be by the other, and thereby Both together;
then one cannot consist with the other, but must Both perish together: For
nothing can consist without that by which it is.

But suppose on the contrary, one could consist without the other, as they say
the Soul can without the Body; then one may be generated without the other,
Soul without Body, and so according to their preposterous precepts, it is not
unnatural for a Woman to bring forth a 15. Abs.
Spirit, that has neither flesh, blood nor bones, instead of a Child.

Or if one Be without the other, as Form without Matter: Mass concepted,
without the Faculty conceptive: then should all corpulent Substances be as
infinite as God, without beginning, 16. Abs.
and Be of themselves, and themselves Gods: But I hope all grant both
impossible: Therefore they must as well end together as begin together; and
begin together as end together. Moreover, experience further tells us, that they
neither can Be, nor consist without other: For if Nature be deprived more, or
less in her work of conception of her due, (her Forms or conceptions being by
her powers Formative or conceptive, or her Formed Faculties by her Facultive
Forms) her Effect is accordingly: If membrally impedited, a membrall
impediment; if totally impedited, a total frustration; of Matter and Form, in
Both: For he that is born without any member, has neither Form nor Faculty
thereof at all: or with any membrall i^perfection, that part has not its
perfection either of Form or Faculty: ^o comes it that some are borne
Fools, and never can be wise: Therefore their original Being must be
together. And that their ultimate end is together, we see, that the Eye is no
Eye without the Sight: and Sight no Sight without the Eye: and so of all the
other Senses and Faculties e minore admajus. Wherefore, membral perfection is
not so much in shape as in virtue; and virtuall perfection not so much in Mass
as in due proportion, and both jointly make natural perfection, which is the
gift of God, or natures general instinct: So, as one can by no means be
without the other, so one cannot subsist without the other: For could there be
a Facultive substance (as that of the Soul is made) without its body; then a
man might live when his 16. Abs.
head were cut off; yea, were his whole body quite burnt and consumed away,
except his GREAT TOE; he, even his Soul might as well live in his GREAT TOE, as
before in his whole Mass; yea, better in that, then without all, as they
childishly suppose.

Therefore, they may as well say, the Popes Soul is in his GREAT TOE when men
kiss it, as say, the Soul lives, when the Body dies. 17. Abs.


Further, this Facultive Gift, or Natures endowment can no more be said to be a
subsistent living Spirit, without its Receptacle, then the Sunbeams without
the Sun, which are the gift or property of the Sun, But the Being of this
communication must be in the Subject, as levitie in the Fire, ponderositie in
the Earth: And though the natures of things be immediate communications of Gods
Power to Nature, yet dis junctively those communications are no Entities,
without God be so many several Beings; for in that sense they are not
communications but absolute Beings of themselves; for betwixt Faculty and
Subject is a Relation to communication, as betwixt Father and Son to
Fatherhood; neither without other, nor it without both: and to say
notwithstanding, as this fancy of the Soul imports, that there may be a
Facultive Substance without its Subject; then Natures several Faculties must
not be the several communications of One Being, but so many absolute
irrelative Beings of themselves: So that this Doctrine of the Soul implies,
18. Abs.
no 19. Abs.
God; if a God, so many several Gods as Faculties: and if but ONE, then it
chops 20. Abs.
that ONE smaller then herbs to the pot: Therefore Faculty cease with its
Subject, or with the Subject God gathers to himself the power, and yet his
power no more by retraction, then less before by communication; and so but One
Being, in whom all things are, or one Ens Entium.

Moreover, those several Faculties cannot be united or comprehended in one
body, but by the several members of the same body; for we see, if the member
decay, the faculty decays: Therefore their unite substance must be terminated
membrally in the body: And if it were possible they could subsist separated
from their members; then in that separation their Being could not be conjunct
or unite, for want of that which tied them together, the several members: And
so, if any Being, so many several Beings as several Faculties: if any Soul,
so many 21. Abs*
several Souls: a Phantasticke Soul, a Rational Soul, a Memorative Soul, a
Seeing Soul, a Hearing Soul, a Smelling Soul, a Tasting Soul, a Touching Soul,
with diverse other Souls of all sorts, and sizes: as, saving your presence, an
22. Abs.
Evacuating Soul, etc.

And further, that those Faculties are thus in their Subjects, and are not
without them, (as accidens non est nisi in subjecto) we see, that they increase
and grow with their Subjects, and perfect together: For a Child is totally
proportionated (as Adam when God formed him of the Earth) before the vital
Faculty be actual, (as Parey says) and the Rational requires a due process
of time after birth, before it be ripe to bring forth the fruit of Rationality,
and as its Subject grows and ripeneth, so it increases and perfecteth: for
it is impossible, that the thing which is not actual in it self, should have a
second thing actual in it; and Rationality in an Infant, is no more in it,
then a Chickin in the egg, only in posse: therefore a Child cannot possibly
ratiocinate, before it be actually Rational; which cannot be before
Organnicall perfection: For Reason cannot Be, and not show it self; show it
self and not Be; for its Being is its Rationality, and its Rationality its
Being: therefore as its Organs are potentiall, it is potentiall; and as its
Organs are weak and imperfect, it is weak and imperfect; and as they are
perfect, it is perfect: Therefore Faculties increase with their Subjects, and
if increase, they must decrease.

Anatomize Man, Take a view of all his Lineaments and Dimensions, of all his
members and Faculties, and consider their state severally, and all are
transitory, even all that goes to the Subject Man is corruptible, and himself
but a Bundle of corruption, or curious Mass of vicilitudes. If all of Man that
goes to his Manhood be mortal, where then, or what is this immortal thing
the Soul they talk of? we have examined all his parts and faculties, and find
even all mortal: It is not sure his prima materia though ingenerable,
incorruptible, insensible, indefinite, etc. Nor his Forma prima, that principle
which first gives Essence to a natural Body; the first Active principle,
informing and figurating the First Matter, sui appetentem; for both are
general to the whole Creation, whose Efficient Cause is only immediately God
himself, by whose power all things that are made shall be returned to that of
which they were made, their Materia prima, or created matter: So that, (as
Solomon says,) Man has no pre-eminence above a Beast, even one thing
befalls them.

What Reason is there now, that Man's Faculties in a higher Degree, should be an
immortal Spirit, more then a Beasts in a lower degree? but both elementary and
finite.

Further, if it be not unnatural that Seeing, Hearing, etc. should be
producted by an Elementary operation, as none deny in the propagation of
Beasts: why is not the rational faculty in Man as natural in Man, and may as
well be producted elementarily by Man, as the other by Beasts, and be as
actually mortal? If this suffice not, observe; Substantia non recipit majus
aut minus, a Giant is no more a man then a Dwarf: there may be a graduall
distinction, and yet no Essential difference; Degrees of Faculties in several
persons, and yet the Faculties the same, and of one nature, though not equally
excellent: and the Degree does not make a Faculty more a Faculty, or less a
Faculty: Therefore, if the said Faculties in an inferior Degree be
elementary, so must they in a superior: But in Brutes, whom none deny to be
wholly mortal, and all their Faculties elementary, have our most noble parts
and Faculties scattered amongst them, though in an inferior degree: As Ambrose
Parey says, (Lib. 2. cap. 1.) If we will diligently search into their nature,
we shall observe the impressions of many virtues: as, of Magnanimity, Prudence,
Fortitude, Clemency, Docility, Love, Carfulness, Providence; yea, Knowledge,
Understanding, Memory, etc. is common to all Brutes; the Affections and
Passions of the Mind, all his Qualities good and bad, and every Faculty he
has is to be found more or less amongst them: And Parey further says, They
are of quick sense, observant of the Rites of Friendship and Chastity, they
submit themselves to the Discipline of Man, they have taught Man many things,
etc.

The Hare is eminent for Memory, the Dog for Apprehension and Fidelity, the
Serpent for Wisdom, the Fox for Subtlety, the Dove for Chastity and
Innocence, the Elephant for Docility, Modesty, and Gratitude. Pliny says, he
comes near the understanding of a man, that they worship the Moon and Stars:
Plutarch, that they worship the Sunrising. The Ape is eminent for Imitation and
Understanding, the Turtle for Love, the Crocodile for Deceit, the Lamb for
Patience, the Waspe for Anger, etc. and for his Five Senses he is by them
excelled.

Aper auditu nos vincit, Aranea tactu,
Vultur odoratu, Linx visu, Simia gustu.
Thus Man in sensu diviso is to be found amongst the other Creatures, and in
him alone those several Faculties are eminent sensu conjuncto, and so only
capable of God: Therefore those Faculties being elementary in an inferior
Degree, in an inferior Creature, why may they not be elementary in a superior
Degree in a superior Creature?

Now from all, this follows, that if in man be an immortali spirit, then
diverse other Creatures have the like, though not in the same Degree; for if
Degree therein should make or mar the thing it self, then some 23. Abs.
would have no more Souls then Beasts, and some less: as Madmen; and Fools
no more; and Infants less. If it be the Rational Faculty, then all men are
borne without Souls, 24. Abs.
and some die 25. Abs.
before they had Souls, as Infants; and some after 26. Abs.
their Souls are gone, as Madmen that live and perish in their madness; and
some 27. Abs.
would be borne, live, and die without Souls, as Fools; and some 28. Abs.
would have Souls but by fits and jumps, as Drunkards, persons with the
Fallingsicknesse, etc. nay all of us spend a great part of our days without
our Souls, for while we are in sound sleep our Rationality cease pro
tempore: Thus this Immortal Spirit goes and comes as occasion serves.

CHAP. IIII.
Objections from Natural Reasons Answered.

BEcause I have only met with one or two in this kind, I shall give a glance
upon them, and pass to those Objections which are extorted from Scripture,
which are various.

Object. Wooln. page 324. If the Soul be compounded of the Elements, it will
not follow, that it must needs be mortal; because Corruption and Death comes
not only, nor so much from Propagation or Composition, as from divine
Malediction: for the wages of sin is death: Without which even Adams Body
should have been immortal as well as his Soul.

To which I answer. The Soul (by his own grounds) was chiefly, the body but
instrumentally in the Transgression: And so, if the wages of sin be death, the
Soul was under the divine Malediction as well as the Body: so that it (if such
a thing be) lost its supernaturality and immortality, as well as the body:
Therefore, if by this Rule the Souls Immortality may be pleaded, much 29. Abs.
more may the Bodies.

I should (according to the import of the Title of this Chapter) have produced
more Objections in this kind: but finding Natural Reason silent therein, I
Answer such silent ones with silence. Needs must Reason be silent in the
defense of this fancy, since it cannot define what that is, to which this
immortality is ascribed: Yet some beyond all Reason to uphold this ignote
endless entitie, say, that though it cannot be defined what it is, yet it
follows not that it is not: as we cannot define what God is, yet it follows
not that there is no God: And so it mattereth not whether it be the Rational
Faculty, or no; or what it is, so long as it is.

To this I Answer, That this is to make no distinction betwixt Reason and
Madness; As if we were bound to believe that, for which there is no sense nor
reason; so might we believe there were ten thousand Gods, yea blocks and stones
were Gods sufficient to save: But we find in Scripture and in Nature sufficient
to convince our Reasons that there is but one God, and he that one whom we
worship, though our Reasons are not able fully to comprehend him; so much of
him we know, as our Reasons is able to contain: whereas for this immortal
spirit, there is not so much of it declared as may convince Reason what it is,
or that it is; and to believe that it is, because we cannot know what it is,
shall be no Article of my Belief.

Thus proved from Scripture and Reason, let us proceed to the Resolution of
what from Scripture shall be obtruded.

CHAP. V.
Objections extorted from Scripture Answered.

OBject. 1. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at
home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: we are confident I say, and
willing rather, to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, 2
Cor. 5. 6. 8.

Whence is inferred a present enjoyment of Glory immediately after death.

I Answer, that both the foregoing and subsequent matter deny such an
Interpretation, or Consequence: for before, wishing to be clothed with our
House from Heaven, on which is this expression of being present with the Lord,
he expounds, that his meaning is thereby, that mortality might be swallowed up
of life, or as he says, 1 Cor. 15. 53. that this corruptible (man) might put
on incorruption, and this mortal put on immortality: And the following matter
of them words, being laid down as the reason or ground why he so spoke, prove,
that by his [presence with the Lord,] he meant nothing else, but his state
after the Resurrection: for says he, we must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, that every one, etc. ver. 1.

Obj. 2. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better; nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is much
needful for you, Phil. 1. 23. 24.

I Answer: this is of the same nature, therefore must have the same
Interpretation: for Paul did not preach one thing to the Philippians, and the
contrary to the Corinthians. Besides, such manner of expressions are not
contradictory to this mortality; for though there be long time to the Living
till the Resurrection, there is none to the Dead: for Psa. 39. 13
from Adams death to his Resurrection at the end of the World, will be to him,
as the twinkling of an eye to the Living; yea, the twinkling of an eye to the
living, is more time, then a thousand, yea ten thousand years is to the dead:
For Being only commensurates with Time, or length of days; not to Be cannot
possibly be capable thereof: So, that the Livings tedious anniversary
expectation of the Resurrection, and end of their faith; is not a twinkling to
the grave: the Livings Future is the Deads Present: Therefore, it is well
figurated in Scripture by sleep, as slept with his fathers, 1 King. 11. 43.
fallen asleep in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 18. etc. not that it is so long a time to
the dead, but that in nature there is nothing so represents death* or
non-being, as sleep: So that this may take away all carnal security; for who
would not watch and pray over night, that knows he must die in the morning?
live well and be wary to day, that must rise and answer to morrow; believe to
day, that would not be damned, but saved to morrow: This administers comfort to
the righteous, but terror to the wicked.

Object. 3. And it came to pass as her soul was in departing, Genesis 35. 18.
Ergo, there is such a thing as the Soul, which continues its Being after
death.

Answ. No such matter; for the sense of the words is, as she was dying, or life
a departing, for the following words say she dyed; which could not be, if her
soul (her constitutive part) lived still, no more then a man can be said to
lose his hand, when he loses a finger.

Object. 4. And he stretched himself upon the Child three times, and cried
unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, pray thee, let this Child's soul come
into him again: And the Lord heard his voice, and the soul of the Child came
into him again, and he revived. 1 King. 17. 21. 22. And Pro. 14. 22. it is
said, his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall mourn.

Ergo, there is such a thing as the soul.

Ans. If it be meant life or breath, whose Being is consistent and terminated
in a corpulent union: For, by that of the Child, is meant his breath or life,
the thing that his corpulent matter wanted; as ver. 17. implies, which says,
his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him: Therefore,
that which was gone, was prayed for, his breath or life, as his Answer further
proves, which was, and it revived.

And by Soul in that of Job is meant, his conscience; whose seat is in the
reasonable and memorative Faculties. Therefore, the use of the word Soul in
those places, do not prove such a thing in man as is supposed: For in
Scripture it is variously used upon various occasions. It is put for the
stomach, Prove. 27. 4. for the eyes, Ier. 13: 17. for the heart, 1 Samuel 18. for
God, Prove. 9. 16. Heb. 10. 38. Ier. 14. 17. for the dead body, Psalm. 16. 10.
for the whole man, Levit. 7. 19. and 4. 1. Acts 7. 14. Number. 15. 39. Romans 13. 1.
Genesis 12. 5. and 46. Act. 2. 41. 1 Pet, 3. 20. for breath, Act. 20. 10. for
life, Isa. 53. 17.

Therefore, from those places those parts may as well be proved so many Souls,
or Spirits of Immortality, as from those where it is put for Breath or Life,
its Being be proved, or such an immortal existence to be in the body.

Object. 5. For which cause we faint not; for though our outward man perish,
yet the inward is renewed day by day.

Ergo, there is soul and body in man.

Answ. It is not said, Though our flesh perish, yet our souls is renewed; then
'twere something to little purpose, but it is said, our outward man, which
compared with what is meant by inward man, must needs be whole man; for by
inward man is meant faith or work of grace, (Romans 1. 17. and 14. 8. and 8. 1. 2
Cor. 5. 17.) which is no part of natural man: so that without it or its
renewing we are men perfect, as well as with it.

Object. 6. Who knows the spirit of man, that goes upward; and the spirit of
a beast that goes downward to the earth? Wherefore man has a soul that goes
presently to Heaven, but the beasts to the earth.

Answ. It cannot bear that sense; for immediately before he says, their
breath is all one, there is no difference, as the one dies so dies the other,
and goes to one place, the dust: Therefore, if the beasts be reversed into the
elements, so must man's. The meaning I take to be thus, that such a wonderful
thing is the breath of a man, that breaths upward, and the breath of a beast
tkat breaths downward, (for Spirit signifies breath) according to that of
Ovid: Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os Homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Iussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
that its Faculty how it is, is past finding out: for Art in all her imitations
could never touch that secret with her pensill.

Object. 7. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul, but rather fear him, who is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell.

Answ. This carries the face indeed of the souls immortality: but if the
interpretation must be confined to that sense, it overthrowes the current of
the whole Scriptures: Wherefore, my opinion of it is, that by [not able to kill
the soul] is meant, (as Luke has it, c. 12. 4) have no more that they can do:
that is, though they have power over this life, which is sown in corruption,
they have none over that which is raised in incorruption, But rather fear him
which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell; that, (as Luke has it,)
after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell. This does not set forth any
immortality before the Resurrection, but shows, that only that is in Gods
hand, and he only able to touch it, that is, cast it into Hell. That this must
be so expounded, I further prove from the nonentity of Hell; for there can be
no casting into Hell, before Hell be, which though it be ordained of old, Isa.
30. 33. No Hell till the Resurrection.
it is but in posse, not in esse till the Resurrection: For satisfaction, it is
convenient to declare what we mean by Hell: for Hell is diversely used in
Scripture: It is put for the grave, Psalm. 16. 10. and 55. 15. Isa. 14. 15. for
the Whale in which Jonah was, Ion. 2. 2. for Satan's Kingdom leading to Hell,
Mat. 16. 18. for Satan, or his malignant spirits, Iam. 3. 6. for the place of
the damned, Mat. 5. 29. and 10. 28. Luke 12. 5. and 16. 23. 2 Pet. 2. 4. and
this last, [the place of the damned] is that which we mean by Hell: and it is
likewise variously called: as, outer darkness, Mat. 22. 13. and 23. 33. wrath
to come, 1 These. 1. 10. and 5. 9. Chains of darkness, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6.
eternal fire, Jude 23. second death, Rev. 20. 16. bottomless pit, Rev. 9. 2.
the place of torment, Rev. 14. 10. and 20. 10. Lake of fire, Rev. 29. 20. and
21. 8. everlasting punishment, Mat. 25. 41. 46. blackness and darkness for
ever, Jude 13. Those several expressions are generally taken to set forth the
end of the Reprobate, or the execution of Gods wrath upon them: Therefore, if
none of the formentioned places that Hell is put for, save that of the place of
the damned, be taken for Hell, then most of those several expressions suite
with it: but the expressions in general grant no immediate execution after
this death, but imply the contrary, as we may see, if we examine them.

First, in Mat. 22. 13. where it is called outer darkness, and 23. v. 33.
damnation of Hell, compared with cap. 25. 41. where it is said, Then shall he
say unto them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels: to this add 2 Cor. 5. 10. For we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in the flesh, whether good or evil: and to these add 1 These. 1.
10. and 5. 9. where it is called, wrath to come: which thus compared show
plainly, it is to come; else execution must go before Judgment, which in a
Commonwealth would be ridiculous injustice, 29. Abs.
as first to hang men, and then judge them. At the day of Judgment we all must
receive our reward according to our deeds good or bad, THEN shall he say unto
them on his left hand etc. and not before THEN: for it cannot be twice
received: therefore, it is fitly called wrath to come; and the very devils
confirm this themselves, Mat. 8. 25. art thou come to torment us before the
time? which proves plainly, that the time of their torment was not come: and
if the Devil cannot be believed, God further cleares it, 2 Pet. 2. 4. For if he
spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered
them into Chains of darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment. And Jude 6. The
Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he
has reserved in everlasting Chains, unto the Judgment of the great day: In
both which places it is said, they are reserved unto Judgment: and Jude ver. 7.
to the Reprobate is reserved the blackenesse for ever: and to this add Rev.
20. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. which clearly show, that at the day of Judgment
both Devils and Reprobate together shall be cast into the Lake of fire:
Therefore, if reserved for both till then, I Will be bold to say, it shall not be
till, nor before then.

Moreover, Rev. 19. 20. it is said, the beast and the false Prophet and them
that worshipped his image were cast alive into the lake of fire and brimstone:
and c. 20. 10. And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the Lake: and
this v. 6. and 14. is called the second death: therefore, this casting into the
Lake must be after the Fall of Antichrist, and after he has done deceiving;
and not before; for if he be there now, he has done deceiving; for once there,
it is impossible he should deceive: but that he has not, there is more
witnesses, then stars in the Sky, or sands in the Sea; our innumerable sins,
whose just reward is the second death.

If it be Questioned, where then the Devils are?

Observe, they are but Creatures, and such as are fallen from their Heavenly
mansions; therefore, within the Sublunary compass, so that as the Earth is the
proper place for ponderous and gross bodies: and the Devils being more subtle
and aiereal may be referred to the air; and not without ground from Scripture:
for Ephesians. 2. 2. the Devil is called the Prince of the power of the air: so
that their casting into Hell, must be the air: and Hell may as well be put for
the air in those places, as in other for the grave, etc. their prison, or
place of custody, as the grave to the dead. And Rev. 12. 9. it is said, he was
cast into the earth, and his Angels etc.

This premised, Hell and Damnation not yet; well might ignorance strain it
self into such incertaine conceits about the place of it is Being, and it not as
yet: Some have feigned it in Mount Aetna, some in the Element of Fire, which is
betwixt the upper region of the Air and the Globe of the Moon; some to be in
the Caves of the Earth, and Conduits of the Sea; some only in the Sea, as
Archer in his Personal reign of Christ mentions, because the Devils were cast
into the Swine, which ran violently down a steopplace into the Sea. Mar. 5. 3.
surely, they might as well say, they have 30. Abs.
Milstones about their necks, because it is also said, better a millstone were
tied about his neck, and he cast into the bottom of the Sea: for the one
follows no more then the other: Some say, it is in the earth equally so far
distant from the surface, as Heaven is above it: as Phillips, etc. and this he
labors to confirm with Scripture: as, Pro. 15. 4. The way of life is above to
the wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath. and Phil. 2. 10. That in the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth,
and things under the Earth: i. e. in Hell says he. And Luke 16. The rich man
saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom: And Ezekiel. 31. 18. Yet shall
thou be brought down with the Trees of Eden unto the nether parts of the Earth.

But those and such like places which literally seem to import Hell, conclude
the thing no more, then other literal expressions prove God to have corpulent
eyes, ears, hands, etc. but are expressions after the manner of men, to show
the gradation of condition betwixt the wicked and the righteous, the one the
extremest debasement, the other the extremest exaltation, which could not be
better figurated to sense, then by Heaven and Earth.

And in particular thus: The first, as Pro. 15. 24. is litterall or figurative,
which interpretation can neither be canonical nor rational; for thereby wise
men must not tread upon the 31. Abs.
ground, but must walk upon the Air, or upon the water, as Christ and Peter
upon the Sea, (Mat. 14. 25. 29.) and there only the way of life: for it says,
their way is above, For the second; as, Phil. 2. 10. that is both prophetical
and figurative, to show how in process of time all Degrees shall subject to
Christ: Angels, Men, Beasts, Devils, and Death, whose Degrees is thus literally
expressed to sense by Heaven, Earth, under the Earth; or Angels that are
highest in dignity, and so celestial; Men and sublunars the middle, and so
terrestrial; Devils and Death the lowest, and so subterrestriall.

The third, as Luke 16. is parabolicall: (of which more anon) and it seems by
this, if Hell be so deep in the Earth, 32. Abs.
the Damned have wonderful good eyes, to see through the earths gross body,
and the Heavens 12. Spheres into the Coelum Empyreum, to spy Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom; or else Heaven must be there too, even in the centure of the
Earth: this is the consequence of such parabollicall Arguments. And the 4th. or
last, as Ezekiel. 31. 18. is a kin to those: for it is but to show, how that
Pharaoh in the height of his pride and fury was brought to confusion, which in
the 15. v. is expressed by, In the day when he went down into the grave, and v.
14. unto death to the nether parts of the earth, to the pit; and v. 17. into
Hell: all which show but the sudden death, and utter confusion of Pharaoh and
his Army: and at the utmost, Hell here can be but put for death, or the grave,
and not for any such place of torment.

There is yet an other Opinion of the place of Hell, which is the best that
ever I heard or read of, and that is (according to Archers judgment) the Earth
reduced to its prima materia or created matter, which he says cannot be
consumed, and there shall the Damned be cast: But least I should dive further
in the inquisition of the place then my Commission will reach, I Will leave it to
the woeful experience of the damned at the day of Judgment.

Object. 8. such a one caught up into the third Heavens: how that he was caught
up into Paradise, 2 Cor. 12. 2. 4. there Paradise is put for the third Heavens:
And to this compare Christ's Answer to the theife upon the Cross: This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise: Therefore, Paradise is the third Heavens, the
place for the souls of the righteous, whither the Theifes soul went that day.

Answ. First, Christ was not there that day himself; for his humanity was three
days and three nights in the grave after his death.

2ly, His whole humanity (soul and body as it is called) suffered death, as it
was necessary, for if his body only suffered, what should our souls have done
for a Redeemer? (of this more hereafter) so that the saying of the prophet is
fulfilled: Psalm. 16. 10. For thou will not leave my soul in Hell, (i. e. his
manhood in the grave) nor suffer thine holy One to see corruption: i. e. or
there to putrify.

3ly, If so; then the souls of the righteous have an earthly fading habitation,
for the 12. Spheres are as the earth is a mere elementall condensation; and at
the Day of the Lord the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements shall melt with fervent heat: 2 Pet. 3. 10. But their habitation is of
a better and enduring substance, Heb. 10. 13. eternal, 2 Cor. 5. 1. an
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.
4. whereas, this makes it mortal, corruptible, and fading: so that, the soul
changes but one corruptible earthly mansion for an other, that shall fleet
away, and no more place shall be found for it, Rev. 10. 20. and 21. 1.

4ly, Christ was the first fruits of them that slept, and thereby (as he told
his Disciples) he went to prepare a place for them in his Fathers house.

Therefore if it were then to prepare, it was not then in esse, there could be
none in, before it self was in Being: so that if Abraham, Isaac, etc. as soon
as they died, entered presently therein, it is as if we should be actually in a
House before the House be built, or enjoy the Purchase before the Price be
paid, or Possession had.

I may (and not without ground) positively affirm, that the place of Glory for
the dead Saints is not yet: and shall not actually Be till the Heaven o^ the
place of glory for the Saints not till the Resurrection.
dissolution of those Heavens and this earth, according to that of Isaiah 65.
15. For behold I create New Heavens and a New Earth, and the former shall not
be remembered, nor come into mind. Chap. 66. the New Heavens and the New earth
shall remain before me says the Lord. And 2 Pet. 3. 12. it is said, we look for
New Heavens and a New Earth, (after the dissolution of the old ver. 12.)
wherein dwells righteousness. And John after he had revealed the end and
final dissolution of the world, and the Judgment of the quick and dead; says,
And I saw a New Heaven, and a New Earth; for the first Heaven and the first
Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea. And ver. 2. 3. etc. And I
saw the holy City, etc. Whence is observable, that Isaiah, Peter, and John with
one consent in probation that they did not mean any state in this world,
expressly conclude the dissolution of those Heavens and this earth, before their
prophecy be fulfilled. 2ly, that they are not the same with those, they style
them New, to distinguish them from the old. 3ly, that they intend no renovation
of the old, Isaiah makes them a work of Creation: [I create New Heavens etc.]
4ly, to confirm it further, Isaiah declares their eternity, [the New Heavens
and the New Earth shall continue before me says the Lord] 5ly, Peter makes
them pure and undefiled: [wherein dwells righteousnesse] And into this New
Earth John saw the holy City, New Jerusalem coming down from God out of
Heaven, (ver. 2.) and heard a voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold, the
Tabernacle of God with men, and he will dwell with them. ver. 3. and ver. 27.
there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles: whence it is most
certain, that it shall never be defiled with sin, for the glory of God shall
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, ver. 23. and they shall reign
for ever and ever. cap. 22. 5. 6ly, there shall be no tears, no death, nor
sorrow, nor any more pain: for the former things are passed away. cap. 21. 4.
none of all which is computable with the state of this world: but if compared
with those places which speak of the state of glory or habitation for the
Saints that sleep in Christ, after this life: as, 1 Pet. 1. 4. where it is made
an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away. and Heb.
10. 34. it is called an enduring substance: and cap. 11. 14. it is called a
Country, and ver. 15. an heavenly Country: which so answer and correspond
with this New Creation, that thereto only it is computable: therefore, they
must needs be one and the same; and that they are, the prophesies themselves do
witness, as, Rev. 21. 24. the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the
light of it: and cap. 22. 5. there they shall reign for ever and for ever: and
Peter makes it the end of their faith, saying, we according to his promise look
for new Heavens etc. and further to confirm it, compare Rev. 7. 14. 15. 16.
17. with cap. 20. 1. 2. 3 4. and you shall find, that it shall be the reward of
those that come out of tribulation etc. Therefore, this is the inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled etc. the purchased possession, Ephe. 1. 14. the
World to come, ver. 21. the reward and end of our faith. This being thus, it is
impossible, that any should enjoy that for the present, which is yet to create:
So that the Thief is found a World too short of this Paradise.

Object. Peter says, it is reserved in Heaven.

To that and such like expressions I Answer, that the word Heaven being fittest
to express the highness of its degree, and exaltation of its glory to sense,
is used for no other end: so that the meaning is, reserved in highest dignity:
for Heaven in Scripture is oftentimes used, to express the height and dignity
of a thing, as, Isa. 14. 12.

Object. Isaiah, there shall be no more thence an Infant of days, nor an old
man that has filled his days: for the Child shall dye an hundred years old,
etc.

Answ. That, if this be expounded by John's Revelation, it cannot admit of an
interpretation suitable to the state of this world: for he says, there shall be
no death there, cap. 21. 4. and before he shows, that Death (the last enemy
that shall be destroyed) was cast into the Lake: Therefore, it is impossible
there should be any death there. So that those expressions of Isaiah are
metaphorical, to express the durance of their state, which John reveals, to
be for ever and ever, cap. 22. 5. Some indeed attribute this of Isaiah to the
Thousand years of Christ's Reign in the Gospels glory, which comes betwixt
the Fall of the Beast and the wars of Gog and Magog; to which though it should
relate, yet that double cord of Peter and John is sufficient to confirm the
thing, both without contradiction plainly and expressly affirming this New
Creation to be after the destruction of the old.

Object. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which
are the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the
presence of God for us, Heb. 9. 24.

Answ. If the subject or matter in hand of that place be observed, the
obscurity or seeming contradiction hereto will vanish: the subject thereof is,
the state of the two Covenants or Testaments; the Old and the New: the first
worldly and carnal, the other heavenly and spiritual; the first the shadow,
the second the substance; the first had a worldly Sanctuary, a Tabernacle made,
with carnal Ordinances, patterns of heavenly things to come; which in this
very place is called holy places made with hands, which were figures of the
true, into which Christ entered not, but into heaven it self; that is, the
Holiest of all, which was not made manifest while the first Tabernacle was
standing, Ver. 8. 12. which in this place is expressed by the title of heaven
it self, not intending the place of glory for the dead Saints, or his local
ascension into any superior material place, but respecting his Mediation or
Offering of himself, whereby now (and for ever) to appear in the presence of
God for us: as ver. 25. and 26. further evidence.

Fifthly, by the third heavens and Paradise in 2 Cor. 12. 2. 4. is meant nothing
else but such a rapture as Daniel, Paul, John, etc. were in, when the Lord
appeared to them in Visions, to declare wonderful things unto them; for he
that was thus caught up, heard unspeakable words, which was not lawful for man
to utter; Ver. 14. And for Paradise in the other place, [To day shall thou be
with me in Paradise] If it be taken of any condition to be in that present day,
it must be the same he was in himself; for he was to be with him, and that was
at rest, where the wicked cease from troubling, Job 4. 17. where the prisoners
rest together, and hear not the voice of the oppressor, Ver. 18. If not to
respect the present day, or any condition therein, (as is most probable) then
it must be meant, (as the Malefactor desired) when he was in his Kingdom,
which could not be before his Resurrection: therefore, the Malefactor could
enjoy no such soulary beatitude, as from hence is supposed, and that before he
had received this Kingdom himself; but must receive the Paradise as Christ
did, by a total Resurrection: wherefore it may well be he was one of the
Saints that rose again soon after Christ's Resurrection, Mat. 28. 53.

Object. 9. By faith Enoch was translated, etc. Heb. 11. 5. And Elijah went up
by a whirlwind into heaven, 2 King. 2. 11. 12.

Answ. This no way helps the fancy of the soul to a Paradise, but rather
wholly confounds the conceit; for Elijah left his mantle, not his body behind,
when he ascended the fiery chariot, and Enoch was wholly taken up by God,
both translated or changed, and therefore, said, not to see death, because they
did not sleep in their change: for in Scripture we read of a threefold
gradation in death; the one sleeping in corruption, which is general, another
sleeping but not seeing corruption, as Christ's, the last a sudden change, as
Paul says, Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, etc. and such as this,
was that of Enoch and Elijah; and this may bear the title of death too, for as
the other is a mediate, this is an immediate change, both end, and meet in one
period, mortality swallowed up of life. And whereas before I affirm, that none
ever except Christ ascended into heaven since the Creation, I mean of those
that slept, of whom he was the first fruits, 1. Cor. 15. 20.

Now that I may not seem to any, to contradict what before I affirmed
concerning the New Heavens and the New Earth, as if I should make this place
into which they ascended, to be the place intended for the Saints generally at
the Resurrection, and so overthrow my former assertions, I shall show the
difference, which if considered, will remove the obscurity: For before, the
place intended for the Saints, was clearly proved incoruptible, and
everlasting, whereas the place into which they ascended, is corruptible, and
shall pass away, and its place no more be found; for the Scripture is plain,
they ascended into Heaven, and as plain the Heavens shall be consumed with
fire: But may be, it is supposed, that Christ and the rest passed the limits of
the Creation, or that the Heavens, except that where he is, shall be dissolved.

To which I Answer, that the Scripture makes no such distinction or difference,
but says, the Heavens shall melt away; or import any thing by Heaven in those
places which speak even of Christ's Ascension, then the same, or part of the
same meant by Heavens in other places which speak of the dissolution.

Further, Reason tells us, that he must be within the compass of the Creation,
for there is no beyond, without it place or being is impossible; Humanity
though glorified is but a Creature, and why not then within the Creation as
well as the Angels, creatures as glorious as glorified humanity? (Luke 20. 36.)
if a Creature, therefore within the Creation, else could it not be a Creature,
his glorification alters not his Creatureship; and the Scripture says, Heaven
must contain him till the restitution of all things, Act. 3. 31: and every
Continent implies a certain place, and every place must be material, for non
datur vacuum, and every matter must imply creation, else it could not be:
therefore he is within the Creation. Moreover, his Humanity not being
ubiquitorie, that is, every where at once, he must be in the creation, and in
some certain place of the creation.

Now seeing Heaven in Scripture is frequently used, to express height or
excellency of degree or dignity of a thing, (as Isa. 14. 12. Heb. 6. 4. Mat.
6. 32. John 3. 12. Ephesians. 2. and 3. 10.) and he ascended upward from the Earth
into some part of the celestial bodies above, Act. 1. 10. therefore, without
doubt he must be in the most excellent, glorious, and heavenly part thereof,
which is the SUN, the most excellent piece of Christ's A^cension i^ to the Su^
the whole Creation, the Epitome of Gods power, conveyour of life, growth,
strength, and being to every Creature under Heaven, it may be with other
things, but nothing without it, the brightness whereof we are not able to
behold at the farthest distance, and according to the famous Copernichus and
Tycho Braheus, it is highest in station to the whole Creation: And it is called
by the Learned, Cor Coeli, Anima and Oculus mundi, Planetarum and Fixarum
Choragus, Author generationis: Fitly therefore may it be called the Right hand
of God, by which through Christ in him we live, move, and have our being; for
it is that which reflecteth the brightness, glory, and power of the Creator
upon the Creatures mortal; his glory must of necessity be the light, else
light could not be, therefore it must be by reflection, else would it be too
glorious for mortal eyes, we could not see it and live: he has drawn a
veil (the body of the Sun) before our eyes, that we may stand in his shadow
and live; for this light is but his shadow, which the Sun as a glass casts
upon the Creatures, it fills the Moon, Stars, and all Sublunars with as much of
his glory as they are able to contain: Therefore the children of men put their
trust under the shadow of his wings: for with him is the fountain of life, and
in his light we shall see light, Ioh. 36. 7. 9. yea, such glory is he of, that
his shadow is our light, we can see him but in part, a glimpse of his glory
fills our eyes, yea the whole world with light, he is light, and in him is no
darkness: therefore light must come from him, or else all would be dark, nay
were he not, there never could be Hell, or outer darkness; for its being
comes by withdrawing both of shadow and substance of his glory, a great gulf
shall be betwixt it and the place of the Saints, that is, there shall be such a
condense interposition, as nothing shall be to reflect the brightness of his
glory upon it, so that it is impossible for them to find the light, and for the
Saints to fall into the dark. If Gods glory be not light, but true light a
created matter, then at the dissolution true light shall be dissolved for ever,
and no more place found for it: so in the New Jerusalem there shall be no
light, but the Saints as well as the Devils shall be in continual darkness:
for there shall be no new light created for it, employed in these words, it
shall have no need of the Sun nor Moon, but the glory of God shall inlighten
it, (and that which inlightneth must needs be light) and the Lamb is the light
thereof; and he shall be the same he is now, yesterday and to day the same for
ever, Heb. 14. 8. Therefore this inlightning glory, or glorious light that he
dwells in now, shall be the light then, discovered naked without reflection,
they being enabled to receive it, their corruption having put on incorruption.
If God be not true light, the Creation could not be consumed with fire; for if
fire be matter created, fire must be burnt with fire, but that is impossible:
therefore, Gods glory or light must be this consuming fire, and not without
reason, for hold a Burning-glasse against the light of the Sun, and the
contracted light meeting with a gross body, causes it to burn: the reason
why any thing burns, is by the combustable grossenes of the body the which
contracted light meets with, whereon it feeds, the corruption whereof
consumes or vanishes before the purity of the light; for that which we call
by the word, fire, is nothing but contradicted light, whose nature is not to
burn, but the heat and burning comes from the grossenes of the matter it
meets, therefore is it, that a Sea-cole fire is hotter then one of wood, the
coal hotter then the flame: So when the true light is displayed, or light
appears naked, that is, when Christ appears naked, that is, when Christ
comes to Judgment, clothed with honor and majesty, covered with light as
with a garment, Psalm. 104. 1. 2 (enlightened with the glory of the Deity,) it
will be to the Creation a consuming fire; else might we behold him and live:
but our corruption is not able to stand in his light; for no sooner shall we
behold it, but we shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye: and then shall
we be enabled, as Job has it, in his light to see light, Therefore was it,
that the Lord put Moses in the clift of a rock while his glory passed by;
because his face (or naked glory) was not to be seen, but his back parts (or
glory through a veil) no man being able to see it naked and live, Exodus 33. 20.
21. 22. 23. If God were not light, there could be neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars
to give light, or any light be in the world; yea the world could never have
been, or could there be any God, or any thing: for if God be not light, he must
be darkness: now darkness is no being, or can give being to any thing, its
but a depravation of light: is not cannot be, or give being: Therefore, to say
God is not light, is to say, he is not, or any Creation ever was or is: so that
light is from everlasting to everlasting: As this formed light, or inlightning
shadow is now the Author of motion, generation, and subsistence; so in the
beginning the substance or true light was the beginner, and by it all beings
had their beginnings: Wherefore, God being true light, it follows, true light
is no creature, or could be created, except God did create himself. And
further, that he is light, the miraculous discovery of himself in visions by
light does evidence: as, his appearance to Moses in a flame of fire, Exodus 3.
2. and Ezekiel. 10. 4. his filling the Court with the brightness of his glory,
his appearance to Peter in a light, which shined in the prison, Act. 12. 7. and
to Paul in a great light, which shone round about him. Further, day after day,
and night after night declare that he is light, for what is outer darkness but
deprivation of his presence? so the absence of the Sun light manifests it a
deprivation in some measure of his presence, the shadow of his glory, or
reflected light; because then is the fittest time for conjuration or dealing
with Devils, raising of spirits, or the like, according to Cornelius Agrippa;
their power being greatest at the farthest distance of his glory, Diabolical
apparitions, or Walks of Devils in diverse places, are then only frequent, and
the greater this deprivation is, the more formidable, uncough, and terrible it
is, as a daily shadow, or type of eternal night, or outer darkness. And when
Christ both God and Man was in the depth of his passion, the Sun was darkened,
that he cried out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? as if his
presence in that Eclipse had quite left him: which plainly implies, that God is
light, and darkness the absence of his glory, the which the more it is, the
greater is the darkness.

Object. God said, let there be light, and there was light: Ergo, light was
created.

Answ. If that place be compared to what is ascribed to the fourth days work,
and it will be found no other, as the body of the Sun, which was to cast the
shadow of his brightness for light upon the earth, and so time distinguished
into day and night by its presence and absence: in which sense light may be
said to be made, and so shall have an end, this shadow or his back parts we
behold, but not the substance, his face, or true light, which by mortality
cannot be seen, Exodus 33. 20. that is impossible. Now seeing it is clear, that
God is the true light which lightneth the world, and every one that comes
therein, and this glory chiefly in the Sun, the Moderatour and upholder of the
whole Creation. Therefore, there must Christ be, or else he fitteth not at the
right hand of God in all things, or has immortallity dwelling in light, the
which no man can approach. As for the Coelum Empyreum which the Astronomers
have invented for his residence, I know no better ground they have for it, then
such as Dromodotus the Philosopher in Pedantius had to prove there was Devils:
Sunt Antipodes: Ergo Daemones. Sunt Coeli: Ergo Coelum Empyreum.

Object. 10. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was, and the
spirit shall return to God who gave it. Eccles. 12. 7.

Answ. By spirit cannot be meant such a thing as the soul, except all souls go
to God, and none to the Devil: for it is indifferently spoken of all: but by
spirit is meant life, which has various expressions in Scripture: it is the
will of God, that dust shall be made man, and live, and it is done, and he
lives; and his will that it shall dye, and it dies, or returns to what it
was: he withdraws his communicated power, and man cease, [the spirit shall
returne] the communication, power, or faculty of life shall cease, [to God that
gave it] in him that communicated, or gave it, in whom we live, move and have
our being: no otherwise man's spirit (or life) returns to God that gave it: he
takes away the breath and the creatures dye, and return to their dust, Psalm.
104. 29. for the life of man is even a vapor that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away. Iam. 4. 14.

Object. 11. And they stoned Steven, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. Act. 7. 59.

Answ. This is a commendation of his life or being into the hands of God, in
whom with Christ our lives are hid, Col. 3. 3. as a full assurance of his hope
and faith in the Resurrection, that when Christ who is our life, should
appear, he also might appear with him in glory: For God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living: for all live unto him, Luke. 20. 38. And thus, and no
otherwise, was his spirit commended, or returned to him that gave it, whose
spirit goes forth, and we are renewed, Psalm. 104. 30. answerable to that of
the two Witnesses, into whom the spirit of life from God, after they had lien
dead three days and an half, entered into them, and they stood upon their
feet.

Object. 12. God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. Genesis 2. 7. Ergo
man has an immortal soul.

Answ. Then so is the foul of a Beast; for Solomon says, their breath is all
one Eccl. 3. 19. and David reckoning up the creatures, and man amongst them,
says indifferently of them all, God hides his face, and they are troubled, he
takes away their breath, they dye, and return to their dust, Psalm. 104. 29.
and this is further amplified in Genesis 1. 33. to every thing in the Earth
wherein there is a living soul etc. and cap. 7. 21. 22. all flesh dyed, in
whose nostrils was the breath of life: and Number. 31. 28. all which make no
difference betwixt them, but as the one dies, so dies the other, and man has
no pre-eminence above a beast: For what man is he that lives, and shall not
see death, or deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah. Psalm. 89. 48.

Object. 13. And it came to pass the Beggar dyed, and was carried by Angels
into Abraham's bosom etc. Luke 16. from the 22. to the end.

Answ. There was never such a man as Dives or Lazarus, or ever such a thing
happened, no more then Iothams Trees did walk and talk. Iud. 9. 8. but was a
Parable, to prove, that nothing is more effectual for conversion then the
ordinary preaching of the Word by the ministration of the servants of God:
Further, the consequence concerning the soul is but drawn from the literal
sense, in which sense I shall deny it canonical Scripture; for it makes in
that sense more for bodies then the souls present being in Heaven or Hell, ver.
23. 24. and makes Abraham the Father of the Damned, ver. 24. 25. 27. 30. and
ver. 22. Dives dyed and was buried; and yet v. 23. he lift up his eyes being in
torment, and sees Abraham etc. and v. 25. he cried for Lazarus to dip the tip
of his finger to cool his tongue; which in the literal sense thus applycated,
must needs be contradictory, unless his eyes, tongue, and Lazarus finger was
not buried, or their souls had corporeal corpulent members, which to conceit
is ridiculous: Therefore, from this place the Resurrection of the body before
the day of Judgment (even as soon as a man is buried) may better be proved,
then such a present soularie entrance into Heaven or Hell.

Object. 14. By which also he went, and preached to them in prison.

Answ. [By which] that is, by that whereby he was quickened, or raised from the
dead; his divine nature, the Godhead; as the foregoing words (whereon the
sense of those depend) does evidence, ver. 18. Christ once suffered etc. death
in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit, (ver. 19.) by which also he went
etc. So that he went and preached by that, whereby he was quickened or raised:
Therefore, the preaching, here meant, was not by that which was raised: but by
that which did raise; which was ministerially, as the following words further
evidence, showing to whom he preached, even those which were disobedient in the
days of Noah, on whom the long suffering of God waited while the Arc was a
preparing: those were the spirits here meant, the wicked of those days, which
are now in prison, that is, dead or imprisoned in the Elements. Here the grave
or death is called a prison, as indeed it is, for therein all that dye are
reserved in the chains of death (the Elements) not to be delivered till
Judgment, Rev. 20. 13. according to Job. 3. 18. there the prisoners rest
together.

Object. 15. Therefore gloryfie God in your body, and in your spirit. 1 Cor. 6.
20.

Answ. Before, he calls the body the Temple of the holy Ghost, ver. 29. and
ver. 15. the members of Christ; which needs must be the whole man, and not his
bare carcass, for in death who can praise the Lord? in it can be no habitation
for the holy Ghost, and therein were they to glorify Absurd.
God: to make Christ the head of such members, were to make God, the God of the
dead and not of the living: therefore, by body and spirit, is meant whole man,
aiming at a thorough and perfect sanctification, as well in that which
respects thought, [the spirit] as in that which respects action, [the
body:] inwardly to glorify God, as well as outwardly to flee fornication, etc.

Object. 16. I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God, etc. and they cried with a loud voice, etc. Revel. 6. 10. 11.

Answ. They were such souls as lay under the Altar flaine, or sacrificed, or as
ver. 11. has it, were killed; these therefore being dead souls, or martyred
Saints, their cry must be as the cry of the blood of Abel: And the like vision
of dead Saints confirms it, as cap. 20. v. 4. 5. And I saw the souls of them
that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and they lived, and reigned with
Christ a thousand years: but the rest of the dead lived not again till etc.
whence it is plain, that he beheld the Resurrection, or restoration of life
unto dead souls, even of them that were beheaded, but the rest lay dead, or
lived not again till etc.

Thus much of illegitimate Objections from Scripture: Now to the probation
hereof from Procreation or Generation, and as near as I can to resolve all
occurrent Objections thereon, that shall confront.

CHAP. VI.
Of procreation, how from thence this Mortallity is proved.

IT is supposed (as I conceive) by none, that what naturally proceeds from
Man simply by the course of nature, can be immortal, but must first taste of
mortality: And therefore there are two sorts of Opinions to maintain this
Heathenish Invention about the soul, whereon its immortality is grounded, which
I shall chiefly encounter: the one, that it is created, and infused at the
conception, and so only Gods work. The other, that it is concepted by the woman
through the concurrence of the seed of both sexes, but not simply by the course
of nature, but by the supernatural and extraordinary assistance or efficacy of
God in conception more then in other creatures: and so partly man's, and partly
Gods work. But that I may utterly demolish the structure of this Invention, I
shall turn up the foundation of each kind in its place: But first I shall
speak a word or two in general of Procreation it self.

That whole man is generated by man, observe: That as the whole Tree is
potentially in the seed, and actually in time springs from it: or as many
grains of wheat are in one grain virtually, and perfectly actual in time: so
in the seed of mankind, is whole man potentially, and wholly actual in time;
or all Adams succession, which in time are propagated, were wholly in him, life
and limbs, or as it is more common, soul and body. So that whatsoever in time
is actual by procreation, it was at first potentially wholly in its original.

Further, Generatum sequitur naturam generantis (He begat a son in his own
image, Genesis 5. 3.) is not only philosophically, but Theologically true, Mat.
7. 16. Job 4. 14. Therefore, mortal Adam must beget mortal children in his
own likeness, soul and body, except the soul was no part of his likeness:
For that which is immortal cannot generatively proceed from that which is
mortal, as Christ says, that which is borne of the flesh is (as it self is,
corruptible, mutable) flesh, John 3. 6. so then by this mortal flesh, cannot
be generated an immortal spirit, or soul that can subsist by it self
dissolved from the flesh; for if it should, in 32. Abs.
that act it should go beyond it self, which is impossible; and thereby more
should be done 33. Abs.
by man and woman in generation, then God did or could do in the Creation; for
he neither did, or could create any thing greater, purer, or more excellent of
nature then himself, and such as could subsist without him: But if this
doctrine be true, (as Woolner in his Original of the soul averreth) fleshly
man by a fleshly generation, or mixture of the seed of both Sexes does beget or
conceive something greater, purer, and more excellent then himself, an
immortal substance, an Angelical entitie, the Soul, that can subsist without
the flesh by which it is; which is as fire 34. Abs.
without light, earth without heaviness, grosnesse, etc. should be, by which
they are: and further, the Effect to be prior dignitate, precedent to the
Cause, as if a man 35. Abs.
because a creature, should be before his Creator: But if it be Replied, that
the soul is generated by the soul, as the body by the body. I Answer, then
there must be 36. Abs.
He souls and She souls: for without Sexes is no generation.

But now to the first sort, who say it is by infusion, or as the saying is,
Creando infunditur, and infundendo creatur.

To which I Answer, that in conception there is corruption or marring,
according to the proverb, corruption unius est generatio alterius: so that if it
be by conceiving or creating infused, and by infusion concepted or created,
that is as much to say, it is 37 Abs.
made in the marring, and mard in the making: or, infused in the marring, and
mard in the infusion: whence follows, that it is neither conceived, created,
nor infused; neither made, nor mard: but must be, if it be, no man knows what,
or how; 38 Abs.
whether an Angel, a Beast, or a Monster, any thing, or nothing: Riddle me,
riddle me what is this? a Soul, a Soul! Creando infunditur, and infundendo
creatur!

Secondly, if the Soul be a creature infused, then Christ did not take the
whole manhood from the seed of the woman, but worse then a bare p 39 Abs.
brutish body, a dead carcass: But Christ was made of the seed of the woman
according to the flesh, Romans 1. 3. Act. 2. 30. and was as we are, sin
excepted, Heb. 14. 15. and this our Image he received wholly from the woman:
Therefore receiving his whole humanity from her, the soul can be no infused
creature.

3. That which brake the Serpents head was Christ's humanity: But the seed of
the woman brake the Serpents head: Ergo.

4. If we consist of soul and body, and are not men without both, and receive
not our souls from him, but are daily created: Then Adam 40 Abs.
is the father of no man. 2. Christ cannot be the 41 Abs.
Son of man, and so no Savior, because thereby his manhood, constitutive part,
even that which should make him man, could not be by the seed of the woman. 4.
So a man 42 Abs.
is as much a father of fleas and lice, which receive their matter from him, as
of his children. 5. Whereas God blessed man, and bid him, as the rest of the
creatures in their kind, fill the Earth in his kind with men: then he commanded
him 43 Abs.
to do more then he had given him power for: And so to content nature, end
supply her imbecility to obey, is forced to a daily creation. 6. Then God
finished not the Creation in Absurd.
six days, but rested before he had done creating.

Fourthly, If the soul be infused, it must be at the conception, or after the
conception: If at the conception, then every 45 Abs.
abortive conception has an immortal spirit in it, and must rise again: If
after, then there is growth before 46 Abs.
there is life, which is impossible; for the soul is made the vegetive as well
as the motive, sensitive or rational part: and if this immortal spirit be
something else, then we are not conceived 47 Abs.
perfect men, and as we are conceived, so are we borne, 48 Abs.
trees, brutes, or I know not what, and afterward are made men, if we be men
at all: and so 49 Abs.
Infants that dye in the womb, or in the birth are little better then trees,
and worse then beasts.

Fifthly, if the soul be not generated with the body, but a creature infused
into a dead body, for they say, the soul is forma formans, that gives life,
and motion to the body: Then it is lawful to be a Absurd.
Nigromancer: for Nigromancie is nothing but putting a spirit into a dead body,
and so it is but an imitation of God, and God the only Nigromancer, and 50.
Abs.
all the men in the world but Nigromantick Apparitions, whose spirits when they
have done the work for which they were put into the bodies, desert them, as
other conjured Ghosts do.

Sixthly, It is granted that the body considered merely sensitive cannot sin,
and that the body is but an instrument, or as the pen in the hand of a Writer,
to the Soul, whereby it acts and moves: Therefore, if the Soul come
immediately from God, or there be an immediate work of his in its production;
then of necessity, that immortal thing, and not our mortal flesh, is Author
of all sin, and it only prone to all sin, and not the flesh, no more then
a conduite though a meet instrument to convey water is the author; or fount of
water, or prone to spring: And so Gods immediate hand 51. Abs.
is the cause of all sin, that man had better been without this soul; for it
must needs be some damnable wicked spirit, 52. Abs.
or some Devil that God puts in him; for such as the fruit is, such must the
tree be: but the fruit is damnably wicked: Therefore, the Soul must be some
damnable wicked thing: No marvel then if Reprobates must needs sin and be
damned, since God infuses such a malignant Soul, that councels them with Jobs
wife to curse God and dye, yea such a one as wholly works out their
condemnation: This is as if a man should 53. Abs
break his horses legs and then knock out his brains for halting. If it be
said the soul comes pure from God, and it is the body that corrupts it. I
Answer, that this to excuse God one way, makes him like the tyrant Mezentius,
that bound living men to dead bodies, till the putrefaction Vir. Aen. Absurd.
and corruption of the stinking corpse had killed them. Besides, the mind may
sin without the Action of the body, but not the body without the mind, for a
man may covet in his mind, and not act with his body, and yet sin; but if he do
with his body, and not consent with his mind, he sins not: as for example, a
man may accidentally and ignorantly kill a man by a blow, which was never
intended or aimed at him, and yet he not guilty of murder: but if he intend it
in his mind, though he never do it, he is guilty: Therefore the body may be
made sinful by the soul, but not the soul by the body.

Now to the other kind, who say, that this supernatural work by nature, is
effected by Gods special supernatural assistance, operating or applicated to
this natural aptitude, in whose mutual concurrence this immortal substance
is concepted, and in conception united to the flesh, the whole in the whole,
and the whole in every part.

To which I Answer, that there is no more special supernatural efficiency
from God in man's procreation then in other creatures, but that special gift or
natural instinct to every kind of creature given in the Creation to produce
its kind, whether vegetative, sensitive, or rational, Genesis 1. 25. 1 Cor. 15.
38. for the gift or blessing is all one and the same, and alike unto all
according to their kinds, as appears, Genesis 1. 22. God blessed the Fowls and
Fish, saying, Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the waters in the Seas, and
let the Fowls multiply in the earth: And verse 28. the self same he speaks of
man and woman, And God blessed them, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and
replenish the earth: and by this blessing, or Natures general instinct equally
unto all, men and all other creatures continue their multiplications and
procreations: So that the Fowls, Fish, etc. have as great and special
assistance as Man in their conceptions and procreations, equally mediate and
natural: Therefore, if by Man's conception an Angelical immortal Soul is
producted, so likewise is there the 54. Abs.
like in other creatures. The result of all which is this, that as Fish, Birds,
and Beasts each in their kind procreate their kind without any transcendency of
nature: So man in his kind begets man, corruptible man begets nothing but what
is corruptible, not half mortal, half immortal, half Angel, half man; but
complete man totally mortal: for through mortal organs immortality cannot be
conveyed, or therein possibly reside.

If it be scrupled, that this destroys the hope of our faith. I Answer, It
does but remove it from a false principle to a true, from a deceitful fancy
to an infallible object, the Resurrection: For though I ascribe nothing
actually to nature, but corruption; yet potentially I ascribe incorruption: as
to the kernill of an Apple a Tree may not actually, yet potentially be
ascribed: So I grant, that Nature produces the Seed, to which when she has
done her elementary work, even all that she can do, and in all things
transient finished her course, even from that corrupted seed Christ
supernaturally raises an incortuptible body, 1 Cor. 15. 36. Thou fool, that
which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die; it is sown in corruption, it
is raised in incorruption; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body: Therefore nothing of Man can be immortal, but what first has
seen corruption. So that, if that which is made the better and most excellent
part of Man, without which he is NO MAN (as is held) titled the Soul, shall not
see corruption, it shall not 55. Abs.
participate of the immortallity purchased by Christ, but must needs perish
except there be Ens extra Deum, as that strange invented Entitie must needs be,
and so consequently, 56. Abs.
NO MAN shall be saved: And as before it incurred this Absurdity, that the
Souls of the damned shall not perish, but stand as well as the Stative Angels:
So by this, the Souls both of the righteous and wicked shall for ever cease,
and never be immortallized at the Resurrection: And thence the denial both of
Resurrection, Condemnation, and Salvation, Heaven and Hell, God and Christ 57.
Abs.
is inavoydable: After rusheth in the Epicurean Blasphemy, 58. Abs.
Let us eat, and drink, for to morrow we die: And so, 59. Abs.
so many bellyes, so many Gods, and no other.

It is objected, That the rareness of conception argues a supernatural
immediate assistance essential, without which the soul cannot be.

Answ. That comes by a natural defect, and not by the withholding of Gods
immediate hand, else he should have a special and immediate hand in Adultery:
And so Whoremongers and Adulterers sets God a work to create Souls for 61. Abs.
their Bastards, which is to make God a slave to their lusts.

Further, it is objected, That God has from eternity decreed concerning man
above all creatures, both who should come into the world, and at what time:
Therefore, accordingly he must have a work in man's conception above other
creatures.

Answ. No such thing follows, for time and number may be appointed, and yet
the due course of nature proceed, as well without as with an immediate
assistance, toward man in his kind, as in Beasts in their kind.

Moreover, Woolner in his Treatise on the Soul page 115. says, That the more
spiritual parts, and chiefly the Soul is (but partly mediately, partly
immediately) conceived at the first instant, or union of the seed of both
Sexes: For by it (page 127. he says,) the corporeal parts are prepared and
perfected: Therefore, it must of necessity be at the first instant, or else no
conception: And page 129. That all Souls, as well of Beasts, as of men are
essentially as perfect at the first instant of conception as ever afterward,
And page 97. he says, The Soul can live without the body, and cannot be
corrupted by it.

Answ. That then it follows, If a woman miscarry immediately after that very
instant, 35. Abs.
that the Soul of that Effluction or unshapen deformed piece of congealed blood
being immortal, must needs continue its immortality, and that Effluction as
well as perfect bodies, shall be raised again; for if degrees of corporal
perfection hinder, then those that are borne imperfect, as without legs, arms,
or hands, or any other member, as diverse are, they 63 Abs.
shall never be raised again, and so out of the compass of Christ's death: and
though it should be granted, that Christ's death is denied an Embrio, yet that
souls immortality cannot be nullified, for immortality once begun, must never
have an end, and he says, it cannot suffer with the flesh: therefore, if not
with the whole mass of man's corpulency grown to its full perfection, much
less with an Embrio, that is ten times less imperfect and invalid; for he
says, it is as perfect at the first instant as ever afterward: therefore, it
must be saved or damned (if there be any for others) but no man knows how or
Absurd.
which way, except it can be proved, Christ dyed for bare souls, souls
without bodies, which will puzzle the cunningest soul that ever was made in
the marring, and mard in the making.

Further it is objected, Creatures propagated out of kind, as by buggery; as,
Apes, Satyrs, etc. are supposed, are not endowed with reasonable souls: Ergo,
souls are created immediately, or however of necessity, Gods superficient
power is joined to the propagation thereof.

Answ. As I will not altogether confidently affirm they have rational souls,
so will I not altogether deny it: For in Man it is some organicall deficiency
more or less, that is the cause, that some men are less rational then
others; for some have abundance of wisdom, and some are mere fools: and in
children, whose Organs are not come to perfection, there is not so much as
there is in an Ape: This premised, why in some measure as far as by those
improper Organs can be expressed, may they not be rational, though not in the
same degree as is capable of God, as well as Infants who are as incapable pro
tempore as Apes? But perchance, it will be replied, that then Christ dyed for
Apes, as well as for Infants. I Answer, Christ dyed not for the rational part
separated from the material, nor the material from the rational, if there
should be such buggery births, or if by that unnatural course they should meet
in one, (which is impossible, for the blessing of procreating any thing in its
kind, is to the kind) for that neither, but for the natural production by the
conjunction of both Sexes legitimate from Adam, and not such unnatural
by-blowes: As for births out of kind, they come within the compass of the
Curse, and cannot any ways claim privilege in the Restoration, but must
expect with Thorns, Briars, and all manner of Vermin, and Filth which breeds
on corruption, to be done away, when mortality is swallowed up of life. For all
other Creatures as well as Man shall be raised and delivered from death at the
Resurrection: my Reasons and grounds for it be these. First, that otherwise the
The Resurrection of Beasts etc.
curse in Adam would extend further then the blessing in Christ, contrary to
the Scriptures: For as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. 1 Cor. 15. 22. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 23. Therefore, Death coming
upon all the Creatures by the sin of Adam, no death being before sin, life
shall come upon all by Christ. Secondly, the beasts were not given Man to eat
in the Innocence, but to all flesh wherein was the breath of life, was given
the green herb for meat: Therefore, the death of the beasts, etc. was part of
the Curse, and so to be done away by Christ. Thirdly, if the other Creatures
do not rise again, then Christ shall not conquer Death, but when it is said,
O Death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory? it will be answered
in Beasts, because they are still captivated under its bondage: But as by one
man death entered into the world, To. 5. 12. and by man came death, by man shall
come resurrection from death, and the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is
death, and death shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15. 21. 54. Therefore
death shall not retain them, but they must be delivered out of its Jaws.
Fourthly, those ensuing Scriptures do clearly prove it: Col. 1. 15. to the 23.
All things were created by him and for him, whether they be things in Earth, or
things in Heaven: and be not removed away from the hope of the Gospel, which ye
have heard, and which was preached to every creature under heaven: And Mar. 16.
15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature: that is,
Glad tidings, life and Resurrection from the bondage of corruption to every
Creature by Christ: therefore, is he said to be the First borne of every
Creature, the First that is borne, or raised from the Dead: so that those
whereof he is the First, must follow, that is every creature, else could he not
be the First borne from the Dead of them all. And Rev. 21. 5. after the
dissolution of all things he says, Behold, I make all things New: And Psa.
104. David reckoning up Men, Cattle* etc. says, thou take away their breath,
and they dye, thou sendest forth thy spirit, and renewest the face of the
earth: and Psalm. 102. speaking of the Heavens, says, as a vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed: and Isa. says, in the New earth the
Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like a
Bullock: and Paul says, Romans 8. 19. 20. 21. The expectation of the creature
waits for the manifestation of the sons of God: for the creature was made
subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the
same in hope: because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God: for we
know that the whole Creation groaneth, and traveleth in pain till now.
Therefore the Gospel or Glad Tidings is unto all, all are under hope, and all
things, men, beasts, etc. shall be made new, or restored at the Resurrection,
and so Death shall be swallowed up in victory, and mortallity of life, or Death
having given up her dead, shall be cast into the Lake, Rev. 20. 13. 15. Thus
much by the by: Now to our matter in hand.

But be it granted, that those births are not endowed with reasonable souls,
yet does it not follow, that God creates immediately the soul, or immediately
assisteth nature in its production more then the body: for this is an instance
out of kind, therefore cannot expect the blessing of the kind, but be as it
self is, unnatural and cursed: for to the kind is required Sexes of the kind,
and thereto God has given the blessing to beget its kind, as well for man to
beget perfect man, as for the beasts to beget perfect beasts; so that
whatsoever is borne of man naturally, is man, though one be ennobled with more
excellencies then another. A borne Fool would have been a better instance; for
if to them rational Souls were denied, it might be thought, Nature naturally
begets mere irrational, brutish, inhumane bodies, and rationality, or
humanity is a mere supernatural work. To prevent such a cavil, I Answer, that
by the Soularies ground there can be no 64. Abs.
borne fools, Infants newborn, yea an Embrio should be as actually rational
as men of ripeness of years; for they say, the soul is rationality it self,
and that rationality is no more of the body, then ink is from the pen, and the
soul is absolutely perfect at the first instant, yea it is forma formans:
therefore, naturam expellas, furca licet usque recurres; it is made action,
which cannot but appear, for all action is apparent, and they say it is an
immortal spirit, therefore cannot cease, and if not cease, it must show it
self: Now why are not Infants then as rational as others? nay, let me ask one
Question, If this endless soul be forma formans, the maker of our bodies, why
have we not 65. Abs.
endless bodies? for omne tale generat tale, every like brings forth its like;
so then, if one be immortal the other must be immortal. Secondly, I Answer,
that though some are fools from their birth, yet it does not follow, that Gods
immediate hand is required to man's procreation, but rather the contrary: for
imperfections in a thing argue the mediate generation thereof; because no
imperfection of any kind can come immediately from the hand of God:
imperfections are accidental, or from the curse: therefore not of creation,
but of procreation.

Now seeing all this while we have had to do with this immortal Soul, we
cannot find, or the Soularies tell what it is, such likewise is its residence;
for if we ask where it it? they flap us in the mouth with a Ridle, tota in toto,
and tota in qualibet part, the whole in the whole, and the whole in every
part: that is, the whole immortal Soul in the whole body, and the whole Soul
wholly in every part of the body. To which I Absurd
Answer, that this extends immortality or impossibility of death to the body:
for if immortality be in every part, then no part of man from the crown of the
head to the sole of the foot can be excepted; so we are all 66 A^
Soul all over, and every part a whole Soul immortal: So that it must either
be held to 67 A^
be ubiquitory, which is an Attribute peculiar to God; or else multiplicable by
a corpulent division: and so, were a man minced into Atoms, cut into
innumerable bits, there would be so many innumerable r 68 A^
whole Souls, else could it not be wholly in every part. s 69 Ab^


Monstrum horrendum, ingens; cui quot sunt corpore crines,

Tot vigiles Animae supter, mirabile dictu!

And thus the Ridle is unfolded.

CHAP. VII.
Testimonies of Scripture to prove that whole man is generated, and propagated
by Nature.

THat this is true secundum actum naturae, observe the sense of those ensewing
Scrip^ures: viz.

Genesis 1. 17. 18. compared with the 22. ver. where man and beast have an equal
blessing and charge to propagate their like.

Eccl. 3. 19. There is no distinction betwixt them, etc.

Genesis 17. 7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. Here by
seed must be meant persons and not bare carcasses: else he had been the God of
dead clots, and not of living souls.

Genesis 46. 26. All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt which came out of
his loins, etc.

Job. 31. 15. Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb? Ergo, if his soul were immediately created, so was his
body; for he, that is, his Entite, person, even all that went to make him man
was formed and shapen in the womb, both Epithites for procreation and not for
creation.

Job. 20. 10. 11. 22. Have thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like
cheese? thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with bones
and sinnues, thou have granted me life and favor, and thy visitation has
preserved my spirit. Here Job sets forth exactly the manner of man's
procreation, from the act of generation even to his breathing: First, poured
out as milk, that is, the seminary evacuation of both Sexes in conjunction:
then curdled me like cheese; that is the changing of that to a grosser matter,
congealed blood: then clothed me with flesh and skin: that is, the incarnation
of that condensed blood: then fenced me with bones and sinnues; that is, that
carnate matter was formed into humane shape, and grew into members: then
grantedst me life: that is, began to breath: whence observe, that in ascribing
the whole work to God, he does ascribe it to one kind only, and not partly
mediate, partly immediate; for he ascribes even the evacuation of seed in
carnal copulation, and the conception of flesh and bones in as high a measure,
(yea, to take away all cavil rather a greater,) as he does his life; poured,
clothed, and fenced imply a more absolute act then granting, which is but a
sufferance, permission, or assenting: therefore, his conception was merely and
wholly natural: according to that of David, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. And to this add that of
Zach. 12. 1. The Lord forms the spirit of man within him. Whence it is clear,
that whole man flesh and spirit is a second act, formed in the womb; otherwise
flesh as well as spirit must be created, which all deny.

Genesis 5. 3. Adam begat a son in his own likeness.

Psalm. 139. 15. 16. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in a
secret place, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth: thine
eyes did see my mass: yet being imperfect, and in thy book all my members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet was none of them:
whence is evident, that his whole Person was an act of nature in his mothers
womb or secret place; what of him was in the Book of Gods providence, he
declares, was made (not created) in a secret place, to wit, his substance or
Mass, all that went to the subject man, and I hope the Soularies will not blot
his Soul out of the Book of Gods providence, or say it was no part of him.

Luke 1. 31. Thou shall conceive in thy womb and bring forth a son: whence
observe, that what she was to bring forth, she was to conceive, to wit a son;
and none will deny, Christ was borne complete man, in all things as we are, sin
excepted: And if any scruple arise from Romans 1. 3. He was made of the seed of
David according to the flesh, I Answer. That it is a distinction of his manhood
from his godhead, as all Interpreters agree.

Genesis 4. 1. She conceived and bare Cain: see the like cap. 38. 3. 4. 5. Judge.
13. 3. 5. 7. And Job 3. 3. There is a man child conceived. And Genesis 17. 6. And
Kings shall come out of thee. ver. 17. twelve Princes shall he beget. And Judge.
8. 30. Gideon had 70. Sons out of his body begotten. And Number. 5. Then she shall
be free, and shall conceive seed. and Heb. 11. 11. compared with Genesis 17. 8.
and such like, plainly show man's procreation wholly natural.

Ioh. 3. 6. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is borne
of the spirit, is spirit: Here is the natural birth by nature, and the
spiritual birth by grace declared each in his kind, the one a mere natural,
the other a supernatural work: It is therefore inavoydablely true, otherwise
the Soul cannot be saved; for what is not borne again cannot be saved, as the
immediate words testify, except a man be borne again, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God: So then, the soul as well as the body is born, that is,
proceeds from the flesh, except we be born without it: Wherefore, they are no
more twain, but one flesh.

Thus having found Man's Foundation to be wholly in the Dust, from thence taken,
and thither to return: Let this then be the use of all: That man has not
wherewith at all to boast no more then of dirt under his feet, but is provoked
wholly out of himself, to cast himself wholly on Jesus Christ with whom in God
our lives are hid, that when he who is our life shall appear, he might also
with him appear in glory, to whom be the honor of our immortality for ever,
and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

