A PEARL IN A DOVNGHILL. OR Lieu. Col. JOHN LILBVRNE in Newgate: Committed
illegally by the House of Lords, first for refusing (according to his Liberty)
to answer Interrogatories, but protesting against them as not being competent
Judges, and appealing to the House of Commons. Next, committed close prisoner
for his just refusing to kneel at the House of Lords Bar
ALthough most of States and States men be of late turned upside down like a
wheel, yet this worthy valiant and public spirited Gentleman (unto whom his
Nation is as much bound to, at least as to any one, all things considered) is
the very same man (both in principles and practice) whom the Bishops so long
imprisoned in the Eleet by a most cruel and barbarous sentence, which they
procured in the Star Chamber against him, and so ^as whipped, gagged and
pilloried, yea and in his close imprisonment almost famished and murdered,

And all because he would not submit to be examined against himself, betray
his friends, accuse his brethen, nor sell the lawful rights and just liberties
of England, for a mess or morsel of base preferment, whose fidelity,
constancy and integrity the Parliament justified, and condemned that sentence
as illegal, bloody, and tyranicall, delivered him out of prison, adjudged him
worthy of reparation, abolished Episcopacy, the Star Chamber, High Commission,
Councell-table, and many such arbitrary proceedings,

All which being duly and seriously considered, may it not seem very strange,
that this so famous a man still holding forth the same tenets and practice now
in time of Parliament and Reformation, should be now again in Newgate as he
was once before, by an Order from the House of Commons, both in less then a
twelve month? Is it not because there is a Popish and Episcopal party under
other pretenses as busy working in the Kingdom now as ever? And as he was a
special instrument of the Bishops overthrow, so those their agents are the
prime causers and workers both of his ruin, and all that will take his part,
if posibly they could once get that Decree sealed and un altered, so that their
should not be Separate or Sectary any more mentioned.

And though his malicious adversaries will not be warned of their Downfall, and
are as mad against him, because he will not bow before them, as ever Hamon was
against Mordecay; yea and more shameless and bloody, then ever his former
adversaries in sending him to Newgate, the basest of prisons, and showing
plainly they thirst much more after his precious life, then ever Kain did after
Abels, his apparently proceeding of a present discontent, and theirs of a long
forged malicious intent and therefore if God permit these wicked men thus to
prevail over the Godly, it is to crown the sufferings of the one with glory,
and to reward the persecutions of the other with misery.

But to take a view of his actions, we find by such credible proof, that his
very adversaries shall not be able to contradict (yea and themselves did never
the like) passing by both what he did, and suffered under the Episcopal
tyranny, because large volumnes thereof are extant, and beginning, since his
deliverance out of the Fleet prison at the beginning of the Parliament:

In the first place, has he been ungrateful to his Deliverers, or perfidious
to his Country? No his engagements was with the first in this present war: to
defend his Country, and for f^king a comfortable and profitable way of living;
his actions at Westminster-ball, Keinton-field, and Brainford, his carriage at
Oxford in Iron Chains, against strong temtations, and upon trial for his life
their, will witness his fidelity, magnanimity, and undaunted resolution to the
Parliament and Common wealth, and that in such measure that not many, if any of
this age can show the like, testimony.

And for such as would recapitulate his actions and sufferings since, let them
trace him in his service to the Sat, under the Earl of Manchester, and
defending the public freedoms since, and they will find that with the loss
both of his blood, estate and many hazards of his life, he has performed Noble
services, as the taking of Tickle Casts, Sir John Wortleys bouse, and the like,
in all which, malice it self cannot accuse him, either of Cowardice or
Covetousness.

No nor yet of carelessness, not deeming it sufficie^ to be faithful himself,
but always held a watchful eye over the actions of others, and as bold in
discovery of the Fraud, Treachery, Cowardice, Cruelties, plundring, and
Covetousness, of false hearted friends, as valiant in fight against the
enemies:

And now if you will begin to think why a man so faithful in all his ways
should be so liable to trouble as he has been [for be has been diverse times
in Pursevants bands and so committed by Committees] if you shall consider how
this Pearl comes to be cast upon this Doung bill, you will find, the
faithfulness of his heart toward God and all good People, and the freeness
of his tongue against all kind of injustice or unworthiness, in whom soever,
is the only cause and no other.

And if you seriously weigh things, you will confess it would grieve any good
man's heart, that Treachery, Coward^ce, Cruelty, plundring and Covetousness
have bin too too slenderly punished, and faithfulness so many ways
discouraged, and that it is a very sad thing in a time so zealously pretending
to reformation: That any quiet people should be punished and reproached, for
worshipping and serving of God according to their conscience, and [that trouble
house] Consormity as much Cried up as in the Bishops times.

That the Press should be stopped in time of Parliament, as barring all free
informations, and admitting only what appointed Lycencers shall allow; does it
not even break the hearts of all knowing good People, to see the doors kept
shut in Committees, and men examined against themselves, and for refusing to
accuse themselves, sent to Prison; and that free Commoners, who by the Laws of
the Land, are not to be adjudged of life, limb, liberty or estate, but by
Commoners: should at the pleasure of the Lords, be liable to their summons, and
attachment by Pursevants, to their Oath ex officio, to their examination in
criminal causes to selfe-accuseing, and to imprisonment during their
pleasures, the chosen Commons of England, the SUPREME POWER, standing by like
a Cipher, as unconcerned, mcer loukers on; this is that which puts wise men
past all patience, asking, for what it is that this Nation has engaged in
such, in so deadly a war? For what it is so much precious blood has been
spilt, so many Families wasted, so much treasure consumed, so many Widows and
father less children made miserable? Is all this to take down the High
Commission, Starchamber, and Councell-Board: and to set up the Lords with the
like power, to oppress the Commons? It had been well say they, this had been
declared, when our Money, Plate, Horse, and voluntary Contributions, were first
desired; But then other things were mentioned, though now neglected.

We had (say they) as many Lords before the Parliament as since, and it was
often boasted they should remove our grievances, as well as a Parliament, but
it was done by addition, and increase of more, not by Substraction; God forbid
a Parliament should do so But why then (say they) are we now subjected to the
Lords? Is it not sufficient that they are Lords over their Tennants, but they
must be Lords over the People; that every one must be at their summons, at
their command, at their imprisonment, yea to Newgate; why not whipping,
gagging, banging? Oh, they are but green in their power, and do not know what
the People will bear, nor what the Peoples friend (that should be) the HOUSE
OF COMMONS will suffer; hereafter may be time enough, they are yet the Peoples
most gracious Lords, intending to the most knowing, faithful and religious, no
worse then Newgate for the present.

And why presume ye thus Oh ye Lords? Set forth your merit before the People,
and say, for this good it is, that we Will reign over ye. Remember your
selves, or shall we remember ye? Which of ye before this Parliament, minded
my thing so much as your pleasures? Plays, Masks, Feastings, Huntings,
Gamings, Dawncings, with the appurtenances. If you owed any man money, or
abused any man, what law was to be find against you? What Pattents and Project;
did you suppress, or so much as (...) (nay had not a hand in?) What fearful
enemies you were to Ship money, (...) to the proceedings of the High
Commission; Star Chamber, and Councell-board, (...) goodness was unexpressible,
and undiscernable, before this (...).

But though you cannot excuse all, you will say, you that are the good (...)
then over topt with the evil, will you then be tried by what good you have
done since this Parliament, and since the expulsion of the Popish Lords and
Bishops; where will you begin? What think you of the stay at Worcester, till
the Enemy was provided at Shrewsbury, a shrewd beginning for poor England? Or
what think you of the Earl of Bedfords business at Sherbarn Castle, or of the
enemies escape at Brainford, or at Oxford or at Dennington, and to close all
with that memorable but shameful defeat in the West; It must needs be
remembered how the war thrived, whilst any Lord was employed: and how
powerful the enemy is grown, since the Now Medill, wherein there is not one
Lord.

It was wont to be said when a thing was spoiled, that the Bishops Foot had
been in it, and if the LORDS MEND NOT, it will be said so of them, and justly
too.

For what other have they been, but a mere Clog to the HOUSE OF COMMONS in all
their proceedings? How many necessary things have they obstructed? How many
evil things promoted? What devices have they had of prudentials and
expedients, to delay and pervert what is good: and subtle policies to
introduce things evil.

It is easy to discern who are their Creatures in the House of Commons, and
how they were made theirs, constantly manifesting themselves, by their evil
and pernicious partakings against the Freedom of the People, by whose united
endeavors, Monepolies in Trades of Merchandise, Oppressions in Committees,
Corruptions in Courts, of lustice, gross abuses in our Laws and Lawyers are
maintained, and the Reformation intended in all things, performed by balves,
nay, quite perverted, and a mere shadow given for a substance, to the
astonishment of all knowing free born Englishmen, and to their perpetual
vexation and danger; Because to know, or find fault, or discover these things,
to preserve just freedom, and to withstand their exorbitances: is the most
hateful thing to these Lords, of any thing in the world, Newgate (in their
esteem) is too good for all such.

And this is the only crime for which this worthy man is made the subject of
their malice, a man that has discovered more of the liberties of England, then
any one man alive; a man that has resisted all kinds of Oppressions, with the
perpetual hazard of his life, liberty, and estate.

And must no place but Newgate be his habitation? Is this the reparation for
his damages, and recompense for his faithful service? Must he be here reserved
a sucrifice to appease the displeasure of the late reconciled enemies of the
Commonwealth

Thou do well O England, to give up this thy firstborn LILBVRNE, the SON of
thy STRENGTH, and high RESOLUTION, for FREEDOM; If thou intendest to become a
Bond slave again, to either King, Lords, or any others: for he will never
submit either body or mind to any kind of slavery.

But certainly those Worthyes in the House of Commons, that consider what the
People have done and suffered for their libertyes will never suffee so foul a
deed, it cannot be but they intend the utter most of just freedom to the
People, and love those best, that most know and affect true liberty, and are
greatest opposers of exorbitant power in whomsoever: and consequently cannot
but instantly deliver this just man, and in him all English men, from the like
oppression and h^eforth reduce the Lords to a condition suitable to the
freedom of the (...) and (...) with the freedom of Parliaments.

The People are become a Knowing and Judicious People, (...) has made them
wise, now Opression makes wise men mad, (...) all one to them, who oppresses
them, oppression they cannot (...) and if Parliaments do in deed and in truth
really deliver them, they will love Varliements, as performing the trust
reposed in them, and the end for which Parliaments were ordained, otherwise
they will ebominate them, because, for People (...) or intime of Parliament, is
like as for a man to be betrayed o(...) father; which God of his mercy preserve
both People and Parliament (...) that for ever.

London June, 1646.
FINI^.

