EBEN-EZER A MEMORIAL OF THE DELIVERANCE OF ESSEX, County, and Committee,
Being an Exposition on the first ten Verses of the third Chapter of the
Prophecy of HABAKKVK In Two SERMONS.

The first preached at Colchester before his Excellency on a day of
thanksgiving for the Surrender thereof.

The other at Rumford unto the Committee who were imprisoned by the Enemy Sep.
28. A day set apart unto Thanksgiving for their Deliverance.

The Righteous man is delivered out of Trouble, and the wicked comes in his
stead,

Prove. 11. 18. By JOHN OWN Pastor of the Church of God which is at Coggeshall.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for the Author, 1648.

TO His Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, etc.
SIR,
ALmighty God having made you the instrument, of that deliverance and peace,
which in the County of Essex, we do enjoy, next to his own Goodness, the
Remembrance thereof is due unto your name. Those who Honor him, he will
honor, and those who despise him shall be lighty esteemed. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Part
of these ensuing Sermons, being preached before your Excellency, and now by
providence called forth to public view, I am imboldned to dedicate them unto
your Name, as a small mite of that Abundant thankfulness, wherein all
peace-loving men of this County stand obliged unto you.

It was the custom of former days, in the provinces of the Lubens meri toque.
Roman Empire, to erect Statuas and Monuments of grateful Remembrance, to
those presidents and Governors, who in the Administration of their Authority,
behaved themselves, with wisdom courage and fidelity. Yea instruments of great
Deliverances and blessings, through corrupted natures folly, became the Pagans
Deities.

There is scarce a County in this Kingdom wherein and not one from which, your
Excellency has not deserved a more lasting Monument, then ever was erected of
Corinthian Brass: But if the Lord be pleased, that your worth shall dwell only
in the praises of his people, it will be your greater glory, that being the
place, which himself has chosen to inhabit. Now for a Testification of this,
is This only intended; beyond This, toward men, God pleading for you, you need
nothing but our silence. The issue of the last engagements, whereunto you were
called, and enforced, Answering, yea outgoing your former undertakings, giving
Ample Testimony of the continuance of Gods Presence, with you, in your Army,
having stopped the mouths of many Gainsayers, and called to the residue in the
language of the dumb speaking Egyptian Hieroglyphick, (...), men of all sorts
know, that God hates impudence. (...)ut. de Iside Osir.


It was said of the Romans in the raising of their Empire, that they were,
saepe praelio victi, bello nunquam; So naked has the Bow of God bin made for
your Assistance, that you have failed neither in Battle nor War.

Truly had not our eyes beheld the rise, and fall, of this latter storm, we
could not have bin persuaded that the former Atcheivements of the Army under
your conduct, could have bin paralleled. But he who always enabled them to out
do not only others, but themselves, has in this carried them out, to out-doe,
what ever before himself had done by them, that they might show more kindness
and faithfulness, in the latter end, then in the beginning. The weary Ox,
treads hard. Dying bites, are often desperate. Half ruined Carthage, did
more perplex Rome, then when it was entire. Hydras heads (in the Fable) were
increased by their loss; and every new stroke begot a new opposition. Such
seemed the late tumultuating of the exasperated party in this Nation.

In the many undertakings of the enemy, allwhich themselves thought secure, and
others esteemed probable, if they had prevailed in any one, too many Reasons
present themselves, to persuade, they would have done so in all. But to none of
those Worthies, which went out under your command, to several places in the
Kingdom, can you say with Augustus to Varus, upon the slaughter of his Legions
by Harminius in Germany, Quintile Vare read Legiones, God having carried them
all on with success and victory.

One especially in his Northern Expedition, I cannot pass over with silence,
who although he will not, dare not say of his undertakings, as Caesar of his
Asian War, veni, vidi, vici, knowing who works all his works for him, nor
shall we say of the enemies multitude, what Captain Gam, did of the French,
being sent to spy out their numbers, before the Battle of Agin-Court, that
there were of them, enough to kill, and enough to take, and enough to run
away, yet of him, and them, both he, and we, may freely say, It is nothing with
the Lord to help, either with many, or with them that have no power.

The War being divided, and it being impossible your Excellency should be in
every place of Danger; according to your desire, the Lord was pleased to call
you out personally Kent. Essex.
unto two, of the most Hazardous, Dangerous, and difficult undertakings: Where
besides the travail, labor, watching, heat and cold, by day and night,
whereunto you were exposed, even the life of the meanest Soldier in your Army
was not in more imminent danger, then oftentimes was your Own. And indeed
during your abode at the Leagure amongst us, in this only were our Thoughts
burdened with you, That selfe-preservation was of no more weight in your
counsels and undertakings. And I bescech you pardon my boldness, in laying
before you this Expostulation of many thousands, (if we may say to him, who
has saved a Kingdom, what was sometimes said unto a King) know you not that
you are worth ten thousands of us, why should you quench such a light in Izrael?

Sir,
I account it among those blessings of Providence, wherewith the days of my
pilgrimage have bin seasoned, that I had the happiness for a short season, to
attend your Excellency, in the service of my Master Jesus Christ. As also that
I have this opportunity, in the name of many, to cast in my (...) into the
Kingdoms congratulations of your late successes. What thoughts concerning your
person, my brestis possessed with all, as in their storehouse they yield me
delightful Refreshment, So they shall not be drawn out, to the disturbance of
your self-denial. The goings forth of my heart, in Reference to your
Excellency, shall be chiefly to the Most-high, that being more then conqueror,
in your Spiritual and Temporal warfare, you may be long continued for a
blessing, to this Nation, and all the people of God.

Sir, Your Excellencies JOHN OWEN.
Coggeshall, Essex Octo. 5. 1648.

To the Worthy and Honored Sir William Masham, Sir William Row with the rest
of the Gentlemen of the Committee lately under imprisonment by the Enemy in
Colchester, As also To the Honored Sir Henry Mildmay of Wansted, Col. Sr.
Thomas Honywood with the rest of the Gentlemen and Officers lately acting and
engaged against the same Enemy.
SIRS:
THe righteous judgments of God, having brought a disturbance, and noise of
War, for our security, unthankfulness, murmuring, and devouring one another,
upon our Country, those who were entrusted with the power thereof, turned their
streams into several Channells. Troublous Times, are Times of trial.

Many shall be purifyed and made white, and tried, but the wicked shall do
wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand, Dan. 11. 10. Some God called out to suffer, some to do, leaving
Treacherous dealers, to deal treacherously.

Of the two first sorts are you. This honor have you received from God either
with patience and constancy to undergo unvoluntarily a dangerous restraint, or
with Resolution and courage, voluntarily to undertake, a Hazardous engagement,
to give an example, that Faith and Truth so shamefully despised in these evil
days, have not altogether forsaken the sons of men.

It is not in my Thoughts, to relate unto your selves, what some of you
suffered, and what some of you did: what difficulties and perplexities you
wrestled withal, within, and without, the walls of your enemies, (The Birds in
the cage, and the field, having small cause of mutual emulation) for that
which remains of these things, is only a Returnall of praise to him, by whom,
all your works are wrought.

It cannot de denied, but that Providence was eminently exalted, in the work of
your protection and delivery: yet truly for my part, I cannot but conceive that
it vayles to the Efficacy of Grace, in preventing you, from putting forth your
hands unto iniquity, in any sinful compliance with the enemies of our peace.
The times wherein we live, have found the latter more rare then the former.
What God wrought in you, has the pre-eminence of what he wrought for you: as
much, as to be given up to the Sword, is a lesser evil, then to be given up to
a Treacherous Spirit.

What God has done for you all, all men know; what I desire you should do for
God, I know no reason, why I should make alike public. The general and
particular civilities I have received, from all and every one of you,
Advantaging me to make it out in another way. I shall add nothing then to what
you will meet withal, in the following Discourse, but only my Desire that you
would seriously ponder the 11th Observation with the deductions from thence.
For the rest, I no way fear, but that that God, who has so appeared with you,
and for you, will so indulge to your spirits, the presence and Guidance of his
Grace, in these shaking times, that if any speak evil of you as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good Conversation in
Christ, and glorify God in the day of Visitation.

For these following Sermons, one of them was Preached at your desire, and is
now published upon your Request. The first part of the labor, I willingly and
cheerfully under went, The Latter merely in obedience to your commands: being
acted in it, more by your judgments, then mine own; you were persuaded, (mean
as it was) it might be for the Glory of God, to have it made public, where
upon my Answer was, and is, that, for That, not only it, but my self also,
should by his Assistance be ready for the Press. The faillings and
infirmities, attending the Preaching and Publishing of it, (which the Lord
knows to be very many) are mine: The inconveniences of Publishing such a
Tractate from so weak a hand, whereof the World is full, must be yours; The
fruit and benefit, both of the one, and other, is his, for whose Pardon of
infirmities and removeall of inconveniences, shall be, as for you, and all the
Church of God, the Prayer of

Sirs, Your most humble and obliged Servant in the work of the Lord JOHN OWEN.
Coggesh: October. 5. 1648.
SOme few literal faults have escaped, viz. wrath for wroth, revelled for
levelled; which the ingenuous Reader will amend as well as discern.

A MEMORIAL Of the Deliverance of ESSEX, County, and Committee, in two SERMONS.
Habakkuk Chap. 3. verse. 1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 1. A Prayer of Habakkuk the
Prophet upon Sigionoth.

2. O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was afraid: O Lord, revive thy work
in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known; in wrath
remember mercy.

3. God came from Teman, and the holy One from mount Paran, Selab. His glory
covered the Heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.

4. And his brightness was as the light: he had horns coming out of his hand,
and there was the hiding of his power.

5. Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet.

6. He stood and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations,
and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his
ways are everlasting.

7. I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land of
Midian did tremble.

8. Was the Lord displeased against the Rivers? was thine anger against the
Rivers? was thy wrath against the Sea, that thou did ride upon thine horses,
and thy charets of salvation?

9. Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes, even
thy word. Selah. Thou did cleave the earth with Rivers.


OF this Chapter, there are four parts. SERMON. 1.


1. The Title and Preface of it, v: 1. 2. The Prophets maine Request in it: v:
2. 3. Arguments to sustain his Faith in that request from v: 3. unto the 17th.
4. A Resignation of himself, and the whole issue of his desires unto God: from
thence to the end. We shall treat of them in Order.
The Prophet having had visions from God, and The time of his prophecy is
conceived to be about the end of Josiahs reign, not long before the first
Caldean invasion.
prediscoveries of many approaching judgments, in the first and second
Chapters, in this, by faithful Prayer, sets himself to obtain a sure
footing, and quiet abode in those Nation-destroying storms. A Prayer of
Habakkuk the Prophet, that is the Title of it. And an excellent Prayer it is,
full of Arguments to strengthen faith, Acknowledgement of Gods sovereignty,
power, and righteous judgments, with Resolutions to a contented, joyful
rolling him upon him under all dispensations.

Prayer, is the Believers constant sure retreat in an evil time, in a Obser.
1. Prove. 18. 10.
time of trouble. It is the righteous man's wings, to the Name of the Lord,
which is his strong tower. A Preces et la chrimae sunt arma Ecclesiae. Tertul.
Christian Soldiers sure reserve in the day of Battle: if all other forces be
overthrown, here he will abide by it: no power under Heaven can prevail upon
him, to give one step backwards. Hence that title of Psalm 102. A Prayer of
the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed. It Is the overwhelmed man's refuge, and
employment: when he swooneth with anguish (as in the original) this fetches
him to life again. So for it Psalm. 61. 2, 3. In our greatest distresses, let
neither unbelief, nor self contrivances, just^e us out of this way to the
Rock of our salvation.

Prophets discoveryes of fearful judgments, must be attended with fervent
Prayers. That messenger has done but half his business, Obser. 2.
who delivers his errand, but returns not an Answer. He that brings Gods
Message of threats unto his people, must return his peoples message of
entreaties, unto him. Some think they have fairly discharged their duty, when
they have revealed the Will of God to man: without laboring to reveal the
condition and desires of men unto God. He that is more frequent in the Pulpit
to his people, then he is in his closet for his people, is but a sorry
watchman. Moses did not so, Exodus 32. 31. neither did Samuel so, 1 Samuel 12. 23.
neither was it the guize of Jeremiah in his days, Cap. 14 17. If the beginning
of the prophecy be, (as it is) The burden of Habakkuk, the close will be (as
it is) The Prayer of Habakkuk. Where there is a burden upon the People, there
must be Prayer for the people. Woe to them who have denounced desolations, and
not powered out supplications: such men delight in the evil, which the Prophet
puts far from him: Jerem. 17. 16. I have not desired the woeful day, (O Lord)
thou know.

Now this Prayer, is upon Sigionoth: that is, 1. it is tuned to a Verse 1.
Song: 2. such a Song. For the first, that it is a Song, penned in meeter, and
how done so, (1) to take the deeper impression, (2) to be the better retained
in memory, (3) to work the more upon Affections, (4) to receive the
ingredients of poetical loftiness for adorning the Majesty of God, with (5)
the use of Songs in the old Church, (6) and for the present, (7) their times
and seasons, as among the people of God, so all Nations of old; of all, or any
of these, being besides my present purpose, I shall not treat. Of the second,
that it is upon Sigionoth, a little may be spoken.

The Word is once in another place (and no more) used in the title of a Song:
and that is Psalm 7 Siggaion of David: and it is variously rendered. It seems
to be taken from the word, (...) erravit, to err, or wander variously. Prove.
5. 20. the word is used for delight, to stray with delight. In her love (...)
thou shall err with delight, we have translated it, be ravished, noting
Affections out of order. The word then holds out a delightful wandering, and
variety: and this literally, because those two Songs Psalm. 7. and Hab. 3. are
not tied to any one certain kind of meeter, but have various verses for the
more delight: which, though it be not proper to them alone, yet in them the
Holy Ghost, would have it especially noted:

But now surely the kernel of this shell, is sweeter then so. Is not this
written also for their instruction, who have no skill in Hebrew Songs? The true
reason of their meeter, is lost to the most learned. Are not then Gods variable
dispensations toward his, held out under these variable Tunes, not all fitted
to one string: not all alike pleasant and easy? Are not the several tunes, of
mercy and judgment in these songs? is not here Affliction and deliverance,
desertion and recovery, darkness and light, in this variously? doubtless it
is so.

God often calls his people unto Songs upon Sigionoth: Graviter in eum
decernitur ^ui etiam ipsa* conectio denegatur. Prosp: Sent.
keeps them Obser. 3.
under various dispensations, that so drawing out all their affections, their
hearts may make the sweeter melody unto him. They shall not have all honey, nor
all gall: all judgment, lest they be broken, nor all mercy lest they be proud.
Thou answeredst them O Lord our God, thou wast a God that forgavest them,
though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions, Psalm. 99: 8. Here is a Song
upon Sigionoth. They are heard in their prayers and forgiven, there is the
sweetest of mercies: vengeance is taken of their inventions, there is a Tune of
judgment. By terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us O God of
our salvation, Psalm. 65. 5. is a Song of the same Tune. To be answered in
righteousness, what sweeter mercy in the World? nothing more refreshes the
panting soul, then an Answer of its desires: but to have this answer by
terrible things! that string strikes a humbling, a mournful note. Israel
hears of deliverance by Moses, Duplicantur lateres quando venit Moses.
and at the same time have their bondage doubled by Pharaoh. There Is a Song
upon Sigionoth. Is it not so in our days? precious mercies, and dreadful
judgments, jointly powered out upon the Land! We are clothed by our Father,
like Joseph by his, in a party colored coat: here a piece of Genesis 37. 3.
unexpected deliverance, and there a piece of deserved correction: at the same
hour, we may rejoice at the conquest of our enemies, and mourn at the loss
of our harvest. Victories for his own names sake, and showers for our sins
sake, both from the same hand, at the same time. The cry of every soul, is
like the cry of the multitude of old and young at the laying the foundation of
the second Temple: Many shouted aloud for joy, and many wept with a loud voice,
so that it was a mixed noise and the several noyses could not be distinguished.
Ezra. 3. 12, 13. A mixed cry is in our spirits, and we know not which is
loudest in the day of our visitation. I could instance in sundry particulars,
but that every ones observation, will save me that easy labor* And this the
Lord does*

1. To fill Namque bonos non blanda inflant, non aspera frangunt, sed fidei
invictae gaudia vera juvant. Prosy: Epig: in sent: August.
all our sails toward himself at once: to exercise Reas. 1.
all our Affections. I have heard that a full wind behind the Ship, drives her
not so fast forward, as aside wind, that seems almost as much against her as
with her: and the reason they say is, because a full wind, fills but some of
her sails, which keep it from the rest, that they are empty: when a side wind
fills all her sails, and sets herspeedily forward. Which way ever we go in
this World, our Affections are our sails: and according as they are spread and
filled, so we pass on, swifter or slower, whither we are steering. Now if the
Lord should give us a full wind, and continual gale of mercies, it would fill
but some of our sails, some of our Affections, Joy, Delight and the like: but
when he comes with a side wind, a dispensation that seems almost as much
against us, as for us, then he fills all our sails, takes up all our
Affections, making his works, wide, and broad enough, to entertain Psalm. 119.
67. Hos. 5. 15. Heb. 12. 10, 11. 1 Pet. 1. 6.
them every one, then are we carried freely and fully, toward the haven where
we would be. A Song upon Sigionoth, leaves not one string of our Affections
unturned. It is a Song that reaches every line of our hearts, to be framed by
the grace and spirit of God. Therein, hope, fear, reverence with humility and
repentance have a share, as well as Joy, Delight, and Love, with Thankfulness.
Enterchangeable dispensations, take up all our Affections, with all our graces:
for they are gracious Affections, exercised and seasoned with grace, of which
we speak. The stirring of natural Affections as merely such, is but the moving
of a dunghill to draw out a stinking steame, a thing the Lord neither aymeth
at, nor delights in: their Joys, are his provocation, and he laugheth in the
day of their calamity, when their fear comes, Prove. 1. 26, 27.

Secondly, to keep them in continual In caelo non in terramercedem promisit
reddendam: quid alibi poscisquod alibi debitur? Ambros. Offic. lib. 1. cap. 16.
dependence of himself. Reas. 2.
He has promised his own daily bread, not goods laid up for many years. Many
children have bin undone by their Parents giving them too large a stock to
trade for themselves: it has made them spend-thrifts, careless, and wanton.
Should the Lord entrust his people with a continued stock of mercy, perhaps
they would be full and deny him, and say who is the Lord? Prove. 30. 9. Iesurun
did so: Deuteronomy. 32. 14, 15. Ephraim was filled according to her pasture and
forgot the Lord. Hos. 13. 6.

Neither on the other side will he be always chiding: his anger shall not burn
for ever very sore. It is our infirmity (at the least) if we say, God has
forgotten to be gracious, and shut up his tender mercies in displeasure: Psalm.
77. 9. But laying one thing against another, he keeps the heart of his, in an
even balance, in a continual dependence upon himself: that they may neither
be wanton through mercy, nor discouraged by too much oppression. Our tender
Father is therefore, neither always feeding, nor always correcting. And it
shall come to pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear nor dark:
but it shall be one day which shall be known to the Lord: not day nor night,
but it shall come to pass that at evening time it shall be light: says the
Prophet Zech. 14. 6, 7. seeking out Gods dispensations toward his, ending in
Joy and Light in the Evening.

Labor to have your hearts right tuned for songs on Sigionoth sweetly to
answer all Gods dispensations in their choice variety. That instrument will
make no music, that has but some strings Use.
in tune. If when God strikes with mercy upon the string of joy and gladness,
we Answer pleasantly, but when he touches upon that of Cum vexamur ac premimur
tum maxim gratias agimus indulgentissimo patri, quod corruptelam nostram non
pati tur long ius procedere: hinc intelligimus nosesse Deo curae. Lactan.
sorrow and humiliation, we suit it not, we are broken Instruments that make no
melody unto God. We must know how to receive good and evil at his hand. He has
made every thing beautiful in its time, Eccles. 3. 11. every thing in that
whole variety which his wisdom has produceed. A well tuned heart must have
all its strings, all its Affections, ready to answer every touch of Gods
finger: to improve Judgments and mercies both at the same time. Sweet harmony
arises out of some discords. When a soul is in a frame to rejoice with
thankful Obedience for Mercy received, and to be humbled with soul-searching
amending Repentance, for Judgments inflicted at the same time, then it sings a
song on Sigionoth, then it is fit for the days wherein we live. Indeed both
Mercies and Judgments aim at the same end, and should be received with the
same equal temper of mind. A flint is broken between a hammer and a pillow: an
Offender is humbled between a prison and a pardon: a hard heart may be
mollified, and a proud spirit humbled between those two. In such a season the
several Rivolets of our Affections flow naturally in the same stream. When
has a gracious soul the soundest joys, but when it has the deepest sorrows!
habent and gaudia vulnus. When has it the humblest meltings but when it has
the most ravishing Joys! Our Afflictions, which are naturally at the widest
distance, may all swim in the same spiritual channel-Rivolets rising from
several heads, are carried in one stream to the Ocean. As a mixture of several
colors make a beautiful complexion for the body, so a mixture of diverse
Affections under Gods various dispensations, gives a comely frame unto the
soul. Labor then to Answer every call, every speaking providence of God, in
its right kind, according to the intention thereof: and the Lord reveal his
mind unto us that so we may do. Having passed the Title, let us look a little
on those parts of the Use 2.
prayer it self that follow.

The beginning of it in verse 2. has two parts:

First, the frame of the Prophets spirit in his address to God: O Jehovah I
have heard thy speech and was afraid.

Secondly, his Request in this his condition, O Lord revive thy work in the
midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known, in wrath remember
mercy.

In the first you have (1) particularly his frame, he was Afraid or trembled;
which he wonderfully sets out ver. 16. when I heard, my belly trembled, my lips
quivered at the voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my
self.

Secondly, The cause of this fear and trembling: He heard the speech of God. If
you will ask what speech or report this was, that made the Prophet himself so
exceedingly quake and tremble! I answer it is particularly that which you have
Chap. 1. ver. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. containing a dreadful denunciation of
the Judgments of God against the people of Israel, to be executed by the proud
cruel insulting Caldeans. This voice, this report of God makes the Prophet
tremble.

An appearance of God in anger and threats against a people, should Obs. 4.
make his choicest secret ones amongst them to fear, to quake, and tremble.
Trembling of man's heart, must answer the shaking of Gods hand. At the delivery
of the Law with all its attending threats, so terrible was the sight, that
Moses himself, (though a Mediator then) did exceedingly fear and quake: Heb.
12. 21. God will be Acknowledged in all his goings. If men will not bow before
him, he will break them. They who fear not his Threatenings, shall feel his
Inflictings. If his word be esteemed light, his hand will be found heavy. For

1. In point of deserving, who cansay I have purged my heart, I am Job 14. 4.
Chapter 15. 15. 16. Prove. 16. 2. Chap. 20. 9.
clean from sin! none ought to be fearlesse, unless they be senseless. Gods
people are so far from being always clear of procuring National Judgments,
that sometimes 2 Samuel 24. 15. 2 Chronicles. 32. 25
Judgments have come upon Nations for the sins of some of Gods people amongst
them: as the plague in the days of David.

2. In point of Omnes seculi plagae, nobis in admonitionem, vobis in
castigationem a Deo veniunt. Tertul. Apol. cap. 42
suffering who knows but they may have a deep share! The Prophets book is
written within, as well as without, with lamentation, mourning and woe. Ezekiel.
2. ult. If the Lion roars, who can but fear? Amos 3. 8. Fear to the rooting out
of security not the shaking of faith. Fear to the pulling down of carsall
presidence, not Christian confidence. Fear to draw out our ouls in prayer, not
to swallow them up in despair. Fear, to break the arm of flesh, but not to
weaken the staff of the promise. Fear, that we may draw nigh to God, with
reverence, not to run from him with diffidence: in a word, to overthrow
faithless presumption, and to increase gracious submission.

Secondly, Here is the Prophets request: and in this there are these two things,

1. The thing he desires: The reviving Gods work, the remembering mercy. 2. The
season he desires it in, in the midst of the years.
For the first, that which in the beginning of the verse, he calls Gods work,
in the close of it, he terms mercy: and the reviving of his work, is
interpreted to be a remembering mercy. These two expressions then are parallel.
The reviving of Gods work toward his people, is a re-acting of mercy: a
bringing forth the fruits thereof, and that in the midst of the execution of
wrath, as a man in the midst of another, remembering a business of more
importance, instantly turns away, and applies himself thereunto.

Acts of mercy are Gods proper work toward his people, which he will Obs. 5.
certainly awake, and keep alive in the saddest times. Mercy you see is his
work, his proper work, as he calls Judgment his strange Act: Isaiah 28. 21.
He retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy: Micah 7.
18. This is his proper work; though it seem to sleep, he will Awake it, though
it seem to die, he will revive it. Can a woman forget her child, that she
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea they may forget, yet
will I not forget thee: behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands,
thy walls are continually before me, Isaiah 49. 16, 17.

Secondly, for the season of this work, he prays that it may be accomplished,
in the midst of the years: upon which you may see what weight he lays by
his repetition of it in the same verse. It is something doubtful what may be
the peculiar sense of these words: whether the midst of the years, do not
denote the whole time of the peoples bondage under the Caldeans, (whence (...)
in the inward of years.
Junius renders the words, interea temporis, (noting this manner of expression
(the midst of the years) for an Hebraisme) during which space he intercedes
for mercy for them. Or whether the midst of the yearrs, do not denote some
certain point of times, as the season of their return from Captivity, about the
midst of the years between their first King, and the coming of the Messiah,
putting a period to their Church and State. Whether of these is more probable,
is not needful to insist upon; this is certain, that a certain time is pointed
at: which will yield us, Obser. 6.


The Churches mercies and deliverance, have their appointed season: in the
midst of the years it shall be accomplished. As there is a decree bringing
forth the wickeds destruction, Zeph. 2. 2. so there is a decree goes forth in
its appointed season for the Churches deliverance, which cannot be gainsayed:
Dan. 9. 23. Every vision is for its appointed season and time, Hab. 2. 3. then
it will surely come, it will not tarry. There is a determination upon the weeks
and days of the Churches sufferings and expectations, Dan. 9: 24. seventy
weeks are determined upon thy people. As there is a three transgressions and a
four of Rebels for which God will not turn away their punishment, Am. 1. 3.
so a three afflictions and a four of the people of God, after which he will
not shut out their supplications.

Hence that confidence of the Prophet, Psalm. 102. 13, 14. Thou shall arise, and
have mercy upon Sion: for (says he) the time to favor her, yea the set time
is come. There is a time, yea a set time for favor to be showed unto Sion. As
a time to break down, so a time to build up: an acceptable time, a day of
salvation. It came to pass, at the end of 430 years, even the self same day it
came to pass, that all the hosts of the Lord went out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 41.
As a woman with child goes not beyond her appointed Months, but is pained to
be delivered, no more can the fruitful decree cease from bringing forth the
Churches deliverance in the season thereof.

Because there is an appointed period of the Churches humiliation, Reas. 1.
and bearing of her iniquities. Israel shall bear their iniquities in the
wilderness, but this is exactly limited to the space of 40 years. When their
iniquity is pardoned, their warfare is accomplished. Isaiah 40. 2. They say
some men will give poison that shall work insensibly and kill at seven years
end. The great Physician of his Church, knows how to give his sin-sick people
potions, that shall work by degrecs, and at such an Appointed season take away
all their iniquity. Then they can no longer be detained in trouble. God will
not continue his course of Physic, unto them one day beyond health recovered.
This is all the fruit of their Afflictions; to take away their iniquities, Isa
27. 9. and when that is done, who shall keep bound what God will loose? When
sin is taken away from within, Trouble must depart from without.

Because the Churches sorrows are commensurate unto, and do Rea. 2.
contemporise with, the joys and prosperity of Gods enemies, and hers. Now
wicked men's prosperity has assured bounds. The wickedness of the wicked shall
come to an end. There is a time when the iniquity of the Amorites comes to the
full: Gen: 15. 16. it comes up to the brim in the appointed day of slaughter.
When their wickedness has filled the Ephah, a Talent of Lead is laid upon the
mouth thereof, and it is carried away on wings, Zech. 5. 6, 7, 8. swiftly,
certainly, irrevocably. If then the Churches troubles, contemporise, rise and
fall, with their prosperity, and her deliverance, with their destruction! if
the fall of Babylon be the rise of Sion; if they be the buckets, which must go
down, when the Church comes up; if they be the rod of the Churches
chastisement, their Ruin being set and appointed, so also must be the Churches
Mercies.

In every distress, learn to wait with patience for this appointed time, he
that believes will not make have. Though it tarrywait for Use.
it, it will surely come. He that is infinitely good has appointed the time,
and therefore it is the best. He that is infinitely wise, has determined the
season, and therefore it is most suitable. He who is infinitely powerful, has
set it down, and therefore it shall be accomplished. Wait for it believing,
wait for it praying, wait for it contending. Waiting is not a lazy hope, a
sluggish expectation. When Daniel knew the time was come, he prayed the more
earnestly, Dan. 9. 2, 3. You will say perhaps, what need he pray for it when he
knew the time was accomplished! I answer; the more need. Prayer helps the
promise bring forth. Because a woman's time is come, therefore shall she have no
midwife? nay therefore give her one. He that appointed their return, appointed
that it should be a fruit of prayer. Wait Bonum Agonum subituri estis in quo.
Agonothetes Deus vivus est: Christarchos Spiritus Sanctus, corona aeternitatis
brabium, Epithetes Jesus Christus. Tertul. ad Mar.
contending also, in all ways wherein you shall be called out. And be not
discouraged, that you know not the direct season of deliverance. In the morning
sow thy seed, and in the evening, withold not thy hand, for thou know not
which shall prosper, this or that, or whether they shall be both alike good;
Eccles. 11. 6. But proceed we with the Prophets prayer.

From verse the 3. to the 17. He lays down several Arguments taken from the
Majesty, power, providence, and former works of God, for the supporting of his
faith, to the obtaining of those good things, and works of mercy, which he was
now praying for. We shall look on them, as they ly in our way.

God came from Teman, the holy one from mount ^aran: Selah: his Verse 3.
glory covered the heavens, the earth was full of his praise.

Teman was a City of the Edomites, whose land the people of Israel Cen. 36. 15.
Jer. 49. 7. Obad. 9.
compassed in the wilderness, when they were stung with fiery Serpents, and
healed by looking on a brazen Serpent, set up to be a type of Christ. Teman is
put for the whole land of Edom: and the Prophet makes mention of it, for the
great deliverance and mercy granted there to the people, when they were almost
consumed. That Is Gods coming from Teman. See Number. 21. v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. When
they were destroyed by fiery Serpents, he heals them by a type of Christ,
giving them corporeal, and raising them to a faith of spiritual salvation.

Paran the next place mentioned, was a mountain in the Land of Ismael, near
which Moses repeated the Law, and from thence God Deuteronomy. 1.
carried the people immediately to Canaan: another eminent act of mercy.

Unto these he adds the word Selah: as it is a song a note of Elevation in
singing: as it respects the matter, not the form, a note of Admiration and
special Observation: Selah, consider them well for they were great works
indeed.

Special mercies, must have special Observation.
Now by reason of these Actions, the Prophet affirms that the glory of God
covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise. Lofty expressions of
the advancement of Gods glory, and the fulness of his praise amongst his
people of the earth, which attended that merciful deliverance, and gracious
assistance. Nothing is higher or greater then that which covers heaven, and
fills earth.

Gods Gloria est frequens de aliqua fama cum laud Ci. lib. 2. de inv.
Consentiens ^^us bonorum incorrupta vox been judicantium de excellent virtute.
Idem Tusc l. 3. Obs. 7.
glory is exceedingly exalted, and his praise increased every where, by Acts of
favor and kindness to his people.

That which I shall choose from amongst many others that present themselves a
little to insist upon, is that

Former mercies with their times and places are to be had in thankful
remembrance unto them who wait for future blessings. Faith is to this end
separated by them. Awake, awake, put on strength O arm of the Lord, awake as in
the ancient days, as in the generations of old: art not thou it that has cut
Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? Art not thou it that dried the sea, the waters
of the great deep, that has made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed
to pass over? Isa. 51. 9, 10: The breaking of Rahab, that is Egypt, so called
here, and Psalm. 87. 4. Psalm. 89. 11. for her great strength which the word
signifies, and the wounding of the dragon, that great and crooked Afflictour
Pharaoh is remembered, and urged for a motive to a new needed deliverance. so
Psalm. 74. 13, 14. Thou brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and gave him
to be meat to the people in the wilderness. Leviathan, the same Dragon,
oppressing, persecuting Pharaoh; thou brakest his Heads, his Counsels, Armies,
Power, and gave him for meat, that the people for forty years together might
be fed, sustained and nourished, with that wonderful mercy. Out of the eater
came forth meat, out of the strong came forth sweetness.

In this Reciprocation God walks with his people. Of free grace he bestows
mercies and blessings on them: by grace works the returns of Remembrance and
Thankfulness unto himself for them: then showers that down again in new
Mercies. The Countries which send up no vapors, receive down no showers.
Remembrance with thankfulness of former mercies, is the matter as it were,
which by Gods goodness, is condensed into following blessings. For

Mercies have their proper end when thankfully remembered. What more powerful
motive to the obteining of new, then to Reas. 1.
hold out, that the old were not abused. We are encouraged to cast seed again
into that ground, whose last crop witnesses that it was not altogether barren:
that sad spot of good Hezekiah, that He rendered not again according to the
benefit done unto him, is set down as the opening a door of wrath against
himself, Judah and Jerusalem, 2. Chron. 32. 25. On the other side suitable
returns, are a door of hope for further mercies.

The remembrance of them strengthens faith, and keeps our hands from hanging
down in the time of waiting for blessings. Reas. 2.
When faith is supported the promise is engaged, and a mercy at any time more
then half obtained, faith is the substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11. 1. God
(says the Apostle) has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver,
now what conclusion makes he of this experience? in whom we trust, that he will
yet deliver us, 2 Cor. 1. 10. It was a particular mercy, with it is
circumstances, as you may see ver. 9. which he made the bottom of his
dependence. In the favors of men, we cannot do so: they may be weary of
helping, or be drawn dry, and grow helpelesse. Pond's may be exhausted, but
the Ocean never. The infinite fountains of the Deity, cannot be sunk one
hairs breadth by everlastingly-flowing blessings. Now circumstances of Actions,
Time, Place, and the like, oft-times take deep impressions: Mercies should be
remembered with them. So does the Apostle again, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. He did
deliver me from the mouth of the Lion: (Nero that Lion-like tyrant) and what
then? he will deliver me from every evil work. David esteemed it very good
Logic, to argue from the victory God gave him over the Lion, and the Bear, to
a confidence of victory over Goliath: 1 Samuel 17. 37.

The use of this, we are lead unto, Isaiah 43. 16, 17, 18. Thus says Use.
the Lord which makes a way in the Sea, and a Path in the mighty waters: which
brings forth the chariot and the horse, the army and the power, they shall
lie down together, they shall not rise, they are extinct, they are quenched as
tow: Remember ye not the former things, nor consider the things of old. Let
former mercies be an Anchor of hope in time of present distresses. Where is the
God of Marstone-Moore, and the God of Naseby, is an acceptable expostulation in
a gloomy day. O what a catalogue of mercies, has this Nation to plead by in a
time of trouble? God came from Naseby, and the holy one from the West: Selah:
his glory covered the Heavens, and the earth was full of his praise. He went
forth in the North, and in the East he did not withhold his hand. I hope the
poor Town wherein No place in the County so threatened. No place in the County
so preserved. Small undertakings there blessed: Great opposition blasted. Non
nobis, domine non nobis.
I live, is more enriched with a store mercy of a few months, then with a full
trade of many years. The snares of death compassed us, and the floods of
ungodly men made us afraid: Psalm. 18. 4. but the Lord thundered from heaven, the
highest gave his voice, hailestones and coals of fire: yea he sent out his
arrows and scattered them, and he shot out lightning and discomfited them: he
sent from above, he took us, he drew us out of many waters, he delivered us
from our strong enemy, and from them which hated us, for they were to strong
for us, v. 13, 14, 16, 17. How may we say with the same Psalmist in any other
distress, O my God my soul is cast down within me, therefore will I
remember thee from the Land of Jordan, and of the Hennomites from the Hill
Missar, Psalm. 42. 6. where is the God of Elijah, divides a new the waters of
Jordan, 2 Kings 2. 14.

The following verses set forth the glory and power of God, in Verse 4.
the accomplishment of that great work of bringing his people into the
promised land: with those mighty things he performed in the wilderness. Verse
4. if I mistake not sets out his glorious appearance on Mount Sinai: of which
the Prophet affirms two things:

1. That his brightness was the light: 2. That, he had horns coming out of
his hand, and there was the hiding of his power.
For the first: is it not that brightness which appeared, when the mountain
burnt with fire to the midst of Heaven: Deuteronomy. 4. 11. A glorious fire in the
midst of clouds and thick darkness. The like description you have of Gods
presence, Psalm. 18. 11, 12. he made darkness his secret place, and
brightness was before him. As the light, the sun, the fountain and cause of
it: called light Job. 31. 26. Now this glorious appearance holds out the kingly
power and Majesty of God in governing the world, which appears but unto few.
The Lord reigns let the earth rejoice, clouds and darkness are round about
him a fire goes before him, his lightnings enlightened the world, Psa. 97. 1,
2, 3.

Secondly, he had horns coming out of his hand. So the words most properly,
though by some, otherwise rendered. That Deuteronomy: 33. 17. Psalm. 75. 10. Zech: 1. 18.
horns in Scripture are taken for strength and power needs no proving. The
mighty power of God which he made appear to his people, in that glorious
representation of his Majesty on Mount Sinai, is by this phrase expressed.
There his Chariots were seen to be twenty thousands, even many thousands of
Angels, and the Lord among them in that holy place, Psalm. 68. 19. There they
perceived that he had horns in his hand: An Almighty power to do what he
pleased. Whence it is added, And there was the hiding of his power. Though the
appearance of it was very great and glorious, yet it was but small to the
everlastingly hidden depths of his omnipotency:

(The most glorious appearance of God comes infinitely short of his own eternal
Majesty as he is in himself: it is but a discovery, that there is the hiding
of infinite perfection.) Or, there his power appeared to us, which was hidden
from the rest of world.

When God is doing great things, he gives glorious manifestations of his Obser.
8.
excellencies to his secret ones. The appearance on Sinai, goes before his
passage into Canaan. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his
secrets unto his servants the Prophets. Amos 3. 7. When he is to send Moses for
the deliverance of his people, he appears to him in a burning unconsumed bush,
Exodus 3. 2. a sign manifesting the presence of his power, to preserve his
Church unconsumed in the midst of burning fiery Afflictions. Unto this very
end, were all the visions, that are recorded in the Scripture; All of them
accommodated to the things which God was presently doing. And this he does:

That they may thereby be prepared to follow him, and serve Reason 1.
him in the great works he has for them to do. Great works are to be done
without great encouragements. If God appears not in light, who can expect he
should appear in operation? He that is called to serve providence in high
things, without some especial John 12. 35. Revel: 16. 10.
discovery of God, works in the dark, and knows not whither he goes, nor what
he does. Such a one travailes in the wilderness, without a directing cloud.
Clear shining from God, must be at the bottom of deep laboring with God.
What is the reason, that so many in our days, set their hands to the plow, and
look back again? begin to serve providence in great things, but cannot
finish? give over in the heat of the day! They never had any such Revelation of
the mind of God upon their spirits, such a discovery of his excellencies, as
might serve for a bottom of such undertakings. Men must know that if God has
not appeared to them in brightness, and showed them the horns in his hand,
hid from others, though they think highly of themselves, they will deny God twice
and thrice, before the close of the work of this Age. If you have no great
discoveries, you will wex vain in great undertakings. Now workings on old
bottomes, are like new wine in old bottels, both are spoiled and lost. The day
is the time of work, and that because of the light thereof: those who have not
light may be spared to go to bed.

That they may be the better enabled to give him glory, when Reason 2.
they shall see the sweet Harmony that is between his Manifestations and his
Operations. When they can say with the Psalmist, as we have heard, so have we
seen, Psalm. 48. 8. as he reveals himself, so he works. When his power and
mercy answer his appearance in the bush, it is a foundation to a prayer, The
good will of him that dwelt in the bush, bless thee. When a soul shall find
God calling him forth to Employments, perhaps great and high, yet every way
suiting that light and gracious discovery which he has given of himself, one
thing Answering another, it sets him in a frame of honoring God aright.

This might be of rich consideration could we attend it: for hence Use


1. As I said before, is Apostasy from Gods work. He appears not unto me, how
can they go upon his Employment? Men that have no vision of God, are in the
dark, and know not what to do. I speak not of visions beyond the word,
Answers of prayers, gracious applications of providence, with wise
considerations of times and seasons. Some drop off every day, some hang by the
ey-lids, and know not what to do; The light of God is not sent forth to lead
and guide them: Psalm. 43. 3. wonder not at the strange backslidings of our
days, many acted upon by-ingagements, and for want of light, know not to the
last what they were adoing.

2. Hence also is the suiting of great light, and great work, in our days. Let
new light be derided whilst men please, he will never serve the Will of God in
this Generation, who sees not beyond the line of foregoing ages.

3. And this thirdly, may put all those, whom God is pleased to employ in his
service, upon a diligent Inquiry into his mind. Can a servant do his masters
work, without knowing his pleasure? we live for the most part from hand to
mouth, and do what comes next: few are acquainted with the designs of God.

The going forth of the Lord with his people toward their rest, Verse 5.
with reference to his harbingers is described v. 5. Before him went the
pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet.



Before him, at his face. The Pestilence, This is Exodus 9. 15. Levit. 26. 25. 2 Samuel 24. 13. Ezekiel. 14. 19. Mat. 24. 7.
often reckoned amongst the weapons wherewith God fights with any people to
consume them: and as speeding an instrument of destruction it is, as any the
Lord ever used toward the children of men.

At his feet went forth a burning coal. A redoubling say some of the same
stroke: burning coals, for burning diseases. When one blow will not do the work
appointed, God redoubles the stroke of his hand:

Levit. 26. 22, 23, 24, 25.

Or burning coals, dreadful judgments, mortal weapons, as fire and flames
are often taken in other descriptions of God's dealing with his enemies: Psalm.
11. 6. 18. 8. prevailing fire is the most dreadful means of destruction, Heb.
12. 29. Isa. 33. 14.

Exodus 23. 28. God threatens to send the Hornet upon the Canaanites, before
the children of Israel: some stinging judgments, either on their consciences,
or bodies, or both. Something of the same kind is doubtless here held out: he
sent plagues and diseases among them to weaken and consume them, before his
peoples entrance. His presence was with Israel, and the pestilence consuming
the Canaanites before their entrance is said to be (...) at his faces, or
appearances, before him, before the entrance of the presence of his holiness.
And the following Judgments that quite devoured them, were the coals going out
at his feet, which he sent abroad, when he entered their land, with his own
inheritance, into theirs, to cast out those malae fidei possessores.

1. Sicknesses, diseases and all sorts of judgments are wholly at Gods
disposal. Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble
spring out of the ground, yet man is borne to trouble, as the sons of the
burning coal lift up in flying, Job. 5. 6, 7.

2. When God intends the total destruction of a people, he commonly weakens
them by some previous judgments. Let the truth of this, be found upon them
that hate us, and the interpretation thereof, be to the enemies, of this Nation:
but the Lord knows, all our hearts may well tremble, at what will be the issue
of the visitations of the last years.

God never wants instruments, to execute his Anger, and ruin his enemies.
Obser. 9.
His treasury of judgments, can never be exhausted. If Israel be too weak for
the Amorites, he will call in the pestilence and burning diseases to their
assistance. What creature has not this mighty God used against his enemies? An
Angel destroys Senacheribs Host, Isa. 37. 36. and smites Herod with Worms:
Acts 12. 23. Heaven above sends down a Hell of fire and brimstone on Sodom
and Gomorah, Genesis 19. 24. The Stars in their courses fought against Sisera.
Judge. 5. 20. Devils do his will herein, He sent evil Angels among the
Egyptians, Psalm. 78. 49. Fire consumes persecuting Ahaziah's companies, 2
Kings 1. 10, 11. The Water drownes Pharaoh and his Chariots, Exodus 14. 28.
Earth swallows up Korah, with his fellow rebels, Numb. 16. 32. Bears rend the
children that mocked Elisha, 2 Kings, 2. 24. Lions destroy the strange Nations
in Samaria, 2 Kings 17. 25. Froggs, Lice, Boyles, Hayle, Rain, Thunder,
Lightning, destroy the Land of Egypt: Exodus 8, 9, 10. Locusts are his mighty
army to punish Israel Joel. 2. 25. Hailstones destroy the Canaanites, Josh. 10.
11. Stones of the wall slay the Syrians, 1 Kings 20. 30. pestilence and burning
diseases are his ordinary messengers. In a word, all creatures, serve his
providence, and await his commands, for the execution of his righteous
Judgments. Neither the beasts of the Field, nor the stones of the Earth, will
be any longer quiet then he causes them to hold a league with the sons of
men. Use. 1.


To teach us all to tremble before this mighty God. Who can stand before him,
qui tot imperat legionibus? If he will strike he wants no weapons: if he will
fight he wants no Armies. All things serve his Will. He says, to one come, and
it comes, to another go, and it goes, to a third, do this, and it does it.
He can make use of our selves, our friends, our enemies, Heaven, Earth, Fire,
Water, etc. any thing, for what end he pleases. There is no standing before
his Armies; for they are all things, and himself to make them effectual.
There is no flying from his Armies, for they are every where, and himself with
them. Who would not fear this King of Nations? He that contends with him,
shall find it, As if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him* or went
into the house and leaned upon a wall, and a Serpent bitte him: Amos 5. 18, 19.
No flying, no hiding, no contending. Worms kill Herod; A Fly choked Adrian,
etc. Use 2.


To be a bottom of confidence and dependence in an evil day. He that has God
on his side, has also all things, that are seen and that are not seen. The
mountain is full of fiery Chariots for Elisha's defense, when outwardly there
was no appearance, 2 Kings 6. 17. All things wait their Masters beck, to do
him service, as for the destruction of enemies, so for the deliverance of his.
What though we had no Army in the time of war? God has millions, Many
thousands of Angels, Psalm. 68. 17. one whereof can destroy so many thousands of
men in a night: Isa. 37. 36. He can choose (when few others will appear with
him against the mighty, as in our late troubles) foolish things to confound the
wise, and weak things, to confound the strong. Senacheribs Angel is yet alive,
and the destroyer of Sodom is not dead. And all those things are at our
command, if their help may be for our good: Judah rules with God, Hos. 11. 12.
has a rule by faithful supplications over all those mighty hosts. Make God
our friend, and we are not only of the best, but also the strongest side. You
that would be on the safest side, be sure to choose that which God is on. Had
not this mighty all-commanding God been with us, where had we been in the late
tumults? so many thousands in Kent, so many in Wales, so many in the North, so
many in Essex, shall they not speed? shall they not divide the prey? is not the
day of those factious Independents come? was the language of our very
neighbors: The snare is broken, and we are delivered. Verse 6.


The Lord having sent messengrs before him into Canaan, stands himself as it
were upon the borders and takes a view of the Land.

He stood and measured the earth, he beheld and drove asunder the Nations, and
the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual hills did bow: his
ways are everlasting.

Two things are here considerable*

1. The Lords exact fore-view of the promised land: he stood and measured the
earth, and beheld the Nations. 2. His operation at that time, he drove asunder
the Nations, and the, etc.
1. He stood and measured. The Prophet here represents the Lord on the
frontire of Canaan, as one taking view of a piece of Land, and exactly
measuring it out, as intending it for his own, weighing and considering the
bounds and limits of it, to see if it will answer the end for which he
purposes it. Gods exact notice and knowledge of his peoples possession is in
those words held out. He views where the lines of every tribe shall run.

Nothing happens or is made out to any of Gods people, without his own careful
providentiall predisposition.
He views the circuit of the whole, where, and how, divided, and separated from
the dwellings of the unclean, and habitations of the uncircumcised.

Fixed bounds, measured limits of habitation is a necessary ingredient, to the
making up of a nat^^all Church.
2. What he did: which is two ways expressed, 1. in reference to the
inhabitants, 2. to the Land it self:

1. For the inhabitants, he drove them asunder: (...) and he made to leap out
of their old channels. Those Nations knit and linked together amongst
themselves, by leagues and civil society, he separated, disturbed, divided in
counsels and arms, (as in the case of the Gibeonites,) persecuted by the
sword, that they suddenly leaped out of their habitations, the residue
wandering as no people. Josh. 9. 3.


Gods justly Nation-disturbing purposes, are the bottom of their deserved
ruin.
2. For the Land, The everlasting Mountains, etc. Those strong firm lasting
Mountains of Canaan, not like the Mountains of sand in the desert where the
people were, but to continue firm to the worlds end, as both the words here
used (...) and (...), perpetuity, and everlasting, do in the Scripture
frequently signify. Now these are said to be scattered and to bow, because of
the destruction Numb. 13. 33.
of the Inhabitants of those lasting hills, being many of them high and mighty
ones like perpetual Mountains: they being given in possession to the sons of
Israel, even the chief things of the ancient Mountains, and the precious
things of the lasting hills: Deuteronomy. 33. 15.

God takes an exact foreview of his peoples portion and inheritance. Like Obs.
10.
a careful father, he knows before hand, what he intends to bestow upon them.
He views it, measures it, prepares it to the utmost bounds. They shall not
have a hayrs breadth which he has not allotted them: nor want the least jot of
their designed portion.

Learn to be contented with your Lot. He is wise also, who Use.
took a view of it, and measured it, and found it just commensurate to your
good: had he known that a footes breadth more had bin needful, you should have
had it. Had he seen it good; you had had no thorns in your Lands, no
Afflictions in your lives. O how careful, how solicitous are many of Gods
people! how full of desires! Oh that it were with me thus or thus! possess
your souls in patience: As you cannot add too, no more shall any take from
your proportion. He took the measure of your wants, and his own supplies long
since. That which he has measured out, he will cut off for you. He knows how
to suit all his children.

It is dangerous incroaching for any of the sons of men upon Gods Obser. 11.
peoples portion, lot, privileges or inheritance. God has measured it out for
them, and he will look that they enjoy it. Vid. Tertul. ad Scapulamde
persecutione.
Shall men remove his bounds, and land-markes, and be free? will it be safe
trespassing upon the Lands of the Almighty? will it be easy and cheap? will he
not plead his Action with power? especially seeing he has given them their
portion. If he has given Seir to Edom, what does he vexing and wasting Jacob?
Shall they not possess what the Lord their God gives them to possess? Jud.
11. 24. He has cautioned all the world; Kings and others in this kind: Touch
not mine anointed, do my prophets no harm: Psalm. 105. 14, 15. Touch them not,
nor any thing that is theirs: harm them not in any thing I bestow on them.
They have nothing but what their Father gives them, and Christ has bought for
them. Will a tender Father think you, contentedly look on, and see a slave
snatch away his childrens bread? If a man has engaged himself to give a
Jewel to a dear friend, will he take it patiently to have an enemy come and
snatch it away before his face? God is engaged to his people for all their
enjoyments, and will he quietly suffer himself to be robbed and his people
spoiled? Shall others dwell quietly in the Land which he has measured for his
own?

See whence the great destructions of People and Nations in Use. 1.
these latter ages have come. Is it not for touching these forbidden things?
The holy Vessels of the Temple at Jerusalem, ruined Babylon. Is not the
wasting of the Western Nations, at this day from hence, that they have served
the whore to deck her self, with the spoils of the spouse? helped to trim her
with the portion of Gods people: taking away their Liberties, Ordinances,
Privileges, Lives, to lay at her feet. Doubtless God is pleading with all
these Kingdoms for their incroaching. They who will not let him be at peace
with his, shall have little quiet with their own. The Eagle that stole a coal
from the Altar, fired her nest. I know how this has been abused to countenance
the holding of Babylonish wedges. God will preserve to his people his own
allowance, not Romes supplyment. This Nation has yet itching singers, and a
hankering mind after the inheritance of Gods people: Let them take heed, he
has knocked off their hands an hundred times, and sent them away with bloody
fingers. O that we were wise, that we be not quite consumed. Of you I hope
better things, and such as accompany salvation, yet give me leave to cautionate
you a little.

1. As to privileges and liberties of this life. Their liberties and estates,
are not as other men's: but more exactly measured for their good, and sanctified
to them in the blood of Christ. If in these things God has called you to the
defense and protection of his, he will expect a real account. You had better
give away a Kingdom that belongs to others, then the least of that which God
has made for his Saints. Think not any thing small, which God accounts worthy
to bestow on his. If he has meted out liberty for them, and you give them
slavery, you will have a sad reckoning.

2. In point of Ordinances, and Christ purchased privileges: Nero primus in
Christianos ferociit: ^ali dedicatore damnation is nostrae etiam gloriamur, qui
enim scit illum intelligere potest, non nisi aliquod bonwn grande a Nerone
damnatum Tertul. Apol.
Here it is dangerous incroaching indeed. God exactly measured Canaan because it
was to be the seat of a National Church. If you love your lives, if you love
your souls, be tender in this point. Here if you meddle with that which belong
not unto you, were you Kings, all your glory would be laid in the dust. 2 Chr.
26. 18. woe to them who cut short the Saints of God in the least jot, of what
he has allotted to them in spiritualls. Is it for any of you, O ye sons of
men, to measure out Gods childrens portion, long since bequeathed them by
Christ? Let them alone with what is given them. If God call Israel out of Egypt
to serve him, shall Pharaoh assign who, and how they shall go, First men
only, then all without their cattle? nay says Moses, we will go as God calls,
Exodus 10. 26.

Was not one main end of the late tumults, to rob Gods people of their
privileges, to bring them again under the yoke of superstition? What God brake
in war, do not think he will prosper in Peace? If you desire to thrive, do
not the same, nor any thing like it. Take they any thing of yours, that belongs
to Caesar, the Civil Magistrate, restrain them, keep them within bounds. But if
they take only what Christ has given them, O touch them not, harm them not.
The heap is provided for them, let them take for themselves. Think it not
strange, that every one should gather his own Manna. The Lord forbid that I
should oversee the Magistrates of England, taking away liberties, privileges,
ordinances or ways of worship, from them to whom the Almighty has made a free
grant of them.

3 If in taking what God has measured out for them, they should not all comply
with you, in the manner and measure of what they take, do them no harm,
impoverish not their families, banish them not, slay them not. Nova and
inaudita est ista praedicatio quae verberibus exigit fidem Grego. Ep. 52.
Alas your judgments, were you Kings, and Emperors, is not a rule to them.
They must be tried by their own faith. Are their souls think you more
precicious to you then themselves? You say they take amiss: they say no:
Magistrum neminem habemusmsi solum Deum; hic ante te est, nec abscondi potest,
sed cui nihil facere possis.
and appeal to the word. Should you now smite them? speak blood, is that the
way of Jesus Christ? should it be as you affirm, you would be puzzled for your
warrant. To run when you are not sent, surely in this case is not safe. But
what if it should prove in the close, that they have followed divine
Directions? Do you not then fight against God, wound Jesus Christ, and
prosecute him as an evil doer? I know the usual colors, the Common pleas, that
are used for the instigation of Authority to the contrary. They are the very
same and no other, that have slain the Saints of God, this 1200 years.
Arguments for persecution are died in the blood of Christians, for a long
season, ever since the Dragon gave his power to the false Prophet, they have
all died as heretics and Schismatics. Suppose you saw in one view all the
blood of the witnesses of Christ, which has been let out of their veins, by
vain pretenses, that you heard in one noise the doleful cry of all Pastorlesse
Churches, dying martyrs, harbourlesse children of Parents inheriting the
promise, wildernessewandring Saints, dungeoned believers, wrested out by
pretended zeal to peaee and truth, and perhaps it may make your Spirits tender
as to this point.

See the warrantablenesse of our contests for Gods peoples Use 2.
rights. It was Jephthaes only argument against the incroaching Ammonites.
Judge. 11. By Gods assistance they would possess what the Lord their God should
give them. If a grant from heaven will not make a firm Title, I know not what
will. Being called by lawful Authority, certainly, there is not a more
glorious Employment, then to serve the Lord, in helping to uphold the portion
he has given his people. If your hearts be upright, and it is the liberties,
the privileges of Gods Saints, conveied from the father, purchased by Christ,
you contend for, Go on and prosper, the Lord, is with you.

2. From what God did.

The works and labors of Gods people are transacted from them in Obser. 11.
heaven, before they once undertake them. The Israelites were now going to
Canaan, God does their work for them before hand They Isa. 26. 22.
did but go up and take possession; Joshua and Caleb tell the people not only
that their enemies defense was departed from them, but that they were but bread
for them: Number. 14. 9. Not corn that might be prepared, but bread, ground, made
up, ready baked, ready to e at. Their work was done in heaven. Known unto God
are all his works from the beginning of the world, Acts 15. 18. All that is
done here below, is but the writing of a visible copy for the sons of men to
read, out of the etenall lines of his own purpose.

Up and be doing, you that are about the work of the Lord. Use
Your Enemies are bread ready to be eaten, and yield you refreshment. Do you
think if our Armies had not walked in a trodden path they could have made such
journeys as they have done of late? had not God marched before them, and traced
out their way from Kent to Essex, from Wales to the North, their carcasses had
long ere this, been cast into the field. Their work was done in heaven before
they begun it. God was gone over the 2 Samuel 5. 24.
Mulberry trees; The work might have been done by children, though he was
pleased to employ such worthy instruments. They see I doubt not their own
nothingnesse, in his All Sufficiency. Go on then, but with this caution, search
by all ways and means to find the footsteps of the mighty God, going before
you.

The trembling condition of the opposing nations round about Verse 7.
when God appeared so gloriously for his people, is held out verse 7.

I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: The curtayns of the Land of Midian
did tremble.

You have here three things considerable.

1. The mention of two Nations enemies of the Church, Cushan and Midian. 2. The
state and condition of those Nations, the tents of the one in Affliction, and
the curtains of the other in trembling. 3. The view the Prophet had of this, I
saw it says he, I saw, etc.
For the first, these two nations, Cushan and Midian, were the neigbouring
people to the Israelites, being in the wilderness when God did such great
things for them. First Cushan, that is the Tentdwelling Arabians on the south
side toward Ethiopia, being as the Ethiopians of the posterity of Cush (thence
called Cushan) the eldest 2 Kings 19. 9. Jer. 13. 23. Joseph Antiq. Chap. 1.
Isa. 37. 9.
son of scoffing Ham, Genesis 10. 6. enemies and opposers of the Church
(doubtless) all the way down from their profane Ancestors. These now beheld
the Israelites, going to root out their Allies, and kindred the Amorites of
Canaan, the posterity of Canaan, the younger brother of their progenitor Cush,
Genesis 10. 6.

Midian were a people inhabiting on the East Side Jordan, on the borders of
Moab: so called from their forefather, Midian the son of Abraham by Keturah,
Genesis 25. 3, 4. These obtained a temporal blessing for a season, from the Love
borne to their faithful progenitor. In the days of Jacob, they were great
Merchants, Genesis 37. 28. At this time in less then 400 years, they were so
multiplied, that they had five Kings of their Nation: Number. 31. 1. Some
knowledge of the true God, was retained as it should seem until now amongst
some of them, being received by tradition from their Fathers. Moses Father in
Law, was a Priest of this Country, Exodus 2. 15, 16. not altogether unacquainted
with Jehovah, Exodus 18 and was himself, or his son persuaded to take up his
portion in Canaan, Number. 10. 29, 30. But for the generality of the Nation, being
not heirs of the promise, they were fallen off to superstition and idolatry.
Exceeding enemies they were to the people in the wilderness, vexing them with
their wiles, and provoking them to abominations, that the Lord might consume
them, Number. 25. 17.

None so vile enemies to the Church as superstitious Apostates.
These two Nations then set out all manner of opposers, gross Idolators as
Cushan, and superstitious envious Apostates as Midian.

2. Their state and condition severally: 1 The tents of Cushan were in
Affliction: the tents, the Arabian Ethiopians of Cush, dwelling in tents: the
Habitation for the Inhabitant, by an Hypallage. They were in Affliction, under
vanity, under iniquity, the place of vanity, so variously are the words
rendered: (...) under Affliction, Vanity, or Iniquity. Sin, and the punishment
of it, are frequently in the Scripture of the same name: so nere is the
Relation. Aven is properly and most usually iniquity, but that it is here taken
for the consequent of it, A consuming, perplexed, vexed condition can be no
doubt. The Cushamites then were in Affliction, full of Anguish, Fear, Dread,
vexation to see what would be the issue of those great and mighty things which
God was doing in their borders for his people. Tantos invidus babet paena justa
tortores, quantos invidiosus habuerit laudat, tores. Prosp* vita contempt.
Afflicted with Isreal's happiness and their own fears, as is the condition of
all wicked oppressers.

2. The Curtains of the Land of Midian, for the Midianites dwelling in
curtained Tabernacles, by the same Figure as before. They trembled, (...),
moved themselves, were moved, that is shaken with fear and trembling, as
though they were ready to run from the Appearance of the mighty God with his
people. The story of it, you have in the book of Numbers: as it was
prophetically foretold by Moses concerning other Nations, Exodus 15. 14, 15,
16. The people shall hear and be afraid, sorrow shall take hold of Number. 25.
chapter 27. and 31.
the inhabitants of Palestina: Then the Dukes of Edom shall be amassed, the
mighty men of Moab, etc. God filled those Nations with Anguish sorrow and
amazement, at the protection he granted his people.

3. The Prophets view of all this: I saw it, or I see it: though it were 870
years before, supposing him to prophesy about the end of Josiah, or beginning
of Jehojakim, yet taking it under the consideration of Faith he makes it
present to his view.

Faith looks backwards and forwards, to what God has done, and to what he
has promised to do: Abraham saw the Day of Christ, so many Ages after, because
he found it by faith in the promise: Habakkuk saw the terrors of Cushan and
Midian so many Ages before, because faith found it recorded among the works of
God to support it self in seeking the like mercies to be renewed: so that this
is the sum of this Verse.

O Lord, faith makes it evident, and presents it before my view, how in former
days, when thou wast doing great things for thy people, thou silledst all
thine, and their enemies, with fear, vexation, trembling and astonishment.

1. Faith gives a present subsistence, to sorepast works as recorded, and
future Obs. 12.
mercies as promised, to support the soul in an evil day. I saw. I have made
the doctrine by Analogy look both ways, though the words of the Text look but
one.

2. Gods dealing with his enemies, in the time of his Churches deliverance is
of especial consideration: I saw, etc.

3. The measuring out of Gods peoples portion fills Cushan with Affliction and
Midian with trembling. Their terrors follow Gods measuring, v. 6.

4 The season of the Churches deliverance being come, Cushan and Midian,
opposing enemies, and superstitious revolters shall surely wax vain and perish.

For the first, that faith gives a present, etc. the Apostle tells us, that
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen: Heb. 11. 1.

1. Of things hoped for: it looks forward to the promises, and so gives the
substance of them in present possession, so confirming our Minds and Hearts,
that they may have a subsistence as it were within us, though not actually made
out unto us. 2. It is the evidence of things not seen: it extends it self not
only to things promised, but taking for its Object the whole Word of God, it
makes evident, and present, things that are past also. The faith commended v.
3. is of things long since done, even the making of the things that are seen
of the things that do not appear. Abraham saw my day says our Savior, Joh.
8. 56. He saw it as Habakkuk the tents of Cushan in affliction. Faith made it
present to him: All the Ages between him and his promised seed were as nothing
to his keen-sighted faith. Hence the Apostle puts the mercies of the promise,
all in one form and rank as already wrought, though some of them were enjoyed
and some of them in this life cannot be. Romans 8. 30. whom he has justified,
them he has glorified: He has done it for them already, because he has made
them believe it, and that gives it a present subsistence in their spirits* And
for forepast works, they are still mentioned by the Saints, as if they had bin
done in their days, before their eyes. Elisha calls up to remembrance a former
Miracle, to the effecting the Like, 2 Kin. 2. 14.

There be three things, in past, or future mercies, which faith makes present
to the soul, giving in the subsistence of them, 1. their Love, 2. their
Consolation, 3. their Use and Benefit.

1. The Love of them: the Love, that was in former works, and the Love that is
in promised mercies, that faith draws out, and really makes ours. The Love of
every recorded deliverance, is given to us by faith. It looks into the
Good Will, the Free Grace, the Loving-kindnesse of God, in every work that ever
he did for his, and cries, yet this is mine: this is the kernel of that
blessing, and this is mine: for the same Good Will, the same kindness he has
toward me also. Were the same outward actings needful, I should have them
also. The Free-love of every mercy is Faiths proper Object. It makes all
Joshuah's great victories, present to every one of us. The promise that had the
Love and Grace in it which run through them all, is given him: Josh. 1. 5. I
will be with thee, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. Now the Apostle
tells us, that the truth and love of this promise is ours, Heb. 13. 5. Faith
may, does assure it self, that what good will soever, was in all the great
mercies which Joshuah received upon that promise, is all ours. All the
good will and choice Love of, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, is mine
and thine, if we are believers. He that has this present, has all Joshuas
victories present. The very glory of the Saints in Heaven is ours in the love
of it. We enjoy that love, which gave them glory, and will Crown us also in
due time.

2. In their comforts and refreshments. Thou gave Leviathan to be meat to
the people in the Wilderness, Psalm. 14. They fed their souls full of the
sweetness of that mercy, The destruction of their oppressing tyrant: we chew
the cud upon the blessings of former ages. Who has not with joy delight and
raised affections, gone over the old preservations of the Church in former
years? How does David run them over with admiration, closing every stop with,
His mercy endures for ever? Psalm. 136. And for things to come, as yet in the
promise only, whether general to the whole Church, as the calling of the Jews,
the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, the breaking out of light,
beauty and glory upon the Churches and Saints, the confusion of Nations, not
subjecting themselves to the standard of the Gospel, etc. or in particular,
further assurance of love then presently enjoyed, nearer Communion with Father
and Son, being with Christ, freed from misery and corruption, dwelling with God
for ever, how does Faith act over these and the like things in the heart,
leaving a savor and relish of their sweetness continually upon the soul? O
how sweet also are the things of the World to come unto poor Believers! Christ
leads the soul by faith, not only into the Chambers of presently-enjoyed
loves, but also into the foreprepared everlasting Mansions in his Fathers
house. Thus it gives poor mortal creatures, a sweet relish of eternal joys:
brings Heaven into a Dungeon, glory into a prison, a crown into a cottage,
Christ into a slaughterhouse.

From the nature of Faith: Though it do not make the thing Reas. 1.
believed to be, (the Act cannot create its own Object,) yet applying it, it
makes it the Believers. It is the bond of union between the soul and the thing
promised. He that believes in Christ, by that believing receives Christ, Joh.
1. 12. he becomes his. It is a grace uniting its subject and object, the person
believing, and the thing believed. There needs no ascending into Heaven or
descending, the word of faith makes all things nigh, even within us. Some Romans
10. 6, 7.
glasses will present things of a great distance very near: Faith looking
through the glass of the Gospel, makes the most remote mercies to be not
only in a close distance, but in Union. It is the subsistence of things hoped
for, that which they have not in themselves, it gives them in the full assured
minds of believers.

From the Intendment of all mercies: they are for every Reas. 2.
believer. All things are theirs, world, life, death, things present, things to
come, 1 Cor. 2. 22. All promises being made to every believer, and all mercies
being the fruit of these promises, they must all belong to every believer. Now
if all these should be kept from us at that distance wherein they fall in their
accomplishment in respect of time, what would they avail us? God therefore
has appointed that they shall have a real, though not a natural presence and
subsistence at all times, to all believers.

See hence what use you may make of past mercies, deliverances, Use. 1.
blessings, with promised incommings: Carry them about you, by Faith, that you
may use them at need: Where is the God of Elijah: Awake, awake oh Arm of the
Lord, etc. I saw the Tents of Cushan: Take store mercies along with you in
every Trial. Use them, or they will grow rusty, and not pass in heaven. Learn
to eat Leviathan many years after his death. Forget not your pearls, scatter
not away your treasure, be rich in a heap of Mercies, Faith will make you so.
The Love, the comfort, the benefit of all former and future blessings are
yours, if you know how to use them. Oh how have we lost our mercies in every
hedge and ditch! Have none of us skill to lay up the last eminent deliverance
against a rainy day?

2. Learn how to make the poorest and most afflicted Condition, comfortable
and full of Joy. Store thy Cottage, thy sick bed, by faith, with all sorts of
mercies. They are the richest furniture in the world. Gather up what is already
cast out, and fetch the rest from heaven. Bring the first fruits of Glory into
thy bosom. See the Jews called, the residue of Opposers subdued, the Gospel
exalted, Christ enthroned, all thy sins pardoned, Corruption conquered, Glory
enjoyed. Roll thy self in those Golden streams every day. Let Faith fetch in
new and Old: Ancient mercies, for thy supportment, Everlasting mercies, for thy
Consolation. He that has Faith, has all things.

2. Gods dealing with his enemies, in the season of his Churches deliverance
Obs. 13.
is of especial consideration; I saw the Tents, etc. so did the Israelites,
beholding the Egyptians dead on the shore. Exodus 14. 30, 31.

The Heathen raged, the Kingdoms were moved, he uttered his voice, the earth
melted, The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge, selah:
Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made on the
earth: Psalm. 46. 6, 7, 8. The enemies undertaking, ver. 6. Gods protection to
his people, ver. 7. A view of the Adversaries desolation, ver. 8. are all
orderly held out.

The Lord tells Moses, that he will harden the heart of Pharaoh, that he might
show his power, to this very end, that it might be considered, and told to one
another, Exodus 10. 2, 3.

How many Psalms have we that are taken up in setting forth Gods breaking,
yoking, befooling, terrifying his Adversaries at such a season?

The remembrance of the slaughter of the first borne of Egypt, was an
ingredient in the chiefest Ordinance the Ancient Church enjoyed, Exodus 14.

Much of the greatness and intensenesse of his love to his own, Reas. 1
is seen in his Enemies ruin. Isa. 43. 3, 4. I gave Egypt for thy ransom,
Ethiopia and Seba for thee, since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, and I loved thee, theresore I will give men for thee, and
people for thy life. When God gives such mighty Kingdoms for a small handful,
it appears they are precious to him. Whosoever shall gather together against
thee shall fall for thy sake, Isa. 54. 15. When God will maintain a quarrel
with all the world, swear that he will never have peace with Ameleck, until
he be consumed, break Nations, Kings and Kingdoms, stretch out his hand in
Judgment round about, and all to save, preserve, prosper, protect, a small
handful, surely he has endeared Affections for them. In the days wherein we
live, can we look, and see, wise men befooled, mighty Warriors vanquished, men
of might become as Children, their persons slain, and trodden down in the
field, can we but cry? Lord, what are we, and what is our house that thou
should do such things for us? A serious view of what God has done in this
Nation of late, what Armies he has destroyed, what strong holds demolished,
what proud haughty spirits defeated, what Consultations made vain, is enough
to make us admire the riches of his love all our days. We may know what
esteem a man sets upon a Jewel by the price he gives for it. Surely God
values them, for whom he has given, the Honors, the parts, the polities, the
lives, of so many tall Cedars, as of late he has done. The loving kindness of
God to his Church is seen, as in a glass, in the blood of their persecutors.

The manifestation of Gods Sovereignty, power, and sovereign Reas. 2.
Justice, is as dear to him as the manifestation of his mercy. The properties
he lays out in destruction, are equally glorious, with those he lays out in
preservation. In the proclamation of his glorious name he omits them not: Exodus
34. 6, 7. In these he triumphs gloriously when he has overthrown the horse
and his rider in the sea, Exodus 15.

Let not our eyes in the late deliverance be always on the light Use.
side of the work, our own Mercies: the dark side of Terror and Judgment is
not without its glory. The Folly that was in their Counsels, the amazement
that was in their Armies, The trembling that accompanied all their
undertakings, the Tympanous products of all their Endeavors, do all cry out
Digitus Dei est hic. Had not God showed infinite wisdom, they had not been
so abundantly foolish; Had not he been Infinite in power, the many thousands of
Enemies had not been so weak.

In the late engagement in this Country, when God stirred us up, with some
others in these parts, to make some opposition to the Enemy gathering at
Chelmsford, what were think you the workings of Gods providence against them?
How came it to pass that we were not swallowed up by them? for

1. They were desirous to ruin us: If we may judge their Desires to answer
their Intetest, or their expressions, with the Language of their friends round
about us to Answer their Desires.

2. They were able to do it. They had from the beginning and so all along,
near as many thousands, as we had hundreds, of them very many old experienced
soldiers, with us not three men, that had ever seen any fighting.

3. They were resolved to do it. Witness their own Confessions, and
frequent Declarations of their purposes, whilst the business was in Agitation.

4. They were provoked to it. The first and only considerable opposition being
made unto them in this place, and thereby first their Assistance from
Colchester hindered, which how much they valued, witness the senseless Letter
they would have forced the Committee to subscribe, to persuade us not to
disturb their Levies there. Secondly, suppressed and discouraged all those
affected to them and their designs in these parts of the County, restraining
some, disarming others, Awing all. Thirdly, hastening the coming of the Army,
lest their friends should suffer. Fourthly, encouraging their coming, by
declaring that they had friends here, by which and the like they were
abundantly provoked.

5. That they were also invited to it, though by persons somewhat
inconsiderable, with promises of a full party of friends to assist them, which
they might have had, and a rich Booty from their Enemies to support them, which
they might have found, is too apparent.

Now being thus advantaged, thus encouraged, thus provoked, and Genesis 20. 6.
Psalm 76. 10.
resolved, why did they not attempt it, why did they not accomplish their
Desires? Is it not worth the while to consider how they were restrained? Was
not much of Gods wisdom seen in mixing a spirit of giddiness and errror in
the midst of them, that they knew not well how to determine, nor at all to
execute their Determinations? Was not his power seen in causing experienced
soldiers as they were, with their multitudes, to be afraid of a poor handful
of unskillfull men, running together because they were afraid to abide in their
houses? Was not his Justice exalted, in keeping them only for the pit which
they had dug for others? Doubtless the hand of God was lifted up. O that
we could all learn Righteousness, peculiarly amongst ourselves of this
place: Is there nothing of God to be discerned, in the vexations, birthlesse
Consultations, and devices of our Observers? Nothing of power in their
restraint? Nothing of wisdom in the selfe-punishment of their anxious
thoughts? Nothing of Goodness that after so long waiting for Advantage, they
begin themselves to think, that neither Divination nor Enchantment will
prevail?

3. The measuring out of Gods peoples portion fills Cushan with Affliction, and
Midian with trembling. Their eye is evil, because God is good. Obser. 14.
Israel's increase is Pharaoh's trouble, Exodus 1. 10. When Nehemiah comes to
build the walls of Jerusalem, it grieved the Enemy exceedingly, that one was
come to seek the welfare of the children of Israel. Neh. 4. 10. This is the
season of that dispensation which you have mentioned, Isaiah 65. 13, 14, 15.

Thus says the Lord, behold my servauts shall eat, but ye shall be hungry,
behold my servants shall drink but ye shall be thirsty, behold my servants
shall rejoyse, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold my servants shall sing for joy
of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and houle for vexation of
spirit. And ye shall etc.

The Reasons of this are taken, 1 from their envy, 2 from their Reason
carnal fear, the two principles whereby they are acted in reference to the
Saints of God.

1. Their envy: Quisfacile potest quale sit hoc malum verbis exprimere, quo
invidus odio hominis, persequitur divinu^ munus in homine: Pros. vit cont.
Invidia est tristitia de bon^ proximi prout proprium malum aestimatur, and est
diminutivum proprii boni. Aqu. 22. ae. q. 36. A. 1. c.
They have a devouring envy at them, which at length shall shame them and
consume them, Isa. 26. 11. They are of their Father the Devil, and he (through
envy) was a murderer from the beginning. Joh. 8. 44. The portion God measures
out unto his people is in distinguishing mercies, differencing blessings: in
such things as the world has not, gives not. Now this is that, which envy
takes for its proper Object. That others should have enjoyments above them,
beyond them, this envious men cannot bear. God accepts Abell, not Cain;
presently Cain is wrath and his countenance falls, Genesis 4. 8. Jacob gets the
blessing, and this fills the heart of Esau, with murderous revenge, Genesis 27.
41. Upon all Gods appearances with the Apostles, how were the Jews cut to the
heart, vexed, perplexed? God gives distinguishing mercies to his people, such
protections, such deliverances, this Cushan and Midian cannot bear.

2. Their carnal fear: They have all of them that conclusion in their breasts,
which Haman's wisemen and wife made to him, H^st. 6. 13. If they begin to fall
before the seed of the Jews, utter ruin will follow. When God begins to own
his people as they in the Acts, chap. 5. v. 24. they doubt whither this will
grow. Their hearts tell them secretly they are usurpers of all they have, and
when God ownes any, they instantly fear lest for their sakes they should be
called to account. When a distinction begins to be made, in Ordinances,
privileges, deliverances, protections, evidently given to some peculiar ones,
they tremble within that they are set apart for no good. This picking and
choosing of men by the Lord Psalm. 4. 3. they cannot bear with. Such mighty works
attend the Israelites, what thinks Midian will be the end of this? It is true
their pride calls on them to act openly more of their malice then their fear:
but yet this lies at the bottom: like a boasting Atheists nightly thoughts.
The chief Priests and Pharisees, having gotten the Apostles Noctu dubitant.
before them, what big words they use to countenance the business? who gave
you this power? Acts 4. 7. But when they are by themselves they cry, what shall
we do? and whereunto will this grow? This lies at the bottom with many at this
day, though they boast and lift up their mouths to Heaven, their hearts do
tremble as an Aspen leaf.

Learn not to be troubled, at the great tumultuating, which is amongst Use.
many against the ways of God at this day. God is measuring out his childrens
portion, giving them their bread in season, viewing for them the lot of their
inheritance. Men of the world, profane Cushanites, superstitious apostaticall
Midianites, will not, cannot be quiet. Vexed they are, envious and afraid, and
will act according to those principles. Cushanites see Religion owned,
Midianites theirs disclaimed, and both are alike provoked. The Lord convert
them, or rebuk them, or the one will have the armies, the other their wiles.
Only judge not their hearts by the outward appearance always: they seem
gallant to you, indeed they are frighted, galled, vexed. I have seen a galled
horse under dressing, leap and curvet, as though it had bin out of metal and
spirit, when indeed it was pain and smart that made him do it. They pretend to
despise us when they envy us. They look like contemners, but are tremblers: be
not troubled at their outward appearance, they have inward anguish; they bite
others, but are lashed themselves.

4. The season of the Churches deliverance being come, Cushan and Midian Obser.
15.
must wax vain and perish. That there is such a season I told you before. When
430 years are expired, Egypt must be destoyed, the Amorites rooted out, and
all the Nations round made to tremble. When 70 years of captivity expire,
Babylon must be ruined, and the Caldean Monarchy quite wasted, that the Jews
may return. The Church being to be delivered, Haman must be hanged. This you
have fully set out, Revel. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. It is the fall of
heathenish tyranny, by the prevailing of the Gospel, which you have there
described. Rome and Constantinople, Pope and Turk, are preserved, for a day and
an hour, wherein they shall fall and be no more. If the season of enjoying
Ordinances and privileges, be come to this Nation, that the Tabernacle of God,
will be here amongst men, woe be to Cushanites, woe be to Midianites, open
opposers and secret Apostates. They shall not be able to be quiet, nor to
prevail. God will not let them rest, nor obtain their purposes: the Story of
Haman must be acted over again; their hearts shall be stirred up to their own
ruin. Revel. 20. 8. this is the frame of perishing Babylonians, in the day of
Sions-restauration.

The Reasons are, 1. because at the deliverance of his people God will plead
with their enemies for their oppressions. It is the day of Reas. 1.
the Lords vengeance, the year of Recompenses for the controversy of Sion,
Isa. 34. 8. It is the vengeance of the Lord and his Temple that lights upon
them, in that day. Jerem. 50. 28. The violence done to me and my flesh, be upon
Babylon shall the inhabitant of Zion say, and my blood upon the inhabitants of
Caldea shall Jerusalem say, Jerem. 51. 35. in this day great Babylon must come
into Remembrance, Rev. 16. 19, 20.

2. The discerning Trial, that shall, and does come along with the Churches
Vindication, will cut off all superfluous false professors, so that they also
shall perish: Mala. 3. 2, 3. Christ comes with a fan to send away the chafe in
the wings of the wind. Have we not seen this end of many Zelots?

3. The Amorites live in Canaan, and must be removed. Oppressors, and
Hypocrites, enjoy many rights of the Church, which must be taken from them:
Rome and her adherents, shall not have so much left, as the Name or title,
appearance or show of a Church. The outward Court they have trodden down and
defiled, shall be quite left out, in the measuring of the Temple, Revel. 11.

Bring this Observation home to the first from this Verse, and it Use
will give you the use of it: proceed we to the next Verse.

Was the Lord displeased against the Rivers? was thine anger against Verse 8.
the Rivers? was thy wrath against the Sea, that thou did ride upon thy
Horses and thy Chariots of salvation?

Was the Lord displeased (...) kindled, did he burn? that is in wrath: Heat is
a great ingredient in the commotion of Anger, in us, here alluded to, or
because the effects of Anger are so often compared to fire. Against the Rivers
or Floods? Again was thine Anger? (...) thy Nose or Face, or thine anger, (...)
signifies both: the Caetera licet abscondere and in abdito alere; ira se
profert et in faciem exit. Senec. de ira.
Face is the seat of angers appearance: fury comes up into the Face. Was thine
anger? thy troubling anger (so the word) against the Sea? the red Sea, through
which thy people passed. That thou did ride upon thy horses, thy Chariots
salvation, or thy Chariots were salvation, currus salutares, thy
safety-bringing Charets.

The words are an admiring expostulation, about the mighty works of the Lord,
for his people, upon the Sea, Rivers and inanimate creatures.

1. The Rivers: Jordan and its driving back is doubtless especially intended.
The Lord showed his power, in disturbing that ancient River in his course, and
making his streams run backward. The story of it you have Josh. 3. 15, 16. The
people being to enter into Canaan, the Lord divides the waters of that River,
making them beneath to sink away, and those above to stand on an heap. This
the Prophet magnifyes, Psa. 114. 5. What aylest thou O Jordan that thou wast
driven back? what mavelous, powerful disturbing thing is happened to thee,
that contrary to thy ancient natural course, thy streams should be frighted,
and run back to the springs from whence they came?

2. The Sea: that is the Red Sea, which in like manner was divided, Exodus 14.
21. which the Prophet also admires in the forecited Psalm: the Sea saw it and
fled: what ayledst thou, O thou Sea that thou fledst? what strong mighty
impression of power was on thee, that the multitudes of thy waters should be
parted, and thy channel discovered dry to the bottom?

That thou did ride upon thy horses and thy chariots of salvation. This you
have again v. 15. thou did* walk through the Sea with thine horses. These
were those Clouds and Winds which the Lord sent before the Izraelites, to the
Sea and Jordan, to drive them back. He makes the clouds his chariots, and
walks upon the wings of the wind Psalm. 104. 3. so Psalm. 18. 11. he did fly
upon the wings of the Wind.

After the manner of men, God is represented as a mighty Conqueror, riding
before his armies and making way for them. The Power and Majesty of God, was
with, and upon those clouds and winds, which went before his people, to part
those mighty waters, that they might pass dry: And therefore they are called
his saving chariots, because by them his people were delivered.

Or by horses and chariots here, you may understand the Angels, who are the
Host of God. Psalm. 68. 17. The chariots of God are twenty thousands, even
thousands of Angels, They have appeared as horses and chariots of fire, 2 Kings
6. 17. And their Ministry no doubt the Lord used in these mighty works of
drying Rivers, and dividing Seas. Either way, the glorious Power and Majesty of
God, in his delivering instruments, is set forth.

Thus the words severally, now jointly.

This admiring Interrogation includes a Negation. Was the Lord kindled against
the Rivers, was thy face against the Rivers, etc. was it that the deep had
offended the most high, that by thine Angels, winds and clouds, thou did so
disturb the floods in their ancient course, and made naked their hidden
channells, until the hoary deep cried out for fear, and lifted up his aged
hands to the Almighty as it were for pity, v. 10? No surely, no such thing; All
those keep the order by thee unto them appointed; it was all for the salvation
and deliverance of thy people. God was not angry with Jordan when he drove it
back, nor with the Sea when he divided it, but all was effected for Isreal's
deliverance.

The very senseless creatures, are as it were sensible of the wrath and Obser.
16.
power of the Almighty. Effects of anger being in and upon the deep, he utters
his voice and lifts up his hands on high, v. 10.

God often in the Scripture sets forth his power and Majesty, by the trembling
of Heaven, and the shaking of the earth, the vanishing of Mountains, and the
bowing of perpetual hills, the professed humble subjection of the most eminent
parts of the Creation. The Sea shall fly as afraid, the Rocks as weak rend and
crumble, the Heavens be darkened, the Mountains skip like Rams, and the little
hills like young sheep, Psalm. 114. 4. (...)
(...)
(...)
Aeschilus. Justin. in apol.

The Heavens shook, the Earth dropped at the presence of God, Psalm. 68. 8. The
Almighty Creator, holds the whole frame of the building in his own hand, and
makes what portion he pleases, and when he pleases, to tremble, consume and
vanish before him. Though many things are not capable of sense and reason, yet
he will make them do such things as Sense and Reason should prompt the whole
subjected Creation unto, to teach that part their duty who were endued
therewith. A servant is beat, to make a child learn his duty.

See hence the stoutnesse of sinful hearts. More stubborn then Use.
the Mountains, more flinty then the Rocks, more senseless then the great
deep. Friend art thou stronger then Horeb, yet that trembled at the presence of
this mighty God, whom it never had provoked? Are thy lusts like the streams of
Jordan, yet they run back from his Chariots of salvation? Are thy corruptions
more firmly seated on thy soul, then the Mountains on their Bases, yet they
leaped like frighted sheep, before that God against whom they had not sinned:
And will thou, a small handful of sinful dust, that have ten thousand times
provoked the eyes of his glory, not tremble before him, coming on his horses
and Chariots of salvation, his mighty Works and powerful Word? Shall a Lion
tremble and thou not afraid, who art ready to tremble with a thought of that
poor creature? Shall the Heavens bow, the deep beg for mercy, and thou be
senseless? Shall all creatures quake for the sin of man, and sinful man be
secure? know you not that the time is coming wherein such men will desire the
trembling Rocks, to be a covert to their more affrighted souls?

No creatures, Seas nor Floods, greater or lesser Waters, shall be able Obs. 17.
to obstruct or hinder Gods peoples Deliverance, when he has undertaken it. Is
the Sea against them? it shall be parted; Is Jordan in the way? it shall be
driven back; both Sea and Jordan shall tremble before him: Euphrates shall be
dried up to give the Kings of the East a passage, Revel. 16. 12.

Waters in the Scriptures are sometimes afflictions, sometimes people and
Nations. Be they Seas, Kings and Princes, or be they Rivers, inferior persons,
they shall not be able to oppose. God has decked his House and made it glorious
with the spoils of all opposers. There you have the spoils of Pharaoh,
gathered up on the shore of the Red Sea, and dedicated in the House of God.
Exodus 15. There you have all the armor of Senacheribs mighty host with the
rest of their spoils, hung up to show. 2 Chapter 32. 21. There you have the glory
and throne and dominion of Nebuchadnezzar himself being turned into a Beast.
Dan. 4. 33. There you shall have the carcasses of Gog and Magog with all their
mighty hosts for coming to encampe against the City of God. Ezekiel. 39. There
you have the Imperial Robes of Eusebius. vit. Con. Constable. Orat
Dioclesian and his companion abdicating themselves from the Empire for very
madness that they could not prevail against the Church. Kings of armies shall
fly apace and she that taries at home shall divide the spoil, Psalm* 68. 12.
All opposers though Nations and Kingdoms shall perish and be utterly
destroyed, Isa. 60. 12. Revel. 19. 18.

God will not exalt any creature unto a pitch of opposition to Reas.
himself, or to stand* in the way of his workings. The very end of all things
in their several stations, is to be serviceable to his purposes toward his
Own. Obedience in senseless Creatures, is natural, even against the course of
nature in the season of deliverance. Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou
Moon in the valley of Ajalon, Josh. 10. 12. Who art thou, O great Mountain?
Before Zerubbabel, thou shall become a plain, Zech. 4. 7. The most Mountainous
opposers shall be levelled, when the Spirit of God sets in for that purpose.
There is a strength in every promise and engagement of God unto his people,
that is able to carry the whole frame of Heaven and Earth before it. If they
can believe, all things are possible to them that believe. When the Decree is
to bring forth, the fruit of the promise, it will overturne Empires, destroy
Nations, divide Seas, ruin Armies, open Prisons, break Chains and Fetters,
and bear down all before it. As the wind shut up in the Earth, will shake the
pillars as it were of its mighty body, but it will find or make a passage. The
least promise of deliverance, if the season thereof be come, though it were
shut up under strong and mighty powers, crafty counsels, dungeons and prisons,
like the doors and lasting bars of the Earth, the truth and power of God
shall make them all to tremble, and give birth to his peoples deliverance.

Have we seen nothing of this in our days? No Seas divided? Use. 1.
no Jordans driven back? no Mountains revelled? no Hills made to tremble?
whence then was the late confusion of Armies? casting down of mighty ones,
reviving of Dead bones, opening of prison-doores, bringing out the captive
appointed to be slain? Is it not from hence, that nothing can stand against
the breakingout of a promise, in its appointed season? was the Lord displeased
with the Rivers? was his Anger against the Walls and Houses, that he rode upon
his Horses and Chariots of Salvation?

Let Faith be strengthened in an evil time. Poor distressed Use 2.
soul all the difficulty of thy deliverance lies in thine own bosom. If the
streams of thy unbelief within, be not stronger then all Seas of opposition
without, all will be easy. O learn to stand still with quietness, between an
Host of Egyptians, and a raging Sea, to see the salvation of God. Be quiet in
prison, between your friends Bullets, and your enemies Swords, God can, God
will make a way. If it were not more hard with us to believe wonders, then it
is to the promise to effect wonders for us, they would be no wonders, so daily,
so continually would they be wrought.

God can make use of any of his creatures to be chariots of Salvation. Obs. 18.
This is the other side of that Doctrine which we gathered from v. 5. Winds and
Clouds shall obey him. (...) Arist. Hist Anima. 6. pellant nidis pullos sicut
and Corvi. Plin. Not. Hist.
Ravens shall feed Elijah that will not feed their own young. The Sea shall
open for Israel, and return upon the Egyptians. And this both in an Ordinary
way as Hos. 2. 21, 22. and in an extraordinary way as before. So many creatures
as God has made so many instruments of good has he for his people: this is
further confirmed, v. 9.

Thy Bow was made quite naked, according to the Oaths of the tribes, Verse 9.
thy word: Sela: thou did cleave the earth with Rivers.

With nakedness thy Bow was made naked. The rest is Elepticall and well
supplied in the Translation.

The Verse has two parts

1. A general proposition, Thy Bow was made, etc. 2. A particular confirmation
of that proposition by instance, Thou did cleave the earth with Rivers.
The proposition holds out two things:

1. What God did, he made his Bow quite naked. 2. The Rule he proceeded by
herein, according to the oaths of the Tribes, even his word.
The assertion of this Verse, is not of some particular act, or work, as the
former, but a general head or fountain of those particular works, which are
ennumerated in the following Verses.

1. A Bow is a weapon of War, an instrument of death, and being ascribed to God
after the manner of men, holds out, his strength, power, might, and efficacy to
do what ever he pleases. And this is said to be quite naked: when a man goes
about to use his Bow, he pulls it out of his Quiver, and so makes it naked. The
exercising of Gods Power, is the making naked of his Bow. This he did in all
those wonders, wherein he stretched out his hand, in bringing his people into
the promised Land, here pointed at. And it is said that with nakedness it was
made naked, because of those very high dispensations and manifestations of his
Almighty Power. This is the making naked of his Bow.

2. For the Rule of this, it is the Oaths of the Tribes, or as afterward SERMON.
2.
his word. The Oaths of the Tribes, that is the Oaths made to them: the Word
he stood engaged to them in. The promise God made by Oath unto Abraham, that he
would give him the Land of Canaan, for an inheritance, even to him, and his
posterity, Genesis 12. 7, 13, 14, 15. is here intimated. This promise was often
renewed to him and the following Patriarchs. Hence it is called Oaths, though
but the same promise often renewed: And it had the nature of an Oath, because
it was made a Covenant. Now it was all for the benefit of the several Tribes,
in respect of actual possession, and was lastly renewed to them, Exodus 3. 17.
Hence called the Oaths of the Tribes: not which they swear to the Lord, but
which the Lord swear to them. So afterward it is called his word. Thy word.
This then is the purport of this general proposition.

O Lord according as thou promisedst, and ingagedst thy self by Covenant to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with their posterity, that thou would give them
the Land of Canaan to be theirs for an inheritance, so by the dispensation of
thy mighty power, thou have fully accomplished it: and this he lays down for
the supportment of faith in a time of trouble.

The words would afford many observations, I shall insist only on one.

The Lord will certainly make good all his promises, and engagements, Obser.
19.
to his people, though it cost him the making of his Bow quite naked, the
manifestation of his power in the utmost dispensations thereof. Gods workings,
are squared to his engagements. This is still the close of all gracious issues
of providence, God has done all according as be promised. Josh. 22. 4. 2 Samuel
7. 21. He brought out his people of old, with a mighty hand, with temptations,
signs and wonders, and a stretched out arm, and all, because he would keep
the Oath which he had sworn, and the engagement which he had made to their
Fathers, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. What obstacles soever may lie in the way he has done it,
he will do it. Take one instance, particular places are too many to be insisted
on. It was the purpose of his heart, to bring his Elect home to himself, from
their forlorn lost condition. This he engages himself to do, Genesis 3. 15.
assuring Adam of a recovery from the misery he was involved in by Satan's
prevalency. This surely is no easy work. If the Lord will have it done, he must
lay out all his Attributes in the demonstration of them to the uttermost. His
wisdom and power must bow their shoulders (as it were) in Christ unto it: he
was the power of God and the wisdom of God. His engaged Love must be carried
along 1 Cor. 1. 24.
through so many secret mysterious marvels, as the Angels themselves desire to
look into, and shall for ever adore. Though 1 Pet. 1. 12.
the effecting of it, required that which man could not do, and God could not
suffer, yet his wisdom will find out a way, that he shall both do it, and
suffer it, who is both God and Man. To make good his engagement to his elect,
he spared not his only Son: and in him were hid, and by him laid out, all the
treasures Col. 2. 3.
of wisdom and knowledge.

Now this is a president, of Gods proceeding in all other engagements
whatsoever. What ever it cost him, he will spare nothing to make them good to
the uttermost. He is our Rock and his work is perfect. A good man, if he want
not power, will go through with his serious promises though he be engaged to
his own hurt, Psalm. 15. 4. The power of the mighty God is serviceable to his
will to the utmost. He cannot will, what he cannot do. His will and power are
essentially the same. And his power shall not be wanting to execute what his
goodness has moved him to engage unto, for his own glory.

Deuteronomy. 32. 4. He is the rock and his work is perfect, all his ways Reas. 1.
are judgment, a God of truth, and without iniquity. Here are many Attributes
of God to make good this one thing, that his work is perfect. His (...),
selfe-sufficiency, Perfection, Righteousness. I will pitch on One, He is a God
of Truth. So he is again called Psalm. 31. 5. and in other places. The Truth of
God in his promises and engagements, requires an accomplishment of them what
ever it cost, what power soever is required thereunto. This the Saints make
their bottom to seek it. Remember thy loving kindness, which thou swarest in
thy Truth, Psalm. 89. 4. It is impossible but that should come to pass which
thou have sworn in thy Truth. No stronger plea, then, Remember the word
wherein thou have caused thy servants to put their trust. Jacob says he is
less then all the Mercy and all the Truth of God, Genesis 32. 10. He sees Gods
Truth in all his Mercy, by causing all things to come to pass, which he had
promised him. It is true, some particular promises have their conditions, whose
truth consists not in the Relation between the word, and the thing, unless the
condition intercede. But the great condition under the Gospel, being only the
good of them, to whom any engagement is made, we Rom 8. 28.
may positively lay down, that Gods Truth requires the Accomplishment of every
engagement for his peoples good. It is neither Mountain nor Hill, King,
Kingdom nor Nation, Hell nor Mat. 16. 18.
Mortality, nor all combined, that can stand in the way to hinder it

His people stand in need of all, that God has engaged himself Reas. 2.
to them for. Gods promises are the just measure of his peoples wants. Whatever
he has promised, that his people do absolutely want. And whatsoever they want,
that he has promised. Our Wants, and his promises are every way commensurate.
If thou know not, what thou stand in need of, search the Promises and
see. What ever God has said he will do for thee, that thou have absolute need
should be done. Or if thou art not so well acquainted with the promises, search
thine own wants, what thou stand absolutely in need of for thy good, that
assuredly God has promised. If then this be the case of engagements, they
shall all be made good. Think you, will God let his people want that which
they have absolute necessity of? By absolute necessity I mean such as is
indispensible, as to their present estate and occasions. That may be of
necessity in one Generation, which is not in another: according to the several
employments we are called to. Does God call forth his Saints, to execute
vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishments upon the people, to bind their
Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron, to execute upon them
the judgment written, as Psalm. 149. 7, 8, 9? does he bring them forth to burn
the whore, to fight with the Revel. 17. 14.
Beast and overcome him, and his followers? it is of indispensable necessity,
that he give them glorious assistance in their undertakings. They shall be
assisted, protected, carried on, though it cost him the making of his Bow quite
naked. According to the several conditions he calls them to, the several
issues of Providence, which he will have them serve in, so want they his
Appearance, in them, with them, for them, and it shall be present. Let them be
assured they are in his way, and then though some prove false and treacherous,
some base and cowardly, though many combine and Associate themselves against
them, in many places, in all places, though whole Kingdoms and mighty Armies
appear for their ruin, be they reviled and clamoured, by all round about
them, all is one, Help they need, and help they shall have, or God will make
his Bow quite naked.

This day is this Doctrine fulfilled before us. Gods Bow made quite naked
according to his Word. We are less then all the Use.
Truth he has showed unto us. Though great working and mighty power has been
required, such as he has not shown in our days, nor in the days of our
Fathers, yet the Lord has not stood at it, for his words sake, wherein he has
made us put our trust. I speak of the General mercies we have received. The
surrender of Colchester the particular celebrated this day, though marching in
the Rear for time, is for the weight in the Van. A mercy of the first
magnitude. Essex has seen more power, in a three months recovery, then in
the protection of six years.

That the mouths of men are stopped, and their faces filled with shame, who
made it their trade to revile and threaten the Saints of God, that the adverse
strength, which has lien hid these seven years, should be drawn forth united
and broken to pieces; that the people of God, divided, and mutually exasperated
through their abuse of peace, should by the sword of a common enemy, and the
help of a common friend, have their wrath abated, their counsels united, and
their persons set in a hopeful way, of closing or forbearance; that God by
their own counsels should shut up men collected from su dry parts to ruin
others, in a City with Gates and Walls for their own ruin; that they should
deny peace tendered upon such conditions, because of the exigencies of the time,
as might have left them power, as well as will for a further mischief; that
such salvation should go forth in other parts, as that the proceedings here,
should not be interrupted; that the bitter service which men here underwent,
should ever and anon be sweetened with refreshing tidings from other places, to
keep up theie spirits in wet, watching, cold and loss of blood; All these I
say, and sundry others, such like things as these, are the Lords doing, and
mavelous in our eyes. Especially let us Remember how in three things the Lord
made his Bow quite naked in this late deliverance.

1. In leavening the counsels of the enemy with their own folly. 2. In
ordering all events to his Own praise. 3. By controlling with his mighty power
the issue of all undertakings.
1. In leavening their counsels with their own folly. Quod homines peccant
eorum est: quod peccando hoc velillud agant ex virtute Dei est, tenebras prout
visu^ est dividentis. August. de praed. Oportet haereses esse, sed tamen non
ideo bonum, haereses, quia eas esse oportebat: quasi non et malum oportuerit
esse, nam et dominum teadi oportebat, sedvae traditori. Tertul. praef. ad.
Haer. Cen. 45. 7. Genesis 50. 20. Acts 4. 27, 28.
Gods Power and the efficacy of his providence, is not more clearly manifested
in any thing then in his effectual working in the debates, advises,
consultations and Reasonings of his Enemies: compassing his ends by their
Inventions. When God is in none of the thoughts of men by his fear, he is in
them all by his providence. The Sun is operative with his heat, where he
reaches not with his light, and has an influence on precious Mineralls, in
the depths and dark bottomes of Rocks and Mountains. The allpeircing
providence of God, dives into the deep counsels of the Hearts of the sons of
men, and brings out precious Gold from thence, where the gracious light of his
countenance, shines not at all. Men freely advise, debate, use and improve
their own Reasons, Wisdom, Interests, not once casting an eye to the Almighty,
and yet all this while do his work, more then their own. All the counsellings,
plottings, of Joseph's Brethren, all the transactions of the Jews, Herod, and
Filate about the death of Christ, with other the like instances abundantly
prove it. Take a few instances, wherein God made his Bow quite naked in the
counsels of his and our enemies.

In general they consult to take Arms, wherein God had fully appeared against
them, when in all probability their work would have bin done without. Had they
not fought, by this time they had bin conquerers. One half years peace more,
which we desired on any terms, and they would on no terms bear, in all
likely hood had set them where they would be. Their work went on, as if they
had hired the Kingdom, to serve them in catching weather. What with some men's
folly, others treachery, all our divisions, had not their own counsels set
them on fighting, I think we should suddenly have chosen them, and theirs, to
be umpires of our quarrels. God saw when it was time to deal with them. In
their undertaking in our own County, I could give sundry instances, how God
mixed a perverse spirit of folly and error in all their counsels. A part of the
Magistracy of the County is seized on: therein their intentions toward the
residue clearly discovered, yet not any attempt made to secure them, which they
might easily have accomplished, although they could not but suppose, that there
were some gentlemen of public and active spirits left, that would be
industrious in opposition unto them. Was not the Lord in their counsels also,
when they suffered a small inconsiderable party in a little Village within a
few miles of them, to grow into such a body as at length they durst not
attempt, when they might have broken their whole endeavor with half an
hundred of men? Doubtless of innumerable such things as these, we may say with
the Prophet, The Princes of Zoan are become fools, the Princes of Noph are
deceived, they have seduced the people, even they that are the stay of their
Tribes, the Lord has mingled a perverse spirit in the midst of them, they
have caused the people to err in every work, as a drunken man staggereth in
his vomit. Isa. 19. 13, 14. Doubtless the wrath of man shall praise the Lord,
and the remainder of it will he restrain.

2. In ordering all events to his own praise. The Timing of the enemies
eruptions in several places, is that which fills all hearts with wonder and
all mouths with discourse in these days. From the first to the last, they had
their season. Had they come together, to the Eyes of flesh, the whole Nation
had bin swallowed up in that Deluge. In particular, let Essex take notice of
the goodness of God; The high thoughts and threats of men, which made us for
diverse weeks fear a Massacre, were not suffered to break out into open
hostility, until the very next day after their strength was broken, in the
Neighbor Country of Kent. As if the Lord should have said, I have had you in a
chain all this while: though you have showed your teeth, you have not
devoured: now go out of my chain, I have a net ready for you. For the Armies
coming to our Assistance, I cannot see how we needed them many days sooner,
or could have wanted them one day longer. Further these homebred eruptions were
timely seasoned, to rouse, the discontented Soldiery, and divided Nation, to
be ready to resist the Scottish invasion. God also being magnifyed in this,
that in this sweet disposal of events, unto his glory, the counsels of many
of those, in whom we thought we might confide, run totally cross to the
appearance of God in his providence.

What shall we say to these things, If the Lord be for us, who shall be
against us? All these things come forth from the Lord of Hosts, who is
wonderful in couns^ll, and excellent in Operation. Isa. 28. 29. Who so is wise
will ponder them, and they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

3. In controlling mighty actions. I mean giving success to his people in all
their undertakings. The Commander in chief of all the forces in this Kingdom
since his sitting down before Colchester, was proffered a pass to go beyond
the Seas for his security. Whence is it, that he has now the necks of his
enemies, and has given any of them their lives at their entreaty? greater
Armies then this, have bin buried under lesser walls; did not the number of
the besieged at first, exceed the number of the besiegers? were not their
Advantages great? their skill in war amongst men of their own persuasion,
famous and renowned? so that the sitting down before it, was judged an action,
meet only for them, who could believe they should see the Bow of God, made
quite naked. It had bin possible doubtless to Reasons eye, that many of those
fictions, wherewith a faction in the great City fed themselves of the many
Routings, Slaughters, and Destructions of the Army, might have bin true. Some
of them I say, for some were as childish as Hellish. In brief, they Associated
themselves and were broken in pieces, they Associated themselves and were
broken in pieces. High walls, Towering imaginations, lofty threats all brought
down. So let all thine enemies perish O Lord, but let them that love him, be as
the Sun when he goes forth in his might, and let the Land have rest for many
years, Judge. 5. 31.

This will discover unto us the bottom and rise of all Gods Use 2.
appearances for his people: even the engaging of his own free Grace. He does
not make his Bow quite naked, according to their Deuteronomy: 7. 7, 8.
deservings, but his own Word Not because they of themselves are better then
others, but because he loves them more then others. Were Gods Assistances,
suited to our walkings, they would be very uneven: but his good will is
constant so are our deliverances.

Be exhorted to Thankfulness, Not In beneficio reddendo plus animus quam
census operatur, Ambs. offi. li 1. c. 32.
Verbal but Real: not Use 3.
the exultation of carnal affections, but the savoury obedience of a sound
mind. There are many ingredients in thanks giving: suitable and seasonable
obedience to Answer the Will of God in his mercies, is doubtless the crown of
all. Look then under the enjoyment of blessings, in general, to close walking
with God in the duties of the Covenant, and in particular, to the especial
work of this your generation, and you are in the way to be thankful.

Be sedulously careful to prevent that, which God has mightily decryed by our
late mercies: viz. mutual Animosities, strife, Use. 4.
Contention, and Violence, against one another, (...). Iraenae. Epist. ad Vict.
apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. (...) Clem* Ep. ad Cor.
I mean of those that fear his Name. God has interposed in our quarrels
from Heaven. The language of our late deliverance is, be quiet lest a worse
thing happen unto you. Our poor Brethren of Scotland, would not see the
hatefulness of their animosities toward their friends, until God suffered
that very thing, to be the means to deliver them up to the power of their
enemies. The weapons they had formed, were used against themselves. Let us
learn betimes to agree about our pasture lest the Wolves of the Wilderness
devour us. Persecution and Idolatry have ruined all the states of the Christian
World.

Of the Assertion we have spoken hitherto. Come we now to the particular
confirmation of it by instance.

Thou did cleave the earth with Rivers. Cleave the earth, or make channels
in the Earth, for waters to flow in.

Another most eminent work of Almighty power is here set forth. Eminent in it
self, and eminent in its typical signification. And the same thing being twice
done, has a plural expression; Rivers.

The bringing of streams of waters, from the Rock, for the thirsty people in
the Wilderness, is that which is here celebrated. Now this the Lord did twice.

1 Exodus 17 6. when the people were in Rephidem, in the first year after their
coming from Egypt, they fainted in their journies for want of water, and
(according to the wonted custom of that Rebellious people) complained, with
murmuring. So they extorted all their mercies, and therefore they were attended
with such sore judgments Whilst the meat was in their mouths, the Plague was
on their bones.

Mercies extorted by murmurings, unseasoned with loving kindness, though they
may be Quails in the mouth will be plagues in the belly. Let us take heed lest
we r^pine the Almighty into a full Harvest, and lean souls. Get and keep
mercies in Gods way, or there is death in the Pot. Psl. 105. 15.


Forty years after this, when the first whole evil generation was consumed,
the children who were risen up in their fathers stead, fall a murmuring for
water in the wilderness of Zin: and with a proffligacy of Rebellion wish they
had bin consumed with others in the former Plagues: Number. 20. 4. Here also the
Lord gives them water and that in abundance, v. 11. Now of this observe.

1. The places from whence this water marvellously issued: they were Rocks,
that in all probability, never had spring from the Creation of the World:
Further they are observed to be Rocks of flint, Psalm. 114. 8. which turned the
Rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of waters, So Deuteronomy. 8.
15. A Rock into a poole, and a flint into a stream, is much beyond Samsons
Riddle, of sweetness from the eater.

2. The abundance of waters that gushed out; waters to satisfy that whole
Congregation, with all their cattle, consisting of some millions. Yea and not
only they, but all the beasts of that wilderness were refreshed thereby also.
Isa. 43. 20. The beast of the field shall honor me, the Dragon and the Owl,
because I give water in the wilderness, Rivers in the Desert, to give drink to
my people, my chosen.

(The very worst of the sons of men, Dragons and Owls fare the better Vir
bonus Commune bonum. Genesis 39. 3.
for Gods protecting providence toward his own.)
And all this in such abundance, that it was as plentiful as a Sea. He clave
the Rock in the Wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the great Deep, he
brought streams also out of the Rocks, and caused waters to run down like
Rivers, Psalm. 78. 15, 16. so also it is celebrated, Isa. 41. 18. Chap. 48. 21.
Hos. 13. 5: and in many other places.

Great deliverances call for frequent Remembrances.
Thus were Rivers brought out of the Rocks: and with, or for these Rivers, God
did cleave the earth, that is, either he provided channels for those streams
to run in, that they might not be wasted on the surface of that sandy
wilderness, but Preserved for the use of his people; or else the streams were
so great and strong, that they pierced the earth, and parted channells for
themselves.

Great Rivers of water, brought out of flinty Rocks, running into prepared
channells, to refresh a sinful thirsty people, in a barren wilderness, I
think is a remarkable mercy.

2. As it was eminent in it self, so likewise is it exalted in its typical
concernment. Is there nothing but flints in this Rock? nothing but water in
these streams? nothing but the Rod of Moses in the blows given to it? Did the
people receive no other refreshment, but only in respect of their bodily
thirst? yes says the Apostle, They drank of that spiritual Rock which
followed them, and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. Was not this Rock, a
sign of that Rock of Ages on which the Church is built? Mat. 16. 18. Did not
Moses smiting, hold out his being smitten with the Rod of God, Isa. 53. 4, 5?
was not the pouring out of these plentiful streams, as the pouring out of his
precious Blood, in a Sea of mercy, abundantly sufficient to refresh the whole
fainting Church in the wilderness? latet Christus in petra, here is Christ in
this Rock. Had Rome had wisdom to build on this Rock, though she had not had an
infallibility, as she vainly now pretends, she might have had an infaillability
(if I may so speak) yea she had never quite failed. Give me leave to take a few
observations from hence: as

1. Sinners must be brought to great extremities, to make them desire the Blood
of Jesus. Weary and thirsty, before rock-water come. Thirst is a continually
galling pressure. When a soul gaspeth like a parched Land, and is as far from
self-refreshement, as a man from drawing waters out of a flint, then shall the
side of Christ be opened to him. You that are full of your lusts, drunk with
the world, here is not a drop for you. If you never come into the wilderness,
you shall never have Rock-water,

2. Mercy to a convinced sinner seems of times as remote, as Rivers from a Rock
of flint. The truth is, he never came near mercy, who thought not himself far
from it. When the Izraelites cried, we are ready to die for thirst, then stood
they on the ground, where Rivers were to run.

3. Thirsty souls shall want no water, though it be fetched for them out of a
Rock. Panters after the blood of Jesus, shall assuredly have refreshment and
pardon, through the most unconquerable difficulties. Though grace and mercy
seem to be locked up from them, like water in a flint, whence fire is more
natural then water, yet God will not strik the rock of his justice and their
flinty hearts together, to make hellsire sparkle about their ears, but with a
rod of mercy on Christ, that abundance of water may be drawn out for their
refreshment.

4. The most eminent temporal blessings, and suitable refreshment, (water from
a Rock for them that are ready to perish) is but an obscure representation of
that love of God, and refreshment of souls, which is in the blood of Jesus.
Carnal things are exceeding short of spiritual, temporal things of eternal.

5. The blood of Christ is abundantly sufficient for his whole Church, to
refresh themselves; streams, rivers, a whole Sea.

These and the like observations flowing from the typical relation of the
blessing intimated, shall not further be insisted on, one only I shall take
from the Historiall Truth.

God sometimes brings plentiful deliverances and mercies for his Obs. 19.
people from beyond the ken of sense and reason, yea from above the ordinary
reach of much precious faith. I mean not what it ought to reach, which is all
the Omnipotency of God; but what ordinarily it does, as in this very business
it was with Moses.

I say plentiful deliverances, mercies like the waters that gushed out in
abundant streams, until the earth was cloven with Rivers: that the people
should not only have a taste and away, but drink abundantly, and leave for the
beasts of the field.

From beyond the ken of sense and reason, by events which a rationally wise
man, is no more able to look into, then an eye of flesh is able to see water in
a flint: or a man probably suppose that diverse millions of creatures should be
refreshed with waters out of a Rock, where there was never any spring from the
foundation of the world.

Now concerning this observe,

1. That God has done it. 2. That he has promised he will yet do it. 3. Why
he will so do?
First he has done it. I might here tire you with presidents. I could lead you
from that Mother deliverance, the womb of all others, the redemption that is in
the blood of Jesus, down through many dispensations of old, and of late,
holding out this proposition to the full. One shall suffice me, and if some of
you cannot help your selves with another, you are very senseless.

Look upon Peter's deliverance, Act. 12. The night before he was to Preached at
the Committee at Rumford.
be slain, he was kept safe in a prison. A prison he had neither will, nor power
to break. He was bound with two-chaines, beyond his skill to unloose, or force
asunder; kept he was by 16 Soldiers, doubtless men of blood and vigilance;
having this to keep them waking, that if Peter escaped with his Head, they were
to lose theirs. Now that his deliverance was above sense and reason, himself
intimates, v. 11. he has delivered me from the expectation of the Jews. The
wise subtle Jews, concluded the matter so secure, that without any doubts or
fears, they were in expectation of his execution the next day. That it was also
beyond the ready reach of much precious faith, you have an example in those
believers, who were gathered together in the house of Mary, v. 12. calling her
mad, who first affirmed it, v. 15. and being astonished when their eyes beheld
it, v. 16. The whole seeming so impossible to carnal Herod, after its
accomplishment, that he slayes the keepers as false in their Hellish trust. A
just recompense for trusty villains.

The time would fail me to speak of Isaac and Joseph, Gidron, Noah Genesis 22.
14. Genesis 39, etc.
Daniel and Job, all presidents worthy your consideration. View them at your
leisure, and you will have leisure, if you inend to live by faith.

2. He has said it. It is a Truth abounding in promises and performances. I
shall hold out one or two, It will be worth yourwhile to search for others your
selves. He that digges for a mine, finds many a piece of gold by the way.

Isa. 41. 14, 15. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye few men of Israel, behold
I will make thee, a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth, thou shall
thresh the Mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the hills as chafe,
thou shall fan them, etc.

To make a worm a threshing instrument with teeth, to cause that instrument to
beat Mountains and hills into chafe, that chafe to be blown away with the
wind, that, that worm may rejoice in God, to advance a small handful of
despised ones, to the ruin of Mountanous Empires, and Kingdoms, until they
be broken and scattered to nothing, is a mercy that comes from beyond the ken
of any ordinary eye.

Eze. 37 3. The Prophet professes that the deliverance promised was beyond his
apprehension. Son of man can these bones live and I answered O Lord God thou
know. The Lord intimates in the following verses, that he will provide a
means, for hisChurches recovery, when it seems as remote therefrom, as* dry
bones scattered upon the face of the Earth are from a mighty living Army. This
he calls opening their graves, v. 12, 13.

Because he would have his people wholly wrapped up in his Allsufficiency. 3
Reas. 1.
Not to straighten themselves, with what their faith can ken in a promise: much
less to what their reason can perceive in appearance. In the application of
promises to particular trials and extremities, Faith oftentimes is exceedingly
disturbed, either in respect of persons, or things, or seasons. But when it will
wholly swallow up it self in All Sufficiency, the fountain of all promises,
there is no place for fear or disputing. Have your souls in spiritual trials
never bin driven from all your outworks, unto this main fort? Has not all hold
of promises in time of trial given place to temptations, until you have
fallen down in All Sufficiency, and their found peace? God accounts a flight to
the strong Tower of his Name, to be the most excellent Valor. This is faiths
first, proper, and most immediate Object: To particular promises it is drawn
out, on particular occasions: here is or should be its constant abode: Genesis 17.
1. And indeed the soul will never be prepared to all the Will of God, until
its whole complacency be taken up in this sufficiency of the Almighty. Here God
delights to have the soul give up it self to a contented losing of all its
reasonings, even in the infinite unsearchablenesse of his goodness and power.
Therefore will he sometimes send forth such streams of blessings, as can flow
from no other fountain, that his may know where to lie down in peace. Here he
would have us secure our shallow bottomes in this quiet Sea, this infinite
ocean, whither neither wind, nor storm, do once approach. Those blustering
temptations which rage at the shore, when we were half at Land, and half at
Sea, half upon the bottom of our own reason, and half upon the Ocean of
providence, reach not at all unto this deep. Oh if we could in all trials, lay
our selves down in these arms of the Almighty, his Al-sufficiency in power and
goodness, oh how much of the haven should we have in our voyage, how much of
home, in our pilgrimage, how much of Heaven in this wretched Earth! Friends
throw away your staves, break the arm of flesh, lie down here quietly in every
dispensation, and you shall see the salvation of God. I could lose my self in
seting out of this, wherein I could desire you would lose your selves in every
time of trouble.

Have thou not known? have thou not heard that the everlasting God, the Lord,
the Creator of the ends of the earth, faints not, neither is weary? there is
no searching of his understanding. He gives power to the faint and to them who
have no might, he increases strength. Even the youths shall faint and be
weary, and the young men shall utterly fall. But they that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they
shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not be faint. Isa. 40. 28, 29,
30, 31.

To convince the unbelieving world it self of his power, providence, Rea. 2.
and love to them that put their trust in him: that they may be found to cry,
verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God who Psalm 58. 1.
1.
rules in the earth. When the Egyptian Magicians see real Miracles, beyond
all their juggling pretenses, they cry out this is the finger of God, Exo. 8.
19. profane Nebuchadnezzar beholding the deliverance of those three worthies,
from the fiery Furnace, he owns them for the servants of the most high God,
Dan. 3. 26. Daniel being preserved in the Lions den Darius acknowledges the
power and Kingdom of the livingGod, Dan. 6. 26 Glorious appearances of God for
his people beyond the reach of reason, wrests from the World amazement, or
acknowledgement, and in both God is exalted He will appear in such distresses
as that he will be seen of his very enemies: they shall not be able with the
Philistians to question whether it be his hand, or a chance happened to 1 Samuel
6. 10.
them, but conclude with the Egyptians, that fly they must for God fights for
his people, Ex. 14. 25. If God should never give blessings but in such a way,
as reason might discover their dependence on secondary causes, men would not
see his goings, nor acknowledge his operations. But when he mightily makes bare
his Arm, in events beyond their imaginations, they must veil before him.

Consider whether the mercy celebrated this day, ought not to be Use 1.
placed in this series of deliverances, brought from beyond the ken of sense
and reason, from above the reach of much precious faith. For the latter I leave
it to your own experience, to the former let me for the present desire your
consideration of these five things.

1. By whom you were surprised and put under restrant. Now these were of two
sorts: 1. The heads and leaders, 2. The tumultuous multitude.

For the first, some of them being dead, and some under durance, I shall not
say any thing: nullum cum victis certamen et aethere cassis. I leave the
stream from the flint to your own thoughts.

2. For the multitude, an enraged, headles, lawles, godles multitude, gathered
out of Innes, Taverns, Alehouses, Stables, Highways, and the like nurseries of
piety and pity. Such as these having gotten their Superiors under their power,
their Governors under their disposal, their Restrainers under their restraint,
their Opressors, as they thought, under their fury, what was it that kept in
their fury and their revenge, which upon the like occasions and advantages,
has almost always bin executed? Seaech your stories, you will not find many
that speak of such a deliverance. For a few Governors prevailed on, unto
durance, by a godless rout, in an insurrection, and yet to come off in peace
and safety, is surely a Work of more then ordinary providence.

2. Consider the season of your surpisall, when all the Kingdom was in an
uproare, and the arm of flesh almost quite withered as to supply. The North
invaded, the South full of insurrections, Wales unsubdued, Idem huic ur* by
dominandi finis erit, qui parendi suerit: Senec. de To.
The great City, at least suffering men to lift up their hands against us* So
that to the eye of reason the issue of the whole, was if not lost, yet
exceedingly hazardous: and so to the Eye of reason your captivity endless. Had
they gone on as was probable they would, whether you had this day bin brought
out to execution, or thrust into into a dungean, or carried up and down as a
Pageant, I know not, but much better condition, I am sure rationally you could
not expect.

3. The end of your surprizall. Amongst others, this was apparently one, to be
a reserve for their safety, who went on, in all ways of Ruin. You were kept to
preserve them in those ways, wherein they perished. Whether could reason reach
this or no; that you being in their power, kept on purpose for their Rescue, if
brought to any great straight, with the price of your Heads, to redeem their
own, that they should be brought to greater distress, then ever any before in
this Kingdom, and you be delivered, without the lest help to them in their
need, It was beyond your Friends reason, who could not hope it, it was beyond
your Enemies reason who never feared it, if you believed it, you have the
comfort of it.

4. The refusal of granting an exchange, for such persons, as they accounted
more considerable then your selves, and whose enlargement might have advantaged
the cause they professed to maintain, exceedingly more then your restraint,
what does it but proclaim your intended ruin? This was the way of deliverance,
which for a long Season, Reason chiefly rested on, the maine pillar of all its
building, which when it was cut in two, what could in it be seen but desolation.

5. The straights you were at length reduced to, between your Enemies swords and
your friends bullets, which intended for your deliverance, without the
safeguard of providence, might havebin your ruin, peircing more then once, the
house wherein you were. Surely it was then an eminent work of Faith to stand
still, and see the Salvation of God.

The many passages of providence evidently working for your preservation, which
I have received from some of your selves, I willingly pass over. What I have
already said is sufficient to declare that to Reasons Eye you were as dead
bones upon the Earth. For our parts who were endangered spectators, at the
best, we were but in the Prophets frame, and to any question about your
enlargement could Answer only, the Lord alone he knows. And now behold the
Lord has chosen you out, to be examples of his loving kindness, in fetching
mercy for you, from beyond the ken of Reason, yea from above the reach of much
precious Faith. He has brought water for you out of the flint. Reckon your
deliverance under this head of operations, and I hope you will not be
unthankful.

You that have received so great mercy, we that have seen it, and all Use 2.
who have heard the Doctrine confirmed, let us learn to live by Faith. Live
above all things that are seen. Subject them to the cross of Christ. Measure
your condition, by your interest in Gods All Sufficiency. Do not in distress
calculate what such, and such things can effect, but what God has promised.
Reckon upon that, for it shall come to pass. If you could get but this one
thing, by all your sufferings and Dangers, to trust the Lord, to the utmost
extent of his promises, it would prove a blessed captivity. All carnal fears
would then be conquered, all sinful compliances with wicked men removed, etc.
Use. 3.


Be exhorted to great Erunt Homicidae, Tyranni, fures, adulteri, raptores,
Sacrilegi proditores, infra ista omnia, ingratus est. Senec. Benef. l. 1.
Gratiarum cessat decursus, ubi recursus non fuerit. Bern. Sermon 50.
Thankfulness, you that have bin made partakers of great deliverances. In
great distresses, very nature prompts the sons of men to great promises. You
have heard the ridiculous story of him, who in a storm at Sea, promised to
dedicate a Wax-candle to the blessed Virgin, as big as the mast of his Ship,
which he was resolved when he came on shore to pay with one of 12 in the pound.
Let not the Moral of that Fable be found in any of you. Come not short of any
of your engagements, no greater discovery of an Hypocritical frame, then to
flatter the Lord in trouble, and to decline upon deliverance in cold blood. The
Lord of Heaven give you strength to make good all your resolutions: as private
persons, in all godliness and honesty, following hard after God in every known
way of his; as Magistrates, in Justice Equity and faithful serving the
Kingdom of Christ: Especially let them never beg in vain for help at your
hands, who did not beg help in vain, for you at the hands of God.

Consider, if, there be so much Si Tanti vitrum quanti Margaritum? Tertul.
sweetness in a temporal deliverance, Use. 4.
Oh what excellency is there in that Eternal Redemption, which we have in the
Blood of Jesus? If we rejoice for deing delivered from them, who could have
killed the body, what unspeakeable rejoysing is there in that mercy whereby we
are freed from the wrath to come. Let this possess your thoughts, let this
fill your souls, let this be your haven from all former storms, and here
strik I sail, in this, to abide with you, and all the saints of God for ever.

FINIS.

