THE BRANCH OF THE LORD, The Beauty of SION: OR, The Glory of the CHURCH, in
It Is Relation unto CHRIST.

Opened in Two SERMONS; one preached at Berwick, the other at Edinburgh.

By John Owen, Minister of the Gospel.

PSALM. 48. 12, 13, 14. Walk about sion, and go round about her: tell the Towers
thereof.
Mark ye well her Bulwarks consider her Palaces, that you may tell it to the
Generation following.
For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our Guide unto death.
EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, in the year 1650.

To His EXCELLENCY the Lord General CROMWELL, etc.
MY LORD,
IT was with Thoughts of Peace, that I embraced my Call, to this Place, and
Time of War. As all Peace that is from God is precious to my spirit, so
incomparably, that between the Father and his Elect, which is established, and
carried on in the Blood and Grace of Jesus Christ. The Ministerial
dispensation of this Peace, being through free Grace committed even unto me
also, I desire that in every place, my whole may be, to declare it to the men
of Gods good pleasure. That this was my chief design, in answer to the Call of
God upon me, even to pour out a savor of the Gospel upon the Sons of Peace in
this place, I hope is manifest to the Consciences of all, with whom (since my
coming hither) in the Work of the Ministry I have had to do. The Enmity
between God and us, began on our Part: The Peace which he has made, begins and
ends with himself. This is the way of God with sinners, when he might justly
continue their Enemy, and fight against them to their Eternal ruin, he draws
forth Love, and beseeches them to be reconciled, who have done the wrong, and
them to accept of Peace, who cannot abide the Battle. Certainly, the bearing
forth of this Message, which is so worthy of all Acceptance, and ought to be
so welcome, cannot but have sweetness enough to season all the Pressures and
temptations wherewith it is sometimes attended. This has bin my desire to
pursue, and that, with the weapons which are not carnal. And though some may be
so seasoned with the leaven of contention about carnal things, or at best the
tithing of Mint and Cummin, as to disrelish the weightier things of the Gospel,
yet the great Owner of the Vineyard, has not left me without a comfortable
assurance, that even this labor in the Lord has not been in vain. The
following Sermons, which I desire to present unto your Excellency, were
preached one at Berwick upon your first advance into Scotland; the other at
Edinburgh. My willingness to serve the Inheritance of Christ here, even in my
Ablence, caused me to close with the desires, that wercheld out to this
purpose. And I do present them to your Excellency, not only because the Rise of
my Call to this service, under God was from you; but also, because in the
carrying of it on, I have received from you in the weaknesses and temptations
wherewith I am encompassed, that daily spiritual Refreshment and support by
inquiry into, and discovery of the deep and hidden dispensations of God toward
his secret ones, which my spirit is taught to value. The carrying on of the
Interest of the Lord Jesus amongst his Saints, in all his ways, which are
Truth and Righteousness, the matter pointed at in this Discourse, being the
Aim of your spirit in your great under-takings it bears another Respect unto
you. I am not unacquainted with it is meannesse yea it is coming short in respect
of use and fruit, of what the Lord has since, and by others drawn forth; but
such as it is, having by Providence stepped first into the world, I wholly
commend it to him for an Incense, who graciously supplied the seed to the
sower: beseeching him that we may have joy unspeakable and glorious, in the
Acceptance of that Peace, which he gives us in the Son of his Love, whilst the
Peace whose desire in the midst of war, you continually bear forth to him,
and to others, is by them rejected to their hurt.

Edinb. Nov. 26. 1650. Your Excellencies most humble servant in our dearest
Lord, John Owen.

ISAIAH 56. Chap. 7. verse. -- For mine House shall be called an House of
Prayer for all People.
FRom the 3d verse of this Chapter to the 8th, you have Promises and
Predictions of calling in Gentiles and Strangers to the Church of God,
notwithstanding any Objections, or hindrances laid in their way, By
Ceremonial and Typical constitutions, they being all to be removed in the
Cross of Christ, Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16: Colos. 2. 14. making way for the
accomplishment of that signal Promise which is given in the 2: Chapt: of this
Prophecy 2, 3. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain
of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
shall be exalted above the hills, and ALL NATIONS shall flow unto it: And MANY
PEOPLE shall go, and say, Come ye, let us go up etc.

The words of the 7th verse, are a RecapiTulation of the whole, holding out
summarily the calling of the Gentiles to the Holy Mount, or spiritual Church
of Christ: Where also you have a description of the services performed by them
upon their coming: Their burnt offerings and sacrifices shall be accepted upon
mine Altar: Answerable to that eminent prediction of the solemn worship of the
called Gentiles, Mal. 1. 11.

For, from the rising of the Sun, even to the going down of the same, my Name
shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered
unto my Name, and a peace offering: for my Name shall be great among the
Heathen says the Lord of Hosts.

The Spiritual services of the Saints of the Gentiles, are in each place set
forth by those Ceremonial Ordinances, of Incense, Altar and Sacrifice, as were
then most acceptable from the Lords own appointment.

Now this whole promise is once again straightned, without loss of life or
beauty, and comprised in the words of the Text.

That which before he termed sacrifice and burntofferings, here he calls
Prayer: and those who before were, the sons of the stranger, are here, all
People: some, many of all sorts, the whole world, all men, without distinction,
the Partition. Wall being broken down. My House shall be called, etc.

The Thing here spoken of is Gods House, described

1. By its Appropriation unto him, it is his peculiar, My House. 2. By its
extent of receipt in respect of others, it is for all People. 3. By the
employment of its Inhabitants, that is Prayer, it shall be called an House of
Prayer.
House, here may be taken two ways.

1. Properly, as it was in the Type for the Material Temple at Jerusalem:
whereunto these words are applied by our Savior, Math. 21. but that is no
farther concerned herein, but as the spiritual Holiness of the Antitype,
could not be represented without a Ceremonial Holiness of the Type.

2. Spiritually, for the Church of Christ to be gathered to him out of all
Nations: the House wherein Juge sacrificium, a continual spiritual sacrifice
is to be offered to him: This is peculiarly intended: so then observe:

1. Christ's Church of Saints, of believers, is God's House. 2. The Church of
Christ under the Gospel, is to be gathered out of all Nations. 3. There are
established Ordinances, and appointed Worship for the Church of Christ under
the Gospel.
It is the first that I shall speak unto.

Christ's Church of Saints, of believers, is God's House: That his Church, is of
Saints, and Believers, will appear in the issue.

By the Church of Christ, I understand, trimarily the whole Multitude of them,
who antecedently, are chosen of his Father, and given unto him: Consequently,
are redeemed, called, and justified in his blood: The Church which he loved,
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the Word. That he might present it unto himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.

And secondarily also, every holy Assembly of mount Sion, whereunto, the Lord
Christ is made beauty and glory: every particular Church of his Saints,
inasmuch as they partake the nature of the whole, being redeemed by his blood,
Acts 20. 28.

That this Church belongs unto God, I shall only leave evidenced under the
claim whereby he here appropriates it to himself, he calls it His, My House:
That it is his House, I shall further demonstrate: Three things are required to
making of a House: 1. A Foundation. 2. Materials for a superstruction. 3. An
orderly framing of both into an useful building.


And all these concur to the Church of Christ:

1. It has a Foundation: I have laid the Foundation, faith Paul, 1. Cor. 3.
10. and, other Foundation can no man lay, save that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, V. II. That Which Paul laid ministerially, God himself laid
primarily and efficiently: Thus says the Lord God, Behold I lay in Sion for a
Foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious Corner stone, a sure Foundation,
Isa. 28. 16. Now this Foundation is no other but the Rock upon which the Church
is built, Math. 16. 18. which makes it impregnable to the Gates of hell,
communicating strength, and permanency, continually to every part of the
building.

2. A Foundation only will not make a House, there must also be Materials for
a superstrustion: Those you have, 1. Pet. 2. 5. you are (says he) lively
stones: All Gods Elect, are stones, in due time to be hewed, and fitted for
this building. For

3. Materials themselves will not serve: they must be fitly framed, and wisely
disposed, or they will be an Heap, not an House. This then is not wanting.

Ye are built upon the Foundation of the Prophets, and the Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom the whole building fitly
framed together, grows into an holy Temple in the Lord: in whom also ye are
builded together, for an habitation to God by the spirit, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22.

There is much spiritual and heavenly Architecture in these 3. verses. I shall
only touch on some particulars.

1. The Foundation of this House, this Temple is laid, and that is Jesus
Christ, other Foundation can no man lay: He is here called, the chief corner
stone: and, the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, It is not which they
were, but which they laid: It is Genetivus efficiculis, not materiae: That
expression holds out, the persons working, not the thing wrought.

2. The Materials of this Building, Elect, believers: said in the former verse,
to be fellow citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: they alone
are built on Christ, and thereby have union with him: not one dead rotten stone
in all this Building, as shall be declared.

3. The Architects or builders are of two sorts:

1. Principal, the Spirit, we are framed to an habitation for God by the
Spirit: He is the principal Workman in this Fabric: without him, is not one
stone laid therein.

2. Secundary and Isntrumental, the Prophets and Apostles, and this they were
two ways:

1. Personally, in their several Generations: this was their work, their
labor, to lay the Foundation, and carry on the building of this House.

2. Doctrinally: so they labor in it to this very day: Their Doctrine in the
Scripture holds out the only Foundation, and the only way of building thereon.

4. The manner of the building, it is fitly framed together, (...): closely
joynted and knit in together: sweetly closed together with Christ* the head,
from which, all the Body by joints and hands having nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the increase of God. Col 2. 19.

5. What kind a House it is: It receives here a twofold Title, 1. an holy
Temple: 2. an habitation, or a Tabernacle, because of it is allusion to both
those holy places of the worship of God, fulfilling the Types of them both.

Hence it is most evident that this Church of Christ is a House, and being
appropriated unto God, God's House.

To make this the more evident, I shall do these two things:

1. Show you what are the chief Properties of this House. 2. Declare what is
the Relation, wherein Jesus Christ stands to this House, having called it all
along the Church of Christ.
1. For the Properties or chief qualities of this House, they are three: 1. It
is a living House: 2. it is strong: 3. it is glorious.

1 It is a living House: Unto whom coming as unto a living stone, ye also as
lively stones are built up a spiritual House, 1 Pet: 2: 4: 5. Christ the
foundation is a living Stone, and they that are built upon him, are living
stones. Hence they are said to grow together into an House: Growth is a sign
of life: Growing from an inward Principle: such as the Growth of any thing is,
such is its life: the Grows of this House is spiritual, so therefore also is
its life: it lives with a spiritual life: a life whose fullness, is in its
foundation, he has life in himself: Joh: 5. 26* and from him, in them: I am
crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live, Gal: 2: 22: yea it is himself in
them; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. It is true those stones are dead in
the Rock as well as others: by nature Children of wrath as well as they, Ephesians.
2: 3: being dead in Trespasses and sins: v: 1. He who Hews them our, gives them
life: He quickens them, when dead in trespasses and sin: There is not one
rotten dead stone in all this building: However some such may, by the advantage
of their outward appearance, crowd in, yet they are not of the House it self.

2. It is a strong House: the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it, Mat. 1.
6: 18. though the Rain descend, and the floods come, and the winds blow, upon
this House, yet it will not fall, because it is founded on a Rock, Matthew. 7.
25. We were all once an house built upon Adam: and when the wind came, and
beat upon us, we fell, and the fall of that house was very great: He in his
best estate was found to be but sand: now we are built upon a Rock that will
abid all trialls: The waves may make a noise and dash themselves against him,
but it will be to their own ruin* But you will say, may not weak and
inconsistent materials be built upon a Rock, which yet may have never the more
strength for their firm foundation? Ans 1: It is not so here, for the whole
building is framed together in the foundation, Ephesians. 2. 22. not only on it,
but also in it, and so not to be prevailed against, unless the Rock it self be
orethrown. 2. It is a living Rock, that this house is built on: a Rock
continually communicating strength unto every stone in the building, that it
may be enabled to abide in him: I should proceed too for, should I go to
declare the mighty defense and fortification of this House: what has been
spoken from the foundation, is enough to demonstrate it to be a strong House.

3. It is a Glorious House, and that in a threefold respect:

1. It is Glorious in respect of Inward Glory brought unto it of God in the
face of Jesus Christ: being beautiful, through the comeliness that he puts
upon it: Hence Christ speaking of it, says, How fair art thou O love for
delights, Canticles, 7: 6. and thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in
thee, Chap. 4 7. and how I pray comes that about, why Christ washes it in his
own blood, that it might be wholly a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5. 26 27. And
further he being the branch of the Lord, and fruit of the earth is made beauty
and Glory, Excellency and Comeliness thereunto. Psalm. 4. 2.

It has the beauty and Glory of Justification, which does not only take away
all filthy Garments, causing Iniquity to pass away, but also gives fair change
of Raiment, Zech. 3. 4, 5. even the Garments of Salvation, and the Robe of
Righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. And then it has, the Glory, and beauty of
sanctification, whence the Kings daughter is all Glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13.
The comeliness and beauty that is in a sanctified soul, is above all the Glory
of the world. This House is all overlaid with gold within: Christ is unto it a
Head of Gold, Cant. 5. 11. His house is not like Nebucadnezers Image, that the
Head should be of Gold, and the members some of them of Clay: they all partake
of his Nature, and are very glorious therein:

2. In respect of its outward structure; which it eminently has in all the
peculiar Assemblies thereof: O thou afflicted and tossed with tempest and not
comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with fair Colors, and thy foundations
with saphires: I will make thy windows of Agats and Carbuncles, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones, Isa. 54, 11, 12. So also where it is called the new
Jerusalem, (a city from its laws and policy) this city is said to be of pure
Gold, (not dross and mire) the building of the wall of Jasper, and the
foundation of the wall garnished with all manner of precious stones, Revel. 21.
18. 19. This is that which the Psalmist calls the beauties of Holiness, Psalm.
110.

3. The Glory of the Ordinances of the Gospel in their vigor and purity:
There is nothing so glorious as our King on his throne: Christ in his Court;
this House, reigning in the Administration of his Ordinances: then al his
Garments, smell of Mirrh, Aloes and Cassia, out of the Ivory Palaces whereby
they have made him Glad, Kings daughters are among his honorable women, upon
his right hand does stand the Queen in Gold of Ophir, Psalm. 45. 8, 9. His
goings are seen, the goings of our God and King in the sanctuary, Psalm. 68.
24, 25. etc. The Apostle exalts the Glory of Gospel-Administrations exceeding
above the old Tabernacle and Temple worship, which yet was excreeding pompous
and glorious. If (says he) the minist ation of death, written and engraven in
stones was glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold
the face of Moses, for the Glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done
away, How shall not the the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious: For
if the ministration of Condemnation be Glory, much more does the ministration
of Righteousness exceed in Glory: For even that which was made glorious, had
no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excels, for if that
which is done away was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious, 2
Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Let men think as meanly as they please of the
spiritual service of God amongst his people: All Glory that ever yet appeared
in the world, was but a buble to it: all that God ever Instituted before, came
exceeding short of it: He delights in it, who beholds the proud afar off.

3 It is glorious in respect of the Exaltation it has above, and Triumph over
all its opposers: To see a House, a Palace hanged round about with Ensigns,
Spoils, and banners taken from the Enemy that have come against it, is a
Glorious thing: thus is this House of God decked: Kings of Armies did flee
apace, and she that carried at home, divided the spoil, Psalm: 68. 12. she that
ta^ies at home, the mother of the family, the Church of God, she has all the
spoils. The Lord has affirmed, that not only every one that opposes, but
all that do not serve this house, shall be utterly destroyed, Isa. 60: 12.
There you have the spoil of Pharaoh, and all his Host, gathered on the shore
of the red sea, and dedicated in this House, Exodus: 15. There you have the Robes
of Nebuehadnezzar here referred when himself was turned into a Beast, Dan 34.
There you have the imperial Ornaments of Dioclesiar, and his companion casting
aside their dominion for very madness that they could not prevail against this
house: There is the blood of Julian kept for a monument of Vengeance against
Apostates: There you have the Rochets of the Prelates of this land, hung up of
late with other Garments of their adherents rolled in blood: There is a place
reserved for the remaining spoils of the great whore, when she shall be burned
and made naked, and desolate Revel. 11. never any rose, or shall arise against
this house, and go forth unto final prosperity: Let the men of the world take
heed how they burden themselves with the foundation stone of this house, it
will assuredly break them all in pieces.

Thus have I given you a Glimpse of this house, with the chief properties of
it, which as God assumes as his own, so also peculiarly it belongs unto the
Lord Christ; yea what Relation it stands in unto him, or rather he unto it, is
the maine thing I intend.

Jesus Christ stands in a two fold Relation unto this House,

1 In respect of its fabric and building. 2 In respect of its state and
Condition.
In the first regard Christ relates to this House in afour fold Respect. As 1
Its foundation. 2 Its Arc. 3 Its Altar. 4 Its Candlestick.


In Respect of state and condition, Christ relates unto this house of God in a
five-fold regard. As 1 The Owner 2 The Builder 3 The Inhabiter 4 The watchman
or keeper 5 The Avenger
thereof:

I shall pass through these (God assisting) in Order: and begin with what was
first laid down, His Relation to this House in respect of its fabric and
building; as 1 The foundation of it: This was in part declared before: He is the
stone which the builders rejected, but made of the Lord the head of the Corner,
Psalm. 118. 22. He is the lowest in the bottom to bear up the weight of the
building, and the Highest in the Corner to Couple the whole together: other
foundation can no man lay but that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
3. 10. He is the Rock, on which he builds his Church, Mat. 16. 18.

Now there be 3. things, required to a Foundation, all which are eminently seen
in the Lord Christ, in Reference to this House.

1. That it be first laid in the Building: It were a course exceeding
preposterous, first to build a House, and then to lay the Foundation. Jesus
Christ is the first that is laid in this holy fabric: and that in a fourfold
Respect.

1. He is the first, in respect of God's eternal purpose: The Lord purposed
that he should have the pre-eminence in this as well as in all other things,
Col. 1. 15. He is in that Respect the first born among many Brethren Romans 8.
29. the Residue of this House, being predestined to be made conformable unto
him: He is before all things, by him all things, (that is all spiritual
things, all the things of this House) consist, He is the Head of the Body the
Church: this I mean, God purposed that Christ should be the bottom and
foundation of this whole building, that it should be all laid on him: I do not
mean, that God first intended Christ for a foundation, and then his Elect for a
building. The order of Intention and Execution is as to first, and last,
inverted by all Agents: but this I say, God purposing to build his Elect into
an holy Temple, purposed that Jesus Christ should be the Foundation.

2. In Respect of outward manifestation: God first manifests and declares him,
before he laid one stone in this building, Genesis 3. 15. The seed (says he) of
the woman shall break the serpents Head: in that was laid the first stone of
this building: then was the Lamb slain, (...), Revel. 13. 8. (presently) after
the foundation of the World: and thence, is Grace in him said to he given to
the Elect, (...), Titus 1. 2. many Ages ago.

3. Because in order of Nature, Christ must be first laid in the Heart of every
Individual stone, before they are laid up in this building. If Christ be not
in men, they are (...), 2. Cor. 15. 1. altogether useless for this building;
try them never so often, they must at last be rejected, and laid aside.

4. In respect of every particular Assembly, and little Sanctuary of Mount
Sion: If he be not first laid in the midst of such Assemblies, they will prove
to be pi^acles of Babel, not Towers of Sion: This therefore was the way of the
Saints of old, first to give up themselves to the Lord Christ, and then to one
another, by the will of God, 2. Cor. 8. 5.

In these Respects Christ the Foundation, is first laid in this spiritual
building: which is the first property of a Foundation.

2. A Foundation must be hidden, and out of sight unto all those that outwardly
look upon the House: They cannot perceive it, though every part of the House
does rest upon it: And this has occasioned many mistakes in the World. An
unwise man coming to a great House, seeing the Anticks and Pictures stand
crouching under the Windows and sides of the House, may happily think, that
they bear up the weight of the House, when indeed they are for the most part
pargetted Posts; they bear not the House, the House bears them. By their bowing
and outward Appearance, the Man thinks the Burden is on them, and supposes,
that it would be an easy thing, at any time, by taking them away, to demolish
the House it self; But, when he sets himself to work, he finds these things
of no value, there is a Foundation in the Bottom, which bears up the whole,
that he thought not of: against that, he may waste himself, until he be
broken in pieces.

Men looking upon the Church, do find that it is a fair Fabric indeed, but
cannot imagine how it should stand. A few supporters it seems to have in the
world, like crouching Anticks under the Windows, that make some show of
under-propping it: Here you have a Magistrate, there an Army, or so: think the
men of the world, can we but remove these props, the whole would quickly topple
to the ground: Yea, so foolish have I been my self; and so void of
understanding before the Lord, as to take a View of some goodly appearing Props
of this building, and to think, how shall the House be preserved if these
should be removed: they looked unto me, like the Mariners in Paul's ship without
whose abode therein, they could not be saved: when lo, suddenly some have been
manifested to be pargetted Posts, and the very best, to be held up by the
House, and not to hold it up.

On this Account, the men of the world, think it no great matter to demolish
the spiritual Church of Christ to the Ground: they encourage one another to
the work, never thinking of the Foundation that lies hidden, against which they
dash themselves all to pieces. I say then, Christ as the Foundation of this
House, is hidden to the men of the World, they see it not, they believe it not:
there is nothing more remote from their Apprehension, then that Christ should
be at the bottom of them and their ways, whom they so much despise.

3. The Foundation is that which bears up the whole weight of the Building.
What part of the House soever, is not directly poysed upon it, has no strength
at all: take a goodly stone, hew it, square it, make it every way fit for your
Fabric, so that it may seem to be the best of all your Materials; yet if you
do not lay it upon the Foundation, answerable to that, which may give it a
solid Basis, and bear up the weight and poyse thereof, it will be useless,
combersome, and quickly fall to the Ground.

Let a man be hewed and squared by the Word and ordinances into outward
conformity, never so exactly, that he seems one of the most beautiful Saints
in the World, yet if he be not laid rightly by Faith upon the Foundation, to
derive from thence, strength, supportment, and vigor, he will quickly fall to
the ground: What then will become of their building, who heap up all sorts of
rubbish to make an House for the Lord.

2. Christ is the Ark of this House: The Ark in the Tabernacle, and afterward
in the Temple, was the most holy thing, in the most holy Place. There was
nothing in it but the two Tables of stone written with the Finger of God:
before it was Aarons Rod that budded, with a Pot full of Manna: over it was the
Propitiatory or Mercy seat, being a plate of Gold, as long and asbroad as the
Ark, covering it, being shadowed with the Cherubims of Glory. Now all this
glorious Fabric, did signify, that unless the Law with its condemning power
were hid in the Ark, and covered with the Mercy seat, no person could stand
before the Lord: Besides, the Law was the old Covenant of works, and being
renewed unto them chiefly to be subservient to the Gospel, and partly with its
Appurtenances and carnal Administration, to be the tenor of the Israelites
holding the land of Canaan, and this being in the Ark, it was said to contain
the Covenant, and is frequently called the Ark of the Covenant.

Jesus Christ is the Ark of this spiritual House. When the Temple was opened
in Heaven, there was seen in the Temple the Ark of Gods Testament, Revel. 11.
10. Jesus Christ made conspicuous to all, who lay much hid under the old
Testament, Romans 3. 25. God is said to set forth Christ to be (...), a
Propitiation, or Mercy seat, for by that very term is the Mercy seat expressed,
Heb. 9. 5. He is then the Ark, and the Mercy seat covering it. He then does
those two things:

1. In behalf of this House and every stone thereof, he hides the Law with its
condemning power, that nothing from thence shall be laid to their charge. If a
man have a suit to be tried in any Court, and a powerful Friend engage himself,
that the only Evidence which is against him, shall not be produced, will it not
give him encouragement to proceed? In that great and tremendous trial, which is
to be above, there is but one principal Evidence against us, which gives li^e
to all others, which if it be removed, all the rest must fail. This is the Law:
Christ as the Ark and Mercy seat hides this Law: it shall not (I speak in
respect to this House) be produced at the day of trial: will it not be a great
encouragement to them to appear at the Throne of God? Christ hides the Law as
being the End of it, Romans 10. 4. that the Righteousness thereof might be
fulfilled in us, Rom 8. 4. He has so far answered all that the Law required,
that none from thence can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, Romans 8.
33, 34. Let not poor sinners fear; it will not be with them as with Uzzah: He
touched the Ark, and died: Touch this Ark, and live for ever.

And 2ly, he is the Ark of this House, as containing in himself the New
Covenant; it is made with him, originally: established in him, irreversibly;
made out through him in all the grace of it, faithfully.

3. He is the Al^ar of this House: There were two Altars in the old Tabernacle,
and Temple: An Altar for Sacrifice, and an Altar for Incense, Exodus chap. 29.
and 30. The first was the great Brazen Altar, that stood without the Holy
Place, whereon the burnt offerings, and all sacrifices of blood, for Remission,
were offered. The other less made of Shittim wood, all overlaid with pure
Gold, and a Crown of beaten Gold upon it, on which they were to burn pure
Incense unto the Lord always: And they were both most holy, sanctifying the
Gifts with legal sanctification, that were offered on them, Math. 23. 19. Now
both these does our Savior supply in this House: 1. He is the great great
Altar of sacrifice, the Altar of offerings for Expiation and Atonement: We
have an Altar whereof they have no Right to eat, who serve at the Tabernacle,
Heb. 13 10.. That seven he who sanctified the People with his own Blood, and
suffered without the gate, v. 11. The good will and soul of Christ offering up
himself, through the eternal spirit, a pure Oblation and sacrifice, by one
offering to perfect for ever them that are sanctified, is all onr Altar: 2. He
is the Golden Altar of Incense. Incense is Prayer, Psalm. 141. 2. Let my Prayer
come before thee as Incense. Jesus Christ is the Golden Altar, whereon that
Incense is offered, Revel. 8 3, 4. even that Altar which is always before God,
Rev. 9. 13. as by being the former, he makes our Persons accepted; so by the
latter he makes our duties accepted: And all the living stones of this House,
are Priests to offer sacrifice on these Altars: by him as Priests, they have
Approximation to the Holy Place: there they have a share and participation in
all the sacrifices that are offered upon, or by him.

4. He is the Candlestick of this House. The making, fashioning, and use of the
Candlestick, in the holy place of the Tabernacle, you have Exodus 25 31. etc. It
was one of the most glorious Utensils of that frame: made of pure and beaten
Gold, with much variety of works, knops, flowers and lamps. The Use of it was
to bear out light, for all the worship of God in that most Holy Place. The
Tabernacle was made close, without any window: It was not to receive light from
without: It had all its own light from within. It is true, this Candlestick
with its 7. lamps, did secundarily represent the Churches of Christ, which hold
out his light among themselves, and unto others, Revel. 1. last: the seven
Candlesticks thou saw are the seven Churches: Therefore Solomon made ten
Candlesticks of pure Gold, 1. Kings 7. 49. to set out yet further the Increase
and multiplying of the Churches of God. Upon this account also, the two
witnesses are said to be two Candlesticks, Rev. 11. 4. And, the two anointed
ones that stand before the God of the whole Earth, Zech. 4. 3. Whence that in
the Revelation is taken, there is mention indeed of two Anointed ones, but of
one Candlestick: the Holy Ghost plainly intimating, that though the Churches
and Witnesses of Christ are also Candlesticks in a second sense, yet there is
one Eminent Candlestick which has light originally in it self, which also it
communicates unto all others. And this is that which is mentioned in Zech. 4.
which has the two Olive Trees, or the two Anointed Churches of Jews and
Gentiles, standing by it, receiving light from it, to communicate to others:
they empty the Golden oil out of themselves, which they receive from the
Candlestick. For this Candlestick has seven lamps, v. 2. which lamps that burn
before the throne, are the seven spirits of God, Rev. 4. 5. seven spirits that
is, the perfection and compleatnesse of the Spirit of God, in all his Graces
and Operations. Now who has these seven spirits? Even he who received not the
spirit by measure, Joh. 3. 34. being the stone upon which are the seven Eyes,
Zech. 3. 9. He alone then is this Candlestick, and all the light which this
House has, it is from him.

There are two ways whereby Jesus Christ makes out light to this House.

1. By way of Doctrinall Revelation: 2. Of Real Communication.

1. He alone discovers light to all the Stones of this Building. No man has
seen God at any time: the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him Joh 1. 10. No saving discovery of God, of his
Nature, his Will, his Love, but what is by Christ. The Moon and Stars give
light, but it is only what they receive from the Sun. The Prophets and
Apostles, held out light, but it was all received from him. They spoke by the
spirit of Christ that was in them I have received of the Lord that which I have
delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 23. The same Apostle curses every one that shall
bring in any other light into this House, be they Angels or Men, Gal. 1. 8. 9*
Christ alone fully knows the mind of God, as being always in the bosom of
his Father, Joh: 1. 18. Yea he knows it to the uttermost, being one with his
Father, Joh. 10: 30. And he is willing to reveal it, for even for this end came
he into the world, that he might bear witness to the truth. And he had Ability
enough to do it, for in him were hid all Treasure of wisdom and knowledge,
Col. 2. 3. He alone is the Author of all light to this his holy Habitation.

Many Attempts have been to set up light in this House, and not from Christ.
Some would kindle their Traditions or the Doctrine of this House: Some their
Prudentials for the Government of it: Some their Ceremonials for the Worship of
it: All Candles in the Sun. Shall men think to compasle themselves with sparks,
and walk in the light of the fire which themselves have kindled, in the face of
the Sun of Righteousness? shall not such men ly down in sorrow? Beloved, take
heed of such ignes fatui, foolish misguiding fires.

2. By way of Real Communication, He is the true light which lightneth
everyman, Joh. 1. 9. Every one that has any spiritual light really
communicated to him, has it from Christ. It is part of his work to recover
sight to the blind, Luke 4. 18. And therefore he advises the Church of Laodicea
to come to him for eye salve, that she might see, Revel. 3. 18. At his coming,
Sion shines forth, Isa 60. 1. because his light arises upon her, v. 2. The
former Doctrinall Teaching of it self w^ll not suffice. That light may shine in
darkness, and the darkness not comprehend it, Joh. 1. 5. All the light: the Sun
can give, will not make a blind man see. There must be a visive faculty within,
as well as light without: The Stones of this building are by Nature all blind*
yea darkened, yea darkness it self. If the Lord Christ do not by the mighty
efficacy of his spirit create a visive Power within them, as well as reveal the
will of his Father to them, they will never spiritually discern the things of
God. The natural man discerns not the things of God, nor indeed can do, 1.
Cor. 2 14.

It is true, men by the help of Common Gifts, with the use of the former
Doctrinall Revelation, may attain to such a knowledge of the mind of God, as
may in a sense be called Illumination, Heb. 6. 4. Far may they go much may they
do, by this light. They may teach others, and be cast away themselves: They may
dispute for Truth, yea dye for Truth, and all this while have but the first
common Anointing, see nothing clearly, but, Menwalking like Trees. A spiritual
Insight into the mind of God, is not to be obtained, without an Almighty Act of
the Spirit of Christ, creating a new power of Life, and Light upon the Soul.

Some indeed think that they have this seeing Power in themselves. Do but show
them outwaraly what is to be seen, and let them alone for the discerning of it.
Well then, let them alone, if ever they are stones of this living House, I am
deceived. Thou that art so, know whence is all thy light: and if thou art any
thing in the dark, draw nigh to the Candlestick, from whence all light is:
Thence must thy light come, yea and thence it shall come: the secrets of the
Lord shall make their abode with thee.

And this is the fourfold Relation wherein the Lord Christ stands unto this
House, as it is a Spiritual building.

In Respect of State and Condition, Jesus Christ stands in a fivefold Relation
to this House: which I shall unfold in order.

1. He is the Owner of it. He calls it HIS. Upon this Rock will I build my
Church, Math. 16 18 Moses was faithful in all etc. but Christ as a son over
his OWN House, whose House are we, Heb. 3. 4, 5. And that you may see that he
does not own it as His, without good Right and Title, know that in the great
Oeconomie of Grace, Jesus Christ has a threefold Right and Title to this House.

1. Of Inheritance, He is by his Father appointed Heir of all things, Heb. 1.
3. By Inheritance he obtains this excellent name, to be Lord of this House. God
sends him to the Vineyard as the Heir, after his servants were refused: And he
has an Engagement from his Father, that he shall enjoy his whole Inheritance
upon demand, Psalm. 2. 8. For the Father appointed, in the fullness of time, to
gather together all these things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which
are in Earth in him, Ephesians. 1. 10. So that as Christ is the first begotten of the
Father, Heb. 1. 6. and the first born of every creature, Col. 1. 15. the Right
of Heirship is his. But this will not do: for

2. When He should come to take possession of this House, He finds that it is
morgaged, and that a great Debt lies upon it, which he must pay to the
uttermost farthing, if ever He intend to have it. To the former Title, there
must also be added a Right of Furchase. He must Purchase this House, and pay a
great Price for it. And what is this Price? what is required of him? No less
then his dearest blood, Acts 20. 28. Yea he must make his Soul an Offering for
sin; and charge himself with the whole Debt, all the Curse and Punishment,
which this House had in part actually contracted upon it self, and wholly
deserved. He must put his shoulders under the burden due to it, and his back to
the stripes prepared for it. A hard Task. But Jesus Christ being the Heir, the
Right of Redemption belonged unto him. It was not for his Honor that it should
lie unredeemed. Full well he knew that if he did it not, the whole Creation was
too beggarly to make this Purchase. It Is true, that Nature of ours, which He
assumed to pay that by, which He never took, was startled for a while, and
would have deprecated this grievous price, crying out, If it be possible let
this cup pass from me: but he recollects himself and says, I am content to do
thy will O God: and so, through the eternal spirit offered himself up into God
for a Ransom. He likes the House, and will have it to dwell in what ever it
cost him. Here (says he) shall be my Habitation and my dwelling for ever,
Psalm. 133. Know you not (says the Apostle) that you are the Temple of the
Spirit of Christ? Well, and how come we so to be? you are bought with a price,
2. Cor 6. 19. They who affirm that he also thus purchased the unclean styes of
the Devil, wot not what they say.

3. Unto Purchase, He must also add Conquest. An unjust Usurper had taken
possession of this House, and kept it in bondage: Satan had seized on it, and
brought it, through the wrath of God, under his power. He then must be
conquered, that the Lord Christ may have complete possession of his own House.
For this purpose (then) was the Son of God made manifest, that he might destr^y
the works of the Devil, 1. Joh. 38. And how does he do it? 1. He overpowers
him, and destroves him, in that, Through death he destroyed him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil, Heb. 2. 14. 2. He spoiled him having
overcome him, He bund the strong man, and then spoiled his goods, Math 12. 27.
All that darkness, unbelief, sin, and hardness, that he had stuffed this
House withal, Christ spoils them, and scatters them all away. 3. To make his
Conquest complete, He triumphs over his Enemy, and like a mighty Conqueror
makes an open show of him to his everlasting shame, Col. 2. 15. Having spoiled
Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in his Cross: And by this means strengthens his Title to his Inheritance.

I might also farther insist on the Donation of his Father, and the actual
possession he takes of it by his Spirit, but these are sufficient, to prove
this House to be Christ's. I shall take some Observations hence.

1. Is this the House of Christ? is he the Owner of it? let men take heed how
they spoil it for themselves. The Psalmist makes this a great Argument in his
pleading against opposers, that they came into the Lords inheritance, Psalm. 79.
1. The Title of Christ's purchase was not then so clearly known, as that of his
Inheritance, and therefore they of old pleaded chiefly by that Title. Now he
has proclaimed to all, his other Titles also: the whole Right he has to this
House, to his Saints. Who then shall meddle with it and go free? Amongst men,
every one with all his might will defend his own possession. And shall we think
that the Lord Christ will suffer his to be spoiled at an easy rate? shall not
men pay dear for their encroachment? How has he in our days frustrated all
attempts for the persecution of his? Touch not (says he) mine Anointed. Men
may upon various pretenses claim this privilege, to such a Land, Nation, or
Faction; it will in the end appear to be theirs and only theirs, who are
living stones of this House: dogs may scramble for their bread, but shall not
enjoy it: It is Christ in this House that will make every stone of it a
burdensome stone: He has done it, that men may learn (...). do not think it
will excuse thee to say, thou wast mistaken.

2. Is Christ the Owner of this House, let the Order and disposal of it, be
left to himself. Men are apt to be tampering with his House and Household. They
will be so kind and careful, as to say out their wisdom and prudence about
it: Thus and thus shall it be, these are parts and members of it. Christ is
exceeding jealous of his Honor in this particular: He cannot bear it, that men
pretending to his Glory, should think him so wanting in Love, or Wisdom,
toward his own, as not exactly to dispose of all things that concern the
Reiglement thereof. Men would not be so dealt withal in their own Houses, as
they deal with Christ in his. We have all Wisdom enough (as we suppose) to
order our own houses: Only, the Wisdom and Love of the Father, leaves his to
the discretion of others: these thoughts are not from above.

3. Has Christ taken his own House to himself upon so many Titles, let not men
put those buildings on him for his, which are not so, which he holds not by
these Titles. Go to a man that dwells in a stately Palace of his own, show him
a hog sty, tell him, this is your House, here you dwell, this is yours; can you
put a great indignity on him? No, says the man, that is not mine, I dwell in
yonder sumptuous Palace. And shall we deal thus with the Lord Jesus? He
hathbought and adorned his own House: a glorious House it is I ^now men shall
hold out to him, a sty of swine, a den of unclean Beasts, a ruinous Heap,
whereof the far greatest part are dead stones, and tell him, this is his
Church, his House, will it notexceedingly provoke him? will he bear such a
reproach? Nay, he will reject such Tenders, to their Ruin.

2. Jesus Christ is the Builder of this House. This man is counted worthy of
more Honor then Moses, inasmuch as he that builds the House, has more
Honor then the House* Heb. 3. 3. I (says he) will build my Church, Math. 16.
18. This is not a Fabric for any workman but Christ. It is true, there are
others employed under him: and some so excellent, that they may be said to be
w^se master builders, 2. Cor. 3. 10. But yet all the Efficacy of their labor
in this building is not from themselves, but merely from him, by whom they are
employed. Except the Lord build this house, they labor in vain that go about
to build it.

Now this House receives a two fold building. 1. Spiritual, of all the stones
thereof into one mystical House: of this I chiefly treat. 2. Ecclesiastical,
of some particular stones into several Tabernacles, which are useful
Partitions in the great mystical House, called Assemblyes, and dwelling places
of mount Sion: both these it has from Christ alone.

1. For the first. If all the most skillful Workmen in the world should go to
the pit of Nature, by their own strength to hew out stones for this building,
they will never with all their skill and diligence, lay one stone upon it.
There is Life required to those stones, which none can give but Christ* The
Father has given into his hand alone, to give life eternal to whom he will,
Joh. 17. 2. He alone can turn stones into children of Abraham. To him is
committed all dispensation of quickening power. He brings us from the dust of
death, and no man has quickened his own soul. With spiritual power, all
spiritual life is vested in Christ. If dead stones live, it must be, by
hearing the voice of the Son of God. Christ's building of his mystical House,
is his giving life unto dead stones, or rather, being life unto them. Of those
who will attempt to build themselves, and draw a Principle of spiritual life,
from the broken Cisterns of Nature, I shall speak afterward.

For the second, or the communion of living stones one with another, and all
with Christ, in the Order and Worship appointed by the Gospel, so becoming
Assemblies, and dwelling places of Mount Sion, this also is of him. This is for
his outward solemn Worship: and he would never allow, that the will of any
creature, should be the measure of his Honor. He sets up the Candlesticks, and
holds the Stars in his hand. Look to the Institution of this building, it is
from Christ: Look for Directions about this building, it is wholly from him.
From him, his Word, his Spirit, is the Institution, Direction, and Perfection
of it: from hence now take some Observations.

1. Is Christ the Builder of this House? Can he alone ^it us for this
Building? Can he alone, and that by his Almighty Power put li^e into dead
stones, that they may grow up to be a holy and living Habitation unto him?
what then becomes of that famous workman Freewill, and a power of believing in
our selves, do not they work effectually in this Temple? As it was in Salomons
Temple, there was neither Axe, nor Hammer, nor any Tool of Iron heard in it,
all the while it was in building. 1. Kings 6. 7. So in this spi^^^ual House,
that Iron Tool of Freewill, is not once heard: It comes not nigh the work,
Christ does all alone. He gives life to whom he pleases. Shall a dead will be
thought to have a quickening, life-giving power in it? Shall a Spirit of life be
spun out of the Bowels of Nature? Is it the will of man, or the will of God
that draws men unto Christ? And is it Spirit or flesh that unites us to him?
Where then is this workman employed that makes all this noise in the world?
Even there where men cry, Go to, let us build a City and a Tower whose top may
reach to Heaven? Gen 11 4 amongst those who would build a Babel, a Tower of
their own to get to Heaven by. The Lord comes down and scatters all their
under-takings. This Workman never placed Stone in the House of Christ. Nay, it
is like the foolish woman, that pu^s down her house with both her hands. what
Free grace sets up, that Freewill strives to demolish.

3. See hence a great mistake of many poor Creatures, who would fain be stones
in this House: what course take they? They Hew and square themselves, strive to
cut off this and that rubbish, which (as they suppose) alone hinders them from
being fitted to this building. They pare themselves with vows, promises,
resolutions and engagements, beautify themselves with duties and services: and
then with many perplexing fears present themselves to the building: never
knowing whether they are admitted or no. All this while, the great Master
Builder stands by, scarsely dealt withal. What now is the issue of such
Attempts? what they build one day, falls down in another. When they have
oftentimes in their own thoughts, brought the Building to such a pass, as that
they are ready to think, it will be well with them, now surely they shall have a
share and Interest in this living and glorious House, when all on the sudden
they fall again to the ground: their Hopes wither, and they suppose themselves
in the worlds rubbish again. There is no end of this Alternation. Would now
this poor soul see where its great defect lies? It has not applied it self
aright to the only Builder. Would thou be a stone in this Fabric, lay thy
self before the Lord Jesus: say to him, that thou art in thy self altogether
unfit for the great Building he has in hand, tha thou have often attempted to
put thy self upon it, but all in vain: Now Lord Jesus, do thou take me into
thine own Hand: if thou castest me away, I cannot complain: I must justify
thee in all thy ways: but thou call things that are not, as though they
were. Thou turnest dead stones into Children of Abraham: Oh turn my dead, into
a living stone. Fear not, He will in no wise cast thee out.

The vanity of men attempting to mix their Power and Wisdom in the heaping
up Tabernacles for Christ, might be hence discovered, but I forbear.

3. Jesus Christ is the great Watchman or Keeper of this House. There are
indeed other Watchmen, and that of God's own appointment for the use of this
House. Son of man, I have set thee a Watchman, Ezekiel. 2. 11. I have set Watchmen
upon thy walls, Isa 61. 6, 7. which in a special manner are the Pastors of the
Churches, they watch, Heb. 13. 17. As the Priests and Levits heretofore kept
the watch of the Lord: It cannot be denied, but that many who have taken upon
them to be these Watchmen, have watched only for their own advantage, have
been very dogs, yea dumb dogs, the very worst of dogs, Isa. 66. 10. yea they
have been, and oftentimes are under various pretenses, great smiters and
wounders of the Spouse of Christ, Cant 5. but yet were they never so good and
true to their Trusts, they were never able all to watch and keep this House,
had it not another Watchman. Except the Lord keep the City, these Watchmen
watch in vain, Psalm. 127. 1. He that keeps Israel, who does neither slumber
nor sleep, must keep this House, or it will be destroyed. Christ then is that
Holy One, and that WATCHER that came down from Heaven, and commanded to cut
down the tree and the branches, Dan. 4. 13, 14. Nebuchadnezzar and his great
power, for meddling with this House.

Now Christ watches this House for two ends.

1. To see what it wants, 2. Cor. 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro,
throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in its behalf. He looks down
from heaven to behold them that fear him, Psalm. 14. He is that Stone upon which
are seven Eyes Zech. 3. 9. A sufficiency, in perfection of wisdom,
inspection, and government for the good of his House. And those seven eyes of
his run to and fro through the whole earth, for this very purpose, Zech. 4. 10.
He takes notice of the state and condition of his People, to eye them in all
their distresses, and to give them timely and suitable deliverance. They may
call every spring of their Refreshment, Beer la^ai-roi.

2. To see that the Son of Violence draw not nigh unto it, and if he do, to
require it at his hands, to make him eat his own flesh, and drink his own
blood, that he may learn to devour no more. Observe then,

1. Whence it is that this House which seems so often to be nigh to
destruction, is yet preserved from ruin. Ofttimes it is brought into a
condition, that all that look on say, Now it is gone for ever: but still it
recovers and gets up again. The Lord Christ he looks on all the while: He
knows how far things may proceed for trial. When it comes to that pass, that
if pressures and troubles should continue, the House would be over born indeed,
then he puts in, rebukes the winds and waves, and makes all things still
again. Like a Father who looks upon his Child in a difficult and dangerous
business, knows that he can relieve him when he pleases, but would willingly
see him try his strength and cunning, lets him alone, until perhaps the Child
thinks himself quite lost, and wonders his Father does not help him: but when
the Condition comes to be such, that without help he will be lost indeed,
instantly the Father puts in his hand and saves him. So deals the Lord Jesus
with his House, lets it oftentimes strive and wrestle with great Oppositions,
to draw out and exercise all the Graces thereof: but yet all this while He
looks on, and when danger is nigh indeed, He is not far off.

2. Let all the Enemies of the Church know, that there is one, who has an Eye
overthem in all their Counsels and under-takings. Whilst they are digging deep,
He looks on, and laughs them to scorn. How perplexed was the King of Syria,
when he found that the Prophet was acquainted with all his designs, and made
them known to the King of Israel. It cannot but be a matter of perplexity to
the Enemies of this House, when they shall find that the great Friend and
Protector thereof, is continually present in all their Advisoes. Let them not
wonder at their birthlesse under-takings, the Eye of Christ is still uupon them.

3. Let the Saints see their privilege, who ever they are, in what condition
soever, the Eye of Christ is upon them. He watches over them for good, and
knows their souls in Adversity. When no Eye sees them, he looks on them, they
cannot be cast out of his care, nor hid from his sight. There are many poor
souls, who go heavily all the day long; that mourn in their spirits unknown,
unregarded, unpitted: The Eye of Christ is on them for good continually: they
cannot be thrown out of his watchful care.

4. Christ is the In dweller of this House, He has not built it, and framed
it, for no use. It is for an Habitation for himself. He has chosen Zion, he
has desired it for ^^s Habitation this is my rest (says he) here will I
dwell, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. This House i^ built up, to be an Habitation unto him,
Ephesians. 2. 22. He is the King of Saints, and this House is his Court. It is true
for his human Nature, the Hevens must receive him until the time of the
Restitution of all things, Acts. 4. 27. but yet, he dwells in this House
three ways.

1. By his Spirit, Christ dwells in this House, and every stone of it, by his
Spirit Know you not that Christ is in you except you be reprobates. 2 Cor 13. 5
Christ in you that is, the Spirit of Christ; Christ by his Spirit. So the Holy
Ghost expounds it, Romans 8. 9. If the Spirit of God dwell in you, which: v 10.
is if Christ be in you: Christ and his Spirit, as to Indwelling are all one:
for he dwells in us by his Spirit. The love of God is shed in abroad in our
Hearts by the Holy Ghost that is given unto us, Romans 5. 5. There is not only
the love of God, a grace of the Spirit shed abroad in us, but there is also the
Holy Spirit given unto us. This is fully asserted, Romans 8. 11. The Spirit of
him that raised up Jesus, dwells in you: as also, 2 Timothy 1. 14. keep the good
thing committed to thee, by the Holy Ghost that dwells in us, Hence the
Saints are said to be Temples of the Holy Ghost. Jesus Christ does not build
Temples, merely for Graces, created Graces, He dwells in them himself, He dwells
in them by his Spirit. And this is a glorious Privilege of this House, that
Jesus Christ in a Mystical and wounderfull manner should dwell in it, and
every stone of it. Hereby all beleivers become to be not one personal but) one
Mystical Christ. 1 C^r. 12. 6. However we are distanced, in respect of his
human Nature, yet Mistically we are one, one body, one Mistical Christ, because
we have one Spirit, dweling in us and him. If a man were never so tall, so that
his Head should reach the sterres, and his freet stand upon the Ground, yet
having but one soul, he is but one man still. Though Christ in his human Nature
be exceedingly distanced from us, yet there being one and the same Spirit in
him and us, we are one Mystical Christ. Yet abserve,

1. Though Christ be united unto the persons of the Saints, by the Indwelling
of the Spirit, yet the Saints have not that which is called Personal Union,
with him nor with the Spirit Personal Union is, by a person of the Deity,
assuming the nature of man, into one personallty with it self, that having of
it sown no personal subsistence. Things are here clean otherwise: Christ does
not assume the Saints into a personal subsistence with himself, but dwells in
their persons by his Spirit.

2. That the Operations of the Indwelling Spirit of Christ, and all his
manifestations are Voluntary. He works as he will, and reveals what he will:
(...) where he dwells. He does not work in us Naturally but Voluntarily, unto
what proportion he pleases: therefore though he dwell equally in all Saints, in
respect of Truth and reality, yet he does not in respect of working and Eficacy.

2. By his graces. Christ dwells in this House and in all the stones thereof
by his Graces. He dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. He dwells in us
by his word in all wisdom, Col. 3. 16. All the graces we are made partakers
of, we receive from his fullness, and by them, he Inhabits, in us. They are
indeed the ornaments of the living stones of this House, to make them meet and
fit for such an Indweller as the Lord Christ. Christ will not dwell in a soul,
whose mind is darkness, His will stubbornness, and His Affections carnal and
sensual. He puts Light, and life, and love, upon the soul, that it may be
meet for him to dwell in: Christ dwells in all the world by his power, and
Presence, but he dwells only in his Saints, by his Spirit, and Grace.

3. By his Ordinances. Where two or three of his are assembled together, there
is he in the midst of them. The Ordinances of Christ, are the great Ornaments
of his Kingly Court: by them he is glorious in all the Assemblies of mount
Sion. Some would feign cast out this Indwelling of Christ from among his
Saints: In due time he will thoroughly rebuke them: Some again would thrust him
out into the world: but he will make men know, that his Ordinances are given
unto his: it is true the benefit of some of them, extends to the world, but the
Right and enjoyment of them, that, is the privilege of his Saints: Thus Christ
dwells in his House: Hence Observe,

1. The Intimacy of the Lord Jesus with his Saint, and the delight he takes in
them: Hedwelleth with them, he dwells in them. He takes them to the nearest
Union with himself possible. He in them, they in him, that they may be one. He
has made many an admirable change with us. He took our sin, and gives us his
Righteousness; He took our Nature, and gives us his Spirit. Neither is it a
bare Indwelling, neither: He thereby holds with us all acts of the cho^sest
communion. if (says he) any man haere my voice, and open to me, I will come to
him: and what then? I will sup with him, and he shall sup with me, Revel. 3. 20.

1, I will sup with him. I will delight and satisfy my self with him. Jesus
Christ takes abundance of delight and contentment in the Hearts of his Saints.
When they are faithful, when they are fruitful, He is marvellously refreshed
with it. Hence is that Prayer of the Spouse, Awake O North wind and come thou
South, blow upon my Garden, that the savor of my spices may flow out, let my
boloved come and eat of his spices, Can. 4. 16. she would have the Spices, the
Graces she has received, breathed on by a fresh gale of the Spirit, that they
might yield a sweet savor. And why so? that her Beloved may have something for
his Entertainment, that he may come and sup, and eat of his pleasant fruits. A
poor Soul, that has received Christ, has not any desire so fervent, as that
it may have something for the Entertainment of him: that He who filled it when
it was hungry, may not (as it were) be sent away empty. And the Lord Jesus is
exceedingly taken with those Refreshments. The King is held in his Galleries,
Cant. 4. 5. He is detained, yea bound with delight, He knows not how to pass
away. Therefore He rests in his love, Zeph. 3. 17. He is exceedingly satiated
in the delight he takes in his Saints: Neither is this all, that when Christ
comes he will sup with us (though this we a great deal, o what are we that we
should entertain our Lord* but also,

2 The saints sup with him. He provides Choice Refreshments for them also. When
Christ comes in unto us, he will entertain a soul bounteously. He provides
love for us. When the Spirit of Christ, is bestowed on us, he sheads abroad the
love of God in our Hearts, Romans 5. 5. He sheeds it abroad, powers it out
abundantly. Friends, love is a Choice danty. He that knows it not is a stranger
to all spiritual banquets: It is a choice dish in the feast of fatt things,
that Christ prepares: He povides Righteousness and Peace and joy in the holy
Ghost for us. That his Kingdom, Romans 14. 17 and, this Kingdom of his, is
within us. Of such precious things as these does Christ provide a supper for
them, with whomhe dwells. It Christ be in you, more or less, you shall not
want this entertainment. We are indeed sometimes like made Guests, that when
meat is set one the Table, cast it all down, without tasting a morsel. When
Christ has prepared sweet and precious dantyes for us, we cast them on the
Ground. We throw away our peace, our joy, by folly and unbeli^fe; But this
makes not the Truth of God of none effect.

2 Does Christ Dwell in us by his Spirit, should we not be careful, least we
grieve that Spirit of his? The Spirit of Christ is very tender. Did the Saints
continually consider this, that Christ dwells in them, that he is grieved, and
troubled, at all their unbelief, unruly passions, worldy desires, foolish
Imaginations, surely they could not but be much more watchfulover themselves,
then generally they are. He is refreshed when we walk with him, and hold
fellowship with him To turn aside from him, to hold fellowship with world or
flesh, this grives him, and burdens him. Oh grive not the Spirit of God whereby
you are sealed to the day of Redemption. And let me tell you, if you do,
though he will not utterly depart from you, nor take his kindness away for ever
more* yet he will do that that shall make your heartake, your joints tremble,
and break all your bones in pieces: For,

1 He will depart from you, as to all sense of his presence: that you shall have
neither joy, nor comfort, nor peace. He will hide his face, and make you
believe (as we say) that he is gone utterly from you. And this he will do, not
for a day or a night or so, but for a great while together. You shall go to
seek him, and you shall not find him. Yea beg, and cry, and have no Answer:
Now all the world for one smile from Christ, for one impression of his presence
upon my Heart, and all in vain. When the Spirit of Christ was thus departed
from David upon his miscarriage, as to the sense and joy of it: how does he cry
out, Make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice, Psalm. 51. 8. If thou valuest the presence of Christ at
no greater rate, but to jeopard it upon every Occasion* thou may happily go
without the comfort of it all thy days. Examine your selves, is it not so with
some of you? have you not lost the sense of the presence of Christ by your
folly and uneven walking? Perhaps you value it not much, but go on as Sampson
with his hair cut, and think to do as at other times: but if the Philistines
set upon thee, it will be sorrow and trouble. In every Assault thou will find
thy self a lost man. Sooner or later it will be bitterness to thee.

2. He will depart, as to the Efficacy of his working in thee, and leave thee
so weak, that thou shall not be able to walk with God. His Spirit is a Spirit
of Grace and Supplications. He will so withdraw it, that thou shall find thy
Heart in a poor condition, as to those things. To be cold in Prayer, dead in
Hearing, enstranged from Meditation, slight in all duties, this shall be thy
portion. A frame that a tender Soul would tremble to think of. Ah! how many
poor creatures are come to this state in these days, by their neglect and
contempt of Christ dwelling in them, they have lost their sirst love, their
first life, their Graces are ready to die, and their whole souls asleep, in a
heartlesse, lifelesse, zealelesse frame. They shall be saved, but yet as
through fire.

3. He will depart as to Assurance of what is to come, as well as to a sense of
what is present. It is the Indwelling Spirit of Christ that gives Assurance:
here by are we sealed to the day of Redemption. He bears witness with our
Spi^its, that we are the Children of God. Upon our grieving him, he will
withdraw as to this also. We shall be beweldred, and in the dark, not knowing
what will become of our Souls to Eternity. For it Christ by his Spirit do not
speak Peace, who shall?

2. Does he dwell in us by his Grace?

1. Let us first know whence all Graces are, that in a want, or weakness of
them, we may know whither to go for a supply. Of his fullness we receive, and
Grace for Grace. All supplies of Graces are from Christ. Lord, increase our
faith, say the Apostles: Not only Faith originally is from him, but all
Increases of it also. I believe, help thou my unbelief, says the poor man. We
wrestle and struggle with a little Grace, a little Faith, a little Love, a
little Joy, and are cont^nted if we can keep our Heeds above water, that we be
not quite sunk and lost. How sweet would it be with us, if upon a serious
consideration from whence all these Graces flow, that we would apply our selves
to draw out fafther degrees and heightenings of them, whereby he might dwell
more plentifully in us, and we might always converse with him in his Gracious
Train of Attendants. How this may be done in particular, is not my business
now to show.

2. Learn to tender the Graces of Christ, as those which hold out his presence
to us. Let us tender them in our own Hearts, and prize them in whomsoever they
are. They are pledges o^ the Indwelling of Christ. Certainly if men valued
Christ, they would more value his Graces. Many pretend to Love him, to Honor
him, yea with Peter to be ready to die with him, or for him: but what evil
surmizes have they of the Graces of Christ appearing in others: How do they call
them, Hypocrisy, Humor, Folly, Pride, Singularity, with other terms of a later
Invention. I cannot so easily believe, that any one can love the Lord Jesus,
and hate the Appearances of him in others. Where is any thing of Christ, there
is also Christ.

5. Jesus Christ is the great Avenger of this House, and of all the Injuries or
wrongs that are done unto it. All (says he) that devour Israel shall offend,
Jerem. 2. 3. He will not hold him guiltless that rises up against it* see Isa.
59. 15, 16, 17; 18. he takes upon him the avenging of his House, as his own
proper work. Shall He not avenge his Elect? he will do it speedily: See also
Isa. 63. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. How dreadful is he in the execution of his revenging
judgments against the Enemies thereof. So also is he described Revel. 19. 13,
14, 15. He has promised to make the Stones of this House heavy stones, they
shall burden all that touch them, Zech 12. 3. He comes forth of the Myrtle
trees in the bottom (his lowly people, in a low condition) with the Red horse
following him, Zech. 1. 8. upon this account he ^^arfully b^oke the old Roman
Pagan Empire, Revel. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and will as fearfully destroy the
Antichristian Roman power, with all its adherents, Revel. 17. 18, 19. Sooner or
later he will call to an account every Instrument of persecution in the world.
Hence he is said to be a Lion in the behalf of this House, that treads down all
before him, Mic. 5. 8. Jacob says of him in Judah, He is a Lion, as an old
Lion, who shall rouse him up? Genesis 49. 9. Suppose-any do rouse him up, how
then? He will not ly down, until he eat of the prey, and drink the blood of
the slain, Numb. 23. 24. Many poor Creatures have by their Opposition to his
House* roused up this Lion, and what has been the Issue? what attempts have
been to cause him to ly down aga^n: all in vain: if he be once roused up, he
will not couch down, until he eat and drink the blood of the slain. But suppose
great Opposition be made unto him, will he not give over? not at all: As a Lion
that comes upon his prey, if a multitude of shepherds be called forth against
him, he will not be afraid at their voice, nor abase himself at their noise,
Isa. 31. 4. In brief, sooner or later, temporally or eternally, he will avenge
all the Injuries, and destroy all, the Enemies of his holy dwelling, 1 Thessalonians.
1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

And these are some of the Relations wherein the Lord Christ stands unto this
House of God, being made thereby unto it, Beauty and Glory, Comeliness and
Excellency. The carrying on of this Building by the union of all the stones
thereof ^o the Foundation, and their cementing one to another, by Faith, Love,
and Order, I shall not now treat of: Nor of the following points of the Text.
The General uses of what has bin said, are three, the Heads whereof I shall
name.

1. See the Eminent Privilege of them which are indeed stones of this House,
which is living, strong, and glorious, which is so nearly related to the Lord
Christ: There is more of Duty, dignity, and safety in this thing, then can
easily be expressed. To do service unto Christ, as his, to have the Honor of
being his, and to be safe guarded as his are great privileges: let them who
have any sense of these things, further draw out these particulars, from what
has been spoken.

2. Learn hence the vanity of resting upon outward Church privileges, if we
are not withal, interested in this spiritual estate where men are living
stones indeed, they ly in beauty and order in the Assemblies: where they are
otherwise, where Assemblyes are made up of dead rubbish, and yet cry, the House
of the Lord, the House of the Lord, the Lord Jesus abhorres those Assemblies,
He stands not in these Relations unto them.

3. See hence the Ruin of Persecution, that has appeared in the world in
various forms. It has put on all manner of colors and pretenses, and
prevailed with all sorts of persons at one time or other to close with it: what
has been the Issue? what is like to be? The House indeed has been battered
sometimes, but they who have come against it, have been broken all to pieces.
Shall the Residue of men, who under new pretenses, or old ones new painted,
drive on the same design, shall they prosper? Thou, O Lord Jesus, in thine
anger, wilt cut them off. The Lord open the Eyes o^ the sons of men, that they
may not hope any more to separate between Christ, and his Saints, between whom
there are so many everlasting Relations.

(...).
FINIS:

