Die Saturni, Apr. 6. 1645.
It is Decreed, and Ordained by the reverend Assembly of Divines now assembled
in holy Convocation, that Dr. Burgess, and Mr. Edwards do return thanks
unto the worthy Author of this Treatise, entitled, The Araignement of
Persecution, for his pious endevoures, and vigilant care he has taken therein,
at the entreaty of this Synod: And it is further Ordained, that they do desire
him to print and publish the said Treatise forthwith, and that it be commended
to the people, as a divine Hand-Maide to the right understanding of the
Directory: And it is yet furcher Decreed and Ordained, that none shall presume
to print or reprint the said Treatise, but whom he shall authorize under his
own hand writing till this most Holy Synod shall take furuther Order.

Scribes.
Henry Roborough, Adoniran Byfeild,


I appoint my Cozen MARTIN CLAW-CLERGIE Printer to the reverend Assembly of
Divines, and none else, to Print this Treatise.

Yongue MARTIN MAR-PREIST,

THE Araignement OF Mr. PERSECUTION: Presented to the CONSIDERATION OF THE
HOUSE OF COMmons, and to all the COMMON PEOPLE of England WHEREIN HE IS
INDICTED, ARAIGNED, CONVICTED, AND CONdemned of emnity against God, and all
Goodness, of Treasons, Rebellion, Bloodshed, etc. and sent to the place of
Execution.

In the prosecution whereof, the Jesuiticall Designs, and secret Encroachments
of his Dfendants, Sir SIMON SYNOD, and the JOHN of all Sir JOHN'S, Sir JONH
PRESBITER, upon the Liberty of the Subject is detected, and laid open, By
Yongue MARTIN MAR-PREIST, Son to old MARTIN the Metrapolitane.

This is Licenced, and printed according to Holy Order, but not Entered into
the Stationers Monopole.

Anglia MARTINIS disce savere tuis. EUROPE.

Printed by MARTIN CLAW CLERGY, Printer to the Reverend Assembly of Divines,
and are to be sold at his Shop in Toleration Street, at the Sign of the
Subjects Liberty, right opposite to Persecuting Court. 1645.

TO THE REVEREND LEARNED THE PROLOcutor, Assossors, the Commissioners of the
Church of Scotland, and the rest of the venerable Assembly of Divines, now
sitting in holy Convocation at Westminster.
Reverend Sirs,
According to my duty at your divine entreaty, I have reduced those pious
instructions received from you, into such a pleasing form, as I hope, shall
not only affect, but abundantly edefie the people of this Kingdom under your
holy Jurisdiction; for considering your spiritual care over them, and how your
time has been taken up wholly in the procurement of that sacred Ordinance for
Tithes, wisely thought on before the Directory, for he is an Infidel and
denies the faith, that does not provide for his family: your late humble
Advice digested into several Assertions: your sore travill and pain you have
daly ever since your holy Convocation undergon, to bring to birth his
Holiness, Sir JOHN PRESBYTER; and other your toylesome endeavors for the
Henone of your holy cloth, I have therefore more willingly become your
Joyrnoman to ease your Burden in this your toylesome time of Deformation; and
having thus prepared my endeavoures, fit for the puolike view, I am emboldned to
Dedicate them unto your divine protection, not doubting of the sacred
imposition of your hands upon them, to sanctify them unto the people, as,
truly Presbyterean, that comeing forth with your Classical Authority, they may
obtain a reverent estimation with them. And seeing I have made such a happy
beginning, I doubt not of an answerable encouragement from you to proceed as I
have begun, but a small matter will please MARTIN, if you sanctify him with
the Benediciae of a Cornelian Benefice of 400. l. per annum, to knock down
the Anabaptsts, Brownists, etc. with your thumping, bumping, Presbyterean,
Classical CLUB, that shall suffice pro tempore, and withal to gratify him
with the De me of Paul's House that is but a small matter, it will become his
worship very well for the present, and afterward you may do, as it shall seem
best to your divine wisdoms aeeording to his best deservings therein; he is a
singular man in such a business, and wants nothing but preforment; you do not
think, neither does it enter into your hearts, how reverend Yongue MARTIN can
thunder-thump the Pulpit, O, he can staer most devnitly, rail and bawle most
fervently, storm most tempestiously even till be foame at mouth most
precisely; Oh how be can spetter't out! O these caused Anabaprists, these
wicked Brownists, these Hecetickes, these Scismatickes, these Sectaries; O
MARTIN has it at his fingers end, has an University man, skild in the Tongues
and Sciences, and can sophistioue any Text, O he is excellent at false Glosses,
and Scholasticke Interpretations, he can wrest the Scriptures most nearly, tell
the people it is thus and thus in the Original, an excellent man to make a
Presbyter! and O Brethren, if MARTIN thus delude the people and thrash those
Heretics in hope sure MARTIN shall be partaker of his hope, you will not muzle
the ox that trendeth out your corn; no, MARTIN has better esteem of the
Assembly, he does not once suppose, that like Bell's Assembly of Priests they will
devour all themselves, and leave nothing for MARTIN, but it is no matter,
MARTIN will be content with hard meats rather then desert the service of such
on holy, such a reverend Assembly, such a Quagmire of croaking skip-jacke
Presbyters, such is his zeal and pious affection to the Cause, he is resolved
to work with his own hands, rather then be troublesome: Thus committing his
endeavoures to your learned Consultations, pious Debates, and sacred
Conclusions he rests in expectation of his Reward,

Yours humbly devoated in all Synoddicall, Classical, Consistoreall, or
Predicatory Function, till death us depars, Yongue MARTIN MAR-PREIST, Son to
old MARTIN the Metrapolitane.

To his Friend the Author upon his Book.
'Twas boldly ventured to set upon
This foul black Feind, mad PERSECUTION,
Pluto's Grand Agent, whom the world beside,
Durst not but fawn upon, thou'st taken, and tried:
Thy pains sure have been great, to seek him out,
Thou have encompast Europe all about,
The Sottish, English, Irish Climates too,
Thou have trac'd'ore, to see what things they do:
What was the cause that so much blood was shed
In all those places? Why rents and sad divisions
In Kingdoms once made happy? now the visions
Of woeful ruin; Spectacles for time,
To write destructions everlasting line.
Thank then Yongue MARTIN for his love and care,
T'impart to theo, who these proud actours are,
And let him have thy prayers, so thou shall be,
As much beloved of virteous men as he.
A. B.

THF ARAIGNEMENT OF PERSECUTION.
A Certain dreadful, and severe Gentleman by name, Gods-vengance, of the
Town of Impartiallity, in the County of Justjudgment, having a long time
through the daily perswations of his Kinsman, Mr. Long-sufferance (an honest
peaceable Gentleman, unwilling his enemy should perish) forborne to proceed
against the great Enemy and Incendiary of mankind, Mr. Persecution, according
to his inquity, at length taking occasion at his Kinsmans abused patience,
forthwith procurss a warrant from the Lord Chief Justice, Peace-with-all-men,
for the Constable, Mr. Reward-of-tyranny, to attach him; who takes with him two
approved men of the Parish, old Mr. Woefull-experience, and honest Mr.
Sound-judgment; and making strict search and inquiry after him front Religion
to Religion, found him at length amongst the Papists, under the name of Mr.
Spanish-Inquisition; but the suitable. Fox no sooner perceived their Authority,
but shrunk out of his Roman Papal Robe, and presently turned Protestant, clad
with an English Episcopal habit, under the name of Mr. High Commission, but
Constable Reward-of-Tyranny, with old Woefull-Experience, and honest
Sound-Judgment being acquainted with his trikes, made after him, whereat he
cast of his Lawne sleeves, Hoode, Typpit, etc and forthwith, least all Trades
should fail, became a zealous Covenanter, in the godly shape of a Presbyter,
changing his name into Classical Presbytrie (a new cheat to cosen the world),
and then Scholar like, as if it had been for a goodly fat Benefice, in the
twinkling of an eye jumpt out of Scotland into England, and turned a reverend
Synodian, disguised with a Sylogisticall pair of Britches (saving your
presence) in Bocardo, and snatching a Rhetorical Cassok he girt up his loins
with a Sophistical Girdle, and ran into the wilderness of Tropes, and
Figures, and there they had lost him, had it not been for the Spirits Teaching,
by whose direction they traced him through the various winding; subtle
by-Pathes, secret tracts, and cunning Meanders the evening wolves, wild Boares
and Beasts of the Forest in the briery thickets of Rhetorical Glosses,
Sophistications, and scholastic Interpretations had made, but being sit to lay
hands on him, the cunning: Hocus Pocus vanished out of their sight, and
presently takes Sanctuary, for lookeing about for him, Behold, he was doing his
business (Sr. Beverence) in the Pulpit, thumping it devoutly, and most furiously
like the Son of Thunder he ratl'd the Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. letting his
bolts (which according to the Proverb were soon shot) sly at random against
them: but thinking to apprehend him, he skipt from them, from Pulpit to Pulpit,
from University to University, from College to College, even through all the
Pulpits, Universities, and Colleges in Christendom, and then he hied him from
Parsonage to Parsonage, where the Parsons Wifes had thought to have hid him
amongst the Herds of Tyth Pigges, flocks of chickings, geese etc. but that
failing, he ran as if he had been wild through the Gleabe Land, and skipt over
into a Tyth Cocko, and thought all had been cock sure; but perceiving they
espied him, up starts the Fox, and presently fast by the Synod he caught hold
on the Altar, but fearing least he should be made a burnt Offering he vanished
into 12. Articles, but that business not thriving, the next sight that was
made of him, was in a petitionary garb in the behalf of the London Ministors:
And a thousand other tricks, that I cannot reckon, he had; but one above all
the rest I must not forget, which was the master peace of all the rest; for to
bloke up all passages; stop all mouths, and fortify himself round, he turned
reverend Imprimatur: and here tho pursuers were at a stand, for all was as fast
as the Devil and tho Presbyters could make it, they sought to Authority to open
the Press, and still the Pres-byters (as their custom is) were in the way,
that nothing could be done: Well, no good was to be done in public, they then
go to it privatoly, and to work a deliverance, fell into dangrous labor, and
at length brought forth the villain into public view, and notwithstanding all
his trickos detected, apprehended, and carried him to Justice Reason, who having
examined the Malefactor, sets down his Examination, and binds over
Gods-Vengance to prosecute the Malefactor at the next Assizes, and finding him
not baylable, makes his Mittimus for the Cohstable to commit him to the Goal,
there to be kept in safe custody without ^(...)^ or Manuprise till the, next
Goal delivery.

Now for the better understanding of this Araignment this ensuing Catalogue of
the names of the several Officers of the Court is here annexed.

The Court of Assizes held at the Araignment of Persecution. 1645.

Lord Parliament The Judge Justice Reason Humanity Conformity

Justices the Peace. Sir Charles-Royall-Prerogative. The Kings Sergeant. Sir
Peter-protestant. The Kings Arturney. Sir John-Equity High-Sherriffe. Mr.
Obedience Under Sherriffe. Clarke. Crier.

Mr. Soveraignty-of-Christ. Power-of-Parliamentes. Vnity-of-Kingdomes.
Nationall-Strength. Setled-Peace. Humaine-Society Grand Jnquest.
United Provinces. Desolate-Germany. Blood-of-Primes. Publike-Good.
Nationall-Wealth. Civill-Government. Domestick-Miseries

Mr. Creation. Gospel. Politique-power State Policy. Innocent-blood.
Good-samaritane. Trueth-and-peace. Orphan. Jury of life and death.
Light-of-nature. Day-of-judgement.
National-loyalty. Liberty-of-Subject

Mr. PER SECUTION. Prisoner. Mr. Gods-Vengence. Prosecutour. Caffar Christian
Martyrs Liberty-of Conscience.

Evidences. Sir Simon Synod and Sir John Presbyter. Defendants.

A new Jury for Life and Death endeavored by Sir Simon Synod.

Mr. Satan Antichrist. Spanish-inquisition. Counsell-of-Trent. Rude-multitude.
Sr. John Presbiter. Scotch-government. False-prophets. Sir Symons Jury men.
Eccles.-Supremacy. Pontificall-Revenue.
High Commission. Assembly-of-Divines.

THus (Reader) the Court being complete, for thy more speedy progression
through the matter intended, suppose the transaction of many passages in these
Assizes here in this Relation omitted, as needless the repetion; the
Essentialls thereof being so tedious (to the impatient Reader, yet not
unnecessary and useless (I hope) to the diligent peruser) for wherein without
prejudice to our present matter, an omission may be, my silence for formality
sake gives place to a supposition thereof, otherwise I shall transgress upon
the Readers Patience. Thus then the Grand Inquest (the matter being thus far
brought) fall into debate.

1. Mr. Soveraignenity of Christ. Gentlemen, our Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, whose Image and express prerogative I am, has by the price of his
blood, constituted himself sole Head and King so everover the Consciences of
men and therefore he charge his Householders, the Kings of the Earth, to let
the Tares and the Wheat grow together in the Field of the World until the
Harvest the Day of Judgment, therefore this Malefactor Persecution, in my
Judgment, being in his Inclinations and Actions altogether averse thereto, is
an Arch-traitour to the Preagative Royal of Jesus Christ over the Consciences
of men, and therefore Lawfully and Justly charged with this Bill.


2. Mr. Power of Parliaments. My Verdict (Mr. Foreman) is, that Persecution for
Conscience is Inconsistant with the Sovereignty of Kingdoms, for it divides
their Powers one against another, and in themselves occasioneth murmurings,
grutchings, and repinings, which in in time break forth into Conspiracies,
Rebellions, Insurrections, etc. as well to the prejudice of Soveraignity, as to
the ruin of the Subject; and which is more, the tendency, operation, and end
of Persecution, is to reduce the Power of Kingdoms and Parliaments from
themselves into the hands and disposal of the Pontifical Clergy, according
to the divelish Decree of Pope Paul 4. con. Trent lib. 5. p. 409. So that there
can be no security for the Power of Majestracy, where Ecclesiasticke usurpation
is predominant; for the greater their Power is, the the less powerful is
Majestracy: wherefore I must needs consent to the equity of this Byll.


3. Mr. Vnity-of-Kingdomes. Mr. Foreman, should I relate how through the
divilish polecy and cruelty of this Persecution for conscience I have been
banished from betwixt Kingdoms, States, and Provinces to their utter
destruction in one an others ruin, I should be unhappily too troblesome:
wherefore in short, my verdict is concurrant with yours.


4. Mr. Nationall-Strength. Mr. Foreman, I conceive that you cannot be
unsensible that the National strength of Kingdoms and People consists in the
general peace, as several members wisely compacted in the natural skin of
one politic body: wherefore, to foster this Malefactor amongst a people, is to
vender the strength of a Kingdom to ruin, for he is a constant sower of
division emulation, hatred, etc. amongst them: So that my verdict is not any
ways dissenting from your judgment.


Mr. Setled-Peace. Mr. Foreman, By reason of Persecution for conscience, I can
find no absolute acceptance in any Kingdom or Nation throughout, Christendom
For he so poysoneth all National Pacifications, Leagues and Covenants, that
their peace changes with their Reigion; so that their peace cannot be truly
settled whererefore my verdici is concurrant.


6. Mr. Humaine-Society. Mr Foreman, My verdict is, what by experience you have
all found, that he has not only set Kingdoms at variance, but even sat be
against son, and son against father, one friend against an other, and embrewes
them in one an others blood, to the destruction of all human society:
wherefore, I conceive this Charge against him is according to equiry.


7. Mr. Blood-of-Princes. Mr. Foreman, The blood of Kings, Rulers, and
Governors; the Treasons, Designs, and Conspiracies against their persons,
whereof History is full, and whereto our Age is not wanting, occasioned by
Persecution, enforces my verdict in approbation of the Byll against him.


7. Mr. United Provinces. Mr. Foreman, Whosoever reads the History of the
Vnnited Prvinces, and considers their wonderful preservation, flourishing
state and prosperity they enjoy, notwithstanding their with waging of
continual war with a foreign Enemy, may clearly perceive, the great mercy
of God upon a Nation and People, that in tender to the consciences one of an
other, exclude, banish and extirpate Persecution out of their Territories:
wherofore I likewise consent to the equity of the Byll given in against him.


8. Mr. Desolate-Germany. Mr. Foreman, Those that doubt of the truth of this
Byll, let them but look upon the German desolations, depopulations, war,
famine, and pestilence occasioned through papal supremacy over our
consciences, and he may receive full satisfaction of the equity of this Byll.


9. Mr. Publique-good. Mr. Foreman, that which is destructive to the public
good is Treasonable, and not to be suffered in a Commonwealth, because it
strikes at the Root and Foundation of Magistracy, whose proper end is, that
all may lead a Quiet and Peaceable life under the public Protection. But this
Fellow, Persecution, diverteth the public good from the Generality to this or
that Sort, to this or that prevailing Faction: so that where, or in what State
soever he is Predominate, there is an impossibility of an equal enjoyment of
the public good, but even the better sort, such as stand for the good of
others as well as their own, and have hazarded their lives for the public
good against the common Enemy, as Anabaptists, Brownists etc. are by him
deprived of the public Liberty and Freedom of the Subject, for which they
have engaged Estate and Life. Therefore Mr. Foreman, my Verdect upon the Bill
is BILLA VERA.


0. Nationall-wealth. Mr. Foreman, that which is the Ruin of National Wealth
is destructive to the very Being and continuance of Nations, Kingdoms, and
States: for it brings Devastation and Depopulation thereof, and so not to be
suffered. But this Persecution for Conscience stirs up Wars and Bloodshed,
in Nations, Kingdoms, and States, which consumes their Wealth, devoureth
their Fruit, burns and destroys their Cities, Towns, and Villages, and
throws all into a Wilderness. Therefore Mr. Foreman you have my consent to
the verity of this Byll.


Foreman. Gentlemen, we have spent much time, and our verdict is expected, if
you (12.) Mr. Civill-Government. and Mr. (13.) Domesticke-Miseries, be agreed
with us in your verdict, there remains nothing, but the endorsment hereof
with Billa-Vera.


Ambo. We are agreed with you.


This past, the Grand Jury give in their verdict or Indictment endorsed with
Billa vera, whereby the Malefactor Persecution is made a lawful prisoner, to
be brought forth to the Bar, and to be put upon the Jury of life and death.

Whereupon the Clarke (the month of the Court) commands the Jailer to set forth
Persecution to the Bar.

The Jailer sets forth Persecution to the Bar.

The Indictment.

Clar. Persecution, Hold up thy Hand, and hear thy Indictment. Perse-secution,
(...) stand Indicted in this County of Just-Judgment by the name of
Persecution, late of the Town of Tyranny, in the County of Martyrdom, by
Gods-Vengance, of the Town of Impartiallity, in the County of Just-Judgment,
That thou art an enemy to God and all goodness, a Traitor to Kings and
Princes, their persons, Crowns and Dignities divider of them one against an
other, and of Kingomes and people in themselves, and that thou art guilty of
the war and bloodshed at present in this Land, yea almost of all the blood of
the whole earth from the blood of righteous Abell unto the blood of these
present times, contrary to the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his
crown and dignity: How (...) thou Persecution, art thou guilty of this
Treason, Rebellion and bloodshed in manner and form as thou stand Indicted,
or not guilty?


Pris. Not guilty.


Clar. By whom wilst thou be tried?


Pris. By God and my Country.


Then an Impannell being returned, the Clarke says,

You good men that are Impanneled between our Sovereign Lord the King, and the
prisoner at the Bar, answer to your names at the first call upon pain and
peril that may fall thereon.


They all answer to their names.

Clar. Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier o -- yes -- If any man can inform my Lord the Kings Justices, the Kings
Sergeant, or the Kings Attorney before this Inquest be taken, between our
Sovereign Lord the King, and the prisoner at the Bar, let them come forth
and they shall be heard; for the prisoner stands at the Barreupon his deliverance.


Clar. You the prisoner that is called to the Bar, these men which you have
heard called, and personally appear, shall pass between our Sovereign Lord
the King and you, upon trial of your life and death, if you will challenge
them, or any of them, you must speak unto them or any of them as they come to
the Book to be sworn, before they be sworn.


Prisoner. My Lord, let me humbly crave liberty to Challenge this Jury, who
though my Lord in all probability they be honest Gentlemen, yet my breeding,
education, nature and course of life is not so well known unto them, as unto
diverse other Geentlemen (of worth and quality) here present, indifferent men,
of far more esteem in the world, more able to discern my cause, and the
evidence mine accusars shall bring: Besides my Lord, these men of the Jury are
men possessed with an inveterate hatred and malice against me, and are parties in
my Indictment; for together with the Grand Inquest they conspired together
against me, and provoaked Gods-Vengance to prosecute against me: now for me to
be tried by mine accusars and mortal enemies I hope your Lordship cannot
conceive it equal or legal: wherefore my Lord, I beseech you have mercy upon
me, consider the blood of the innocent, least it be a prey to the malice of
envy, and let more indifferent men be chosen.


Judge Persecution, I much wonder at thy impudence in excepting against such a
Jury, yet so far as in equity I may I am willing for justice sake, to grant the
utmost the Law affords.


Prisoner. I humbly thank your Lordship, the Lord bless your Honor, and I
beseech your Honor for the assistance of Sir Simon Synod.


Judge Well then let Sir Simon be called into the Court.


Clarke Call Sir Simon Synod.


Crier Sir Simon Synod, come into the Court.


Judge Sir Simon, if you can further his Majesty's service, in the proposal of
others in the room of those Persecution does except against to Mr. Sherriffe
to be impanneled, you are commanded.


Sir Simon Synod My Lord, since it is your Lordshids pleasure with the consent
of this Honorable Bench, that I shall be serviceable to him I shall most
willingly propose to his consideracion persons of sufficient worth and
estimation in the World, that are not prejudicial to the Person of the
Prisoner, neither are parties in his accusation, indisserent men, acquainted
with his life and conversation, able to discern the evidence, that shall be
brought in again (...) him, men whom I shall commend unto your Lordships
acceptance for soundness of judgment, and singular Piety in the cause of the
Cle^^y, this being a matter which concerns them in an high nature: wherefore
by your Lordships favor I shall propose those if (if no better can be
procured) to wit, Mr. Satan, Mr, Antichrist, Mr. Spanish Inquisition, Mr.
Councell-of-Trent, Mr. High Commission, Mr. Ass^mbly-of-Divines, Mr.
Rude-Multitude, Sr. John Presbyter, mine only son, Mr. Scotch Government, Mr.
F^^ls^-Prophets, Mr. Ecclesiasticall-Supremacy, Mr. Pontificall-Revenue: These
never sailed the designs of the Clergy, who in all Ages have endeavored the
Advancement of the Church of God, the Tribe of Levi: wherefore this being a
Case that concerns their Advancement, which above all things in the wo^ld is
to be endeavored, I am emboldned to propound them unto Mr. Sheriff, for the
Tri^ll of this Prisoner.


Judge. (...). Simm, this is a strange Jury you propose.


Justice Reason. My Lord; it is according to the nature of the Clergy, can you
expect Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? if you shall but according to
Reason consider of their Wa^es and Pretenses, which indeed bear a specious
show, you shall find them no better then ravening Woolves in Sheep Clothing.


Justice Humanity. My Lord, it cannot stand with Humanity, much less which
L^^a^ Equity, that a Case which concerns the general good of mankind should
be referred to the Verdict of such anhumane Jury.


Kings Ser. My Lord there be diverse of them whom Royal Prerogative has called
in to his Assistance, and at this day I conceive makes use of them for the
Establishing the Liberty of the Subject and the Protestant Religi^ on, so that
for my part I cannot see how all of them can be condemned.


Kings Attorn. My Lord, a great part of them are Props to the Protestant
Religion.


Justice Reason. My Lord, what though Royal Prerogative and the Protestant
Religion should be founded upon them? must they therefore be concluded
Anthentick? non sequitur: and for the Liberty of the Subject, though they may
be used as a Gloss; yet Reason will tell you, that they are as directly
opposite to it, as the Zenith is to the Antipodes.


Judge. Sr. Simon, I cannot in Equity permit such unworthy Persons to be on the
Jury, only Mr. Assembly of Divines, Sr. John Presbiter and Mr.
Scotch-governement are commanded to attend the Court, for the service of the
King, if occasion be.

Then the former Jury being sworn, etc. the Jailer is co(...)anded to set
fortb PERSECUTION to the Bar

Clar. PERSECUTION, hold up thy hand: Look upon him Masters of the Jury,
hearken to his cause, You shall understand, that he stands indicted in this
County of Just-judgment, by the name of PERSECUTION, etc. Upon this Indictment
he has been Arraigned, and thereto has pleaded not guilty, and for his
trial has put himself upon God and the Country, which Country are you:
your Charge is to enquire whether he be guilty of this Treason, murder, etc. in
manner and form as he stands Indicted, or not guilty: And hear your Evidence.


Crier. If any man can give Evidence, or can say any thing against the Prisoner
let him come forth, for the Prisoner stands upon his deliverance. Clar. call
Gods-Vengance. Gaffar Christian. Gaffar Martyrs. Gaffar Lib. Cons.

Crier. Gods-Vengance. here. Gaffar Christian. here. Gaffar Martyrs. here.
Gaffar Lib. Cons come forth and prosecute, or you forfeite your Recognisance I
cannot get in my Lord Sir Simon keeps me out. O! murder, murder, my Lord.





Judge. What is the matter?


Lib. Cons. My Lord, Sir Simon Synod is like to pull out my throat with the
revenous Claws of an Assembly, and Mr. Scotch-Government was fit to stab me
with his Scotch dagger, and the John of all Sr. John's, Sr. John Presbyter with
his Classical Club would beat out my brains: For my Lord, they are afraid I
should come into your Honors presence, least I should find entertainment in
this Kingdom, and so Mr. Pontificall-Revenue turn Separate from the Church of
England.


Crier. Peace there, every man keep silence upon pain of imprisonment: make
way there for Liberty-of-Conscience; Jemmy, put up thy dagger; Sir Simon ^oe
pair your nalles; Sir John, away with your Club, that Liberty-of-Conscience
may come into the Court.


The Witnesses being come in, they are sworn every one according to their
knowledge to give in a true Evidence for the King against the Prisoner at the
Bar.

Clar. Gods-Vengance, stand up, what can you say for the King against the
Prisoner at the Bar?


GODS-VENGANCE
My Lord, I have from the beginning dilligently observed the Nature and
inclinations of this Prisoner, eve^ to have been so averse to God and all
goodness, that his Actions in all Nations Kingdoms and St(...)s, amongst
Societyes and people, have been in direct Enmity to the end of Christ's coming:
for he came not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them Luke 9. 56. Joh. 3. 17.
But this fellow PERSECVTION, destroys both Life Temporal and Spiritual: he
wastes men's Estates, the more Godly and upright they are, the more cruel,
raging and hateful he is against them, he brings Misery, Poverty and Beggary
on their Wives and Children: yea my Lord, this Savage Blood-thirsty Wretch
Hangs, Burns, Stoneth, Tortureth, Saweth a sunder, Casts into the siery
Furnace, into the Lions Den, Teareth in pieces with Wild Horses, Plucketh out
the eyes, Roastet quick, Bureth alive, Plucketh out the Tongues, Imprisoneth,
Scourges, Revileth, Curses, yea, with Bell Book and Candle, Belyeth, Cutteth
the Ears, Slitteth the Nose, Manacles the Hands, G^^g^th the Mouths, Whippeth
Pil^oreth, Ban sheth into remote Islands, makes them fly by wh^le ^h^^ falls
into W^ld Deserts, Stigmatizeth some, and sometimes makes such (so
Stigmatized) when the wind turns, to Stigmatize their friends with Reproaches,
Calumnies, Oppression of Conscience etc. Deprives them of the Communication of
their Friends, of all Releife, of Pen, Ink and Paper, Sep^ra^e^ Man and Wife,
Deprives Parents of their Children and Children of their Parents, Impriseneth
men only for the discharge of a good Conscience, Stops Presses, whereby men
cannot make their just defense, Suffers nothing to be Licensed, Printed,
Preached, or otherwise published, but what himself allows, and having thus
bound the hands and stopped the mouths of all good men, then he comes forth in
Print against them like an Armed man, and furiously assalts them, Exults and
Exalts himself over them, Feigneth Arguments for them and then like a Valiant
Champion gives them a conquering Answer, and thus puts them to f^ight, and
p^^snes them with Revilings, Scanda^l^, Forgeries, and Opprob^ions Nicknames,
as Antinomians, Anabaptists, Brownists, Independants, Scismatiques, Heretics
etc. Thus he deals with the Godly party: Yea, he forces Millions to make
Shipwreck of a good Conscience, who for fear of such inhumanity deny the Lord
that bought them, to their final condemnation. Oh! therefore (my Lord) if
there be any Bowels of Mercy, any tender Compassion in you^ pity the
destitute, the Afflicted, the tormted, who wander about in Sheepskinnes and in
Goateskinnes in deserts and in mountains, in Dens and in Caves of the Earth,
of whom the World is not worthy.

Secondly, my Lord, he makes a Nation guilty of all the righteous blood spilt
upon the Earth; from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharias, and of all
that are slayon upon the Earth; for it is all innocent blood that is shed in
that case, purchased by the blood of Jesus Christ, who came not to destroy, but
to save men's lives; and therefore would have all taught in all Nations, that
all might be persuaded to the obedience of the truth, that all might be saved:
Therefore to kill the unbeleivor, as, Turk, Pagan, Jew, etc. is to slay such
as Christ would have to live to repent, which must needs be Murder in the
highest Nature: And cursed is he that shall stay an Innocent P^erson and all
the people shall say Amen, Deuteronomy. 29. 25. The Land that sheddeth Innocent Blood,
Innocent blood shall be upon it. Deuteronomy. 19: 10: and Innocent Blood the Lord will
not pardon. 2 King: 24. 4.

Thirdly, my Lord, he occasioneth Treasons, Conspicasies, Reballions, Wars,
Foreign and Domesticke, in all Nations and Kingdoms in the Earth, He
divides Prince against Prince, Kingdom against Kingdom, and Kingdoms in
themselves, Breeds and b^get^eth a National hatred betwixt Prince and
People, and amongst themselves: he sets Neighbor against Neighbor, Yea
Father against Son and Son against Father, he breaks the bonds of Peace
and Freindship National and Domesticke, In^^geth and Fills the wholl Earth
with blood and Violence: for what at this day is the Reason the Protestants
(...) the Blood of the Papists? but because the Papists seek theirs? they hate
and persecute the Papists, because the Papists hate and persecute them: they
would extirpate and root out the Papists because the Papists would do the
like to them. And on the other side, the Papists plot and conspire against the
Protestants, because the Protestants will not suffer them to live amongst them,
but Banish, Imprison, Hang, Draw, Quarter, and set up the L^mbs of some of them
(in open defiance to the God of heaven and earth) upon the Gates of the City,
who though unhappily they be found Traitors to the Public Pease and Politiqus
Government, yet Nature might teach them to bury their Limb, An Eye for an Eye,
a Tooth for a Tooth, Blood for Blood, says God: but now Blood cannot satisfy
Inhumane cruelty: If this be Canonical, Let me have old Tobits Apochripha, who
hazarded his life to bury the dead.

Where two stand at Enmity, there must needs be Mastery, or else no safety:
When one knows tho other is his mortal Enemy, he will use all the Means,
Strenght and Policy that he can to subdue him. This enrageth to all manner of
Tyranny and bloodshed, sets one Kingdom against another, because each
knows and takes each other for his deadly Enemy: Their faith being built
upon this rotten and devouring principle of forcing the consciences one of
another. But if the Papist knew the Protestant, the Protestant the papist to
love another: and would no^ molest or in the least injure o^ another for their
Conscience, but live peaceably and quietly one by another; bearing one with
another, and so of all Religions: What man would lift up his hand against his
Neighbor? This could not but cond^^ to a general true settled Peace, to the
wholl World. And in a short time, the Enmity of Heart between the Papist and
Protestant etc. would be quite worn ou^ Why should we hate and destroy one
another? are we no^ all the Creatures of one God? redeemed by one Lord Jesus
Christ? this should provoke us to Love and peace one toward another. If God
have revealed more Light of the Gospel to one then to another, shall the more
knowing trample the ignorant under his feet? we should carry our selves loving
and meek one toward another, with Patience persuading and exhorting the
contrary minded proving if at any time God will turn their hearts, by this
means the great Incendiary of the World, an enforced enraged Conscience, would
be at rest. What is more near and dear then our Consciences? if that be
enraged who can appease it? if that be satisfied, what Content Joy or Peace
like unto it? or what more mild, more Gentle or Loving? Therefore how tender
ought we to be in Cafes of Conscience? it is a Lion if enraged, a Lamb if
appeased: it is all Honey or all Gall, enraged it is like the Wild Bore of the
Forest, pleased, it is like the Dove from the Arc: no greater Friend, no
greater Foe.

It is better therefore for Kingdoms to set the Conscience free as in Holland,
Polonta, Transylvania etc. and be at Peace in themselves, then to bind and
enforce it and be Rent in themselves with Emulations, Heart-burnings,
Conspiracies, Rabellions etc. If this Fiery Spirit were allaied, This ignorant
Zeall of forcing all to believe as we believe, extinct: National Fears,
Jelousies, and Hatred would cease betwixt Nation and Nation, people and people:
for as this violent Implacable Spirit suggesteth Fears and Jelousies betwixt
one Conscience-forcing King and an other: Kingdom and Kingdom: Nation and
Nation: ^oit forces them to draw their swords, and standin continual Defiance
and Defense for fear of mutual Invasion. Yea under a false Opinion of
advancing Gods glory: by forcing others to their faith, they invade, assult and
murder one an other, and yet both (deluded by this Seducer) think they do
God good service, when alas it is all innocent blood that is shed: What was the
maine cause so many Nations have been rent and divided in themselves, and one
against an other, and in their divisions devoured one an other of late days?
What occasioned the revolt of the German Princes, from the House of Austrea,
of the Neitherlandess from the King of Spain, the bloody Maskery in France?
And amongst our selves, what occasioned the rising of the Scots, the Rebellion
in Ireland, and those bloody divisions in England but this divelish Spirit of
binding the conscience? One would compel the other to their faith, and force
them from their own, and that will not be borne, they had rather dye, then
deny their faith; and therefore is it, that a considerable party rebelleth, and
in that Rebellion wallow in one an others blood, bume and destroy all before
them, and yet both (as they suppose) sight the Lords battle, while indeed the
Devil bears the greatest share, whose servants they are in that Quarrel owe
as well as the other. Does not the Holy Ghost make it it a speaciall Mark of
Antichrist to force all both great and small, etc. and is it not the cause of
the Woman's flight inter the Wilderness from the presence of the Dragon; the
scattering of the Church into Deserts and secret places; the Death of the two
Witnesses, and wearing out of the Saints of the most High? How comes the Woman
on the scarlet colored Beast drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyes of Jesus, and all the blood of the Earth to be found in
her, but by this divelish Spirit, even the Spirit of Devils. which goes forth
unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world to provoake them to war
against the Saints; I mean, this binding of conscience, and forceing
consormity, though never so much against knowledge and perswat^^ of heart,
which at this day is so hotly endeavored, preached, and pleaded for by the
proud, Prelaticall Presbytrie of this Land, who by their subtle insinnations,
and secret delusions endeavor the infusion thereof into the hearts of their
Rulers, and to beget it as a principle of faith in the multitude: Should they
possess a Parliament and Kingdom with this Spirit, that Parliament and
Kingdom cannot expect peace and safety to continue; the fire may be smoohered
for a time, but it wili break out at last, as this Kingdom has already fonnd
by woeful experience, the blood of its Nobles and Commons, etc. whereof my
Lord, this infernal Feind (here araigned before your Honor, a Trator to his
Majesty's Crown and Dignity, the Privileges of Parliament, Rights, and Lib: of
the Subject, is the cause: Yea my Lord, he is Jakes on both sides, in was he
that occasioned the fears and jealousies betwixt his Majesty and the two
Houses of Parliament, and unhappily drew them into the Field of Blood, neither
party would be oppressed in Conscience, or deprived of their Religion; this was
one half of the Quarrel, and publicly professed the main, though it may be
Monarchy was the other half; and my Lord, he seduced the King into the North,
and provoaked your Lordship unto Arms, and has continued to this day firmly
on both sides, so that fall which side it will, he concludes to be Conqueror,
and be established absolute Monarke, for he so deports himself betwixt you
both, that both may persecute, and hitherto he has too much prevailed with
your Lordship: Therefore my Lord, if this vile Incendiary (here happily
detected and araigned) be not cut off from betwikt you, there is no hopes of
peace, till the sword (and it may be samine, and pestilence too) wrestle it out
to a Conquest on one side; and when all is done, yet peace will not, nor can
possibly long endure; for where Persecution is, there will be heart burnings,
envyings, emnlations, and murmurings, which at length will break out into
Commotions, Conspiracies, Insurrections and Rebellions. And thus my Lord, I
give place to what shall be further evidenced by the Witnesses.

Clar. GAFFAR CHRISTIAN stand up, what can you say for the King against the
Prisoner at the Bar.


CHRISTIAN.
My Lord, I have known this man by woeful Experience, well high 1644 years:
and my brethren of old, the Prophets, bare witness against him unto the day of
my Nativity, that he was in their times the most Pestilent Enemy to Mankind to
God and all Goodness, that ever was borne in to the World: and my Lord, I am
able to prove his continuance in that cursed Condition oven unto this day: so
that he has lived and escaped the hands of Justice above 5660 years, and all
his days has been a Murderer and Butcher of good men, yea scarce any consider
it.

Secondly, my Lord, this Prisoner, PERSECUTION for Conscience, makes the
Gospel of none effect, in stead of Sincerity he sets up Hyprocricy, instead
of the Fear of God, he sets up the Torrour of men: instead of the
Simplicity of the Word, he sets up the Usurpation of the Sword for my Lord,
the compelling of men against their Consciences, enforces such Inconveniences
and Impieties inevitably: Yea my Lord, of such a Divelish Spirit is this Enemy
of, as he exalts himself against the Mercy of God in Christ toward the
Sons of men, to the very prevention thereof to Multitudes, and the tumbling
of them head long without remorse to the Devil: for they that are blind, they
that are Tares, who knows but they may see, may become Wheat hereafter: but
if they be cut off, (as this merciless Inhumane Miscreant uses) for their
blindness, how shall they see? for (Isa. 38. 19.) The Grave cannot praise
thee, they that go down into the Pit cannot hope for thy Truth. Blasphemers
may hereafter become faithful Witnesses of Christ, Act. 3. 3. and 9. 5. 6.
Idolaters, true Worshippers, no people of God, the people of God, as the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 9. and some come at the first, third, sixth, and some not
till the eleventh (...) Mat. 20. 6. but should those that are in their sins
till the II. hour be cut off because they came no sooner: they should have
been prevented from conversion, or coming at all, as godly King Edward moved by
his bloody Bishops, to the burning of a godly Woman called John Butcher (Fox
Act. Mon. p. 1784) answered, Will you have me send her quick to the Devil in
her errors. This is the service this PERSECUTION does, instead of building he
destroyed, instead of saving he danneth, under the colors of Christ he
figliteth for the Devil his Master.

Thirdly my Lord, his nature is at direct emnity against the very command
Christ gave unto the Apostles in the General Commission: Go teach all
Nations, etc. Mat. 28. 19. where teaching, not violent compulsion is
constituted, and once for ever ordained she means and only way for conversion
to the faith of Jesus in all Nations: Now compulsion and perswation all know
are directly opposite, as much as to will and to nill; So that the command of
the one by the Authority of the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, is a flat
denial of the other by the same Authority: For here (vec. 1920.) by full power
of that Authority, Teaching is commanded; as, teach all Nations, etc. teaching
them to observe all things, what ever I have commanded, etc. Therefore, all
violence, as by monaces, threats, imprisonments, bodily punishments, spayling
of goods, and such like cruelties of this tyrant, is condemned in all Nations
as a means for no Nation in the Administration of the Gospel.

Fourthly, my Lord, this Adversaries practice and the Discipline of this old,
envi^us, malignant wretch here justly arigned before your Honor, is quite
contrary to the Apostles in their Administration of the Gospel; for they did
r^ e^ suggest, or stir up any Prince, or Majestrate (in whose hand is the
compulsive civil power,) to force such by violence of pepall I awes, Edicts,
Ordinances, Imprisonments, or she like, as would not suject unto their Gospel:
but on the contrary, gave up themselves to seorgings, imprisonments, sthning,
etc. which this Enemy occasioned against them, for the promulgat on thereof.
And the worst that they did, or were commanded to do, to such as would not
receive the Gospel, was but to shake off the dust from their feet, (...) Luke
10. 11. Acts 13. 51 which was nothing so ill, as this Beind's fire and faggot;
burning, hanging, froning, storging, imprisoning, etc. whose nature has ever
been and is always versant in such crueltios; and yet my Lord, this spawne of
Satin, this malicious Hyprocise, does all under the vizour. of Religion, his
wool feish nature is never seen abroad but in sheeps clothing, in nomine
Domini, he perpatrates, all his villainy: So that my Lord, he is a most
dangerous invererate Antichrist's and Archetraytour to his Majesty (the King of
Kings) his royal Crown and Dignity, and in invadour and destroyer of the just
Liberies, the lives and, fortunes of his Majesty's liege people.

Fifthly, my Lord, it is against the Law of Charity, not to do ^as we would be
done unto: He that hangs a Jew, because he will not be a Christian, would be
^^ath^a Jew should reward him in the same kind, because he will not be a Jew,
though in equity he deserve it. for innocent blood requires blood. Yea my
Lord, to forcemen and women against their consciences is world then to ravish
the bodies of womena and Maids against their wills: Yea, it is beyond the
Turkish cruelty, for though the Turks force the bodies of Christians and
Strangers to slavery, yet they let their conscience go free: But our late Idol
blood-sucking Bishops, and after them our ravenous Presbiters, as towardly
young Cubbes for bear not to force the consciences of their friends and
neighbors; and imprison them for walking after the light God has given them:
And my Lord, it is this Malefactaur which rendereth them so guilty: Yea my
Lord, this Foul Spirit breathed into them at their Consacration is not yet
cast out of them, which like a roaring Lion seeks whom it may devour: So
that if your Lordships justice do not spoedely interpose the bloody resolves
and villainous intents of our new upstart frisking Presbyters, we shall be all
devoured by those greedy Synodian Cor^^rants, which if you suffer, We then to
your Lordship in the latter Day, for be assured, that all the miseries,
tortures, and torments they inflict upon us, will not only rise up in judgment
against them, but even against your Lordship.

Sixthly my Lord, he us^^peth that to himself, which Christ has referred to
the Last Day, to wit, to judge them that reject him, for John 12. 47. 48. If
any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him not, for I came not to judge
the World, but to save the World: he that rejects me and receivetb not my
words, has one that judges him, the word that I have spoken, the same shall
judge him at the last day. and 1. Cor. 4. 5. Judge nothing before the time
until the Lord come and Mat. 7. 1. 2. Judge not least ye be judged, for with
what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged etc. and to these add Isa. 11.
4. Therefore no man upon pain of judgment, must presume to judge any in
respect of Christ or his words, but must refer it to the last day, whose word
shall judge him, and not Fire and Faggot, Hanging and Quartering, Imprisoning
etc. such are incompetent Judges, for to this end Christ both died and revived,
that he might be Lord both of the dead and the living. Let us not therefore
judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling
Block as an occas^on of fall in his brothers way: for, Who art thou that
judge another man's servant? to his own master he stands or falls. Romans
14.

4. We are not equal Judges one over another in matters of Faith, Who is it
that shall condemn? it is Christ that dyed: What is he that shall dare to
execute Vengence for unbeleefe? He that is innocent let him throw the first
stone. The Assembly (surely) will not plead Innocence, and if not, why are they
so ha^y to throw? Surely, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Yet Mr. Calamy a man
but newly Metamorphosed by a figure which we Rhetoricians call METONOMIA
BENEFICII from Episcopallity to Pres^ytery: upon demand what they would do
with Anabaptists, Antinomians etc. tells us, That they will not m^ddle with
their Consciences, but with their Bodies and Estates. Truly if this be the
drift, they are even leapt out of the Frying (...) into the Fire. If they be
fallen, this is not to restore them with the Spirit of meeknes. But my Lord,
Justice upon this Malefactor would cure the Synodians of that Disease, for
Patience per force is a Medicine for a mad Dog. And thus my Lord, your
Honor has my Testimony of this Malefactor.

Clar. GAFFAR MARTYRS, What can you say for the King against the Prisoner at
the Bar?


MARTYRS.
My Lord, Had not my life been hid in Jesus Christ, who is God of the living,
and not of the dead, for though dead in the grave, yet I live unto him, to be
raised and revived at the last day; or could the arm of flesh suppress the
cry of blood, my witness would have been dis^^abled: for this Malefacteur
PERSECUTION persecuted me even to the death; so that my voice is no other then
the cry of blood, even of the Prophets and Martyrs of Jesus, that you hear;
for my Lord, such has been his cruelty to me to suppress my Testimony against
him while I was living, that all the tortures and tormen^ wit and malice could
invent, he with his blood-thirsty Clergy devised against, and executed upon me,
whereby I was most baberously murdered; so that my Lord, I have no other voice
left me, then that of blood, split for the Word of God and the testimony of
Jesus, crying with a loud voice, how long O Lord holy and true do thou not
avenge our blood? I could enlarge my self into a Sea of blood against him,
discover him drunken with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus: yea my
Lord, Articles of all manner of impiety against God, and all goodness,
Treasons, Rebellions, etc. I could exhibit against him, but my faithful
brother, that pore despised CHRISTIAN, has most justly witnessed abundantly
against him: And there is yet an other faithful Witness to give in his
Evidence, Gaffar LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE, who I know, is thoroughly furnished
with matters of highest concernement against him, to whose just Evidence I
shall give place.

Clar. Gaffar LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE, what can you say for the King against the
Prisoner at the Bar?


Prisoner. My Lord, before he proceed, be pleased to hear the just exceptions,
Sir Simon Synod and Sir John Presbyter after their so long and serious
consultation have devised and contrived, why his Testimony should not be heard,
as an unsit Witness in such a case as this.


Justice Reas. My Lord, if Baal be God, let him plead for himself.


Judge. And reason good: For the judgment of this Court is not to be swayed by
favor, affection, humor of multitudes, or the like, but by Reason and equity
it self: Wherefore for the more free and just proceeding herein this Court
Ordains and Proclameth freedom for both sides, one as well as the other,
whether Presbyterian Tormentoi^^s or Independent Sufferers to give in their
grounds and reasons to the Sentence of this Court, whether
LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE be tolerable, and his Evidence to be received. Wherefore
Sir Simon, if you have any thing why this man's witness may be di^^nabled, you
have liberty to speak.


Sir SIMON SYNOD.
My Lord, this fellow LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE, (...) a Free-willer, a loose
Libectine, one that opens a gate to all manner of prophanes, in what Country
or State soever he gets intertainement, a man of all Religions and of no
Religion, a compound of all heres^es, scisme, and faction; a prestelent enemy
to National Conformity, our late Solemn League and Covenant, a Tratour to
your late sacred and blessed Ordinance for Tithes, a work of Superarrogation*
a Confuter of our mighty Champions Mr. Priune, Edwards, etc. He is for no
Reformation, but strives to frustrate all my endeavors, and the pious ends of
the rest of my holy brethren of the Tribe of Lev^, for the advancement of the
Church God, the Clergy of the Land, with ecclesiastical Revennue, and power
coercive to curb opposition, and force Reformation to Presbyterian
Government: yea my Lord, this is he that would reduce the National
Reformation of this Kingdom, so much endeavored by your Lordship, even to
open loosensse, every man to be of what Religion he li^^, every mecannioke
illiterate fellow to turn Preacher, and be as good as their Minister, no
distinction made betwixt the Clergy and the Laity, our Canonical Coats,
Girdles, long Cloakes and Black Gowno^ made a dirision, a taunt, and a curse,
as ominous as Lawne sleeves and as hateful as a Miter, our holy Tithes, as of
Lamb, Pigge, Goose, etc. be turned into voluntary Contribution, oh
insufferable sacraledge! from the good will of the people good Lord preserve
us: yea my Lord, the upper hand in public places, (the Clergies delight) as,
in streets, (...) feasts, etc. be denied us, the reverent estimation of our
Coat be past either Cap, Congue, or Curtsey, no difference betwixt the Black
Cassocke and the L^^thr^n Jacket, and all our goodlyfat Benefices turned to the
labor of our hands, (alas my Lord, we were never brought up to labor, we
cannot dig, and to beg we are ashamed) our delusions, false Glosses,
Sophistications, and godly pretonces be detected, and divulged, and so all
things that are dainty and goodly to depart from us: alas, alas my Lord! this
will undo the Clergy quite, we may leave our Callings, and learn new Trades,
if we turn Cobblers, Tinkers, and Weavers we may ^hance get constant work, if
not, now and then a job of preaching amongst the people; Consider my Lord, it
will put out the two eyes of the Kingdom: Much more I could say, but I shall
give way to my Son Sir John, who by your Lordships favor shall further inform
this Court in the defense of this Prisoner.

Judge. Well Sir Simon, this being a business of high concernment, either what
you or your Sir John, or what any man else can say in the behalf of his
Majesty concerning the Prisoner, this Court freely permits, yea commands
Information thereof.


Clar. Call Sir John Prosbyter, son to Sir Simon.


J. Rea^. Magus.


Crier. Sir John Presbyter son to Sir Simon come into the Court.


Judge. Sir John your Father has informed us, that you have matter of
exception against LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE, if you have the mercy of the Court
permiteeth the Prisoner the benefit thereof.


Sir JOHN PRESBYTER
My Lord, My Reasons against LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE, why both himself and his
Evidence is to be rejected, are these.

1. Because I suppose (...) must needs be granted, that the Majestrate is
Edwards Antipol. p^g. 280.
^ustos a^ vindex vtriusque Tabulae, (as is confessed by all Orthodox Divines)
that the care of Religion belongs to him: And because Austin and other Divines
on Psalm 2. 10. 11. and on D^^t. 17. 19. give unto Magestrates that power. Ergo,

[J. Reas. Statesmen must wear Bells about their necks, because ancient
Divines say Kings are but Packe-horses to the Clergy.]

2. Because in this Kingdom the Reformation in Worship, Government, etc. which
shall be settled and established by your Lordship is judged and taken page 281.
for granted by you to be according to the mind of Christ; else why has your
Lordship called so many able, godly, and learned Divines (of us) to consult
with for that purpose? and why else will you establish it, if there be any
other more agreeable to the Word? Ergo.


[J. Reas. The Synod is guided by the Holy Ghost sent in a Cloake-bag from
Scotland, as of old from Rome to the Council of Trent, Goncil. Trent l. 6 p.
497.]

3. Because it is against the solemn League and Covenant for Reformation,
taken by the Parliament and Kingdom of England and Scotland, and page 282. and
283.
so cannot be condescended to in England without the breach of that Oath and
Covenant: So that all Apollogie and motion for Toleration comes too late, the
door is shut against it, the Kingdoms hands are bound, so that if a Toleration
were not in it self unlawful, and against the duty of the Majestrate, yet now
because of the Oath and Covenant it is unlawful; so that whatsoever might have
been granted before, cannot be now, least the Kingdom should be guilty before
God of Covenant breaking. Ergo,


[J. Reas. Because the Assembly bath sadled the Parliament, it is unlawful for
the Presbyters to go a foot. Ergo, Persecution was unlawful when the Priests
were persecuted, but now it is lawful they persecute. Ergo, Toleration was
lawful, and the duty of the Majestrate when the power was in the hands of the
Bishops, but now the Presbyters are crowding into S. Peter's Chair, the
Parliament is bound to compel all men to the Decrees of the Assembly, as that
impudent, and desperate Incendiary Mr. Edwards boldly and openly affirms, an
Assertion able to divide the Kingdom in twenty pieces.]

4. Because it is against the greatest lights in the Church both ancient and
page 281.
modern, as Agustine, Ambrose, Calvine, Phillip Melancton, Zanchius, Musculus,
Bullinger, likewise the judgment of the Divines of New England are against the
Toleration of any Church Government and way but one, they will not suffer
Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. Mr. Cotton the greatest Divine in New England, and
a precious man, is against Toleration, and holds that men may be punished for
their Consciences, as will appear by his Letter to Mr. Williams. Ergo,


[J. Reas. Presbyterian Government is unlawful, because Mr. Cotton condemns
it in his Book entitled, The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.]

5. Because at this time for want of settled Government, people being left to
so great liberty, multitudes are fallen, and do daily to Antinomianis^e, page
289.
Anabaptisme, Independancy, yea to deny the Immortality of the soul: Ergo,


[J. Reas. One Anabaptist, Independent, or the like, that can render a Reason
for what he holds, is better then se^ven Presbyters that conclude from such
bald Premises, Pro. 26. 16.] [Here the Author of that Book, entitled, M^ns
Mortality, desires Mr. Edwards with those that are so invective against it in
their Pulpits that they would cease their railing at it there, and come forth
in Print against it; for the thing being so rare, so little questioned, and the
contrary so generally concluded as a principle of faith, any bumbast-stuffe
will pass there for authentike with the people without trial, but if it be
put forth to public view, it must expect an encounter by one or other, and
therein the Author of that Book observes the policy of his Presbyterian
Adversaries to maintain their repute with the people, in being so hasty in the
Pulpit and so slow to the Press.]

6. Independants, and all kind of Sectaries as long as they have their liberty,
page ibid.
snuff up the wind, and will not hearken to any way whereby they may receive
satisfaction; but if once the Majestrate declares, and by Laws concludes one
way of Church Worship, it may be they will hear reason. Ergo,


[J. Reas. It seems the Presbyters till then can render them none, for the
reason and ^orce of that Argument li^s in take him Jailer. Ergo, If once the
Majestrate declares, and by Laws concludes all the fat Benefices of the
Kingdom upon Independancie, then it may be the Presbyters will bear reason,
and turn Independants.]

7. Independancie has ever been from the first to the last, a Fountain of
evil, root of bitterness, divisions, etc. as the Histories of the Anabaptists
(the page 394.
highest form of Independancy, and Church way) declare, in respect of the
evils they fell into, and the mischeifes they brought upon Germany, and how God
cursed and scattered them. Ergo,


[J. Reas. If the King conquer, the Parliament will be Traitors to posterity by
Cr^nicle; for who writ the Histories of the Anabaptists but their Enemies?]

8. My Lord, becausethe Presbyterian way has been countenanced from page 29^^.
Heaven, and blessed from sorts of sects, etc. and that for almost an hundred
years: Ergo,


[J. Reas. Both Papal and Episcopal is better then Presbyterian, for they
are, and have been more uniform, and have continued many hundred years longer
then Presbyterian, and were long before Presbytrie was thought on: for alas, it
was but a shift at a pinch the Devil made, when neither of the other would
serve his turn; and so came up Presbytrie, but what good the Devil will have
on it I know not; for who knows the luck of a Iousi^ Curre, he may prove a
good Dog?]

9. My Lord, If Toleration of Government though not of Doctrine page 301.
should be granted, then the simple Anabaptists, and that simple sort called
Dippers will come in too, saying, that Baptism at such an age, and Baptizing
in Rivers by Dipping are but matters of order and time: Ergo,


[J. Reas. He that desembleth hatred with lying lips, and he that inventeth
slander is a fool, Pro. 10. 18.]

Wherefore I humbly beseech your Lordship, seriously to consider the depth page
303.
of Satan in this Design, of Toleration, how this is now his last Plot and
Design, and by it would undermine and frustrate the whole work of
Reformation, it is his Master piece for England. I am confident if the Devil
page 304.
had his choice. whether the Hierarchy, Ceremonies, and Liturgy should be
established in this Kingdom, or a Toleration granted, he would choose and
prefer a Toleration before them.


[J. Human. That is of Presbyterian Compulsion, because Episcopal in England
is worn out of Date: Mr. Edwards knows the Devil is not so simple, to choose
Hierarchy, Ceremonies, etc. where their deceit is detected, hated, and
rejected, it seems be's better acquainted with him then so, the next time he
writes, we shall have more of the Devils mind, but it is likely he will have
finished his Design first, and then it may be, Mr. Edwrads will tell us, that
the Devil is better persuaded of Presbytrie (his last shift) then ever he was
of Episcopacie, he will be so serviceable to him therein, for if Mr. Edwards
and the Devil be not deceived, he intends with it to devour, break in
pieces, and stamp the residue the Hierarchy has left under his feet, so to
wear out the Saints of the most High.]

And thus my Lord, you have, my Reasons, why this fellow LIBERTY-OF CONSCIENCE,
is not to have admittance within the verge of this Kingdom, much less to enter
thus into the bowels of this Court to give in Evidence to be proceeded on upon
the life and death of this holy man, Mr. PERSECUTION.


Lib. Cons. My Lord, Sir John^s a pretty forward child, that can pratle thus
before he have his teeth; thy say he has been breeding of teeth ever since the
the Assembly were in consultation; surely they will be huge, long, boarish tuskes
when they come ^ut; should your Lordship but cause his mouth to be opened, you
might see great iron teeth lie in his (...), ready to cut, he wants nothing but
a Parliament Corrall to whet them with all: but my Lord, were he mine, I would
knock out his brains with an Independent Hammer, to prevent the grows of
such teeth, for Daniell tells us the nature of great iron teeth. Now whereas my
Lord, he excepteth against my witness, I humbly conceive, the equity of this
Cou^^ cannot receive his exception against me in the justification of this
Butcher and murderer of good men, seeing himself is a merciless inhumane
Butcher, the son of a Butcher, yea my Lord, his Grandfather and
Great-Grand-father were Butchers; for whereas my Lord, he has acquired the
name of Sir John Presbyter, in truth he is a Priest, the son of a Bishop,
Grandchild to the Pope, and the Devil is his Great-Grand-father, all
murderers and Butchers of Gods people. Therefore good my Lord le^ not mine
Evidence be thus unjustly disinabled.


Judge. LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE, you are sworn for the King, to give in your
Evidence in his Majesty's behalf against the Prisoner at the Bar; and the
challenge against you being such as may be dispensed with, you are to proceed
in your Evidence.


LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE.
My Lord, To what the former Evidence have testified I shall with brevity add,
that this Malefactor PERSECUTION destroys the Innocent with the wicked,
contrary to the comma^^d of Christ, Mat. 13. 30. let the tares and the wheat
grow together until the harvest, from which Parable appears, that the
Kingdom of heaven or Christ's Government over the whole world does strictly
charge his servants, the Kings and Rulers of the Earth (for by him Kings
reign) to suffer tares; Turks, Jews, Pagans, and Infidels, as well as
Christians to grow or live together in the Field of the World, their Dominions
until the Day of harvest, or desolution of all things, and not pluck them up,
because they are Tares, Turks, Jews, Pagans, etc. least they pluck up such
as may become as the Pillars of Solomon in the House of God, even glorious
witnesses of Jesus Christ: What greater Rebellion therefore can there be by
those Servants to the Householder, then to pluck up the tares from the wheat?
As their Office brings all under their Dominions, so it is to preserve all in
their Dominions, that tares and wheat, Infidel and Beleiver may grow and live
peaceably together in civil cohabitation, commerce, etc. in their Dominions
until the Harvest, or end of all things, when the Lord of the Harvest shall
separate the tares from the wheat, with come ye^ blessed, go ye cursed, etc.

Secondly my Lord, he depriveth the Jews (as much as in him lies) of their
geliverance according to the Covenant God made with their Fathers from this
their Captivity, notwithstanding the wrath of the Lord threatened against them,
that shall evil entreat them th^rein, Zach. 2. 8. Esa. 54. 15. 17. cap. 51.
22. 23. for my Lord, he has made the name of a Jew as hateful as Judas; yea,
his nature is not to leave a man of them to piss against the wall. Now my
Lord, though the Jews are led captive by the Gentiles under the time of the
Gospel, and though the natural branches are broaken off, and the Heathen
grafted in, yet still they are beloved for their Fathers sakes, Romans 11. 28.
and are not to be persecuted for their infidelity, for he that touches them,
touches the apple of Gods eye: What though they are stumbled? shall we boast
our selves against them? God forbid; for if we that are wild by nature, be
grafed contrary to nature into the good Olive Tree, how much more shall they
which are natural branches be grafted into their own Olive Tree again?
Therefore the Apostle would not have us ignorant of this Mystery, that
blindness in part is happened to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, and all Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. 25. 26. compared to Isa. 49. 22.
23. Deuteronomy. 30. 1. 2. 4. 5. Amos 9. 14. 15. Now what hinders their salvation
and deliverance so much as persecution, for they are even led captive by
PERSECUTION, and made slaves to him even to this day? And how shall they
believe, if they shall have no time given them to believe? this divelish Spirit
gives them not a minute, he will not suffer a Jew to live amongst the
Christians, or come near him: what hopes then is there the Jews should be
converted, where this Tyrant is in force? Shall we that have received vantage
by their rejection, thus recompense them with tyranny? our Lord whom they
slew, would not have them slaven, but they are beloved of him, and himself
will be their Deliveror, Romans 11. 26. 27. 28. yes this Incendiary has caused
our Kings, and our Rulers, our Bishops and our priests not to suffer a Jew by
authority to live amongst them; how then can we complain of the vengance that
is at this time upon us and our children, that have been so cruel, so
hateful, so bloody minded to them and their children? we have given them the
cup of trembling, surely we must taste of the dregs: Hearken therefore no
longer to those which teach this bloody doctrine of persecution, for neither
they, their preachings, fastings, weepings long prayres, etc. can deliver in
the day of distress, as long as ye persecute: Behold, ye fast for strife and
debate, and to smite with the Presbyterian fist of wickedness; but this is the
Fast which the Lord has chosen, to undo the heavy burden, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke.

Thirdly my Lord, He is a murderer of Kings and Princes, etc. for the
murdering of heriticke Princes is the natural brat of this divelish Spirit;
for from this ground, that the contrary minded are to be forced, the Papists
justify the murdering of Herticks, making all Heretics which separate from
them; for that Religion that is bottomed on this principle, that all must be
forced, will they, nill they, where it cannot force, must murder: so comes it
to pass, so many Kings have been murdered, by the Papists, because casting of
the Romish yoke, they free themselves from their power of forcing, therefore
the Papists to make good their coercive principle, betake themselves privately
to murder such Princes, to prevent a countermanding power, and keep all in
their catholic subjection; so that such as would have all forced, where they
connot force, is to be feared, will privately murder: Therefore it is
dangerous for a King to trust his person with such men, for if the King should
change his Religion, to one opposite to theirs, who knows, those men will not
do as their principle leads them, even murder their Prince; but on the
contrary, that Religion that is grounded on the principle of meekness
patience, and long sufferance, instructing the contrary minded, and utterly
contesting against all compulsion, cannot in the least measure administer any
fear or danger unto Princes of their persons, be of what Religion they will,
for be they of any Religion or of no Religion, for matter of violence it is all
one to the Spirit of meekness, for its nature is only to persuade, not to
compel; if by fair means it cannot prevai'e, it has done, committing the
issue to God.

Fourthly my Lord, He is an utter enemy to all spiritual knowledge, a hinderer
of its increase and grows; for no man knows but in part, and what we know,
we receive it by degrees, now a little, and them a little; he that knows the
most, was once as ignorant as he that knows the least; nay, is it not frequent
amongst us, that the thing that we judged heresy we now believe is orthodox;
now can such think themselves were worthy to been persecuted in, and for that
their ignorance? they cannot sure be of that mind; such therefore cannot
condemn, imprison, or hang the ignorant, or such as discover or oppose their
ignorance, but in that they condemn themselves, sin against nature and their
own knowledge: The twelve at Ephesus that had not so much as heard whether
there were a Holy Ghost or no, if they had been so evilly used by Paul when he
heard it, how should they spoke with tongues, and prophosied? yet we see how
common a thing it is, if we know not, nor believe so much as the multitude
knows or beleiveth, or the Doctrine of the Presbycrean Church requires, we
must be persecuted; and if our knowledge go beyond them, that we protest
against their errors, and labor to inform them better, we must taste of the
same sauee too, so that we must know nor believe neither more nor less then
they, but must believe just as they believe, or else be persecuted; as if a
Statute should be enacted, that an Image should be made, and all that were
higher or lower then the Image should be hanged: By this we may see, what an
unreasonable thing it is evilly to entroat such as we judge ignorant and
erroneous, or all to be erroneous and heretical that we understand not our
selves: What shall we say then of such Ministers, that of rational creatures
would teach us to be thus nnreasonable? their end is destinction, their belly,
them God, they serve the Parliament but for their own bellyes, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the simple: These uphold the accursed Doctrine
of Persecution, least liberty of printing, writing, teaching, should discover
their deceipts, and they be disinherited of their Fathers Inheritance; their
intents are plain to him that has but half an eye to see, they will not do
much, only change the title, before it was Episcopal Prelacy, it shall be now
but Preistly or Presbyterian Prelay, so that, he that lives but a small time
shall surely see a Presbyter as fat as ever was a Bishop; those are enemies to
all knowledge, that is either too short or beyond their bellyes, therefore is
it, that all heads must be made even with the Presbyters, none higher nor none
lower, just as tall, and no taller, he that is too short must be stretched out,
and he that is too long must be pared even, least they should miss of their
Prayers, give us this day our daily tithes, that the Gormaine proverb might be
fulfilled, phophen geizegkeite, Gattes barmchartzegkite, were his in ebekeite,
the coveteousnesse of the Preints and the mercy of God endure for ever; I would
exhort them to be otherwise minded, but that I know, venture non habet aures,
the belly has no ears.

Pris. My Lord, I beseech you hear me after this tedious Accusation, it is
false and malicious, as by sound reason, and Personages of Honor I shall
clearly evidence: First my Lord, as for GODS VENGANCE my Prosecutour, both the
Juries, with diverse others, together with the witnesses, enforced him to
prosecute me, and I know not by what pretense they procured GODS VENGANCE
against me; for my Lord, I am innocent, and ever have been from my Cradle from
such and so heinous accusation, as is laid to my charge: And for that fellow,
that pretends he has known me since the comeing of Christ, he is a man of no
reputation, without habitation, a beggarly fellow, arunagate, a loose fellow,
he stays in no place, keeps no hospitallity, blaspheameth that most divine,
Leviticall, ever to adored Ordinance for Tithes, and counts it as an unholy
thing, paies none where he lives, but sharkes here and there, where he can
skufle in his head, runs from house to house, to delude simple women, who are
ever learning, and never learned, and whereas he says, his name is CHRISTIAN,
his name is not CHRISTIAN, neither is he of the generation of Christianity, but
a most factious dissembling Anabaptist, a Tubpreacher, and no christian, as Sir
Simon, Sir John, and diverse other reverend, and honorable persons here present
can witness: As for Gaffar Martyrs, he is as a sounding brass and tinckling
Cymball, who though he gives up his body to be burnt, himself is but a
castaway, and this I am able to make good unto your Honor, by the most grave,
and solid judgment of all the reverend Divines, the Clergy of Christendom:
Therefore my Lord, it much mattereth not, what his Evidence is, it being but
the malice of an Heretic: And as for LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE, Sir Simon, and
that blessed babe, his Son Sir John, (Sanctified from his mothers womb, the
Synodian Whore of Bibylon,) has informed your Honor of the unworthiness of
his witness. My Lord, I desire Sir Simon may speak in my defense.


Sir Simon. My Lord, this Gentleman here arraigned, is altogether innocent from
this accusation, I have had ancient familiarity with him, a daily society has
past betwixt us, and I never could find any such thing in him, and my Lord,
here is Mr. Pontifical Revennue, Mr. Ecclesiastical Supremacy, Mr. Na tionall
Conformity, Mr. Rude Multitude, Mr. Scotch Government, and mine only Son, Sir
John Presbyter, all to witness his innocence from this Accusation: And if your
Lordship make any scruple hereof, that learned Gentleman, Justas Conformity, of
Lincolns Inn Esquire. can thorughly resolve you, both by Scripture Texts,
Presidents of all sorts, and the consiant interrupted practices, examples, of
the most eminent Emperors, Princes, Councels, Parliaments, etc.


Lib. Cons. My Lord, the Defendant smells of a fat Benefice; see, see, his
pockets are full of Presbyterian Steeples, the Spires stick under his Girdle:
ha, ha, hah; instead of Weather-cocks, every Spire has got a Black Box upon
it. and in it the pure and immaculate Ordinance for Tithes, Oblations, etc.
Sure shortly, instead of Moses and A^ron, and the Two Tables, we shall have Sir
Simon, and Sir John holding the late solemn League and Covenant, and that
demure, spotless, pretty, lovely, sacred, divine, devout, and holy Ordinance
for Tithes (the Two Tables of our new Presbyterian Gospel) painted upon all
the Churches in England. Oh brave Sir Simon, the Bells in your pocket chime
all-in while ours chime all-out: I pray you give us a Funeral Homile for your
friend here before he depart, here is twenty shillings for your pains, you know
it is sacraledg to bring down the price, As it was in the beginning, is now,
and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.


Crier. Make way there for the Jurie.


The Jurie withdraw, and thus fall into debate about their verdict.

Creation. Gentlemen, from the Evidence of the Witnesses against PERSECUTION, I
clearly perceive, that he is of so divelish and unnatural disposition, as is
not computible with the works of the Creation, all creaturs of a kind
associate, feed, and converse together, there is a public freedom of all
kinds amongst themselves, the Ox, the Ass, the Sheep, and all sorts of
Cattle; the Dove, the Sparrow, and all kinds of Birds have a State harmony, a
public Toleration, general Concord and unity among themselves in their
several kinds: but this Malefactor as from the Witnesses is evident,
unnaturallizes mankind above all kinds of Creatures, that where he rules, no
peace public, or private; no freedom, rights, or liberty either civil or
spiritual; no society, cohabitation, or concord National nor Domesticke can
possibly be amongst men, but envying, hatred, emulation, banishment, etc.
Wherefore, from the consideration hereof, and of what the Witnesses have given
in, to me he appears guilty, what say you Mr. Gospel?


Gosp. Mr. Foreman, Whereas it is by Sir John and such like urged, that the
Kings of the Gentiles have equal power with the Kings of Israel of old:
understand, that their supremacy was but for a time, until Shiloh came, and no
longer, to whom then the gathering of the people should be; he came to take
away the First, that he might establish the Second, being made Mediator of a
better Covenant, established on better promises, the forgiveness of sins,
and the gift of eternal life: But he that despised Moses Laws, dyed without
mercy under two or three witnesses. The old Covenant was over the Old man, and
its Condemnation or punishment was over the Old man, to wit, this corruptable
fallen State of Mortallity, and therefore they executed death upon the
transgressors thereof. The New Covenant is over the New man, to wit, the Spirit
that shall be raised out of this corruptable at the Resurrection; therefore
has it the promise of forgiveness of sins, and eternal life; the penalty of
that, temporal death, the death of the Old or earthly man in this life; the
penalty of this, everlasting death, the death of the New or spiritual man in
the life to come; we are New Creatures or New men now but by faith, not
actual till the Refurrection, we are to live as if we were raised again, for
the condition of the Gospel is not to us, as the Condition of Innocence was to
Adam, a Condition in this present State of this present State, as his was to
him, to wit, the Condition of immortallty in immortallity; but ours a condition
in present mortallity of future immortallity: so is it, that mortallity being
swallowed up of life, we are presently under the end of its Condition,
Salvation, or Condemnation. Therefore as the Resurrection cannot possibly be
but by Christ, so the penalty cannot possibly be by other; it is out of the
Sphere of this world, therefore one of the power of the Princes of this world,
as they cannot be Mediators of the New Testament, so they cannot be punishers
therein; Therefore to punish the Offenders therein, is to attempt the Throne of
Christ, and asurpe (as much as in them lies) his Mediatourship: Therefore has
he referred the contemners of his Gospel until the Judgment of the Last Day.
And for that in Isaiah 49. 23. And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and
Queens the nursing Mothers: it is a Prophecy of the deliverance of the Jews
from their Captivity, to whom Kings and Queens shall be assistance in their
return to the Land of their Forefathers, as ver. 19. 22. 23. 26. etc. witness.


Politic Power. Mr. Foreman, Salus populi, the safety of the people, is the
Sovereign Law, or fundamental constitution of Civil Government; therefore
though Majestracy has been corrupted and abused, (as appears by our
Evidence) to the terror of the most virteous, conscientious, well minded men,
and the maintenance and protection of the wicked; so that it has been
perverted from the geneall good if all sorts, sects, and societies of people,
unto this or that sort or sect; yet this evil in Majestracy is to be cut off,
ne pars sincera trabatur. And Mr. Foreman, it appears by our Evidence, that
PERSECUTION is the original of the disease, therefore to be cut off, least the
whole politiqus body perish: For where Persecution is, what dissenuions,
mutintes, tumults, insurrections, aproares, and divisions; what what
conspiracies, Treasons and Rebellions; what bloodshed, cruelty, and inhumanity
has been by our Evidence declared, the which by our own experience we find
verefied in diverse Kingdoms, States, and Provinces: for do we not see,
betwixt the Catholic Cause and the True Protestant Religion (so called) the
Christian world is embrewed with blood, destroying and devouring one an other:
the dashing of those two imperious, ambitious, insolent Religions, the Papal
and Protestant together besides what it has done to the House of Austrea, etc.
has split the Dominons of this politic body asunder, that they wallow in one
an others vital blood, burning, destroying, and ruinating all before them; how
many Towns, Villages, and sumptenus buildings have been burn? what Tillage
and Meddowes laid wast, and how many thousands of innocent souls have been
slayen in Ireland contrary to the end and foundation of poltique Government?
and does not England taste even the dregs of this Cup, yea swallow it down
with greedynes, that we are even drunk with one an others blood, enraged with
madness, crueltics, etc. without all hopes of peace till one of these
persecuting Religions have devoured the other.


Mr. State-Policie. Mr. Foreman, though from Rome, the spirit of Persocution is
conveyed into most sects of Religion, and is daily found to the shame of
Religion among such as are or would be counted religious, and most States, and
Kingdoms being rent with such persecuting Religions, therefore the Kingdoms of
Christendom have judged the Toleration of diverse Sects inconsistent with State
policy; yet Politians would they consider, need not in curing one mischeife run
upon a greater; for such good and wholesome means might be provided, as in a
small time this violent spirit might be worn out, the next generation be of a
better temper, and at length Persecution to be as rare as now common, and a
more placable peaceable spirit consiliated among the generality of men: And
seeing this impatient, violent, ambitious spirit is so dangerous to Civil
Societies their friendship and unity, so destructive to public peace and
safety: It is therefore necessary, that Kings and all Governors, whose Office
is; that all may lead a peaceable and quite life under them, should in policy
to the general good, see to the securing of their Dominions from this factious
spirit, by such wholesome strict Laws as may best conduce to the suppression
thereof, as of Treason, Rebellion, or the like; for allare Traitors and Rebels
in their hearts to the public peace, and general good of human societies,
salus populi, the peoples safety, (which our State counts the suprame Law)
which are of a perseuting spirit; for it is in direct opposition to that Law;
And who more guilty then the Papist and the Protestant, when one is too mighty
for the other, the Papist stronger then the Protestant, the Protestant stronger
then the Papist, the stronger is so ambitious and fiery zealous for his own
cause, especially the Papist, that one place is too hot for them both, and the
Protestant as he is a persecutour of the Papist, so as well as the Papist, is
he a Persecutour of Anbaptists, Brownists, Antinomians, Independants, etc. but
they persecute none, but seek the general good, peace, and safety of all
Sorts, Sects, and Societies of people, yea even of their Enemies; so that as
Papists are Enemies and Traitors to the safety of all Sorts, Sects, and
Societies, so are the Protestants, considered in this persecuting capacity,
both persecuting; therefore in this sense their Religions are both traiterous,
desperate, and dangerous to the Public Good: Therefore it ought to be the
care of those Kingdoms and States where those persecuting Religions are, to
purge those Religions of this Malignant persecuting spirit, this traiterous
disposition, for Relegions may be absolute, yea the Protestant more truley
Protestant, if cured of this Pestilentiall disease of persecution, for indeed
persecution is no part of Religion, but a mere spirit of Treason insensibly
insinuated, and distilled into Religions by Popes, Bishops and Priests; so that
ignorantly the members of those Religions are made Traitors to their own
Rights and Liberties, and so enslaved to the traiterous designs of the
Clergy, the very root of Treason; for indeed the Teachers of Persecution are
the Archest Jesuiticall Traitors of all, whether Papist, Protestant etc. such
as Mr. Edwards, who most impudently and traitorously says in his Antipologie,
that the Parliament is bound in duty, to compel all men to the Decrees of the
Assembly.


Mr. Polit-Power. Mr. State Policy, I commend your policy herein, for indeed
Mr. Edwards in so saying, is a Traitor to politic power: But I pray you
proceed.


Mr. State-Policie. Well then, as all are borne subjects to their Kings, so are
Kings to see, that all may have their Birthright, Liberty, and Privilege of
Subjects, that all may be kept in the general Bond of peace, of what sort or
sect soever, for as Lucius Lavinius said to King James, all the different
members being wrapped up in the skine of one constitution, need no stronger
obligement, to uphold the whole then their own interest: Therefore, were the
devouring principle of persecution weeded out from betwixt all Religions, they
might all enjoy their public safety to the general enlargement and
strengthening of politic power, for the strength of the King lies in the
multitude of people, so that it is most consonant to State policy to include
all, rather then deprive any of public protection.


M. Nationall-Loyalty. Mr. Foreman, this is a matter of great weight, that we
have in hand, therefore not slightly, but seriously to be weighed, and
deliberately examined both from our own knowledge and experience, as from the
just Evidence given in by the Witnesses, (for I conceive, this prisoner is
anciently known to us all) that we may be better enabled to give in our
verdict, wherefore having something to say of ancient experience, I shall first
desire Mr. State-Policie, since he has given us an hint of wholesome means
that might be used, to prevent and suppress this turbulent rebellious Spirit
of Persecution, that he would declare what further he has in his thoughts
thereon.


Mr. State-Polic. That which in it self is wicked, neither honorable to God,
allowed by him, nor profitable to man, but dangerous and destructive to common
safety and peace, falls under the Sword of the Majestracy, and the Majestrate
may (...) use such means as shall best secute the public peace from the evil
their of: Now since the generality of the people are possessed with this Evil
Spirit, infused, nourished, and preserved in their hearts by Popes, Bishops,
Priests, and (at present in the Land) by the traiterous Synod, called the
Assembly of Divines, who labor with might and maine to establish and sede this
traiterous spirit in the Land; and further, since all by compulsion are to be
forced to the Civil peace and public unity, and all are to be desended and
preserved under the public freedom, one as well as an other; therefore to
this end the Majestrate ought to bind all Religions, that no Religion have
power over other, that all in the General have Toleration, and none in
particular be offensive; for the Papist may be a Papist, the Protestant a
Protestant without the power of Compulsion, the deprivation thereof is no ways
injurious to their Religion; as a man that has a wen, or a bunch that grows
upon any member, may be a perfect man, and that a perfect member without it:
Therefore to this end a National Covenant would not be inconsiderable, to
engage all in this public freedom, that as all should be sharers in it, so
all should be desenders of it. That no Protestant Minister or other should
teach privately or publicly, either by preaching, writing, or conference any
thing contradictory or distructive thereto. That no man upbraid, reproach,
scoff, deride, threaten, or do any violence to any for his Religion, and such
like: And that this be continued from Generation to Generation under such and
such penalties as the State shall think fit; so that in a small time, if the
Governors would hearken to the fear of the Lord, this oppression of
conscience, which is now made State Policy (condemned by the God of mercy and
all merciful men) would wax out of date, and be cast out as abominable to
God, and destructive to mankind: Then their fears and jealousies one of an
other, which puts them in a continual posture of war both offenfive and
defensive would be at an end; their Controversies would be of an other kind,
false and equal Disputes, and it is better and far cheaper to provide words
for Argumentation, then instruments of war for blows and bloodshed and would
conduce I am sure more to the common good and satety the one does increase
knowledge the other nothing but rage and revenge: by reasoning those that are
ignorant would shortly see, how they and their Forefathers have been cheated of
the Tenth of their increase, fooled, and nursed up in blinnesse by Bishops,
Priests, etc. merely to uphold their greatnosse, stuff and cram their ungodly
guts, that it is become a Proverb, as fat as a Bishop, and how soon, if
PERSECUTION be acquitted, it may be verified on the the Presbyters, I leave that
to the issue, only I wish the people to try things themselves, and not trust
too much to their L'ppes, for their Lips are Cozen German to their Teeth,
and this is most certain, they all speak through the Teeth.


Mr. Nation. Loyal. Mr. Foreman, according to the Evidence we have received,
and result of our consultation hitherto, he is guilty ipso facto of what is
laid to his charge; and for mine own part, I know that Toleration is not
against National Loyalty, but may well stand with National peace, as by
diverse ancient and modern Examples I can make it appear, Abraham lived among
the Cannanites and Perizzites, Genesis 13. 7. and 16. 3. again he sojourned in
Egypt, Genesis 12. 10. after in Gerar, where King Abimelech bid him dwell where it
pleased him, cap. 20. and 21. 23. 24. afterward among the Hittites, cap. 23.
Lot lived in Sodom, Iseack also dwelt in Gerar, yet contrary to the King and
his Subjects cap. 20 Jacob lived 20. years with his Uncle Laban in one house,
yet different in Religion, Genesis 31. 30. 33. the Children of Israel lived 430.
years in Egypt, Exodus 12. 40. afterward were carried away to Babylon, where
they remained 70. years, all which times they differed in Religion, yet no
danger to the State: Sampson lived among the Philistimes, Lot in the Land of
Vz, yet their Religion though different was not disturbant to the State: And in
the time of Christ, when Israel was captive to the Romans, lived diverse Sects
of Religions, Herodians, Scribes, and Pharisees, Sadduces and Libertines such as
denied the Resurrection, and Samaritanes the common Religion of the Jews, the
Christian and Apostolic Religion, all which deffered from the common Religion
of the State; which in all probability was the worship of Dima, whom all the
world almost then worshipped, Act. 19. 20. yet all these lived under the
Government of Caesar, not any ways injurious to his Crown and Dignity, or
disturbant to the peace of his Government: but when Persecution arose, then the
State was troubled by tumults, uproares, etc. And how does Toleration injure
the State of Holland, Poland, Trasilvmia, etc. their Weals, States, and
Cities are well and peaceably governed, diverse Religions are in their
Provinces, yet all have one harmony in matters of State, all united and engaged
in the general safety, peace, and tranqillity of their several Kingdoms,
States, and Provinces, wherein they so freely enjoy their soverall safeties,
protection and freedoms.


Mr. Liberty-of-Subject. Mr. Foreman besides what I have received form the
Witnesses, of my own experience I know, that if PERSECVTION be not executed,
the Liberty of the Subject (now in controversy) cannot be settled in this Land;
for the Anbaptists, Brownists, Independants, etc. true and faithful Subjects
to the State, that stood to the public cause, when the Priests and such like
scurrel^^s vermin, durst scarce be seen in it, but Jesuitically carried
themselves in an equal balance betwixt both, that though the King had
conquered, yet most of them would have kept their Benefices, a wise generation!
I say, these more noble spirited men, that freely spend their lives, fortunes,
and estates for the Liberty of the Subject, and that from the most noble and
rational princ^^ple, the Common Good and not for self respect, neither those
of them which suruive, nor the succeders in their faith shall enjoy this
Liberty, their just Birthright, but be wholly deprived thereof, and the
purchase of their Blood be ceased and devour^^d by those Presbyterian
Horse-leeches, and confined to such blood-thirsty Ca^^tle, which is directly
opposite to the just Liberty of the Subject.


Mr. C^^mpas. S^^m. Mr. Foreman, I have beheld the i^nnocency of their
intentions, and ^^ty of their lives, (to wit of Anabaptists, Brownists, etc)
their affections to the Commonwealth, their forwardnes of assistance in purse
and person, kowing their Meetings to be so innocent, so far from confederacy or
counterplots (page 3.) ^^d yet their pers^^ns so hated, contemned, and belyed,
such wounds made upon their consciences, that my heart abounds with grief,
that their misery should be thus passed by, their wounds so wide and deep,
and no oil of mercy powered in: so that me thinks, every man is bound in
conscience, to speak and do what ^^e can in the behalf of such an harmeles
people as these. (pap. 4.) Therefore, Mr. Foreman, being privy to the truth of
the Evidence against PERSECVTION, the sole causer of their wounds and misery,
I conclude him, an enemy against God and all goodness, etc. and that he is
guilty of the Indictment.


Mr. Truth-and-Peace. Mr. Foreman, much I could say against the Prisoner, to
witness the verity of the Indictment, but for brevity sake I shall refer you
to the discovery I have made of his Impiety, Treason, Bloodshed, etc. in that
Book entitled, The Bloody Tenent, and I commend unto you, and to the
necessary perusal of the COMMONNS and nobles of England, that most famous
piece, called, The Compassionate Samaritane, as a most exact model of
rationa^^y.


Mr. Light-of-Nature. Mr. Foreman, whereas Sir Simon in the defense of
PERSECVTION says, that LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE opens a gate to all manner of
profaneness, loosenes^^e, etc. the Light of Nature might teach him, that
Toleration is no Approbation, or the suffering of Religions a warrant to be of
no Religion, much less to public profaneness; for this comes within the
nompasse of that which Nature teaches the most ignorant, therefore within the
reach of public restrain^^, according to the Laws of common mode^^y and
civility, which Nature has written in the hearts of all men naturally: Such
public Transgressions that are uncivil, unnatural, and unbecomeing human
society, is open profaneness and lo^^senesse fall under the restraint, and
correction of the Magestrate, whose power is over the things of Nature, those
being offenses of that kind: As the Majestrate is to maintain the public
peace, and all civil societies therein, so is it preserve public modesty,
comlines, and civillity, that there may be a general comely demeanor as
rational creatures, so their carriage and public demeouours are to be
rational regular, and comely, and not openly licentious, profane, and
blasphenious, contrary to common sense, reason, and humanity.


Mr. Creation. Gentlemen, we have spent much time, and our Uerdict is expected,
and the case is so evident and plain, that I think what is done may suffice,
if you Mr. Orphan, and Mr. Day-of-Judgement be agreed with us in your Verdict,
let us give it in: what say you?


Ambo. We are agreed; guilty, guilty.


Crier. A Verdict: Make way there for the Juri^^.


Judge. PERSECUTION, hold up thy hand* Masters of the Jurie, look upon the
Prisoner, is he guilty of this Treason, Rebellion, Bloodshed, etc. in manner
and form as he stands indicted, or not guilty.


Foreman. GUILTY my Lord.


Judge. PERSECUTION, thou have heard the heinous Accusation; that has been
proved against thee, and the verdict the Jurie have given in upon thee, what
can thou say for thy self, to award the sencence of death (...) passing
against thee?


Pers. My Lord, the Jurie have not dealt honestly in their verdict, wherefore I
appeal from them to the Assembly of Divines, for a trial of their honesty in
this verdict.


Judge. PERSECUTION, indeed thoustand'st need of a Long Clo^^k to cover thy
kn^^verie; but there is no appeal from this Court, they are no Sanctuary of
refuge in this case, neither can I conceive such worthy Gentlemen should
perjure themselves, yet if thou have any thing else to say, to award the
Sentence of death, speak for thy self.


Pers. I thank your Honor, the Lord bless your Honor: My Lord, I am so
terrified in my self at the apprehension of death that I am not in case to
speak for my self: I beseech your Lordship, that Sir Simon may speak in my
behalf.


Sir Sym. My Lord, The enemies of our peace in this matter have dealt very
subtly, and most traytorously against the reverend Assembly of the faithful,
the Clergy, to divide them from your Lordships protection, to destroy and
hinder the work of Reformation, etc. for my Lord, this man here indicted by
the name of PERSECUTION, is none of the man; for here is Mr. National
Conformity, Mr. Pontifical Revenue, Mr. Ecclesiastical Supremacy, Personages
of Honor, and eminency through out whole Christendom, to testify with me,
that this Prisoner has ever endeavored to purge the Church of God, from
Heresy, Soism^^, and all manner of irregular exorbitant courses, and labored
for the peace of the Church, that we may lead, a lazy and an easy life
without God, and the people in the fear of the Clergy. Indeed my Lord, he was
once of the Church of Rome, and thereupon generally branded by the name of
PERSECUTION; but my Lord, for this hundred years and upward he has been of
the true Protestant Religion, even from the time of Luthar, and at this present
en- devoureth with us the the good of the Church in its restitution to
Prelaticall Presbytrie: And upon his separation from Rome with Luthar, he
utterly reno^^nced the nicke-name of PERSECUTION, and though unhappily through
Jesuiticall suggestions and delusio^^s he was too frequent in the Spanish
Inq^^uisition, and of la^^e by Episcopal sophistications intised to offi^^iate
in the High Commission; yet my Lord, he was ever in himself an honest
Reformer, and indeed his true name is Present Reformation, he was borne not
long after the Primative times, but his nature and inclinations by evil
Instruments have been so much abusd, that he had even lost his name, and being
nicke-named when he was yongue, and through long continuance of time, forgot
his name, that indeed he answered a long time to the name of PERSECUTION, but
his true and proper name is Present Reformation, which by Interpretation, is,
Presbyterian Government: Wherefore my Lord, I beseech you, consider the
subtilty of this malignant heretical faction, who have procured the
apprehension and indictment of this Present Reforformation under the odious
name of PERSECUTION, thereby at once to make your Honor both ruin your self,
and the Presbytrie of the Kingdom: therefore my Lord, whether the Jurie have
dealt honestly in their Verdict, your Honor by this may esily discern.


Judge. PERSECUTION, what say thou to this? Is thy name Presen^^ Reformation?


Pers. Yes my Lord, and my name is according to my natural disposition.


Judge. Who gave you that name?


J. Re^^. My Lord, his Godfathers and Godmothers in his Baptism, wherein he
was made a member of the Assembly, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Antichrist.


Judge. His Godfathers, and Godmothers? who are your Godfathers, and your
Godmothers?


Pers. My Lord, Mr. Ecclesiasticall-Supremacy, and Mr. Scot^^-Government are
any Godfathers, Mrs. State-Ambition, and Mrs. Church-Revennue are my
Godmothers, and I was sprinkled into the Assembly of Divines at the taking of
the late solemn League and Covenant.


J. Reas. My Lord, he is at this time Primate and Metr^^pol^^tan^^ over all the
Ecclesiast. Courts of Tyranny in the world, the Spanish Inquisition, the High
Commission, and now our Divince have sprinkled his federall Holiness into
their Assembly, and hereupon changed his name from PERSECUTION, and A(...) him
Present Reformation.


Judge It Is strange, that at the making of the late solemn League and Covenant
boodthirsty PERSECUTION should be Anabaptized Present Reformation; then here is
a Design of blood in the Covenant, if under the name of Reformation the
Clergy have infused the traiterous bloodthirsty spirit of Persecution into it.


J. Human. My Lord, there was never any National or Provincial Synod, but
strengthened the hands of PERSECUTION, and that under the vizor of Religion:


I. Reas. And my Lor^^, Sir Simon, and Sir John's agitation for PERSECUTION, is
on purpose, to save this villain, to cut their throats, that hazard, and spend
their lives and fortunes for Us, and for the State of the Kingdom, such as
have been faithful in the public Service, never tainted with Treason, or
double dealing, though the Kings negotiation with large promises have attempted
it, even such chiefly, as they brand with the names of Anaaptists, Brownists,
etc. those notwithstanding, they would have deprived of the liberty of the
subject, yea of the liberty of their lives; and the sole cause hereof is,
because they labor to inform your L. with rational principles, and are
zealous inquirers into the Gospel, from thence discovering the iniquity of the
pontifical Clergy, and (laboring for the common good) communicate their
understandings to the benefit of others, which proveing prejuditiall to the
wicked ends of the Clergy, they labor with opprobrions names, lies and
slanders to make such odious, the better accomplish their ends, and in this
Design they have played their parts, for should PERSECUTION be put to death,
the whole Clergy fear to be undone, as their exceptions against
LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE did manifest; they are afraid of the mercy of the people,
they cannot endure to serve only for Conscience, their tongues are even with
their bellyes, pin(...) g^^ts, and ^^oyle the Priests, shut your hand; and
there is a general silence, you may be Anabaptist, Brownist, or what you (...),
if the matter be ^^rought to that pass: This is that they fear my Lord,
Therefore, would they have their hands strengthened with PERSECUTION, to prevent
it, let who will perish, if they stand. Moreover, my Lord, those very men which
plead for PERSECUTION, are the same, even this man, Sir John, is the very man,
that in the days of the Bishops complained; and contested against PERSECUTION,
used all possible means to be delivered out of his Episeopall Paws,
endeavored to cast him out of the High Commission; but as soon as those
underling Divines are from under their Episcopal Taskmasters, and beginning
to encroach upon your Lordships power, presently take this notorious bloody
Traitor, PERSECUTION, stripped by your Lordship of his High Commission habit,
and out of their zeal dress him in a divine Synedicall garb, and chang his
name from PERSECUTION, and christian him Reformation; so to engage your Lordship,
and the Kingdoms of England and Scotland in blood, to settle and establish
bloody Persecution by Covenant over the Cons^^iences of honest and faithful
men unto the State, under the specious and godly pretense of Reformation, as
Mr. Edwards one of their Champions manifests, who is so impudent, as to assert,
that your Lordship is bound to compel all men to the Decrees of the Synod,
(ascribing to them, as the Papists to the Pope,) an infallible unerring spirit,
and openly proclaims, that Toleration of such honest faithful Subjects, as
Anabaptists, Brownists, Independants, Antinomians, etc. to be in direct
opposition to the Covenant, and though before they might have been lawfully
tole are yet now they cannot under breach of the Covenant: Consider My Lord, is
not this Jesuiticall subtilty, most desperate and secret delusion, that by this
Covenant they would engage your Lordship, either to be a Covenant breaker, or
else intringe the Liberty of the Subject entrusted by the Common people in your
hands, one of these is inavoydable, and yet all under the color of
Reformation, the true Protestant Religion, the cause of God, and I know not
what; in nomine Domini perpetrant onine malum; so that it is most certain,
that this fellow, whose name Sir Simon feigneth to be Reformation, is absolute
PERSECUTION, so that had these Reformers but as much power as Queen Maryes
Clergy, their Reformation would conclude in fire and faggot.


Judge. oh insufferable Assembly! I see it is dangerous for a State to pin their
faith upon the sleive of the Clergy.


J. Reas. Further my Lord, whereas others are impoverished, spend their
estates, engage and loose their lives in this Quarrel, they are enriched, and
advanced by it, save their purses and persons, cram and fill their greedy guts
too filthy to be carried to a Bear, heap up wealth to themselves, and give not
a penny, while others (against whom they exclaim) venture and expend all, yea
my Lord, this great go bellied Idol, called the Assembly of Divines, is not
ashamed in this time of State necessity, to guzle up and devour daily more at
an ordinary meal, then would make a Feast for Bell and the Dragon, for besides
all their fat Benefices, forsooth they must have their four shillings a ^ceco
by the day, for litting in constollidation; and poor men when they had filled
all Benefices with good Trencher men of their own Presbyterean Tribe, they
move your Lordship, that all Ministers may be wholly freed from all manner of
Taxations, that now the Trade of a Presbyter is the best Trade in England, all
are taxed, and it goes free; poor men that have not bread to still the cry of
their children, must either pay or go in person to the wars, while those
devouring Church-lubbers live at case, feed on dainties neither pay nor go
themselves but preach out our very hearts, they make it a case of conscience to
give all, but wise men the'l give hope: let the sick, the lame and maimed
Soldiers, and those that that have lost their limbs, and begin the streets,
let women that have lost their husbands, let parents that have lost their
children, let children that have lost their parents, and let all that have or
suffer oppression and misery, in and for the public cause consider this, and
be no longer riden and jayded by Clergy Masters; but to give the Devil his
due, one thing to their commendations I have observed, that they are so
zealoussy affected with the honor of their cloth, that 'twere pity to
diiroable them of their Casloke garb to be led in a string from Westminister
to Allgate in Leatherne Jackets, and Mattokes on their shoulders; and my Lord,
though some think they would do the State more good in Leatheren Jackets and
Mattokes then in long Cloakes and Cassockes, yet me thinks, they would do the
State better service with their Canonical Girdles, were the knot tied in the
right place.


Judge. Sir Simon, we convocated the Assembly to consult with about matters of
Religion, not arrogating to our selves, or ascribing to them a Spirit of
infallability, considering that we are but Parliament men, not Gods, therefore
we made trial of their advice, but for them hereupon to arogate Supremacy over
the State and people, lay claim to an unerring spirit and persuade us, (as
Edwards in his Autipol. says) that we take it for granted, that the
conclusions of their Debates, Controversies, and Consulations are according to
the mind of Christ, because We called them together, and hereupon to compel all
men to their Decrees, is most impudent presumption, and popish arrogance; We
did not suppress the High Commission, to subject Our Selves to an Assembly,
race out Episcopal to set up Presbyterian Prelacy, for what more Prelaticall,
what more exorbitant then such presumption, it is a mere Monopole of the Spirit
Sir Simon: you have so played the Jesuits, as it seems, We have only put down
the men, not the Function; caught the shadow, and let go the substance: while
We were supprossing Primates, Metrapolitanes, Archbishops, Bishops,
Ecclesiasicall Courts, Canons, Injunctions, Decrees, etc. you have so subtly
carried the business, as it seems, Primacy, Metrapolitanisme, Prclacy, etc.
shrunk into the Presbytry, and our High Commission turned into an Assembly of
Divines; We out of Our good intentions cast out this Evil Spirit thence, and
it entered it seems, into these Swine, who thus headlong run upon their own
destruction, (the Divellbath brough his hogs to a fair Market) arrogating an
infallability, and a supremacy over Us, and the people, condemning PERSECUTION,
when they were persecuted, but commending and approving it, if they may
pesecute: Truly Sir Synton, you have out run the Constable, your ambition is a
little too swift for your policy: What breath out threatenings, menaces, and
persecutions openly, before you have power to persecuted sure you were not in
your wits; when they were vented.


J. Human. My Lord, they have set even till they are run mad, you might do well
to adjorne them to Bedlam; for my Lord, they are raging mad; to have the
innocent blood of the Anabaptists, Browni^^s, Independants, etc.


J. Reas. My Lord, they have over studdied themselves, and cracked their wits
in finding out a Religion for us; poor men they have been mightily puzzled
about it, it has cost them the consumption of many fat Pigge, Chicken, capon,
etc. the infusion of many a cup of sack, to bring it to birth, and after such
dalerous pangs, and bitter throws for almost these two years, who would have
though, they should be delivered of such a ridiculous vermin, called, a
Presbyter; parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus: And now my Lord, after
this mountanous delivery, they are at their wits end, what dressing to put it
out in, all the Taylours in the Kingdom are not able to content them, what to
do they know not, and now the matters worse then ever it was, they had thought
to have shown the world it in the godly shape of Reformation, but upon
examination, it is found to be PERSECUTION, a sad event! there is no way now,
but Bedlam for our Doctors, it may chance to chastize them into their wits
again, and then upon their second thoughts, it may be, they will bethink
themselves, to put a Blew Bonnet upon it, and then 'twill pass from England to
Scotland, and from Scotland to England again without Question or control.


Indge. Sir Simon, Weblesse God, that has put it into the hearts of those
honest godly people, (though publicly despised and hated) those faithful
friends and lovers of the Parliament and Kingdom, whom you nicke-name
Anabaptists, Brownists, Independants, etc. to discover and detect unto us the
Jesuitical and Traiterous Designs of the Synod with the hazard of their
Liberties and for ought they know of their lives and fortunes; for should they
not ventured themselves in the discovery of such a subtle generation, We
should have been kept ignorant through their zealous pretenses and had there
been a mountain more of their villainy, it seems they would have covered it
with a veil of tears, Fastings, affected prayers, and the like, from Our
discerning.


J. (...) It is an approved truth, that such as are called Anabaptists,
Brownists etc. have in all Ages ventured, yea given up their lives, to inform
Kings, Kingdoms, Parliaments, and States in things that concern their peace,
and the glory of God, which ubough condemned at first, afterward have proved
no other; yea such as your Lordships Predecessors have condemned by peuall
Laws, Statutes, etc. which now your Lordship through the mercy of God find
otherwise, and it is we that reap the benefit of their blood in the
suppression of Episcopal Inrisdiction, High Commission, etc. not they; for
their sufferings, and their testimony have detected and informed us of their
unlawfulness, it being their custom my Lord, to wear out the Mysteric of
Iniquity with their blood: And now my Lord, we that have received vantage by
their bitter sufferings, shall we boast our selves against them? it were
ungrtitude to God, and inhumanity to them.


Judge. True: We find by daily experience, that the Seperates are not such as
ground their Religion on self ends, for like Salamanders in the fire, they
live in the heat of Persecution, they spare not their lives, to witness the
innocende of their Cause, the fire of Persecution cannot consume, but endames
them toward their God and the Truth; the menacing of Kings and Governors, and
cruelties of their greatest Adversaries hinders not their testimony; this we
find, when ever they are convented before Us, even to our astoneshment; and we
further find, it is not their own good alone that they aim at, but the
general good of all men, that all (one as well as an other) may lead an honest
and a quiet life under Our Protection, and We have to our benefit) found the
blessing of God upon their endeavors, as the hopeful and glorious success in
the Conquest of York, which envy and malice it self cannot deny, was
instrumentally atcheived by their valor and sidelity: Wherefore in justice to
their uprightness, and faithfulness to that trust reposed in Us for the public
Good; the Liberty and property of the Subject, We may not deny them the benefit
of Subjects, but as they are faithful parties in the general venture, so to
be heriditatory to the general purchase, having as just a Right thereto by the
price of their blood as Our Selves, for that which is purchased by blood, all
the purchasers have an equal right to the thing purchased.


J. Reas. My Lord, but our Dessembly Doctors teach otherwise, yet I think if
your Lordship should settle Anabaptistrie or the like, even that which they now
persecuts and threaten, preach and pray against, and forewarne the people off,
as heretical and damnable, provided you should endow it with goodly fat
Benefices, and sanctify it with the hallowed Ordinance for Tithes, Offerings,
Oblations, etc. questionless the generallity of those Persecutiones of
Anabaptists would have the wit to turn Anabaptists, for their Religion is
moved upon the Wheel of the State; when the State was for Bishops, then they
were for Bishops, and were very Canonical Surplisse men, Altar bowers, and the
like, and the precisest sort those that are now our most zealous Presbyters)
did then so comply and conform to Episcopal superstition, as they kept their
Benefices, (except here and there one of the honoster sort,) while the honest
Separate (counting nothing too dear for his God) did openly resist and
witness against it, even to imprisonments, deprivation of goods, etc. But our
temporizing Doctors, our State Protestant Ministers are not so simple to swime
against the stream, they are wiser in their generation, for they know most
wealth goes that way, as long as your Ordnance is laden with Tithes, Offerings
and Oblations, they will be sure to give fire; but should the State deprive their
Religion of all Ecclesiastical Revenue, of Parsonages, Tithes, etc. yea,
should it be this very Presbyterid they so aim at, that they should so
impoverish, certainly we should have more Parishes then Presbyters, more
Steeples then Doctors; then they would no be so hot for Presbytry, so zealous
to persecute its opposers, I would your Lordship would make trial, call in but
your Ordinance for Tithes, and turn them to the good will of people, and then
-- a tyth Pigge will be sold for a penny.


Judge. Well notwithstanding the Doctrine and subtilty our Divines we cannot
deal so unworthely with those honest men, but must by the grace of God being
by them better informed, proceed to Sentence against this Malefacture according
to the just Verdict of the Jurie.


PERSECUTION falls upon his knees.
Pers. Good my Lord, have mercy upon me, I beseech your Houour even for the
Clergies sake, have mercy upon me; consider my Lord, that in my death is their
ruin, it will be the greatest in road upon the Divines of Christendom, that
ever was made. Oh!

I beseech you my Lord, by the Mystery of their holy Convocation, by their
agony, and bloody sweat, by their Cross and Passion at my shameful
approaching death and burial, Good Lord deliver me.

By their glorious Resurrection, and Ascension from the Pulpit above the State:
By the coming of the Holy Ghost to them in Cloak Bag from Scotland, Good
Lord deliver me.

By the late solemn League and Covenant: By the 400. and 50. l. for the Copy
of their Directory: By all the fat Benefices, and goodly Revenues of the
Clergy, Good Lord deliver me.

By the Apocripha writings and nonsense Arguments of Mr. Edwards: By the
distracted thoughts and subitaine apprehensions of Mr. Prinne: By the Designs
of the Clergy: By their fained tears: By their hypocrisy: By their false
Glosses, Interpretations, and Sophistications, Good Lord deliver me.

By the Advance of the mickle Army into the South: By the late innocent and
undefiled Ordinance for Tithes: By all that is near and dear unto the
Clergy, the pomp and glory of this world, Good Lord deliver me.


Judge. PERSECUTION, what would thou have? here is no place of mercy for
thee, the Vengance of God cannot be dispensed with, thou art not in the High
Commission, nor before the Assembly, this is a Court where justice must take
place.


Pers. Oh my Lord, I beseech your Lordship for the mercy of this honorable
Bench: My Lord, I am a Clergy man, and beseech your Honor for the benefit of
my Clergy: I have been of all the Universities of Christendom, have taken all
their Degrees, proceeded through all Ecclesiastical Orders and Functions, and
my Lord, at present am under the Holy Order of Presbytrie, and I hope a
Presbyter shall find favor in your eyes: Wherefore I beseeth you my Lord, that
I may have the benefit of Degration.


Judge. PERSECUTION, be contented, you shall be sent to the place of
Degradation.


Pers. Oh Good my Lord, let not a Presbyter come to so shameful an end, I
beseech this Honorable Bench, that I may be repreeved but as long as the Synod
and Presbytrie endure.


Judge. No PERSECUTION, such is thy Treason, Rebllion, etc. as cannot be
dispensd with.


Pers. Oh my Lord, a psalm of mercy, I besoech your Honor, a psalm of mercy.


Judge. No PERSECUTION, no; prepare to hear thy Sentence.

Hereupon this ensuinge Letter was privately conveyed to Justice Conformity.


To the right worshipful Justice Conformity, all blessing and benedictition
from his Holiness Sir SIMON, and his Son Sir JOHN.
Right worshipful,
Tese are to adjure you, as you will Answer it before US, at the great and
dreadful DAY of OUR Classical exaltation above all persons in the Kingdom,
that you forthwith solicit my Lord, to suspend his Sentence but till the
advance of the mickle Army into the South, for then we fear not the
procurement of his plenary pardon; and for your encouragement herein last night
my Son Jacke and I went into our Presbyterian warehouse, and have taken a list
of all the Instruments of torture and torment already prepared for our Design:
to wit, triple knotty corded whips, Gagges, Pillories, Stocks, Sharp Knifes,
Pincers, hot burning Irons, Halters, Gallows, Gybbets, Rackes, Spits,
Fine-forkes, Gridirons, Axes, Sawes Fleshhookes, firery Furnaces, hot Ovens,
boiling Caldrons, Fire and Faggot close Prisons, dark and noisome Dungeons,
Fetters, Manaeles, all in abundance, most bloody and cruel Executioners,
terrible and Divilish Tormentours as, Presbyterian Hangmen, Goalers, etc.
besides multitudes of Synodean Tyranies newly invented, not yet discovered to
the people, such as never either by Pope, Bishop, on their adherents were
devised: and though we have prepared those Divelish Instruments, yet we shall
not be so indiscreet, to rush them in all on a sudden; no, we shall observe
the temper of the people, the course of times, make a graduall progression, now
a little, and then a little, and always a most godly and holy pretense to
usher in a damnable and wicked designs if in the paysing a business we find
it so he avy, that neither Synod, Devil, nor Presbyter can lift, we'll suspend
the matter, and insensibly prepare the people for the entertainment thereof,
which by our vainglorious fasting, hypocritical tears, prayres, and
suphisticall Serimans we shall easily do: And for your further encouragement
understand; there are of certain, from a late Consistory of Devils dispatched
seven foul Spirits a pecce for every Presbyter throughout England, to attend
them in their Parochial Jurisdiction; so that a Presbyter shall be seven
times worse then a Bishop, for it is intended, he shall be more fearce and
cruel then his follows, therefore Woe, Woe unto those Anabaptists, Brownists,
etc. those cursed Heretics, for those presbyterian Feinds expect but the word
of command, to dovoure them up: But Mr William, all this will come to nothing,
if this Prisoner be put to death, you see those Sectaries have had such
freedom of speech that my Son Jacke and I can do no good; now, there being
not such a considerable person in this County as your self to prevail, WE
therefore charge you, as your hope to be a Judge, fail not at this dead lift
for your Ears; indeed he is in your debt, but he vows by your fiat justitia,
that if you prevail, he will provide you a pair of better and longer, then ever
you had: Hereof fail not, and we shall not be backward to answer your deserts,
when, WE and the parliament, shall be Commenced by.

Your entire Friends, Sir SIMON SYNOD, and Sir JOHN PRESBYTER.

J. Conformity. My Lord, were your Lordship but rightly informed concerning
this Prisoner under the name of Mr. PERSECUTION, what he is, and from whence he
came, your Honor would less wonder at his several ^^ations and dilatory
pleaes, to award the Sentence of death, for were he guilty, what would not a
man do for his life? skin for skin, and all that a i^ (...) will be give for
his life, but such is his innocence, that the proceedings against him have been
altogether upon false grounds; for whereas by the Evidence he is asserted to be
born soon after the time of Innocence, and by them ^^andeth charged with all
the Innocent blood spilt upon the whole earth: I shall by your Lordships favor
upon good grounds make it appear, to be otherwise, for my Lord, this prisoner
is not yet above an 100. years of age, being borne in Geneva, of very good
Lutheran and Calvenish parentage, about the year 1544. where he was very well
educated and instructed both in the Tongues and Liberal Sciences; and upon a
certain time going to Sea, he was by a great wind raised by Belg^bub the
Prince of Devils blown into Scotland: And being so near us, forth of his
zeal and pious affection to reform the Church of the Eiscopall Prelacy to
Presbyterian, he occasioned the rising of the Scots as one man to oppose that
power, against which ever since he has contested, and he lately advanced with
their mickle Army to the Leagure before York, and for all this, he received
many an affront by Gronewels scismaticall Brigade, and from thence taking his
joyrney through Derby, Stafford, Coventry, and Cambridge, where performing much
good service he came to London, since whose coming, old Grand Mr. PERSECUTION
charged in the Indict^^ent and convicted by the Jurie, was happily and timely
executed upon Tower Hill, by all which it appeareah, that the Witnesses that
have given in Testimony against this prisoner, the Gentleman at the Bu^, have
greatly abused him, your Lordship, and the Jurie, he not being the person
charged, and consequently innocent of the crimes laid to his charge, he being
Indeed as real an adversary to Old Mr. PERSECUTION, as any Gentleman of this
whole County; hereof if your Lordship make any doubt, I beseech you; that a
Farrier may be called into the Court, who may make a perfect discovery to your
Lordship of his age, by opening his mouth and vewing his Teeth, whose yongue,
small, Presbyterean Pegges have no proportion betwixt the Great Twangs, and
Boarish Tuskes of Old Mr. PERSECUTION: And besides this my Lord, to testisie
what I have said, to be anthenticke, there are hand reds (...) the mickle
Army, whose absence have occasioned this his inability to justify and clear
himself, but if your Lordship please but to adjcu^^e the business but till
their mickle Advance into the South, the matter shall be made clear unto your
Honor, for then we make no question to awe and crush those Heretical false
witnesses, and advance Presbytry to its super Prelaticall Throne of CLASSICAL
SUPREMACY, and though at first it be but jure H(...)no, a little five and
faggot will quickly Commence it jure divino.


J. Reass. My Lord, I am much afraid of a Conspiracy betwixt Sir Simon, and
Sir John Presbyter with Justice Confomity, whom like an Ignora^us they have
persuaded into their Combination, how to delude your Lordship, thereby to
deliver PERSECUTION from the justice of this Court; You may easily perceave,
how they would pinch your Lordships Nose with a pair of Scotch-Spectacles, and
fix a pair of long Synodian Ears unto your Lordships head, that your
Lordship might see nothing but Blew Caps, hear nothing but Synodian Thunder;
but I hope your Honor is thoroughly sensible hereof; yet least your Lordships
Innocence, and honest endeavoures for the general and equal Rights and
Liberties of the Common People, should be circumvented and perverted by their
policy, I shall (hoping my plain dealing merely (I call God to witness) out
of unfeigned love unto your Honor, and the common Good of all the Common
People shall not be recompensed with your High Displeasure) present the cunning
insu^^uations and subtle fictions of Justas Conformity in their true shape;
for whereas he says, that this presont Prisoner is not the person indicted,
and convicted of Treason, Rebellion, etc this being but a yong^^e man, the
other very old, I can assure your Lordship, that he is herein merely delusive,
for the man is the very same, only through the advice of Sir JOHN he has made
use of a Presbyterian Barber, who has shaven from his head, his old deformed
Tresses, cropped of his hair above the ears after the half moon fashion,
taught him the Presbyterian posture of his eyes, plaistered up the wrinkles of
his bended brow with Scotch mortar, whereby he has acquired a more smooth
Synodian countenance, but in a small time if he be let alone, he will be as
terrible and frightfull as ever; for his pretty small Pegges that he speaks
off, your L. is therein misinformed; for the Farrier that rearched his mouth,
was a Presbytere^^ Horse Doctor, prepared on purpose by yongue Sir JOHN for
that very end, who discovered to your (...) only the upper part of his fore
teeth, whereas were his mouth but searched by an Independent Farrier, he would
discover besides those in the hinder part of his Classical Jaws, his Great
Iron Fangs, as great and terrible as those spoaken of by Daniell, cap. 7. 7.
And as for the good service Justice Conformity mentioned, that be performed in
his Road from Scatland to London, It was so good, that the Prisoners there
care for no more of his goodness for if he mumble us thus with his yongue
small Presbyterian Pegges, what bloody massacrie, what cruel crushing of
bones, rending, tearing and devouring of flesh, must we expect, if your
Lordship permit him the use of his dreadful devouring Tuskes, his huge
monsterous iron Fangs, but I hope your Lordship will first grant him the favor
of an Independent Tooth-drawer, and then we shall not greatly fear his
Gun^^es: And concerning the Mickle Army, my Lord, you may perceive how they
would bind your hands from the execution of justice by the force of Arms, as
though the wisdom of this Court were to be inslaved to such sinister
respects; my Lord, it is highly dere^atory to your Honor, and here are
sufficient English Evidence, to prove this old seducer, to be PERSECUTION
himself, as has been manifest before your Honor; let not the people be thus
deprived of justice, they did not in choosing your Lordship to this place,
wherein you are, intend the making of themselves slaves in any the least kind,
to Synods, Sir John's, force of arms, or the like, or to put themselves at so
vast a distance, as to make their addresses to you, as to some Dietie, but in
their choosing of you, authorized and entrusted you, to vindicate and preserve
their native and just Liberties in general, yea, and common to them with your
self: therefore you cannot without betraying this Trust, by any coersive power
subject any of their consciences, persons, or estates to any Ecolesiasticall
Jurisdiction whatsoever: And now seeing this vile person at the Bar has been
legally indicted, araigned, and convicted, and thereby found an Arch enemio and
Traitor to the peoples common Liberty and Safety, Judgment and Execution
ought forthwith to pass upon him accordingly, that this Hypocritical Pharisie,
this blood-thirsty Catiffe, this Long Gown'd M(...)ntebanke with his spiritual
delusions may no longer cheat the world, as he has done.


Hereupon the Court proceeds to Judgment.

Judge. Make Proclamation.


Crier. O -- yes, every man keep silence etc.


Judge. With much patience this Coure has heard the several, pleaes betwixt
PERSECUTION, and LIBERTY-OF-CONSCIENCE u^^sd on both sides; having seriously
weighed the same in the Balance of equity, has found PERSECUTION and his
Abettours with all their Pleas too light, even mere subtle, alrie, and empty
delusions: It is therefore the Sentence of this Court concerning Sir Simon, and
Sir John Presbyter, who have thus Iesuitically endeavored to pervert the
justice of this Court by their false, their subtle, and Traiterous su^^stions
in the behalf of this notorious bloody Malefactor PERSECUTION, that Sir SIMON
be committed close Prisoner to King Henry the eigh^^s Chapel, there to be
kept in Parliamentory safe custody, till the GREAT ASSIZES, held in the first
year of the REIGN of our Sovereign Lord CHRIST, (when the Kingdom, and the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the Saints of
the most High) there, and then to be Araigned with the rest of his Holy Tribe,
whether Universal, National, Provincial, or Consistoriall Counsels, or
Synods whatsoever, before his Highness the KING OF KINGS, and LORD OF LORDS.


I. Reas. And my Lord, in the mean time to keep his Holiness in action, I
beseech, your Honor, that he may Synodicate a full Resolution to these enfuing
Queries.

1. Whether it does not as much conduce to the Subjects Liberty still to be
subjected to Episcopal usurpation, as to be given over to Presbyterian cruelty?

2. Whether it would not been more profitable for the Kingdom of England, to
have forthwith hired a Coach and twelve Horses to have set a Directory from
Scotland, then to have spent the learned consultations, pi^us debates, and
sacred conclusions of such an holy, such a reverend, such an heavenly, such a
godly, such a learned, such a pious, such a grave, such a wise, such a sollid,
such a discreet, such a spiritual, such an evangellicall, such an infallible,
such a venerable, such a super-celestiall Quire of Angels, such a superlative
Assembly of Divines for almost these two years space, after the prosuse and
vast expense of above forty thousand pounds, besides their goodly fat
Benefices, upon their devouring Guts, for an English DIRECTORY of worship
equivolent to the Scotch DIRECTORY?

3. Whether this Directory standing in so many thousands to fumble it together,
and the Copy sold at 400. and 50. l. be not of more value then the Writings of
the Prophets and Apostles?

4 Whether St. Peter's Chair does not becomme a Presbyter, as well as a Bishop?

5. Whether the late divine Ordinance for Tithes, Offerings, Oblations, and
Conventions be not better Gospel, and in all Presbyterian wisdom to be
preferred and provided before the Directory for the worship of God?

O Cives, Cives, quaerenda pecunia primum,
Virtus post nummos.

Judge. And as for Sir JOHN PRESBYTER, this Court has Voted him to the
unclean, filthy, impious, unholy, dark, and wordly Dungeon, called, JURE
HUMANO, there with Archbishops, Bishops, etc. the Grand-Presbyters, his
Forefathers, to be fast bound with the Majesteriall Chains of human Laws,
Ordinances, Edicts, etc. and in them to be kept in safe custody till the
aforesaid great Assizes; in the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Christ, there,
and then to be brought forth to the Trial of that Great and terrible DAY. Now
to the Prisoner.

PERSECUTION, hold up thy hand: Thou have been Indicted, and Araigned of
emnity against God and all goodness, of Treasons, Rebellion, Bloodshed, etc. and
for thy trial have put thy self upon thy Country, which Country have found
thee guilty, and to award the Sentence of death, from passing upon thee, thou
have had the liberty this Court in justice could permit, to make thy defense:
we have heard thine allegations, evasions, the the Reasons and Pleaes of thy
Defendants, to whom was given all freedom of Defense could be desired, also We
have heard the distracted jubitaine mediation of J. Conformity in thy behalf,
yet notwithstanding all that can be made for thee, thy guilt is so palpably
apparent and gross, that all the subtilety, craft, and policy thou and thy
Confederates can devise, cannot obscure thee from the eye of justice: for this
Court upon thy trial, has found out thy villainy, Treason, and Bloodshed, and
how thou art guilty of all that is laid to thy charge: Therefore the Sentence
of this Court is, that thou shall return to the place from whence thou came,
to wit, the noisome, and filthy CAGE of every unclean and hateful Bird, the
GLERGIE of Christendom, there to be fast bound with Inquisition, Synaddicall,
Classical, Preist-bitter-all Chains until the Appearing of that Great and
terrible Judge of the whole Earth, who shall take thee alive, with Sir SIMON,
and his Son Sir JOHN, and east thee with them and their Confederates into the
LAKE of fire and brimstone, where the Beast and the False Prophet are, there to
be cormented day and night for ever, and ever.

Rev. 19. 1. 2. 3. And after these things I heard a great voice of much people
in Heaven, saying, Allelujah: salvation and glory, honor and power, unto the
Lord our God:

For true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the Great Where,
which did corrupt (...) Earth with her Fornication, and avenged the blood of
his servants at her band. Again they said, Allelujah: And her smoke rose up for
ever and ever.


The POSTSCRIPT.
Least the honest innocent intentions of Yong^e MARTIN should receive some
Synoddicall misconstruction, he desires to be his own Interpreter concerning
some passages, and for the rest he leaves so the fate of the public censure.
Now whereas his License may seem to be an immitation of an Order of Parliament,
it is only to show the estentation, pride, and vain glory of the boasting
Presbyters. And whereas he ascribes many Epithites, as, divine, holy etc. to
the Ordinance for Tithes, they are not intended in derision to the Parliament,
or to any of their Laws, Statutes, or Ordinances whatsoever, but are used in
the fence of Presbyterian acceptance, and of the reverend estimation they
would persuade us of that above any other whatsoever. And the use of the late
League and Covenant, is likewise only in the Presbyterian sense, simply
respecting that Tribe, according to Edwards Inerpretation thereof. Honest
MARTIN would not be mistaken, he is no enemy to the unity of the two Kingdoms
in Civil League and peace, but it is his hearts desire and prayres, that not
only they, but that all the Nations of the Earth were so in themselves and one
with another. And for the Advance of the Scots, that is used, only to show, how
those Presbyterian Jesuits would make that, which the two Kingdoms intend for
the common good, to be perveted only to the Advance of their persecuting
Faction: And this MARTIN proclaims to be his own genuine meaning.

FINIS.

