A REVIEW of the true Nature of SCHISM, WITH A Vindication of the
Congregationall Churches in England, from the imputation thereof Unjustly
charged on them by Mr D. Cawdrey, Preacher of the Word at BILLING in
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.

By JOHN OWEN D. D.

(...).

2 Timothy 2. 24. (...):

Tit. 1. 7. OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for THOMAS
ROBINSON. M. DC. LVII.

Christian Reader.
IT is now about three weeks since, that there was sent unto me, a book
entitled, independency a great schism; as the frontispeece farther promises,
undertaken to be managed against something written by me, in a treatise about
the true nature of schism, published about a year ago; with an addition of a
charge of inconstancy in opinion, upon my self: of the one, and the other, the
ensueing discourse will give a farther and full account. Coming unto my hands
at such a season, wherein, as it is known, I was pressed with more then
ordinary occasions of sundry sorts, I thought to have deferred the examination
of it, until farther leisure might be obtained, supposing that some fair
advantage would be administered by it, to a farther Christian debate, of that
discovery of truth, and tender of peace, which in my Treatise I had made.
Engaging into a cursory perusal of it, I found the Reverend Authors design,
and discourse, to be of that Tendency, and nature, as did not require, nor
would admit of any such delay: His manifold mistakes in apprehending the
intention of my Treatise and of the severalls of it His open presumption of his
own principles, as the sourse and spring of what pretends to be argumentative
in his discourse, arbitrarily inferring from them, without the least attempt of
proof, whatever tenders its assistance to cast reproach on them with whom he
has to do, his neglect in providing a defense for himself by any principles
not easily turned upon him, against the same charge which he is pleased to
manage against me: His avowed laying the foundation of his whole fabric, in
the sand of notoriously false suppositions, quickly delivered me from the
thoughts of any necessity to delay the consideration of what he tendered to make
good the Title of his discourse. The open and manifest injury done, not only to
my self, in laying things to my charge which I know not, lading me with
reproaches, tending to a rendering of me odious to all the ministers and
Churches in the world, not agreeing with me in somefew things concerning
Gospel administrations, but also to all other Churches and persons of the same
judgment with my self, called for a speedy account of the true state of the
things contended about.

Thou have therefore here Christian Reader the product (through the grace of
him who supplyeth seed to the sower) of the spare hours of four or five
days, in which space of time this ensuing discourse was begun and finished:
Expect not therefore any thing from it, but what is necessary for the
refutation of the book, whereunto it is opposed; and as to that end and
purpose, I leave it to thy strictest judgment. Only I shall desire thee to take
notice, that having kept my self to a bare defense, I have resolvedly forborne
all recharge on the Presbyterian way, either as to the whole of it, whence by
way of distinction it is so called, or as to the differences in judgment and
practice of them who profess that way, among themselves, which at this day,
both in this and the neighbor nation, are more and greater, then any that our
Author has as yet been able to find amongst them whom he does principally
oppose. As the ensuing sheets were almost wrought of at the press, there came
to my hand a Vindication of that eminent servant of God* Mr John Cotton, from
the unjust imputations and charge of the Reverend person with whom I have now
to do, written by himself not long before his death; The opportunity of
publishing that discourse, with the ensueing, being then lost, I thought meet
to let the Reader know, that a short season will furnish him with it. Farewell,
and love, truth, and peace.

Ch: Ch: Coll: OXON: July: 9. 1657.
A VINDICATION OF THE TREATISE about the true nature of SCHISM. etc.
CHAP. 1.
THe present State of things in the Christian world, will on a slight
consideration yield this account of controversies in Religion; that when they
are driven to such an issue, as by foreign coincidences to be re^dered the
interest of parties at variance, there is not any great success to be obtained
by a mannagement of the^, though with never so much evidence and conviction of
truth. An answering of the profession that is on us, by a good and lawful
means, the paying of that homage and tribute we owe to the truth, the tendering
of assistance to the safe-guarding of some weaker professors thereof, from the
sophismes and violence of adversaries, is the most that in such a posture of
things, the most sober writers of Controversies can well aim at.

The winning over of men to the truth we seek to maintain, where they have
been preingaged in an opposition unto it, without the alteration of the
outward state of things, whence their engagements have insensibly sprung and
risen, is not ordinarily to be expected. How far I was from any such thoughts
in the composing and publishing my Treatise of the nature of Schism, I
declared in sundry passages in the treatise its self. Though the thing
contended about, whatsoever is pretended to the contrary, will not be found
amongst the most important heads of our Religion, yet knowing how far on
sundry accounts the stated, fixed interest of several sorts of men, ingageth
them to abide by the principles they own in reference thereunto* I was so
far from hoping to see speedily any visible fruits of the efficacy of the
truth I had managed, that I promised my self a vigorous opposition, until
some urgent providence, or time, altering the frame of men's spirits should make
way for its acceptance. Freely I left it in the hand of him, whose truth, I
have good security I had in weakness maintained, to dispose of it with its
issues and events at his pleasure. I confess knowing several parties to be
concerned in an opposition to it, I was not well able to conjecture from what
hand the first assault of it would arise. Probability cast it on them, who
looked on themselves in the nearest proximitie of advantage by the common
notion of Schism opposed. The truth is, I did apprehend my self not justly
chargeable with want of charity, if I thought that opposition would arise from
some other principles, than mere zeal for a supposed truth, and therefore
took my aim in conjecturing at the prejudices that men might fear themselves
and interests obnoxious unto by a reception and establishment of that notion of
Schism, which I had asserted. Men's contentedness to make use of their
quietness in reference to Popery, Socinianism, Arminianism, daily vented
amongst us, unless it were in some declamatory expressions against their
Toleration, which cost no more than they are worth, if shaken off by a speedy
engagement against my treatise, confirmed such thoughts in me. After therefore
it had passed in the world for some season, and had found acceptance with many
learned and godly persons, reports began to be raised about a design for the
refutation of it; that so it should be dealt withal I heard was judged
necessary at sundry conventions; what particular hand it was likely the task
would fall upon, judging my self not concerned to know, I did not enquire.
When I was informed how the disposal of the business did succeed, as I was
not at all surprised in reference to the party in general from which it did
issue, so I did relieve my self under my fears, and loathing to be engaged in
these contests by these ensuing considerations. 1. That I was fully persuaded
that what I had written was for the substance of it the truth of God, and being
concerned in it only on truths account, If it could be demonstrated that the
sentence I had asserted, was an unlawful pretender thereunto, I should be
delivered from paying any further respect or service to that, whereunto none at
all was due. 2. That in the treatise its self so threatened, I had laid in
provision against all contending about Words, Expressions, collateral
Assertions, deductions, positions, all and every thing, though true, that might
be separated from the life or substance of the notion, or truth pleaded for. 3.
That whereas the whole weight of the little pile turned on one single hing, and
that visible and co^spicuous, capable of an ocular demonstration, as to its
confirmation or refutation, I promised my self that any man who should
undertake the demolishing of it, would be so far from passing that by, and
setting himself to the superstruction, that subsists in its single strength
and vigor, that indeed finding that one thing necessary for him, he would
solely attempt that, and therein rest. This I knew was evident to any
considering person that should but view the treatise, that if that foundation
were cast down, the whole superstructure would fall with its own weight: but
if left standing, an hundred thousand volumes against the rest of the treatise
could not in the least prejudice the cause undertaken to be managed in it. Men
might indeed by such attempts manifest my weakness and want of skill, in
making inferences and deductions from principles of Truth, wherein I am not
concerned, but the truth its self contended for, would still abide untouched.

4. Having expressly waved man's day, and judgment, I promised my self security
from a disturbance by urging against me the authority of any, of old or late;
supposing that from the eviction of their several interests, I had emancipated
my my self from all subjection to their bare judgments in this cause. 5.
Whereas I had confined my self to a bare defensative of some, not intending to
cast others from the place, which in their own apprehensions they do enjoy,
(unless it was the Roman party) I had some expectations that peace-loving
godly men, would not be troubled that an apparent immunity from a crime was
without their prejudice or disadvantage manifested in behalf of their
brethren, nor much pain themselves to reinforce the charge accounted for. So
that the bare notion of Schism, and the nature of it abstracted from the
consideration of persons, would come under debate. Indeed I questioned whether
in that friendly composure of affections, which for sundry years has been
carrying on between sober and godly men of the Presbyterian and
Congregationall judgment, any person of real godliness would interest
himself to blow the coal of dissension, and engage in new exasperations. I
confess I always thought the plea of Cicero for Ligarius against Tubero most
unreasonable; namely, that if he had told (as he calls it) an honest and
merciful lie in his behalf, yet it was not the part of a man to refell it,
especially of one who was accused of the same crime: but yet I must needs say,
a prompt readiness to follow most questionable accusations against honest
defe^satives, from good men unjustly accused by others of the same crime, I did
not expect. I added this also in my thoughts, that the facility of tendering a
discourse to the purpose, on the business under consideration, was obviated by
its being led out of the common rode, wherein common place supplies would be of
little use to any that should undertake it: not once suspecting that any man of
learning and judgment would make a return unto it out of vulgar discourses
about ministers calling, Church government or the like. How far these and the
like considerations might be a releife unto my thoughts, in my fears of
further controversiall engagements, having the pressure of more business upon
me than any one man I know of my Calling in the whole nation, I leave it to the
judgment of them who love truth and peace. But what little confidence I ought in
the present posture of the minds of men, to have placed in any or all of them,
the discourse under Consideration has instructed me: That any one thing has
fallen out according to my expectations and conjectures, but only its being a
product of the men, of the persuasion owned therein, I am yet to seek. The
truth is I cannot blame my Adversary viis et modis to make good the opposition
he is engaged in; it concerns him and his advisers beyond their interest in
the appearing skirts of this Controversy. Perhaps also an adjudged necessity of
indeavoring a disreputation to my person and writings, was one ingredient in
the undertaking. If so, the whole frame was to be carried on by correspondent
medium's. But let the principles and motives to this discourse be what they
will, it is now made public, there being a warmer zeal acting therein, then in
carrying on some other things, expected from the same hand.

To what may seem of importance in it, I shall with all* possible plainness
give a return. Had the Reverend Author of it thought good, to have kept within
the bounds, by me fixed, and heartily debated the notion proposed, abstracting
from the provocations of particular applications, I should most willingly have
taken pains for a further clearing and manifesting of the truth contended
about.

But the whole discourse wherewith I have now to do, is of another complexion,
and the design of it, of another tendency; yea so managed sometimes, that I
am ready to question whether it be the product and fruit of his spirit whose
name it bears: for though he be an utter stranger to me, yet I have received
such a character of him, as would raise me to an expectation of any thing from
him, rather then such a discourse.

The Reader will be able to perceive an account of these thoughts in the
ensuing view of his Treatise.

1. I am without any provocation intended, and I hope given, reviled from one
end of it to the other; and called, partly in down right terms, partly by
oblique intimations, whose reflections are not to be waved, Satan, Atheist;
Sceptick, Donatist, Heretic, Schismaticke, Sectarie, Pharisee, etc. and the
closure of the Book is merely an attempt to blast my reputation, whereof I
shall give a speedy account.

2. The professed design of the whole is to prove Independency, as he is
pleased to call it, which what it is, he declares not, nor (as he mannages the
business) do I know, to be a great Schism, and that Independents, (by whom it
is full well known whom he intends) are Schismatics, Sectaries, the troublers
of England. So that it were happy for the Nation, if they were out of it; or
discovering sanguinary thoughts in reference unto them; and these kinds of
discourses fill up the book, almost from one end to the other.

3. No Christian care does seem to have been taken, nor good conscience
exercised from the beginning to the ending, as to imputation of any thing unto
me, or upon me, that may serve to help on the design in hand.

Hence I think it is repeated near an hundred times, that I deny their
Ministers to be Ministers, and their Churches to be Churches, that I deny all
the reformed Churches in the world, but only our own (as he calls them) to be
true Churches, all which is notoriously untrue, contrary to my known
judgment, professedly declared on all occasions, contrary to express
affirmations in the book he undertakes to confute, and the whole design of
the book its self. I cannot easily declare my surprizall on this account.
What am I to expect from others, when such Reverend men as this Author, shall
by the power of prejudice be carried beyond all bounds of moderation, and
Christian tenderness in offending? I no way doubt but that Satan has his
design in this whole business. He knows how apt we are to fix on such
provocations, and to contribute thereupon to the increase of our differences.
Can he according to the course of things in the world, expect any other issue,
but that in the necessary defensative I am put upon, I should not wave such
reflections and retortions on him, and them with whom I have to do, as present
themselves with as fair pleas, and pretenses unto me, as it is possible for me
to judge, that the charges before mentioned (I mean of Schism, Heresy, and
the like) did unto him. For as to a return of any thing in its own nature
false and untrue, as to matter of fact, to meet with that of the like kind
wherewith I am entertained, I suppose the Devil himself was hopeless to
obtain it. Is he not filled with envy to take notice in what love without
dissimulation I walk with many of the Presbyterian judgment? What Christian
intercourse, and communion I have with them in England, Scotland, Holland,
France, fearing that it may tend to the furtherance of peace and union among
the Churches of Christ? God assisting I shall deceive his expectations, and
though I be called Schismatic, and Heretic a thousand times, it shall not
weaken my love or esteem, of, or toward any of the godly Ministers, or people
of that way and judgment with whom I am acquainted, or have occasion of
converse.

And for this Reverend Author himself, I shall not fail to pray, that none of
the things, whereby he has, I fear, administered advantage unto Satan to
attempt the exasperations of the spirits of Brethren one against another, may
ever be laid to his charge. For my own part I profess in all sincerity, that
such was my unhappiness, or rather happiness in the constant converse which
in sundry places I have with Persons of the Presbyterian judgment, both of the
English and Scottish Nation, utterly of another frame of spirit, then that
which is now showed, that until I saw this treatise, I did not believe that
there had remained in any one godly, sober, judicious person in England, such
thoughts of heart in reference to our present differences, as are visible and
legible therein: Tantaene animis coelestibus irae?


I hope the Reverend Author will not be offended, if I make bold to tell him,
that it will be no joy of heart to him one day, that he has taken pains to
cast oil on those flames, which it is every ones duty to labor to extinguish.

But that the whole matter in difference may be the better stated and
determined, I shall first pass through with the general concernments of the
book it self, and then consider the several Chapters of it, as to any
particulars in them that may seem to relate to the business in hand. It may
possibly not a little conduce toward the removal of those obstructions unto
peace and love, laid in our way by this Reverend Author, and to a clearer
stating of the controversy* pretended to be ventilated in his discourse, to
discover and lay aside those mistakes of his, which being interwoven with the
main discourse from the beginning to the end, seem as principles to animate
the whole, and to give it that life of trouble, whereof it is partaker. Some of
them were, as absolutely considered, remarked before; I shall now renew the
mention of them, with respect to that influence which they have into the
Argumentative part of the Treatise under consideration.

1. First then it is strenuously supposed all along, that I deny all, or any
Churches in England, to be true Churches of Christ, except only the Churches
gathered in the Congregationall way, and upon their principles: then that I
deny all the reformed Churches beyond the Seas to be true Churches of Christ.
This supposition being laid, as the foundation of the whole building, a
confutation of my treatise is fixed thereon, a comparison is instituted
between the Donatists and my self: Arguments are produced to prove their
Churches to be true Churches, and their Ministers true Ministers. The charge of
Schism on this bottom is freely given out and asserted, the proof of my
Schismatic separation from hence deduced, and many terms of reproach are
returned as a suitable reply to the provocation of this opinion. How great a
portion of a small treatise may easily be taken up with discourses relating to
these heads, is easy to apprehend. Now lest all this pains should be found to
be useless, and causlesly undergone, let us consider how the Reverend Author
proves this to be my judgment. Does he evince it from any thing delivered in
that treatise he undertakes to confute? does he produce any other testimonies
out of what I have spoken, delivered, or written else where, and on other
occasions to make it good? This I suppose he thought not of, but took it for
granted, that either I was of that judgment, or it was fit I should be so, that
the difference between us might be as great, as he desired to have it appear
to be.

Well to put an end to this controversy, seeing he would not believe, what I
told the world of my thoughts herein in my book of Schism, I now inform him
again, that all these surmises are fond and untrue. And truly for his own sake
with that respect which is due to the reputation of Religion, I here humbly
entreat him not to entertain what is here affirmed with un-Christian surmizes,
which the Apostle reckons amongst the works of the fiesh, as though I were of
another mind but durst not declare it, as more then on^^ in some particulars he
insinuates the state of things with me to be. But blessed be the God of my
salvation, and of all my deliverances, I have yet liberty to declare the whole
of my judgment in and about the things of his worship. Blessed be God, it is
not as yet in the power of some men to bring in that their conceited happiness
into England, which would in their thoughts accrue unto it, by my removal from
my native soil, with all others of my judgment and persuasion. We are yet at
peace, and we trust that the Lord will deliver us from the hands of men, whose
tender mercies are cruel. However be it known unto them that if it be the will
of the Lord upon our manifold provocations to give us up to their disposal,
who are pleased to compass us with the ornaments of reproaches before
mentioned, that so we might fall as a sacrifice to rage or violence, we shall
through his assistance and presence with us, dare to profess the whole of that
truth, and those ways of his, which he has been pleased to revea^ unto us.

And if on any other account this Reverend person suppose I may foster opinions
and thoughts of mine own and their ways which I dare not own, let him at any
time give me a command to wait upon him, and as I will freely and heartily
answer to any enquiries he shall be pleased to make after my judgment, and
apprehensions of these things, so he shall find that (God assisting) I dare
own, and will be ready to maintain what I shall so deliver to him. It is a
sufficient evidence that this reverend Author is an utter stranger to me, or he
would scarce entertain such surmizes of me as he does. Shall I call in
witnesses as to the particular under consideration? one evidence by way of
instance lies so near at hand, that I cannot omit the producing of it: not
above 14 days before this treatise came to my hands, a learned Gentleman whom
I had prevailed withal to answer in the Vespers of our Act, sent me his
Questions by a Doctor of the Presbyterian judgment, a friend of his, and mine.
The first Question was, as I remember, to this purpose: Utru^ ministri
Ecclesiae Anglicanae habeant validam ordinationem; I told the Doctor, that
since the Questions were to pass under my approbation, I must needs confess
my self scrupled at the limitation of the subject of the Question in that
term Ecclesia Anglicana, which would be found ambiguous and aequivocall in the
disputation; and therefore desired that he would rather supply it with
Ecclesiarum reformatarum, or some other expression of like importance, but as
to the thing it self aimed at, namely the assertion of the ministry of the
Godly ministers in England, I told him and so now do the Reverend Author of
this treatise, that I shall as willingly engage in the defense of it, with the
lawfulness of their Churches, as any man what ever. I have only in my treatise
questioned the institution of a national Church, which this Author does not
undertake to maintain, nor indeed has the least reason so to do, for the
asserting of true ministers and Churches in England; I mean those of the
Presbyterian way. What satisfaction now this Reverend Author shall judge it
necessary for him to give me, for the public injury which voluntarily he has
done me, in particular for his attempt to expose me to the censure and
displeasure of so many godly ministers and Churches as I own in England, as a
person denying their ministry, and Church station, I leave it to himself to
consider. And by the declaration of this mistake how great a part of his book
is waved as to my concernments therein, himsefe full well knows.

A second principle of like importance which he is pleased to make use of, as a
thing granted by me, or at least which he assumes, as that which ought so to
be, is that what ever the Presbyterian ministers and Churches be, I have
separated from them, as have done all those whom he calls Independants. This is
another fountain out of which much bitter water flows. Hence we must needs be
thought to condemn their ministry and Churches. The Brownists were our
fathers, and the Anabaptists are our elder Brothers, we make an harlot of our
mother, and are Schismatics and Sectaries from one end of the book to the
other. Quod erat demonstrandum. But does not this Reverend Author know that
this is wholly denied by us? Is it not disproved sufficiently in that very
Treatise which he undertakes to answer?

He grants, I suppose, that the separation he blames, must respect some union
of Christ's institution: for any other, we profess our selves unconcerned in
its maintenance, or dissolution, as to the business in hand. Now wherein have
we separated from them as to the breach of any such union? For an individual
person to change from the constant participation of ordinances in one
congregation, to do so in another, barely considered in its self, this
Reverend Author holds to be no separation. However for my part, who am forced
to bear all this wrath and storm, what has he to lay to my charge? I
condemn not their Churches in general, to be no Churches, nor any one that I
am acquainted withal in particular. I never disturbed, that I know of, the
peace of any one of them, nor separated from them; but having already received
my punishment, I expect to hear my crime by the next return.

3. He supposes throughout that I deny not only the necessity of a successive
ordination, but as far as I can understand him, the lawfulness of it also.
By ordination of Ministers many upon a mistake understand only the imposition
of hands that is used therein. Ordination of Ministers is one thing, and
imposition of hands another, differing as whole and part; Ordination in
Scripture compriseth the whole Authoritative translation of a man from among
the number of his brethren into the state of an officer in the Church. I
suppose he does not think that this is denied by me, though he tells me with
the same Christian candor, and tenderness, which he exercises in every
passage almost of his book, of making my self a Minister, and I know not
what; I am, I bless the Lord, extremely remote from returning him any of his
own coin in satisfaction for this Love. For that part of it which consists in
the imposition of hands by the Presbytery, (where it may be obtained according
to the mind of Christ.) I am also very remote from mannaging any opposition
unto it. I think it necessary by virtue of precept, and that to be continued
in a way of succession. It is, I say, according to the mind of Christ, that he
who is to be ordained unto office in any Church, receive imposition of hands
from the Elders of that Church, if there be any therein. And this is to be done
in a way of succession, that so the Churches may be perpetuated. That alone
which I oppose is the denying of this successive ordination, through the
Authority of Antichrist. Before the blessed and glorious Reformation, begun and
carried on by Zuinglius, Luther, Calvin, and others, there were, and had been
two States of men in the world, professing the name of Christ, and the Gospel,
as to the outward profession thereof. The one of them in glory, splendour,
outward beauty, and order, calling themselves the Church, the only Church in
the world, the Catholic Church; being indeed, and in truth in that state
wherein they so prided themselves the mother of harlots, the beast, with his
false Prophet. The other party poor, despised, persecuted, generally esteemed
and called Heretics, Schismatics, or as occasion gave advantage for their
farther reproach, Waldenses, Albigenses, Lollards, and the like. As to the
claim of a successive ordination down from the Apostles, I made bold to
affirm, that I could not understand the validity of that successive
ordination, as successive, which was derived down unto us from, and by the
first party of men in the world.

This Reverend Authors reply hereunto, is like the rest of his discourse, page
118. He tells me, this casts dirt in the face of their Ministry, as do all their
good friends the Sectaries, and that he has much a do to forbear saying, The
Lord rebuke thee. How he does forbear it, having so expressed the frame of his
heart toward me, others will judge: the searcher of all hearts knows, that I
had no design to cast dirt on him, or any other godly man's ministry in
England. Might not another answer have been returned without this wrath: This
is so, or it is not so, in reference to the ministry of this Nation. If it be
not so, and they plead not their successive ordination from Rome, there is an
end of this difference. If it be so, can Mr. C. hardly refrain from calling a
man Satan, for speaking the truth? It is well if we know of what spirit we are.

But let us a little farther consider his answer in that place. He asks
first, Why may not this be a sufficient foundation for their Ministry, as well
as for their Baptism? if it be so, and be so acknowledged, whence is that
great provocation that arose from my enquiry after it: For my part I must tell
him, that I judge their Baptism good and valid, but to deal clearly with him,
not on that foundation. I cannot believe, that that Idolater, murderer, man of
sin, had, since the days of his open Idolatry, persecution, and enmity to
Christ, any authority more or less from the Lord Jesus committed to him, in or
over his Churches. But he adds, secondly, That had they received their
ordination from the woman flying into the wilderness, the two witnesses, or
Waldenses, it had been all one to me, and my party; for they had not their
ordination from the people (except some extraordinary cases) but from a
Presbytery, according to the institution of Christ. So then, ordination by a
Presbytery, Is it seems opposed by me and my party; but I pray Sir, who told
you so? when, wherein, by what means have I opposed it? I acknowledge my self
of no party. I am sorry so grave a Minister should suffer himself to be thus
transported, that every answer, every reply, must be a reflection, and that
without due observation of truth and love. That-those first reformers had their
Ordination from the people, is acknowledged; I have formerly evinced it by
undeniable testimony. So that the proper succession of a Ministry amongst the
Churches that are their offspring, runs up no higher than that rise. Now the
good Lord bless them in their Ministry, and the successive ordination they
enjoy, to bring forth more fruit in the earth to the praise of his glorious
grace. But upon my disclaiming all thoughts of rejecting the ministry of all
those, who yet hold their ordination on the account of its successive
derivation from Rome, he cries out, egregiam vero laudem, and says that yet I
secretly derive their pedigree from Rome: well then he does not so; why then,
what need these exclamations? we are as to this matter wholly agreed; nor shall
I at present farther pursue his discourse in that place, it is almost totally
composed and made up of scornful revilings, reflections, and such other
ingredients of the whole.

He frequently and very positively affirms without the least hesitation, that I
have renounced my own ordination, and adds hereunto, that what ever else they
pretend, unless they renounce their ordination, nothing will please me. that I
condemn all other Churches in the world as no Churches; but who I pray told him
these things? did he enquire so far after my mind in them, as without breach of
charity to be able to make such positive and express assertions concerning
them? A good part of his book is taken up in the repetition of such things as
these, drawing inferences and conclusions from the suppositions of them, and
warming himself by them into a great contempt of my self and party, as he
calls them. I am now necessitated to tell him, that all these things are false,
and utterly, in part and in whole untrue, and that he is not able to prove any
one of them. And whether this kind of dealing becomes a minister of the
Gospel, a person professing Godliness, I leave it to himself to judge. For
my own part I must confess that as yet I was never so dealt withal by any
man, of what party soever, although it has been my unhappiness to provoke
many of them. I do not doubt but that he will be both troubled and ashamed when
he shall review these things. That whole Chapter, which he entitles,
Independentisme is Donatisme, as to his application of it unto me, or any of my
persuasion, is of the same importance, as I have sufficiently already evinced.
I might instance in sundry other particulars, wherein he ventures without the
least check or supposition, to charge me with what he pleases, that may serve
the turn in hand; so that it may serve to bring in, he and his party are
Schismatics, are Sectaries, have separated from the church of God, are the
cause of all our evils and troubles, with the like terms of reproach, and
hard censures, lying in a fair subserviency to a design of widening the
difference between us, and mutually exasperating the spirits of men, professing
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, one against another, nothing almost comes amiss.
His sticking upon by matters, diverting from the maine business in hand,
answering Arguments by reflections, and the like, might also be remarked. One
thing wherein he much rejoices, and fronts his book with the discovery he has
made of it, namely concerning my change of judgment as to the difference under
present debate, which is the substance and design of his appendix, must be
particularly considered, and shall be, God assisting, in the next Chapter
accordingly.

CHAP. 2.
An Answer to the Appendix of Mr. C^. Charge.
THough perhaps impartial men will be willing to give me an acquitment from
the charge of altering my judgment in the matters of our present difference,
upon the general account of the copartnership with me of the most inquiring
men in this generation, as to things of no less importance; and though I might
against this reverend brother and others of the same mind and persuasion with
him, at present relieve my self sufficiently by a recrimination, in reference
to their former Episcopal engagements, and sundry practices in the worship of
God them attending, pleading in the mean time the general issue of changing
from error to truth, (which that I have done as to any change I have really
made, I am ready at any time to mainetaine to this Author) yet it being so much
insisted upon by him as it is, and the charge thereof in the instance given,
accompanied with so many evil surmisings, and uncharitable reflections,
looking like the fruits of another principle then that whereby we ought in the
mannagement of our differences to be ruled, I shall give a more particular
account of that, which has yielded him this great advantage. The sole instance
insisted on by him, is a small treatise published long ago by me, entitled,
The duty of Pastors and People distinguished; wherein I profess my self to be
of the Presbyterian judgment. Excerpta out of that treatise, with
animadversions and comparisons thereon, make up the appendix, which was judged
necessary to be added to the book, to help on with the proof that Independency
is a great schism: had it not been indeed needful to cause the person to
suffer, as well as the thing, some suppose this pains might have been spared.
But I am not to prescribe to any, what way it is meet for them to proceed in,
for the compassing of their ends aimed at. The best is, here is no new thing
produced, but what the world has long since taken notice of, and made of it
the worst they can. Neither am I troubled that I have a necessity laid upon me
to give an account of this whole matter. That little treatise was written by me
in the year 1643, and then printed, however it received the addition of a
year in the date affixed to it by the printers, which for their own advantage
is a thing usual with them. I was then a young man my self, about the age of
26. or 27. years. The controversy between Independencie and Presbytery was
young also; nor indeed by me clearly understood, especially as stated on the
Congregationall side. The conceptions delivered in the treatise were not (as
appears in the issue) suited to the opinion of the one party, nor of the
other; but were such as occurred to mine own naked consideration of things,
with relation to some differences that were then upheld in the place where I
lived, only being unacquainted with the Congregationall way, I professed my
self to own the other party, not knowing but that my principles were suited
to their judgment and profession; having looked very little further into those
affairs, then I was led by an opposition to Episcopacy and Ceremonies. Upon a
review of what I had the^ asserted, I found that my principles were far more
suited to what is the judgment and practice of the congregationall men, then
those of the Presbiterian. Only whereas I had not received any farther clear
information in these ways of the worship of God, which since I have been
engaged in, as was said, I professed my self of the Presbyterian judgment, in
opposition to Democraticall confusion; and indeed so I do still; and so do all
the congregationall men in England, that I am acquainted withal* so that when
I compare what then I wrote with my present judgment, I am scarce able to find
the least difference between the one and the other; only a misapplication of
names and things by me, gives countenance to this charge. Indeed not long
after, I set my self seriously to enquire into the controversies then warmly
agitated in these nations. Of the congregationall way I was not acquainted with
any one person, minister or other; nor had I to my knowledge seen any more then
one in my life. My acquaintance lay wholly with ministers, and people of the
Presbyterian way. But sundry books being published on either side, I perused,
and compared them with the Scripture, and one another, according as I received
ability from God. After a general view of them, as was my manner in other
controverses, I fixed on one to take under peculiar consideration, and
examination, which seemed most methodically, and strongly to maintain that
which was contrary as I thought to my present persuasion. This was Mr. Cotton's
book of the keys. The examination and confutation hereof, merely for my own
particular satisfaction, with what diligence, and sincerity I was able, I
engaged in. What progress I made in that undertaking, I can manifest unto any,
by the discourses on that subject, and animadversions on that book yet abiding
by me. In the pursuit and management of this work, quite besides, and contrary
to my expectation, at a time, and season wherein I could expect nothing on that
account but ruin in this world, without the knowledge or advice of, or
conference with any one person of that judgment, I was prevailed on to receive
that and those principles, which I had thought to have set my self in an
opposition unto. And indeed this way of impartial examining all things by the
word, comparing causes with causes, and things with things, laying aside all
prejudicate respects unto persons, or present Traditions, is a course that I
would admonish all to beware of, who would avoid the danger of being made
independents. I cannot indeed deny, but that it is possible I was advantaged in
the disquisition of the truth I had in hand, from my former embracing of the
principles laid down in the treatise insisted on; now being by this means
settled in the Truth, which I am ready to maintain to this Reverend and learned
Auhor, if he, or any other suppose they have any advantage hereby against me,
as to my reputation, which alone is sought in such attempts as this: or if I am
blameably liable to the charge of inconstancy, and inconsistency with my own
principles, which he thought meet to front his book withal, hereupon I shall
not labor to divest him of his apprehension, having abundant cause to rejoice
in the rich grace of a merciful and tender father, that men seeking occasion
to speak evil of so poor a worm, tossed up and down in the midst of
innumerable temptations, I should be found to fix on that, which I know will be
found my rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus.

I am necessitated to add somewhat also to a surmise of this Reverend man, in
reference to my Episcopal compliances in former days, and strict observation
of their canons. This indeed I should not have taken notice of, but that I find
others besides this Author pleasing themselves with this apprehension, and
endeavoring an advantage against the truth I profess thereby. How little some
of my Adversaries are like to gain, by branding this as a crime is known; and
I profess I know not the Conscience, that is exercised in this matter. But to
deliver them once for all from involving themselves in the like unchristian
procedure hereafter, let them now know what they might easily have known
before; namely, that this accusation is false, a plain calumny, a ly. As I was
bred up from my infancy under the care of my father, who was a nonconformist
all his days, and a painful labourer in the vineyard of the Lord; so ever
since I came to have any distinct knowledge of the things belonging to the
worship of God, I have been fixed in judgment against that which I am
calumniated withal; which is notoriously known to all that have had any
acquaintance with me; what advantage this kind of proceeding is like to bring
to his own soul, or the cause which he mannageth, I leave to himself to
judge.

Thus in general; to take a view of some particular passages in the Appendix
destined to this good work; the first Section tries with much wit and
Rhetoric to improve the pretended alteration of judgment to the blemishing of
my Reputation; affirming it to be from truth to error; which as to my
particular, so far as it shall appear I am co^cern'd, (I am little moved
with the bare affirmation of men, especially if induced to it by their
interest. I desire him to let me know when and where, I may personally wait
upon him, to be convinced of it: in the mean time so much for that Section: in
the second, he declares what my judgment was in that treatise about the
distance between Pastors and People, and of the extremes that some men on each
hand run into: and I now tell him, that I am of the same mind still, so that
that note has little availed him. In the third he relates what I delivered,
that a man not solemnly called to the office of the Ministry by any outward
call, might do as to the preaching of the Gospel in a collapsed Church State.
unto this he makes sundry objections; that my discourse is dark, not clear,
and the like; but remembering that his business was not to confute that
treatise also, but to prove from it my inconstancy, and inconsistencie with my
self: he says, I am changed from what I then delivered: this is denied, I am
punctually of the same judgment still: but he proves the contrary by a double
argument. 1. Because I have renounced my ordination. 2. Because I think now,
that not only in a complete Church State, but when no such thing can be
charged, that gifts and consent of the people is enough to make a man a
Preacher in office; both untrue and false in fact. I profess I am astonished,
to think with what frame of spirit, what neglect of all rules of truth and
love this business is managed. In the fourth Section, He charge me to have
delivered somewhat in that treatise about the personal indwelling of the Holy
Ghost in believers, and my words to that purpose are quoted at large. What
then? am I changed in this also? no, but that is an error in the judgment of
all that be orthodox: but that is not the business in hand, but the Alteration
of my judgment; wherefore he makes a kind of exposition upon my words in that
treatise, to show that I was not then of the mind that I have now delivered my
self to be of, in my book of Schism; but I could easily answer the weakness
of his exceptions, and pretended expositions of my former assertions, and
evidence my consistency in judgment with my self in this business ever since;
but this he says is an error which he gathered out of my book of Schism; and
some body has sent him word from Oxford that I preached the same doctrine at
St. Mary's. I wish his informer had never more deceived him; it is most true I
have done so, and since printed at large what then I delivered, with sundry
additions thereunto; and if this Reverend Author shall think good to examine
what I have published on that account, (not in the way in this treatise
proceeded in, which in due time will be abhorred of himself and all good men,
but with candor, and a spirit of Christian ingenuity and meekness,) I shall
acknowledge my self obliged to him; and in the mean time I desire him to be
cautious of large expressions, concerning all the Orthodox, to oppose that
opinion, seeing evidences of the contrary lie at hand in great plenty: and let
him learn from hence how little his insulting in his book on this account is
to be valued. Sec. the 5. he shows that I then proved the name of priests not
to be proper, or to be ascribed to the ministers of the Gospel; but that now
(as is supposed in scorn) I call the ministers of their particular
congregations parochial priests; untrue! In the description of the Prelaticall
Church I showed what they esteemed and called parish ministers amongst them. I
never called the Presbyterian ministers of particular Congregations parochial
priests. Love truth and peace; these things ought not thus to be. Sec. the 6.
He labors to find some difference in the tendency of several expressions in
that treatise, which is not at all to the purpose in hand, nor true as will
appear to any that shall read the treatise it self. In the 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
Sec: He takes here and there a sentence out of the treatise and examins it,
interlacing his discourse with untrue reflections, surmizes and
prognostications: and in particular p. the 238 and 239. But what does all this
avail him in reference to his design in hand? not only before, but even since
his exceptions to the things then delivered, I am of the same mind that I was,
without the least alteration. And in the viewing of what I had then asserted, I
find nothing strange to me, but the sad discovery of what frame of spirit the
charge proceeded from. Sec. 12. does the whole work; there I acknowledge my
self to be of the Presbyterian judgment, and not of the Independent or
congregationall. Had this Reverend Author thought meet to have confined his
charge to this one quotation, he had prevented much evil that spreads it self
over the rest of his discourse, and yet have attained the utmost of what he can
hope for, from the whole; and hereof I have already given an account. But he
will yet proceed, and Sec. 13. inform his Reader that, in that Treatise I
aver, that two things are required in a teacher, as to formal ministerial
teaching. 1. Gifts from God, 2 Authority from the Church: well! what then? I am
of the same mind still: but now I cry down ordination by Presbytery, what, and
is not this a great alteration and sign of inconstancy. Truly, Sir, there is
more need of humiliation in your self, then triumphing against me; for the
assertion is most untrue, and your charge altogether groundless; which I
desire you would be satisfied in, and not to be led any more by evil surmises,
to wrong me, and your own soul. He adds sect. 14. two cautions, which in
that treatise I give to private Christians in the exercise of their gifts, and
closes the last of them with a Juvenile Epiphonema, divinely spoken, and like
a true Presbyterian: and yet there is not one word in either of these cautions
that I do not still own and allow; which confirms the unhappiness of the
charge. Of all that is substantial in any thing that follows, I affirm the
same, as to all that which is gone before. Only as to the liberty to be
allowed unto them which meet in private, who cannot in conscience join in the
Celebration of public ordinances, as they are performed amongst us, I confess
my self to be otherwise minded at present, than the words there quoted by this
Author do express. But this is nothing to the difference between Presbytery
and independency: and he that can glory, that in 14. years, he has not
altered or improved in his conception of some things, of no greater importance
then that mentioned, shall not have me for his rival. And this is the sum of
M^. C. Appendix; the discourse whereof being carried on with such a temper of
spirit as it is, and suited to the advantage aimed at, by so many evil
surmises, false suggestions, and uncharitable reflections, I am persuaded the
taking of that pains, will one day be no joy of heart unto him.

CHAP. 3.
A Review of the chargers Preface.
HIs first chapter consists for the most part, in a repetition of my words, or
so much of the discourse of my first Chapter as he could wrest, by cutting off
one, and another parcel of it from its coherence in the whole, with the
interposure of glosses of his own, to serve him to make biting reflections upon
them with whom he has to deal. How unbecoming such a course of procedure is,
for a person of his worth, gravity and profession, perhaps his (...), have by
this time convinced him. If men have a mind to perpetuate controversies unto an
endless, fruitless reciprocation of words and cavils, if to provoke to easy
and facile retorsions, if to heighten and aggravate differences beyond any hope
of reconciliation, they may do well to deal after this manner with the writings
of one another. Mr. C. knows how easy it were to make his own words, dress
him up in all those ornaments wherein he labors to make me appear in the
world, by such glosses, inversions, additions, and interpositions, as heis
pleased to make use of; but meliora speramus. Some particulars that seem to be
of any importance to our business in hand, may be remarked as we pass through
it: page 1. He tells us the Donatists had two principles: 1. that they were the
only Church of Christ in a corner of Africa, and left no Church in the world
but their own. 2. That none were truly baptized, or entered members of the
Church of Christ, but by some Minister of their party. These Principles, he
says, are again improved by men of another party: whom though yet he name
not, yet it is evident whom he intends: and page: 3. he requires my judgment of
those principles.

Because I would not willingly be wanting in any thing that may tend to his
satisfaction, though I have some reason to conjecture at my unhappiness in
respect of the event: I shall with all integrity give him my thoughts of the
principles expressed above.

1. Then, if they were considered in reference to the Donatists who owned them,
I say they were wicked, corrupt, erroneous principles, tending to the
disturbance of the communion of Saints, and everting all the rules of love,
that our Lord Jesus Christ has given to his disciples, and servants to
observe: if he intend my judgment of them in reference to the Churches of
England, which he calls independent, I am sorry that he should think he has
any reason to make this inquiry. I know not that man in the world who is less
concerned in obteining Countenance to those principles then I am. Let them who
are so ready on all occasions or provocations to cast abroad the solemn forms
of reproach, Schismatics, Sectaries, Heretics, and the like, search their
own hearts, as to a conformity of spirit unto these principles. It is not what
men say, but what men do, that they shall be judged by. As the Donatists were
not the first who in story were charged with Schism, no more was their Schism
confined to Africa. The agreement of multitudes in any principles, makes it in
its self not one whit better, and in effect worse. For my part I acknowledge
the Churches in England, Scotland and France, Helvetia, the netherlands,
Germany, Greece, Muscovia, etc. as far as I know of them, to be true Churches;
such for ought I know may be in Italy or Spain; and what pretense or color
this Reverend person has to fix a contrary persuasion upon me, with so many
odious imputations and reflections, of being one of the Restorers of all lost
Churches, and the like, I profess I know not. These things will not be peace
in the latter end; shall the sword devour for ever? I dare not suppose that he
will ask why then do I separate from them? he has read my book of Schism,
wherein I have undeniably proved, that I have separated from none of them, and
I am loath to say, though I fear before the close of my discourse I shall be
compelled to it, that this Reverend Author has answered a matter before he
understood it, and confuted a book, whose maine and chief design he did not
once apprehend. The rest of this chapter is composed of reflections upon me
from my own words wrested at his pleasure, and added to according to the
purpose in hand, and the taking for granted unto that end that they are in the
right, we in the wrong, that their Churches are true churches, and yet not
esteemed so by me, that we have separated from those churches, with such like
easy suppositions. He is troubled that I thought the mutual chargings of each
other with Schism, between the Presbyterians, and Independents was as to its
heat abated and ready to vanish: wherein he has invincibly compelled me to
acknowledge my mistake; and I assure him I am heartily sorry that I was
mistaken, it will not be some bodies joy one day that I was so. He seems to be
offended with my notion of Schism, because if it be true, it will carry it
almost out of the world, and bless the churches with everlasting peace. He
tells me that a learned Dr. said my book was one great Schism, I hope that is
but one Drs. opinion; because being nonsense it is not fit it should be
entertained by many. In the process of his discourse he culls out sundry
passages deliverd by me in reference to the great divisions and differences,
that are in the world among men professing the name of Christ, and applies them
to the difference between the Presbyterians and Independents, with many notable
lashes in his way; when they were very little in my thoughts, nor are the
things spoken by me in any tolerable measure applicable to them. I suppose no
rational man will expect, that I should follow our Reverend Author in such
ways and paths as these; it were easy in so doing to enter into an endless
maze of words, to little purpose, and I have no mind to deal with him as he
has done by me, I like not the copy so well as to write by it; so his first
chapter is discussed, and forgiven.

CHAP. 4.
Of the nature of schism.
THe second Chapter of my book, whose examination this Author undertakes in
the second of his, containing the foundation of many inferences that ensue, and
in particular of that description of Schism which he intends to oppose, it
might have been expected, that he should not have culled out passages at his
pleasure to descant upon, but either have transcribed the whole, or at least
under one view have laid down clearly what I proposed to confirmation, that
the state of the controversy being rightly formed, all might understand, what
we say, and whereof we do affirm: but he thought better of another way of
procedure, which I am now bound to allow him in; the reason whereof he knows,
and other men may conjecture.

The first words he fixes on are the first of the Chapter. The thing whereof we
treat being a disorder in the instituted worship of God; whereunto he replies,
It is an ill sign or omen, to stumble at the threshold in going out: these
words are ambiguous, and may have a double sense, either that schism is to be
found in matter of instituted worship only, or only in the differences made
in the time of celebrating instituted worship, and neither of these is yet
true, or yet proved, and so a mere begging of the thing in question: for says
he, Schism may be in, and about other matter besides instituted worship.

What measure I am to expect for the future from this entrance or beginning, is
not hard to conjecture. The truth is, the Reverend Author understood me not at
all, in what I affirmed: I say not, that Schism in the Church is either about
instituted worship, or only in the time of worship, but that the thing I treat
of, is a disorder in the instituted worship of God, and so it is, if the being,
and constitution of any Church be a part of God's worship: but when men are
given to disputing, they think it incumbent on them to question every word and
expression, that may possibly give them an advantage: but we must, now we are
engaged, take all in good part as it comes. Having nextly granted my request of
standing to the sole determination of Scripture in the controversy about the
nature of schism: he insists on the Scripture use and notion of the word,
according to what I had proposed: only in the metaphorical sense of the word,
as applied unto civil and political bodies, he endeavors to make it appear,
that it does not only denote the difference and division that falls among them
in judgment, but their secession also into parties; which though he proves not
from any of the instances produced, yet because he may not trouble himself any
further in the like kind of needless labor; I do here inform him that if he
suppose that I deny that to be a Schism, where there is a separation, and that
because there is a separation, as though schism were in its whole nature
exclusive of all separation, and lost its being when separation ensued, he has
taken my mind as rightly, as he has done the whole design of my book, and my
sense in his first animadversions on this Chapter. But yet because this is not
proved, I shall desire him not to make use of it for the future as though it
were so. The first place urged is that of John 7. 43. There was a schism among
the people: it is not pretended that here was any separation: Acts 14. 4. the
multitude of the city was divided, that is, in their judgment about the
Apostles and their doctrine: but not only so, for (...), is spoken of them,
which expresses their separation into parties: what weight this new criticisme
is like to find with others, I know not, for my part I know the words enforce
not the thing aimed at; and the utmost that seems to be intended by that
expression, is the siding of the multitude, some with one, some with another,
whilst they were all in a public commotion, nor does the context require any
more. The same is the case, Acts 23. 7. where the Sadduces and Pharisees were
divided about Paul, whilst abiding in the place where the Sanedrim sat, being
divided into parties long before: and in the testimony cited in my margent for
the use of the word in other Authors, the Author makes even that (...), to
stand in opposition, only to (...): nor was it any more. There was not among
the people of Rome, such a separation as to break up the Corporation, or to
divide the Government, as is known from the story. The place of his own
producing, Acts 19. 9. proves indeed that then and there, there was a
separation, but as the Author confesses in the margent, the word there used to
express it has no relation to (...). Applied to Ecclesiastical things, the
Reverend Author confesses with me, that the word is only used in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians 1 Cor. 19. chapter 11. 18. and therefore that from
thence the proper use and importance of it is to be learned. Having laid down
the use of the word to denote difference of mind and judgment, with troubles
ensuing thereupon, amongst men met in some one assembly about the compassing of
a common end and design. I proceed to the particular accommodation of it, to
Church-rents and schism in that Solitary instance given of it in the church of
Corinth: What says our Author hereunto? Says he, Page 26. this is a
fore-stalling the readers judgment, by a mere begging of the thing in
question: as it has in part been proved from the Scripture its self, where it
is used for separation into parties, in the political use of the word; why it
may not so be used in the ecclesiastical sense, I see no reason: but if this
be the way of begging the Question, I confess I know not what course to take
to prove what I intend. Such words are used sometimes in warm disputes
causelessely; it were well they were placed where there is some pretense for
them; Certainly they will not serve every turn. Before I asserted the use of
the word, I instanced in all the places where it is used, and evinced the sense
of it from them? if this be begging, it is not that lazy trade of begging,
which some use; but such as a man had as good professedly work as follow. How
well he has disproved this sense of the word from Scripture we have seen, I am
not concerned in his seeing no reason why it may not be used in the
ecclesiastical sense, according to his conception, my enquiry was how it was
used, not how it might be used in this Reverend Authors judgment. And this is
the substance of all that is offered to overthrow that principle, which if it
abide and stand, he must needs confess all his following pains to be to no
purpose. He sees no reason but it may be as he says.

After the declaration of some such suspicions of his, as we are now wonted
unto, and which we cannot deny him the liberty of expressing, though I profess
he do it unto my injury, he says, this is the way on the one hand to free all
church-separation from schism, and on the other to make all particular
churches more or less inschismaticall: well, the first is denied; what is
offered for the confirmation of the second? says he, what one congregation
almost is there in the world, where there are not differences of judgment
whence ensue many troubles about the compassing of one common end and design;
I doubt whether his own be free therefore. If my testimony may remove his
scruple, I assure him through the grace of God, hitherto it has been so, and I
hope it is so with multitudes of other Churches, those with whom it is
otherwise, it will appear at last to be more or less blameable on the account
of Schism.

Omitting my farther explication of what I had proposed, he passes unto p. 27.
of my book, and thence transcribes these words: they had differences among
themselves about unnecessary things, on these they engaged into disputes and
sidings even in the solemn assemblies, probably much vain janglings,
alienation of affections, exasperations of spirit, with a neglect of due
offices of love ensued hereupon, whereunto he subjoines, that the Apostle
charges this upon them is true, but was that all? were there not divisions into
parties as well as in judgments? we shall consider that ere long, But I am
sorry he has waved this proper place of the consideration of this important
assertion; the truth is, hic pes fig^ndus, if he remove not this position, he
labors, in vain for the future. I desire also to know what he intends by
divisions into parties; if he intend that some were of one party, some of
another, in these divisions and differences, it is granted: there can-be no
difference in judgment amongst men, but they must on that account be divided
into parties: but if he intend thereby, that they divided into several
churches, assemblies, or congregations, any of them setting up new churches on
a new account, or separating from the public assemblies of the church whereof
they were, and that their so doing is reproved by the Apostle under the name of
Schism; then I tell him that this is that indeed whose proof is incumbent on
him. Fail he herein, the whole foundation of my discourse continues firm and
unshaken; the truth is, I cannot meet with any one attempt to prove this, which
alone was to be proved, if he intended that I should be any farther concerned
in his discourse, then only to find my self reviled and abused.

Passing over what I produce to give light and evidence unto my assertion, he
proceeds to the consideration of the observations and inferences I make upon
it. p. 29. and onward.

The first he insists upon is, that the thing mentioned is entirely in one
Church, amongst the members of one particular society: no mention is made of
one church divided against another, or separated from another.

To this he replies 1. that the church of Corinth, was a collective church,
made up of many congregations, and that I my self confess they had solemn
assemhlies, not one assembly only; that I beg the Question by taking it for
one single congregation. But I suppose one particular congregation may have
more then one solemn assembly, even as many, as are the times, wherein they
solemnly assemble.

2. I supposed, I had proved that it was only one congregation, that used to
assemble in one place, that the Apostle charged this crime upon; and that this
Reverend Author was pleased to overlook what was produced to that purpose, I am
not to be blamed. 3. Here is another discovery, that this Reverend person never
yet clearly understood the design of my treatise, nor the principles I proceed
upon. Does he think it is any thing to my present business, whither the church
of Corinth were such a church as Presbyterians suppose it to be, or such a one
as the Independents affirm it? whilst all ackowledge it to be one church, be
that particular church of what kind it will; if the Schism rebuked by the
Apostle consisted in division in it, and not in separation from it as such, I
have evinced all that I intended by the Observation under consideration. Yet
this he again persues, and tells me, that there were more particular churches
in and about Corinth, as that at Cenchrea, and that their differences were not
confined to the verge of one church (for there were differences abroad out of
the Church) and says, that at unawares I confess that they disputed from house
to house, and in the public assemblies: but I will assure the Reverend Author
I was aware of what I said: Is it possible he should suppose that by the verge
of one Church I intended the meeting place, and the assembly therein? was it at
all incumbent on me, to prove that they did not manage their differences in
private, as well as in public? is it likely any such thing should be? did I
deny that they sided and made parties about their divisions and differences? is
it any thing to me, or to any thing I affirm, how, where, and when, they
managed their disputes, and debated their controversies? it is true there is
mention of a church at Cenchrea, but is there any mention that that church made
any separation from the church of Corinth? or that the differences mentioned
were between the members of these several churches? is it any thing to my
present design, though there were 20 particular congregations in Corinth,
supposing that on any consideration they were one Church? I assure you Sr. I am
more troubled with your not understanding the business and design I manage,
then I am with all your reviling terms, you have laden me withal.

Once for all; unless you prove that there was a separation from that Church
of Corinth (be it of what constitution it may by any be supposed) as such, into
another church, and that this is reproved by the Apostle under the name of
Schism, you speak not one word to invalidate the principle by me laid down:
and for what he adds; that for what I say there was no one church divided
against another, or separated from another, is assumed, but not proved unless
by a negative, which is invallid; he wrests my words: I say not, there was no
such thing, but that there was no mention of any such thing: for though it be
as clear as the noone day, that indeed there was no such thing, it suffices
my purpose that there was no mention of any such thing, and therefore no such
thing reproved under the name of Schism. With this one observation, I might
well dismiss the whole ensuing treatise, seeing of how little use it is like to
prove, as to the business in hand, when the Author of it indeed apprehends not
the principle which he pretends to oppose; I shall once more tell him, that he
abide not in his mistake, that if he intend to evert the principle here by me
insisted on, it must be by a demonstration that the Schism charged on the
Corinthians by Paul consisted in the separation from, and relinquishment of
that church, whereof they were members, and congregating into another not
before erected or established; for this is that which the Reformed Churches are
charged to do by the Romanists, in respect of their Churches, and accused of
schism thereupon. But the differences which he thinks good to manage and
maintain, with, and against the Independents do so possess the thoughts of
this Reverend Author, that what ever occurres to him, is immediately measured
by the regard which it seems to bear, or may possibly bear thereunto, though
that consideration were least of all regarded in its proposal.

The next observation upon the former thesis that he takes into his
examination, so far as he is pleased to transcribe it, is this; Here is no
mention of any particular man or number of men separating from the assembly of
the whole church) or subducting of themselves from its power; only they had
groundless causlesse differences amongst themselves; Hereunto our Author
variously replies and says, 1. was this all? were not separations made, if not
from that church, yet in that church as well as divisions? Let the Scripture
determine, chap. 1. 11. chapter 5. 3. I am a Disciple of Paul said one, and I a
Disciple of Apollo said another: in our language; I am a member of such a
ministers congregation, says one, such a man for my money: and so a third, and
hereupon they most probably separated themselves into such and such
congregations; ana is not separation the ordinary issue of such envyings?

I doubt not but that our Reverend Author supposes that he has here spoken to
the purpose, and matter in hand; and so perhaps may some others think also. I
must crave leave to enter my dissent upon the account of the ensuing reasons;
for, 1. It is not separation in the Church by men's divisions and differences
whilst they continue members of the same Church, that I deny to be here charged
under the name of Scisme, but such a separation from the Church, as was before
described; 2. The disputes amongst them about Paul and Apollos, the instruments
of their conversion cannot possibly be supposed to relate unto Ministers of
distinct congregations among them. Paul and Apollos were not so, and could not
be figures of them that were; so that those expressions do not at all answer
those which he is pleased to make parallel unto them. 3. Grant all this, yet
this proves nothing to the cause in hand, men may cry up some the Minister of
one congregation, some of another, and yet neither of them separate from the
one, or other, or the congregations themselves fall into any separation,
wherefore (4) He says, probably they separated into such and such
congregations; But this is most improbable; for first, there is no mention at
all of those many congregations that are supposed, but rather the contrary, as
I have declared, is expressly asserted: 2. There is no such thing mentioned or
intimated, nor, 3. are they in the least rebuked for any such thing, though the
forementioned differences which are a less evil are reproved again, and
again, under the name of Schism: so that this most improbable improbability
or rather vain conjecture, is a very mean refuge and retreat from the evidence
of express Scripture, which in this place is alone inquired after-Doth indeed
the Reverend Author think, will he pretend so to do, that the holy Apostle
should so expressly, weightily, and earnestly, reprove their dissentions in the
church, whereof they were members, and yet not speak one word, or give the
least intimation of their separation from the church; had there indeed been any
such thing? I dare leave this to the conscience of the most partially addicted
person under heaven, to the Authors cause, who has any conscience at all; nor
dare I dwell longer on the confutation of this fiction, though it be upon the
matter the whole of what I am to contend withal. But he farther informs us
that* there was a separation to parties in the church of Corinth, at least as
to one ordinance of the Lords supper, as appears c. 11. v. 18, 21, 22, 23. and
this was part of their Schism. v. 16. And not long after they separated into
other Churches, sleighting and undervaluing the first ministers and churches,
as nothing or less pure then their own, which we see practiced sufficiently
at this day. A. Were not this the head and seat of the first part of the
controversy insisted on, I should not be able to prevail with my self, to
cast away precious time in the consideration of such things as these, being
tendered as suitable to the business in hand; It is acknowledged that there
were differences amongst them, and disorders in the administration of the Lords
supper, that therein they used respect of persons, as the place quoted in the
margin by our Author, Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3. manifests that they were ready to do in
other places; the disorder the Apostle blames in the administration of the
ordinances was, when they came together in the Church, v. 18. when they came
together in one place; v. 20. there they tarried not one for another as they
ought v. 33. but coming unprepared, some having eaten before, some being hungry
v. 21. all things were managed with great confusion amongst them v. 22. and if
this prove not, that the Schism they were charged withal consisted in a
separation from that church with which they came together in one place, we are
hopeless of any farther evidence to be tendered to that purpose. That there
were disorders amongst them in the celebration of the Lords supper is certain;
that they separated into several congregations on that account, or one from
another, or any from all, is not in the least intimation signified; but the
plain contrary shines in the whole state of things, as there represented: had
that been done, and had so to do, been such an evil, as is pleaded, (as
causlesly to do it is no small evil) it had not passed unreproved from him,
who was resolved in the things of God, not to spare them. 2 That they
afterward fell into the separation aimed at to be asserted Our Reverend Author
affirms, that so he may make way for a reflection on the things of his present
disquietment; but as we are not as yet concerning our selves, in what they did
afterward; so when we are, we shall expect somewhat more then bare
affirmations for the proof of it: being more then ordinarily confident, that
he is not able from the Scripture, or any other story of credit, to give the
least countenance to what he here affirms. But now as if the matter were well
discharged, when there has not one word been spoken; that in the least reaches
the case in hand; he says 3. by way of supposition that there was but one
single congregation at Corinth; yet (said he) the Apostle dehorts the brethren
from Schism, and writes to more then the Church of Corinth, chapter 1. v. 2. A. I
have told him before, that though I am full well resolved that there was but
one single congregation at Corinth in those days, yet I am not at all
convinced as to the proposition under confirmation to assert any such thing,
but will suppose the church to be of what kind my Author pleases, whilst he
will acknowledge it to be the particular Church of Corinth. I confess the
Apostle dehorts the brethren from Schism, even others as well as those at
Corinth, so far as the church of God in all places, and ages, are concerned in
his instructions and dehortations, when they fall under the case stated,
parallel with that which is the ground of his dealing with them at Corinth; but
what that Schism was from which he dehorts them, he declares only in the
instance of the Church of Corinth: and thence is the measure of it to be taken,
in reference to all dehorted from it. Unto the 3d. Observation added by me, he
makes no return, but only lays down some exceptions to the exemplification
given of the whole matter, in another schism that fell out in that Church
about 40 years after the composure of this, which was the occasion of that
excellent Epistle unto them from the Church of Rome, called the Epistle of
Clement; dissuading them from Persisting in that strife and contention, and
pressing them to unity and agreement among themselves: some things our Reverend
Author offers as to this instance, but so, as that I cannot but suppose, that
he consulted not the Epistle on this particular occasion; and therefore now I
desire him that he would do so, and I am persuaded he will not a second time
give countenance to any such apprehension of the then state of the Church, as
though there were any separation made from it, by any of the members thereof,
doing or suffering the injury there complained of, about which those
differences and contentions arose. I shall not need to go over again the
severalls of that Epistle; one word mentioned by my self, namely (...) he
insists on, and informs us, that it implies a separation into other
assemblies; which he says I waved to understand. I confess I did so in this
place, and so would he also, if he had once consulted it. The speech of the
Church of Rome is there to the Church of Corinth, in reference to the elders
whom they had deposed. the whole sentence is; (...). and the words immediately
going before are; (...): then follows that (...); our Author I suppose,
understands Greek, and so I shall spare my pains of transcribing Mr. Youngs
latin translation; or adding one in English of mine own; and if he be pleased
to read these words, I think we shall have no more of his (...).

If a fair opportunity call me forth to the farther mannagement of this
controversy, I shall not doubt but from that Epistle, and some other pieces of
undoubted antiquity, as the Epistle of the Church of Vienna and Lions, of
Smyrna, with some public records of those days, as yet preserved, worthy all
of them to be written in letters of Gold, to evince that state of the Churches
of Christ in those days, as will give abundant light to the principles I
proceed upon in this whole business.

And thus have I briefly vindicated what was proposed as the precise Scripture
notion of schism, against which indeed not any one objection has beenraised,
that speaks directly to the thing in hand. Our Reverend Author being full of
warm affections against the independents, and exercised greatly in disputing
the common principles which either they hold, or are supposed so to do;
measures every thing that is spoken, by his apprehension of those differences,
wherein as he thinks their concernment does lie: had it not bin for some such
prejudice, (for I am unwilling to ascribe it to more blameable principles) it
would have been almost impossible that he should have once imagined that he had
made the least attempt toward the eversion of what I had asserted; much less
that he had made good the title of his book* though he scarce forgets it, or
any thing concerning it but its proof, in any one whole leaf of his treatise.
It remains then that the nature and notion of Schism as revealed and
described in the Scripture, was rightly fixed in = my former discourse; and I
must assure this Reverend Author, that I am not afrighted from the embraceing
and maintaining of it, with those scare crows of new light; singularity, and
the like, which he is pleased frequently to set up to that purpose. The
discourse that ensues in our Author concerning a parity of reason, to prove
that if that be schism, then much more is separation so, shall afterward if
need be, be considered, when I proceed to show what yet farther may be granted
without the least prejudice of truth, though none can necessitate me to recede
from the precise notion of the name and thing delivered in the Scripture. I
confess I cannot but marvel, that any man undertaking the examination of that
Treatise, and expressing so much indignation at the thoughts of my discourse,
that lies in this business, should so slightly pass over that, whereon he
knew that I laid the great weight of the whole. Has he so much as indeavourd
to prove, that that place to the Corinthians, is not the only place wherein
there is in the Scripture any mention of schism in an ecclesiastical sense;
or that the Church of Corinth was not a particular church: is any thing of
importance offered to impair the assertion that the evil reproved was within
the verge of that church, and without separation from it? and do I need any
more to make good to the utmost that which I have asserted; but of these things
afterward.

In all that follows to the end of this chapter, I meet with nothing of
importance that deserves farther notice; that which is spoken is for the most
part built upon mistakes; as that when I speak of a member or the members of
one particular church, I intend only one single congregation exclusively to
any other acceptance of that expression, in reference to the apprehension of
others: that I deny the reformed Churches to be true churches, because I deny
the Church of Rome to be so; and deny the institution of a national church,
which yet our Author pleads not for. He would have it for granted that because
Schism consists in a difference among church members, therefore he that raises
such a difference, whither he be a member of that church wherein the difference
is raised, or of any other or no (suppose he be a Mahumetan or a Jew) is a
Schismatic; pleads for the old definition of Schism, as suitable to the
Scripture, after the whole foundation of it is taken away: wrests many of my
expressions! as that in particular, in not making the matter of Schism to be
things relating to the worship of God, to needless discourses about Doctrine
and Discipline, not apprehending what I intended by that expression of the
worship of God; and I suppose it not advisable to follow him in such
extravagancies. The usual aggravations of Schism he thought good to
reinforce, whither he hoped that I would dispute with him about them, I cannot
tell. I shall now assure him that I will not, though if I may have his good
leave to say so, I lay much more weight on those insisted on by my self,
wherein I am encouraged, by his approbation of them.

CHAP. 5.
THe third Chapter of my Treatise consisting in the preventing and removing
such objections as the precedent discourse might seem liable and obnoxious
unto, is proposed to examination, by our Reverend Author, in the third Chap. of
his Book: and the objections mentioned undertaken to be managed by him, with
what success, some few considerations will evince.

The first Objection by me proposed was taken from the Common Apprehension of
the nature of Schism, and the issue of stateing it as by me laid down; namely
hence it would follow that the separation of any man or men from a true Church,
or of one Church from others is not Schism. But now waving for the present the
more large consideration of the name and thing, which yet in the process of my
discourse I do condescend upon, according to the principle laid down; I say
that in the precise signification of the word, and description of the thing as
given by the holy Ghost this is true; no such separation is in the scripture so
called, or so accounted, whither it may not in a large sense be esteemed as
such, I do not dispute, yea I afterward grant it so far, as to make that
concession the bottom and foundation of my whole plea, for the vindication of
the reformed churches from that crime. Our Reverend Author reinforces the
objection by sundry instances; As, 1. that he has disproved that sense or
precise signisication of the word in Scripture, how well let the Reader judge.
2. That supposing that to be the only sense mentioned in that case of the
Corinthians, yet may another sense be intimated in Scripture and deduced by
regular and rational consequence: Perhaps this will not be so easy an
undertaking, this being the only place where the name is mentioned, or thing
spoken of in an Ecclesiastical sense: but when any proof is tendered of what
is here affirmed, we shall attend unto it. It is said indeed that if separation
in Judgment in a Church be a Schism, much more to separate from a Church! but
our question is about the precise notion of the word in Scripture, and
consequences from thence, not about consequents from the nature of things,
concerning which if our Author had been pleased to have staid a while, he would
have found me granting as much as he could well desire. 3. 1 John 2. 19. is
sacrificed (...) and interpreted of Schism. Where (to make one venture in
imitation of our Author) All Orthodox Interpreters, and writers of
controversies expound it of Apostasy; neither will the context or arguing of
the Apostle admit of another exposition; men's wresting of Scripture to give
countenance to inveterate errors is one of their worst concomitants; so then
that separation from Churches is oftentimes evil is readily granted: of what
nature that evil is, with what are the aggravations of it, a judgment is to be
made, from the pleas and pretenses that its circumstances afford: so far as it
proceeds from such dissensions as before were mentioned, so far it proceeds
from schism, but in its own nature absolutely considered it is not so.

To render my former assertions the more unquestionably evident, I consider the
several accounts given of men's blameable departures' from any Church, or
Churches mentioned in Scripture, and manifest that none of them come under the
head of Schism. Apostasy, irregularly of walking, and professed sensuality,
are the heads, whereunto all blameable departures from the Churches in the
Scripture are referred.

That there are other accounts of this crime, our Author does not assert; he
only says, that all, or some of the places I produce, as instances of a
blameable separation from a Church, do mind the nature of Schism as
precedaneous to the separation; What ere the matter is I do not find him
speaking* so faintly and with so much caution through his whole discourse as in
this place: all, or some do it; they mind the nature of Schism; they mind it
as precedaneous to the separation, so the sum of what he aims at in
contesting about the exposition of those places of Scripture is this; some of
them do mind (I know not how) the nature of Schism, which he never once named
as precedaneous to separation; therefore the precise notion of Schism in the
Scripture does not denote differences and divisions in a Church only; Quod erat
demonstrandum: That I should spend time in debating a consideration so remote
from the state of the controversy in hand, I am sure will not be expected by
such as understand it.

Page 77. Of my treatise I affirm that for a man to withdraw or withold
himself from the communion external and visible of any Church or Churches, on
that pretention or plea (be it true or otherwise) that the worship, doctrine,
or discipline instituted by Christ is corrupted among them, with which
corruption he dares not defile himself, is no where in the Scripture called
Schism, nor is that case particularly exemplified, or expressly supposed,
whereby a Judgment may be made of the fact at large, but we are left, upon the
whole matter, to the guidance of such general rules and principles as are
given us for that end and purpose: Such is my meanness of apprehension that I
could not understand, but that either this assertion must be subscribed unto,
as of irrefragable verity, or else that instances to the contrary must have
been given out of the Scripture; for on that hinge alone does this present
controversy (and that by consent) turn it self: But our Reverend Author
thinks good to take another course (for which his reasons may easily be
conjectured) and excepts against the assertion it self in General: first, as
ambiguous and fallacious, And then also intimates that he will scan the words
in particular; Mihi jussa capessere, etc. 1. He says, that I tell not whither
a man may separate where there is corruption in some one of these only or in
all of them, nor 2. How far some or all of these must be corrupted before we
separate. A. This is no small vanity under the sun, that men will not only
measure themselves by themselves, but others also by their own measure: Our
Author is still with his finger in the sore, and therefore supposes that others
must needs take the same course. Is there any thing in my assertion whither a
man may separate from any church or no? any thing upon what Corruption he may
lawfully so do? any thing of stating the difference betwixt the Presbiterians
and Independants? do I at all fix it on this fo^t of account when I come so to
do? I humbly beg of this Author, that if I have so obscurely and intricately
delivered my self and meaning, that he cannot come to the understanding of my
design, nor import of my expressions, that he would favor me with a command
to explain my self, before he engage into a public refutation of what he
does not so clearly apprehend! Alas, I do not in this place in the least intend
to justify any separation, nor to show what pleas are sufficient to justify a
separation, nor what corruption in the church separated from, is necessary
thereunto, nor at all regard the controversy his eye is allwaies on; but only
declare what is not comprised in the precise Scripture notion of Schism, as
also how a Judgment is to be made of that which is so by me excluded, whither
it be good or evil. Would he have been pleased to have spoken to the business
in hand, or any thing to the present purpose, it must not have been by an
inquiry into the grounds and reasons of separation, how far it may be
justified by the plea mentioned, or how far not* when that plea is to be
allowed, and when rejected; but this only was incumbent on him to prove!
namely, that such a separation upon that plea, or the like, is called Schism
in the Scripture, and as such a thing condemned. What my concernment is in the
ensuing observations; that the Judaicall Church was as corrupt as ours, that if
a bare plea true or false will serve to justify men, all separatists may be
justified, he himself will easily perceive: But however, I cannot but tell him
by the way, that he who will dogmatize, in this controversy from the Judaicall
Church, and the course of proceedings amongw them, to the direction and
limitation of duty, as to the churches of the Gospel, considering the vast and
important differences between t he constitutions of the one and the other, with
the infallible obligation to certain principles, on the account of the typical
institution in that Primitive Church, when there neither was nor could be any
more in the world, must expect to bring other Arguments to compass his
design, then the analogy pretended. For the justification of Separatists of
the reason, if it will ensue, upon the examination for separation, and the
circumstances of the seperating, whereunto I refer them, let it follow, and
let who will complain; But to fill up the measure of the mistake he is engaged
in, he tells us page 75. that this is the pinch of the question, whither a man
or a company of men may separate from a true Church, upon a plea of Corruption
in it, true or false, and set up another Church, as to ordinances, renouncing
that Church to be a true Church. This (says he) is plainly our case at
present, with the Doctor and his Associates; truly I do not know that ever I
was necessitated to a more sad and fruitless employment in this kind of labor
and travail. Is that the question in present agitation? is any thing, word,
title, or iota spoken to it? is it my present business to state the difference
between the Presbyterians and Independents? do I any where do it upon this
account? do I not every where positively deny that there is any such separation
made? nay can common honesty allow such a state of a question, if that were the
business in hand to be put upon me? are their ordinances and churches so
denied by me as is pretended? what I have often said, must again be repeated,
The Reverend Author has his eye so fixed on the difference between the
Presbyterians and the Independants, that he is at every turn lead out of the
way into such mistakes, as it was not possible he should otherwise be overtaken
withal; this is perhaps mentis gratissimus error: But I hope it would be no
death to him to be delivered from it. When I laid down the principles which it
was his good will to oppose, I had many things under consideration, as to the
settling of Conscience in respect of manifold oppositions; and to tell him the
truth, least valued that which he is pleased to manage, and to look upon as my
sole intendment; if it be not possible to deliver him from this strong
imagination, that carries the images and species of Independency always before
his eyes, we shall scarce speak ad idem in this whole discourse. I desire then
that he would take notice, that as the state of the controversy he proposes,
does no more relate to that which peculiarly is pretended to ly under his
consideration, then any other thing whatever that he might have mentioned; so
when the peculiar difference between him and the Independents comes to be
managed, scarce any one term of his state will be allowed. Exceptions are in
the next place attempted to be put in to my assertion, that there is no example
in the Scripture of any one Churches departure from the union which they ought
to hold with others, unless it be in some of their departures from the common
faith, which is not Schism; much with the same success as formerly: let him
produce one instance, and, En Herbam. I grant the Roman church on a supposition
that it is a Church (which yet I utterly deny) to be a schismatic Church
upon the account of the intestine divisions of all sorts; or what other
accounts other men urge them with the same guilt I suppose he knows by this,
that I am not concerned. Having finished this exploit, because I had said, if I
were unwilling, I did not understand how I might be compelled to carry on the
notion of Schism any farther; he tells me, though I be unwilling, he doubts
not but to be able to compel me: but who told him I was unwilling so to do? do
I not immediately without any compulsion very freely fall upon the work? did I
say I was unwilling? Certainly it ought not to be thus; of his abilities in
other things I do not doubt; in this discourse he is pleased to exercise more
of something else.

There is but one passage more that needs to be remarked, and so this Chapter
also is dismissed; He puts in a Caveat that I limit not Schism to the worship
of God, upon these words of mine; the consideration of what sort of union in
reference to the worship of God (where he inserts in the repetition; mark
that) is instituted by Jesus Christ, is the foundation of what I have further
to offer; whereto he subjoined the design of this in that he may have a fair
retreat, when he is charged with breach of union in other respects, and so with
Schism; to escape by this evasion: this breach of union is not in reference to
the worship of God in one assembly met to that end. I wish we had once an end
of these mistakes, and false uncharitable surmises. By the worship of God I
intend the whole compass of institutions, and their tendency thereunto. And I
know that I speak properly enough in so doing; I have no such design as I am
charged withal, nor do I need it; I walk not in fear of this Authors forces,
that I should be providing before hand to secure my retreat. I have passed the
bounds of the precise notion of Schism before insisted on, and yet doubt not
but God assisting to make good my ground. If he judge I cannot, let him command
my personal attendance on him at any time, to be driven from it by him; let
him by any means prove against me at any time a breach of any union instituted
by Jesus Christ, and I will promise him, that with all speed I will retreat
from that state, or thing, whereby I have so done. I must profess to this
Reverend Author, that I like not the cause he mannages one whit the better for
the way whereby he mannageth it. We had need watch and pray that we be not lead
into temptation: seeing we are in some measure not ignorant of the devices of
Satan.

Now that he may see this door of escape shut up, that so he may not need to
trouble himself any more in taking care, least I escape that way, when he
intends to fall upon me with those blows, which as yet I have not felt, I
shall shut it fast my self, beyond all possibility of my opening again: I
here then declare unto him, that when ever he shall prove that I have broken
any union of the institution of Jesus Christ, of what sort soever, I will not
in excuse of my self, insist on the plea mentioned, but will submit to the
discipline, which shall be thought meet by him to be exercised toward any one
offending in that kind: yet truly on this engagement I would willingly
contract with him, that in his next reply he should not deal with me, as he
has done in this, neither as to my person, nor as to the differences between
us.

CHAP. 6.
HAving declared and vindicated the Scripture proper notion of Schism, and
thence discovered the nature of it with all its aggravations, with the mistakes
that men have run into, who have suited their apprehensions concer^ing it, unto
what was their interests to have it thought to be, and opened a way thereby for
the furtherance of peace among professors of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, for
the further security of the consciences of men unjustly accused and charged
with the guilt of this evil, I proceeded to the consideration of it in the
usual common acceptance of the word, and things, that so I might obviate what
ever with any tolerable pretense is insisted on, as deduced by a parity of
reason from what is delivered in the Scripture, in reference to the charge
managed by some or other against all sorts of Protestants. Hereupon I grant,
that it may be looked on in general as (...), a branch of union, so that it be
granted also, that that union be an union of the institution of Jesus Christ.
To find out then the nature of Schism under the consideration of the
condescension made: and to discover wherein the guilt of it does consist: it is
necessary that we find out what that union is, and wherein it does consist,
whereof it is the brcadth and interruption, or is supposed so to be over and
above the breach above mentioned and described. Now this union being the union
of the Church, the several acceptations of the Church in scripture are to be
investigated, that the union inquired after, may be made known. The church in
scripture being taken either for the Church Catholic or the whole number of
elect beleivers in the world (for we lay aside the consideration of that part
of this great family of God, which is already in heaven, from this distinction)
or else for the general visible body of those who profess the gospel of
Christ, or for a particular society joining together in the celebration of the
ordinances of the new testament, instituted by Christ to be so celebrated by
the^; The union of it, with the breach of that union, in these several
respects with the application of the whole, to the business under
consideration, was to be enquired after: which also was performed.

I began with the consideration of the Catholic invisible Church of Christ,
and the union thereof; having declared the rise of this distinction, and the
necessity of it from the nature of the things themselves; as to the matter of
this church, or the church of Christ as here militant on earth, I affirm, and
evince it to be, all and only elect believers; the union of this church
consists in the inhabitation of the same spirit in all the members of it,
uniting them to the head Christ Jesus, and therein to one another. The breach
of this union, I manifested to consist in the loss of that spirit, with all
the peculiar consequences and effects of him in the hearts of them, in whom he
dwells; This I manifest according to our principles to be impossible, and upon a
supposition of it, how remote it would be from Schism, under any notion or
acceptance of the word; so closing that discourse with a charge on the
Romanists of their distance from an interest in this church of Jesus Christ.

Our Reverend Author professes that he has but little to say to these things,
some exceptions he puts in unto some expressions used in the explication of my
sense, in this particular: that which he chiefly insists upon, is the
accommodation of that promise Matthew. 16. 28. upon this rock will I build my
church, to the Church in this sense, which he concludes to belong to the
visible Church of professors; now as I am not at all concerned, as to the truth
of what I am in confirmation of, to which of these it be applied, so I am far
from being alone in that application of it to the Catholic Church which I
insist upon; All our Divines that from hence prove, the perseverance of all
Individual believers, as all do that I have met withal, who write on that
subject, are of the same mind with me. Moreover the Church is built on this
rock in its Individuals; or I know not how it is so built. The building on
Christ, does not denote a mere relation of a general body to his truth, that
it shall allwaies have an existence, but the union of the Individualls with him
in their being built on him, to whom the promise is made. I acknowledge it for
as unquestionable a truth as any we believe, that Christ has had, and ever
shall have to the end of the world, a visible number of those that profess his
name, and subjection to his kingdom; because of the necessary consequence of
profession upon believing; but that, that truth is intended in this promise any
farther but in respect of this consequence, I am not convinced. And I would be
loath to say that this promise is not made to every particular believer, and
only unto them; being willing to vindicate to the Saints of God, all those
grounds of consolation which he is so willing they should be made partakers of.

As to the union of this Church and the breach of it, our Reverend Author, has
a little to say: because there may be some decaies in true grace in the members
of this Church: he affirms that in a sort there may be said to be a breach in
this union, and so consequently a schism in this body. He seemed formerly to
be afraid lest all schism should be thrust out of the world; If he can
retrive it on the account of any true believers failing in grace, or falling
for a season, I suppose he needs not fear the loss of it, whilst this world
continues: But it is fit, wise, and learned men should take the Liberty of
calling things by what names they please; so they will be pleased withal, not
to impose their conceptions and use of terms on them who are not able to
understand the reasons of them. It is true there may be a Schism among the
members of this church, but not as members of this church, nor with reference
to the union thereof. It is granted that schism is the breach of union; but
not of every union much less not a breach of that, which, if there were a
breach of, it were not Schism: However by the way I am bold to tell this
Reverend Author, that this Doctrine of his, concerning schism in the Catholic
invisible Church, by the failings in Grace in any of the members of it for a
season, is a new notion, which as he cannot justify to us, because it is false,
so, I wonder how he will justify it to himself, because it is new. And what
has been obtained by the Author against my principles in this chapter. I
cannot perceive. The nature of the church in the state considered, is not
opposed; The union asserted not disproved; the breach of that union, is denied
(as I suppose) no less by him then my self; That the instances that so^e
Saints, as members of this Church may sometimes fail in grace more or less for
some season; and that the members of this Church, though not as members of this
Church, yet on other considerations may be guilty of Schism, concern not the
business under debate, himself I hope is satisfied.

CHAP. 7.
OUr progress in the next place is to the consideration of the Catholic
Church visible. Who are the members of this church, whereof it is constituted,
what is required to make them so, on what account men visibly professing the
gospel may be esteemed justly divested of the privilege of being members of
this church, with sundry respects of the church in that sense, are in my
treatise discussed. The union of this church that is proper and peculiar unto
it as such, I declared to be the profession of the saving doctrine of the
gospel, not everted by any of the miscarriages, errors, or oppositions to it,
that are there recounted. The breach of this union I manifest to consist in
apostasy, from the profession of the faith, and so to be no Schism, upon
whomsoever the guilt of it does fall; pleading the immunity of the Protestants
as such from the guilt of the breach of this union, and charging it upon the
Romanists, in all the ways whereby it may be broken, an issue is put to that
discourse.

What course our Reverend Author takes in the examination of this chapter, and
the severalls of it, whereon the strength of the controversy dothly; is now to
be consideed; does he deny this church to be a collection of all that are duly
called Christians in respect of their profession? to be that great multitude
who throughout the world, profess the Doctrine of the Gospel, and subjection
to Jesus Christ? does he deny the union of this church, or that whereby that
great multitude are incorporated into one body as visible and professing, to be
the profession of the saving doctrines of the Gospel, and of subjection to
Jesus Christ according to them? Does he deny the dissolution of this union as
to the interest of any member by it in the body, to be by apostasy from the
profession of the Gospel? Does he charge that apostasy upon those whom he
calls Independents as such, or if he should, could he tolerably defend his
charge? Does he prove that the breach of this union, is under that formality
properly Schism? nothing less! as far as I can gather: might not then the
trouble of this Chapter have been spared? or shall I be necessitated to defend
every expression in my book, though nothing at all to the main business under
debate, or else Independency must go for a great Schism. I confess this is
somewhat an hard Law, and such as I cannot proceed in obedience unto it,
without acknowledging his ability to compel me to go on further then I am
willing; yet I do it with this engagement, that I will so look to my self,
that he shall never have that power over me any more; nor will I upon any
compulsion of useless needless cavils and exceptions do so again* so that in
his reply he now knows how to order his affairs so, as to be freed from the
trouble of a Rejoinder.

His first attempt in this chapter, is upon a short discourse of mine, in my
process, which I profess not to be needful to the purpose in hand, relating
to some later disputes about the nature of this Church, wherein some had
affirmed it to be a Genus to particular churches, which are so many distinct
species of it, and others that it was a totum made up of particular churches as
its parts, both which in some sense I denied; partly out of a desire to keep
off all debates about the things of God, from being enwrapped and agitated in
and under Philosophical notions and feigned terms of Art, which has
exceedingly multiplied controversies in the world and rendered them endless,
and does more or less streighten or oppose every truth that is so dealt
withal: partly because I evidently saw men deducing false consequents from the
supposition of such notions of this Church: for the first way, our Reverend
Author lets it pass, only with a remarke upon my dissenting from Mr Hooker of
New England, which he could not but note by the way, although he approves what
I affirm. A worthy note! as though all the brethren of the Presbyterian way,
were agreed among themselves in all things of the like importance; or that I
were in my judgment enthralled to any man or men, so that it should deserve a
note when I dissent from them. Truly I bless God, I am utterly unacquainted
with any such frame of spirit, or bondage of mind, as must be supposed to be in
them whose dissent from other men is a matter of such observation. One is my
Master, to whom alone my heart and judgment are in subjection: for the latter
I do not say absolutely that particular Churches are not the parts of the
Catholic visible, in any sense, but that they are not so parts of it as such,
so that it should be constituted and made up by the^, and of the^, for the
order and purpose of an instituted Church, for the celebration of the worship
of God, and institutions of Christ, according to the Gospel; which when our
Author proves that it is: I shall acknowledge my self obliged to him. He says
indeed, that it was once possible that all the members of the Catholic
Church, should meet together, to hear one sermon, etc. But he is to prove,
that they were bound to do so, as that Catholic Church, and not that it was
possible for all the members of it under any other notion, or consideration so
to convene. But he says, they are bound to do so still, but that the multitude
makes it impossible: Credat Apella: that Christ has bound his Church to that
which himself makes impossible. Neither are they so bound: they are bound, by
his own acknowledgement, to be members of particular Churches: and in that
capacity, are they bound so to convene; those churches being by the will of
God, appointed for the seat of ordinances. And so what he adds in the next
place of particular Churches, being bound according to the institution of
Christ to assemble for the celebration of ordinances, is absolutely destructive
of the former figment. But he would know a reason why 40 or more, that are not
members of one particular church, but only of the Catholic, meeting together,
may not join together in all ordinances, as well as they may meet to hear the
word preached, and often do; to which I answer; that it is because Jesus
Christ has appointed particular Churches, and there is more required to them,
then the occasional meeting of some, any, or all, if possible of the members
of the Catholic church as such, will afford.

His reflections upon my self, added in that place, are now grown so common,
that they deserve not any notice. In his ensuing discourse, if I may take leave
to speak freely to our Reverend Author, he wrangles about terms and
expressions, adding to, and altering those by me used in this business at his
pleasure, to make a talk to no purpose. The sum of what he pretends to
oppose is, that this universal church, or the universality of Professors
considered as such, neither formally as members of the church Catholic,
mistically Elect, nor as any members of any Particular Church, have not as
such, any Church form of the institution of Christ, by virtue whereof, they
should make up one instituted Church, for the end and purpose of the
celebration of the Ordinances of the Gospel therein. If he suppose he can
prove the contrary, let him cease from cavilling at words, and by expressions,
which is a facile task for any man to engage in, and no way useful, but to
make controversies endless; and answer my Reasons against it, which here he
passes over, and produce his testimonies and arguments for that purpose. This
trivial ventilation of particular passages cut off from their influence into
the whole, is not worth a nut-shell, but is a business fit for them who have
nothing else to employ themselves about.

Coming to consider the union that I assign to this Church, after whose breach
an enquiry is to be made, which is the maine, and only thing of his
concernment, as to the aim he has proposed to himself, he passes it over
very slightly: taking no notice at all of my whole discourse, from p. 116. top.
133. of my treatise; wherein I disprove the pretensions of other things to be
the union, or bond of union to this church; he fixes a very little while on
what I assign to be that union. This I say is profession of the faith of the
Gospel, and subjection to Jesus Christ according to it: to which he adds, that
they are bound to more then this, viz: to the exercise of the same specificall
Ordinances, as also to love one another, to subjection to the same discipline,
and where it is possible to the exercise of the same numericall worship. All
this was expressly affirmed by me before; it is all virtually contained in their
profession, so far as the things mentioned are revealed in the Gospel: only as
to the celebrating of the same numericall Ordinances, I cannot grant that they
are obliged hereunto as formally considered members of that Church, nor shall,
until our Reverend Author shall think meet to prove, that particular
congregations are not the institutions of Jesus Christ. But hereupon he
affirms, that that is a strange assertion used by me pa: 117. namely, that if
there be not an institution of joining in the same numericall ordinances, the
union of this Church is not really a Church union. This is no more but what was
declared before, nor more then what I urged the testimony of a learned
Presbyterian for: no more but this, that the universality of Christians
throughout the world, are not under such an institution, as that, to assemble
together for the celebration of the same numericall Ordinances; the pretense of
any such institution being supplied by Christ's acknowledged institution of
particular Churches for that purpose.

What I have offered in my Treatise, as evidence that Protestants are not
guilty of the breach of this union, and that where any are, their crime is not
Schism but Apostasy, either as to profession or conversation, I leave to the
judgment of all candid, sober, and ingenious Readers; for such as love strife,
and debates, and disputes, whereof the world is full, I would crave of them,
that if they must choose me for their Adversary, they would allow me to answer
in person, viva voce, to prevent this tedious trouble of writing, which for the
most part is fruitless and needless. Some exceptions our Author lays in,
against the Properties of the profession by me required, as necessary to the
preservation of this union: as to the first of professing all necessary saving
Truths of the Gospel, he excepts that the Apostles were ignorant of many
necessary truths of the Gospel for a season, and some had never heard of the
holy Ghost. Act. 29. and yet they kept the union of the Catholic Church. And
yet our Author before he closes this chapter, will charge the breach of this
union on some, whose errors cannot well be apprehended to lie in the denial of
any necessary truth of the Gospel, that is, indispensably necessary to
salvation. As to his instance of the Apostles, he knows it is one thing not to
know clearly and distinctly for some season, some truths in hypothesi, and
another to deny them being sufficiently and clearly revealed in thesi; and for
those in the Acts, it is probable they were ignorant of the dispensations of
the holy Ghost, with his marvelous effects under the Gospel, rather then of
the person of the holy Ghost: for even in respect of the former it is
absolutely said that the holy Ghost was not yet, because Jesus was not yet
glorified. I shall not pursue his other exceptions, being sorry that his
judgment leads him to make them; that which alone bears any aspect to the
business in hand, he insists on page 99. in these words. I have intimated and
partly proved, that there may be a breach of union, with respect to the
Catholic Church upon other considerations (namely besides the renuntiation of
the profession of the Gospel:) As first, there is a bond that obliges every
member of this Church, to join together in exercising the same Ordinances of
worship: when then any man shall refuse to join with others, or refuse others
to join with him, here is a breach of love and union among the members of the
Catholic Church; and in the Particular Churches as parts of the Catholic.

The Reader must pardon me for producing and insisting on these things, seeing
I do it with this profession, that I can fix on nothing else so much to the
purpose in hand: and yet how little these are so, cannot but be evident upon a
slight view to the meanest capacities. For 1. he tells us there may be a
breach of union with respect to the Catholic church, on other considerations:
not that there may be a breach of the unio^ of the Catholic Church. 2. That
there is a bond binding men to the exercise of Ordinances; so there is binding
man to all holiness; and yet he denies the vilest profane persons to break
that bond or this union. 3. That there may be a breach of union among the
members of the Church: but who knows it not, that knows all members of
Particular Churches, are also members of this church general. Our enquiry is
after the union of the Catholick-Church visible, what it is, how broken, and
what the crime or evil is, whereby it is broken, what obligations lie on the
members of that Church, as they stand under any other formal consideration;
what is the evil they are any of them guilty of, in not answering these
obligations, we were not at all enquiring, nor does it in this place concern
us so to do. And in what he afterward tells us of some proceedings contrary to
the practice of the universal Church she intends I suppose all the Churches in
the worldj wherein the members of the universal Church have walked or do so;
for the universal Church as such, has no practice as to cecelebration of
ordinances; and if he suppose it has, let him tell us what it is, and when
that practice was. His appeal to the primitive believers, and their small
number will not avail him: for although they should be granted to be the then
Catholic visible Church (against which he knows what exceptions may be laid
from the believers amongst the Jews, such as Cornelius, to whom Christ had not
as yet been preached, as the Messiah come, and exhibited) yet as such, they
joined not in the celebration of ordinances, but (as yet they were) as a
particular congregation; yea though all the Apostles were amongst them, the
foundation of all the Churches that afterward were called.

He concludes this chapter with an exception to my assertion, that if the
Catholic Church be a political body, it must have a visible political head,
which nothing but the Pope claims to be. Of this he says, 1. There is no
necessity, for says he, he confesses the common wealth of the Jews, was a
political body, and God who is invisible, was their political head: 2. Jesus
Christ is a visible head, yea sometimes more, visus, seen of men whilst on
earth, though now for a time in majesty (as some great Princes do,) he has
withdrawn himself from the sight of men on earth, yet is he seen of Angels and
Saints in he aven. A. 1. I confess God was the King and Ruler of the Jews,
but yet that they might be a visible Political body, the invisible God,
appointed to them under him, a visible head; as the Pope blasphemously pretends
to be appointed under Jesus Christ. 2. Jesus Christ is in his humane nature
still visible, as to his Person, wherein he is the head of his Church, he ever
was, and is still invisible. His present absence, is not upon the account of
Majesty, seeing in his majesty he is still present with us; and as to his
bodily absence he gives other accounts, then that here insinuated. Now it
suffices not to constitute a visible political body, that the head of it, in
any respect may be seen, unless as that their head he is seen: Christ is
visible, as this Church is visible; He in his laws, in his word; that in its
profession, in its obedience. But I marvel that our Reverend Author thus
concluding for Christ to be the political head of this Church, as a Church,
should at the same time contend for such subjects of this head as he does, p.
96. namely persons, contradicting their profession of the knowledge of God, by
a course of wickedness, manifesting principles of profaneness, wherewith the
belief of the truth they profess, has an absolute inconsistency; as I
expressly describe the persons, whose membership in this church, and relation
thereby to Christ their head he pleads for. Are indeed these persons any better
the^ Mahumetans as to church privileges? they are indeed in some places, as to
providentiall advantages of hearing the word preached; but woe unto them on
that account; it shall be more tolerable for Mahumetans in that day of Christ,
then for them: shall their Baptism avail them? though it were valid in its
administration, that is, was celebrated in obedience to the co^ma^d of Christ,
is it not null to the^? is not their circumcision uncircu^cision? shall such
persons give their children any right to church privileges? let them if you
please be so subjects to Christ, as Rebels and Traitors are subject to their
earthly princes: they ought indeed to be so, but are they so? do they own
their Authority? are they obedient to them? do they enjoy any privilege of
Laws? or does* the Apostle any where call such persons as live in a course of
wickedness, manifesting principles utterly inconsistent with the profession of
the Gospel, brethren? God forbid we should once imagine these things so to be!
And so much for that chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Independentisme and Donatisme.
THe Title of our Authors book is, Independency a great Schism, of this
chapter that it may be the better known what kind of schism it is,
Independentisme is Donatisme. Men may give what title they please to their
books and chapters, though perhaps few books make good their titles. I am sure
this does not as yet, nisi accusasse sufficiat: Attempts of proof we have not
as yet met withal: what this chapter will furnish us withal, we shall now
consider. He indeed that shall weigh the title, Independentisme is Donatisme,
and then casting his eye upon the first lines of the chapter it self, find,
that the Reverend Author says, he cannot but acknowledge, that what I plead
for the vindication of protestants from the charge of schism in their
separation from Rome, as the Catholic church, to be rational, solid, and
judicious; will perhaps be at a loss in conjecturing how I am like to be dealt
withal in the following discourse; a little patience will let him see, that
our Author lays more weight upon the Title, then the preface of this chapter;
and that with all my fine trappings I am enrolled in the black book of the
Donatists: but 1 quod fors feret feramus aequo animo; or as another says,
debemus optare optima, cogitare difficulima, far quaecunque erunt; as the
case is fallen out, we must deal with it as we can. 1. He says; he is not
satisfied, that he not only denies the Church of Rome (so called) to be a
particular Church, page 154. but also affirms it to be no Church at all. That
he is not satisfied, with what I affirm of that Synagogue of Satan where he
has his throne, I cannot help it, though I am sorry for it:

I am not also without some trouble, that I cannot understand, what he means by
placeing my words, so as to intimate, that I say, not only that the church of
Rome is no particular church, but also that it is no church at all; as though
it might in his judgment or mine, be any Church, if it be not a particular
church; For I verily suppose neither he nor I judge it to be that Catholic
Church, whereto it pretends. But yet as I have no great reason to expect that
this Reverend Author should be satisfied in any thing that I affirm, so I hope
that it is not impossible, but that without any great difficulty, he may be
reconciled to himself affirming the very same thing, that I do p. 113. It is
of Rome in that sense, wherein it claims it self to be a church, that I speak:
and in that sense he says it is no church of Christ's institution, and so for
my part, I account it no church at all; but he adds, that he is far more
unsatisfied that I undertake the cause of the Donatists, and labor to exempt
them from Schism, though I allow them guilty of other crimes. But do I indeed
undertake the cause of the Donatists? do I plead for the^? will he manifest it
by saying more against them in no more words, then I haved one? do I labor to
exempt them from Schism? are these the ways of peace, love and truth that the
Reverend Author walks in? do I not condemn all their practices, and
pretensions from the beginning to the end? can I not speak of their cause in
Reference to the Catholic Church and its union, but it must be affirmed that I
plead for them? But yet as if righteousness and truth had been observed in
this crimination, he undertakes as of a thing granted to give my grounds of
doing, what he affirms me to have done: The first is, as he says, His singular
notion of Schism, limiting it only to differences in a particular Assembly. 2.
His jealousy of the charge of Schism to be objccted to himself, and party, if
separating from the true Churches of Christ be truly called Schism. A. What
may I expect from others, when so grave and Reverend a person as this Author is
reported to be, shall thus deal with me? Sr I have no singular notion of
Schism, but embrace that which Paul has long since declared, nor can you
manifest any difference in my notion from what he has delivered; nor is that
notion of Schism at all under consideration in Reference to what I affirm of
the Donatists, (who in truth were concerned in it, the most of them to them to
the utmost) but the union of the Church Catholic and the breach thereof;
Neither am I jealous or fearful of the charge' of Schism, from any person
living on the earth, and least of all from men proceeding in church affairs
upon the principles you proceed on. Had you not been pleased, to have supposed
what you please, without the least ground, or color, or reason, perhaps you
would have as little satisfied your self in the charge you have undertaken to
manage against me, as you have done many good men, as the case now stands, even
of your own judgment in other things.

Having made this entrance, he proceeds in the same way, and page 164. laye's
the foundation of the title of his book and this chapter, of his charge of
donatisme in these words. This lies in full force against him and his party,
who have broken the union of our churches, and separated themselves from all
the protestant churches in the world, not of their own constitution, and that
as no true churches of Christ: this I say is the foundation of his whole
ensuing discourse; all the ground that he has to stand upon in the defense of
the Invidious title of this chapter; and what fruit he expects from this kind
of proceeding I know not; The day will manifest of what sort this work is;
Although he may have some mistaken apprehensions to countenance his conscience
in the first part of his assertion, or that it may be forgiven to inveterate
praejudice though it be false; namely; that I and my party (that is the
phraseology, this Author in his love to unity delights in) have broken the
union of their churches (which we have no more done, then they have broken the
union of ours, for we began our reformation with them, on even terms, and were
as early at work as they) yet what color, what excuse can be invented to
alleviate the guilt of the latter part of it, that we have separated from all
the reformed churches as no churches? and yet he repeats this again. page 106.
with especial reflection on my self: I wonder not says he, that the Doctor
has unchurched Room, for he has done as much to England and all foreign
protestant churches, and makes none to be members of the church, but such as
are by covenant and consent joined to some of their congregations. Now truly
though all righteous laws of men in the world, will afford recompense and
satisfaction for calumniating accusations and slanders of much less
importance then this here publicly ownd by our Reverend Author, yet seeing the
gospel of the blessed God, requires to forgive, and pass by greater injuries,
I shall labor in the strength of his grace to bring my heart unto conformity
to his will therein; notwithstanding which, because by his providence I am in
that place and condition, that others also that fear his name may be some way
concerned in this unjust imputatio^, I must declare that this is open
unrighteousness, wherein neither love nor truth has been observed. How little
I am concernd in his following parallel of Independentisme and Donatisme,
wherein he proceeds with the same truth and candor, or in all that follows
thereupon, is easy for any one to judge. He proceeds to scan my Answers to the
Romanists, as in reference to their charge of Schism upon us; and says, I do
it suitable to my own principles. And truly if I had not, I think I had been
much to blame. I refer the Reader to the Answers given in my book, and if he
like them not, notwithstanding this Authors exceptions, I wish he may fix on
those that please him better* in them there given, my conscience does acquiesce.

But he comes in the next place to Arguments, wherein if he prove more happy
then he has done in Accusations, he will have great cause to rejoice. By a
double Argument, as he says, he will prove that there may be Schism besides
that in a particular Church. His first is this.

Schism is a breach of Union, but there may be a breach of union in the
Catholic visible church. His second this; where there are differenccs raised
in matter of faith professed, wherein the union of the Catholic Church
consists, there may be a breach of union, but there may be differences in the
Catholic, or among the members of the Catholic church in matter of faith
professed, Ergo. Having thus laid down his Arguments, he falls to conjecture
what I will answer, and how I will evade; but it will quickly appear that he is
no less unhappy in arguing and conjecturing, then he is, and was in accusing.
For to consider his first Argument: if he will undertake to make it good as to
its form, I will by the same way of arguing, engage my self to prove what he
would be unwilling to find in a regular conclusion. But as to the matter of it,
1. Is Schism every breach of union? or is every breach of Union schism?
Schism in the Ecclesiastical notion is granted to be in the present dispute,
the breach of the union of a church, which it has by the institution of
Christ; and this not of any union of Christ's institution, but of one certain
kind of union; for as was proved, there is an union, whose breach can neither
in the language of the Scripture, nor in reason, nor common sense be called or
accounted schism, nor ever was by any man in the world, nor can be without
destroying the particular nature of schism, and allowing only the general
notion of any separation, good or bad, in what kind soever. So that secondly,
it is granted, not only that there may be a breach of union in the Catholic
church, but also that there may be a breach of the union of the Catholic
church, by a denial or relinquishment of the profession wherein it consists;
but that this breach of union is sehisme, because sehisme is a breach of union,
is as true, as that every man who has two eyes, is every thing that has two
eyes. For his second, it is of the same importance with the first; there may be
differences in the Catholic church, and breaches of union among the members of
it, which are far enough from the breach of the union of that church, as such.
Two professors may fall out and differ, and yet I think continue both of them
professors still. Paul and Barnabas did so; Chrysostom and Epiphanius did so;
Cyrill and Theodoret did so. That which I denied was, that the breach of the
union of the catholic church as such, is Schism. He proves the contrary by
affirming there may be differences among the members of the catholic church,
that do not break the union of it, as such. But he says though there be
Apostasy, or Heresy, yet there may be Schism also; but not in respect of the
breach of the same union, which only he was to prove. Besides evil surmizes,
reproaches, false criminations, and undue suggestions, I find nothing wherein
my discourse is concerned to the end of this chap. page 109. upon the passage
of mine; we are thus come off from this part of Schism for the relinquishment
of the Catholic church, which we have not done, and so to do, is not schism,
but a sin of another nature, and importance; he adds, that the ground I go
upon why separation from a true church (he must mean the catholic church, or
he speaks nothing at all the business in hand) is no schism, is that before
mentioned, that a schism in the Scripture notion is only a division of
jugment in a particular assembly. But who so blind as they that will not see?
the ground I proceeded on evidently, openly, solely, was taken from the nature
of the Catholic church its union, and the breach of that union, and if obiter
I once mention that notion, I do it upon my confidence of its truth, which I
here again tender my self in a readiness to make good to this Reverend
Author, if at any time he will be pleased to command my personal attendance
upon him to that purpose. To repeat more of the like mistakes and surmizes,
with the wranglings that ensue on such false suppositions to the end of this
chapter, is certainly needless; for my part, in and about this whole business
of separation from the catholic church, I had not the least respect to
Presbyterians or Independents as such, nor to the differences betwee^ them,
which alone our Author out of his zeal to truth and peace attends unto: If he
will fasten the guilt of Schism on any on the account of separation from the
Catholic church, let him prove that that church is not made up of the
universality of professors of the Gospel throughout the world, under the
limitations expressed; that the union of it as such, does not consist in the
profession of the truth; and that the breach of that union whereby a man ceases
to be a member of that Church is Schisms, otherwise to tell me that I am a
Sectary, a Schismatic, to fill up his pages with vain surmizes and
supposalls, to talk of a difference and schsme among the members of the
catholic church, or the like impertinencies, will never farther his discourse
among men, either rational, solid, or judicious. All that ensues to the end of
this chapter is about the ordination of ministers, wherein however he has bee^
pleased to deal with me in much bitterness of spirit, with many clamours and
false Accusations; I am glad to find him (p. 120.) renouncing ordination from
the Authority of the church of Rome as such, for I am assured, that by his so
doing, he can claim it no way from, by, or through Rome; for nothing came to
us from thence, but what came, in and by the Authority of that Church.

CHAP. IX.
WE are now gathering toward what seems of most immediate concernment as to
this Reverend Authors undertaking; namely to treat of the nature of a
particular church, its union and the breach of that union; the description I
give of such a church is this; It is a society of men called by the word to the
obedience of the faith in Christ, and joint performance of the worship of God
in the same individual ordinances according to the order by him prescribed.
This I profess to be a general description of its nature, waving all contests
about accurate definitions, which usually tend very little to the discovery or
establishment of truth: after some canvassing of this description, our Author
tells us that he grants it to be the definition of a particular church, which
is more then I intended it for; only he adds that according to this
description, their churches are as true as ours; which I presume by this time
he knows was not the thing in Question. His ensuing discourse of the will of
Christ, that men should join not all in the same individual congregation, but
in this or that, is by me wholly assented unto, and the matter of it contended
for by me, as I am able; what he is pleased to add about explicit covenanting
and the like, I am not at all for the present concerned in; I purposely waved
all expressions concerning it, one way or other, that I might not involve the
business in hand with any unnecessary contests; it is possible somewhat
hereafter may be spoken to that subject, in a tendency unto the reconciliation
of the parties at variance. His argument in the close of the Section for a
Presbyterian church from Acts 20. 17. because there is mention of more elders
then one in that Church, and therefore it was not one single congregation I do
not understand; I think no one single congregation is wholly completed
according to the mind of Christ, unless there be more elders then one it;
there should be elders in every Church; and for my part, so we could once agree
practically in the matter of our churches, I am under some apprehension that it
were no impossible thing to reconcile the whole difference, as to a
Presbyterian church, or a single congregation. And though I be reproved a new
for my pains, I may offer ere long to the candid consideration of godly men,
something that may provoke others of better abilities and more leisure, to
endeavor the carrying on of so good a work. Proceeding to the consideration of
the unity of this church, he takes notice of three things laid down by me,
previously to what I was farther to assert; all which he grants to be true, but
yet will not let them pass without his animadversions. The two first are that
1. a man may be a member of the Catholic invisible church, and 2 of the
visible Catholic church, and yet not be joined to a particular Church. These,
as I said, he ownes to be true, but asks how I can reconcile this with what I
said before, namely, that the members of the Catholic visible Church are
initiated into the profession of the faith by Baptism; but where lies the
difference? why says he, Baptism according to his principles is an ordinance
of worship only to be enjoyed in a particular Church, whilst he will grant
(what yet he does deny, but will be forced to grant) that a minister is a
minister to more then his own church, even to the Catholic Church, and may
administer Baptism out of a particular church, as Phillip did to the Eunuch.
A. How well this Author is acquainted with my principles, has been already
manifested; as to his present mistake I shall not complain, seeing that some
occasion may be administered unto it, from an expression of mine, at least as it
is printed, of which I shall speak afterward; for the present he may be
pleased to take notice, that I am so far from confining Baptism subjectively
to a particular congregation, that I do not believe that any member of a
particular church was ever regularly baptized: Baptism precedes admission into
Church membership, as to a particular Church; the subject of it, is professing
believers and their seed; as such they have right unto it, whither they be
joined to any particular church or no; suitable to this judgment has been my
constant and uninterrupted practice. I desire also to know, who told him that I
deny a minister to be a minister to more then his own Church, or averred that
he may perform ministerial duty only in and toward the members of his own
congregation: for so much as men are appointed the objects of the dispensation
of the word I grant a man in the dispensation of it to act ministerially
toward not only the members of the Catholic church, but the visible members
of the world also in contradistinction thereunto:

The third thing laid down by me, whereunto also he assentes is, that every
believer is obliged to join himself to some one of those Churches, that there
he may abide in Doctrine and fellowship and breaking of bread and prayer: but
my reasons whereby I prove this, he says he likes not so well: and truly I
cannot help it; I have little hope he should like any thing well which is done
by me: Let him be pleased to furnish me with better, and I shall make use of
them; but yet when he shall attempt so to do, it is odds but that one or
other, will find as many flawes in them as he pretends to do in mine; But this,
he says he shall make use of, and that, he shall make advantage of, and I know
not what, as if he were playing a prize upon a stage. The third reason is that
which he likes worst of all, and I like the business the better, that what he
understands least, that he likes worst; it is, that Christ has given no
direction for any duty of worship, merely and purely of sovereign institution,
but only to them and by them who are so joined; Hereupon he asks: 1. is
Baptism a a part of worship? A: yes, and to be so performed by them, that is a
Minister in, or of them; I fear my expression in this place lead him to his
whole mistake in this matter: 2. prayer and reading of the word in private
families are they no duty of worship: An: Not merely and purely of sovereign
institution. 3. Is preaching to convert heathens a duty of worship? not (as
described) in all cases; when it is, it is to be performed by a minister; and
so he knows my answer to his next invidious inquiry, relating to my own
person; Against my fourth Reason taken from the Apostles care to leave none out
of this order, who were converted, where it was possible: he gives in the
instance of the Eunuch, and others converted where there were not enough to
engage in such societies; that, is in them with whom it was impossible: my fifth
is from Christ's providing of officers for these Churches; This also he says
is weak as the rest, for first, Christ provided officers at first for the
Catholic Church, that is the Apostles. 2. all ordinary officers are set first
in the Catholic Church, and every minister is first a minister to the
Catholic Church, and if (says he) he deny this, he knows where to find a
learned Antagonist.

A. But see what it is to have a mind to dispute: will he deny that Christ
appointed officers for particular Churches, or if he should have a mind to do
it, will his arguments evince any such thing; Christ appointed Apostles,
Catholic officers, therefore he did not appoint officers for particular
Churches; though he commanded that elders should be ordained in every Church;
Pastors and teachers are set first in the Catholic church, therefore Christ
has not ordained officers for particular Churches; But this is the way with
our Author! if any word offers it self, whence it is possible to draw out the
mention of any thing, that is, or has at any time been in difference between
Presbiterians and Independents, that presently is run away withal; for my part
I had not the least thought of the controversy which to no purpose at all he
would here lead me to: but yet I must tell him that my judgment is, that
ordinary officers are firstly to be ordained in particular churches: and as I
know where to find a learned Antagonist as to that particular, so I do, in
respect of every thing that I affirm or deny in the business of Religion, and
yet I bless the Lord I am not in the least disquieted or shaken in my
adherence to the truth I profess.

My last reason, he says, is fallacious and inconsequent, and that because he
has put an inference upon it never intended in it. Now the position that these
reasons were produced to confirm being true, and so acknowledged by himself,
because it is a truth that indeed I lay some more then ordinary weight upon, it
being of great use in the days wherein we live: I would humbly entreat this
Reverend Author to send me his reasons whereby it may be confirmed, and I shall
promise him if they be found of more validity then those which according to my
best skill I have already used, he shall obtain many thanks, and much respect
for his favor;

What he remarks upon, or adds to my next discourse about instituted worship in
general, I shall not need to insist on: only by the way I cannot but take
notice of that which he calls a chief piece of Independencie, and that is!
that those who are joined in church fellowship are so confined that they cannot
or may not worship God in the same ordinances in other churches: how this comes
to be a chief piece of Independency, I know* not. It is contrary to the known
practice of all the churches of England that I am acquainted with, which he
calls Independents. For my part I know but one man of that mind, and he is no
child in these things.

For the ensuing discourse about the intercision of ordinances, it being a
matter of great importance, and inquired into by me merely in reference to the
Roman Apostasy, it needs a more serious disquisition, then any thing at present
administered by our Author will give occasion unto: possibly in convenient time
I may offer somewhat farther toward the investigation of the mind of God
therein: every thing in this present contest is so warped to the petty
difference between Presbyterians and Independents, that no fair progress nor
opportunity for it can be afforded: If it may be, in my next debate of it, I
shall wave al mention of those meaner differences: and as I remember I have not
insisted on them in what I have already proposed to this purpose, so possibly
the next time I may utterly escape. For the present, I do not doubt but the
spirit of God in the Scripture, is furnished with sufficient authority to erect
new churches, and set up the celebration of all ordinances on supposition that
there was an intercision of them. To declare the way of his exerting his
Authority to this purpose, with the obviating of all objections to the
contrary, is not a matter to be tossed up and down in this scambling chase: and
I am not a little unhappy, that this Reverend Person was in the dark to my
design and aim all along, which has entangled this dispute with so many
impertinences; But however I shall answer a question which he is pleased to put
to me in particular: he asks me then whither I do not think in my conscience
that there were no true churches in England until the Brownists our fathers,
the Anabaptists our elder brothers, and our selves arose and gathered new
Churches. With thanks for the civility of the inquiry in the manner of its
expression, I answer no! I have no such thoughts, and his pretense of my
insinuation of any such thing, is most vain, as also is his insultation
thereupon; truly if men will in all things take liberty to speak what they
please, they have no reason but to think that they may at one time or other
hear that which will displease;

Having investigated the nature of a particular Church, I proceed in my
treatise of Schism, to inquire after the union of it, wherein it does consist,
and what is the breach thereof; The sum is the joint consent of the members
to walk together in celebration of the same numericall ordinances, according
to the mind of Jesus Christ, is that wherein the union of such a Church does
consist. This is variously excepted against: and I know not what disputes about
an implicit and explicit covenant, of Specificating forms, of the practice of
new and old England, of Admission of church members, of the right of the
members of the Catholic church to all ordinances, of the miscarriage of the
Independents, of church Matriculations and such like things, not once
considered by me in my proposal of the matter in hand; are fallen upon. By the
way he falls upon my judgment about the inhabitation of the Spirit, calls it an
error, and says so it has been reputed by all that are orthodox; raising
terrible suspicions and intimations of judgments on our way from God, by my
falling into that error; when yet I say no more then the Scripture says in
express terms forty times, for which I refer him to what I have written on
that subject, wherein I have also the concurrence of Polanus, Bucanus,
Dorchetus with sundry others Lutherans and Calvinists; It may be when he has
seriously weighed what I have offered to the clearing of that glorious truth of
the Gospel, he may entertain more gentle thoughts both concerning it and me.

The rest of the chapter I have passed through, once and again, and cannot fix
on any thing worthy of farther debate: A difference is attempted to be found in
my description of the union of a particular Church, in this and another place:
because in one place I require the consent of the members to walk together, in
another mention only their so doing, when the mention of that only, was
necessary in that place, not speaking of it absolutely, but as it is the
difference of such a church from the church Catholic, some impropriety of
expression is pretended to be discovered: (id populus curat scilicet:) which
yet is a pure mistake of his, not considering unto what especial end and
purpose the words are used: He repeats sundry things as in opposition to me,
that are things laid down by my self and granted: Does he attempt to prove
that the union of a Church is not rightly stated: he confesses the form of
such a Church consists in the obscrvance and performance of the same ordinances
of worship numerically: I ask, is it the command of Christ that believers
should so do? is not their obedience to that command, their consent so to do?
are not particular churches instituted of Christ? is it not the duty of every
believer to join himself to some one of them? was not this acknowledged above?
can any one do so without his consenting to do so? is this consent any thing
but his voluntary submission to the ordinances of worship therein? As an
express consent and subjection to Christ in general is required to constitute
a man a member of the Church Catholic visible; so if the Lord Jesus has
appointed any particular church for the celebration of his ordinances; is not
their consent who are to walk in them, necessary thereunto? But the Topic of
an explicit covenant, presenting its self with an advantage, to take up some
leaves, would not be waved, though nothing at all to the purpose in hand. After
this, my confession made in as much condescension unto compliance as I could
well imagine, of the use of greater asse^blies, is examined, and excepted
against, as being in my esteem, he says, though it be not so indeed, a matter
of prudence only: But I know full well, that he knows not what esteem or
disesteem I have of sundry things of no less importance. The consideration of
my postulata, proposed in a preparation to what was to be insisted on, in the
next Chapter, as influenced from the foregoing dissertations alone remains,
and indeed alone deserve our notice.

My first is this. The departing of any man or men from any particular Church,
as to the communion peculiar to such a Church, is no where called Schism, nor
is so in the nature of the thing it self, but is a thing to be judged and
recieve a title according to the circumstances of it; to this he adjoines; this
is not the Question, a simple secessio^ of a man or me^ upon some just occasion
is not called schism, but to make causless differences in a Church, and then
separating from it, as no Church, denying communion with it, has the nature
and name of schism in all men's judgments but his own. An. What Question does
our Reverend Author mean? I fear he is still fancying of the difference
between Presbyterians and Independents, and squaring all things by that
Imagination; whether it be a Question stated to his mind or no, I cannot tell,
but it is an assertion expressive of mine own, which he may do well to
disprove if he can. Who told him that raising causlesse differences in a
Church, and then separating from it, is not in my judgment schism? May I
possibly retain hopes of making my self understood by this Reverend Author? I
suppose though, that a pertinacious abiding in a mistake, is neither schism
nor heresy. And so this may be passed over.

My second is, one Church refusing to hold that communion with another, which
ought to be between them, is not Schism properly so called. The reply hereunto
is twofold* 1. That one Church may raise differences in, and with another
church, and so cause Schism. 2 That the Independents deny any communion of
churches, but what is prudentiall, and so that communion cannot be broken. To
the first I have spoken sufficiently before; the latter is but an harping on
the same string: I am not speaking of Independent churches, nor upon the
principles of Independents, much less on them, which are imposed on them; Let
the Reverend Author suppose or aver what communion of churches he pleases, my
position holds in reference to it, nor can he disprove it; however for my part
I am not acquaintcd with those Independents, who allow no communion of
churches, but what is prudentiall; and yet it is thought, that I know as many,
as this Reverend Author does.

Upon the last proposal we are wholly agreed; so that I shall not need to
repeat it; only he gives me a sad farewell at the close of the Chapter, which
must be taken notice of; is (says he) not the design of his book to prove if
he could, and condemn us as no churches, let the world be judge; and I say let
all the saints of God judge; and Jesus Christ will judge whither I have not
outrageous injury done me in this imputation; but, says he, unless this be
proved, he can never justify his separation. Sr. when your and our brethren
told the Bishops, they thanked God they were none of them, and defied the
Prelaticall church, did they make a separation or no; were they guilty of
Schism? I suppose you will not say so: nor do I; yet have I done any such
thing in reference to you or your churches; I have no more separated from you,
then you have done from me; and as for the distance which is between us upon
our disagreement about the way of reformation, let all the churches of God
judge, on which side it has been managed with more breach of love, on yours or
mine; Let me assure you Sir, through the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, I can
freely forgive unto you all your reproaches, revilings, hard censurings, and
endeavors to expose me to public obloquie, and yet hope that I may have
before we die, a place in your heart and prayers.

CHAP. X.
Independency no Schism.
WE are come now to the chapter that must do the work intended, or else operam
and oleum perdidimus; Independentisme a great Schism, is the title of it; what
this Independentisme is, he does neither here declare, nor in any other part of
his book; nor do I know what it is that he intends by it; I hear indeed from
him that it is a schism, a Sect, but of what peculiar import, or wherein it
consists, he has not declared; I suppose he would have it taken for separation
from true Churches, but neither does the notion of the name, though invidiously
broached and disavowed by them, to whom it is ascribed, import any such thing;
nor is the thing it self owned by them, with whom he pretends to have to do: I
find indeed that he tells us, that all Sectaries are Independents; Anabaptists,
Seekers, Ranters, Quakers. Does he expect that I should undertake their
defense? what if it should appear, that I have done more against them then our
Reverend Author, and many of his brethren joined with him; he may perhaps be
willing to load my self and those which he is pleased to call my associats, my
party, I know not what, with their evils and miscarriages. But is this done as
becomes a Christian, a Minister, a Brother? what security has he, that had he
been the only judge and disposer of things in Religion in this nation, if I and
my associats had been sent to plant Churches among the Indians, that he should
have prevented the eruption of the errors and abominations which we have been
exercised withal in this generation, unless he had sent for Duke D'Alva's
instruments to work his ends by? and indeed there is scarce any Sect in the
nation, but had they their desires, they would take that course. This may be
done by any that are uppermost if they please. But how shall we know what it is
he intends by Independentisme: All (it may be) that are not Presbyterians are
Independents. Among these some professedly separate, both from them and us,
(for there are none that separate from them, but withal they separate from us
that I know of) because, as they say, neither theirs nor ours are true
Churches; we grant them to be true Churches, but withal deny that we separate
from them; is it possible at once to defend both these sects of men? is it
possible at once with the same arguments to charge them? The whole discourse
then of our Reverend Author being uniforme, it can concern but one of these
sects of Independents: which it is, any man may judge, that takes the least
view of his treatise. He deals with them that unchurch their Churches,
unminister their ministers, disanull their ordinances, leaving them Churchless,
officerlesse, and in the like sad condition: Is this Independentisme a Schism?
though that it is properly so called, he cannot prove, yet I hope he did not
expect, that I should plead for it; what I shall do in this case, I profess,
well I know not. I here deny that I unminister their ministers, unchurch their
Churches; has this Author any more to say to me, or those of my persuasion?
does not this whole discourse proceed upon a supposition that it is otherwise
with them with whom he has to do? only I must tell him by the way, that if he
suppose by this concession, that I justify and own their way, wherein they
differ from the congregationall ministers in England, to be of Christ's
institution, or that I grant all things to be done regularly among them, and
according to the mind of Christ, therein I must profess he is mistaken. In
breife by Independentisme he intends a separation from true Churches, with
condemning them to be no churches, and their Ministers no Ministers, and their
ordinances none, or Antichristian; whatever becomes of the nature of schism, I
disavow the appearing as an advocate in the behalf of this Independentisme. If
by Independentisme he understand the peaceable proceeding of any of the people
of God in this nation in the several parts of it, to join themselves by their
free consent to walk together in the observation and celebration of all the
ordinanees of Christ appointed to be observed and celebrated in particular
churches, so to reform themselves from the disorders wherein they were
entangled, being not able in some things to join in that way of reformation,
which many godly ministers commonly called Presbyterians, have engaged in, and
seek to promote, without judging and condemning the^ as to the whole of their
station or ordinances; If this I say be intended by Independentisme, when the
Reverend Author shall undertake to prove it Schism, having not in this book
spoken one word or title to it, his discourse will be attended unto. This whole
chapter then being spent against them, who deny them to be true Churches, and
defend separation, I marvel what can be said unto it by me, or how I come to
be concerned in it, who grant them true Churches, and deny separation.

But our Reverend Author, knowing that if this bottom be taken from under him,
he has no foundation for any thing he asserts, thought it not sufficient to
charg me over and over with what is here denied, but at length attempts to make
it good from mine own words; which if he does effect make and good, I confess
he changes the whole nature and state of the dispute in hand: Let ut see
thenhow he answers this undertaking.

From those words of mine, the reformation of any church, or any thing in it,
is the reducing of it to its primitive institution: approving the assertion as
true, he labors to evince that I deny their Churches to be true Churches; how
so I pray; why we erect new churches out of no Churches; and it had been happy
for England if we had all gone to do this work among the Indians. What will
prove Englands happiness or unhappiness, the day will manifest; this is but
man's day and judgment. He is coming who will not judge by the seeing of the eye,
nor by the hearing of the ear; In the mean time, we bless God, and think all
England has cause to bless God, what ever become of us, that he and our
brethren of the same mind with him, in the things of God, have their liberty to
preach the gospel, and carry on the work of reformation in their native soil,
and are not sent into the ends of the earth, as many of ours have been. But how
does our gathering of Churches deny them to be true churches? Does our
granting them to be true Churches, also grant that all the Saints in England
are members of their Churches? It is notoriously known, that it is and was
otherwise, and that when they, and we began: to reform, thousands of the people
of God in these nations, had no reason to suppose themselves to belong to one
particular Church rather then another. They lived in one parish, heard in
another, removed up and down for their advantage, and were in bondage on that
account all their days.

But he says in some words following I discover my very heart: I cannot but by
the way tell him, that it is a sufficient evidence of his unacquaintednesse
with me, that he thinks there is need of searching, and racking my words to
discover my very heart, in any thing that belongs (though in never so remote a
distance) to the worship of God. All that know me, know how open and free, I am
in these things, how ready on all occasions to declare my whole heart; it is
neither fear nor favor can influence me unto another frame: But what are the
words that make this noble discovery: They are these that follow: When any
Society or combination of men (what ever hitherto it has been esteemed) is not
capable of such a reduction, and revocation (that is to its primitive
institution) I suppose I shall never provoke any wise or sober person, if I
profess I cannot look on such a society as a church of Christ: His reply
hereunto is the hinge upon which his whole discourse turns, and must
therefore be considered. Thus then he; is not this, reader, at once to unchurch
all the churches of England since the reformation? for it is known, during the
reign of the prelates they were not capable of that reduction: and what
capacity our Churches are now in for that reduction, partly by want of power
and assistance from the magistrate, without which some dare not set upon a
reformation, for fear of a praemunire, partly by our divisions amongst our
selves, fomented by he knows whom, he cannot but see as well as we lament. And
hereupon he proceeds with sundry complaints of my dealing with them. And now
Chistian Reader what shall we say to these things? A naked supposition, of no
strength, nor weight, that will not hold in any thing or case, namely that a
thing is not to be judged capable of that, which by some external force it is
withheld from, is the sole bottom of all this charge. The Churches of England
were capable of that reduction to their primitive institution, under the
prelates, though in some things hindered by them, from an actual Reducement; so
they are now in sundry places, where the work is not so much as attempted; the
sluggards field is capable of being weeded; the present pretended want of
capacity from the non-assistance of the magistrate, whilst perfect liberty for
Reformation is given, and the work in its several degrees encouraged, will be
found to be a sad plea for some, when things come to be tried out by the rule
of the Gospel. And for our divisions I confess I begin to discover somewhat
more by whom they are fomented, then I did four days ago: for the matter it
self. I desire our Reverend Author to take notice, that I judge every church
capable of a reduction to its primitive institution, which, all outward
hindrances being removed, and all assistances granted, that are necessary for
reformation according to the Gospel, may be reduced into the form and order
appointed unto a particular church by Jesus Christ; and where any society is
not so capable, let them call themselves what they please, I shall advise those
therein, who have personally a due right to the privileges purchased for them
by Jesus Christ, in the way of their administration by him appointed, to take
some other peaceable course to make themselves partakers of them; and forgiving
this advise I neither dread the anger nor Indignation of any man living in the
world: And so I suppose by this time the Author knows what is become of his,
quod erat demonstrandum; and here in room of it I desire him to accept of this
return.

Those who in the judgment of charity were and continue, members of the church
catholic invisible by virtue of their union with Christ the head thereof; and
members of the general visible church, by their due profession of the savings
truths of the gospel, and subjection to Christ Jesus their King and Savior
according to them, do walk in love and concord in the particular churches,
whereof by their own consent and choice they are members, not judging and
condemning other particular churches of Christ, where they are not members as
they are such, as to their stationand privileges, being ready for all
instituted communion with the^, as revealed are not according to any gospel
rule, nor by any principles acknowledged amongst Christians, to be judged or
condemned as guilty of Schism; but such are all they for whom, under any
consideration what ever, I have pleaded as to their immunity from this charge,
in my treatise of Schism; therefore they are not to be judged so guilty. If
you please, you may add, Quod er at demonstratum.

I shall not digress to a recharge upon this Reverend Author, and those of the
same profession with him, as to their mistakes and miscarriages in the work of
Reformation, nor discuss their ways and principles, wherein I am not
satisfied as to their proceduce: I yet hope for better things, then to be
necessitated to carry on the defensative of the way wherein I walk by opposing
theirs. It is true that he who stands upon mere defense, is thought to stand
upon none at all: but I wait for better things from men, then their hearts will
yet allow them, to think of. I hope the Reverend Author thinks, that as I have
reasons wherewith I am satisfied as to my own way, so I have those that are of
the same weight with me against him. But what ever he may surmise I have no
mind to foment the divisions that are amongst us; hence I willingly bear all
his imputations without retortion. I know in part how the case is in the world.
The greatest chargers have not always the most of truth; witness Papists,
Lutherans, Prelutists, Anabaptists. I hope I can say in sincerity, I am for
peace; though others make themselves ready for war.

But we must proceed a little further, though as to the cause by me undertaken
to be managed, causelessely. The discourse of our Author from the place fixed
on, wherein he faintly endeavored to make good the foundation of this chapter,
which I have already considered, consists of two parts: 1. His Animadversions
on some principles which I lay down, as necessary to be stated aright and
determined, that the question about gathering churches may be clearly and
satisfactorily debated. Some of them he says have been handled by others;
which if it be a rule of silence to him, and me, it might have prevented this
tedious debate: what ever his thoughts may be of my pamphlet, I do not fear to
affirm of his Treatile, that I have found nothing in it, from the beginning to
the ending, but what has lien neglected on booksellers stalls for above these
seven years. For the rest of those principles, which he excepts against, as he
thinks meet, I leave their consideration, to that farther enquiry, which the
Lord assisting I have destined them unto. The way of gathering churches upon a
supposition of their antecedency to officers, he says is very pretty, and
loads it with the difficulty of men's coming to be baptized in such a case: but
as I, can tell him of that which is neither true, nor pretty, in the practice
of some whom he knows, or has reason so to do, so I can assure him that we
are not concerned in his objection about baptism, and with them who may
possibly be so, it is a ridiculous thing, to think it an objection. And for
that part of my enquiry, whether the Church be before ordinary officers, or
they before it, as slight as he is pleased to make of it, it will be found to
lie very near the bottom of all our differences, and the right stating of it,
to conduce to the composure and determination of them. His charges and
reflections which he casts about in his passage, are not now to be further
mentioned; we have had them over and over; indeed we have had little else: If
strong, vehement, passionate affirmations, complaints, charges, falfe
imputations, and the like, will amount to a demonstration in this business, he
has demonstrated Independentisme to be a great Schism.

He shuts up his discourse as he began it; reciting my words by adding,
interposing, perverting, commenting, enquiring, he makes them speak what he
pleases, and compasses the ends of his delight upon them. What contentment he
has received in his so doing, I know not; nor shall I express what thoughts I
have, of such a course of proceedure: This only I shall say, it is a facile way
of writing treatises and proving what ever men have a mind unto.

My last task is to look back to the beginning of this last chapter, and to
gather up in our passage, what may seem to respect the business in hand, and
so the whole matter will be dismissed. The plea insisted on for immunity from
the charge of Schism, with reference to the Episcopal Government of the
Church of England, and the constitution which under it, it is pretended to have
had, he passes over; though on sundry accounts his concernments ly as deeply in
it as in any thing pleaded In that treatise. The things he is pleased to take
notice of, as far as they tend in the least to the issue of the debate between
us, shall be reviewed. Considering the several senses wherein that expression,
the church of England, may be taken, I manifest in my treatise, in which of
them, and how far, we acknowledge our selves to have been, and to continue
members of the Church of England. The first is as it comprises the elect
believers in England: what the unity of the Church in this sense is, was before
evinced; our desire to be found members of this Church, with our endeavor to
keep the unity of it in the bond of peace, was declared. I am greived to repeat
our Reverend Authors exceptions to this declaration; says he, unless he
think, there are no members of this church in England, but those that are of
his formed particular churches, I fear he will be found to break the union that
ought to be between them: And why so I pray? The union of the members of the
church in this sense, consists in their joint union to and with Christ their
head by one spirit. What has the Reverend Author to charge upon me with
reference thereunto? Let him speak out to the utmost; yea I have some reason to
think that he will scarce spare, where he can strike; God forbid that I should
think all the members of the Catholic Church in England to be comprised either
jointly or severally in their Churches or ours, seeing it cannot be avoided but
you will keep up those notes of division. I doubt not but there be many
thousands of them who walk neither with you nor us. He adds, that by gathering
saints of the first magnitude we do what lies in us, to make the Invisible
Church visible: It is confessed, we do so; yea we know that that church which
is invisible in some respect, and under one formal consideration, is visible
as to its profession, which it makes unto salvation. This, with all that lies
in us, we draw them out unto: what he adds about the churches being elect, and
the uncomely parts of it, which they may be for a season who are elect
believers, because it must be spoken; are useless cavills. For the scornful
rejection of what I affirm concerning our love to all the members of this
church, and readiness to tender them satisfaction in case of offense, with his
insinuatio^ of my want of modesty and truth in asserting these thoughts,
because he will one day know, that the words he so despises, were spoken in
sincerity, and with the reverence of the great God, and out of love to all his
Saints, I shall not farther vindicate them; such hay and stubble must needs
burn.

My next profession of our Relation to the Church of England, in respect of
that denomination given to the body of professors in this Nation, cleaving to
the Doctrine of the Gospel, here preached and established by Law, as the
public profession of this Nation. But he tells me first: 1. That many
Independent Churches in this Nation, are grossly apostatized from that doctrine,
and so are heretical. 2. That the worship was professed and protested, and
established as well as the doctrine, and that we are all departed from it, and
so are schismatic: for we hold communion with them, he says in the same
doctrine, but not in the same worship. Answer. His first exception arises from
the advantage he makes use of, from his large use of the word Independent,
which will serve him in his sense for what end he pleases. In the sense before
declared his charge is denied; Let him prove it by instance if he be able:
surely God has not given orthodox men leave to speak what they please, without
due regard to love and truth. 2. As to the worship established in this nation
by law, (he means the way of worship, for the substantials of it we are all
agreed in) I suppose he will not say a relinquishment of the practice of it is
schism; if he do, I know what use some men will make of his affirmation,
though I know not how he will free himself from being schismatic; for his
renewed charg of schism, I cannot I confess be moved at it, proceeding from
him, who neither does, nor will know what it is. His next endeavor is to make
use of another concession of mine, concerning our receiving of our regeneration
and new birth by the preaching of the word in England; saying, could they make
use of our preaching etc. but the truth is, when the most of us by the free
grace of God received our new birth through the preaching of the word, neither
they, nor we, as to the practice of our ways, were in England; so that their
concernment as such, in the concession is very small; and we hope since in
respect of others, our own ministry has not been altogether fruitless,
though we make no comparison with them.

In rendering of the next passage which is concerning anabaptists and
anabaptisme, I shall not contend with him; he has not in the least impaired
the truth of what I assert in reference to them and their way. I cannot but
take notice of that passage which for the substance of it has so often
occurred, and that is this; does not himself labor in this book to prove that
the administration of ordinances in our assemblies is null, our ordination null
and antichristian. For the proof of which suggestion he referrs his Reader to
page 197 of my book. I confess seeing this particular quotation, I was
somewhat surprised, and began to fear that some expression of mine (though
contrary to my professed judgment) might have given countenance to this
mistake, and so be pleaded as a Justification of all the uncharitableness and
something else, wherewith his book is replenished; but turning to the place I
was quickly delivered from my trouble, though I must ingeniously confess, I
was cast into another which I shall not now mention.

Page 167. we arrive at that which alone almost I expected would have been
insisted on, and quite conttary thereto, it is utterly waved; namely the
wholebusinesse of a national Church, upon which account indeed all the
pretense of the charge this reverend Author is pleased to manage, does arise.
Take that out of the way, and certainly they, and we are upon even terms; and
if we will be judged by them who were last in possession of the Reiglement of
that church, upon supposition that there is such a church still, they are no
more Interested in it then we, yea are as guilty of schism from it as we. But
that being set aside and particular churches only remaining, It will be very
difficult for him to raise the least pretense of his great charge. But let us
consider what he thinks meet to fasten on, in that discourse of mine about a
national church. The first thing is my inquiry, whether the denial of the
Institution of a national church (which he pleads not for) does not deny in
consequence that we had either ordinances or ministry amongst us: to which I
say, that though it seems so to do, yet indeed it does not, because there was
then another church state, even that of particular churches amongst us, with
many kind reflections of my renouncing my ministry and rejecting of my jejune
and empty vindication of their ministry (which yet is the very same that
himself fixes on) he asks me how I can in my conscience believe, that there
were any true ministers in this church in the time of its being national, and
so proceeds to infer from hence my denying of all ministry and ordinances
among them. Truly though I were more to be despised then I am (if that be
possible) yet it were not common* prudence for any man to take so much pains
to make me his enemy, whether I will or no. He cannot but know that I deny
utterly, that ever we had indeed, whatever men thought, a national church; for
I grant no such thing, as a national church in the present sense contended
about. That in England under the rule of the prelates, when they looked on the
church as national, there were true churches, and true ministers, though in
much disorder as to the way of entering into the ministry and Dispensing of
ordinances, I grant freely; which is all this reverend Author, If I understand
him, pleads for; and this he says I was unwilling to acknowledge, lest I
should thereby condemn my self as a schismatic. Truly, in the many sad
differences and divisions that are in the world amongst Christians, I have not
been without sad and jealous thoughts of heart, lest by any doctrine or
practice of mine I should occasionally contribute any thing unto them; If it
has been otherwise with this Author, I envy not his frame of spirit. But I
must freely say, that having together with them, weighed the reasons for them;
I have been very little moved with the clamorous accusations, and insinuations
of this Author. In the mean time, if it be possible to give him satisfaction,
I here let him know, that I assent unto that sum of all he has to say, as to
the Church of England, namely that the true and faithful ministers, with the
people in their several congregations, administering the true ordinances of
Jesus Christ, whereof baptism is one, was and is the true Church state of
England, from which I am not separated; nor do I think that some addition of
humane prudence, or Imprudence can disanull the ordinances of Jesus Christ.
upon the disavower made of any other national Church state, and the assertion
of this to answer all intents and purposes, I suppose now that the Reverend
Author knows that it is incumbent on him to prove, that we have been members
of some of these particular Churches in due order, according to the mind of
Christ, to all intents and purposes of Church membership, and that we have in
our Individual persons raised causeless differences in those particular
churches whereof we were members respectively, and so separated from them, with
the condemnation of them; or else according to his own principles he fails in
his brotherly conclusion: (...). I suppose the reader is weary of pursuing
things so little to our purpose: if he will hear any further, that Independents
are schismatics, that the setting up of their way has opened a door to all
evils and confusions, that they have separated from all churches, and condemn
all churches in the world but their own; that they have hindered Reformation
and the setting up of the Presbyterian Church; that being members of our
Churches, as they are members of the nation, because they are borne in it, yet
they have deserted them; that they gather Churches which they pretend to be
spick and span new; they have separated from us, that they countenance Quakers,
and all other Sectaries, that they will reform a national church whether men
will or no, though they say that they only desire to reform themselves, and
plead for liberty to that end.

If any man I say have a mind to read or hear of this any more, let him read
the rest of this chapter, or else converse with some persons whom I can direct
him to, who talk at this wholesome rate all the day long.

What seems to be my particular concernment, I shall a little further attend
unto. Some words (for that is the manner of mannaging this controversy) are
culled out from page 259. 260. to be made the matter of farther contest. Thus
they lie in my Treatise. As the not giving a man's self up unto any way, and
submiting to any establishment pretended or pleaded to be of Christ, which he
has not light for, and which he was not by any act of his own formerly
engaged in, cannot with any color or pretense of reason be reckoned to him for
schism, though he may if he persist in his refusal prejudice his own
edification; so no more can a man's peaceable relinquishment of the ordinary
communion of one Church in all its relations be so esteemed. These words have
as yet unto me a very harmless aspect; but our Reverend Author is
sharp-sighted, and sees I know not what monsters in them: for first (says he)
here he seems to me to be a very Sceptick in his way of independency: why so I
pray? This will gratify all sects, Quakers, and all with a toleration: how I
pray? it is Schism, not toleration we are treating about. But this leaves them
to judge of, as well as others, what is, and what is not according to the mind
of Christ, why pray Sr. who is appointed to judge finally for them? why then
should they be denied their liberty? but is that the thing under consideration?
had you concluded that their not submitting to what they have not light for its
institution, is not properly Schism, you should have seen how far I had been
concerned in the inference: but excursions unto Quakers etc. are one topic of
such discourses. But now he asks me one Question, it seems to try whither I am
a Sceptick or no; whether (says he) does he believe his own way to be the
only true way of Christ, for he has instituted but one way, having run from
and renounced all other ways in this nation. I promise you this is a hard
Question; and not easily answered. If I deny it, he will say I am a Sceptick,
and other things also will be brought in: if I affirm it, it may be he will
say that I condemn their churches for no churches, and the like: it is good to
be wary when a man has to deal with wise men; how if I should say that our
way and their way is for the substance of them, one way, and so I cannot say
that my way is the only true way exclusively to theirs: I suppose this may do
pretty well. But I fear this will scarce give satisfaction, and yet I know not
well how I can go any farther; yet this I will add; I doindeed believe, that
wherein their way and our way differ, our way is according to the mind of
Christ and not theirs: and this I am ready at any time (God assisting)
personally to maintain to him: and as for my running from ways of religion, I
dare again tell him, these reproaches and calumnies become him not at all. But
he proceeds, if so, (says he) is not every man bound to come into it, and not
upon every conceived new light to relinquish it. Truly I think Mr. C. himself
is bound to come into it, and yet I do not think that his not so doing makes
him a Schismatic: and as for relinquishment I assert no more, then what he
himself concludes to be lawful.

And thus Christian Reader I have given thee a brief account of all things of
any importance that I could meet withal in this treatise, and of many which
are of very little; if thou shall be pleased to compare my treatise of Schism
with the refutation of it, thou will quickly see, how short this is, of that
which it pretends to: how untouched my principles do abide, and how the most
material parts of my discourse are utterly passed by, without any notice taken
of them. The truth is, in the way chosen by this Reverend Author to proceed in,
men may multiply writings to the worlds end, without driving any controversy to
an issue; descanting and harping on words, making exceptions to particular
passages and the like, is an easy and facile, and to some men a pleasant
labor: what small Reason our Author had to give his book the title it bears,
unless it were to discover his design, I hope does by this time appear. Much
of the proof of it lies in the repeated asseverations of it, it is so, and it
is so. If he shall be pleased to send me word of one argument tending that way,
that is not founded in an evident mistake, I will promise him, if I live, a
reconsideration of it.

In the mean time I humbly beg of this Reverend Author, that he would review in
the presence of the Lord the frame of spirit, wherein he wrote this charge; as
also that he would take into his thoughts all the reproaches, and all that
obloquy he has endeavored to load me causlesly and falsely withal. As for my
self, my name, reputation, and esteem with the Churches of God, to whom he
has endeavored to render me odious, I commit the whole concernment of them to
him, whose presence through grace I have hitherto enjoyed, and whose promise I
lean upon, that he will never leave me nor forsake me. I shall not complain
of my usage: but what am I? of the usage of many precious Saints and holy
Churches of Jesus Christ, to him that lives and sees, any farther then by
begging that it may not be laid to his charge: and if so mean a person as I
am, can in any way be serviceable to him, or to any of the churches that he
pleads for, in reference to the Gospel of Christ, I hope my life will not be
dear to me that I may effect it; and I shall not cease to pray that both he
and those who promoted this work in his hand, may at length consider the many
calls of God that are evident upon them, to lay aside these unseemly
animosities, and to endeavor a coalition in love, with all those who in
sincerity call upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours.

For the distances themselves that are between us, wherein we are not as yet
agreed; what is the just state of them, the truth and warrantablenesse of the
principles whereupon we proceed, with the necessity of our practice in
conformity thereunto, what we judge our Brethren to come short in, of, or
wherein to go beyond the mind of Jesus Christ, with a farther ventilation of
this business of Schism, I have some good grounds of expectation, that
possibly ere long we may see a fair discussion of these things, in a pursuit
of truth and peace.

FINIS.

