(...): OR, A DISPLAY OF ARMINIANISME. BEING A DISCOVERY of the old Pelagian
Idol Free Will, with the new Goddess Contingency, advancing themselves, into
the Throne of the God of heaven to the prejudice of his Grace, Providence, and
Supreme Dominion over the children of men.

Wherein the maine errors of the Arminians are laid open, by which they are
fallen off from the received Doctrine of all the Reformed Churches, with their
opposition in diverse particulars to the Doctrine established in the Church of
England.

Discovered out of their own writings and confessions, and confuted by the
Word of God.

By John Owen, Master of Arts of Queens College in Oxon.

Produce your cause, says the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons, says the
King of Jacob: Isa. 41. 21. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker, let the
pot sheards strive with the potsheards of the earth: Chap. 45. 9. (...).
Constant: apud Socrat. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. LONDON Printed by I. L. for Phil.
Stephens, at the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS AND GENTLEMEN OF THE COMMITTEE FOR RELIGION.
THe many ample testimonies of zealous reverence to the providence of God, as
well, as affectionate care, for the privileges of men, which have been given,
by this Honorable Assembly of Parliament, encourage the adorers of the one, no
less then the Lovers of the other, to vindicate that also, from the
encroachments of men. And as it was not doubtless without divine disposition,
that those should be the chiefest Agents, in robbing men of their privileges,
who had nefariously attempted to spoil God of his providence: so we hope, the
same All-ruling hand, has disposed of them, to be glorious instruments, of
re-advancing his right, and supreme dominion over the hearts of men, whose
hearts, he has prepared with courage and constancy, to establish men, in their
inviolated rights: by reducing a sweet Harmony, between awful Sovereigntie,
and a well moderated liberty. Now the first of these, being demandated to your
particular care, I come unto you, with a Bill of Complaint, against no small
number in this Kingdom; who have wickedly violated, our interest in the
providence of God, and have attempted to bring in, the foreign power of an
old Idol, to the great prejudice, of all the true subjects, and servants of the
most High. My accusation I make good, by the evidence of the fact, joined with
their own confessions. And because to wave the imputation of violent
intrusion, into the dominion of another, they lay some claim, and pretend some
title unto it. I shall briefly show how it is contrary to the express terms
of the Great Charter of heaven, to have any such power, introduced amongst men:
Your known Love to truth, and the Gospel of Christ, makes it altogether
needless for me, to stir you up by any motives, to hearken to this just
Complaint, and provide a timely remedy for this growing evil: especially since
experience, has so clearly taught us here in England, that not only
eternal, but temporal happiness also, depends on the flourishing of the
Truth of Christ's Gospel.

Justice and Religion, were always conceived, as the maine Columns and
upholders of any State, or Commonwealth; like two pillars in a building,
whereof the one cannot stand, without the other; nor the whole fabric without
them both. As the Philosopher spoke of Logic and Rhetoric, they are Arts
(...), mutually ayding each other, and both aiming at the same end, though in
different manners: so they, without repugnancie concur, and sweetly fall in,
one with another, for the reiglement and direction, of every person in a
Commonwealth, to make the whole happy and blessed: and where they are both
thus united, there, and only there, is the blessing, in assurance whereof,
Hezekiah rejoiced: Truth and Peace. An agreement without Truth, is no Peace,
but a covenant with Death, a league with Hell, a conspiracy against the
Kingdom of Christ, a stout rebellion against the God of Heaven; and without
Justice, great Commonwealths, are but great troops of Robbers: Now the result
of the one of these, is civil Peace, of the other Ecclesiastical, betwixt
which two, there is a great sympathy, a strict connection: having on each other
a mutual dependence: Is there any disturbance of the State? it is usually
attended with Schisms, and factions in the Church, and the divisions of the
Church, are too often, even the subversions of the Commonwealth. Thus it has
been ever since that unhappy difference, between Cain and Abel: which was
not, concerning the bounds and limits of their inheritance, nor which of them
should be heir to the whole world: but about the Dictates of Religion, the
offering of their sacrifices. This fire also of dissension, has been more
stirred up, since the Prince of Peace, has by his Gospel, sent the Sword
amongst us: for the preaching thereof, meeting with the strong holds of Satan,
and the depraved corruption of humane nature, must needs occasion a great
shaking of the earth. But most especially, distracted Christendom, has found
fearful issues of this discord, since the proud Romish Prelates, have sought
to establish their hell-broached errors, by inventing, and maintaining,
uncharitable destructive censures against all that oppose them: which first
causing Schisms, and distractions in the Church, and then being helped
forwards, by the blindness and cruelty, of ambitious Potentates, have raised
war of nation against nation, witness the Spanish Invasion of 88. of a people
within themselves, as in the late Civil wars of France, where after diverse
horrible Massacres, many chose rather to die Soldiers, then Martyrs.

And Oh, that this truth, might not at this day, be written with the blood of
almost expiring Ireland. Yea, it has lastly descended to dissension, betwixt
private parties, witness the horrible murder of Diazius, Sleid. Com.
whose brains were chopped out with an axe, by his own brother Alphonsus, for
forsaking the Romish Religion: what rents in State, what grudgings, hatreds and
exasperations of mind, among private men, have happened by reason of some
inferior differences, we all at this day grieve to behold; tantum Religio
potuit suadere malorum: most concerning then is it for us to endeavor
obedience, to our Saviors precept, of seeking first the kingdom of God, that
we may be partakers, of the good things, comprised in the promise annexed: were
there but this one Argument, for to seek the peace of the Church, because
thereon depends the peace of the Common wealth, it were sufficient to quicken
our utmost industry, for the attaining of it. Now what peace in the Church,
without Truth? all conformity to any thing else, is but the agreement of Herod
and Pilate, to destroy Christ and his Kingdom, neither is it this, or that,
particular truth, but the whole Counsel of God, revealed unto us, without
adding, or detracting, whose embracement is required, to make our Peace firm
and stable. No halting betwixt Jehovah and Baal; Christ and Antichrist, as good
be all Philistine, and worshippers of Dagon, as to speak part the language of
Ashdod, and part the language of the Jews: hence, hence has been the rise of
all our miseries, of all our dissentions, whilst factious men, labored every
day, to commend themselves to them, who sat aloft in the Temple of God, by
introducing new Popish Arminian errors, whose Patronage they had wickedly
undertaken: who would have thought, that our Church, would ever have given
entertainment, to these Belgicke Semipelagians, who have cast dirt upon the
faces, and raked up the ashes, of all those great and pious souls, whom God
magnified, in using as his instruments to reform his Church; to the least of
which, the whole troop of Arminians, shall never make themselves equal,
though they swell till they break? what benefit did ever come to this Church,
by attempting to prove, that the chief part, in the several degrees of our
salvation, is to be ascribed unto our selves, rather then God? which is the
head and sum, of all the Controversies, between them and us: and must not the
introducing and fomenting of a doctrine, so opposite to that truth our Church
has quietly enjoyed, ever since the first reformation necessarily bring along
with it Schisms and dissentions, so long as any remain who love the truth, or
esteem the Gospel above preferment: Neither let any deceive your Wisdoms, by
affirming, that they are differences of an inferior nature, that are at this
day agitated, between the Arminians and the Orthodox Divines of the reformed
Church, be pleased but to cast an eye on the following instances, and you will
find them hewing, at the very root of Christianity. Consider seriously their
denying of that fundamental Article of Original sin: Is this but a small
escape in Theology? why, what need of the Gospel? what need of Christ
himself, if our nature be not guilty, depraved, corrupted? neither are many of
the rest of less importance; surely these are not things, in quibus possimus
dissentire salva pace ac charitate, as Austin speaks, about which we may
differ, without loss of peace or charity, one Church cannot wrap in her
communion, Austin and Pelagius; Calvine, and Arminius. I have here only given
you a taste, whereby you may judge of the rest of their fruit: mors in olla,
mors in olla; their doctrine of the final apostasy of the elect, of true
believers, of a wavering haesitancy, concerning our present grace, and future
glory, with diverse others, I have wholly omitted: those I have produced, are
enough to make their abettors incapable of our Church communion: the Sacred
bond of peace, compasses only the unity of that Spirit which leads into
all truth. We must not offer the right hand of fellowship, but rather proclaim
(...), Greg. Naz.
an holy war, to such enemies, of Gods providence, Christ's merit, and the
powerful operation of the holy Spirit* neither let any object that all the
Arminians do not openly profess, all these errors, I have recounted; let ours
then show wherein they differ from their Masters, Profitentur Remonst. hasce ad
promotionem causae suae arts adhibere, ut apud vulgus non ulterius
progrediantur quam de articulis vulgo notis, ut pro ingeniorum diversitate
quosdam lacte diualant, aliis solidiore cibo etc. Festus Hom. praestat ad
specimen Con. Bell.
we see their own confessions, we know their arts, (...), the depths and
crafts of Satan, we know the several ways they have to introduce, and
insinuate their Heterodoxies into the minds of men: with some they appear
only to dislike our doctrine of reprobation: with others to claim an
allowable liberty of the will: but yet for the most part, like the Serpent,
where ever she gets in her head, she will wriggle in her whole body sting and
all: give but the least admission, and the whole poison must be swallowed. What
was the intention of the maintainers of these strange assertions amongst us, I
know not: whether the efficacy of error prevailed really with them, or no? or
whether it were the better to comply with Popery, and thereby to draw us back
again unto Egypt, but this I have heard, that it was affirmed on knowledge in
a former Parliament, that the introduction of Arminianisme amongst us, was the
issue of a Spanish consultation: Hieron. Zanch. ad Holderum: Res. Miscel.
it is a strange story that learned Zanchius tells us, how upon the death of the
Cardinal of Lorraigne there was found in his Study a note, of the names of
diverse Germane Doctors and Ministers, being Lutherans, to whom was paid an
annual pension, by the assignment of the Cardinal, that they might take pains
to oppose the Calvinists, and so by cherishing dissension, reduce the people
again to Popery. If there be any such amongst us, who upon such poor
inconsiderable motives, would be won to betray the Gospel of Christ, God
grant them repentance* before it be too late; however, upon what grounds, with
what intentions, for what ends soever, these Tares have been sowed amongst us
by envious men, the hope of all the piously learned in the Kingdom is, that by
your effectual care and diligence, some means may be found to root them out.
Now God Almighty increase and fill, your whole Honorable Society, with
wisdom, zeal, knowledge, and all other Christian graces, necessary for your
great calling and employments, which is the daily prayer of

Your most humble and devoted servant JOHN OWN.

To the Christian Reader.
READER,
THou can not be such a stranger in our Izrael, as that it should be
necessary for me, to acquaint thee, with the first sowing and spreading of
these Tares in the Field of the Church, much less to declare, what divisions
and thoughts of heart, what open bitter contentions, to the loss of
Ecclesiastical peace, have been stirred up amongst us about them: only some
few things relating to this my particular endeavor, I would willingly
premonish thee of.

First, Never were so many prodigious errors introduced into a Church, with so
high a hand, and so little opposition, as these into ours, since the nation of
Christians was known in the world, the chief cause I take to be, that which
Aeneas Sylvius gave, why more maintained the Pope to be above the Council, then
the Council above the Pope, because Popes gave Archbishopricks, Bishoprics,
etc. but the Councels sued in forma pauperis, and therefore could scarce get an
Advocate to plead their cause: the fates of our Church having of late devolved
the government thereof into the hands of men tainted with this poison,
Arminianisme became backed, with the powerful Arguments, of praise and
preferment, and quickly prevailed, to beat poor naked truth into a corner: It
is high time then for all the lovers of the old way, to oppose this innovation,
prevailing by such unworthy means, before our breach grow great like the Sea,
and there be none to heal it.

My intention in this weak endeavor, (which is but the undigested issue of a
few broken hours, too many causes in these furious malignant days,
continually interrupting the course of my studies) is but to stir up such,
who having more leisure, and greater abilities, will not as yet move a finger,
to help vindicate oppressed Truth.

In the mean time I hope this discovery may not be unusefull, especially to
such who wanting either, will or abilities, to peruse larger discourses, may
yet be allured by their words which are smoother then oil, to taste the poison
of Aspes that is under their lips: Satan has (...), depths where to hide, and
methods how to broach his lies: and never did any of his Emissaries employ his
received talents with more skill and diligence, then our Arminians: laboring
earnestly in the first place to in still some errors that are most plausible,
intending chiefly an introduction of them that are more palpable, knowing that
if those be for a time suppressed, until these be well digested, they will
follow of their own accord: wherefore I have endeavored, to lay open to the
view of all, some of their foundation errors, not usually discussed, on which
the whole inconsistent superstructure is erected, whereby it will appear, how
under a most ^^ine pretense of furthering Piety, they have prevaricated against
the very grounds of Christianity: wherein

First, I have not observed the same method in handling each particular
Controversy, but followed such several ways as seemed most convenient to
clear the truth and discover their heresies:

Secondly some of their errors I have not touched at all, as those concerning
universal grace, justification, the final Apostasy of true believers: because
they came not within the compass of my proposed method, as you may see Chap.
1. where you have the sum of the whole discourse.

Thirdly, I have given some instances, of their opposing the received Doctrine
of the Church of England, contained in diverse of the 39. Articles: which would
it did not yield us just cause of further complaint, against the iniquity of
those times whereinto we were lately fallen: Had a poor Puritan offended
against half so many Canons, as they opposed Articles, he had forfeited his
livelihood, if not endangered his life: I would I could hear any other
probable reason, why diverse Prelates were so zealous for the discipline, and so
negligent of the Doctrine of the Church: but because the one was reformed by
the word of God: the other remaining as we found it in the times of Popery.

Fourthly, I have not purposely undertaken to answer any of their Arguments,
referring that labor to a further design: even a clearing of our Doctrine of
reprobation, and of the administration of Gods providence, toward the
Reprobates and over all their actions, from those calumnious aspersions they
cast upon it, but concerning this, I fear the discouragements of these woeful
days, will leave me nothing but a desire: that so necessary a work, may find
a more able Pen:

JOHN OWN.
Arma: Vt omnis controversia dirimatur per verbum Dei, consilium hoc suspectum
videre debet and non uno nomine pernitiosum est: Remon: vindic. ad Videl. p.
30. 1. Lib. Arbitrium. 2. Contingentia. 3. Indifferentia ad (...) velle and
nolle 4. Supremum actus sui dominium. 5. Ens (...) independens in agendo
divinam 1. Voluntatem mutabilem, 2 Scientiam fallibilem, conjecturalem, 3.
Providentiam otiosam, Constituentia



(...) Specimen: Primus Copiarum impetus, in Campo qui de nomine alterius
ducis, Lib. Arbit. dicitur seu humanarum actionum ditio Vtrinque autem a
voluntate humana remota and confossa jacent, 1. Coactio 2. Necessitas absoluta
interna 3. Mera seu solitaria spontaneitas
Arma: Ad Legem ad Prophetas Scrutamini Scripturas: Johan. 5. 39. 1. Decretum
absolutum immutabile, 2. Praescientia infallibilis, 3. Providentia, per 1.
Sustentationem, 2. Determinationem, 3. Gubernationem, 4. Directionem, sum
effica^. quibus omnem creaturam, 1. Essentiam. 2. Subsistentiam, 3. Motionem,
4. Determinationem ad actum, 5. Efficientiam in agendo realem, debere necesse
est.



1. Lib. Arbit. 2. Integritas naturae 3. Lumen natural 4. Actus elicitus, 5.
Faciens quod in se est 6. Faedus novum universale. 7. Vires credendi per lapsum
non amissae. 8. Potentia active obedientialis ad bonum morale 9. Suasio moralis
Lingua nostra praevaleamus, labia nostra penes nos sunt, quis esset nobis
Dominus: Psalm. 12. His tu gradibus Romule Arpin: ascendisti in coelum. Dei
munus est quod vivimus, nostrum vero, quod been sancteque vivimus, -- fortunam
a Deo petendam, a seipso sumendam esse sapientiam Quia sibi quisque virtutem
a^quirit nemo de sapientibus de ea gratias Deo egit

Impetus copiarum secundus, circa gratiam and naturam, ubi adversis frontibus
and cominus pugnatur Campus autem hic status naturae post lapsum vocetur, cujus
loca praecipua quae in mappa -- (...) delineantur, sunt. 1. Reatus primi
peccati, 2. Corruption naturae, 3. Mors spiritualis, ubi multa mortuorum
sepulchra, e quibus resurgente Christo, exierunt pauci. 4. Impotentia credendi:
5. Caecitas intellectus: 6. Pravitas voluntatis: 7. Obduratio cordis: 8.
Aversio a bono incommutabili: 9. Propensio ad bonum commutabile.
1. Praedestinatio gratuita 2. Meritum Christi 3. Operatio Spiritus 4. Gratia
efficax: 5. Infusio habituum 6. Vocatio secundum immutabile dei propositu^ 7.
Evangelium Jesus Christi 8. Liber vitae Non nobis Domine non nobis, sed nomini
tuo da honorem: Psalm. 114. Nam quos praescivit etiam praedestinavit
conformandos imagini filii sui ut is sit primogenitus inter multos fratres,
quos vero praedestinavit eos etiam vocavit and quos vocavit eos etiam
iustificavit, and quos justificavit eos etiam glorificavit: Romans 8. Cui soli
sapienti gloria sit per Iesum Christum in secula.

Reader,
SOme sheets of this Treatise being printed after the first draught of the
Author, and a great part of it in his absence, makes it require thy courtesy
favorably to correct any misprinting or greater oversight that may prejudice
the sense thereof: to take notice also of these follow Errata, but account them
as not committed, because corrected.

Page 17. l 9. read, mutability. p. 25. l. 5 dele, and: p. 29. l. 23. r. cap.
p. 34. l. 17. for essence, r. esteem: p. 36. l 21, 22. r. his law, cannot
possibly aim at nothing: p. 37. l. 20. d. it: p. 40. l. 5. r. tolerable, l 6.
r. them: p. 42. l. 1. r. and yet it is not: l. 2. d* yet l. 8. d neither, l.
22. r. that we: p. 44. l 18. or no. in, p. 45. l. 24. r. not unneces. (...)
corrupted: p. 53. l. 15. r. can be deriv: p. 56. l. 25. r. as equal an as: p.
59. l. 3 ^ r. laid down: p. 62. l. 25. us: first, p. 63. l. 2. for events, r
deserts: p. 68. l. 27. of God. in, p. 78. l 36. r. sinners deserve, p. 116. l.
12. r. for granted, p. 119. l. 12. by those, p. 120. l. 25. r. his will and
heavenly instructions, p. 128. l. 1. Agent. p. 130. l. 21. r. nor any thing.

In the Margin.
Page 7. h omiss great: p. 15. c datrib. lib. 3: p. 24 c dele Aristot: p 46. f
vellet, p. 47. m desiderio, p. 65. m de bono perseve: p. 75. k dimanet 3 p.
117. c Fest, Hom. and Peltium. p. 134. f praecipienti, p. 135. 1. Cor. ad Molin.

A DISPLAY OF ARMINIANISME, (...).
CHAP. I.
THe soul of man, by reason of the corruption of nature, is not only Ephesians. 4.
18. John 1. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
darkened, with a mist of ignorance, whereby he is dis-inabled, for the
comprehending of divine truth, but is also armed, with John. 6. 42. and 7. 52.
Natura sic apparet vitiata ut hoc majoris vitii sit, non videre: Aug.
prejudice and opposition, against some parts thereof, which are either, most
above, or most contrary, to some false principles, which he has framed unto
himself. As a desire of selfe-sufficiencie, was the first cause of this
infirmity, so a conceit thereof, is that where with he still languisheth,
nothing does he more contend for, then an independencie of any supreme power,
which might either help, hinder, or control him, in his actions. This is that
bitter root, Pelag: Semipelag. Scholastico.
from whence have sprung, all those heresies, and wretched contentions, which
have troubled the Church; concerning the power of man in working his own
happiness, and his exemption, from the overruling providence of Almighty
God. All which wrangling disputes of carnal reason, against the word of God:
come at last to this head, whether the first and chiefest part, In hac causa
non judicant secundum aequitatem, sed secundum affectum commodi sui. Luth. de
erv. Arbit.
in disposing of things in this world, ought to be ascribed to God, or man: men
for the most part have vindicated this pre-eminence, unto themselves, by
exclamations, that so it must be, or else, that God is unjust, and his ways
unequal: never did any men postquam Christiana gens esse caepit: more eagerly
endeavor the erecting of this Babel, then the Arminians, the modern blinded
Patrons of humane selfe-sufficiencie; All whose innovations in the received
doctrine of the reformed Churches, aim at, and tend to, one of these two ends.

First, to exempt themselves from Gods jurisdiction, to free themselves from
the supreme dominion of his all-ruling providence, not to live, and move, in
him: but to have an absolute independent power, in all their actions, so that
the event of all things, wherein they have any interest, might have a
considerable relation, to nothing, but chance, contingencie, and their own
wills; a most nefarious, sacrilegious attempt: to this end.

First, they deny the eternity, and unchangeablenesse of Gods decrees: for
those being established, they fear, they should be kept within bounds, from
doing any thing, but what his counsel has determined should be done, if the
purposes of the strength of Israel, be eternal, and immutable, their idol
Free Will, must be limited, their independencie prejudiced: wherefore, they
choose rather to affirm, that his decrees, are temporary and changeable, yea
that he does really change them, according to the several mutations he sees in
us: which how a wild a conceit it is, how contrary to the pure nature of God,
how destructive to his attributes: I shall show in the second Chapter.

Secondly, they question the praescience, or foreknowledge of God: for if
known unto God, are all his works, from the beginning, if he certainly
foreknow all things, that shall hereafter come to pass, it seems to cast an
infallibility of event, upon all their actions, which encroaches upon the
large territory, of their new goddess contingencie, nay it would quite
dethrone the Queen of heaven, and induce a kind of necessity, of our doing
all, and nothing but, what God foreknows: now that to deny this praescience is
destructive to the very essence of the Deity, and plain atheism, shall be
declared, Chapter the third.

Thirdly, they depose the all-governing providence of this King of Nations,
denying its energeticall, effectual power, in turning the hearts, ruling the
thoughts, determining the wills, and disposing the actions of men, by granting
nothing unto it, but a general power, and influence, to be limited, and used,
according to the inclination, and will of every particular agent: so making
Almighty God a desirer, that many things, were otherwise, then they are, and an
idle spectator of most things that are done in the world, the falsenesse of
which assertions shall be proved: Chapter the fourth.

Fourthly, they deny the irresistibilitie, and uncontrolable power of Gods
will, affirming, that oftentimes he seriously wills, and intends what he
cannot accomplish, and so is deceived of his aim: nay whereas he desires, and
really intends, to save every man, it is wholly in their own power whether
he shall save, any one or no, otherwise, their Idol Free Will, should have but
a poor deity, if God, could how, and when, he would, cross and resist him,
in his dominion: concerning this see Chapter the fifth. His gradibus itur in
coelum, corrupted nature, is still ready, either nefariously with Adam, to
attempt to be like God, Psalm. 50.
or to think foolishly, that he is altogether like unto us: one of which
inconveniences, all men run into, who have not learned, to submit their
frail wills, to the Almighty will of God, and captivate their understandings,
to the obedience of faith.

Secondly, the second end, at which the new doctrine of the Arminians aims,
is to clear humane nature, from the heavy imputation, of being sinful,
corrupted, wise to do evil, but unable to do good: and so to vindicate unto
themselves, a power, and ability, of doing all that good, which God can justly
require to be done, by them, in the state wherein they are, of making
themselves, differ from other, who will not make so good use, of the endowments
of their natures, that so the first, and chiefest part, in the work of their
salvation, may be ascribed unto themselves: a proud Luciferian endeavor; to
this end:

First, they deny, that doctrine of predestination, whereby God is affirmed, to
have chosen certain men, before the foundation of the world, that they should
be holy, and obtain everlasting life, by the merit of Christ, to the praise of
his glorious grace: any such predestination which may be the fountain, and
cause of grace, or glory, determining the persons, according to Gods good
pleasure, on whom they shall be, bestowed: for this doctrine, would make the
special grace of God, to be the sole cause, of all the good, that is in the
elect, more then the reprobates, would make faith, the work, and gift of God:
with diverse other things, which would show their Idol to be nothing, of no
value: wherefore what a corrupt heresy they have substitute into the place
hereof, see Chapter the sixth.

Secondly, they deny original sin, and its demerit, which being rightly
understood, would easily demonstrate, that notwithstanding, all the labor, of
the Smith, the Carpenter, and the Painter, yet their Idol, is of its own
nature, but an unprofitable block, it will discover, not only the impotencie
of doing good, which is in our nature, but show also, whence we have it: see
Chapter the seventh.

Thirdly, if ye will charge our humane nature, with a repugnancie to the Law of
God, they will maintain, that it was also in Adam, when he was first created,
and so comes from God himself: Chapter the eighth.

Fourthly, they deny the efficacy, of the merit, of the death of Christ,
both, that God intended by his death, to redeem his Church, or to acquire unto
himself, an holy people, as also, that Christ by his death, has merited, and
procured for us, grace, faith, or righteousness, and power to obey God, in
fulfilling the condition of the new covenant; nay this were plainly to set up
an Arc, to break their Dagons neck: for what praise (say they) can be due,
to our selves, for believing, if the blood of Christ, has procured God to
bestow faith, upon us: increpet te Deus o Satan, see Chapter nine and ten.

Fifthly, if Christ will claim such a share in saving of his people, of them
that believe in him, they will grant, some to have salvation, quite without
him, that never heard, so much as a report, of a Savior: and indeed in
nothing, do they advance their Idol, nearer the throne of God, then in this
blasphemy, Chapter 11.

Sixthly, having thus robbed God, Christ, and his grace, they adorn their Idol
Free Will, with many glorious properties, no way due unto it, discussed,
Chapter 12. where you shall find how, movet cornicula risum, furtivis undata
coloribus.

Seventhly, they do not only claim, to their new made Deity, a saving
power, but also affirm, that he is very active, and operative in the great
work of saving our souls.

First, in fitly preparing us for the grace of God, and so disposing of our
selves, that it becomes due unto us: Chapter 13.

Secondly, in the effectual working of our conversion, together with it:
Chapter 14.

And so at length with much toil, and labor, they have placed an Altar for
their Idol, in the holy temple, on the right hand of the Altar of God: and on
it, offer sacrifice, to their own net, and dragge; at least nec Deo, nec
libero Arbitrie, sed dividatur: not all to God, nor all to Free Will, but let
the Sacrifice of praise, for all good things, be divided between them.

CHAP. II.
Of the eternity and immutabilitie of the decrees of Almighty God, denied and
overthrown by the Arminians.
IT has been always believed among Christians, and that upon infallible
grounds, as I shall show hereafter, that all the decrees of God, as they are
internal, so they are eternal acts of his will, and therefore unchangeable,
and irrevocable: mutable decrees, and occasional resolutions, are most
contrary, to the pure nature, of Almighty God: such principles as these,
evident, and clear, by their own light, were never questioned, by any, before
the Arminians began, (...), and to profess themselves, to delight, in opposing
common notions of reason, concerning God and his essence, that they might exalt
themselves into his throne: to ascribe the least mutabilitie, to the divine
essence, with which, all the attributes, and internal free acts of God, are
one and the same, Phil lib quod sit Deus immutabilis.
was ever accounted (...) transcendent Atheism, in the highest degree: now be
this crime of what nature it will, it is no unjust imputation, to charge it on
the Arminians, because, they confess themselves guilty, and glory in the
crime.

1. They undermine, and overthrow, the eternity of Gods purposes, by
affirming, that ( in the order of the divine decrees, there are some which
precede, every act of the creature, and some again, that follow them) so
(...), quaedam sunt quae omnem actum (...) quaedam quae (...). cap. 5. see. 1.
page 67.
Corvinus the most famous, of that sect; now all the acts of every creature,
being but of yesterday, temporary, like themselves, surely, those decrees of
God, cannot be eternal, which follow them in order of time: and yet they
press this, especially, in respect of humane actions, as a certain,
unquestionable verity: ( it is certain that God wills or determines, many
things, which he would not, did not some act of man's will, go before it) says
their greater Master Certum est Deum quaedam velle, quae non velle ni^i aliqua
(...) humana antecederet, A^ min. Antipe. k^p 211.
Arminius: the like affirms, with a little addition, (as such men do always
proficere in peius,) his genuine scholar Nic. Multa tamen arbitror Deum velle,
quae non vellet, adeoque nec just^ velle posset, nisi aliqua actio creatu^^
praece le^et* ad Ames. page 24.
Grevinchovius, I suppose (says he) that God wills many things, which he
neither would, nor justly could will, and purpose, did not some action of the
creature precede: and here observe that in these places, they speak not of Gods
external works, of those actions, which out wardly are of him, as inflicting
of punishments, bestowing of rewards, and other such outward acts of his
providence, whose administration we confess to be various, and diversely
applied to several occasions: but of the internal purposes of Gods will, his
decrees, and intentions which have no present influence upon, or respect unto,
any action of the creature: yea they deny that concerning many things, God has
any determinate resolution at all, or any purpose, further, then a natural
affection toward them: God does, or omitteth, that, toward which, in his own
nature, and his proper inclination, he is affected, as he finds man, to
comply, or not to comply, with that order, which he has appointed, says Deus
facit vel non facit (...), ad quod, (...), and natura (...) inclinatione (...)
est ^ prou^ (...) cum isto ordine consp^^at vel non consp^a^ (...) ad (...)
cap. 5. ad see. 3.
Corvinus: surely, these men care not, what indignities they cast upon the God
of heaven, so they may maintain the pretended endowments of their own wills;
for such an absolute power do they here ascribe unto them, that God himself,
cannot determine of a thing, whereunto, as they strangely phrase it, he is well
affected, before, by an actual coucurrence, he is sure of their compliance:
now this imputation, that they are temporary, which they cast upon the decrees
of God in general, they press home upon that particular, which lies most in
their way, the decree of election: concerning this, they tell us roundly, that
it is false that election is confirmed from eternity, so the Falsum est quod
electio facta est ab aeterno. Rem. apol. cap. 18. p. 190.
Remonstrants in their Apology; not withstanding, that Saint Paul tells us,
that it is the purpose of God, Romans 9. 11. and that we were chosen before the
foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. neither is it any thing material, what
the Arminians there grant, viz, that there is a decree, preceding this, which
may be said to be from everlasting, for seeing that Saint Paul teaches us,
that election, is nothing but Gods purpose, of saving us, to affirm that God
eternally decreed, that he would elect us, is all one, as to say, that God
purposed, that in time he would purpose to save us: such resolutions, may be
fit, for their own wild heads, but must not be ascribed to God only wise.

Secondly, as they affirm them to be temporary, and to have had a beginning,
so also to expire and have an ending, to be subject, to change and
variableness: some acts of Gods will, do cease at a certain time, says
Volitiones aliquae Dei cessant ce^to quodam tempore Episcop. disp. de vol. Dei.
These. 7.
Episcopius: what? does any thing, come into his mind, that changes his will,
yes says Deus vult omnes Salvos ^ieri, sed compulsus pertinaci and
incorrigibili malitia quorundam, vult illos jacturam facere Salutis. Armin.
Antip. fol. 195.
Arminius, he would have all men to be saved, but compelled, with the
stubborn, and incorrigible malice of some, he will have them to miss it:
however this is some recompense, denying God a power to do what he will, then
grant him to be contented to do what he may: and not much repine at his hard
condition: certainly, if but for this favor, he is a debtor to the Arminians,
thieves give, what they do not take, having robbed God of his power, they will
yet leave him so much goodness, as that he shall not be troubled at it, though
he be sometimes compelled to, what he is very loath to do: how do Bell. Amiss.
pal. Armi. antip. crin. 3. Rem apol. ut.
they and their fellows the Jesuits, exclaim upon poor Calvin, for sometimes
using the harsh word of compulsion, describing the effectual, powerful
working of the providence of God, in the actions of men, but they, can fasten
the same term, on the will of God, and no harm done: surely, he will one day
plead his own cause against them: but yet blame them not, si violandum est ius,
regnandi causa violandum est: it is to make themselves absolute, that they thus
cast off the yoke of the Almighty: and that both in things concerning this
life, and that which is to come, they are much troubled, that it should be
said, that (Docent) unum quemque invariabilem vite (...) (...) ortu, in lucem
ha^^ nobiscum (...).
every one of us, bring along with us, into the world, an unchangeable
preordination, of life and death eternal; for such a supposall, would quite
overthrow, the maine foundation of their heresy, viz. that men can make their
election, void and frustrate, (...) Armin. in epist. de^. ad Examen. lib. Per.
as they jointly lay it down, in their Poslunt homi nes electionem suam irritam
and frustraneam reddere, Rem. apol. cap. 9. p. 105.
Apology, nay it is a dream, says Dr. Iackson of the divine essence.
Iackson, to think of Gods decrees, concerning things to come, as of acts,
irrevocably finished, which would hinder that which Welsingius lays down for a
truth, to wit, Non mirum videri debet quod aliquando ex electis reprob^ and ex
reprobis clecti siant, Welsin. de of. Chapter hom.
that the elect, may become reprobates, and the reprobates, elect, now to these
particular sayings, is their whole doctrine concerning the decrees of God,
inasmuch, as they have any reference to the actions of men, most exactly
conformable, as:

First, Omnia Dei decreta, non sunt perempto^ia, sed quaedam conditionata ac
mutabilia: concio. Ad Cle. ^xon. ann. 1641. Rem. decla. sen in synod. alii
passim: electio sicut and justificatio, and incerta and revocabilis, ^tramque
vero conditionatam qui negave^^t, ipsum quoque evagelium negabit: Grevin. ad
Ames. p. 136. 137.
their distinction of them, into peremptory, and not peremptory, (terms,
rather used in the citations of litigious courts, then as expressions of Gods
purpose, in sacred Scripture) is not, (as by them applied) compatible, with the
unchangeablenesse of Gods eternal purposes: (...), say they, or temporary
believers, are elected, (though not peremptorily) with such an act of Gods
will, as has a coexistence every way commensurate, both in its original,
continuance, and end, with their fading faith: which sometimes, like Jonas
gourd, is but filia unius noctis, in the morning it flourishes, in the evening
it is cut down, dried up, and withers: a man in Christ by faith, or actually
believing, (which to do, is as they say, in every ones own power) Ad gloriam
participandam pro isto tempore quo credunt electi sunt Rem. apol fol 190.
is in their opinion the proper object, of election; of election, I say, not
peremptory which is an act pendent, expecting the final perserverance, and
consummation of his faith: and therefore immutable, because man having
fulfilled his course, God has no cause to change his purpose, of crowning him
with reward; thus also, (as they teach) a man according to his infidelity,
whether present, and removeable, or obdurate and final, is the only object of
reprobation: which in the latter, cause, is peremptory, and absolute, in the
former conditional and alterable; it is the qualities of faith, and unbelief,
on which their election, and reprobation do attend. Decreta hypothetica
poslunt mutari, quia conditio respectu hominis vel non praestatur vel non
praestatur, atque ita existit vel non existit: and (...) extitit aliquandiu,
saepe existere desinit, and ursus postquam aliquandi^ desiit, existere incipit.
Corvi. ad Moli. cap. 5. see. 10.
Now let a faithful man, elected of God, according to his present
righteousness, apostate totally from grace, (as to affirm that there is any
promise of God, implying his perseverance is with them to overthrow all
religion) and let the unbeleeving reprobate, depose his incredulity and turn
himself unto the Lord; answerable to this mutation of their conditions, are
the changings of the purpose of the Almighty, concerning their everlasting
estate: again, suppose these two by alternate courses, (as the doctrine of
Apostacy maintains they may) should return each to their former estate, the
decrees of God concerning them, must again be changed, for it is injust with
him, either not to elect him that believes, though it be but for an hour, or
not to reprobate unbeleevers: now what unchangeablenesse can we affixe to these
decrees, which it lies it in the power of man to make as inconstant as Euripus:
making it beside to be possible, that all the members of Christ's Church, whose
names are written in heaven, should within one hour be enrolled in the black
book of damnation;

Secondly, as these not-peremptory decrees, are mutable, so they make the
peremptory decrees of God, to be temporal: final impenitencie, Dicique beatus
ante obitum ne^o.
say they, is the only cause, and the finally unrepenting sinner, is the only
object of reprobation, peremptory and irrevocable: as the Poet thought none
happy, so they think no man to be elected, or a reprobate, before his death:
now that denomination, he does receive from the decree of God concerning his
eternal estate, which must necessarily then be first enacted; the relation
that is between the act of reprobation, and the person reprobated, imports a
coexistence of denomination: when God reprobates a man, he then becomes a
reprobate: which, if it be not before he has actually fulfilled the measure of
his iniquity, and sealed it up with the talent of final impenitencie in his
death, the decree of God, must needs be temporal, the just judge of all the
world, having till then suspended his determination, expecting the last
resolution of this changeable Proteus: nay that Gods decrees concerning men's
eternal estates, are in their judgment temporal, and not beginning until
their death, is plain from the whole course of their doctrine; especially,
where they strive to prove, that if there were any such determination, God
could not threaten punishments, or promise rewards: Quis enim co^minetur poenam
ei, quem peremptorio decreto a poena immunem esse vult Rem Apol. cap. 17. fol.
187.
Who, say they, ean threaten punishment, to him, whom by a peremptory decree,
he will have to be free from punishment: it seems he cannot have determined,
to save any whom he threatens to punish if they sin, which is evident he does
all so long as they live in this world, which makes God not only mutable, but
quite deprives him of his foreknowledge: and makes the form of his decree run
thus: if man will believe, I determine he shall be saved, if he will not, I
determine he shall be damned, that is, I must leave him in the mean time, to
do what he will, so I may meet with him in the end.

Thirdly, they affirm no decree of Almighty God concerning men is so
unalterable, Author of Gods Love to Mankind. p. 4.
but, that all those who are now in rest, or misery, might have had contrary
lots: that those which are damned, as Pharaoh, Judas, etc. might have been
saved, and those which are saved, as the blessed Virgin, Poten, John, might
have been damned, which must needs reflect with a strong charge of mutabilitie
on Almighty God, who knows who are his: diverse other instances in this
nature I could produce, whereby it would be further evident, that these
innovators in Christian religion, do overthrow the eternity, and
unchangeablenesse of Gods decrees, but these are sufficient to any discerning
man: and I will add in the close, an antidote against this poison, briesly
showing what the Scripture and right reason, teach us concerning these secrets
of the most High.

First, known unto God, says Saint James, are all his works, from the
beginning, Acts 15. 18. whence, it has hitherto been concluded, that, what
ever God does in time bring to pass, that, he decreed from all eternity so to
do, all his works were from the beginning known unto him; consider it
particularly in the decree of election, that fountain of all spiritual
blessings; that a saving sense, and assurance thereof, (2 Pet. 1. 10.) being
attained, might effect a spiritual rejoicing in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 31. such
things, are every where taught, as may raise us to the consideration of it, as
of an eternal act, irrevocably and immutably established; he has chosen us
before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. his purpose according to
election, before we were borne must stand, Romans 9. 11. for to the irreversible
stability of this act of his will, he has set to the seal of his infallible
knowledge, 2 Timothy 2. 19. his purpose of our salvation by grace, not according
to works, was before the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. an eternal purpose,
proceeding from such a will, as to which, none can resist: joined with such a
knowledge, as to which all things past, present, and to come, are open, and
evident: directed by an infallible wisdom, and counsel: must needs also, be
like the laws of the Medes, and Persians, permanent and unalterable.

Secondly, Quicquid operatur operatur u^ est.
the decrees of God being conformable to his nature, and essence, do require
eternity, and immutabilitie, as their unseparable properties: God, and he
only, never was, nor ever can be, what now he is not; passive possibility to
any thing, which is the fountain of all change, can have no place in him who
is actus simplex, and purely free from all composition, whence Saint James
affirms, that with him there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning, Iam.
1. 17. with him, that is in his will, and purposes: and himself by his
Prophet, I am the Lord, and I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob, are not
consumed, Mal. 3. 6. where, he proves the not changing of his gracious
purposes, because he is the Lord: the eternal acts of his will, not really
differing from his unchangeable essence, must needs be immutable.

Thirdly, whatsoever God has determined according to the counsel of his
wisdom, and good pleasure of his will, to be accomplished to the praise of his
glory, stands sure, and immutable: for the strength of Israel, will not lie,
nor repent, for he is not a man, that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15. 29. he
declares the end, from the beginning, and from ancient times, the things that
are not yet done, saying, my counsel shall stand: and I will do all my
pleasure. Isa. 46. 10. which certain and infallible execution of his pleasure,
is extended to particular contingent events, Chap. 48. 17. yea, it is an
ordinary thing with the Lord, to confirm the certainty of those things that
are yet for to come, from his own decree: as* The Lord of Hosts has sworn
saying, surely as I have thought, so it shall come to pass, and as I have
purposed it shall stand, that I will break the Assyrian, etc. Isa. 14. 24, 25.
it is certain, the Assyrian shall be broken, because the Lord has purposed
it: which were a weak kind of reasoning, if his purpose might be altered:
nay, he is of one mind and who can turn him, and what his soul desires,
that he does, Ioh 23. 13. The Lord of Hosts has purposed, and who shall
disanull it, Isa. 14. 7. So that the purpose of God, and immutabilitie of his
counsel, Heb. 6. 16. have their certainty, and firmness, from eternity: and
do not depend on the variable lubricity of mortal men, which we must needs
grant, unless we intend to set up impotency against omnipotency, and arm the
clay, against the Potter.

Fourthly, If Gods determination concerning any thing, should have a temporal
original; it must needs be, either because he then perceived some goodness in
it, of which before he was ignorant; or else, because some accident did affixe
a real goodness, to some state of things, which it had not from him: neither
of which, without abominable blasphemy can be affirmed; seeing he knows the
end from the beginning, all things from everlasting; being always the same,
the fountain of all goodness of which other things do participate, in that
measure which it pleases him to communicate it unto them: add to this, the
omnipotency of God, there is power and might in his hand, that none is able to
withstand him, 2 Chronicles. 2. 6. which will not permit that any of his purposes be
frustrate; in all our intentions, if the defect be not in the error of our
understandings, which may be rectified by better information; when we cannot
do that which we would, we will do that which we can, the alteration of our
purpose, is for want of power to fulfill it; which impotency cannot be ascribed
to Almighty God: who is in heaven, and has done whatsoever he pleased, Psalm.
115. verse. 3. So that the immutability of Gods nature, his Almighty power, the
infallibility of his knowledge, his immunity from error in all his counsels; do
show, that he never fails, in accomplishing any thing, that he proposes for
the manifestation of his glory.

To close up this whole discourse, wherein I have not discovered half the
poison contained in the Arminian doctrine, concerning Gods decrees, I will in
brief, present to your view, the opposition that is in this matter, betwixt
the word of God, and the Patrons of free will.

S. S.
He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world: Ephesians. 1. v. 4.
He has called us according to his own purpose and grace before the world
began: 2 Timothy 1. 9. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of
the world: Act. 15. 18. Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient
times the things that are not yet done, saying, my counsel shall stand, and I
will do all my pleasure: Isa. 46. 10. For the children being not yet borne,
neither having done either good or evil, that the purpose of God according to
election might stand: as Romans 9. 11. The foundation of God stands sure,
having this seal, the Lord knows who are his: 2 Timothy 2. 19. The counsel of
the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations.
Psalm. 33. 12.
S. S.
My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: Isa. 46. 10. I am the
Lord, and I change not. Mal. 3. 6. With the Father of lights there is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning, James Chap. 1. 17. See Exodus 3. 13, 14.
Psalm. 102. 27. 2 Timothy 2. 13. 1 Samuel 15. 29. Isa. 14. 7. Job 23. 13. Psalm. 115.
3.
Lib. Arbit.
It is false, to say that election, is confirmed from everlasting, Rem. Apol.
It is certain, that God determines diverse things, which he would not, did not
some act of man's will, go before: Armin. Some decrees of God, praecede all
acts of the will of the creature, and some follow: Cor. Men may make their
election void, and frustrate: Rem. Apol. It is no wonder, if men, do
sometimes of elect, become reprobate, and of reprobate, elect: Welsin. Election
is uncertain, and revocable, and who ever denies it, overthrowes the Gospel:
Grevin. Many decrees of God, cease at a certain time: Episcop.
Lib. Arbit.
God would have all men to be saved, but compelled with the stubborn malice of
some, he changes his purpose, and will have them to perish: Armin. As men may
change themselves from believers to unbeleevers, so Gods determination
concerning them, changes: Rem. All Gods decrees are not peremptory, but some
conditionate and changeable: Sermon at Oxford.


CHAP. III.
Of the praescience, or foreknowledge of God, and how it is questioned and
overthrown by the Arminians.
THE praescience, or foreknowledge of God, has not hitherto in express terms
been denied by the Arminians, but only questioned, and overthrown by
consequence: in as much as they deny the certainty and unchangeablenesse of
his decrees, on which it is founded: it is not a foreknowledge of all, or any
thing, which they oppose, but only, of things free and contingent: and that
only to comply with their formerly exploded error, that the purposes of God
concerning such things, are temporal and mutable; which obstacle being once
removed, the way is open how to ascribe the presidentship of all humane
actions, to omnipotent contingencie, and her Sire Free Will: Now, we call that
contingent, which in regard of its next and immediate cause, before it come to
pass, may be done, or may be, not done: as, that a man shall do such a thing
to morrow, or any time hereafter: which he may choose whether ever he will do,
or no. Such things as these are free and chanceable, in respect of men their
immediate, and second causes, but if we (as James chap. 4. ver. 13, 14, 15.
we ought to do) look up unto him who fore-seeth, and has ordained the event
of them, or their omission, they may be said necessarily to come to pass, or
to be omitted: it could not be, but as it was: Christians hitherto, (yea and
(...). Hom. Gods will was done.
Heathens) in all things of this nature, have usually upon their event,
reflected on God, as one, whose determination was passed on them from
eternity, and who knew them long before: as the killing of men by the fall of
a house, who might in respect of the freedom of their own wills, have not
been there: or if a man fall into the hands of thieves, we presently conclude,
it was the will of God: it must be so, he knew it before.

Divines Quaecunque possunt per creaturam fieri, vel cogitari, vel dici, et
etiam quaecumque ipse facere potest, omnia cognoscit Deus, etiamsi neque sunt
neque erunt, neque fuerunt, scientia simplicis intelligentiae: Aquin. p. q 14.
a. 9. c. ex verbis Apostoli, Romans 4. qui vocat ea quae non sunt tanqua^ ea quae
sunt: sic scholasti^i omnes: Per. Scholast. orthod. speci. cap. 3. alii passim.
Vid. Hieron. Zanch. de scientia Dei, lib. de atrib. 31. cap* 2. q 5.
for distinction sake, ascribe unto God a two fold knowledge; one, intuitive,
or intellective whereby, he foreknoweth and sees all things that are possible:
that is, all things that can be done by his Almighty power: without any
respect to their future existence, whether they shall come to pass, or no:
yea, infinite things whose actual being, eternity shall never behold, are
thus open and naked unto him: for, was there not strength and power in his hand
to have created another world? was there not counsel, in the storehouse of his
wisdom, to have created this otherwise? or not to have created it at all?
shall we say, that his providence extends it self every way, to the utmost of
its activitie? or can he not produce innumerable things in the world, which now
he does not? now all these, and every thing else, that is feazable to his
infinite power, he fore-sees and knows, Scientia (as they speak) simplicis
intelligentiae, by his essential knowledge.

Out Vid. Sam. Rhaetorfort: exercit. de great: ex. 1. cap. 4.
of this large and boundless territory of things possible, God by his decree
freely determines what shall come to pass; and makes them future, which
before were but possible. After this decree (as they commonly speak)
follows, or together with it, (as Res ipsae nullo naturae momento possibiles
esse dicendae sunt priusquam a Deo intelliguntur, scientia quae dicitur
simplicis intelligentiae, ita etiam scientia quae diciter visionis, et fertur
in res futras, nullo naturae momento, posterior statuenda videtur, ista
futuritione, rerum; cum scientia, etc. D. Tw^s^. ad errat vind* great.
others more exactly) takes place, that praescience of God, which they call
Scientia visionis dicitur, quia ea quae videntur, apud nos habent esse
distinctum extra videntem. Aq. p. q. 14. a 9 c.
visionis of vision, whereby he infallibly sees all things in their proper
causes; and how and when they shall come to pass: Now these two sorts of
knowledge In eo d^ffert praescientia intuitionis, ab ea, quae approbationis
est, quod illa praesciat, quod eveni^e possible est: haec vero quod impossible
est non evenire: Ferrius. Orthod. Scholast. speci. cap. 23. caeterum posterior
ista scientia non proprie dicitur a Ferrio scientia approbationis, illa enim
est, qua Deus dicitur nosse quae amat and approbat: ab utraque altera
distincta: Mat. 7. 23. Romans 11. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 9. Quamvis infinitorum numerorum,
nullus sit numerus, non tamen est incomprehensibilis e^, cujus scientiae non
est numerus: Aug. de civit. Dei lib. 12. cap. 18.
differ, in as much as by the one, God knows what it is possible may come to
pass; by the other, only what it is impossible, should not come to pass:
things are possible, in regard of Gods power, future, in regard of his decree.
So, (that if I may so say) the measure of the first kind of Science, is Gods
omnipotency what he can do: of the other, his purpose what certainly he will
do, or permit to be done. With this praescience then, God foreseeth all, and
nothing but what he has decreed shall come to pass.

For Quibusdam effectibus praeparavit causas nenessarias, ut necessario
evenire^t, quib^sdam vero causas contingentes ut evenirent contingenter,
secundum conditionem proximarum causarum: Aquin. p. q. 23. a. 4. in cor. Zanch.
de natu. Dei lib. 5. qu. 4. thesi.
every thing to be produced next and under him, God has prepared diverse and
several kinds of causes: diversely operative in producing their effects: some
whereof, are said to work necessarily: the institution of their nature, being
to do as they do, and not otherwise: so the Sun gives light, and the fire
heat. And yet in some regard, their effects and products may be said to be
contingent, and free: in as much, as the concurrence of God the first cause is
required to their operation, who does all things most freely, according to the
counsel of his will; thus the Sun stood still in the time of Joshua: and the
fire burned not the three Children: but ordinarily such agents working
necessitate naturae, their effects are said to be necessary.

Secondly, to some things God has fitted free and contingent causes: which
either apply themselves to operation in particular, according to election:
choosing to do this thing, rather then that: as Angels, and men, in their free
and deliberate actions, which they so perform, as that they could, have not
done them: or else, they produce effects (...), merely by accident: and the
operation of such things, we say to be casual: as if a hatchet falling out of
the hand of a man, cutting down a tree, should kill another, whom he never
saw: now nothing in either of these ways comes to pass, but God has
determined it, both for matter, and the manner: Res et medos rerum Aquin.
even so, as is agreeable to their causes; some necessarily, some freely, some
casually, or contingently, yet all so, as having a certain futurition from his
decree; he infallibly foreseeth that they shall so come to pass: but yet, that
he does so, in respect of things free, and contingent is much questioned by the
Arminians in express terms, and denied by consequence, notwithstanding Cui
praescientiam tollis aufers divinitatem. Hieron. ad. Pelag. lib. 5.
Saint Hierome affirms, that so to do, is destructive to the very Essence of
the Deity.

First, their Doctrine, of the immutabilitie of Gods decrees, on whose
firmness is founded the infallibility of this praescience, does quite
overthrow it; God thus foreknowing only what he has so decreed shall come to
pass; if that be no firmer settled, but that it may, and is often altered,
according to the diverse inclinations of men's wills, (which I showed before they
affirm,) he can have at best but a conjecturall foreknowledge, of what is yet
for to come: not founded on his own unchangable purpose; but upon a guess, at
the free inclination of men's wills. For instance: Deus ita omnium salutem ex
aequo vult, ut illam ex aequo optet et desideret: Cor. ad moli. cap. 31. sect.
1.
God wills that all men should be saved: this act of his will, according to
the Arminian doctrine, is his conditionate decree to save all men if they will
believe; well, among these is Judas, as Talis gratia omnibus datur quae
sufficiat ad fidem generandam. idem: ibid. sect. 15.
equal a sharer in the benefit of this decree as Peter? God then will have him
to be saved, and to this end, allows him all those means, which are necessary
to beget faith in him, and are every way sufficient to that purpose, and do
produce that effect in others: what can God foresee then but that Judas, as
well as Peter, will believe? he intends he should, he has determined nothing
to the contrary: let him come then, and act his own part, why, he proves so
Pertinaci quorundam malitia compulsus: Armin. ubi sup.
obstinately malicious, that God with all his omnipotency as they speak, by
any way, that becomes him, which must not be by any irresistible efficacy,
cannot change his obdurate heart: well then, he determines according to the
exigence of his justice, that he shall be damned for his impenitencie; and
foreseeth that accordingly: but now, suppose this wretch even at his last
moment, should bethink himself and return to the Lord, which in their
conceit he may, not withstanding his former reprobation: (which Reprobatio
populi Judaici f^it actio temporaria et quae bono ipsorum Judaeorum si nodo
sanabiles adhuc essent, animumque advertere vellent servire poterat, utque eo
fini serviret a Deo facta erat: Rem. apol. cap. 20. fol. 221.
as they state it, seems a great act of mercy): Injustum est apud Deum vel non
credentem eligere vel credentem non eligere* Rem. Apel.
God must keep to the rules of his justice and elect or determine to save him:
by which the varlet has twice, or thrice, deceived his expectation.

Secondly, (...) cap. 5. sect. 9.
they affirm, that God is said properly to expect, and desire, diverse things,
which yet never come to pass: we grant says Corvinus, that there are desires
in God, that never are fulfilled: now surely to desire what one is sure, will
never come to pass is not an act regulated by wisdom, or counsel: and
therefore they must grant, that before, he did not know, but perhaps so it
might be: Bona quaedam Deus optet et desiderat: Rem. Confess ca sect. 9.
God wishes and desires some good things, which yet come not to pass, say
they, in their confession: whence one, of these two things, must needs follow:
either first, that there is a great deal of imperfection in his nature, to
desire, and expect, what he knows shall never come to pass: or else, he did
not know but it might; which overthrowes his praescience: yea, and say they
expressly, Dei spes et expectio est ab hominibus elusa: Rem. scrip. syn. in
cap. 5. Isa. v. 1. In co vis argumenti est, quod Deus ab If aele obedientiam et
sperarit. et expectarit. idem. ibid. Quod Deus de elusaspe sua conqueratur.
idem ubi supra.
That the hope, and expectation of God, is deceived by man: and confess, that
the strength, of their strongest argument; lies in this, that God hoped, and
expected, obedience from Israel. Secondly, that he complains that his hope is
deluded: which being taken properly, and as they urge it, cannot consist with
his eternal praescience. For they dis-esteeme the usual answer of Divines,
that hope, expectation, and such like passions, which include in them any
imperfection, are ascribed unto God per (...), in regard of that analogy, his
actions hold with such of ours, as we perform having those passions.

Thirdly, Deum futura contingentia, decreto suo determinasse ad alter utram
partem, (intellige quae a libera creaturae voluniate patrantur) falsum,
absurdum, et multiplicis blasphemiae praevium abomino^ et exsecror: Armin
declarat. ^enten.
they teach, that God has determined nothing, concerning such things, as these
in question: That God has determined future contingent things unto either
part, (I mean such as issue from the free will of the creature) I abominate,
hate, and curse, as false, absurd, and leading us on unto blasphemy, says
Arminius: to determine of them to either part, is, to determine, and ordain,
whether they shall be, or whether they shall not be: as that David shall, or
shall not go up to morrow, against the Philistines and prevail. Now the
infallibilite of Gods foreknowing of such things, depending on the certainty
of his decree, and determination: if there be no such thing as this; that also,
must needs fall to the ground,

Fourthly, Disquiri permittimus: ^. Operosam illam quaestionem, de scientia
futurorum contingentium absoluta et conditionata: 2. Etsi non negemus Deo illam
scientiam attribui posse. 3. Tamen an necessariu^ saluti sit ad hoc ut Deus
recte colatur examinari permittimus: 4. Tum merito facessere de beat a scholis
et ecclesiis, intricatae et spinosae istae quaestiones quae de ea agitari
solent, -- quomodo illa cum liberate arbitrii, cum seriis Dei comminationibus,
-- aliisque actionibus, consistere possit: quae omnia crucem potius miseris
mortalibus fixerunt quam ad religionem cultumque divinum, momenti aliquid
inquisitoribus suis attulerunt ^piscopius. disput. 4. sect. 10. Rem. Apol. p.
43. 44.
see what positively they write, concerning this everlasting foreknowledge of
God. First, they call it a troublesome question: Secondly, they make it a thing
disputable, whether there be any such thing, or no? and though happily it may
be ascribed unto God: yet, Thirdly, they think it no motive to the worship of
him: Fourthly, they say, better it were quite exploded, because the
difficulties that attend it, can scarcely be reconciled, with man's liberty,
Gods threatenings and promises: yea, Fifthly, it seems rather to be invented,
to crucify poor mortals: then to be of any moment in religion; so Episcopius:
it may be excepted, that this is but one Doctors opinion: it is true; they are
one man's words; but the thing it self, is countenanced by the whole sect. As
first, in the Large prolix Declaration of their opinions, they speak not one
word of it, and being taxed for this omission, by the Professors of Leyden:
they vidicate themselves so coldly in their Apology, that some Ames: Antisynod
p. 10.
learned men do from hence conclude; that certainly in their most secret
judgments, all the Arminians, do consent with Socinus, in ascribing unto God,
only a conjecturall foreknowledge. And Deus suo modo aliquando metuit, hoc
est merito suspicatur et. prudenter coniicit,hoc vel illud malum oriturum:
Vorsti: de Deo: page 451.
one great Prophet of their own affirms roundly, That God after his manner
oftentimes fears, that is, suspecteth and that not without cause, and
prudently coniectureth, that this or that evil may arise; Vorst: and their
chiefest Patriarchs, Deus non semper ex praescientia finem intend^t: Armini*
Antip. page 667. Corvin. ad Mol. cap. 5. sect. 5.
That God does often intend, what he does not foresee will come to pass,
Armin. Corvin. Now whether this kind of Atheism be tolerable among Christians
or no, let all men judge who have their senses exercised in the word of God,
which I am sure teaches us another lesson. For:

First: it is laid down, as a firm foundation: that known unto God, are all
his works, from the beginning of the world, Acts 15. 18. Every thing then,
that in any respect may be called his work, is known unto him from all
eternity: now, what in the world, if we may speak as he has taught us, can
be exempted from this denomination? even actions in themselves sinful; are
not; though not as sinful, yet in some other regard, as punishments of others;
Behold, says Nathan, to David, (in the name of God) I will take thy wives
before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy
wives, in the sight of this sun: for thou did it secretly, but I will do
this thing before all Israel: 2 Samuel 12, v. 11, 12. So also, when wicked
robbers had nefariously spoiled Job of all his substance; the holy man
concludes, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away: Job 1. 1. Now, if the
working of Gods providence be so mighty, and effectual, even in, and over
those actions, wherein the devil, and men, do most maliciously offend, as did
Absalom, and the Sabean, with the Caldean thieves, that it may be said to be
his work, and he may be said to do it, (I crave liberty to use the Scripture
phrase) then certainly nothing in the world, in some respect or other, is
independent of his all-disposing hand: yea, Judas himself betraying our
Savior, Cum et pater tradiderit filium suum, et ipse Ch: corpus suum: et Judas
dominum suum: cur in hac traditione Deus est pins, et homo reus, nisi quia in
^e una quam fecerunt, causa non fuit una propter quam fece^unt: Aug. Epist. 48.
did nothing, but what his hand and counsel before determined should be done,
Acts. 4. 28. in respect of the event of the thing it self: and if these
actions, notwithstanding these two hindrances, First, that they were
contingent, wrought by free agents, working according to election and choice:
Secondly, that they were sinful and wicked in the agents, had yet their
dependence on his purpose and determinate counsel; surely, he has an interest
of operation in the acts of every creature; but his works, as it appears
before, are all known unto him from the beginning: for he works nothing by
chance, or accidentally, but all things determinately, according to his own
decree, or the counsel of his own will: Ephesians. 1. v. 11.

Secondly: the manner of Gods knowing of things, does evidently show, that
nothing that is, or may be, can be hid from him: Deus non particulatim, vel
singillatim omnia videt, velut alternanter concepta, hinc ill^c inde huc, sed
omnia videt simul: August. lib. 15. de trinit* cap 14. In scientia divina
nullus est discursus, sed omnia perfect intelligit: Tho. p. q. 14 a. 7. c.
which is not by discourse and collection of one thing out of another,
conclusions out of principles: but altogether and at once, evidently, clearly,
and distinctly, both in respect (...), by one most pure act of his own essence
he discerns all things: For there is no creature that is not manifest in his
sight, but all are naked and opened unto his eyes, Heb. 4. 13. So Tilen.
Syntag. de attrib. Dei. These. 22. Zanch, de not Dei.
that those things, concerning which we treat, he knows three ways: First,
in himself and his own decree, as the first cause, in which respect they may
be said to be necessary, in respect of the certainty of their event: Secondly,
in their immediate causes, wherein their contingencie does properly consist:
Vnum quodque quod est, dum est, necesse est ut sit.
Thirdly, in their own nature as future, but to his infinite knowledge even
present.

Thirdly: the Scripture Psalm. 44. 21. Job 14. 11. Dan. 2. 47. Psalm. 7. 2. 126.
2. 147. 4. Luke 12. 27. Mat. 10. 29, 30. Psalm. 139. 2.
is full of expressions to this purpose, to wit; That God knows all secrets,
and reveals hidden things: he searches the reins, and the heart: he knows
the number of the stars: and the birds of the air: the lillies of the field
the falling of sparrowes, the number of the hairs of our heads: some places
are most remarkable, as that of the Psalmist, He knows my thoughts long
before: even before ever they come into our minds, before their first rising;
and yet many actions that are most contingent, depend upon those thoughts known
unto God from eternity: nay, which breaks the very neck of the goddess
contingencie, those things wherein her greatest power is imagined to consist,
are directly ascribed unto God: as our words the answer of the tongue, Prove.
16. 1. the directing of an arrow, shot by chance, to a mark not aimed at, 1
King. 22. 34. Surely God must needs foreknow the event of that contingent
action; he must needs know the man would so shoot who had determined his arrow
should be the death of a King: He makes men poor and rich: Prove. 22. 1. He
lifts up one, and pulls down another: Psalm. 75. How many contingencies did
(...), his piercing eye run through, to foresee the crowning of Hester, for
the deliverance of his people: In a word; known unto God are all his works:
now what can possibly be imagined to be more contingent, then the killing of a
man by the fall of an axe from out of his hand, who intended no such thing; yet
this God assumeth as his own work: Exodus 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 9. v. 4, 5. and so
surely was by him foreknowne.

Fourthly: Do but consider the prophesies in Scripture; especially those
concerning our Savior, how many free and contingent actions did concur for
the fulfilling of them: as Isa. 7. v. 14. cap. 9. v. 5. and cap. 53. Genesis 3.
15, etc. The like may be said of other predictions: as of the wasting of
Jerusalem by the Babylonians, which though in regard of Gods praescience, it
was certainly to come to pass: yet they did it most freely, not only
following the counsel of their own wills; but also using divination, or
chanceable lots for their direction: Ezekiel. 21. 21. yet he who made the eye
sees all these things: Psalm. 94. 9.

Diverse other reasons and testimonies might be produced to confirm our
doctrine, of Gods everlasting praescience; which notwithstanding Episcopius
blasphemy, that it serves for naught but to cruciate poor mortals; we believe
to be a good part of the foundation of all that consolation which God is
pleased to afford us in this vale of tears; amidst all our afflictions, and
temptations, under whose pressure, we should else faint and despair; it is no
small comfort to be assured, that we do, nor can suffer nothing, but what his
hand and counsel guide unto us: what is open, and naked before his eyes, and
whose end and issue he knows long before: which is a strong motive to
patience, a sure anchor of hope, a firm ground of consolation; now to present
in one view, how opposite the opinions of the worshippers of the great goddess
contingencie, are to this sacred truth: take this short Antithesis.

S. S.
Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world: Acts 15.
18. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all
things are naked, and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do:
Heb. cap. 4. ver. 13. He that formed the eye shall he not see, Psalm. 94. 9.
When a man goes into the wood with his neighbor to hew wood, and his hand
fetches a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the head slippeth
from the helve, and lights upon his neighbor that he die: Deuteronomy. 19. 5. God
delivers him into his hand: Exodus 21. 13. Take no thought, saying, what what
shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed,
for your heavenly Father knows that you have need of all these things: Matthew.
6. 31, 32. Take away Gods praescience and you overthrow his Deity: Hierom.
Lib. Arbit.
God sometims fears and prudently coniectureth, that this, or that evil may
arise, Vorsti: God does not always foresee the event of what he intends,
Corvin. ad Mol. Future contingencies are not determined unto either part,
Armin. that is, God has not determined, and so consequently does not
foreknow, whether they shall come to pass or no. God hops and expects,
diverse things that shall never come to pass: Rem. The doctrine of praescience
seems to be invented only to vex and cruciate poor mortal men: Episcop.


CHAP. IIII.
Of the providence of God in governing the world diversely, thrust from this
pre-eminence by the Arminian Idol of Free Will.
I Come now to treat of that, betwixt which and the Pelagian Idol, there is
bellum (...) implacable war and immortal hatred, absolutely destructive to
the one side; to wit, the providence of God. For this, in that notion
Christiantie has hitherto embraced it: and that, in such a sense as the
Arminians maintain it can no more consist together, then fire and water, light
and darkness, Christ and Belial: and he that shall go to conjoyne them,
ploughs with an ox, and an ass, they must be tied together with the same
ligament quo ille mortua iungebat corpora vivis, wherewith the tyrant tied dead
bodies to living men. This strange advancement of the clay against the potter,
not by the way of repining and to say why have thou made me thus; but by the
way of emulation, I will not be so I will advance my self, to the sky, to the
sides of thy throne, was heretofore unknown to the more refined (...),
Theophrastus apud Picum: vid. Senecam. de Pro* vid. and Plotinum.
Paganism: as these of contingency, so they with a better error made a
goddess of providence; because as they feigned, she helped Latona to bring
forth in the I Will of Delos: intimating that Latona or nature though big and
great with sundry sorts of effects, could yet produce nothing, without the
interceding help of divine providence: which mythologie of theirs, seems to
contain a sweeter gust of divine truth, then any we can expect from their
towering fancies, An actus divinae providentiae omnium rerum conservatrix, sit
affirmativus potentiae, an tantum negativus voluntatis, quo nolit res creatas
perdere: Rem. Apol. cap. 6.
who are inclinable to believe that God for no other reason, is said to
sustain all things but because he does not destroy them: now that their proud
God-opposing errors may the better appear, according to my former method, I
will plainly show what the Scripture teaches us concerning this providence,
with what is agreeable to right, and Christian reason, not, what is dictated by
tumultuating affections.

Providence, is a word which in its proper signification may seem to
comprehend all the actions of God, that outwardly are of him: that have any
respect unto his creatures, all his works that are not ad intra essentially
belonging unto the Deity: now because God works all things according to his
decree or the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. for, whatsoever he does now,
it pleased him from the beginning, Psalm. 115. seeing also that known unto God
are all his works from eternity, therefore three things concerning his
providence are considerable. 1. Providentia seu ratio ordinis ad finem duo
praecipue continet: principium decernens seu ipsam rationem ordinis in mente
divina, ipsi deo coaete^num, and principium exequens, quo suo modo, per debita
media, ipsa in ordine and numero disponit, Thom.
His decree or purpose, whereby he has disposed of all things in order, and
appointed them for certain ends, which he has foreordained: 2. His
prescience, whereby, he certainly foreknoweth all things that shall come to
pass: 3. His temporal operation, or working in time ( My Father works
hitherto, Ioh. 5. 17. whereby he actually executes all his good pleasure: the
first and second of these have been the subject of the former Chapters, the
latter only now requires our consideration.

This then we may conceive, as an ineffable act or work of Almighty God:
whereby he cherishes, sustaineth, and governs the world, or all things by
him created, moving them agreeably to those natures, which he endowed them
withal in the beginning, unto those ends, which he has proposed: to confirm
this, I will first prove this position, that the whole world is cared for by
God, and by him governed, and therein all men, good, or bad, all things, in
particular, be they never so small and in our eyes inconsiderable: secondly,
show the manner, how God works all, in all things, and according to the
diversity of secondary causes which he has created: whereof, some are
necessary, some free, others contingent, which produce their effects, nec (...)
nec (...), merely by accident.

The providence of God in governing the world, is plentifully made known unto
us, both by his works, and by his word. I will give a few instances of either
sort. 1. in general, that the Almighty (...) and framer of this whole
universe, should propose unto himself no end in the creation of all things:
that he should want either power, goodness, will, or wisdom, to order, and
dispose the works of his own hands is altogether impossible. 2. Take a
particular instance, in one concerning accident, the knowledge whereof by some
means or other, in some degree or other has spread it self throughout the
world: and that is that almost universal destruction of all by the flood,
whereby the whole world was well-nigh reduced to its primitive confusion, is
there nothing but chance to be seen in this? was there any circumstance about
it that did not show a God, and his providence? not to speak of those
revelations, whereby God foretold that he would bring such a deluge: what
chance fortune could collect, such a small number of individuals of all sorts,
wherein the whole kind might be preserved? what hand guided that poor vessel
from the rocks, and gave it a resting place on the mountains? certainly, the
very reading of that story, Genesis 7. having for confirmation, the Catholic
tradition of all mankind, were enough to startle the stubborn heart of an
Atheist.

The word of God does not less fully relate it, then his works do declare it,
Psalm. 19. My Father works hitherto says our Savior, Ioh. 5. 17. but did not
God end his work on the seventh day, and did he not then rest from all his
works? Genesis 2. 2. True; from his work of creation by his omnipotence: but his
work of gubernation by his providence; as yet knows no end: yea, and diverse
particular things he does, besides the ordinary course, only to make known that
he thus works, Ioh. 9. 3. as he has framed all things by his wisdom, so he
continues them, by his providence in excellent order; as is at large declared
in that golden Psalm. 104. and this is not bounded to any particular places, or
things, but his eyes are in every place beholding the evil, and the good,
Prove. 15. 3. so that none can hide himself, in secret places, that he shall
not see him: Ierem. 23. 24. Acts 17. 24. Job 5. 10, 11. Exodus 4. 11. and all
this he says, that men may know from the rising of the Sun, and from the West,
that there is none besides him, he is the Lord, and there is none else, he
forms the light, and creates darkness, he makes peace, and creates evil,
he does all these things, Isaiah 45. 7. in these and innumerable like places,
does the Lord declare that there is nothing which he has made, that with the
good hand of his providence he does not govern and sustain.

Now, this general extent of his common providence to all, does no way hinder,
but that he may exercise certain special acts thereof, toward some in
particular: even by how much nearer then other things they approach unto him,
and are more assimilated unto his goodness. I mean his Church here on earth,
and those whereof it does consist: for what nation is there so great that has
God so nigh unto them, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. in the government hereof he most eminently
shows his glory, and exercises his power; join here his works, with his
word, what he has done, with what he has promised to do for the conservation
of his Church, and people, and you will find admirable issues of a more
special providence: against this he promises, the gates of hell shall not
prevail: Mat. 16. 18. amiddest of those he has promised to remain, Matthew.
18. 20. supplying them with an addition of all things necessary, Matthew. 6. 33.
desiring, that all their care might be cast upon him, who cares for them, 1
Pet. 5. 7. forbidding any to touch his anointed ones: Psalm. 105. 15. and that
because they are unto him as the apple of his eye: Zach. 2. 8. now this
special providence has respect unto a supernatural end, to which that, and
that alone is to be convayed.

For wicked men, as they are excepted from this special care and government,
so they are not exempted from the dominion of his Almighty hand: he who has
created them for the day of evil, Prove. 16. 4. and provided a place of their
own, Acts 1. 25. for them to go unto: does not in this world, suffer them to
live without the verge of his all-ruling providence: but by suffering and
enduring their iniquities with great patience, and long-suffering, Romans 9. 20.
defending them oftentimes, from the injuries of one another, Genesis 4. 15. by
granting unto them many temporal blessings: Matthew. 5. 45. disposing of all
their works, to the glory of his great name, Prove. 21. 1, 2. he declares, that
they also live, and move, and have their being in him, and are under the
government of his providence: Nay, there is not the least thing in this world
to which his care and knowledge does not descend: ill would it become his
wisdom not to sustain, order and dispose of all things by him created, but
leave them to the ruin of uncertain chance: Majestatem Dei dedecet, scire per
momenta singula, quot nascantur culices, quae pulicum and muscarum in terra
multitudo: Hieron. in cap. 1. Haback.
Hierome then was injurious to his providence, and cast a blemish on his
absolute perfection, whilst he thought to have cleared his Majesty, from
being defiled with the knowledge and care of the smallest reptiles and vermin
every moment and St. Quis disposuit membra pulicis ac culicis, ut habeant
ordine^ suum, habeant vitam suam, habeant motum suum: etc. qui fecit in coelo
angelum, ipse fecit in terra vermiculum, sed angelum in coelo pro habitatione
coelesti, vermiculum in terra pro habitatione terrestri, nunquid angelum fecit
repere in coeno, aut vermiculsi in coelo: etc. August. Tom. 8. in Psalm. 148.
Austine is express to the contrary, who says he, has disposed the several
members of the flea, and gnat, that has given unto them order, life, and
motion, etc. even most agreeable to holy Scriptures, so Psalm. 104. 20, 21. and
145. 15. Matthew. 6. 26. He feeds the fowls and cloatheth the grass of the
field, Job 39. 1, ^. and Jonah. 4. 6, 7. sure it is not troublesome to God to
take notice of all that he has created: did he use that great power in the
production, of the least of his creatures, so far beyond the united activitie
of men and Angels, for no end at all? doubtless even they also must have a
well disposed order, for the manifestation of his glory, not a sparrow falls to
the ground, without our Father: Matthew. 10. 29, 30. even the hairs of our head
are numbered, he cleatheth the lillies and grass of the field which is to be
cast into the even, Luke 12. 27, 28. Behold his knowledge, and care of them,
again he used frogs, and lice, for the punishment of the Egyptians, Exodus 8.
with a gourd, and a worm he exercised his servant Jonah: Chap. 3. yea he calls
the locusts his terrible Army, and shall not God know and take care of the
number of his soldiers, the ordering of his dreadful Host.

That God by his providence governs and disposes of all things by him
created, is sufficiently proved; the manner how he works all in all, how he
orders the works of his own hands, in what this governing and disposing of
his creatures does chiefly consist, comes now to be considered. And here four
things are principally to be observed: First, the sustaining, preserving and
upholding of all things by his power. For he upholdeth all things by the word
of his power: Heb. 1. 3. Secondly, his working together with all things, by an
influence of causalitie, into the agents themselves, for he also has wrought
all our works in us: Isaiah 26. 12. Thirdly, his powerful overruling of all
events, both necessary, free, and contingent, and disposing of them to certain
ends for the manifestation of his glory: So Joseph tells his brethren, as for
you, you thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to
pass, as it is at this day, to save much people alive, Genesis 50. 20. Fourthly,
his determining and restraining second causes to such and such effects: even
the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns
it whither soever he will, Prove. 21. 1.

First, his sustentation or upholding of all things, is his powerful
continuing of their being, natural strength and faculties bestowed on them at
their creation; In him we live, and move, and have our being: Acts 17. So that
he does neither work all himself in them, without any cooperation of theirs,
which would not only turn all things into stocks, yea and take from stocks,
their own proper nature, but also is contrary to that general blessing he
spread over the face of the whole world, in the beginning, increase, Rem. apol.
cap. 6.
and multiply: Genesis 1. 22. nor yet, leave them to a self subsistence, he in
the mean time only not destroying them, which would make him an idle spectator
of most things in the world, not to work hitherto as our Savior speaks: and
grant to diverse things here below, an absolute being, not derivative from him;
the first whereof is blasphemous, the latter impossible.

Secondly, for Gods working in, and together with all second causes, for the
producing of their effects: what part or portion in the work, punctually to
assign unto him, what to the power of the inferior causes, seems beyond the
reach of mortals, neither is an exact comprehension thereof, any way necessary,
so that we make every thing beholding to his power for its being, and to his
assistance for its operation.

Thirdly, his supreme dominion, exercises it self in disposing of all
things, to certain and determinate ends for his own glory: and is chiefly
discerned, advancing it self over those things which are most contingent: and
making them in some sort necessary, inasmuch as they are certainly disposed of
to some proposed ends: between the birth and death of a man, how many things
merely contingent do occur? how many chances; how many diseases, in their
own nature all evitable; and in regard of the event not one of them but to
some prove mortal: yet certain it is, that a man's days are determined, the
number of his months are with the Lord, he has appointed his bounds which he
cannot pass: Job 14. 5. And oftentimes by things purely contingent and
accidental, he executes his purposes, bestows rewards, inflicteth
punishments, and accomplisheth his judgments; as when he delivers a man to
be slain by the head of an axe, flying from the helve in the hand of a man
cutting a tree by the way: but in nothing is this more evident, then in the
ancient casting of lots, a thing as casual and accidental as can be imagined,
hudled in the Cap at a venture; yet God overruleth them to the declaring of his
purpose, freeing truth from doubts, and manifestation of his power, Prove. 16.
33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing of it is from the
Lord: as you may see in the examples of Achan: Josh. 7. 16, 17. Saul, 1 Samuel
10. 21. Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 41. Jonah, chap. 1. 8. Matthias, Act. 1. 26. And
yet this overruling act of Gods providence, (as no other decree or act of his)
does not rob things contingent of their proper nature: for cannot he who
effectually causes that they shall come to pass, cause also that they shall
come to pass contingently.

Fourthly, Gods predetermination of second causes, (which I name not last as
though it were the last act of Gods providence about his creatures, for indeed
it is the first that concerns their operation:) is that effectual working of
his, according to his eternal purpose, whereby though some agents, as the wills
of men, are causes most free and indefinite, or unlimited Lords of their own
actions, in respect of their internal principle of operation, that is their
own nature, are yet all in respect of his decree, and by his powerful working
determined to this or that effect, in particular: not that they are compelled
to do this, or hindered from doing that; but are inclined and disposed to do
this or that, according to their proper manner of working, that is most freely:
For truly such testimonies are every where obvious in Scripture, of the
stirring up of men's wills and minds, of bending and inclining them to diverse
things: of the governing of the secret thoughts and motions of the heart; as
cannot by any means be referred to a naked permission, with a government of
external actions, or to a general influence, whereby they should have power
to do this or that, or any thing else, wherein as some suppose his whole
providence consists.

Let us now jointly apply these several acts to free agents, working according
to choice, or relation, such as are the wills of men: and that will open the way
to take a view of Arminian Heterodoxies, concerning this Article of Christian
belief: and here two things must be premised: First, that they be not deprived
of their own radical, or original internal liberty: Secondly, that they be
not exempt from the moving influence and gubernation of Gods providence; the
first whereof, would leave no just room for rewards and punishments; the
other, as I said before, is injurious to the majesty and power of God: Qui sic
homines voluit esse liberos ut fecit sacrilegos: Aug.
St. Augustine judged Cicero worthy of special blame even among the heathens,
for so attempting to make men free, that he made them sacrilegious: by denying
them to be subject to an overruling providence: which gross error was
directly maintained by (...). Damascen.
Damascen, a learned Christian, teaching, things whereof we have any power not
to depend on providence, but on our own free will: an opinion fitter for a
hog of the Epicures heard, then for a Scholar in the School of Christ: and
yet, this proud prodigious error is now, though in other terms, stiffly
maintained. For what do they else, who ascribe such an absolute independent
liberty to the will of man; that it should have in its own power every
circumstance, every condition whatsoever, that belongs to operation; so that
all things required on the part of God, or otherwise to the performance of an
action being accomplished: it remains solely, in the power of a man's own
will, whether he will do it, or no: which supreme and plainly divine
liberty, joined with such an absolute uncontrollable power and dominion over
all his actions, would exempt and free the will of man, not only from all
fore-determining, to the production of such and such efffects; but also, from
any effectual working or influence of the providence of God into the will it
self, that should sustain, help or cooperate with it, in doing or willing
any thing: and therefore the authors of this imaginary liberty, have wisely
framed an imaginary concurrence of Gods providence, answerable unto it: viz. a
general and indifferent influence, always waiting, and expecting the will of
man to determine it self to this, or that effect, good or bad: God being as it
were always ready at hand, to do that small part which he has in our
actions, whenever we please to use him: or, if we please to let him alone, he
no way moves us to the performance of any thing: now God forbid that we should
give our consent to the choice of such a Captain, under whose conduct we might
go down again unto Paganism; to the erecting of such an Idol, into the
Throne of the Almighty: No doubtless; let us be most indulgent to our wills,
and assign them all the liberty that is competent unto a created nature, to
do all things freely according to election and foregoing counsel, being free
from all natural necessity, and outward compulsion: but for all this, let us
not presume to deny Gods effectual assistance, his particular powerful
influence, into the wills and actions of his creatures, directing of them to a
voluntary performance of what he has determined: which the Arminians opposing
in the behalf of their darling Free Will, do work in the hearts of men, an
overweening of their own power, and an absolute independence of the providence
of God. For:

First, they deny that God (in whom we live and move and have our being) does
any thing by his providence, Deus in^^^^^ suo nihil confert creaturae quo ad
agendum incitetur ac adjuvetur. Cor. ad Molin. cap. 3. sect. 15. p. 35.
whereby the creature should be stirred up, or helped in any of his actions:
that is, God wholly leaves a man in the hand of his own counsel, to the
disposal of his own absolute independent power, without any respect to his
providence at all: whence, as they do, they may well conclude: Quae Deus
libere prorsus et contingenter, a nobis fieri vult ^a potentius aut efficacius
quam per modum voti aut desiderii, velle non potest. Vorst. parasc. p. 4.
That those things, which God would have to be done of us freely, (such as are
all humane actions,) he cannot himself, will or work, more powerful and
effectually, then by the way of wishing or desiring, as Vorstius speaks: which
is no more, then one man can do concerning another, perhaps far less then
an Angel: I can wish or desire that another man would do, what I have a mind,
he should: but truly to describe the providence of God by such expressions,
seems to me intolerable blasphemy: but thus it must be, without such helps
as these, Dagon cannot keep on his head, nor the Idol of uncontrollable
Free Will enjoy his dominion.

Deinde etsi in isto casu destinatum aliquod consilium ac voluntas Dei
determinata consideranda esset, tamen in omnibus actionibus et in iis quidem
quae ex deliberato hominum consilio et libera voluntate et male quidem fiunt
ita se rem habere inde concludi non possit, puta, quia hic nullum consilium et
arbitrii libertas locum habent Cor. ad Molin cap. 3. s. 14. p. 33.
Hence Corvinus will grant, that the killing of a man by the slipping of an
axes head from the helve, although contingent, may be said to happen according
to Gods counsel, and determinate will; but on no terms will he yield, that
this may be applied to actions wherein the counsel and freedom of man's will,
do take place: as though, that they also, should have dependence, on any such
overruling power: whereby, he absolutely excludes the providence of God, from
having any soveraigntie within the territory of humane actions, which is
plainly to shake off the yoke of his dominion, and to make men Lords paramount
within themselves: so that they may well ascribe unto God, (as they do)
Respectu contingentiae quam res habent in se tum in divina scientia Deo
expectatio tribuitur. Rem. defen* sent. in act. syn. f. 107.
only a deceiveable expectation, of those contingent things, that are yet for
to come: there being no act of his own, in the producing of such effects, on
which he can ground any certainty: only, he may take a conjecture, according
to his guess at men's inclinations: and indeed this is the Helena for whose
enjoyment, these thrice ten years* they have maintained warfare with the
hosts of the living God: their whole endeavor being to prove, that
notwithstanding the performance of all things on the part of God required for
the production of any action, Potentia voluntatis, ab omni interna et externa
necessitate immunis debet manner. Rem. confess. cap. 6. sect. 3.
yet the will of man remains absolutely free, yea in respect of the event, as
well as its manner of operation, to do it, or not to do it: Vid. plura. Rem.
apol cap. 6. fol. 69. a.
that is, notwithstanding Gods decree that such an action shall be performed,
and his foreknowledge that it will so come to pass, notwithstanding his
cooperating with the will of man (as far as they will allow him) for the
doing of it, and though he has determined, by that act of man to execute some
of his own judgments: In arbitrio creaturae semper est vel influere in actum
vel influxum suum suspendere, et vel sic, vel aliter influere. Corvin. ad
Molin. cap. 3. sect. 15.
yet there is no kind of necessity, but that he may as well omit, as do it:
which is all one as if they should say, our tongues are our own, we ought to
speak, who is Lord over us? we will vindicate our selves into a liberty, of
doing what, and how, we will: though for it we cast God out of his throne: and
indeed if we mark it, we shall find them undermining, and pulling down, the
actual providence of God, at the root and several branches thereof. For:

First, for his conservation or sustaining of all things, they affirm An
conservatio ista sit vis sive actus potentiae an actus merus voluntatis
negativus, quo vult res creatas non destruere aut annihilare, -- posterius non
sine magna very specie affirmatur: lucus ad Heb. 1. 3. inepte adducitur. Rem.
apol. cap. 6. sect. 1. fol 68. a.
it to be very likely, that this is nothing but a negative act of his will,
whereby he wills or determines, not to destroy the things by him created: and
when we produce places of Scripture which affirm that it is an act of his
power, they say, they are foolishly cited. So that truly let the Scripture say
what it will, (in their conceit) God does no more sustain and uphold all his
creatures, then I do a house, when I do not set it on fire, or a worm, when
I do not tread upon it.

Secondly, for Gods concurring with inferior causes in all their acts, and
working, they affirm it to be only Curandum diligenter, ut Deo quidem
universalis, homini vero particularis influxus in actus tribuatur, quo
universalem Dei influxum, ad particularem actum determinet: Corvin. ad Mol.
cap. 3. sect. 5.
a general influence alike upon all, and every one, which they may use, or not
use at their pleasure; and in the use, determine it to this or that effect, be
it good or bad, so Corrinus, as it seems best unto them: in a word, to the
will of man Ita concurrit Deus in agendo, cum hominis voluntate, ut istam pro
genio suo agere et libere suas parts obire sinat. Romans confess. cap. 6. sect. 3.
it is nothing but what suffers it to play its own part freely according to
its inclination, as they jointly speak in their confession: observe also, that
they account this influence of his providence, not to be into the agent, the
will of man, whereby that should be helped or enabled to do any thing, (no
that would seem to grant a selfe-insufficiencie,) Influxus divinus est in
ipsum actum non in voluntatem: Armin. Antip. alii passim.
but only into the act it self for its production, as if I should help a man
to lift a logge, it becomes perhaps unto him so much the lighter, but he is not
made one jot the stronger: which takes off the proper work of providence,
consisting in an internal assistance.

Thirdly, for Gods determining, or circumscribing the will of man to do this
or that in particular: they absolutely explode it as a thing destructive to
their adored liberty: Determinatio cum liberate vera nullo modo consistere
potest: Rem. apol* cap. 7 fol. 82.
It is no way consistent with it, say they in their Apology: so also
Providentia divina non determinat volum tatem liberam ad unam contradictionis
vel contrarietatis partem: Armin. Artic. perpen.
Arminius, The providence of God does not determine the will of man to one part
of the contradiction: that is, God has not determined that you shall, nor does
by any means overruled your wills, to do this thing, rather then that; to do
this, or to omit it: so that the sum of their endeavor is to prove that the
will of man, is so absolutely free, independent, and uncontrouleable, that God
does not, nay with all his power cannot determine it, certainly and infallibly
to the performance of this or that particular action, thereby to accomplish his
own purposes, to attain his own ends: truly it seems to me the most
unfortunate attempt that ever Christians lighted on, which if it should get
success answerable to the greatness of the undertaking, the providence of God
in men's essence, would be almost thrust quite out of the the world: tantae
molis erat: the new goddess contingencie, could not be erected, until the God
of heaven was utterly dispoyled of his dominion over the sons of men, and in
the room thereof a homebred Idol of selfe-sufficiencie set up, and the world
persuaded to worship it: but that the building climb no higher, let all men
observe how the word of God overthrowes this Babylonian tower.

First, in innumerable places it is punctual, that his providence does not
only bear rule in the counsels of men, and their most secret resolutions,
whence the Prophet infers that he knows that the way of man is not in
himself, that it is not in man that walks to direct his ways: Ierem. 10. 23.
And Solomon, that a man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs his
steps, Prove. 16. 9. David also having laid this ground, That the Lord brings
the counsel of the heathen to naught, and makes the devices of the people to
be of none effect, but his own counsel abides for ever, and the thoughts of
his heart to all generations: Psam. 33. 10, 11. proceeds accordingly in his
own distress to pray, that the Lord would infatuate, and make Dominus
dissipavit consilium quod dederat Achitophel agendo in cord Absolon ut tale
consilium repudiaret, et aliud quod ei non expediebat eligeret: August* de
great. et lib. Arbit. cap. 20.
foolish the counsel of Achitophel, 2 Samuel 15. 33. which also the Lord did, by
working in the heart of Absalom, to hearken to the cross counsel of Hushai.

But also secondly, that the working of his providence is effectual even in
the hearts and wills of men, to turn them which way he will, and to determine
them to this, or that in particular according as he pleases: The preparations
of the heart, in man, and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, says
Solomon, Prove. 16. 1. which Jacob trusted and relied on, when he prayed, That
the Lord would grant his sons to find favor and mercy, before that man,
Genesis 43. 14. whom then he supposed to be some Atheistical Egyptian; whence we
must grant, if either the good old man, believed that it was in the hand of
God, to incline and unalterably turn and settle the heart of Joseph, to favor
his brethren, or else his prayer must have had such a senseless sense as this:
Grant O Lord, such a general influence of thy providence, that the heart of
that man, may be turned to good toward my sons, or else that it may not, being
left to its own freedom; a strange request; yet how it may be bettered, by one
believing the Arminian doctrine I cannot conceive: Thus Solomon affirms, that
the heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord, like the rivers of water he
turns it which way he will, Pro. 21. 1. If the heart of a King who has an
inward natural liberty equal with others, and an outward liberty belonging
to his state and condition above them, be yet so in the hand of the Lord, as
that he always turns it, to what he pleases in particular, then certainly
other men, are not excepted from the rule of the same providence: which is the
plain sense of these words, and the direct Thesis, which we maintain, in
opposition to the Arminian Idol of absolute independent Free Will: So Daniel
also reproving the Babylonian Tyrant, affirms that he glorified not God in
whose hand was his breath, and whose were all his ways, Dan. 5. 23. not only
his breath and life, but also all his ways, his actions, thoughts and words,
were in the hand of God.

Yea, Secondly, sometimes the Saints of God, as I touched before, do pray that
God would be pleased thus to determine their hearts, and bend their wills, and
wholly incline them to some one certain thing, and that without any prejudice
to their true and proper liberty: So David, Psalm. 119. 36. Incline my heart
unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness. This prayer being his, may
also be ours, and we may ask it in faith, relying on the power, and promise of
God in Christ, that he will perform our petitions, John 14. 14. Now I desire
any Christian to resolve, whether by these and the like requests, he intends
to desire at the hand of God, nothing but such an indifferent motion to any
good, as may leave him to his own choice whether he will do it or no; which
is all the Arminians will grant him: or rather that he would powerfully bind
his heart and soul unto his Testimonies, and work in him an actual embracing
of all the ways of God, not desiring more liberty, but only enough to do it
willingly: Nay surely the prayers of Gods servants requesting with Solomon,
that the Lord would be with them, and incline their heart unto him to keep his
statutes, and walk in his* Commandments, 1 Kings 8. 5. 7. And with David, to
create in them a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within them: Psalm. 51.
when according to Gods promises, they entreat him to put his fear into their
hearts: Ierem. 31. 32. To unite their hearts to fear his Name, Psalm. 86. 11.
to work in them, both the will and the deed, an actual obedience unto his law
cannot possibly aim at any thing but a general influence, enabling them
alike, either to do, or not to do, what they so earnestly long after.

Thirdly, the certainty of diverse promises and threatenings of Almighty God,
depends upon his powerful determining, and turning the wills and heart of men
which way he pleases: thus to them that fear him, he promises that they
shall find favor in the sight of man, Prove. 3. 4. Now if notwithstanding, all
Gods powerful operation in their hearts, it remains absolutely in the hands
of men, whether they will favor them that fear him or no: it is wholly in
their power whether God shall be true in his promises or no: surely when Jacob
wrastled with God on the strength of some such promise, Genesis 32. 12. he little
thought of any question, whether it were in the power of God to perform it:
yea and the event showed that there ought to be no such question, G^n. 33. for
the Lord turned the heart of his brother Esau, as he does of others, when he
makes them pity his servants when at any time they have carried away captives,
Psalm. 106. 46. See also the same powerful operation, required to the execution
of his judgments: Job 12. 17. and Chap. 20. 21, etc. In brief, there is no
prophecy nor prediction in the whole Scripture, no promise to the Church or
faithful, to whose accomplishment, the free actions and concurrence of men is
required, but evidently declares, that God disposes of the hearts of men,
rules their wills, inclines their affections, and determines them freely to
choose, and do, what he in his good pleasure has decreed shall be performed;
such as were the prophesies of deliverance from the Babylonish captivity by
Cyrus, Isa. 42. Of the conversion of the Gentiles, of the stabilitie of the
Church, Matthew. 16. Of the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, Matthew. 24.
with innumerable others: I will add only some few reasons for the close of
this long discourse.

This opinion that God has nothing but a general influence into the actions
of men, not effectually moving their wills, to this, or that, in particular.

First, it grants a goodness of entitie or being unto diverse things, whereof
God is not the author: as those special actions which men perform without
his special concurrence; which is blasphemous: the Apostle affirms that of
him are all things.

Secondly, Qui aliquid boni a Deo non effici affirmat, ille Deum esse negat: si
namque vel tantillum boni a Deo non est: jam non omnis boni effector est ^oque
nec Deus: Bucer. in cap. 9. ad Romans
it denies God to be the Author of all moral goodness: for an action is
good in as much as it is such an action in particular: which that any is so,
according to this opinion is to be attributed merely to the will of man: the
general influence of God moves him no more to prayer, then to evil
communications tending to the corruption of good manners.

Thirdly, it makes all the decrees of God, whose execution depends on humane
actions, to be altogether uncertain, and his foreknowledge of such things to
be fallible, and easily to be deceived: so that there is no reconciliation
possible to be hoped for, betwixt these following and the like assertions.

S. S.
In him we live and move and have our being, Act. 17. 28. He upholdeth all
things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. Thou have wrought all our works in
us: Isa. 26. 12. My Father works hitherto: John 5. 17. The preparations of
the heart in man and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Pr. 16. 1. The
heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord, like the rivers of water he
turns it which way he will: Prove. 21. 1. Incline my heart unto thy
Testimonies, and not unto covetousness: Psalm. 119. 36. Unite my heart to fear
thy Name, Psalm. 86. 11. Thou have not glorified God in whose hand is thy
breath, and whose are all thy ways: Dan. 5. 23. See Matthew. 27. 1. compared
with Act. 2. 23. and chap. 4. 27, 28. Luke 24. 26. John 19. 34. 36. For the
necessity of other events, see Exodus 21. 17. Job 14. 5. Matthew. 19. 7. etc.
Lib. Arbit.
Gods sustaining of all things is not an affirmative act of his power but a
negative act of his will: Rem. apol. whereby he will not destroy them. God by
his influence bestows nothing on the creature whereby it may be incited or
helped in its actions: Corvinus. Those things God would have us freely do our
selves: he can no more effectually work or will then by the way of wishing:
Vorstius. The providence of God does not determine the Free Will of man to this
or that particular, or to one part of the contradiction: Arminius. The will of
man ought to be free from all kind of internal and external necessity in its
actions: Rem. that is, God cannot lay such a necessity upon any thing as that
it shall infallibly come to pass as he intends: see the contrary in the
places cited.


CHAP. V.
Whether the will and purpose of God may be resisted and he be frustrate of his
intentions.
BY the former steps, is the Altar of Ahaz, set on the right hand of the Altar
of God: the Arminian Idol, in a direct opposition exalted to an equal pitch,
with the power, and will of the most high: I shall now present unto you, the
spirit of God once more contending, with the towering imaginations of poor
mortals, about a transcendent privilege of greatness, glory and power: for
having made his decrees mutable, his prescience fallible, and almost quite
divested him of his providence; as the sum and issue of all their endeavors,
they affirm that his will may be resisted, he may fail of his intentions, be
frustrate of his ends, he may, and does propose, such things, as he neither
does, nor can at any time accomplish: and that, because the execution of such
acts of his will, might happily clash against the freedom of the wills of men:
which if it be not an expression of spiritual pride, above all that ever the
devil attempted in heaven, divines do not well explicate that sin of his:
now because there may seem some difficulty in this matter, by reason of the
several acceptations of the will of God: especially in regard of that whereby
it is affirmed that his law and precepts, are his will, which alas we all of us
too often resist or transgress, I will unfold one distinction of the will of
God, which will leave it clear, what it is, that the Arminians oppose, for
which we count them worthy of so heavy a charge.

Divinum velle est eius esse, Aquin. p. q. 19. ar. ad ^um.
say the Schoolmen, The will of God is nothing but God willing, not differing
from his essence, secundum rem, in the thing it self, but only secundum
rationem, in that it imports a relation to the thing willed: the essence of
God then, being a most absolute pure simple act or substance: his will
consequently can be but simply one, whereof we ought to make neither division,
nor distinction: if that whereby it is signified, were taken always properly
and strictly for the eternal will of God: the differences hereof, that are
usually given, are rather distinctions of the signification of the word, then
of the thing.

In which regard, they are not only tolerably, but simply necessary; because
without him, it is utterly impossible to reconcile some places of Scripture,
seemingly repugnant: in the 22. Chapter of Genesis v. 2. God commands
Abraham, to take his only son Isaac; and offer him for a burnt offering in
the land of Moriah. Here the words of God are declarative of some will of God
unto Abraham: who knew it ought to be, and little thought, but that it should
be performed: but yet, when he actually addressed himself, to his duty in
obedience to the will of God: he receives a countermand, verse. 12. that he
should not lay his hand upon the child, to sacrifice him: the event plainly
manifests, that it was the will of God that Isaac should not be sacrificed:
and yet notwithstanding, by reason of his command; Abraham seems before bound
to believe, that it was well-pleasing unto God, that he should accomplish what
he was enjoined: if the will of God in the Scripture be used but in one
acceptance, here is a plain contradiction: Thus God commands Pharaoh to let
his people go: could Pharaoh think otherwise, nay was he not bound to
believe, that it was the will of God, that he should dismiss the Israelites at
the first hearing of the message: yet God affirms, that he would harden his
heart, that he should not suffer them to depart, until he had showed his
signs and wonders in the land of Egypt: to reconcile these, and the like
places of Scripture, both the ancient Fathers, and Schoolmen, with modern
Divines, do affirm that the one will of God, may be said to be diverse or
manifold, in regard of the sundry manners, whereby he wills those things to
be done, which he wills, as also in other respects: and yet taken in its
proper signification, is simply one and the same: the vulgar distinction of
Gods secret and revealed will, is such, as to which all the other may be
reduced: and therefore I have chosen it to insist upon.

The secret will of God, in his eternal, unchangeable purpose, concerning all
things which he has made, to be brought by certain means to their appointed
ends: of this himself affirms, that his counsel shall stand and he will do
all his pleasure, Isaiah. 46. 10. this some call the absolute efficacious will
of God, the will of his good pleasure always fulfilled: and indeed this is the
only proper, eternal, constant, immutable will of God, whose order can neither
be broken, nor its law transgressed, so long as with him there is neither
change, nor shadow of turning.

The revealed will of God, contains not his purpose and decree, but our
duty, not what he will do according to his good pleasure, but what we should
do if we will please him: and this, consisting in his word, his precepts and
promises, belongs to us and our children, that we may do the will of God:
now this indeed is rather (...), then (...), that which God wills, then his
will, but termed so, as we call that the will of a man which he has
determined, shall be done: This is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which sees the son and believes on him, may have everlasting life, says
our Savior: Ioh. 6. 40. that is, this is that which his will has appointed:
hence it is called voluntas signi, or the sign of his will, Metaphorically
only called his will, says Aquin. q. g. 19. a 11. c.
Aquinas: for in as much, as our commands are the signs of our wills, the same
is said of the precepts of God: This is the rule of our obedience, and whose
transgression makes an action sinful, for (...), sin is the transgression of
a law, and that such a law, as is given to the transgressor to be observed: now
God has not imposed on us the observation of his eternal decree and
intention, which as it is utterly impossible for us to transgress or
frustrate: so were we unblameable if we should: a Master requires of his
servant, to do what he commands, not to accomplish what he intends: which
perhaps he never discovered unto him: nay, the commands of superiors, are not
always signs that the commander will have the things commanded actually
performed, as in all precepts for trial: but only that they who are subjects
to this command, shall be obligd to obedience, as far as the sense of it does
extend, and hoc clarum est in praeceptis divinis, says Durand. did c. 48. q.
3.
Durand. etc. and this is clear in the commands of God: by which we are
obliged to do, what he commands, and it is not always his pleasure, that
the thing it self, in regard of the event, shall yet be accomplished: as we
saw before in the examples of Pharaoh, and Abraham.

Now the will of God in the first acceptance, is said to be hid or secret, not
because it is so always, for it is in some particulars revealed and made
known unto us, two ways.

First, by his word, as where God affirms that the dead shall rise, we
neither doubt not, but that they shall rise, and that it is the absolute will
of God that they shall do so. Secondly, by the effects, for when any thing
comes to pass, we may cast the event on the will of God as its cause, and
look upon it as a revelation of his purpose. Jacobs sons little imagined,
that it was the will of God, by them to send their brother into Egypt: yet
afterward, Joseph tells them plainly, it was not they, but God that sent him
thither, Genesis 45. but it is said to be secret for two causes: First, because
for the most part it is so, there is nothing in diverse issues declarative of
Gods determination but only the event: which while it is future is hidden to
them who have faculties to judge of things past and present, but not to
discern things for to come. Hence Saint James bids us not be too peremptory in
our determinations, if we will do this, or that, not knowing how God will
close with us, for its performance. Secondly, it is said to be secret, in
reference to its cause, which for the most part is past our finding out: his
paths are in the deeps and his footsteps are not known.

It appears then, that the secret and revealed will of God are diverse, in
sundry respects, but chiefly, in regard of their acts, and their objects.
First, in regard of their acts, the secret will of God is his eternal decree,
and determination, concerning any thing to be done, in its appointed time: his
revealed will is an act, whereby he declares himself to love, or approve any
thing, whither ever it be done, or no.

Secondly, they are diverse in regard of their objects, the object of Gods
purpose and decree, is that which is good in any kind, with reference to its
actual existence, for it must infallibly be performed: but the object of his
revealed will, is that only which is morally good, (I speak of it inasmuch as
it approves or commands,) agreeing to the Law, and the Gospel: and that
considered, only inasmuch as it is good: for whither it be ever actually
performed, or no, is accidental to the object of Gods revealed will.

Now of these two differences, the first is perpetual, in regard of their
several acts, but not so the latter, they are sometimes coincident in regard
of their objects: for instance, God commands us to believe, here his revealed
will, is that we should so do: withal he intends we shall do so, and
therefore ingenerateth faith in our hearts that we may believe: here his secret
and revealed will, are coincident, the former being his precept, that we should
believe, the latter his purpose that we shall believe: in this case, I say, the
object of the one, and the other, is the same, even what we ought to do, and
what he will do.

And this inasmuch, as he has wrought all our works in us: Isaiah 26. 12. they
are our own works, which he works in us: his act in us, and by us, is ofttimes
our duty toward him: he commands us by his revealed will to walk in his
Statutes, and keep his Laws, upon this, he also promises that he will so
effect all things, that of some this shall be performed: Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. A
new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart
of flesh: And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and you shall keep my judgments and do them: so that the self
same obedience of the people of God, is here the object of his will, taken in
either acceptance: and yet the precept of God, is not here as some learned men
suppose, declarative of Gods intention, for then, it must be so to all, to whom
it is given, which evidently it is not, for many are commanded to believe, on
whom God never bestows faith: it is still to be looked upon, as a mere
declaration of our duty, its closing with Gods intention, being accidental
unto it: there is a wide difference betwixt, do such a thing, and you shall
do it: if Gods command to Judas to believe, imported as much as it is my
purpose, and intention that Judas shall believe, it must needs contradict that
will of God, whereby he determined that Judas for his infidelity should go to
his own place: his precepts are in all obedience of us to be performed, but do
not signify his will, that we shall actually fulfill his commands. Abraham was
not bound to believe, that it was Gods intention that Isaac should be
sacrificed, but, that it was his duty; there was no obligation on Pharaoh to
think, it was Gods purpose the people should depart, at the first summons, he
had nothing to do with that: but there was one, to believe that if he would
please God, he must let them go. Hence diverse things of good use in these
controversies may be collected.

First, That God may command many things by his word, which he never decreed
that they should actually be performed: because, in such things, his words are
not a revelation of his eternal decree and purpose: but only a declaration of
some thing where with he is well pleased, be it by us performed or no in the
forecited case, he commanded Pharaoh, to let his people go, and plagued him
for refusing to obey his command: hence we may not collect, that God intended
the obedience and conversion of Pharaoh by this his precept, but was frustrated
of his intention, for the Scripture is evident and clear, that God purposed by
his disobedience, to accomplish an end far different, even a manifestation of
his glory by his punishment: but only that obedience unto his commands is
pleasing unto him: as 1 Samuel 15. 22.

Secondly, That the will of God to which our obedience is required, is the
revealed will of God, contained in his word, whose compliance with his decree
is such, that hence we learn three things tending to the execution of it.
First, that it is the condition of the word of God, and the dispensation
thereof, instantly to persuade to faith and obedience: Secondly, that it is our
duty, by all means to aspire to the performance of all things by it enjoined,
and our fault if we do not. Thirdly, that God by these means, will accomplish
his eternal decree of saving his elect, and that he wills the salvation of
others, inasmuch as he calls them unto the performance of the condition
thereof: now our obedience is so to be regulated by this revealed will of God,
that we may sin, either by omission, against its precepts: or commission
against its prohibitions: although by our so omitting, or committing of any
thing, the secret will or purpose of God be fulfilled. Had Abraham disobeyed
Gods precept, when he was commanded to sacrifice his son Isaac: though Gods
will had been accomplished thereby, who never intended it: yet Abraham had
grievously sinned against the revealed will of God, the rule of his duty: the
holiness of our actions, consists in a conformity unto his precepts, and not
unto his purposes: on this ground ( Multi voluntatem Dei faciunt cum illam
nituntur vitare, et resistendo imprudenter obsequuntur divino consilio: Greg.
Moral. lib. 6. cap. 11.
Gregory affirms) that many fulfill the will of God (that is his intentions)
when they think to change it, (by transgressing his precepts) and by
resisting, imprudently obey Gods purpose: and to show how merely we in our
actions are tied to this rule of our duty. August. Enchirid: ad Lauren: cap:
101.
Saint Austine shows how a man may do good in a thing cross to Gods secret
will: and evil in that which complyeth with it: which he illustrates by the
example of a sick parent having two children, the one wicked, who desires his
fathers death, the other godly, and he prays for his life: but the will of God
is he shall die, agreeably to the desire of the wicked child: and yet it is
the other, who has performed his duty, and done what is pleasing unto God.

Thirdly, to return from this unnecessarie digression: that which we have now
in agitation, is the secret will of God, which we have before unfolded, and
this it is that we charge the Arminians for affirming, that it may be resisted:
that is, That God may fail in his purposes, come short of what he earnestly
intends; or be frustrated of his aim and end: as if he should determinately
resolve the faith and salvation of any man: it is in the power of that man, to
make void his determination, and not believe, and not be saved: now it is only
in cases of this nature, wherein our own Free-wils have an interest, that they
thus limit and circumscribe the power of the most high: in other things, they
grant his omnipotency to be of no less extent then others do: but in this
case, they are peremptory and resolute, without any coloring or
tergiversation, for whereas there is a question proposed by the Apostle, Romans
9. 19. Who has resisted his will? which that none has or can, he grants in
the following verses: Ea sententia non continet Apostoli verba, sed Jud ^orum
objectionem ab Apostolo rejectam: Crovin. ad M^l. cap* 3. pe^. 19.
Corvinus affirms, it is only an objection of the Jews rejected by the
Apostle: which is much like an answer young scholars usually give to some
difficult place in Aristotle, when they cannot think of a better, loquitur ex
aliorum sententia: for there is no sign of any such rejection of it by the
Apostle, in the whole following discourse: Yea, and it is not the Jews, that
Saint Paul disputes withal here, but weaker brethren concerning the Jews;
which is manifest from the first verse, of the next Chapter, where he
distinguishes between brethren to whom, and Israel of whom he spoke.
Secondly, he speaks of the Jews in the whole Treatise in the third person,
but of the disputer in the second. Thirdly, it is taken for a confessed
principle, between Saint Paul, and the disputer as he calls him; that the Jews
were rejected, which surely themselves would not readily acknowledge: So that
Corvinus rejects as an objection of the Jews, a granted principle of Saint
Paul, and the other Multa non ^ieri quae Deus fieri vel non dubitamus: Corvin.
ibid. cap. 5. p. 5.
Christians of his time: with the like confidence, the same Author affirms,
That they nothing doubt but that many things are not done which God would have
to be done: Multa fiunt quae Deus fieri non vult: nec semper fiunt quae ispe
fieri vult: Vorst. de Deo: page 64.
Vorstius goes further, teaching That not only many things are done, which he
would have done, but also that many things are done, which he would not have
done: He means not our transgressing of his Law, but Gods failing in his
purpose; as Corvinus cleares it, acknowledging, that the execution of Gods
will, is suspended or hindered by man: to whom Ab homine esse agnoscimus, quod
voluntatis (divinae) executio saepe suspendatur: Corvin: ubi sup: paraq. 12.
Episcop. disput. pri. de volun. Dei coral. 5.
Episcopius subscribes; as for example: God purposes and intends the
conversion of a sinner, suppose it were Mary Magdalen: Can this intention of
his be crossed and his will resisted? yea, say the Arminians; for God converts
sinners by his grace; but we can resist God when he would convert us by his
grace; say Possumus Deo resistere cum nos vult per gratiam suam convertere:
Rem. coll. Hag. p. 193. Objiciet quis ergo illum suum finem Deus non est
assecutus, Respondemus, nos hoc concedere: Rem. defens: sent in Synod. fol. 256.
six of them jointly in their meeting at the Hague: But some one may here
object, say they, that thus God fails of his intention, does not attain the
end, at which he aims: we answer, this we grant: or be it the salvation of
men, they say They are certain Nobis certum est, Deum multorum salutem
intendere, in quibus eam non assequitur, Grevin. ad. Ames. fol. 271.
that God intends that for many, which never obtain it; that end he cannot
compass.

And here me thinks they place God in a most unhappy condition, by affirming
that they are often damned, whom he would have to be saved, though he desires
their salvation with a most Veheme^^ est in Deo affectus ad homini
benefaciendum: Cor. ad Molin. cap. 5. sect. 8.
vehement desire and natural affection, such I think, as Crows have to the
good of their young ones, for that there are in him Esse in Deo desideria quae
non implentur concedimus: idem. sect. 9. Non decet ut Deus infinita sua
potentia utatur ad id efficiendum quo desideria suo naturali fertur Armi.
Antiper. p. 584.
such desires as are never fulfilled, because not regulated by wisdom and
justice; they plainly affirm: For although by his infinite power perhaps, he
might accomplish them, yet it would not become him so to do.

Now let any good natured man, who has been a little troubled for poor
Jupiter in Homer, mourning for the death of his son Sarpedon, which he could
not prevent: or has been grieved for the sorrow of a distressed father, not
able to remove the wickedness and inevitable ruin, of an only son; drop
one tear for the restrained condition of the God of heaven: who, when he would
have all and every man in the world to come to heaven to escape the torments of
hell, and that with a serious purpose and intention, that it shall be so: a
vehement affection and fervent natural desire, that it should be so, yet being
not in himself alone able to save one, must be forced to loose his desire, lay
down his affection, change his purpose, and see the greatest part of them to
perish everlastingly: Deus ^o fine et intention remedium praeparavit, ut omnes
ejus actu fierent participes, quamvis id non actu evenit: Rem. Apol. cap. 7.
fol. 86.
yea notwithstanding that he had provided a sufficient means for them all to
escape, with a purpose and intention that they should so do.

In brief, their whole doctrine in this point is laid down by Corvinus, Chap.
3. against Moulin, and the third Section: where first, he allows of the
distinction of the will of God, into that whereby he will have us do
something, and that whereby he will do any thing himself: the first is
nothing but his Law and Precepts, which we with him affirm may be said to be
resisted, in as much as it is transgressed: the latter he says, If it respect
any act of man's, may be considered as praeceding that act, or following it: If
praeceding it, then it may be resisted, if man will not cooperate: Now this is
the will of God whereby himself intends to do any thing: The sum of which
distinction is this, the will of God concerning the future being of any thing,
may be considered as it goes before the actual existence of the thing it
self, and in this regard it may be hindered or resisted; but as it is
considered to follow any act of man, it is always fulfilled: by which latter
member, striving to mollify the harshnesse of the former, he runs himself
into inexplicable nonsense, affirming, that, that act of the will of God,
whereby he intends men shall do any thing, cannot be hindered after they
have done it, that is, God has irresistibly purposed they shall do it,
provided they do it: in his following Discourse also, he plainly grants, that
there is no act of Gods will about the salvation of men, that may not be made
void and of none effect, but only that general decree, whereby he has
established an inseparable connection between faith and salvation, or whereby
he has appointed faith in Christ, to be the means of attaining blessedness:
which is only an immanent act of Gods will, producing no outward effect: so
that every act thereof, that has an external issue by humane cooperation, is
frustrable and may fall to the ground: which in what direct opposition it
stands to the word of God, let these following instances declare.

First, Our God is in heaven, says the Psalmist, he has done whatsoever he
pleased, Psalm. 115. 5. not only part, but all, whatsoever he pleased should
come to pass by any means: He rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to
whom he will, Dan. 4. 23. The transposition of kingdoms, is not without the
mixture of diverse free and voluntary actions of men, and yet in that great
work, God does all that he pleases; yea, before him, all the inhabitants of
the earth are reputed as nothing, and he does according to his will, in the
Army of heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his
hand, or say unto him, What do thou? verse. 35. My counsel, says he, shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46. 10. I have purposed I will also
do it, verse. 11. Nay, so certain is he of accomplishing all his purposes;
that he confirms it with an Oath, the Lord of Hoasts has sworn, surely as I
have thought, so it shall come to pass, and as I have purposed so it shall
stand: Isa. 14. 24. and indeed it were a very strange thing, that God should
intend what he fore-seeth will never come to pass: but I confess this
Argument will not be pressing against the Arminians who question that
praescience: but yet, would they also would observe from the Scripture, that
the faylings of wicked men's counsels and intentions is a thing that God is said
to deride in heaven, as Psalm. 2. 4. He threatens them with it, Take counsel,
says he, together and it shall come to naught, Isa. 8. 10. speak the word and
it shall not stand: see also Chap. 29. 7, 8. and shall they be enabled to
recriminate, and cast the like aspersion on the God of heaven? no surely, says
Saint Ne credere cogamur aliquid omnipotentem D^um voluisse factumque non esse,
August. En. cap. 103.
Austine: Let us take heed we be not compelled to believe that Almighty God
would have any thing done which does not come to pass: to which truth also
that the Schoolmen have universally consented is showed by Alvarez disput.
32. pro. 3. and these few instances will manifest the Arminian opposition to
the word of God in this particular.

S. S.
Our God is in heaven and has done whatsoever pleases him, Psalm. 115. 3. I
will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46. Who can stay his hand or say unto him, what
do thou? Dan. 4. 35. I have purposed, I will also do it, Isa. 45. As I have
purposed so it shall stand, Chap. 14. 24.
Lib. Arbit.
We nothing doubt but many things which God wills, or that it pleases him to
have done, do yet never come to pass: Corvin. We grant that some of Gods
desires are never fulfilled, idem. It is in the power of man to hinder the
execution of Gods will. idem. It is ridiculous to imagine that God does not
seriously will any thing but what takes effect: Episcopius. It may be objected
that God fails of his end: this we readily grant: Remonstr. Synod.


CHAP. VI.
How the whole doctrine of Predestination is accounted by the Arminians.
THe cause of all these quarrels, wherewith the Arminians and their abettors,
have troubled the Church of Christ, comes next unto our consideration: the
eternal predestination of Almighty God, that fountain of all spiritual
blessings, of all the effects of Gods love derived unto us through Christ: the
demollishing of this rock of our salvation, has been the chief endeavor of
all the Patrons of humane selfe-sufficiencie: so to vindicate unto themselves,
a power, and independent abillitie of doing good, of making themselves to
differ from others, of attaining everlasting happiness, without going one
step from without themselves: and this is their first attempt, to attain
their second proposed end, of building a tower, from the top whereof they may
mount into heaven, whose foundation is nothing but the sand of their own
free will and endeavors: quite on the sudden (what they have done in effect)
to have taken away this divine praedestination, name, and thing, had been an
attempt as noted as notorious, and not likely to attain the least success
amongst men professing to believe the Gospel of Christ: wherefore, suffering
the name to remain, they have abolished the thing it self, and substituted
another so unlike it in the room thereof, that any one may see they have
gotten a bleareeyed Leah instead of Rachel, and hug a cloud instead of a
Deity. The true Doctrine it self, has been so excellently delivered by
diverse learned Divines, so freed from all Objections, that I shall only
briefly and plainly lay it down, and that with special reference to the
seventeenth Article of our Church, where it is clearly avowed; showing withal
which is my chief intention, how it is thwarted, opposed, and overthrown by
the Arminians: Predestination in the usual sense it is taken, is a part of
Gods providence, concerning his creatures, distinguished from it by a double
restriction.

First, in respect of their Objects, for whereas the Decree of providence
comprehends his intentions toward all the works of his hands, predestination
respects only rational creatures.

Secondly, in regard of their ends, for whereas his providence directs all
creatures in general, to those several ends to which at length they are
brought, whether they are proportionated unto their natures, or exceeding the
sphere of their natural activitie: Predestination is exercised only in
directing rational creatures, to supernatural ends: so that in general it is
the counsel, decree, or purpose of Almighty God, concerning the last and
supernatural end of his rational creatures, to be accomplished for the praise
of his glory: But this also must receive a double restriction, before we come
precisely, to what, we in this place aim at: and these again in regard of the
objects or the ends thereof.

The Object of Predestination is, all rational creatures; now these are either
Angels or men, of Angels I shall not treat: Secondly, the end by it provided
for them is either eternal happiness, or eternal misery: I speak only of
the former, the act of Gods predestination, transmitting men to everlasting
happiness: and in this restrained sense, it differs not at all from election,
and we may use them as Synonyma, terms of the same importance: though by some
affirming that God predestinateth them to faith whom he has chosen, they seem
to be distinguished as the decrees of the end, and the means conducing
thereunto; whereof the first is Election, intending the end, and then takes
place Predestination providing the means; but this exact distinction appears
not directly in the Scripture.

This Election the word of God proposes unto us, as the gracious immutable
decree of Almighty God, whereby, before the foundation of the world, out of
his own good pleasure, he chose certain men, determining to free them from
sin and misery, to bestow upon them grace and faith, to give them unto
Christ, to bring them to everlasting blessedness for the praise of his
glorious grace: or as it is expressed in our Church Articles, Predestination to
life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby before the foundations of the
world were laid, he has constantly decreed by his counsel secret to us, to
deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out of
mankind, and to bring them by Christ unto everlasting salvation, as vessels
made unto honor: wherefore they who are endued with so excellent a benefit of
God, be called according to Gods purpose, etc.

Now to avoid prolixitie I will annex only such annotations, as may clear the
sense, and confirm the truth of the Article, by the Scriptures: and show
briefly how it is overthrown by the Arminians in every particular thereof.

First, the Article consonantly to the Scripture affirms, that it is an
eternal decree, made before the foundations of the world were laid, so that by
it we must needs be chosen before we are borne, before we have done either good
or evil: the words of the Article are clear, and so also is the Scripture, He
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world: Ephesians. Chap. 1. verse.
4. The children being not yet borne, before they had done either good or evil,
it was said, etc. Romans 9. 11. We are called with an holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us
in Jesus Christ before the world began: 2 Timothy 1. 9. Now from hence it would
undoubtedly follow, that no good thing in us, can be the cause of our election,
for every cause must in order praecede its effect, but all things whereof we by
any means are partakers, in as much as they are ours are temporary, and so
cannot be the cause of that which is eternal: things with that qualification,
must have reference to the sole will and good pleasure of God, which inference
would break the neck of the Arminian election: wherefore to prevent such a
fatal ruin, they deny the principle, to wit, that election is eternal:
Electio non est ab aeterno: Rem. apol.
So the Remonstrants in their Apology; Electio alia completa est quae neminem
spectat nisi immociente^: -- Electio peremptoria totum salutis complementum et
consummationem decernit, ideoque in objecto requirit totam consummatam fidei
obedientiam: Grevin. ad Ames. fol. 136. passim. dis.
Complete election regards none but him that is dying, for this peremptory
election decrees the whole accomplishment and consummation of salvation, and
therefore requires in the object the finished course of faith and obedience,
says Grevinchovius: which is to make Gods election nothing but an act of his
justice, approving our obedience: and such an act as is incident to any weak
man, who knows not what will happen in the next hour that is yet for to come:
and is this post-destination, that which is proposed to us in the Scripture, as
the unsearchable fountain of all Gods love toward us in Christ? Non
agnoscimus aliam praedestinationem in evangelio patefactam, quam qua Deus
decrevit credentes and qui in eadem fide perseverarent salvos facere: Rem.
coll. Hag. fol. 34.
yea, say they, we acknowledge no other predestination to be revealed in the
Gospel, besides that whereby God decrees to save them who should persevere in
faith, that is Gods determination concerning their salvation is pendulous,
until he find by experience, that they will persevere in obedience. But I
wonder why, seeing election is confessedly one of the greatest expressions of
Gods infinite goodness, love, and mercy toward us; if it follow our
obedience, we have it not like all other blessings and mercies promised unto
us, is it because such propositions as these, believe Peter and continue in the
faith unto the end, and I will choose thee before the foundation of the world,
are fitter for the writings of the Arminians then the word of God? neither will
we be their rivals in such an election, as Electionis fructum aut sensum in hac
vita nullum agnosco: Grevin.
from whence, no fruit, no effect, no consolation, be derived to any mortal
man whilst he lives in this world.

Secondly, the Article affirms that it is constant, that is, one immutable
decree, agreeably also to the Scriptures, teaching but one purpose, but one
foreknowledge, one good pleasure, one decree of God, concerning the infallible
ordination of his elect unto glory: although of this decree, there may be said
to be two acts, one concerning the means, the other concerning the end, but
both knit up in the immutabilitie of Gods will: Heb. 6. 17. The foundation of
God, stands sure: having this seal, God knows who are his: 2 Timothy 2. 19.
His gifts and calling are without recalling not be repented of, Romans 11. 29.
now what say our Arminians to this, why a whole multitude of new notions, and
terms have they invented, to obscure the doctrine; Election say they is
Episcop. These. p. 35. Epist. ad Walach. p. 38. Grevinch. ad Ames. p. 133.
either Legal, or Evangelicall, general or particular, complete, or
incomplete, revocable or irrevocable, peremptory, or not peremptory, with I
know not how many more distinctions of one single eternal act of Almighty
God: whereof there is neither volanec vestigium, sign or token in the whole
Bible, or any approved Author: and to these quavering divisions they
accommodate their doctrine, or rather they purposely invented them to make
their errors unintelligible: yet something agreeably thus they dictate; There
Electio alia completa est, quae neminem spectat nisi morientem, alia
incompleta, quae omnibus fidelibus communis est, -- ut Salutis bona, sunt
incompleta quae continuantur, fide continuat^, and abnegata revocantur, sic
electio est incompleta in hac vita, non peremptoria, revocabilis. Grev. ad Ames.
is a complete election, belonging to none but those that are dying, and there
is another incomplete, common to all that believe, as the good things of
salvation are incomplete which are continued whilst faith is continued, and
revoked when that is denied, so election is complete in this life, and
revocable: again, there are say they in their confession, Tres sunt ordines
credentium and resipiscentium in Scripturis, novitii, credentes aliq^andiu,
perseverantes, duo priores ordines credentium eliguntur vere quide^, at non
pro^sus absolute, nec nisi ad tempus puta quamdiu and qu^tenus tales sent* etc.
Rem. confess. cap. 18. sect. 6, 7.
three orders of believers, and repenters in the Scripture, whereof some are
beginners, others having continued for a time, and some perseverants, the two
first orders are chosen, vere truly, but not absolute prorsus, absolutely, but
only for a time, so long as they will remain as they are, the third are chosen
finally and peremptorily; for this act of God is either continued or
interrupted according as we fulfill the condition: but whence learned the
Arminians this doctrine? not one word of it from the word of truth, no mention
there of any such desultory election, no speech of faith, but such as is
consequent to the one eternal irrevocable decree of predestination, they
believed who were ordained to eternal life, Acts 13. 48. no distinction of men
half and wholly elected, where it is affirmed that it is impossible the elect
should be seduced, Matthew. 24. 24. that none shall snatch Christ's sheep out of
his fathers hand, Ioh. 11. 28, 29. what would they have more? Gods purpose of
election is sealed up, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and therefore cannot be revoked: it must
stand firm, Romans 9. 11. in spite of all opposition: neither will reason allow
us to think any immanent act of God, to be incomplete or revocable, because of
the near alliance it has with his very nature: but reason, Scripture, God
himself, all must give place to any absurdities if they stand in the Arminian
way, bringing in their Idol with shouts, and preparing his throne, by claiming
the cause of their predestination to be in themselves.

Thirdly, the Article is clear, that the object of this predestion, is some
particular men chosen out of mankind, that is, it is such an act of God, as
concerns some men in particular: taking them as it were aside from the
midst of their brethren, and designing them for some special end and
purpose, the Scripture also abounds in asserting this verity, calling them
that are so chosen, a few: Mat. 20. 16. which must needs denote some certain
persons; and the residue according to election, Romans 11. 5. those whom God
knows to be his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Men ordained to eternal life, Acts 13. 48. us
Romans 8. 39. those that are written in the Lambs book of life, Revel. 21. 27.
all which and diverse others clearly prove, that the number of the elect is
certain, not only materially as they say, that there are so many, but formally
also Aquinas.
that these particular persons and no other are they, which cannot be altered:
nay the very nature of the thing it self does so demonstratively evince it,
that I wonder it can possibly be conceived, under any other notion: to
apprehend an election of men, not circumscribed with the circumstance of
particular persons, is such a conceited Platonicall abstraction, as it seems
strange that any one dares profess to understand: that there should be a
predestination and none predestined, an election and none elected, a choice
amongst many yet none left or taken, a decree to save men, and yet thereby
salvation destinated to no one man, either re aut spe, indeed or in
expectation, in a word that there should be a purpose of God to bring men unto
glory, standing inviolable though never any one attained the proposed end, is
such a riddle as no Oedipus can unfold: now such an election, such a
predestination have the Arminians substituted, in the place of Gods everlasting
decree: we Nos negamus Dei elect^onem ad salutem extendere sese ad singulares
personas, qua singulares personas: Rem. Coll. Hag. fol. 76.
deny say they that Gods election, extends it self to any singular persons,
as singular persons: that is, that any particular persons, as Peter: Paul,
John, are by it elected: no? how then? Deus statuit indiscriminatim media ad
fidem administrare, and prout has, vel illas personas, istis mediis credituras
vel non credituras videt, ita tandem de illis statuit, Corvi. ad Tilen. 76.
Why God has appointed without difference, to dispense the means of faith, and
as he sees these persons to believe, or not to believe, by the use of those
means, so at length he determines of them: as says Corvinus: well then; God
chooses no particular man to salvation, but whom he sees believing by his own
power, with the help only of such means as are affoorded unto others, who
never believe, and as he makes himself, thus differ from them, by a good use
of his own abilities, so also he may be reduced again into the same
predicament, and then his election which respects not him in his person, but
only his qualification, quite vanishes: but is this Gods decree of election?
yes say they; and Ecclesiae tanquam Sacrosancta doctrina obtruditur Deum
absolutissime and immutabili decreto ab omni retro aeternitate, pro puro suo
beneplacito, singulares quosdam homines, eosque, quoad caeteros, paucissimos,
citra ullius obedientiae aut fidei^n Christum intuit^ praedestinasse ad vitam:
Praefat. lib. Armin. ad. Perk.
make a doleful complaint, that any other doctrine should be taught in the
Church, it is obtruded (say the true born sons of Arminius) on the Church as a
most holy doctrine, that God by an absolute immutable decree, from all
eternity, out of his own good pleasure, has chosen certain persons, and
those but a few in comparison, without any respect had to their faith and
obedience; and predestined them to everlasting life: but what so great
exception is this doctrine liable unto; what wickedness does it include, that
it should not be accounted most holy? nay, is not only the matter, but the very
terms of it contained in the Scripture: does not it say the elect are few,
and they chosen before the foundation of the world; without any respect to
their obedience or any thing that they had done: out of Gods mere gracious
good pleasure, that his free purpose according to election might stand; even
because so it pleased him: and this that they might be holy, believe, and be
sanctified, that they might come unto Christ and by him be preserved into
everlasting life; yea, this is that which gals them, Nulla Deo tribui potest
voluntas, qua ita velit hominem ullum salvari, ut salus inde illis constet
certo and infallibiliter, Arm. Antiperk. fol. 583.
no such will can be ascribed unto God whereby he so wills any one to be
saved, as that thence their salvation should be sure and infallible, says the
father of those children.

Well then let Praedestinatio est praeparatio beneficiorum quibus certissime
liberantur quicunque liberantur, Aug. de bono per. sen. cap. 14.
St. Austine his definition be quite rejected, that predestination is a
preparation of such benefits, whereby some are most certainly freed and
delivered from sin, and brought to glory: and that also of Saint Paul, that
(by reason of this) nothing can separate us from the love of God, that is in
Christ: what is this election in your judgment? Decretum electionis nihil
aliud est quam decretum quo Deus constituit credentes in Christo justificare,
and salvare, Corvin. ad Tilen. fol. 13.
Nothing but a decree whereby God has appointed to save them that believe in
Christ: says Corvinus, be they who they will: or a general purpose of God,
whereby he has ordained faith in Christ, to be the means of salvation: yea,
but this belongs to Judas, as well as to Peter, this decree carries an equal
aspect to those that are damned, as to those that are saved, salvation under
the condition of faith in Christ, was also proposed to them, but was Judas and
all his company elected? how came they then to be seduced and perish? that any
of Gods elect go to hell, is as yet a strange assertion in Christianity;
notwithstanding this decree, none may believe, or all that do may fall away,
and so none at all be saved, which is a strange kind of predestination: or all
may believe, continue in faith, and be saved: which were a more strange kind
of election.

We poor souls thought hitherto, that we might have believed according unto
Scripture, that some by this purpose were in a peculiar manner made the
Fathers, (thine they were) and by him given unto Christ, that he might bring
them unto glory, and that these men were so certain and unchangeable a number,
that not only God knows them as being his, but also, that Christ calls them
all by name: Ioh. 10. 3. and looks, that none takes them out of his hand: we
never imagined before, that Christ has been the Mediator of an uncertain
Covenant, because there are no certain persons covenanted withal, but such as
may or may not fulfill the condition: we always thought, that some had been
separated before by Gods purpose from the rest of the perishing world, that
Christ might lay down his life for his friends, for his sheep, for them that
were given him of his Father: but now it should seem he was ordained to be a
King, when it was altogether uncertain whether he should ever have any
subjects, to be a head without a body, or to such a Church whose collection and
continuance depends wholly and solely on the will of men.

These are doctrines that I believe searchers of the Scripture, had scarce ever
been acquainted withal, had they not lighted on such Expositors, as teach,
Ratio dilectionis personae est, quod probitas, fides, vel pietas, qua ex
officio suo and praescripto Dei ista persona praedita sit. Deo grata sit. Rem.
Apol. page 13.
that the only cause why God loves, (or chooses) any person, is, because the
honesty, faith and piety, wherewith, according to Gods command and his own
duty, he is endued, are acceptable to God: which though we grant it true of
Gods consequent, or approving love; yet surely there is a divine love,
wherewith he looks upon us otherwise, when he gives us unto Christ: else,
either our giving unto Christ is not out of love, or, we are pious, just, and
faithful, before we come unto him, that is, we have no need of him at all:
against either way, though we may blot these testimonies out of our hearts, yet
they will stand still recorded in holy Scripture, viz. that God so loved us
when we were his enemies, Romans 5. 8. sinners, verse. 10. of no strength, that he
sent his only begotten Son to die, that we should not perish but have life
everlasting, Ioh. 3. 16. but of this enough.

Fourthly, Another thing that the Article asserteth according to the Scripture
is, that there is no other cause of our election, but Gods own counsel, it
recounteth no motives in us, nothing impelling the will of God, to choose some
out of mankind, rejecting others, but his own decree that is his absolute will
and good pleasure, so that as there is no cause, in any thing without himself,
why he would create the world or elect any at all, for he does all these things
for himself for the praise of his own glory, so there is no cause in singular
elected persons, why God should choose them, rather then others; he looked upon
all mankind in the same condition, vested with the same qualifications, or
rather without any at all, for it is the children not yet borne, before they do
either good or evil, that are chosen or rejected, his free grace embracing the
one, and passing over the other, yet here we must observe, that although God
freely without any desert of theirs chooses some men to be partakers, both of
the end and the means, yet he bestows faith or the means, on none, but for
the merit of Christ: neither do any attain the end or salvation, but by their
own faith through that righteousness of his: the free grace of God
notwithstanding choosing Jacob, when Esau is rejected, the only antecedent
cause of any difference, between the elect and reprobates, remains firm and
unshaken: and surely unless men were resolved to trust wholly to their own
bottomes, to take nothing gratis at the hands of God, they would not endeavor
to rob him of his glory: of having mercy on whom he will have mercy, of loving
us without our desert, before the world began: if we must claim an interest in
obtaining the temporal acts of his favor, by our own endeavors; yet oh, let
us grant him the glory of being good unto us, only for his own sake, when we
were in his hand as the clay in the hand of the potter: what made this piece of
clay, fit for comely service and not a vessel wherein there is no pleasure,
but the power, and will of the framer? it is enough, yea, too much for them to
repine and say, why have thou made us thus, who are vessels fitted for wratth?
let not them who are prepared for honor, exalt themselves against him, and
sacrifice to their own nets, as the sole providers of their glory: but so it
is? humane vileness will still be declaring it self, by claiming a worth no
way due unto it: of a furtherance of which claim, if the Arminians be not
guilty, let the following declaration of their opinions in this particular
determine.

We Rotunde fatemur, fidem in consideratione Dei in eligendo ad salutem
antecedere, et non tanquam fructum electionis sequi Rem. Hag. coll. p. 35.
confess say they, roundly, that faith in the consideration of God choosing us
unto salvation, does precede, and not follow as a fruit of election, so that
whereas Christians have hitherto believed, that God bestows faith, on them
that are chosen, it seems now it is no such matter, but that those whom God
finds to believe, upon the stock of their own abilities, he afterward
chooses. Neither is faith in their judgment, only required as a necessary
condition in him that is to be chosen, but as a cause moving the will of God to
elect him that has it, Grevin. ad Ames. p. 24. Cor. ad Molin. p. 260.
as the will of the Judge is moved to bestow a reward on him, who according to
the law has deserved it; as Grevinchovius speaks, which words of his, indeed
Corvinus strives to temper, but all in vain, though he wrest them contrary to
the intention of the Author: for with him agree all his fellows: Electionis and
reprobationis, causa unica vera and absoluta non est Dei voluntas sed respectus
obedientiae and inobedientiae: Epis. disput. 8.
the one, only, absolute cause of election, is not the will of God, but the
respect of our obedience, says Episcopius: At first they required nothing but
faith, and that as a condition, not as Cum peccatum pono causam meritoriam
reprobationis ne existimato e contra me ponere, justitiam causam meritoriam
electionis. Armin. Anteperk. Rem. Apol. p. 73.
a cause, then perseverance in faith, which at length they began to call
obedience; comprehending all our duty to the precepts of Christ: for the cause
say they of this love to any person, is the righteousness faith and piety
wherewith he is endued, which being all the good works of a Christian, they in
effect affirm a man to be chosen for them: that our good works are the cause
of election, which whither it were ever so grossly taught, either by Pelagians
or Papists I something doubt.

And here observe, that this does not thwart my former assertion, where I
showed, that they deny the election of any particular persons, which here they
seem to grant upon a foresight of their faith, and good works: for there is
not any one person, as such a person, notwithstanding all this, that in their
judgment is in this life elected: but only as he is considered with those
qualifications, of which he may at any time divest himself, and so become
again to be no more elected then Judas.

The sum of their Doctrine in this particular, is laid by one of ours in a
Tract entitled Gods love to mankind, etc. a Book full of palpable ignorance,
gross sophistry, and abominable blasphemy, whose Author seems to have
proposed nothing unto himself, but to rake all the dunghils of a few the most
invective Arminians, and to collect the most filthy scumme and pollution of
their railings to cast upon the truth of God, and under I know not what
selfe-coyned pretenses, belch out odious blasphemies against his holy name.

The sum, says he, of all these speeches (he cited to his purpose) is, Gods
Love, page 6.
That there is no decree of saving men, but what is built on Gods
foreknowledge of the good actions of men: No decree? no not that whereby God
determines to give some unto Christ, to ingraft them in him by faith, and
bring them by him unto glory: which gives light to that place of Deum nullam
creaturam praecise ad vitam aeternam amare, nisi considerata^ ut justam sive
justitia legali sive evangelica, Armin. artic. perpend. fol. 21.
Arminius, where he affirms, That God loves none precisely to eternal life,
but considered as just either with Legal or Evangelicall righteousness. Now
to love one to eternal life, is to destinate one to obtain eternal life by
Christ: and so it is co-incident with the former assertion that our election or
choosing unto grace and glory is upon the foresight of our good works: which
contains a doctrine so contradictorie to the words, and meaning of the
Apostle, Romans 9. 11. condemned in so many Councels, suppressed by so many
Edicts and Decrees of Emperors and Governors: opposed as a pestilent heresy,
ever since it was first hatched, by so many Orthodoxe Fathers and learned
School men: so directly contrary to the Doctrine of this Church, so injurious
to the grace and supreme power of Almighty God: that I much wonder, any one
in this light of the Gospel, and flourishing time of learning, should be so
boldly ignorant or impudent, as to broach it amongst Christians: Vid. Prosp. ad
excep. Genesis ad dub. 8. 9. vid. Car. de ingratis. c. 2. 3.
to prove this to be a heresy, exploded by all Orthodoxe, and Catholic
antiquity, were to light a candle in the Sun: for it cannot but be known,
to all and every one, who ever heard or read any thing of the state of Christ's
Church, after the rising of the Pelagian tumults.

To accumulate testimonies of the Ancient is quite beside my purpose: I will
only add the confession of Non potest defendi praedestitio ex operibus
praevisis nisi aliquid boni ponatur in homine justo, quo discernatur ab impio,
quod non sit illi a Deo, quod sane patres omnes summa consensione rejiciunt,
Bellar. de great. and lib. Arbit. cap. 14.
Bellarmine, a man otherwise not over-well affected to truth: Predestination
says he, from the foresight of works, cannot be maintained, unless we
should suppose something in the righteous man, which should make him differ
from the wicked that he does not receive from God: which truly all the Fathers
with unanimous consent do reject: but we have a more sure testimony to which
we will take heed, even the holy Scripture pleading strongly for Gods free and
undeserved grace.

First, our Savior Christ, Matthew. 11. 26. declaring how God reveals the
Gospel unto some, which is hidden from others: a special fruit of election:
rests in his will and good pleasure as the only cause thereof: even so O
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight: so comforting his little flock,
Luke 12. 32. he bids them fear not, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the kingdom: his good pleasure is the only cause why his kingdom is
prepared for you, rather then others: but is there no other reason of this
discrimination? No; he does it all, that his purpose according to election
might stand firm, Romans 9. 11. For we are predestined according to the
purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own will,
Ephesians. 1. 11. But did not this counsel of God direct him to choose us rather
then others? because we had something to commend us more then they? No; The
Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you because you were more in
number then any people, but because the Lord loved you: Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. He has
mercy, on whom he will have mercy, yea, before the children were borne and had
done either good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of him that calls it was said unto her, the elder
shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I
hated: Romans 9. 11, 12. In brief, where ever there is any mention of election
or predestination, it is still accompanied with the purpose, love, or will, of
God; his foreknowledge, whereby he knows them that are his, his free power
and supreme dominion over all things: of our faith, obedience or any thing
importing so much, not one syllable, no mention, unless it be as the fruit and
effect thereof: it is the sole act of his free grace and good pleasure, that he
might make known the riches of his glory toward the vessels of mercy: Romans 9.
23. for this only end has he saved us and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given in Jesus Christ before the world began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Even our calling is
free and undeserved, because flowing from that most free grace of election,
whereof we are partakers before we are: it were needless to heap up more
testimonies, in a thing so clear and evident: when God and man stand in
competition, who shall be accounted the cause of an eternal good, we may be
sure the Scripture will pass the verdict on the part of the most high: and the
sentence in this case may be derived from thence by these following reasons.

First, If final perseverance in faith and obedience, be the cause of, or a
condition required unto election, then none can be said in this life to be
elected: for no man is a final perseverer until he be dead, until he has
finished his course and consummated the faith: but certain it is that it is
spoken of some in the Scripture, that they are even in this life elected: few
are chosen, Mat. 20. 16. for the elects sake those days shall be shortened,
Matthew. 24. and shall seduce if it were possible the very elect, verse. 24. where
it is evident, that election is required to make one persevere in the faith:
but no where is perseverance in the faith required, to election: yea and Peter
gives us all a command, that we should give all diligence, to get an assurance
of our election even in this life, 2 Pet. 1. 10. and therefore surely it cannot
be a decree presupposing consummated faith and obedience.

Secondly, consider two things of our estate, before the first temporal act of
Gods free grace, (for grace is no grace if it be not free) which is the first
effect of our predestination, comprehends us: Were we better then others, no
in no wise? both Jews and Gentiles, were all under sin, Romans 3. 9. there is
no difference for we have all sinned and come short of the glory of God, verse.
23. being all dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Being by nature
children of wrath as well as others, verse. 3. a far off until we are made
nigh by the blood of Christ, verse. 12. we were enemies against God, Romans 5. 10.
Titus. 3. 3. and look what desert there is in us with these qualifications,
when our vocation the first effect of our predestination, as Saint Paul
shows, Romans 8. 30. and as I shall prove hereafter, separateth us from the
world of unbeleevers, so much there is in respect of predestination it self;
so that if we have any way deserved it, it is by being sinners, enemies,
children of wrath, and dead in trespasses: these are our events, this is the
glory whereof we ought to be ashamed.

But secondly, when they are in the same state of actual alienation from God,
yet then in respect of his purpose to save them by Christ: some are said to be
his; thine they were and thou gave them unto me, John 17. 6. they were his
before they came unto Christ by faith; the sheep of Christ before they are
called, for he calls his sheep by name, John 10. 30. before they come into
the flock or congregation: for other sheep, says he, I have which are not of
this fold: which must also be gathered, Ioh. 10. 16. to be beleved of God
before they love him, herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved
us: 1 Ioh. 4. 10. Now all this must be with reference to Gods purpose of
bringing them unto Christ, and by him unto glory: which we see goes before all
their faith and obedience.

Thirdly, Election is an eternal act of Gods will, he has chosen us before
the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. consummated antecedently to all duty
of ours, Romans 9. 11. now every cause must in order of nature, praecede its
effect; nothing has an activitie in causing, before it has a being:
operation, in every kind is a second act, flowing from the essence of a thing,
which is the first: but all our graces and works, our faith, obedience, piety
and charity, are all temporal, of yesterday, the same standing with our
selves, and no longer, and therefore cannot be the cause of, no nor so much as
a condition necessarily required for the accomplishment of an eternal act of
God; irrevocably established before we are.

Fourthly: If Predestination be for faith foreseen, these three things, with
diverse such absurdities will necessarily follow: first, that election is not of
him that calls, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 9. 11. that is of the good
pleasure of God, who calls us with an holy calling, but of him that is
called: for depending on faith it must be his whose faith is, that does
believe: secondly, God cannot have mercy on whom he will have mercy, for the
very purpose of it is thus tied to the qualities of faith and obedience, so
that he must have mercy only on believers, antecedently to his decree, which
thirdly, hinders him from being an absolute free agent, and doing of what he
will with his own: of having such a power over us, as the Potter has over his
Clay, for he finds us of different matter, one clay, another gold, when he
comes to appoint us to different uses and ends.

Fifthly, God sees no says, no obedience, perseverance; nothing but sin and
wickedness in any man, but what himself intends graciously and freely to
bestow upon them, for faith is not of our selves, it is the gift of God, it is
the work of God that we do believe, John 6. 29. he blesses us with all
spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1. Now all these gifts and graces, God
bestows only upon those whom he has antecedently ordained to everlasting
life: For the election obtained it and the rest were blinded, Romans 11. 7. God
added to his Church daily those that should be saved, Acts 2. 47. therefore
surely God chooses us not, because he foreseeth those things in us, seeing he
bestows those graces because he has chosen us: Non ob aliud dicit non vos me
eligistis sed ego vos elegi nisi quia non elegerunt eum ut eligeret eos, sed ut
eligerent eum elegit eos: Aug. de bono: perse. cap. 16.
Wherefore says Austine, does Christ say, you have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you, but because they did not choose him that he should choose them: but
he chose them that they might choose him. We choose Christ by faith, God
chooses us by his decree of election, the question is whether we choose him,
because he has chosen us, or he chooses us, because we have chosen him, and
so indeed choose our selves: we affirm the former, and that because our choice
of him, is a gift he himself bestows only on them whom he has chosen.

Sixthly, and principally, the effects of election infallibly following it,
cannot be the causes of election, certainly praeceding it: this is evident, for
nothing can be the cause, and the effect, of the same thing; before and after
it self: but all our faith, our obedience, repentance, good works, are the
effects of election flowing from it, as their proper fountain, erected on it,
as the foundation of this spiritual building: and for this the Article of our
Church is evident and clear; Those, says it, that are endued with this
excellent benefit of God, are called according to Gods purpose, are justified
freely, are made the sons of God by adoption, they be made like the image of
Christ, they walk religiously in good works, etc. Where first they are said
to be partakers of this benefit of election, and then by virtue thereof, to be
entitled to the fruition of all those graces: Secondly, it says, those who are
endued with this benefit, enjoy those blessings; intimating that election, is
the rule whereby God proceeds in bestowing those graces; restraining the
objects of the temporal acts of Gods special favor, to them only whom his
eternal decree does embrace; both these indeed are denied by the Arminians,
which makes a further discovery of their Heterodoxies in this particular.
Dicis electionem divinam esse regulam fidei dandae vel non dandae: ergo electio
non est fidelium sed fides electorum: sed ^iceat mihi tua bona venia hoc
negare. Armin. Antip. fol. 221.
You say, says Arminius to Perkins, that election is the rule of giving, or
not giving of faith, and therefore election is not of the faithful, but faith
of the elect: but by your leave this I must deny: but yet what ever it is the
sophistical heretic here denies, either antecedent or conclusion, he falls
foul on the word of God: they believed, says the holy Ghost, who were
ordained to eternal life, Act. 3. 48. And the Lord added daily to his Church
such as should de saved, Act. 2. 47. from both which places it is evident, that
God bestows faith only on them whom he has praeordained eternal life: but
most clearly, Romans 8. 29, 30. for whom he did foreknow, he also predestined
to be conformed to the Image of his Son, moreover, whom he did predestinate,
them also he called, and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he
justified, them also glorified, Saint Austin interpreted this place, by adding
in every link of the chain, only those, how ever the words directly import a
precedence of predestination, before the bestowing of other graces: and also a
restraint of those graces, to them only, that are so predestinate: Now the
inference from this, is, not only for the form Logical, but for the matter
also, it contains the very words of Scripture, faith is of Gods elect: Titus
1. 1.

For the other part of the proposition, that faith and obedience are the fruits
of election, they cannot be more peremptory in its denial, then the Scripture
is plentiful in its confirmation: He has chosen us in Christ, that we should
be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. not because we were holy, but that we should be so:
holiness whereof faith is the root, and obedience the body, is that whereunto,
and not for which we are elected: the end, and the meritorious cause, of any
one act cannot be the same, they have diverse respects, and require repugnant
conditions: again we are predestined unto the adoption of children by Jesus
Christ: verse. 5. adoption is that whereby we are assumed into the family of
God, when before we are foreigners, aliens, strangers, a far off, which we see
is a fruit of our predestination, though it be the very entrance, into that
estate, wherein we begin first to please God in the least measure: of the same
nature, are all those places of holy writ which speak of Gods giving some unto
Christ, of Christ's sheep hearing his voice, and of others not hearing, because
they are not of his sheep: all which, and diverse other invincible reasons I
willingly omit: with sundry other false assertions, and heretical positions,
of the Arminians about this fundamental Article, of our Religion, concluding
this Chapter with the following scheme.

S. S.
Whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
his Son, that he might be the first borne among many brethren: moreover whom
he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also
justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified; so that nothing shall
be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8. 29, 30. -- 39.
He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. Not for the works that we have done, but according to his
own purpose and grace which was given us in Jesus Christ before the world
began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. For the children being not yet borne, before they had done
either good or evil, that the purpose of God which is according to election
might stand, not of works but of him that calls, etc. Romans 9. 11. Whatsoever
the Father gives that comes unto me, Ioh. 11. Many are called, but few are
chosen, Matthew. 22. 14. Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to
give you the kingdom, Luke 12. 32. What have thou that thou have not received,
1 Cor. 4. 7. Are we better then they? no in no wise, Romans 3. 9. But we are
predestined to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ according to the good
pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1. 5. John 6. 37. -- 39. John 10. 3. Chap. 13. 18.
and 17. 6. Act. 13. 48. Titus 1. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 19. James 1. 17, etc.
Lib. Arbit.
No such will can be ascribed unto God, whereby he so would have any to be
saved, that from thence his salvation should be sure and infallible, Arminius.
I acknowledge no sense no perception of any such election in this life:
Grevinch. We deny that Gods election unto salvation extends it self to
singular persons: Remonst. Coll. Hag. As we are justified by faith, so we are
not elected but by faith: Grevinch. We profess roundly that faith is
considered by God as a condition preceding election, and not following as a
fruit thereof: Rem. Coll. Hag. The sole and only cause of election is not the
will of God, but the respect of our obedience: Episcopius. For the cause of
this love to any person, is the goodness, faith and piety, wherewith according
to Gods command and his own duty he is endued, is pleasing to God: Rem. Apol.
God has determined to grant the means of salvation unto all without
difference, and according as he fore-seeth men will use those means so he
determines of them: Corvin. The sum of their doctrine is: God has appointed
the obedience of faith to be the means of salvation, if men fulfill this
condition he determines to save them which is their election, but if after
they have entered the way of godliness, they fall from it they loose also their
predestination, if they will return again they are chosen anew, and if they
can hold out to the end, then, and for that continuance they are peremptorily
elected, or postdestinated, after they are saved: now whether these positions
may be gathered from those places of Scripture which deliver this doctrine, lot
any man judge.


CHAP. VII.
Of Original sin, and the corruption of nature.
HErod the great imparting his counsel of rebuilding the Temple unto the
Jews, Joseph. Antiq.
they much feared, Judae. lib. 15. cap. 14.
he would never be able to accomplish his intention; but like an unwise builder
having demolished the old, before he had sat down and cast up his account,
whether he were able to erect a new, they should (by his project) be deprived
of a Temple: wherefore to satisfy their jealousies, he resolved as he took
down any part of the other, presently to erect a portion of the new in the
place thereof. Right so the Arminians, determining to demolish the building of
divine providence, grace, and favor, by which men have hitherto ascended into
heaven, and fearing lest we should be troubled, finding our selves on a sudden
deprived of that wherein we reposed our confidence for happiness, they have by
degrees erected a Babylonish Tower in the room thereof, whose top they would
persuade us shall reach unto heaven: First therefore the foundation stones they
bring forth, crying hail, hail, unto them, and pitch them on the sandy rotten
ground, of our own natures. Now because heretofore, some wise master builders,
had discovered this ground, to be very unfit to be the basis of such a lofty
erection, by reason of a corrupt issue of blood and filth, arising in the
midst thereof, and over-spreading the whole platform: to encourage men to an
association in this desperate attempt, they proclaim to all, that there is no
such evil fountain in the plain which they have chosen, for the foundation
of their proud building, setting up it self against the knowledge of God in
plain terms, having rejected the providence of God, from being the Original
of that goodness of entity which is in our actions, and his predestination,
from being the cause of that moral and spiritual goodness where with any of
them are clothed, they endeavor to draw the praise of both, to the rectitude
of their nature, and the strength of their own endeavors: but this attempt in
the latter case, being thought to be altogether vain, because of the
disabilitie and corruption of nature, by reason of original sin propagated
unto us all by our first Parents, whereby it is become wholly void of
integrity and holiness, and we all become wise and able to do evil, but to
do good have no power, no understanding; therefore they utterly reject this
imputation of an inherent original guilt, and demerit of punishment, as an
enemy to our upright and well deserving condition: and Oh, that they were as
able, to root it out of the hearts of all men, that it should never more be
there, as they have been to persuade the heads of diverse, that it was never
there at all.

If any would know, how considerable this Article concerning Original sin,
has ever been accounted in the Church of Christ, let him but consult the
writings of Saint Augustine, Prosper, Hilary, Fulgentius, any of those learned
Fathers, whom God stirred up to resist, and enabled to overcome, the spreading
Pelagian heresy, or look on those many Counsels edicts decrees of Emperors,
wherein that heretical doctrine, of denying this original corruption, is
condemned, cursed, and exploded; now amongst those many motives they had to
proceed so severely against this heresy one especially inculcated deserves our
consideration: viz.

That it overthrew the necessity of Christ's coming into the world to redeem
mankind: it is sin only that makes a Savior necessary, and shall
Christians tolerate such an error, as by direct consequence, inferres the
coming of Jesus Christ into the world to be needless, my purpose for the
present, is not to allege any testimonies of this kind, but holding my self
close to my first intention, to show how far in this Article as well as
others, the Arminians have Apostated, from the pure doctrine of the word of
God, the consent of Orthodox Divines, and the Confession of this Church of
England.

In the ninth Article of our Church, which is concerning original sin, I
observe especially four things: First, that it is an inherent evil, the fault
and corruption of the nature of every man: Secondly, that it is a thing not
subject, or conformable to the Law of God: but has in it self, even after
Baptism, the nature of sin: Thirdly, that by it, we are averse from God and
inclined to all manner of evil: Fourthly, that it deserves Gods wrath and
damnation, all which are frequently, and evidently taught in the word of God,
and every one denied by the Arminians, as it may appear by these instances, in
someof them.

First, That it is an inherent sin and pollution of nature, having a proper
guilt of its own, making us responsable to the wrath of God: and not a bare
imputation of another fault, to us his posterity, which because it would
reflect upon us all with a charge of a native imbecillitie and insufficiency to
good, is by these self-idolizers, quite exploded.

Infantes sunt simplices, and stantes in eodem statu in quo Adamus fuit ante
lapsum: Venat. Theol. (...). and me. fol. 2.
Infants are simply in that estate, in which Adam was, before his fall, says
Venator: Nec refert an infantes isti, sint fidelium an ethnicorum liberi
infantium enim qua infantium eadem est innocentia: Rem. Apol. fol. 87.
Neither is it all considerable, whether they be the children of believers, or
of heathens and infidels: for infants, as infants have all the same innocence,
say they, jointly in their Apology: nay more plainly, Malum culpae non est,
quia nasci plane est involuntarium, etc. ibid. fol. 84.
it can be no fault wherewith we are born: in which last expression, these bold
innovators, with one dash of their pens, have quite overthrown a sacred
verity, an Apostolic Catholic fundamental Article, of Christian Religion:
but truly to me, there are no stronger Arguments of the sinful corruption of
our nature, then to see, such nefarious issues of unsanctified hearts: let us
look then to the word of God confounding this Babylonish design.

First, That the nature of man, which at first was created pure and holy, after
the image of God, endowed with such a rectitude and righteousness, as was
necessary and due unto it, to bring it unto that supernatural end to which it
was ordained, is now altogether corrupted and become abominable, sinful and
averse from goodness, and that this corruption or concupiscence is originally
inherent in us, and derived from our first parents, is plentifully delivered in
holy writ, as that which chiefly compels us to a self-denial, and drives us
unto Christ.

Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me,
says David, Psalm. 51. 5.

Where for the praise of Gods goodness toward him, he begins with the
confession of his native perverseness, and of the sin wherein he was wrapped
before he was born: neither was this peculiar to him alone, he had it not, from
the particular iniquity of his next progenitors, but by an ordinary
propagation from the common parent of us all: though in some of us, Satan by
this Pelagian attempt; by hiding the disease has made it almost incurable: for
even those infants, of whose innocence the Arminians boast, are unclean in the
verdict of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 7. 14. if not sanctified by an interest in the
Promise of the Covenant, and no unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: Imbecillitas membrorum infantilium innocens est non animus: Aug.
The weakness of the members of infants is innocent, and not their souls: they
want nothing, but that the members of their bodies are not as yet ready
instruments of sin: they are not sinful only by an external denomination,
accounted so, because of the imputation of Adams actual transgression unto
them: for they have all an uncleanness in them by nature, Job 14. 4. from
which they must be cleansed, by the washing of water and the word, Ephesians. 5.
20. their whole nature is overspread with such a pollution, as is proper only
to sin inherent, and does not accompany sin imputed, as we may see in the
example of our Savior, who was pure, immaculate, holy, undefiled, and yet the
iniquity of us all was imputed unto him: hence are those phrases of washing
away sin, Acts 22. 16. of cleansing filth, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Titus 3. 5.
something there is in them, as soon as they are borne, excluding them from the
kingdom of heaven, for except they also be borne again of the spirit they
shall not enter into it, Ioh. 3. 5.

Secondly, The opposition that is made between the righteousness of Christ,
and the sin of Adam, Romans 5. which is the proper seat of this doctrine,
shows that there is in our nature an inbred sinful corruption, for the sin
of Adam holds such relation unto sinners, proceeding from him by natural
propagation, as the righteousness of Christ, does unto them, who are borne
again of him by spiritual regeneration: but we are truly intrinsecally and
inherently sanctified, by the spirit and grace of Christ: and therefore there
is no reason, why being so often in this Chapter called sinners, because of
this original sin, we should cast it off, as if we were concerned only by an
external denomination, for the right institution of the comparison, and its
Analogy quite overthrows the solitary imputation.

Thirdly, All those places of Scripture, which assert the pronnesse of our
nature to all evil, and the utter disabilitie that is in us to do any good,
that wretched opposition to the power of godliness, wherewith from the womb
we are replenished, confirms the same truth: but of these places, I shall have
occasion to speak hereafter.

Fourthly, The flesh, in the Scripture phrase, is a quality (if I may so say)
inherent in us: for that, with its concupiscence, is opposed to the spirit and
his holiness, which is certainly inherent in us: now the whole man by nature
is flesh: for that which is borne of the flesh is flesh, Ioh. 3. 6. it is an
inhabiting thing, a thing that dwells within us, Romans 7. 17. in brief this
vitiosity sinfulness, and corruption of our nature, is laid open: First, by
all those places, which cast an aspersion of guilt, or desert of punishment; or
of pollution, on nature it self: as Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. We are dead in
trespasses, and sins, being by nature children of wrath, as well as others,
being wholly encompassed by a sin that does easily beset us. Secondly, by
them, which fix this original pravitie, in the heart, will, mind, and
understanding: Ephesians. 4. 18. Romans 12. 2. Genesis 6. 5. Thirdly, by those which
positively decypher this natural depravation. 1 Corinthians. 2. 14. Romans 8. 7. or
Fourthly, that place it in the flesh, or whole man, Romans 6. 6. Gal. 5. 16. so
that it is not, a bare imputation of another fault, but an intrinsecall
adjacent corruption of our nature it self, that we call by this name of
original sin: but alas, it seems we are too large carvers for our selves,
in that wherewith we will not be contented: the Arminians deny all such
imputation, as to heavy a charge, for the pure unblameable condition, wherein
they are brought into this world, they deny I say, that they are guilty of
Adams sin, as sinning in him, or that his sin is any way imputed unto us,
which is their second assault, upon the truth of this Article of faith.

Adamus in propria persona peccavit and nulla est ratio cur Deus peccatum illud
infantibus imputet. Bor. in artic. 31.
Adam sinned in his own proper person, and there is no reason, why God should
impute that sin of his, unto infants: says Boreus. The nature of the first
Covenant, the right and power of God, the comparison instituted by the Apostle,
between Adam and Christ, the divine constitution whereby Adam was appointed to
be the head, fountain and origin of all humane kind, are with him, no reasons
at all, to persuade it: Contra aequitatem est ut qui^ reus agatur propter
peccatum non suum, ut vere nocens judicetur, qui quoad propriam suam voluntatem
innocens est, Rem. Apol. c. 7. fol. 84.
For it is against equity, says their Apology, that one should be counted
guilty for a sin that is not his own, that he should be reputed nocent, who
in regard of his own will is truly innocent: and here Christian Reader, behold
plain Pelagianisme obtruded on us, without either welt or guard: men on a
sudden made pure and truly innocent, notwithstanding all that natural
pollution and corruption, the Scripture every where proclaims them to be
replenished withal: neither is the reason they intimate, of any value, that
their wills assented not to it, and which a little before they plainly urge:
Contra naturam peccati est, ut censeatur peccatum, aut ut proprie in peccatum
imputetur, quod propria voluntate, commissum non est: ibid.
It is say they against the nature of sin: that, that, should be counted a
sin, or be imputed, as a sin, to any, by whose own proper will: it was not
committed: which being all they have to say, they repeat it over and over, in
this case; it must be voluntary, or it is no sin: but I say this is of no
force at all: for first, Saint John in his most exact definition of sin,
requires not voluntarinesse to the nature of it, but only an obliquitie, a
deviation from the rule, it is an anomie, a discrepancie from the Law; which
whither voluntary or no, it skils not much: but sure enough, there is in our
nature such a repugnancie, to the Law of God: so that secondly, if originally
we are free from a voluntary actual transgression, yet we are not, from an
habitual voluntary digression, and exorbitancy from the Law: but thirdly, in
respect of our wills, we are not thus innocent neither, for we all sinned in
Adam, as the Apostle affirms: now all sin is voluntary say the
Remonstrants, and therefore Adams transgression, was our voluntary sin also;
and that in diverse respects; First, In that his voluntary act is imputed to us,
as ours, by reason of the covenant which was made with him on our behalf: but
because this consisting in an imputation, must needs be extrinsecall unto us;
therefore secondly, we say, that Adam being the root, and head of all humane
kind, and we all branches from that root, all parts of that body, whereof he
was the head, Omnes eramus unus ille homo: Aug.
his will may be said to be ours, we were then all that one man, we were all in
him, and had no other will but his; so that though that be extrinsecall unto
us, considered as particular persons, yet it is intrinsecall, as we are all
parts of one common nature: as in him we sinned, so in him we had a will of
sinning: thirdly, Est voluntarium, voluntate primi originantis, non voluntate
contrahentis* ratione naturae, non personae: Thom. 1. 2. q. 81. a.
Original sin, is a defect of nature, and not of this, or that, particular
person, whereon Alvarez grounds this difference, of actual, and original
sin, that the one is always committed by the proper will of the sinner, to
the other, is required only the will of our first parent, who was the head of
humane nature.

Fourthly, It is hereditary natural, and no way involuntary or put into us
against our wills, it possesses our wills, and inclines us to voluntary sins.

I see no reason then, why Corvinus should affirm as he does: Absurdum est ut
ex unius obedientia multi actu inobedientes, facti essent, Corvin ad Mol. cap.
7. sec. 8.
that it is absurd, that by one man's disobedience, many should be made actually
disobedient: unless he did it purposely to contradict St. Paul, teaching us,
that by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, Romans 5. 19. Paulus ait,
Corvinus negat, eligite cui credatis: choose whom you will believe; St. Paul,
or the Arminians: the sum of their endeavor in this particular, is to clear
the nature of man, from being any way guilty of Adams actual sin; as being
then in him, a member and part of that body whereof he was the head: or from
being obnoxious unto an imputation of it, by reason of that Covenant which God
made with us all in him: so that denying as you saw before, all inherent
corruption and pravitie of nature, and now all participation by any means of
Adams transgression, me thinks they cast a great aspersion on Almighty God,
however he dealt with Adam for his own particular, yet for casting us, his most
innocent posterity out of Paradise: it seems a hard case, that having no
obliquitie or sin in our nature to deserve it, nor no interest in his
disobedience, whose obedience had been the means of conveying so much
happiness unto us: we should yet be involved in so great a punishment, as we
are, For that we are not now by birth, under a great curse and punishment, they
shall never be able to persuade any poor soul who ever heard of Paradise, or
the garden where God first placed Adam: and though all the rest, in their
judgment be no great matter, but an infirmity and languor of nature or some
such thing: yet what ever it be, they confess it lights on us, as well as him:
Fatemur peccatum Adami, a deo posse dici imputatum posteris ejus, quatenus Deus
posteros Adami eidem malo, cui, Adamus, per peccatum obnoxium se reddidit:
obnoxios nasci voluit^ sive quatenus Deus, malum, quod Adamo inflictum erat in
poenam, in posteros ejus dimanare and transire permisit: Rem. Apol. p. 84.
We confess (say they) that the sin of Adam, may be thus far said to be
imputed to his posterity, inasmuch as God would have them all, borne obnoxious
to that punishment, which Adam incurred by his sin: or permitted that evil,
which was inflicted on him, to descend on them: Now be this punishment what it
will, never so small, yet if we have no demerit of our own, nor interest in
Adams sin, it is such an act of injustice, as we must reject from the most
holy, with a God forbid: far be it from the Judge of all the world to punish
the righteous with the ungodly: if God should impute the sin of Adam unto us,
and thereon pronounce us obnoxious to the curse deserved by it: if we have a
pure, sinlesse, unspotted nature, even this, could scarce be reconciled with
that rule, of his proceeding in justice, with the sons of men, the soul that
sins it shall die: which clearly grants an impunity to all not tainted
with sin. Sin and punishment, though they are sometimes separated by his
mercy, pardoning the one, and so not inflicting the other, yet never by his
justice, inflicting the latter, where the former is not: sin imputed, by it
self alone without an inherent guilt, was never punished in any, but Christ:
the unsearchablenesse of Gods love and justice, in laying the iniquity of us
all upon him, who had no sin, is an exception from that general rule he
walks by, in his dealing with the posterity of Adam: so that if punishment
be not due unto us, for a solely imputed sin, much less, when it does not
stand with the justice and equity of God, to impute any iniquity unto us at
all, can we justly be wrapped in such a curse and punishment, as woeful
experience teaches us, that we lie under. Now in this act of injustice
wherewith they charge the Almighty, the Arminians place the whole nature of
original sin: Peccatum itaque originale, nec habent pro peocato proprie dicto
quod posteros Adami odio Dei dignos faciat, nec pro malo, quod per modum
proprie dictae poenae ab Adamo in posteros demanet sed pro infirmitate, etc.
Rem. Apol. fol. 84.
We account, not say they, original sin, for a sin properly so called, that
should make the posterity of Adam to deserve the wrath of God, nor for an
evil, that may properly be called a punishment: but only for an infirmity of
nature. Which they interpret to be a kind of evil, that being inflicted on
Adam, God suffers to descend upon his posterity: so all the depravation of
nature, the pollution, guilt, and concupiscence, we derive from our first
parents: the imputation of Adams actual transgression, is all straightened to a
small infirmity, inflicted on poor innocent creatures.

But let them enjoy their own wisdom, which is earthly, sensual and
devilish: the Scripture is clear, that the sin of Adam, is the sin of us
all, not only by propagation and communication, (whereby not his singular
fault, but something of the same nature, is derived unto us) but also by an
imputation of his actual transgression unto us all: his singular disobedience
being by this means made ours: the grounds of this imputation I touched before,
which may be all reduced to his being a common person and head of all our
nature, which investeth us, with a double interest in his demerits, whilst so
he was: 1. as we were then in him and parts of him: 2. as he sustained the
place of our whole nature, in the Covenant God made with him, both which even
according to the exigence of Gods justice, require that his transgression, be
also accounted ours: and Saint Paul is plain not only, that by one man's
offense, many were made sinners: Romans 5. 19. by the derivation of a corrupted
nature; but also that by one man's offense judgment came upon all: verse. 18.
even for his one sin, all of us, are accounted to have deserved judgment and
condemnation; and therefore verse. 12. he affirms, that by one man, sin and
death entered upon all the world: and that because we have all sinned in him:
which we no otherwise do, but that his transgression, in Gods estimation is
accounted ours: and the opposition the Apostle there makes, between Christ
and his righteousness, and Adam and his disobedience does sufficiently evince
it: Par^us. ad 5. Romans
as may appear by this figure Sicut sic ex Adamo Christo in omnes (...) (...)
redundavit, eis (...) (...) per unu^ (...) Adami, (...) Christi.
the whole similitude chiefly consists, in the imputation of Adams sin, and
Christ's righteousness, unto the seed of the one by nature, and of the other by
grace: but that we are counted righteous, for the righteousness of Christ, is
among Protestants, (though some differ in the manner of their expressions) as
yet without question: and therefore are no less undoubtedly accounted sinners
by, or guilty of the first sin of Adam.

I shall not show their opposition unto the truth in many more particulars,
concerning this Article of Original sin: having been long ago most
excellently prevented even in this very method, by the way of Antithesis to the
Scripture, and the Orthodoxe doctrine of our Church, by the famously learned
Master Reynolds, in his excellent Treatise Of the sinfulness of sin: where
he has discovered their errors, fully answered their sophistical objections,
and invincibly confirmed the truth from the word of God: only as I have showed
already, how they make this we call original sin, no sin at all, neither
inherent in us, nor imputed unto us, nor no punishment truly so called; so
because our Church says directly, that it meriteth damnation, I will briefly
show, what they conceive, to be the desert thereof.

First, for Adam himself, they affirm, that the death threatued unto him, if
he transgressed the Covenant, and due unto him for it, Cum de ^^tema morte
loq^^^tut Remonstrantes in hac de Adamo quaestione, non intelligent mortem
illam, quae aeterna, poena sensus, etc. Rem. Apol. cap. 4. fol. 57.
was neither death temporal, for that before he was subject unto, by the
primarie constitution of his nature: nor yet such an eternal death, as is
accompanied with damnation, or everlasting punishment: No? Why then let us here
learn some new Divinity? Christians have hitherto believed, that whatsoever
may be comprised under the name of death: together with its antecedents,
consequents, and attendants was threatened to Adam, in this commination: and
Divines until this day, can find but these two sorts of death in the
Scripture, as poenall unto men, and properly so called: and shall we now be
persuaded that it was neither of these that was threatened unto Adam? in must be
so, if we will believe the Arminians: it was neither the one, nor the other, of
the former: but whereas he was created mortal and subject to a temporal
death, the sanction of his obedience, was a threatening of the utter dissolution
of his soul and body, or a reduction to their primative nothing: but what if a
man will not here take them at their words, but believe according to Saint
Paul, that death entered by sin; that if we had never sinned, we had never
died, that man in the state of innocence was by Gods constitution, free even
from temporal death, and all things directly conducing thereunto. Secondly,
that this death threatened to our first parents, comprehended damnation also of
soul and body for evermore, and that of their imaginary dissolution, there is
not the least intimation in the word of God: why I confess they have impudence
enough in diverse places to beg that we would believe their assertions, but
never confidence enough, to venture once to prove them true. Now they who make
so slight of the desert of this sin, in Adam himself, will surely scarce
allow it to have any ill merit at all, in his posterity.

Whether An ullus omnino homo, propter peccatum originis solum damnetur, ac
aeternis cruciatibus addicatur, merito dubitati potest: imo nullum ita damnari
affirmate non veremur: Cor. ad Molin. cap. 9. sect. 5.
ever any one were damned, for Original sin, and adjudged to everlasting
torments; is deservedly doubted of: yea we doubt not to affirm, that never any
was so damned, says Corvinus: and that this is not his sole opinion, he
declares, by telling you no less of his Master Arminius: Verissimnm est
Arminium docere, perverse dici peccatum originis reum facere mortis. Corvin. ad
Tilen. p. 388.
It is most true, says he, that Arminius teaches, that it is perversely said,
that original sin makes a man guilty of death. Of any death it should seem,
temporal eternal or that annihillation they dream of: and he said true
enough, Perverse dicitur peccatum originis, reum facere mortis, quum peccatum
illud poena sit peccati actualis Adami: Armin. Resp. ad quaest. 9. a. 3.
Arminius does affirm it, adding this reason, because it is only the
punishment of Adams actual sin: now what kind of punishment they make this
to be I showed you before. But truly I wonder, seeing they are every where so
peremptory, that the same thing cannot be a sin, and a punishment; why they
do so often nickname this infirmity of nature, and call it a sin, which
they suppose to be as far different from it, as fire from water: is it
because they are unwilling, by new naming it, to contradict St. Paul in
express terms, never proposing it, under any other denomination? or if they
can get a sophistical elusion for him, is it least by so doing, Christians
should the more plainly discern their heresy? or what ever other cause it
be, in this I am sure they contradict themselves, notwithstanding in this they
agree full well, Deus neminem ob solum peccatum originis rejecit Episcop. disp.
9. These 2.
That God rejects none, for original sin only, as Episcopius speaks: and
here if you tell them that the question is not de facto, what God does; but de
iure, what such sin deservers, they tell us plainly Pro certo sta^uunt Deum
nullos infantes, sine actualibus ac propriis peccatis, morientes, aeternis
cruciatibus destinare veil, aut jure destinare posse ob peccatum quod vocatur
originis. Rem. Apol. f. 87.
That God will not destinate any infants to eternal punishment for original
sin, without their own proper actual sins, neither can he do so, by
right, or in justice: so that the children of Turks, Pagans, and the like
Infidels, strangers from the covenant of grace departing in their infancy, are
far happier then any Christian men, who must under-goe a hard warfare,
against sin, and Satan, in danger to fall finally away at the last hour; and
through many difficulties, entering the kingdom of heaven, when they without
further trouble are presently assumed thither, for their innocence. Yea
although they are neither elected of God; for as they affirm, he chooses none
but for their faith which they have not: nor redeemed by Christ, for he died
only for sinners, he saved his people from their sins, which they are not
guilty of, nor sanctified by the holy Ghost, all whose operations they
restrain to a moral swasion, whereof infants are not a capable subject. Which
is not much to the honor of the blessed Trinity: that heaven should be
replenished with them whom the Father never elected, the Son never redeemed,
nor the holy Ghost sanctified.

And thus you see, what they make, of this original pravitie of our nature, at
most an infirmity, or languor thereof: neither a sin, nor the punishment of
sin properly so called: nor yet a thing that deserves punishment as a sin.
Which last assertion, whether it be agreeable to holy Scripture or no, these
two following observations will declare.

First, there is no confusion, no disorder, no vanity in the whole world, in
any of Gods creatures, that is not a punishment of our sin in Adam. That
great and almost universal ruin of Nature, proceeding from the curse of God
overgrowing the earth, and the wrath of God, revealing it self from heaven, is
the proper issue of his transgression. It was of the great mercy of God, that
the whole frame of Nature, was not presently rolled up in darkness, and
reduced to its primitive confusion. Had we our selves, been deprived of those
remaining sparks of Gods Image in our souls, which vindicates us from the
number, of the Beasts that perish, had we been all borne fools, and void of
reason, by dealing so, with some in particular, he shows us, it had been but
justice to have wrapped us in the same misery, all in general: all things
when God first created them, were exceeding good, and thought so by the
wisdom of God himself: but our sin, even compelled that good and wise
Creator, to hate, and curse the work of his own hands: Cursed is the ground,
says he to Adam, for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days
of thy life: thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee: Genesis 3.
17, 18. hence was that heavy burden of vanity, that bondage of corruption,
under which to this day the whole Creation groaneth, and travelleth in pain
until it be delivered: Romans 8. 21, 22. Now if our sin, had such a strange
malignant influence, upon those things, which have no relation unto us, but
only as they were created for our use; surely it is of the great mercy of God
that we our selves are not quite confounded: which does not yet so interpose it
self, but that we are all compassed, with diverse sad effects of this iniquity,
lying actually, under diverse pressing miseries, and deservedly obnoxious to
everlasting destruction: so that,

Secondly, death temporal, with all its antecedents, and attendants, all
infirmities, miseries, sicknesses, wasting destroying passions, casualties that
are poenall, all evil conducing thereunto, or waiting on it, is a punishment
of original sin: and this not only, because the first actual sin of
Adam, is imputed to us: but most of them, are the proper issues of that native
corruption, and pollution of sin, which is stirring and operative within us,
for the production of such sad effects, our whole nature being by it thoroughly
defiled: hence are all the distortures, and distemperatures of the soul, by
lusts, concupiscence, passions, blindness of mind, perverseness of will;
inordinatenesse of affections, wherewith we are pressed, and turmoiled: even
proper issues of that inherent sin, which possesses our whole souls.

Upon the body also, it has such an influence, in disposing it to corruption
and mortality, as it the original of all those infirmities, sicknesses and
diseases, which make us nothing but a shop of such miseries: for death it
self, as these and the like degrees, are the steps which lead us on apace, in
the road that tends unto it: so they are the direct internal efficient cause
thereof, in subordination, to the justice of Almighty God by such means,
inflicting it as a punishment of our sins in Adam. Man before his fall,
though not in regard of the matter whereof he was made, nor yet merely in
respect of his quickening form, yet in regard of Gods ordination was immortal,
a keeper of his own everlastingnesse: Death, to which before he was not
obnoxious, was threatened as a punishment of his sin: In the day, thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die: the exposition of which words, given by God, at
the time of his inflicting this punishment, and pronouncing man subject to
mortality, clearly shows that it comprehends temporal death also, dust
thou art, and unto dust thou shall return: our return to dust, is nothing but
the souls leaving the body, whereby before it was preserved from corruption.
Further Saint Paul opposes that death, we had by the sin of Adam, to the
resurrection of the body, by the power of Christ: for since by man came death,
by man also came the resurrection from the dead, For as in Adam all die, so in
Christ shall all be made alive: 1 Cor. 15. 21. 22. the life, which all shall
receive by the power of Christ at the last day, is essentially a reunion of
soul and body, and therefore their separation is a thing we incurred by the
sin of Adam: the same Apostle also, Romans 5. describes an universal reign
of death over all, by reason of the first transgression: even diseases also in
the Scripture are attributed unto sin, as their meritorious cause, John 5.
14. 1 Cor. 11. 30. Revel. 2. 22. and in respect of all these, the mercy of God,
does not so interpose it self, but that all the sons of men are in some sort
partakers of them.

Thirdly, the final desert of original sin, as our article speaks, is
damnation: the wrath of God to be poured on us, in eternal torments of body
and soul. To this end also many praevious judgments of God, are subservient:
as the privation of original righteousness, which he took, and withheld,
upon Adams throwing it away: spiritual desertion, permission of sin, with
all other destroying depravations of our nature, as far as they are merely
paenall: some of which, are immediate consequents of Adams singular actual
transgression, as privation of original righteousness, others as damnation it
self, the proper effects of that derived sin and pollution, that is in us;
there is none damned, but for their own sin: when Divines affirm that by
Adams sin we are guilty of damnation, they do not mean, that any are
actually damned for his particular fact, but that by his sin, and our sinning
in him, by Gods most just ordination, we have contracted that exceeding
pravitie, and sinfulness of nature, which deserves the curse of God, and
eternal damnation: it must be an inherent uncleanesse that actually excludes
out of the kingdom of heaven: Revel. 21. 27. which uncleanness the Apostle
shows, to be in infants not sanctified, by an interest in the Covenant: in
brief, we are baptized unto the remission of sin, that we may be saved, Act.
2. 38. that then which is taken away by Baptism, is that which hinders our
salvation, which is not, the first sin of Adam imputed, but our own inherent
lust and pollution: we cannot be washed, and cleansed, and purged from an
imputed sin, which is done by the layer of regeneration, from that which lies
upon us, only by an external denomination, we have no need of cleansing: we
may be said, to be freed from it, or justified, but not purged; the soul then
that is guilty of sin shall die, and that for its own guilt: if God should
condemn us for original sin only, it were not by reason of the imputation
of Adams fault, but of the iniquity of that portion of nature, in which we are
proprietaries.

Now here to shut up all, observe, that in this inquiry, of the desert of
original sin: the Question is not, What shall be the certain lot, of those
that depart this life, under the guilt of this sin only? but what this
haereditary and and native corruption does desrve, in all those in whom it is:
for as Saint Paul says, we judge not them that are without (especially
infants:) 1 Cor. 5. 13. but for the demerit of it in the justice of God, our
Savior expressly affirms, that unless a man be borne again, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven: John 3. and let them that can; distinguish
between a not going to heaven, and a going to hell: a third receptacle of
souls in the Scripture we find not; Saint Paul also tells us, that by nature
we are children of wrath: Ephesians. 2. 3. even originally and actually, we are
guilty of, and obnoxious unto that wrath, which is accompanied with fiery
indignation, that shall consume the adversaries: again, we are assured that no
unclean thing shall enter into heaven: Revel. 21. with which hell-deserving
uncleanesse children are polluted, and therefore unless it be purged with the
blood of Christ, they have no interest in everlasting happiness: by this
means sin is come upon all to condemnation, and yet do we not peremptorily
censure to hell, all infants departing this world without the layer of
regeneration, the ordinary means of waveing the punishment, due to this
pollution: that is the Question de facto, which we before rejected: yea, and
two ways there are, whereby God saves such infants, snatching them like
brands out of the fire.

First, by interesting them into the Covenant, if their immediate, or remote
parents have been believers: he is a God of them, and of their seed: extending
his mercy unto a thousand generations of them that fear him.

Secondly, by his grace of election, which is most free and not tied to any
conditions, by which I make no doubt, but God takes many unto him in Christ,
whose parents never knew, or had been despisers of the Gospel: and this is the
doctrine of our Church, agreeable to the Scripture, affirming the desert of
original sin, to be Gods wrath and damnation, to both which how opposite is
the Arminian doctrine may thus appear.

S. S.
By the offense of one man judgment came upon all to condemnation, Romans 5. 18.
By one man's disobedience many were made sinners: verse. 19. Behold, I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me: Psalm 51. 5. -- else
were your chidren unclean, but now they are holy: 1 Cor. 7. 14. Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? not one: Job 14. 4. Except a man be borne
again he cannot see the kingdom of God: John 3. 3. That which is born of the
flesh is flesh: John 3. 6. We were by nature the children of wrath even as
others: Ephesians. 2. 3. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: to wit, in
him, Romans 5. 12. For I know that in me, that is in my flesh, dwells no good
thing: Romans 7. 18. In the day you eat thereof you shall surely die: Genesis 2.
17. For as in Adam all die, so, 1 Cor. 15. 22. By nature children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2. 3. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles,
Revel. 21. 27.
Lib. Arbit.
Adam sinned in his own proper person only, and there is no reason, why God
should impute that sin unto infants: Borraeus. It is absurd that by one man's
disobedience, many should be made actually disobedient: Corvinus. Infants are
simply in that estate in which Adam was before his fall: Venator. Neither is it
considerable whether they be the children of believers, or of heathens, for all
infants have the same innocence: Rem. Apol. That which we have by birth can be
no evil of sin, because to be borne is plainly involuntarie. Idem.
Original sin, is neither a sin properly so called which should make the
posterity of Adam, guilty of Gods wrath, nor yet a punishment of any sin on
them, Rem. Apol. It is against equity that one should be accounted guilty of a
sin, that is not his own, that he should be judged nocent, who in regard of
his own will is truly innocent. God neither does, nor can in justice, appoint
any to hell, for original sin, Rem. Apol. It is perversely spoken that
original sin makes any one guilty of death: Armin. We no way doubt to
affirm that never any one was damned for original sin: Corvinus.


CHAP. VIII.
Of the state of Adam before the fall or of original Righteousness.
IN the last Chapter we discovered the Arminian attempt, of readvancing the
corrupted nature of man, into that state of innocence and holiness, wherein it
was at first, by God created: in which design, because they cannot but
discern that the success is not answerable to their desires, and not being
able to deny, but that for so much good as we want, having cast it away, or
evil of sin that we are subject unto, more then we were at our first
creation, we must be responsable for to the justice of God; they labor to draw
down our first parents, even from the instant of their forming, into the same
condition wherein we are engaged by reason of corrupted nature: but truly I
fear, they will scarce obtain so prosperous an issue of their endeavor, as
Mahomet had, when he promised the people, he would call a mountain unto him:
which miracle when they assembled to behold, but the mountain would not stir
for all his calling, he replied, if the mountain will not come to Mahomet,
Mahomet will go to the mountain, and away he packed toward it, but we shall
find that our Arminians, can neither themselves, climb the high mountain of
innocence, nor yet call it down, into the valley of sin and corruption,
wherein they are lodged: we have seen already, how vain and frustrate was
their former attempt: let us now take a view of their aspiring insolence, in
making the pure creatures of God, holy and undefiled with any sin, to be
invested with the same wretchedness and perverseness of nature, with our
selves.

It is not my intention, to enter into any curious discourse, concerning the
state and grace of Adam before his fall: but only to give a faithful assent,
to what God himself affirmed of all the works of his hands, they were
exceeding good: no evil, no deformity, or any thing tending thereunto, did
immediately issue, from that fountain of goodness and wisdom, and therefore
doubtless man, the most excellent work of his hands, the greatest glory of
his Creator, was then without spot or blemish, endued with all those
perfections, his nature, and state of obedience, was capable of: and careful
we must be, of casting any aspersions of defect on him, that we will not with
equal boldness ascribe to the image of God?

Nothing does more manifest the deviation of our nature, from its first
institution, and declare the corruption wherewith we are polluted, then that
propensitie which is in us to every thing that is evil, that inclination of
the flesh, which lusts always against the spirit, that lust and
concupiscence, which fomenteth, conceives, hatcheth, brings forth, and
nourishes sin: that perpetual pronenesse that is in unregenerate nature, to
every thing, that is contrary to the pure and holy Law of God: now because
neither Scripture nor experience, will suffer Christians quite to deny this
pravitie of our nature, this averseness from all good, and propensitie to
sin, the Arminians extenuate it, as much as they are able: affirming that it
is no great matter; no more then Adam, was subject unto, in the state of
innocence: but what? did God create in Adam, a pronenesse unto evil? was that
a part of his glorious image, in whose likeness he was framed? yea, says
Corvinus, Ex ratione creationis homo habebat affectum ad ea quae vetabantur.
Cor ad Mol. cap. 6. s. 1.
By reason of his creation, man had an affection to what was forbidden by the
Law, but yet this seems injustice, that God should give a man a law to keep,
Deus homini repugnantiam indidit adversus legem. Ioh. Ghost. in Synod. confess.
and put upon his nature a repugnancy to that law, as one of them affirmed at
the Synod of Dort. No? says the former Author: Homo non est idoneus cui lex
feratur. quando in eo, ad id quod lege vetatur, non est propensio, ac
inclinatio naturalis. Cor. ad. Molin. cap. 10. sect. 15.
Man had not been fit, to have had a law given unto him, had he not been
endued, with a propension, and natural inclination, to that which is forbidden
by the law; but why is this so necessary in men, rather then Angels? no doubt
there was a law, a rule, for their obedience, given unto them at their first
creation, which some transgressed, when others kept it inviolate: had they also
a propensitie to sin, concreated with their nature? had they a natural
affection, put upon them by God, to that which was forbidden by the law? let
them only who will be wise, beyond the word of God, affixe such injustice on
the righteous Judge of all the earth: but so it seems it must be: Inclinatio
ad peccandum ante lapsum in homine suit, licet non ita veheme^s ac inordinata
ut nunc est. Armin. ad Artic. Respon.
There was an inclination in man, to sin before the fall, though not altogether
so vehement and inordinate as it is now, says Arminius: hitherto we have
thought, that the original righteousness, wherein Adam was created, had
comprehended the integrity and perfection of the whole man: not only that
whereby the body was obedient unto the soul, and all the affections
subservient to the rule of reason for the performance of all natural actions:
but also a light, uprightness, and holiness of grace, in the mind and will,
whereby he was enabled to yield obedience unto God, for the attaining of that
supernatural end, whereunto he was created? No? but Iustitia originalis instar
fraenifuit quod praestabat internae concupiscentiae ordinationem. Cor. ad. Mol.
c. 8. ^ 1.
original righteousness, say our new Doctors, was nothing but a bridle: to
help keep man's inordinate concupiscence within bounds: so that the faculties
of our souls, were never endued with any proper innate holiness of their own:
In spirituali morte non separantur proprie dona spiritualia a voluntate, quia
illa nunquam fuerunt ei insita. Rem. coll. Hag. fol. 250.
In the spiritual death of sin, there are no spiritual gifts properly
wanting in the will, because they were never there, say the six Collocutors at
the Hague.

The sum is, man was created with a nature, not only weak and imperfect,
unable by its native strength, and endowments to attain that supernatural
end, for which he was made, and which he was commanded to seek, but depraved
also, with a love and desire of things repugnant to the will of God, by reason
of an inbred inclination to sinning. It does not properly belong to this place,
to show, how they extenuate those gifts also, with which they cannot deny, but
that he was endued, and also deny those which he had: as a power to believe in
Christ, or to assent unto any truth, that God should reveal unto him: and yet
they grant this privilege, to every one of his posterity, in that depraved
condition of nature, whereinto by sin he cast himself and us: we have all
now a power of believing in Christ, that is, Adam by his fall obtained a
supernatural endowment, far more excellent, then any he had before; and let
them not here, pretend the universalitie of the new covenant, until they can
prove it, and I am certain it will be long enough: but this I say, belongs not
to this place: only let us see, how from the word of God, we may overthrow, the
former odious heresy. God in the beginning created man in his own image, Genesis
1. 26. that is, upright: Eccles. 7. 29. endued with a nature composed to
obedience, and holiness: that habitual grace, and original righteousness,
wherewith he was invested, was in a manner due unto him, for the obtaining of
that supernatural end, whereunto he was created: an universal rectitude of
all the faculties of his soul, advanced by supernatural graces, enabling him
to the performance of those duties whereunto they were required, is that which
we call the innocence of our first parents: our nature was then inclined to
good only, and adorned with all those qualifications, that were necessary, to
make it acceptable unto God, and able to do what was required of us by the
law, under the condition of everlasting happiness. Nature, and grace, or
original righteousness, before the fall, ought not to be so distinguished, as
if the one were a thing prone to evil, resisted and quelled by the other: for
both complied in a sweet union and harmony, to carry us along in the way of
obedience, to eternal blessedness: no contention between the flesh and the
spirit, but as all other things at theirs, so the whole man jointly aimed at
his own chiefest good: having all means of attaining it in his power: that
there was then no inclination to sin, no concupiscence of that which is
evil, no repugnancy to the Law of God, in the pure nature of man: is proved,
because

First, The Scripture describing the condition of our nature, at the first
creation thereof, intimates no such propensitie to evil, but rather an holy
perfection, quite excluding it: we are created in the image of God, Genesis 1. 27.
in such a perfect uprightness, as is opposite to all evil inventions, Eccles.
7. 29. to which image, when we are again in some measure renewed, by the grace
of Christ, Colos. 3. 10. We see by the first fruits, that it consisted in
righteousness and holiness; in truth and perfect holiness. Ephesians. 4. 24.

Secondly, An inclination to evil, and a lusting after that which is
forbidden, is that inordinate concupiscence, wherewith our nature is now
infected, which is every where in the Scripture condemned as a sin: Saint
Paul in the seventh to the Romans, affirming expressly that it is a sin, and
forbidden by the Law: verse. 1. producing all manner of evil, and hindering all
that is good: a body of death: verse. 24 and Saint James makes it even the
womb of all iniquity, James 1. 14, 15. surely, our nature was not at first
yoked with such a troublesome inmate; where is the uprightness and innocence
we have hitherto conceived our first parents to have enjoyed before the fall? a
repugnancy to the law must needs be a thing sinful: an inclination to evil,
to a thing forbidden, is an anomie, a deviation, and discrepancy from the pure
and holy law of God: we must speak no more then of the state of innocence, but
only of a short space, wherein no outward actual sins, were committed: their
proper root, if this be true was concreated with our nature: is this that
obedientiall harmony to all the commandments of God, which is necessary for a
pure and innocent creature, that has a law prescribed unto him? by which of
the ten precepts, is this inclination to evil required? is it by the last,
thou shall not covet? or by that sum of them all, thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thy heart, etc. is this all the happiness of Paradise? to be
turmoyled with a nature swelling with abundance of vain desires? and with a
maine stream carried headlong to all iniquity, if its violent appetite be not
powerfully kept in by the bit and bridle of original righteousness? Vidi ego
zelantem parvulum nondum loquebatur, and intuebatur pallidus, amaro aspectu
colluctaneum suum: Aug.
So it is we see with children now, and so it should have been with them in
Paradise, if they were subject to this rebellious inclination to sin.

Thirdly, and principally, whence had our primitive nature this affections to
those things that were forbidden it? this rebellion, and repugnancy to the law,
which must needs be an anomie, and so a thing sinful: there was as yet no
demerit, to deserve it as a punishment? what fault is it to be created?
Operatio quae simul incipit cum esse rei, est ei ab agente, a quo habet esse,
sicut moveri sursum inest igni a generate. Alva^. p. 199.
The operation of any thing which has its original, with the being of the
thing it self, must needs proceed from the same cause, as does the essence or
being it self: as the fires tending upwards, relates to the same original, with
the fire: and therefore this inclination or affection, can have no other Author
but God: by which means he is entitled not only to the first sin, as the
efficient cause, but to all the sins in the world, arising from thence: plainly
and without any strained consequencies, he is made the author of sin: for
even those positive properties, which can have no other fountain but the
author of Nature, being set on evil are directly sinful. And here the Idol
of free will, may triumph in this victory over the God of heaven: heretofore
all the blame of sin lay upon his shoulders, but now he begins to complain,
(...): it is God and the fate of our creation, that has placed us in this
condition of naturally affecting that which is evil: back with all your
charges, against the ill government of this new Deity, within his imaginary
dominion: what hurt does he do, but incline men unto evil: and God himself
did no less, at the first? but let them that will, rejoice in these
blasphemies, it suffices us to know, that God created man upright, though he
has sought out many inventions: so that in this following dissonancy, we
cleave to the better part.

S. S.
So God created man in his own image, in the likeness of God created he him,
male and female created he them: Gen, 1. 27. Put on the new man which is
renewed in knowledge after the image of him that made him: Colos. 3. 10. --
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
Lo this only have I found, that God has made man upright, but he has sought
out many inventions: Eccles. 7. ^9. -- By one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, Romans 5. 12. Let no man say when he is tempted I am tempted
of God, for God tempts no man, but every one is tempted when he is drawn
away of his own lust: Iam. 1. 13. 14.
Lib. Arbit.
There was in man before the fall an inclination to sinning, though not so
vehement and inordinate as now it is: Armin. God put upon man a repugnancy to
his law: Gesteranus in the Synod. Man by reason of his creation had an
affection to those things that are forbidden by the Law: Corvinus. The will of
man had never any spiritual endowments: Rem. Apol. It was not fit that man
should have a law given him, unless he had an natural inclination to what was
forbidden by the Law: Corvinus.


CHAP. IX.
Of the death of Christ, and of the efficacy of his merits.
THe sum of those Controversies, wherewith the Arminians, and their abettors
have troubled the Church, about the death of Christ, may be reduced to heads.
First, concerning the object of his merit, or whom he died for. Secondly,
concerning the efficacy and end of his death, or what he deserved, procured,
merited, and obtained, for them for whom he died: in resolution of the first,
they affirm, that he died for all, and every one,: of the second, that he died
for no one man at all; in that sense, Christians have hitherto believed that he
laid down his life, and submitted himself to bear the burden of his Fathers
wrath, for their sakes. It seems to me a strange extenuation of the merit of
Christ, to teach, that no good at all by his death does redound to diverse of
them for whom he died: what participation, in the benefit of his suffering, had
Pharaoh or Judas? do they not at this hour, and shall they not to eternity,
feel the wait and burden of their own sins? had they either grace in this
world, or glory in the other, that they should be said to have an interest in
the death of our Savior? Christians have hitherto believed, that for whom
Christ died, for their sins he made satisfaction; that they themselves should
not externally suffer for them: is God unist to punish twice, for the same
fault? his own Son once? and again the poor sinners, for whom he suffered?
I cannot conceive an intention in God, that Christ should satisfy his justice
for the sin of them, that were in hell some thousands of years before, and
yet be still resolved to continue then punishment on them to all eternity? no
doubtless; Christ gives life to everyone, for whom he gave his life: he
loses not one of them, whom he purchased with his blood.

The first part of this Controversy, may be handled, under these two
questions. First, whether God giving his Son, and Christ making his soul a
ransom for sin, intended thereby to redeem all and every one, from their
sins, that all and every one alike, from the beginning of the world, to the
last day, should all equally be partakers of the fruits of his death and
passion; which purpose of theirs is in the most frustrate. Secondly, whether
God had not a certain infallible intention, of gathering unto himself a
chosen people, of collecting a Church of first borne, of saving his little
flock, of bringing some certainly to happiness, by the death of his only
Son, which in the event he does accomplish:

The second part also may be reduced to these two heads: first, whether Christ
did not make full satisfaction, for all their sins for whom he died, and
merited glory, or everlasting happiness, to be bestowed on them, upon the
performance of those conditions, God should require? Secondly, (which is the
proper Controversy I shall chiefly insist upon,) whether Christ did not
procure for his own people, a power to become the Sons of God, merit and
deserve at the hands of God for them, grace, faith, righteousness, and
sanctification, whereby they may be enabled infallibly, to perform the
conditions of the new Covenant, upon the which, they shall be admitted to glory.

To the first Question, of the first part of the Controversy, the Arminians
answer affirmatively, to wit, that Christ died for all alike, the benefit of
his Passion, belongs equally to all the posterity of Adam: and to the second
negatively, that God had no such intention of bringing many chosen sons unto
salvation, by the death of Christ; but determined of grace and glory, no more
precisely to one, then to another, to John, then Judas, Abraham, then Pharaoh:
both which as the learned Moulin observed, Molin suffrag. ad Synod. Dordra.
seem to be invented to make Christianity ridiculous, and expose our
Religion, to the derision, of all knowing men: for who can possibly conceive
that one by the appointment of God should die for another; and yet that other,
by the same justice be allotted unto death himself, when ones death only was
due: that Christ has made a full satisfaction for their sins, who shall
everlastingly feel the weight of them, themselves; that he should merit and
obtain reconciliation with God for them, who live and die his enemies: grace
and glory for them, who are graceless in this life, and damned in that which
is to come: that he should get remission of sins for them, whose sins were
never pardoned: in brief, if this sentence be true, either Christ by his death
did not reconcile us unto God, make satisfaction to his justice for our
iniquities, redeem us from our sins, purchase a kingdom, an everlasting
inheritance for us, which, I hope no Christian will say, or else all the former
absurdities must necessarily follow, which no rational man will ever admit.

Neither may we be charged, as straitners of the merit of Christ: for we
advance the true value and worth thereof, (as hereafter will appear,) far
beyond all, that the Arminians ascribe unto it: we confess that, that blood of
God, Acts 20. 28. of the Lamb without spot or blemish, 1. Pet. 1. 19. was so
exceedingly precious, of that infinite worth and value, that it might have
saved a thousand believing worlds, John 3. 16. Romans 3. 22. his death was of
sufficient dignity, to have been made a ransom, for all the sins of every
one in the world: and on this internal sufficiency of his death and passion,
is grounded the universalitie of Evangelicall promises, which have no such
restriction in their own nature, as that they should not be made to all, and
every one, though the promulgation and knowledge of them, is tied only to the
good pleasure of Gods special providence, Matthew. 16. 17. as also that
Oeconomie, and dispensation of the new Covenant, whereby the partition wall
being broken down, there remains no more difference between Jew, and
Gentile, the utmost borders of the Earth being given in for Christ's
inheritance: so that in some sense, Christ may be said to die for all, and the
whole world: first, in as much as the worth and value of his death, was very
sufficient to have been made a price for all their sins: secondly, in as
much as this word All, is taken for some of all sorts, not for every one, of
every sort, as it is frequently used in the holy Scripture, so Christ being
lifted up drew all unto him, John 12. 32. that is, believers out of all sorts
of men: the Apostles cured all diseases, or some of all sorts, they did not
cure every particular disease, but there was no kind of disease, that was
exempted from their power of healing: so that where it is said, that Christ
died for all, it is meant either; first, all the faithful; or secondly, some
of all sorts; thirdly, not only Jews, but Gentiles: For,

Secondly, the proper counsel and intention of God, in sending his Son into
the world, to die, was, that thereby he might confirm and ratify, the new
Covenant to his elect: and purchase for them, all the good things, which are
contained in the tenure of that Covenant: to wit, grace, and glory: that by his
death, he might bring many, (yet some certain) children to glory, obtaining
for them, that were given unto him, by his Father, that is, his whole Church,
reconciliation with God, remission of sins, faith, righteousness,
sanctification and life eternal: that is, the end, to which they are to be
brought, and the means whereby God will have them attain it: he died that he
might gather the dispersed children of God, and make them partakers of
everlasting glory, to give eternal life, to all that God gave unto him, John
17. 2. And on this purpose, of himself, and his Father, is founded the
intercession of Christ, for his elect and chosen people, performed partly on
the earth, John 17. partly in heaven before the Throne of grace: which is
nothing but a presentation of himself, and his merits, accompanied with the
prayers of his Mediatour-ship, before God: that he would be pleased to grant,
and effectually to apply, the good things, he has by them obtained, to all for
whom he has obtained them: his intercession in heaven, is nothing but a
continued oblation of himself. So that whatsoever Christ impetrated, merited,
or obtained, by his death and passion, must be infallibly applied unto, and
bestowed upon them, for whom he intended to obtain it: or else his
intercession is vain, he is not heard in the prayers of his mediatourship: an
actual reconciliation with God, and communication of grace and glory, must
needs betide all them that have any such interest in the righteousness of
Christ, as to have it accepted for their good: the sole end, why Christ would
so dearly purchase those good things, is an actual application of them, unto
his chosen: God set forth the propitiation of his blood, for the remission of
sins. that he might be the iustifier of him that believes on Jesus: Rom, 3.
25, 26. But this part of the Controversy is not that which I principally
intend: only I will give you a brief sum, of those reasons which overthrow
their heresy, in this particular branch thereof.

First, the death of Christ, is in diverse places of the Scripture restrained to
his people, and elect, his Church, and sheep: Matthew. 1. 21. John 10. 11, 12,
13. Acts 20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 25. John 11. 52. Romans 8. 32, 33. Heb 2. 10. 13.
Revel. 5. 9. Dan. 9. 27. and therefore the good purchased thereby, ought not to
be extended, to dogs, reprobates, and those that are without.

Secondly, for whom Christ died, he died as their sponsor, in their room and
turn, that he might free them from the guilt, and desert of death, which is
clearly expressed, Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. He was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes, we are healed: Isa. 53. 5, 6, etc. He has redeemed us, from
the curse, being made a curse for us: Galat. 3. 13. He made him to be sin for
us, who knew no sin, 1 Cor. 5. 21. Evidently he changes turns with us, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him: yea in other things, it is
plain in the Scripture, that to die for another, is to take his place and
room, with an intention that he should live: 2 Samuel, 18. 33. Romans 5. So that
Christ dying for men, made satisfaction, for their sins, that they should not
die: now for what sins he made satisfaction, for them the justice of God is
satisfied, which surely is not done for the sins of the reprobates, because
he justly punishes them to eternity, upon themselves: Matthew. 5. 26.

Thirdly, for whom Christ died, for them also he rose again, to make
intercession for them, for whose offenses he was delivered, for their
justification he was raised: Romans 4. 25. and Chap. 5. 10. He is a high Priest
to make intercession for them in the holiest of holies, for whom by his blood
he obtained everlasting redemption, Heb. 9. 11. 12. Those two acts of his
Priesthood are not to be separated, it belongs to the same Mediator for sin,
to sacrifice and pray: our assurance that he is our Advocate, is grounded on
his being a propitiation for our sins: he is an Advocate, for every one, for
whose sins his blood was a propitiation: 1 John 2, 1, 2. But Christ does not
intercede, and pray for all, as himself often witnesses: John 17. He makes
intercession only for them, who come unto God by him: Heb. 7. 24. He is not a
Mediator of them that perish, no more then and Advocate of them that fail in
their suits, and therefore the benefit of his death also must be restrained to
them, who are finally partakers of both: we must not so dis-joyne the offices
of Christ's Mediatorship, that one of them may be versated about some toward
whom he exercises not the other: much less ought we, so to separate the
several acts of the same office. For whom Christ is a Priest, to offer
himself a sacrifice, for their sins, he is surely a King, to apply the good
things purchased by his death unto them, asb Arminius himself confesses; much
more to whom he is a Priest by sacrifice he will be a Priest by intercession:
and therefore, seeing he does not intercede and pray for every one, he did not
die for every one.

Fourthly, for whom Christ died, he merited grace, and glory, faith, and
salvation, and reconciliation with God, as I shall show hereafter; but this he
has not done for all, and every one: many do never believe, the wrath of God
remains upon some, the wrath of God abides on them that do not believe: 1
John 3. 16. To abide, argues a continued uninterrupted act: now to be
reconciled to one, and yet to lie under his heavy anger, seem to me (...),
things that will scarce consist together: the reasons are many, I only point
at the heads of some of them.

Fifthly, Christ died for them, whom God gave unto him, to be saved, Thine they
were, and thou gave them unto me: Ioh. 17. 6. He lays down his life, for
the sheep committed to his charge: John 10. 11. But all are not the sheep of
Christ, all are not given unto him of God, to be brought to glory: for of those
that are so given, there is not one that perishes, for he gives eternal life
to as many as God has given him: John 17. 2. No man is able to pluck them out
of his Fathers hands: Chap. 10. 28, 29.

Sixthly, look whom, and how many, that love of God embraced, that was the
cause of sending his Son to redeem them: for them, and so many, did Christ
according to the counsel of his Father, and in himself intentionally, lay
down his life: now this love is not universal, being his good pleasure of
blessing with spiritual blessings and saving some in Christ: Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
which good pleasure of his, evidently comprehends some, when others are
excluded, Matthew. 11. 25, 26. yea the love of God in giving Christ for us is of
the same extent, with that grace, whereby he calls us to faith, or bestows
faith on us: for he has called us with an holy calling, according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given us in Jesus Christ: 2 Timothy 2. 9. which
doubtless is not universal and common unto all.

Innumerable other reasons there are to prove, that seeing God has given his
elect only, whom only he loved to Christ to be redeemed: and seeing that the
Son loves only those who are given him of his Father, and redeemeth only
whom he loves: seeing also that the holy Spirit, the love of the Father and
the Son, sanctifies all, and only them that are elected, and redeemed* it
is not our part, with a preposterous liberality against the witness of Christ
himself, to assign the salvation attained by him, as due to them, that are
with out the Congregation of them whom the Father has loved, and chosen:
without that Church, which the Son loved and gave his life for it, nor none
of the members of that sanctified body, whereof Christ is the Head and Savior:
I urge no more, because this is not that part of the Controversy that I desire
to lay open.

I come now to consider the maine Question of this difference, though sparingly
handled by our Divines: concerning what our Savior merited, and purchased for
them for whom he died: and here you shall find the old Idol playing his
prankes, and quite devesting the merit of Christ, from the least ability or
power, of doing us any good; for though the Arminians pretend very speciously,
that Christ died for all men: yet in effect, they make him die for no one man
at all: and that by denying the effectual operation of his death, and
ascribing the proper issues of his passion, to the brave indevours of their
own Pelagian Deity.

We (according to the Scriptures) plainly believe, that Christ has by his
righteousness, merited for us grace and glory; that we are blessed with all
spiritual blessings, in, though, and for him: that he is made unto us
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; that he has procured for
us, and that God for his sake, bestows on us every grace, in this life, that
makes us differ from others, and all that glory we hope for, in that which is
to come: he procured for us remission of all our sins, an actual
reconciliation with God, faith, and obedience: yea, but this is such a
desperate doctrine, as stabs at the very heart of the Idol: and would make him
as altogether useless, as if he were but a figgetree logge: what remains for
him to do, if all things in this great work of our salvation, must be thus
ascribed unto Christ, and the merit of his death? Wherefore the worshippers of
this great God, Lib. Arbit. oppose their engines against the whole fabric,
and cry down the title of Christ's merits, to these spiritual blessings, in
the behalf of their imaginary Deity.

Now because they are things of a twofold denomination, about which we
contend, before the king of heaven; each part producing their evidence; the
first springing from the favor of God toward us: the second from the working
of his grace, actually within us, I shall handle them severally, and apart:
especially because to things of this latter sort, gifts, as we call them,
enabling us to fulfill the condition, required, for the attaining of glory, we
lay a double claim, on Gods behalf: First, as the death of Christ, is the
meritorious cause procuring them of him: Secondly, as his free grace is their
efficient cause working them in us; they also producing a double title,
whereby, they would invest their beloved darling, with a sole propriety in
causing these effects. First, in regard that they are our own acts performed
in us, and by us: secondly, as they are parts of our duty, which we are
enjoined to do, so that the quarrel is directly between Christ's Merits and
our own free will, about procuring the favor of God, and obtaining grace and
righteousness, let us see what they say to the first.

They affirm Immediata mortis Christi effectio, ac passionis, illa est, non
actualis peccatorum, ab his aut illis ablatio, non actualis remissio, non
justificatio, non actualis horu^ aut illoru^ redemptio: Armin. Antiperk, p. 76.
that the immediate, and proper effect, or end, of the death and passion of
Christ, is not an actual oblation of sin from men, not an actual remission
of iniquities, justification and redemption, of any soul: that is, Christ his
death, is not the meritorious cause of the remission of our sins, of
redemption, and justification: the meritorious cause, I say, for of some of
them, as of justification, as it is terminated in us, we confess there are
causes of other kinds, as faith is the instrument, and the holy Spirit the
efficient thereof. But for the sole meritorious procuring cause, of these
spiritual blessings, we always took it to be the righteousness, and death of
Christ: believing plainly, that the end why Christ died, and the fruit of his
sufferings, was our reconciliation with God, redemption from our sins,
freedom from the curse, deliverance from the wrath of God, and power of hell:
though we be not actual partakers of these things to the pacification of our
own consciences, without the intervening operation of the holy Spirit, and
faith by him wrought in us.

But if this be not? Pray what is obtained by the death of Christ? Why
Reconciliatio potentialis and conditionata non actualis and absoluta, per
mortem Christi impetratur: Corvin. ad. Molin. cap 28. sect. 11.
a potentiall, conditionate reconciliation, not actual, and absolute, says
Corvinus: But yet this potentiall reconciliation, being a new expression, never
intimated in the Scripture, and scarce of it self intelligible, we want a
further explanation of their mind, to know what it is that directly they
assign to the merits of Christ: wherefore, they tell us, that the fruit of his
death, was such Remissionis, justificationis, and redemptionis, apud Deum
impetratio, qua facto est, ut Deus jam possit, utpote iustitia cui satisfactum
est non obstante hominibus peccatoribus peccata remittere: Armin. ubi sup.
an impetration, or obtaining of reconciliation with God, and redemption for
us: that God thereby has a power, his justice being satisfied, and so not
compelling him to the contrary, to grant remission of sins, to sinful men,
on what condition, he would: or as another speaks it, Autoris men's non est
alia, qua^ effuso sanguine Christi reconciliandi mundum Deo jus impetratum
fuisse, and inito novo faedere and gratioso cum hominibus, Deum gratiae oftium,
omnibus denuo poenitentiae ac verae in Christu^ fidei, lege adaperuis^e:
Epistol: ad Wala^. sol. ^3.
There was by the effusion of Christ's blood, a right obtained unto, and settled
in God, of reconciling the world, and of opening unto all, a gate of
repentance, and faith in Christ: But now whereas, the Scripture every where
affirms, that Christ died for our good, to obtain blessings for us, to
purchase our peace, to acquire and merit for us, the good things contained in
the promise of the Covenant, this opinion seems to restrain the end, and
fruit thereof, to the obtaining of a power; and liberty unto God, of
prescribing us a condition whereby we may be saved: but yet it may be, thus
much at least Christ obtained of God in our behalf, that he should assign
faith in him, to be this condition, and to bestow it upon us also: No, neither
the one, nor the other, Potuisset Deus, si ita sapientiae suae visum fuisset,
operarios, Judaeos, vel alios etiam praeter fideles eligere, quia potuit aliam
salutis conditionem, quam fidem in Christum exigere, Grevinch. ad Ames. p. 415.
after all this, had it so seemed good unto his wisdom, God might have chosen
the Jews, and others, following the righteousness of the law, as well as
believers, because he might have assigned, any other condition of salvation
besides faith in Christ: says Grevinchovius: Notwithstanding then the death of
Christ for us, we might have been held to the old rule, Do this and live: but
if this be true, I cannot perceive how it may be said, that Chrid died to
redeem us from our sins, to save our souls, and bring us unto glory: neither
perhaps, do they think this to be any great inconvenience, for the same
Author affirms, that Christus non est proprie mortuus ad aliquem falvandum.
idem, ibid. fol. 8.
Christ cannot be said properly to die, to save any one. And a little after he
more fully declares himself, Postquam impetratio praestita ac peracta esset,
Deo jus suum integrum mansit, pro arbitrio suo, eam applicare, vel non
applicare, nec applicatio finis impetrationis propriae fuit, sed jus, and
potestas applicandi, quibus and qualibus vellet. page 9.
That after Christ had obtained all that he did obtain by his death, the right
remained wholly in God, to apply it, or not to apply it, as it should seem
good unto him: the application of grace and glory, to any man, was not the end
for which Christ obtained them, but to get a right and power unto God, of
bestowing those things on what sort of men he would: which argues no redemption
of us from our sins, but a vindication of God from such a condition, wherein
he had not power to forgive them; not an obtaining of salvation for us, but of
a liberty unto God of saving us, on some condition or other.

But now, after God has got this power by the death of Christ, and out of his
gracious good pleasure, assigned faith to be the means for us to attain those
blessings, he has procured himself a liberty to bestow? Did Christ obtain
this faith for us, of him? if it be a thing not in our own power? No: Fides non
est impetrata merito Christi, etc. Cor. ad Mol. cap. 28. page 419.
Faith is not obtained by the death of Christ, says Corvinus: so that there is
no good thing, no spiritual blessing, into which, any man in the world has
any interest by the death of Christ: which is not so great an absurdity, but
that they are most ready to grant it: Se omnino credere, futurum fuisse, ut
finis mortis Christi constaret, etiamsi nemo credidisset, idem. cap. 27. sect.
3. 4.
Arnoldus confesses, that he believes, that the death of Christ might have
enjoyed its end, or his merit its full force, although, never any had believed:
and again, Posita and praestita Christi morte and satisfactione, fieri potest,
ut nemine, novi faederis conditionem, praestante, nemo salvaretur: idem.
Grevinch. ad Ames. fol. 9.
the death and satisfaction of Christ being accomplished, it might come to
pass, that, none fulfilling the condition of the new Covenant, none should be
saved, so also says Grevinchovius: Oh Christ, that any pretending to profess
thy holy Name, should thus slight the precious work of thy death and passion?
surely, never any before, who counted it their glory to be called Christians,
did ever thus extenuate (their friends the Socinians only excepted) the
dignity of his merit and satisfaction: take but a short view of what benefit
they allow to redound to us, by the effusion of his precious blood, and you may
see what a pestilent heresy, these men have labored to bring into the Church:
neither faith nor salvation, grace nor glory, has he purchased for us, not any
spiritual blessing, that by our interest in his death we can claim to be
ours: it is not such a reconciliation with God, as that he thereupon, should be
contented again to be called our God, it is not justification, nor
righteousness, nor actual redemption from our sins, it did not make
satisfaction for our iniquities, and deliver us from the curse: Impetratio
salutis pro omnibus, est acquisitio possibilitatis, ut nimirum Deus illaesa sua
justitia hominem peccatorem possit recipere in gratiam: Rem. Coll. Hag p. 172.
only it was a means of obtaining such a possibility of salvation, as that
God without wronging of his justice, might save us if he would, one way or
other: so that when Christ had done all that he could, there was not one man in
the world immediately the better for it: notwithstanding the utmost of his
endeavor, every one might have been damned with Judas to the pit of hell* Pro
Juda ac Petro mortuus est Christus, and pro Simone Mago and Juda tam pro Paulo
and Petro: Rem. Synod. fol. 320.
for he died as well for Simon Magus and Judas, as he did for Peter and Paul,
say the Arminians: Now if no more good redound to us by the death of Christ,
then to Simon Magus, we are not much obliged to him for our salvation: Nay, he
may be rather said to have redeemed God, then us, for he procured for him
immediately a power to redeem us if he would; for us, only by virtue of that
power, a possibility to be redeemed: which leaves nothing of the nature of
merit annexed to his death: for that deserves that something be done, not
only that it may be done: the workman deserves that his wages be given him,
and not that it may be given him. And then what becomes of all the comfort and
consolation that is proposed to us in the death of Christ: but it is time to
see how this stubble is burned and consumed by the word of God: and that
established which they thought to overthrow.

First, It is clear that Christ died to procure for us an actual
reconciliation with God: and not only a power for us to be reconciled unto him:
for when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his son:
Romans 5. 10. we enjoy an actual reconciliation unto God by his death: he is
content to be called our God, when we are enemies, without the intervening of
any condition on our part required: though the sweetness, comfort, and
knowledge of this reconciliation, do not compass, our souls before we
believe in him. Again, we have remission of sins by his blood, and
justification from them, not a sole vindication into such an estate, wherein,
if it please God, and our selves, our sins are pardonable: for we are
justified through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set
forth, to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins: Romans 3. 24, 25. Yea, he obtained
for us by his death, righteousness and holiness. He gave himself for his
Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, Ephesians. 5. 26. That he might
present it unto himself a glorious Church, without spot, or wrinkle, that we
should be holy, and without blemish: verse. 27. Where first, we have whom Christ
died, or gave himself for, even his Church: secondly, what he obtained for it,
holiness and righteousness, a freedom from the spots, and blemishes of
sin, that is, the grace of justification and sanctity, he made him to be
sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might become the righteousness of God
in him: 2 Cor. 5. 21. And lastly he died, to purchase for us, an everlasting
inheritance: Heb. 9. 15. So that both grace and glory, are bestowed on them for
whom he died, as the immediate fruits of his death and passion.

Secondly, see what the Scripture (...), expressly assigns, as the proper end
and immediate effect, (according to the purpose of God, and his own intention)
of the effusion of the blood of Jesus Christ, and you shall find that he
intended by it, to take away the sins of many, to make his soul an offering
for sin, that he might see his seed, that the counsel of God, might prosper
in his hand: Isaiah 53. to be a ransom for many, Matthew. 20. 28. to bear the
sins of many: Heb. 9. 28. he bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we
should live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24. that we might become the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. thereby reconciling us unto God,
verse. 19. he died, to reconcile us unto God, in the body of his flesh, through
death, that we might be holy and unblameable, Colos. 1. 21, 22. to purge our
sins, Heb. 1. 3. to obtain an everlasting redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. so
that if Christ by his death obtained what he did intend: he has purchased for
us, not only a possibility of salvation; but holiness, righteousness,
reconciliation with God, justification, freedom from the guilt, and condemning
power of sin: everlasting redemption, eternal life, and glory in heaven.

Thirdly, I appeal unto the consciences of all Christians. First, whether they
do not suppose the very foundation of all their consolation, to be stricken
at, when they shall find those places of Scripture, Heb. 7. 12. 15. 24. and 9.
14. 28. Esa. 53. 11. 1 John 2. 2. etc.
that affirm Christ to have died, to take away our sins, to reconcile us unto
God, to put away, or abolish our transgressions, to wash and regenerate us,
perfectly to save us, and purchase for us an everlasting redemption, whereby he
is become unto us, righteousness, and redemption, and sanctification, the Lord
our righteousness, and we become the righteousness of God in him: to be so
wrested, as if he should be said only, to have done something, which these
things might happily follow.

Secondly, whither they think it not a ready way, to impair their love, and
to weaken their faith in Christ, when they shall be taught, that Christ has
done no more for them, then for those that are damned in hell: that be their
assurance never so great, that Christ died for them: yet there is enough to be
laid to their charge to condemn them, that though God is said to have
reconciled them unto himself in Christ, Colos. 1. 19, 20. yet indeed he is as
angry with them, as with any reprobate in the world, that God loves us not
first, but so long as we continue in a state of enmity against him, before our
conversion, he continues our enemy also: so that the first act of friendship or
love, must be performed on our part, notwithstanding that the Scripture says,
we were reconciled unto God being enemies, Romans 5. verse. 10.

Thirdly, Whither they have not hitherto supposed themselves bound to believe,
that Christ died for their sins and rose for their justification? do they not
think it lawful to pray, that God would bestow upon them, grace, and glory
for Christ's sake? and to believe that Jesus Christ was such a Mediator of the
new Covenant, as procured for the persons Covenanted withal, all the good
things comprehended in the promise of that Covenant.

I will not further press upon this prevarication against Christian Religion,
only I would desire all the lovers of Jesus Christ seriously to consider,
whether these men, do truly aim at his honor, and advancing the dignity of
his merit, and not rather, at the crying up of their own endeavors, seeing the
sole cause of their denying these glorious effects of the blood of Christ: is
to appropriate the praise of them unto themselves, as we shall see in the next
Chapter.

These charges are never to be waved, by the vanity of their sophistical
distinctions, as of that of impetration and application, which though it may be
received, in an Orthodox meaning, yet not in that sense, or rather nonsense,
whereunto they abuse it; viz. As though Christ had obtained that for some,
which shall never be imparted unto them, that all the blessings procured by his
death are proper to none, but pendent in the air for them that can or will
catch them: whereupon when we object, Sic efficacia meriti Christi: tota penes
nos stabit, qui vocationem alioqui inefficacem efficacem, reddimus: sane, fieri
aliter non potest, Rem. Apol. p. 93.
that by this means all the efficacy of the merit of Christ, is in our own
power, they readily grant it, and say it cannot otherwise be: let them that
can, receive these monsters in Christianity, for my part in these following
contradictory assertions, I will choose rather to adhere to the authority of
the word of God, then of Arminius and his sectaries.

S. S.
He made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might become the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He loved his Church and gave
himself for it, that he might present it unto himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle or any such things, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 19. When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days,
and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, Isa. 53. 10. By his
knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many for he shall bear their
iniquities, verse. 11. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.
28. By his own blood he entered in once into the holy place having obtained
eternal redemption for us, verse. 12. He has reconciled you in the body of his
flesh, through death to present you holy and unblamable, Colos. 1. 22. Whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins, etc. -- that he might be just, and
the iustifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 25, 26. Who his own self
bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should
live unto righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed, 1 Peter 2. 24.
Lib. Arbit.
The immediate effect of the death of Christ is not the remission of sins, or
the actual redemption of any, Armin. Christ did not properly die to save any
one, Grevinch. A potentiall and conditionate reconciliation, not actual and
absolute is obtained by the death of Christ, Corvin. I believe it might have
come to pass that the death of Christ might have had its end, though never any
man had believed, Corvi. The death and satisfaction of Christ being
accomplished, yet it may so come to pass that none at all fulfilling the
condition of the new covenant, none might be saved, idem. The impetration of
salvation for all, by the death of Christ, is nothing but the obtaining of a
possibility thereof, that God without wronging his justice, may open unto them
a gate of mercy, to be entered on some condition, Rem. Coll. Hag.
Notwithstanding the death of Christ, God might have assigned any other
condition of salvation as well as faith, or have chosen the Jews following the
righteousness of the law, Grevin. Why then the efficacy of the death of
Christ depends wholly on us: true? it cannot otherwise be? Rem. Apol.


CHAP. X.
Of the cause of faith, grace, and righteousness.
THE second part of this controversy, is in particular, concerning grace,
faith, and holiness, sincere obedience to the precepts of the new Covenant,
all whose praise we appropriate to the most high, by reason of a double
interest. First, of the merit of Christ which does procure them for us.
Secondly, of the holy Spirit which works them in us: the death of Christ is
their meritorious cause, the Spirit of God and his effectual grace their
efficient, working instrumentally with power by the word and ordinances: now
because this would deprive the Idol of his chiefest glory, and expose him to
open shame, like the bird furtivis nudata coloribus, the Arminians advance
themselves in his quarrel, and in behalf of their darling, quite exclude both
merit of Christ, and Spirit of God, from any title to their production.

First, For the merit of Christ, whereas we affirm that God blesses us with
all spiritual blessings in him, or for his sake, Ephesians. 1. 3. amongst which,
doubtless faith possesses not the lowest room, that he is made unto us
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; he was made sin for us,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: that he is the Lord our
righteousness, and glories to be called by that name: and whatsoever he is
unto us, it is chiefly by the way of merit: that to us it is given (...), for
Christ's sake to believe on him, Phil. 1. 29. where (...), is plainly referred
to (...) is given, as if the Apostle should have said, Christ is the
meritorious cause of the bestowing of those good gifts, faith, and constancy
unto martyrdom upon you, when I say we profess all these to be the proper and
immediate products of the passion and blood of Christ, these turbulent
Davusses, come in with a prohibition, and quite expel it from having any
interest therein.

Nihil ineptius nihil vanius, qua^ regenerationem and fidem, merito Christi
tribuere, si enim Christus dicatur nobis meritus fidem and regenerationem, tum
fides conditio esse non poterat: quam a peccatoribus, Deus sub comminatione
mortis aeternae exigeret: Rem. Apol. cap. 8. page 95. Si fides sit effectum
meriti Christi non potest esse actus officii nostri: idem.
There is nothing more vain, nothing more foolish (say they in their Apology)
then to attribute our regeneration, and faith, unto the death of Christ, for if
Christ may be said to have merited for us faith, and regeneration, then faith
cannot be a condition, whose performance God should require, at the hands of
sinners, under the pain of eternal damnation: And again, If faith be the
effect of the merit of Christ, it cannot be our duty; No? Suppose then that
the Church should pray, that it would please God, for Christ's sake, to call
home those sheep that belong to his fold, not as yet collected? that he would
grant faith and repentance, for the merit of his Son, to them that are as yet
a far off? were this an altogether vain and foolish prayer? let others
think as they please, it is such a vanity, as I desire not to be weaned from,
nor any one else I believe, that loves the Lord Jesus in sincerity: Oh that
Christians should patiently endure, such a diminution of their Saviors honor?
as with one dash of an Arminian pen, to have the chief effects of his death
and passion quite obliterated: if this be a motive, to the love and honor of
the Son of God, if this be a way, to set forth the preciousnesse of his blood,
by denying the efficacy thereof, in enabling us by faith to get an interest in
the new covenant: most Christians in the world are under a necessity of being
new Catechized by these Seraphicall Doctors.

Until when, they must give us leave to believe, with the Apostle, that God
blesses us, with all spiritual blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. and we will
take leave to account faith a spiritual blessing: and therefore bestowed on us
for Christ's sake; again, since our regeneration is nothing but a purging of
our consciences from dead works, that we may serve the living God: which being
done by the blood of Christ, as the Apostle witnesses, Heb. 9. 14. we will
ascribe our new birth, or forming anew to the virtue of that grace, which is
purchased by his blood: that precious blood it is, which redeemeth us from our
vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. by whose efficacy we are vindicated from
the state of sin and corrupted nature wherein we are born.

The Arminians have but one argument, that ever I could meet with, whereby they
strive to rob Christ of this glory, of meriting and procuring for us faith and
repentance; and that is, because they are such acts of ours, as in duty and
obedience to the precepts of the Gospel, we are bound to perform: Rem. Apol.
ubi sup. Corvin. ad Moli. cap. 28. sect. 9.
and this they every where press at large, usque and usque, in plain terms
they will not suffer their Idol to be accounted defective in any thing that is
necessary to bring us unto heaven: now concerning this argument, that nothing
which God requires of us, can be procured for us by Christ: I would have two
things noted. First, that the strength of it consists in this, that no gift of
God bestowed upon us, can be a thing well pleasing to him as being in us: for
all his precepts and commands signify only, what is well pleasing unto him,
that we should be, or do; and it is not the meriting of any thing by Christ,
but Gods bestowing of it, as the effect thereof, which hinders it from being a
thing, requireable of us, as a part of our duty, which I shall consider
hereafter: only now observe, that there being nothing in us, by the way of
habit or act from the beginning of our faith, to the consummation thereof from
our new birth, until we become perfect men in Christ, by the finishing of our
course, that is not required of us in the Gospel, all, and every grace, whereof
we are in this life partakers, are by this means denied to be gifts of God.
Secondly, consider the extent of this argument it self: nothing whose
performance is our duty, can be merited for us by Christ; when the Apostle
beseeches us, to be reconciled unto God, I would know, whether it be not a
part of our duty to yield obedience to the Apostles exhortation: if not his
exhortation is frivolous and vain, if so, then to be reconciled unto God, is a
part of our duty, and yet the Arminians sometime seem to confess, that
Christ has obtained for us a reconciliation with God: the like may be said, in
diverse other particulars, so that this argument, either proves that we enjoy
no fruit of the death of Christ in this life: or (which is most true) it
proves nothing at all: for neither the merit of Christ procuring, nor God
bestowing any grace, in the habit, does at all hinder, but that in the exercise
thereof, it may be a duty of ours, inasmuch as it is done in us, and by us:
notwithstanding then this exception, which cannot stand by it self alone
without the help of some other, not as yet discovered; we will continue our
prayers, as we are commanded in the name of Christ: that is, that God would
bestow upon us those things we ask for Christ's sake, and that by an immediate
collation, yea even then when we cry, with the poor penitent, Lord help our
unbelief, or with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith.

Secondly, the second plea, on Gods behalf, to prove him, the Author, and
finisher of all those graces, whereof in this life we are partakers, arises,
from what the Scripture affirms, concerning his working these graces in us,
and that powerfully, by the effectual operation of his holy Spirit: to which,
the Arminians oppose a seeming necessity, that they must needs be our own
acts, contradistinct from his gifts, because they are in us, and commanded by
him: the head then of this contention betwixt our God, and their Idol, about
the living child of grace, is: whether he can work that in us, which he
requires of us: let us hear them pleading their cause.

Illud certissimum est, nec jubendum est quod efficitur, nec efficiendum quod
jubetur, stulte jubet and vult, ab alio fieri aliquid, qui ipse quod jubet in
eo efficere vult: Rem. Apol. cap 9 p. 105. a.
It is most certain that, that ought not to be commanded, which is wrought in
us: and that cannot be wrought in us, which is commanded: he foolishly
commands that to be done of others, who will work in them what he
commands: says their Apology. At exigua conclusione pene tu totum
Pelagianum dogma confirmas, dicendo, nullius laudis esse ac meriti: si id in eo
Christus quod ipse donaverat praetulisset. Prosp. ad Collat. cap. 36.
O foolish Saint Prosper, who thought that it was the whole Pelagian heresy,
to say, That there is neither praise, nor worth, as ours, in that, which Christ
bestows upon us: foolish Saint Augustine, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod
vis. Aug.
praying, Give us O Lord, what thou command, and command what thou will:
foolish Benedict Bishop of Rome, who gave such a form to his prayer, as must
needs cast an aspersion of folly, on the most high: O O Domine doce nos quid
aganius, quo gradiamus ostende, quid efficiamus operare: Ben. Pap. in Council.
Legunstad.
Lord (says he) teach us what we should do; show us whither we should go,
work in us, what we ought to perform: O foolish Fathers of the second
Arausican Council, affirming, Multa in homine bona fiunt quae nonfacit homo:
nulla vero facit homo bona, quae non Deus prastet, ut faciat. Consil: Arau. 2.
Can. 20. Quotie^ enim bona agimos, Deus in nobis and nobiscum, ut operemur,
operatur: Can. 9.
that many good things are done in man, which he does not himself, but a man
does no good, which God does not so work, that he should do it: And again,
as often as we do good, God works in us, and with us, that we may so work:
In one word, this makes fools of all the Doctors of the Church, who ever
opposed the Pelagian heresy, in as much as they all unanimously maintained,
that we are partakers of no good thing, in this kind without the effectual
powerful operation, of the Almighty grace of God: and yet our faith and
obedience so wrought in us, to be most acceptable unto him: yea, what shall we
say to the Lord himself, in one place commanding us to fear him, and in
another promising that he will put his fear into our hearts, that we shall not
depart from him, is his command foolish, or his promise false: the Arminians
must affirm the one, or renounce their heresy? but of this, after I have a
little farther laid open this monstrous error, from their own words, and
writings.

Anne conditionem quis serio and sapienter praescribet alteri, sub promisso
praemii and poenae gravissimae comminatione, qui eam, in eo eui praescribit
efficere vult, haec actio tota ludicra, and vix scaena digna est: Rem. Apol.
cap. 9. p. 105. a.
Can any one, say they, wisely and seriously prescribe the performance of a
condition to another, under the promise of a reward, and threatening of
punishment, who will effect it in him, to whom it is prescribed? this is a
ridiculous action, scarce worthy of the Stage: that is, seeing Christ has
affirmed, that whosoever believes shall be saved, and he that believes not
shall be damned, Matthew. 16. 16. whereby faith, is established, the condition of
salvation, and unbeleefe, threatened with hell: If God should by his holy
Spirit, ingenerate faith in the hearts of any, causing them so to fulfill the
condition, it were a mere mockery, to be exploded from a Theater as an
unlikely fiction: which, what an aspersion it casts upon the whole Gospel of
Christ, yea, on all Gods dealling with the children of men, ever since, by
reason of the fall, they became unable of themselves, to fulfill his commands,
I leave to all men's silent judgments: well then, seeing they must be accounted
(...), things inconsistent, that God should be so righteous, as to show us our
duty, and yet so good and merciful, as to bestow his graces on us: let us
hear more of this stuff: Fides and conversio non possunt esse obedientia, si
tantum ab aliquo, in alio, efficiantur: Rem Colloq. Hag. fol. 196.
faith and conversion cannot be our obedience, if they are worught in us by
God, say they at the Hague: and Episcopius, Absurdum est statuere Deum aut
efficere per potentiam, aut procurare per sapientiam, ut electi ea faciant,
quae ab ipsis, ut ipsi ea faciant, exigit and postulat Episcop. disp. pri. 8.
These. 7.
That it is a most absurd thing, to affirm, that God either effects by his
power, or procures by his wisedeme, that the elect should do those things,
that he requires of them: So that where the Scripture calls faith the gift, and
work of God, they say it is an improper locution, in as much as he commands
it, properly, it is an act or work of our own: And Apol. cap. 9. ubi. sup.
Deum dona sua in nobis coronare, dictum hoc Augustini nisi cum grano salis
accipiatur neutiquam est admittendum: idem: Ibid. fol. 115.
for that renowned saying of Saint Augustine, that God crowns his own gifts
in us, that it is not to be received without a grain of salt: That is, some
such gloss as wherewith they corrupt the Scripture: the sum at which they
aim is, that to affirm, that God bestows any grace upon us, or effectually
works them in us, contradicts his word, requiring them as our duty, and
obedience: by which means they have erected their Idol, into the throne of Gods
free grace and mercy, and attribute unto it all the praise, due to those many
heavenly qualifications, the servants of God are endowed withal, for they
never have more good in them, no, nor so much, as is required, all that they
have, or do, is but their duty: which how derogatorie it is to the merit of
Christ, themselves seem to acknowledge, when they affirm, that he is no
otherwise said to be a Savior, Atqui dices, sic servatores nostri essent
omnes, (eodem sensu quo Christus) saltem ex part qui praeconio, miraculis,
martyriis salutis viam, confirmant: esto? quid tum: Idem. cap. 8.
then are all they, who confirm the way to salvation by preaching, miracles,
martyrdom, and example: so that having quite overthrown the merits of Christ,
they grant us to be our own Saviors in a very large sense: Rem. Apol. fol.
96. All which assertions, how contrary they are to the express word of God, I
shall now demonstrate.

There is not one, of all those plain texts of Scripture, not one of those
innumerable and invincible arguments, whereby the effectual working of Gods
grace, in the conversion of a sinner, his powerful translating us, from death
to life, from the state of sin and bondage, to the liberty of the sons of
God, which does not overthrow this prodigious error. I will content my self
with instancing in some few of them which are directly opposite unto it, even
in terms,

First, Deuter. 10. 16. The Lord commands the Israelites, to circumcise the
foreskin of their hearts, and to be no more stiff necked: so that the
circumcising of their hearts, was a part of their obedience, it was their duty
so to do in obedience to Gods commands: and yet in the 30. Chapter, verse. 6. he
affirms, that he will circumcise their hearts, that they might love the Lord
their God, with all their hearts: So that it seems, the same thing, in diverse
respects may be Gods act in us, and our duty toward him: and how the Lord
will here escape the Arminian censure, that if his words be true, in the latter
place, his command in the former, is vain, and foolish, ipse viderit, let him
plead his cause, and avenge himself, on those, that rise up against him.

Secondly, Ezekiel. 18. 31. Make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for why will
you die, O house of Israel? The making of a new heart, and a new spirit, is
here required under a promise of a reward of life, and a great threatening of
eternal death: so that, so to do, must needs be a part of their duty and
obedience: and yet Chapter 36. verse. 36. He affirms that he will do this
very thing, that here he requires of them: a new heart also will I give you,
and a new spirit, will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart,
out of your flesh, and give you an heart of flesh: and I will cause you to
walk in my statutes, etc. In how many places also, are we commanded to fear
the Lord, which when we do, I hope none will deny to be a performance of our
duty; and yet Jerem. 32. 40. God promises that he will put his fear in our
hearts, that we shall not depart from him.

Thirdly, those two, against which they lay particular exceptions, faith, and
repentance, are also expressly attributed, to the free donation of God: he
grants unto the Gentiles repentance unto life: Acts 11. 18. and of faith
directly, it is not of our selves, it is the gift of God: Ephesians. 2. 8. To which
assertion of the holy Spirit, I shall rather fasten my belief; then to the
Arminians, affirming that it is no gift of God, because it is of our selves:
and yet this hinders not, but that it may be styled, Our most holy faith:
Jude 20. Let them that will deny, that any thing can properly be ours, which
God bestows on us: the Prophet accounted them not inconsistent, when he
averred, that God works all our works in us: Isa. 26. 12. They are our
works, though of his working: the Apostle labored, though it was not he, but
the grace of God that was with him: 1 Cor. 15. 10. He works in us (...), of
his good pleasure, Philip. 2. 13. and yet the performance of our duty, may
consist, in those acts of our wills, and those good deeds, whereof he is the
Author: so that according to Saint Petamus ut det quod ut habeamus jubet: Aug.
Austins counsel, we will still pray, that he would bestow, what he commands
us to have.

Fourthly, 1 Cor. 4. Who made thee differ from another, or what have thou, that
thou have not received? Every thing that makes us differ from others, is
received from God: wherefore the foundation of all difference in spiritual
things between the sons of Adam: being faith and repentance, they must also
of necessity, be received from above. In brief; Gods circumcising of our
hearts, Colos. 2. 11. His quickening us when we are dead, Ephesians. ^. 1. 2.
Begetting us anew, John 1. 13. Making us in all things, such as he would have
us to be, is contained in that promise of the New Covenant, Jerem. 32. 40. I
will make with them an everlasting Covenant, that I will not turn away from
them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me: and is no way repugnant to the holy Scripture, declaring
our duty, to be all this, that the Lord would have us: and now let all men
judge, whether against so many, and clear testimonies of the holy Ghost, the
Arminian reasons borrowed from the old Philosophers, be of any value: the sum
of them all, you may find in Cicero, his third Book De Natura Deorum: Quia
sibi quisque virtutem acquirit, -- neminem de sapientibus unquam de ea gratias
Deo egisse, propter virtutem enim laudamur, and in virtute gloriamur, quod non
fieret, si Donum esset Dei, non a nobis, Cicero De Not. Deor.
Every one, says he, obtains virtue for himself: never any wise man thanked
God for that, for our virtue we are praised, in virtue we glory, which might
not be, were it a gift of God: and truly this in softer terms, is the sum
of the Remonstrants Arguments in this particular.

Lastly, observe, that this error, is that which of all others, the Orthodox
Fathers did most oppose in the Pelagian heretics: yea and to this day,
Alvarez: disput. 86. ubi Aug. Thom. alios, citat.
the more learned Schoolmen stoutly maintain the truth herein against the
innovating Jesuits: with some few of the testimonies of the Ancients I will
shut up this discourse: It Certum est nos facere cum facimus, sed ille facet ut
faciamus Aug. de Great. et Lib. Arbit. cap. 16.
is certain, that when we do any thing we do it, says Saint Augustine, but
it is God that causes us so to do: and in another place; -- Neque id donum
Dei esse fateamur, quon^am exigi audivimus a nobis, praemio vitae si hoc
fecerimus oblato? absit, ut hoc placeat particibus and defensoribus gratiae:
Aug. de Praedest. San. cap. 20.
Shall we not account that to be the gift of God? because it is required of us,
under the promise of eternal life? God forbid that this should seem so,
either to the partakers, or defenders of grace: where he rejects both the
error, and the sophisme, wherewith it is upholden? Tanta est erga homines
bonitas Dei, ut nostra velit esse merita quae sunt ipsius dona: Caelest: Epist.
ad Ep. Gal. cap. 12.
So also Coelestius Bishop of Rome in his Epistle to the Bishops of France: So
great, says he, is the goodness of God toward men, that he will have those
good things to be our good duties (he calls them merits according to the phrase
of those days) which are his own gifts: to which purpose I cited before two
Canons out of the Arausican Council: and Saint Prosper in his Treatise, against
Cassianus the Semipelagian, Non enim conturbat nos, superbientium inepta
quaerimonia; quia Liberum Arbitrium causantur anferri: si and principia and
profectus, and perseverantia in bonis usque ad finem, Dei dona esse dicantur:
Prosp. ad Collat. page 404.
affirms it, to be a foolish complaint of proud men, that Free Will is
destroyed, if the beginning, progress, and continuance in good, be said to be
the gifts of God: and so the imputation of folly, wherewith the Arminians in my
first Quotation, charge their opposers, being retorted on them, by this learned
Father, I refer you to these following excerpta for a close.

S. S.
Circumcise the fore-skinne of of your hearts, and be no more stiff necked:
Deuteronomy. 10. 16. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of
thy seed: Chap. 30. 6. Make you a new heart, and a new spirit, O house of
Israel: Ezekiel. 18. 31. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I
put within you: Chap. 36. 36. If you will fear the Lord, and serve him, then
shall you continue following the Lord your God: 1 Samuel 12. 14. And I will put
my fear into your hearts, that ye shall not depart from me: Ierem. 32. 40. He
has wrought all our works in us: Isa. 26. 12. He works in us both to will
and to do, of his good pleasure. Philip. 2. 13. He has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in him: Ephesians. 1. 3. To you it is given in the behalf of
Christ to believe in him. Philip. 1. 29. The blood of Christ purges our
consciences from dead works, to serve the living God: Heb. 9. 14.
Lib. Arbit.
This is most certain that, that ought not to be commanded which is wrought
in us: he foolishly commands that to be done of others, who will work in
them what he commands: Rem. Apol. It is absurd to affirm that God either
works by his power, or procures by his wisdom, that the elect should do
those things which God requires of them: Episcopius. Faith and conversion
cannot be acts of our obedience if they are wrought by God in us: Rem. Col.
Hag. That God should require that of us, which himself will work in us, is a
ridiculous action scarce fit for a stage: Rem. Apol. That saying of Augustine
that God crowns his own gifts in us, is not easily to be admitted. Ibid.
There is nothing more vain and foolish then to ascribe faith and regeneration
to the merit of Christ. Idem.


CHAP. XI.
Whether Salvation may be attained without the knowledge of or Faith in Christ
Jesus.
I Shall shut up all this discourse concerning the meritorious cause of
Salvation, with their shutting out of Christ, from being the only one, and
absolutely necessary means, to bring us unto heaven, to make us happy: this is
the last Pile they erect upon their Babylonish foundation, which makes the Idol
of humane selfe-sufficiencie, every way perfect, and fit, to be sacricrificed
unto: until these proud builders, to get materials for their own Temple, laid
the Axe to the root of Christianity, we took it for grounded, that there is
no salvation in any other, because there is none other name under heaven, given
unto men, whereby we must be saved: Acts 4. 12. Neither yet shall their
nefarious attempts, frighten us from our Creed, nor make us be wanting to the
defense of our Saviors honor, but I shall be very brief in the consideration
of this Heterodoxie, nothing doubting, but that to have repeated it, is fully
to have confuted it, in the judgment of all pious Christians.

First then, they grant salvation, to the ancient Patriarchs and Jews, before
the coming of Christ, without any knowledge of, or faith in him at all: Nay,
they deny, that any such faith in Christ, was ever prescribed unto them, or
required of them: Certum est locum nullum esse, unde appareat, sidem istam, sub
Vet. Test praeceptam fuisse, aut viguisse, Rem. Apol. cap. 7. fol. 91.
It is certain that there is no place in the Old Testament, from whence it may
appear, that faith in Christ (as a Redeemer) was ever enjoined, or found in
any of them: say they jointly, in their Apology: the truth of which assertion,
we shall see hereafter: only they grant a general faith, involved under
types, and shadows, and looking on the promise, as it lay hid in the
goodness, and providence of God, which indirectly might be called a faith in
Christ: from which kind of faith, I see no reason, why thousands of heathen
Infidels should be excluded: agreeable unto these assertions, are the Dictates,
of their Patriarch Arminius: Consideretur omnis descriptio fidei Abrahae, Romans
4. and apparebit in illa Jesus Christi non fieri mentionem, express, sed illa
tantum implicatione, quam explicare cuivis non est facile, Armin. Gavisus est
videre natalem Isaac, qui fuit typus mei: idem.
affirming, that the whole description of the Faith of Abraham, Romans 4. makes
no mention of Jesus Christ, either expressly or so implicitly as that it may
be of any one, easily understood, and to the testimony of Christ himself, to
the contrary, Ioh. 8. ^6. your father Abraham rejoiced to see my days and he
saw it, and was glad: he answers, he rejoiced to see the birth of Isaac, who
was a type of me, a goodly gloss corrupting the text.

Secondly, what they teach of the Jews, that also, they grant concerning the
Gentiles: living before the incarnation of Christ: they also might attain
salvation, and be justified without his knowledge: for Gentes sub veteri
testamento viventes licet ipsis ista ratione qua Iudaeis non fuit revelatum:
non tamen inde continuo ex faedere absolute exclusae sunt, nec a salute
praecise exclusi judicari debent quia aliquo saltem modo vocantur. Corvi.
defens. Armin. ad Tilen. fol. 107.
although says Corvinus, the Covenant was not revealed unto them by the same
means, that it was unto the Jews: yet they are not to be supposed, to be
excluded from the Covenant (of grace) nor to be excluded from salvation: for
some way or other, they were called.

Thirdly, they are come at length, to that perfection, in setting out this
stain of Christianity, that Bertius on good consideration, denied this
proposition, that no man can be saved, that is not ingrafted into Christ, by a
true faith: and Nego hanc propositionem: neminem posse salvari, quam qui Jesus
Christo, perveram fidem sit insitus, Bert. ad sibrand. fol. 133.
Venator to this question, Whether the only means of salvation, be the life,
passion, death, resurrection, and ascension of Jesus Christ, answers, no?
thus they lay men in Abraham's bosom, who never believed in the son of
Abraham: make them overcome the serpent, who never heard of the seed of the
woman, bring goats into heaven, who never were of the flock of Christ, never
entered by him the door: make men please God without faith, and obtain the
remission of sins, Ad hanc quaestionem an unica via salutis, sit vita passio
mors resurrectio and asscensio Jesus Christi? respondeo, non. Venat. apud Test.
Hom. and Peltiam.
without the sprinkling of the blood of the Lamb: to be saved without a
Savior, redeemed without a redeemer: to become the sons of God, and never know
their elder brother: which prodigious error, might yet be pardoned, and
ascribed to humane imbecillitie, had it casually slipped from their pens as
Zuing. profes. fid. ad reg. Gal.
it did from some others: but seeing it has foundation, in all the grounds of
their new doctrine, and is maintained by them, on mature deliberation, Artic.
of the Church of Eng. art. 18.
it must be looked on by all Christians, as an heresy to be detested and
accursed. For, first deny the contagion and demerit, of original sin: then
make the Covenant of grace to be universal, and comprehend all and every one
of the posterity of Adam, Nihil magis repugnat fidei, qua^ sine fide salvum
esse posse quempiam hominum. Acost. de indo, Salu. Proc.
thirdly, grant a power in our selves to come unto God, by any such means as he
will appoint and affirm, that he does assign some means unto all, and it will
naturally follow, that the knowledge of Christ, is not absolutely necessary to
salvation: and so down falls the pre-eminence of Christianity, its heaven
reaching crown, must be laid level with the services of dunghill gods.

It is true indeed, some of the ancient Fathers, before the rising of the
Pelagian heresy; who had so put on Christ, as Lipsius speaks, that they had
not fully put of Plato, have unadvisedly dropped some speeches, seeming to grant,
that diverse men before the Incarnation, living (...), according to the dictates
of right reason, might be saved without faith in Christ: as is well showed by
learned Causabon, in his first excercitation on Baronius: but let this be
accounted part of that stubble, which shall burn at the last day, wherewith
the writings of all men, not divinely inspired may be stained: it has also
since, (as what has not) been drawn into dispute among the wrangling
Schoolmen: and yet, which is rarely seen, their verdict in this particular,
almost unanimously passes for the truth: Aquin. 2. 2 ae. q. 2. a. 7. c.
Christus nascitur ex virgin, and ego credo in eum, o Sol, sub Irenae and
Constantini temporibus iterum me videbis.
Aquinas tells us a story of the corpse of a heathen, that should be taken up in
the time of the Empress Irene, and her son Constantine, with a golden plate
on his breast, wherein was this inscription: Christ is borne of a virgin, and I
believe in him oh Sun, thou shall see me again, in the days of Irene and
Constantine: but the question is not, whether a Gentile believing in Christ may
be saved? or whether God did not reveal himself, and his Son,
extraordinarily to some of them: for shall we straighten the breast, and shorten
the arm of the Almighty, as though he might not do what he will with his own.
But whether a man by the conduct of nature, without the knowledge of Christ,
may come to heaven: Dum multum sudant nonnulli, quomodo Platonem faciant
Christianum, se probant esse ethnicos, Bern. Epist.
the assertion whereof, we condemn as a wicked Pelagian Socinian heresy: and
think, that it was well said of Bernard; that many laboring to make Plato a
Christian, do prove themselves to be Heathens: and if we look upon the
several branches of this Arminian novell doctrine, extenuating the precious
worth and necessity of faith in Christ: we shall find them, hewed off by the
two edged sword of Gods word.

First, for their denying, the Patriarchs and Jews, to have had faith, in
Christum exhibendum and moriturum, as we in him, exhibitum and mortuum, it is
disproved by all Evangelicall promises, made from the beginning of the world,
to the birth of our Savior, as that, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the woman shall
break the Serpents head, and Chap. 12. 3. Chap. 49. 10. Psalm. 2. 7, 8. and
110. with innumerable other, concerning his life, office, and redeeming of his
people: for surely they were obliged to believe the promises of God.

Secondly, those many clear expressions of his death, passion, and suffering
for us: as Genesis 3. 15. Isaiah 53. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. Chap. 63. 2, 3. Dan. 9.
26. but what need we reckon any more: our Savior taught his Disciples, that
all the Prophets from Moses, spoke concerning him, and that the sole reason,
why they did not so readily embrace the faith of his passion, and resurrection,
was, because they believed not the Prophets, Luke 24. 25, 26. showing plainly,
that the Prophets required faith in his death and passion.

Thirdly, by the explicit faith of many Jews, as of old Simeon, Luke 3. 34. of
the Samaritan woman, who looked for a Messiah, not as an earthly King, but as
one that should tell them all things: redeem them from sin, and tell them
all such things, as Christ was then discoursing of, concerning the worship of
God, Ioh. 4. verse. 25.

Fourthly, by the express testimony of Christ himself: Abraham says he,
rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad: Ioh. 8. 56. his day, his
hour, in the Scripture principally denote his passion: and that which he saw
surely he believed, or else the father of the faithful, was more diffident
then Thomas the most incredulous, of his children.

Fifthly, By these following and the like places of Scripture: Christ is a
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Revel. 13. 8. slain in
promises, slain in Gods estimation and the faith of believer, he is the same
yesterday to day and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. under the law and the Gospel: There
is none other name under heaven given unto men, whereby they must be saved:
Acts 4. 12. never any then, without the knowledge of a Redeemer, participation
of his passion, communication of his merits, did ever come to the sight of God:
no man ever came to the Father but by him: hence St. Paul tells the Ephesians,
that they were without Christ, because they were aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel: Ephesians. 2. 12. intimating that Gods Covenant with the Jews, included
Christ Jesus and his righteousness, no less then it does now with us: on
these grounds holy Ignatius, (...) Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians.
called Abel a martyr of Christ, he died for his faith in the promised seed:
and in another place, (...). Epist. ad Phil.
all the Saints were saved by Christ: hoping in him: and waiting on him, they
obtained salvation by him: So Non alia fide quemquam hominum sive ante legem,
sive legis tempore, justificatum esse credendum est, qua^ hac eadem qua Dominus
Jesus, etc. Prosp. ad ob. 8. Gallorum.
Prosper also, We must believe that never any man was justified, by any other
faith, either before the Law, or under the Law, then by faith in Christ, coming
to save that which was lost. Whence Eusebius contendeth, that all the old
Patriarchs might properly be called Christians, they all eat of the same
spiritual meat, and all drank of the same spiritual drink, even of the
rock that followed them, which rock was Christ.

Secondly, if the ancient people of God, notwithstanding, diverse other
especial revelations of his will: and heavenly instructions obtained not
salvation, without faith in Christ, much less may we grant this happiness
without him, to them, who were deprived of those other helps also: Omnes ergo
illos qui ab Abraham sursum versus ad primum hominem, generationis ordine
conscribuntur, etsi non nomine, rebus tamen, and religione Christianos fuisse,
si quis dicat, non mihi videtur errare. Eus. Histor. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 1.
so that though we confess the poor natural endeavors of the heathen, not
to have wanted their reward: either positive in this life, by outward
prosperity, and inward calmnesse of mind, in that, they were not all
perplexed, and agitated with furies, like Nero and Caligula, or negative, in
the life to come, by a diminution of the degrees of their torments: they shall
not be beaten with so many stripes: yet we absolutely deny, that there is any
saving mercy of God, toward them revealed in the Scripture, which should give
us the least intimation of their attaining everlasting happiness: for not to
consider the corruption and universal disability of nature, to do any thing
that is good, (without Christ we can do nothing) Ioh. 15. 5. nor yet the
sinfulness of their best works, and actions, the sacrifices of the wicked
being an abomination unto the Lord, Prove. 15. 8. Evil trees cannot bring forth
good fruit, men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles, Matthew.
7. 16. the word of God is plain, that without faith, it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11. 6. that he, who believes not, is condemned, Mark. 16. 16.
that no nation, or person, can be blessed, but in the seed of Abraham, Genesis 12.
and the blessing of Abraham, comes upon the Gentiles only by Jesus Christ, Gal.
3. 14. He is the way, and the truth, and the life, Ioh. 14. 6. none comes to
the Father but by him, he is the door, by which those that do not enter, are
without, with Dogs, and Idolaters, Revel. 22. So that other foundation, (of
blessedness) can none lay, but what is already laid, even Jesus Christ, 1 Corinthians. 3. 12. in brief, do but compare those two places of Saint Paul, one
Romans 8. 30. where he shows, that none are glorified, but those that are
called: and Chap. 10. 14, 15. where he declares, that all calling, is
instrumentally by the preaching of the Word and Gospel: and it will evidently
appear, that no salvation can be granted unto them, on whom the Lord has so
far powered out his indignation, as to deprive them of the knowledge of the
sole means thereof Christ Jesus. And to those that are otherwise minded, I give
only this necessary caution, let them take heed, lest whilst they endeavor to
invent new ways to heaven for others, by so doing, they loose not the true way
themselves.

S. S.
Oh fools, and slow to believe, all that the Prophets have written: ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, Luke 24. 25, 26. Abraham rejoiced to see
my day, and he saw it and was glad, Ioh. 8. 56. By his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities, Isa. 53.
11. see the places before cited. At the time they were without Christ: being
aliens from the Common-weath of Israel: and strangers from the Covenants of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. There is no
other name under heaven given unto men, whereby we must be saved, but only by
Christ, Act. 4. 12. The blessing of Abraham comes on the Gentiles by Jesus
Christ, Gal. 3. 14. he that believes not is condemned: Mark. 16. 16. without
faith it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11. 6. Other foundation can no man
lay, but what is already laid: even Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
Lib. Arbit.
There is no place in the Old Testament, whence it may appear, that faith in
Christ as a Redeemer, was either enjoyed or found in any then, Rem. Apol.
Abraham's faith had no reference to Christ, Armin. The Gentiles living under the
Old Testament, though it was not revealed unto them as unto the Jews, yet were
not excluded from the Covenant of grace, and from salvation, Corv. I deny this
proposition, that none can be saved that is not ingrafted into Christ by a true
faith, Bert. To this question, whether the only way of salvation, be the life,
passion, death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus Christ, I answer no,
Venator.


CHAP. XII.
Of Free Will, the nature and power thereof.
Our next task, is to take a view of the Idol himself; of this great deity
of Free Will, whose original, being not well known, he is pretended like the
Ephesian image of Diana, to have fallen down from heaven, and to have his
endowments from above: but yet considering, what a nothing he was at his first
discovery, in comparison, of that vast giantlike hugeness, to which now he is
grown, we may say of him, as the Painter said of his monstrous picture, which
he had mended, or rather marred, according to every ones fancy: hunc populus
fecit, it is the issue of the peoples brain. Hieron. ad Ruff.
Origin is supposed to have brought him first into the Church: but among those
many sincere worshippers of divine grace, this setter forth of new Demons,
found but little entertainment: it was looked upon, but like the stumpe of
Dagon, with his head and hands laid down before the Ark of God: without whose
help he could neither know, nor do, that which is good in any kind: still
accounted, but truncus ficulnus, inutile lignum: a fig tree logge, an
unprofitable piece of wood; incerti patres scamnum facerentne? the Fathers of
the succeeding ages, had much debate, to what use they should put it: and
though some exalted it, a degree or two, above its merits, yet the most
concluded to keep it a block still: until at length, there arose a Pelagius:
Dogma quod -- pestifero vomuit coluber sermon Britannus, Prosper. de ingrat.
cap. 1.
stout Champion, challenging on his behalf, the whole Church of God, and like
a Knight errant wandered from the West, to the East, to grapple with any, that
should oppose his Idol: who though he met with Adfuit exhortante Deo provisa
per orbem, sanctorum pia cura patrum. 1 Pestem subeuntem prima recidit, fedes
Roma Petri. 2 Non segnior inde, orientis rectorum cu^a emicuit: Synod. Palest.
3 Hieronimus libris valde excellentibus hostem dissecuit. 4 Atticus
Constantinop. 5 Duae Synodi Affricanae Prosper^ de ingrat.
diverse Adversaries, Concilium cui dux Aut elius ingeniumque Augustinus erat.
Quem Christi graua corn^uberi^re rigans, nostro lumen dedit aevo: Prosp. ibid.
one especially, who in the behalf of the grace of God, continually foiled him
and cast him to the ground, and that in the judgment, Dixit Pelagius, quis est
mihi Augustinus? universi acclamabant blasphemantem in episcopum, ex cujus ore,
dominus universae Africae, unitatis indulserit felicitatem, non solum a
conventu illo, sed ab omni ecclesia pellendum: Oros. Apologet. fol. 621. de
Synod. Palest. prae omnibus studium gerite libros, S. August. quos ad Prosp.
and Hilar. scripsit, memoratis fratribus legendos ingerere: etc Epist. Synod.
Byzac.
of all the lawful judges, assembled in Counsels, and ^mo noverunt, non solum
Romanam Affricanamque ecclesiam, sed per omnes mundi parts, universae
promissionis filios, cum doctrina hujus viri sicut in tota fide, ita in gratiae
confessione congruere: Prosp. ad Ruffin. Augustinum sanctae recordationis virum
pro vita sua, and meritis, in nostra communione semper habuimus, nec unquam
hunc sinistrae suspitionis saltem rumor suspexit: Coelest. Epist. ad Gal.
Episcop. These I have cited to show what a heavy prejudice the Arminian cause
lies under, being professedly opposite to the doctrine of S. Austine, and they
continually slighting of his authority.
in the opinion of most of the Christian by standers: yet by his cunning
insinuation, he planted such an opinion of his Idols deity and
self-sufficiency, in the hearts of diverse, that to this day it could never be
rooted out.

Now after the decease of his Pelagian worshippers, some of the corrupter
Schoolmen, seeing of him thus from his birth exposed without shelter to wind
and weather, to all assaults out of mere charity, and self-love, built him a
temple, and adorned it with natural lights, merits, uncontrouled independent
operations, with many other gay attendances. But in the beginning of the
Reformation, that fatal time for Idolatry and superstition, together with
Abbeys, and Monasteries, the zeal and learning of our forefathers, with the
help of Gods word, demolished this temple, and brake this building down to the
ground: in the rubbish whereof, we well hoped the Idol himself had been so
deeply buried, as that his head should never more have been exalted, to the
trouble of the Church of God: until not long since, some curious wits, whose
weak stomachs were clogged with Manna, and loathed the sincere milk of the
Word, raking all dunghils for novelties, lighted unhappily upon this Idol: and
presently, with no less joy then did the Mathematician at the discovery of a
new Geometrical proportion, exclaim we have found it, we have found it: and
without more ado, up they erected a shrine, and until this day continue
offering of praise and thanks for all the good they do, to this work of their
own hands.

And that the Idol may be free from ruin, to which in himself, they have
found by experience that he is subject; they have matched him to contingency, a
new goddess of their own creation. Who having proved, very fruitful in
monstrous births, upon their conjunctions; they nothing doubt, they shall ever
want one to set on the throne, and make president of all humane actions: so
that after he has with various success, at least twelve hundred years,
contended with the providence and grace of God: he, boasts now, as if he had
obtained a total victory. But yet all his prevailing, is to be attributed to
the diligence, and varnish of his new abetters, with (to our shame be it
spoken) the negligence of his adversaries: in him, and his cause, there is no
more real worth then was, when by the ancient Fathers he was exploded, and
cursed out of the Church: so that they, who can attain through the many
winding Labyrinths, of curious distinctions, to look upon the thing it self,
shall find that they have been, like Egyptian Novices, brought through many
stately Frontispieces and goodly Fabrics, with much show of zeal and
devotion, to the image of an ugly Ape.

Yet here observe, that we do not absolutely oppose Free Will, as if it were
nomen inane, a mere figment when there is no such thing in the world: but only
in that sense the Pelagians and Arminians do assert it. About words we will
not contend, we grant man in the substance of all his actions, as much power,
liberty and freedom, as a mere created nature is capable of: We grant him to
be free in his choice, from all outward coaction, or inward natural
necessity, to work according to election, and deliberation, spontaneously
embracing what seems good unto him: Now call this power, Free Will, or what
you please, so you make it not supreme, independent, and boundless, we are not
at all troubled. The imposition of names, depends upon the discretion of their
inventers. Again, even in spiritual things, we deny that our wills are at all
debarred, or deprived of their proper liberty: but here we say indeed, that we
are not properly free, until the Son make us free: no great use of freedom,
in that, wherein we can do nothing at all: we do not claim such a liberty,
as should make us despise the grace of God, Homo non liberate gratiam, sed
gratia libertatem, ass^quitur: Aug.
whereby we may attain true liberty indeed, which adds to, but takes
nothing from our original freedom. But of this, after I have showed what an
Idol the Arminians make of Free Will: only take notice in the entrance, that
we speak of it now, not as it was at first, by God created, but as it is now,
by sin corrupted: yet being considered in that estate also, they ascribe more
unto it, then it was ever capable of: as it now stands, according to my
formerly proposed method, I shall show, first, what-inbred native virtue they
ascribe unto it, and with how absolute a dominion, and sovereignty, over all
our actions, they endow it: secondly, what power they say it has, in preparing
us for the grace of God: thirdly, how effectually operative it is, in receiving
the said grace: and with how little help thereof, it accomplisheth the great
work of our conversion: all briefly with so many observations, as shall
suffice to discover their proud errors in each particular.

Libertas Arbitrii consistit in eo, quod homo, positis omnibus requisitis ad
volendum, indifferens tamen, sit, ad volendum vel nolendum hoc vel illud:
Armin. art. perpend. fol. 11.
Herein, says Arminius, consists the liberty of the will: that all things
required to enable it, to will any thing, being accomplished, it still remains
indifferent to will, or not, and all of them at the Synod: Voluntatem
comitatur proprietas quaedam inseperabilis quam libertatem vocamus: a qua
voluntas dicitur, potentia quae positis omnibus praerequisitis ad agendum
necessariis, potest velle, and nolle aut velle and non velle: Remon. in. act.
Synod. fol. 16.
There is, say they, accompanying the will of man, an inseparable property,
which we call liberty, from whence, the will is termed a power: which, when
all things prerequired as necessary to operation are fulfilled, may will any
thing, or not will it: that is, our free-wils have such an absolute, and
uncontrollable power, in the territory of all humane actions, that no influence
of Gods providence, no certainty of his decree, no unchangeablenesse of his
purpose, can sway it at all in its free determinations: or have any power with
his Highness, to cause him to will, or resolve, on any such act as God by him
intends to produce; take an instance, in the great work of our conversion:
Omnes irregeniti habent Lib. Arbit. and potentiam Spiritui Sancto resistendi:
gratiam Dei oblatam repudiandi, consilium Dei adversus se contemnendi,
Evangelium gratiae repudiandi, ei qui cor pulsat non ap^riendo: Armin. artic.
perpend.
All unregenerate men, says Arminius, have by virtue of their free will, a
power, of resisting the holy Spirit, of rejecting the offered grace of God, of
contemning the counsel of God, concerning themselves: of refusing the Gospel
of grace, of not opening the heart, to him that knocks: What a stout Idol is
this, whom neither the holy Spirit, the grace, and counsel of God, the calling
of the Gospel, the knocking at the door of the heart, can move at all, or in
the least measure, prevail against him: Woe be unto us then* if when Gods calls
us, our free will be not in good temper, and well disposed to hearken unto him:
for it seems, there is no dealing with it, by any other ways, though
powerful and Almighty. For Positis omnibus operationibus gratiae quibus Deus
in conversione nostri uti possit, manet tamen, conversio ita in nostra
potestate libera, ut possimus non converti: hoc est nosmet ipsos convertere vel
non convertere: Cor. ad Bog. fol 263.
grant (says Corvinus) all the operations of grace, which God can use, in our
conversion, yet conversion remains so, in our own free power, that we can be
not converted, that is, we can either turn or not turn our selves: where the
Idol plainly challenges the Lord to work his utmost; and tells him, that after
he has so done, he will do what he please: his infallible prescience, his
powerful predetermination, the moral efficacy of the Gospel, the infusion of
grace, the effectual operation of the holy Spirit; all are nothing: not at all
availeable in helping or furthering, our independent wills in their proceedings:
well then? in what estate, will you have the Idol placed? Non potest Deus Lib.
Arbit. integrum servare, nisi tam peccare hominem sineret quam been agere:
Corvin: ad Molin. cap. 6.
In such a one, wherein he may be suffered to sin, or to do well at his
pleasure, as the same Author intimates: it seems then as to sin, so nothing
is required, for him to be able to do good, but Gods permission? No? For
Semper Remonstrantes supponunt liberam obediendi potentiam, and non obediendi:
ut qui obediens est idcirco obediens censeatur, quia cum possit non obedire.
obedit tamen, and ^ contra: Rem. Apol. p 70.
the Remonstrants (as they speak of themselves) do always suppose a free
power, of obeying, or not obeying, as well in those who do obey, as in those
who do not obey: that he that is obedient, may therefore be counted obedient,
because he obeys, when he could, not obey; and so on the contrary: where, all
the praise of our obedience, whereby we are made to differ from others, is
ascribed to our selves alone, and that free power that is in us: now this they
mean, not of any one act of obedience, but of faith it self, and the whole
consummation thereof. Quod si quis dicat omnes in universum homines, habere
potentiam credendi si velint, and salutem consequendi: and hanc potentiam esse
naturae hominum divinitus collatam, quo tuo argumento cum confutabis? Armin.
Antip. fol. 272.
For if a man should say, that every man in the world of believing if he will,
and of attaining salvation, and that this power is, settled in his nature, What
Argument have you to confute him, says Arminius triumphantly to Perkins.

Where the sophistical Innovator, as plainly confounds grace and nature, as
ever did Pelagius: that then, which the Arminians claim here in behalf of
their free will, is an absolute independence on Gods providence, in doing any
thing, and of his grace, in doing that which is good. A selfe-sufficiencie in
all its operations, a plenarie indifferency, of doing what we will, this, or
that, as being neither determined to the one, nor inclined to the other, by any
overruling influence from heaven: so, that the good acts of our wills, have no
dependence on Gods providence, as they are acts, nor on his grace, as they are
good: but in both regards, proceed from such a principle within us, as is no
way moved by any superior Agents: Now the first of these, we deny unto our
wills, because they are created, and the second, because they are corrupted:
their creation hinders them from doing any thing of themselves, without the
assistance of Gods providence, and their corruption, of doing any thing that is
good without his grace: a selfe-sufficiencie for operation, without the
effectual motion of Almighty God, the first cause of all things, we can allow
neither to men, nor Angels, unless we intend, to make them Gods: and a power
of doing good, equal unto that they have of doing evil, we must not grant to
man by nature, unless we will deny the fall of Adam, and fancy our selves
still in Paradise: but let us consider these things apart.

First, I shall not stand to decipher the nature of humane liberty, which
perhaps would require a larger discourse, then my proposed Method will bear:
it may suffice, that according to my former intimation, we grant as large a
freedom and dominion to our wills, over their own acts, as a creature subject
to the supreme rule of Gods providence, is capable of: endued we are, with
such a liberty of will, as is free from all outward compulsion, and inward
necessity, having an elective faculty of applying it self, unto that which
seems good unto it: in which its free choice notwithstanding, it is
subservient to the decree of God, as I showed before, Chapter 4. Most free it
is in all its acts, both in regard of the object it chooses, and in regard of
that vital power, and faculty, whereby it works, infallibly complying with
Gods providence, and working by virtue of the motion thereof: but surely to
assert such a supreme independency, and every way unbounded indifferency, as
the Arminians claim, whereby all other things requisite being presupposed, it
should remain absolutely in our own power, to will, or not to will, to do
any thing, or not to do it, is plainly to deny that our wills are subject to
the rule of the most High. It is granted, that in such a chymaericall fancied
consideration of free will, wherein it is looked upon as having no relation to
any act of Gods, but only its creation, abstracting from his decree, it may be
said: to have such a liberty in regard of the object: but the truth is, this
divided sense, is plain nonsense, a mere fiction of such an estate, wherein
it never was, nor ever can be, so long as men will confess any Deity but
themselves, to whose determinations they must be subject: until then more
significant terms may be invented for this free power in our nature, which the
Scripture never once vouchsafed to name, I shall be content to call it with
Prosper, Lib. Arbit. est rei sibi placitae Spontaneus appetitus: Prosp. ad
Collat. cap. 18. p. 379.
a Spontaneous appetite of what seems good unto it; free from all compulsion,
but subservient to the providence of God: and against its exaltation, to this
height of independencie, I oppose.

First, every thing that is independent of any else in operation, is purely
active, and so consequently a God: for nothing but a divine will can be a pure
act, possessing such a liberty by virtue of its own essence: every created
will, must have a liberty by participation, which includes such an imperfect
potentiality, as cannot be brought into act, without some praemotion (as I may
so say) of a Superior Agent: neither does this motion being extrinsecall, at
all prejudice the true liberty of the will, which requires indeed, that the
internal principle of operation be active and free, but not, that, that
principle be not moved to that operation, by an outward Superior Agent:
nothing in this sense, can have an independent principle of operation, which
has not an independent being: it is no more necessary, to the nature of a free
cause, from whence a free action must proceed, that it be the first beginning
of it; then it is necessary to the nature of a cause, that it be the first
cause.

Secondly, if the free acts of our wills are so subservient, to the providence
of God, as that he uses them to what end he will, and by them effects many
of his purposes, then they cannot of themselves, be so absolutely independent
as to have in their own power, every necessary circumstance, and condition,
that thoy may use, or not use at their pleasure: Now the former is proved, by
all those reasons, and Texts of Scripture, I before produced, to show that the
providence of God overruleth the actions and determines the wills of men,
freely to do, that which he has appointed: and truly were it otherwise, Gods
dominion over the most things that are in the world, were quite excluded, he
had not power to determine, that any one thing, should ever come to pass,
which has any reference to the wills of men.

Thirdly, all the acts of the will, being positive entities, were it not
previously moved, by God himself, in whom we live, move, and have our being,
must needs have their essence and existence, solely from the will it self:
which is thereby made (...), a first and supreme cause, endued with an
underived being: and so much to that particular.

Let us now in the second place, look upon the power of our free will, in
doing that which is morally good: where we shall find not only an essential
imperfection, in as much as it is created, but also, a contracted defect, in as
much as it is corrupted: the ability which the Arminians ascribe unto it, in
this kinke, of doing that which is morally and spiritually good, is as large as
themselves will confess to be competent unto it, in the state of innocence:
even a power of believing, and a power of resisting the Gospel: of obeying, and
not obeying: of turning, or of not being converted.

The Scripture, as I observed before, has no such term at all, nor nothing
equivalent unto it: but the expressions it uses, concerning our nature and all
the faculties thereof, in this state of sin and unregeneration, seem to
imply the quite contrary: as that we are in bondage: Heb. 2. 15. dead in sin:
Ephesians. 2. 3. and so free from righteousness, Romans 6. servants of sin: ver.
16. under the reign and dominion thereof: verse. 12. all our members being
instruments of unrighteousness: verse. 13. Not free indeed, until the Son
make us free, so that this Idol of free will, in respect of spiritual things,
is not one whit better, then the other Idols of the heathen: Though it look
like silver and gold, it is the work of men's hands, it has a mouth, but it
speaks not, it has eyes but it sees not, it has ears but it hears not, a
nose but it smells not, it has hands, but it handles not, feet but it walks
not, neither speaks it through the throat, all they that made it, are like
unto it, and so is every one, that trusts in it: O Israel trust thou in the
Lord, etc. That it is the work of men's hands, or a humane invention, I showed
before: for the rest: it has a mouth, unacquainted with the mysteries of
godliness, full only of cursing and bitterness: Romans 3. 14. speaking great
swelling words: Jude verse. 16. great things and blasphemies: Revel. 13. 5. a
mouth causing the flesh to sin: Eccles. 6. 5. his eyes are blind, not able
to perceive those things that are of God, nor to know those things that are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. eyes before which there is no fear of
God: Romans 3. 18. his understanding is darkened, because of the blindness of
his heart, Ephesians. 4. 18. wise to do evil, but to do good, he has no
knowledge, Ierem. 4. 22. So that without farther light, all the world, is but a
mere darkness: John 1. 5. he has ears, but they are like the ears of the
deaf Adder, to the word of God, refusing to hear the voice of the Charmer,
charm he never so wisely, Psalm. 54. 8. being dead, when this voice first calls
it: John 5. 25. ears stopped, that they should not hear, Zach. 8. 11. heavy
ears, that cannot hear, Isa. 6. 10. a nose, to which the Gospel is the savor
of death, unto death: 2 Cor. 2. 16. hands full of blood, Isa. 1. 15. and
fingers defiled with iniquity, Chap. 59. 3. feet indeed, but like
Mephibosheth, lame in both by a fall, so that he cannot at all walk in the
path of goodness: but swift to shed blood, destruction and misery are in
their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, Romans 3. 15, 16, 17.
These and diverse other such endowments, and excellent qualifications, does the
Scripture attribute to this Idol, which it calls the old man, as I shall more
fully discover in the next Chapter: and is not this a goodly Reed whereon to
rely, in the paths of godliness? a powerful Deity, whereunto we may repair,
for a power to become the sons of God? and attaining eternal happiness? the
abilities of Free Will in particular, I shall consider hereafter, now only, I
will by one or two reasons show, that it cannot be the sole and proper cause,
of any truly good, and spiritual act well pleasing unto God.

First, all spiritual acts well pleasing unto God, as faith, repentance,
obedience, are supernatural: flesh and blood reveals not these things: not
of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man: but of the will
of God: John 1. 13. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and that which
is borne of the spirit, is spirit: John 3. 6. Now to the performance of any
supernatural act, it is required, that the productive power thereof be also
supernatural, for nothing has an activitie in causing above its own sphere,
nec imbelles generant feroces aquilas columbae: but our free will is a merely
natural faculty, betwixt which, and those spiritual supernatural acts, there
is no proportion, unless it be advanced above its own or be by inherent
habitual grace. Divine Theological virtues, differing even in the substance
of the act from those moral performances about the same things, to which the
strength of nature may reach, (for the difference of acts, arises from their
formal objects, which to both these are diverse) must have another principle
and cause, above all the power of nature: in civil things, and actions morally
good, in as much as they are subject to a natural perception, and do not
exceed the strength of our own wills, this faculty of Free Will may take
place, but yet, not without these following limitations. First, that it always
requires the general concurse of God, whereby the whole suppositum in which
Free Will has its subsistence, may be sustained: Matthew. 10. 29. 30. Secondly,
that we do all these things imperfectly and with much infirmity, every degree
also of excellency, in these things must be counted a special gift of God:
Isa. 26. 12. Thirdly, that our wills are determined by the will of God, to all
their acts and motions in particular: but to do that which is spiritually
good, we have no knowledge, no power.

Secondly, that concerning which, I gave one special instance, in whose
production the Arminians attribute much to Free Will, An ulla actio S. S.
immediata in mentem aut voluntatem, necessaria sit, aut in Scriptura
promittatur ad hoc, ut quis credere possit verbo extrinsecus proposito,
negativam tuebimur: Episcop. disput. private.
is Faith; this they affirm (as I showed before) to be inbred in nature,
every one having in him from his birth, a natural power to believe in Christ
and his Gospel: for Episcopius denies, that any action of the holy Spirit, upon
the understanding, or will, is necessary, or promised in the Scripture, to
make a man able to believe the word preached unto him: So that it seems, every
man has at all times, a power to believe, to produce the act of faith, upon
the revelation of its object, which gross Pelagianisme is contrary.

First, to the doctrine of the Church of England, affirming that a man cannot
so much as prepare himself, by his own strength to faith and calling upon
God, until the grace of God by Christ, prevent him that he may have a good
will: Artic.

Secondly, to the Scripture teaching that it is the work of God that we do
believe: Ioh. 6. 29. It is not of our selves, it is the gift of God: Ephesians. 2.
8. To some it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: Matthew,
13. 11. And what is peculiarly given to some, cannot be in the power of every
one: To you it is given on the behalf of Christ to believe on him, Phil. 1.
29. Faith is our access or coming unto Christ, which none can do, unless the
Father draw him, Ioh. 6. 44. and he so draws, or has mercy, on whom he will
have mercy, Romans 9. 19. and although Episcopius rejects any immediate action of
the holy Spirit, for the ingenerating of faith, yet Saint Paul affirms, that
there is no less effectual power required to it: then that which raised
Christ from the dead, which sure was an action of the Almighty Godhead. That
we may know, says he, what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward,
who believe according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. So that let the
Arminians say what they please, recalling that I write to Christians, I will
spare my labor of further proving, that faith is the free gift of God: and
their opposition to the truth of the Scripture in this particular, is so
evident to the meanest capacity, that there needs no recapitulation, to
present the sum of it to their understandings.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the power of Free Will, in preparing us for our conversion unto God.
THE judgment of the Arminians, concerning the power of Free Will about
spiritual things, in a man unregenerate, merely in the state of corrupted
nature, before and without the help of grace, may be laid open by these
following positions.

First, That every man in the world, reprobates and others, have in themselves
power and ability of believing in Christ, of repenting, and yielding, due
obedience to the new covenant, and that because they lost not this power by the
fall of Adam: Adamus post lapsum potentiam credendi^ retinuit, and reliqui
repro^i etiam in illo: G^evincho. ad Ames fol. 183
Adam after his fall, says Grevinchovius, retained a power of believing, and
so did all reprobates in him: Adamus non amisit vires eam obedientiam
praestandi, quae in novo faedere exigitur, prout puta ea consideratur
formaliter, hoc est, prout novo foedere exacta est, nec potentiam credendi
amisit, nec amisit potentia^, per resipisce^tiam, ex peccato resurgendi. Rem.
Declarat. sent. in Syn. p. 107.
he did not loose (as they speak at the Synod) the power of performing that
obedience, which is required in the new covenant considered formally, as it is
required by the new covenant, he lost not a power of believing, nor a power of
forsaking sin by repentance: and those graces that he lost not are still in our
power, whence they affirm, that Fides vocatur opus Dei, quia Deus ipse id a
nobis fieri postulat, Rem. Apol. cap. 10. page 112.
faith is called the work of God, only because he requires us to do it: now
having appropriated this power unto themselves, to be sure that the grace of
God be quite excluded, which before they had made needless, they teach

Secondly, That for the reducing of this power into act, that men may become
actual believers, there is no infused habit of grace, no spiritual vital
principle necessary for them, or bestowed upon them, but every one by the use
of his native endowments, do make themselves differ from others: Ea quae de
habituum infusione dicuntur ante omnem fidei actum, rejiciuntur a nobis, Epist.
ad Wall. fol. 67.
Those things which are spoken concerning the infusion of habits, before we can
exercise the act of faith, we reject, says the Epistle to the Walachrians:
Principium internum fidei a nobis in Evangelio requisitu^, esse habitum quenda^
divinitus infusum cujus vi ac efficacitate voluntas determinetur; hoc negavin,
Grevinchov. ad Ames. page 324.
That the internal principle of faith required in the Gospel, is a habit
divinely infused by the strength and efficacy whereof, the will should be
determined, I deny, says another of them. Well then? if we must grant, that
the internal vital principle, of a supernatural spiritual grace, is a mere
natural faculty not elevated by any divine habit? if it be not God that begins
the good work in us, but our own free-wils, let us see what more goodly stuff
will follow: one man by his own mere endeavors, without the aid of any
received gift, makes himself differ from another: Quid in eo positum est, quod
homo discriminare seipsum dicitur? nihil verius, qui fidem Deo praecipient^
habet, is discriminat se ab eo, qui Deo praecipienti fidem habere non vult,
Rem. Apol. cap. 14. page 144.
What matter is it in that, that a man should make himself differ from others?
there is nothing truer; he who yields faith, to God commanding him makes
himself differ from him, who will not have faith when he commands, they are
the words of their Apology: which without question, is an irrefragable truth,
if faith be not a gift received from above: for on that ground only the Apostle
proposes these questions, who made thee differ from another? or what have thou
that thou have not received? and if thou have received, why boasts thou as if
thou have not received? the sole cause why he denies any one by his own power
to make himself differ from another, is, because that wherein the difference
consists, is, received, being freely bestowed upon him: deny this, and I
confess the other will fall of it self. But until their authority, be
equal with the Apostles, they would do well to forbear the naked obtrusions
of assertions so contradictory to theirs; and so they would not trouble the
Church, let them take all the glory unto themselves, as does Ego meipsum
discerno, cum enim Deo ac divinae praedeterminationi resistere possem, non
restiti tamen, atqui in eo quid ni liceat mihi tanquam de meo gloriari? quod
enim potui Dei miserentis est, quod autem volui cum possem nolle, id meae
potestatis est, Grev. ad Ames. p. 253.
Grevinchovius: I make my self (says he) differ from another, when I do not
resist God and his divine predetermination, which I could have resisted, and
why may I not boast of this as of mine own, that I could, is of Gods mercy,
(endowing his nature with such an ability, as you heard before) but that I
would, when I might have done otherwise, is of mine power. Now when after all
this, they are forced to confess some Evangelicall grace, though consisting
only in a moral persuasion, by the outward preaching of the word, they teach,

Thirdly, That God sends the Gospel, and reveals Christ Jesus unto men,
according as they well dispose themselves for such a blessing: Interdum Deus
hanc vel illam gentem civitate^ personam ad Evangelicae gratiae communionem
vocat, quam ipse dignam pronuntiat comparative, etc. Rem. Declarat sent. Synod.
Sometimes (say they in their Synodicall writings) God calls this or that
nation, people, city, or person, to the communion of Evangelicall grace, whom
he himself pronounces worthy of it, in comparison of others: So that whereas
Acts 18. 10. God encourages Paul to preach at Corinth by affirming that he had
much people in that city (which doubtless were his people then, only by
virtue of their election) in these men's judgments? Illi, in quorum gratiam,
dominus Paulum in Corinthum misit, dicuntur Dei populus, quia Deum tum timebant
eique, secundum cognitionem quam de eo habebant, serviebant ex animo, et sic ad
praedicationem Pauli etc. Corv. 3. sect. 27.
they were called so, because that even then they feared God, and served him
with all their hearts, according to that knowledge they had of him, and so were
ready to obey the preaching of Saint Paul: strange doctrine? that men should
fear God, know him, serve him in sincerity, before they ever heard of the
Gospel, and by those means deserve that it should be preached unto them? this
is, that pleasing of God before faith that they plead for; Act. Synod. fol. 60.
That Per legem vel per piam educationem vel per institutionem -- per haec enim
hominem praeparati, and disponi ad credendum, planissimum est, Rem. act. Synod.
preparation and disposition to believe, which men attain by the Law, and
virtuous education: that Praecedit aliquid in peccatoribus, quo quamvis nondum
justificati sunt, digni efficiantur justificatione: Grevin. ad Am. page 434.
something which is in sinners, whereby though they are not justified, yet they
are made worthy of justification: for Tenendum est, veram conversionem
praestationemque bonorum operum esse conditionem praerequisitam ante
justificationem, Filii. Arm. praef. ad cap. 7. ad Rem.
conversion and the performance of good works, is in their apprehension a
condition prerequired to justification, for so speak the children of Arminius:
which which if it be not an expression, not to be paralelled in the writings of
any Christian, I am something mistaken: the sum of their doctrine then in
this particular concerning the power of Free Will, in the state of sin, and
unregeneration, is, That every man having a native inbred power, of believing
in Christ, upon the revelation of the Gospel, has also an ability of doing so
much good, as shall procure of God, that the Gospel be preached unto him, to
which, without any internal assistance of grace, he can give assent and yield
obedience: the preparatory acts of his own will, always proceeding so far,
as to make him excel others, who do not perform them, and are therefore
excluded from further grace. Which is more gross Pelagianisme then Pelagius
himself would ever justify: wherefore, we reject all the former positions, as
so many monsters in Christian Religion, in whose room we assert these that
follow.

First, That we being by nature dead in trespasses and sins, have no power to
prepare our selves, for the receiving of Gods grace: nor in the least measure
to believe, and turn our selves unto him. Not that we deny, that there are any
conditions, prerequired in us for our conversion, dispositions preparing us in
some measure for our new birth or regeneration, but we affirm that all these
also, are the effects of the grace of God, relating to that alone as their
proper cause, for of our selves, Without him we can do nothing, Ioh. 15. 15. We
are not able of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
much less do that which is good, in respect of that, every one of our mouths
must be stopped, for we have all sinned and come short of the glory of God,
Romans 5. 19. 23. We are by nature the children of wrath, dead in trespasses and
sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. Romans 8. 9. our new birth is a resurrection from death,
wrought by the greatness of Gods power: and what ability I pray has a dead
man, to prepare himself for for his resurrection? can he collect his scattered
dust, or renew his perished senses? If the Leopard can change his spots, and
the Ethiopian his skin, then can we do good who (by nature) are taught to do
evil, Ierem. 13. 23. we are all ungodly, and without strength considered when
Christ died for us, Romans 5. 6. wise to do evil, but to do good, we have no
strength, no knowledge. Yea, all the faculties of our souls, by reason of that
spiritual death under which we are detained by the corruption of nature, are
altogether useless in respect of any power, for the doing of that which is
truly good; our understandings are blind or darkened, being alienated from the
life of God, through the ignorance that is in us, because of the blindness of
our hearts, Ephesians. 4. 18. whereby we become even darkness it self, Chap. 5.
8. so void is the understanding of true knowledge, that the natural man
receives not the things that are of God, they are foolishness unto him, 1
Cor. 2. 14. nothing but confounded and amazed at spiritual things, and if he
does not mock, can do nothing but wonder, and say, what means this, Act. 2.
12, 13. Secondly, we are not only blind in our understandings, but captives
also to sin in our wills, Luke 4. 18. Whereby we are servants to sin, John
8. 34. Free only in our obedience to that Tyran, Romans 6. Yea, thirdly, all our
affections are wholly corrupted, for every imagination of the thoughts of the
heart of man is evil continually, Genes. 6. 5. While we are in the flesh, the
motions of sin do work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death:
Romans 7. 5.

These are the endowments of our nature, these are the preparations of our
hearts for the grace of God, which we have within our selves. Nay,

Secondly, there is not only an impotencie, but an enmity in corrupted
nature, to any thing spiritually good. The things that are of God, are
foolishness unto a natural man: 1 Cor. 2. 14. And there is nothing that men
do more hate, and contemn, then that which they account as folly. They mock
at it, as a ridiculous drunkenness, Act. 2. 13. And would to God our days,
yielded us not too evident proofs, of that universal opposition, that is
between light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, Nature and Grace, that we
could not see every day the prodigious issues of this inbred corruption,
swelling over all bounds, and breaking forth into a contempt of the Gospel, and
all ways of godliness. So true it is, that the carnal mind is enmity
against God, it is not subject unto his law, neither indeed can it be: Romans 8.
7. So that,

Thirdly, as a natural man by the strength of his own freewill, neither
knows, nor wills, so it is utterly impossible he should do any thing
pleasing unto God. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots, then can he do good: Jeremy 13. An evil tree cannot bring forth good
fruit, without faith it is impossible to please God: Heb. 11. 6. And that is
not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. So that though Almighty
God, according to the unsearchablenesse of his wisdom, works diverse ways,
and in sundry manners, for the translating of his chosen ones, from the power
of darkness to his mavelous light, calling some powerfully in the midst
of their march in the ways of ungodliness, as he did Paul, preparing others,
by outward means, and helps of common restraining grace, moralizing nature
before it be gotten anew by the immortal seed of the Word, yet this is
certain, that all good in this kind, is from his free grace, there is nothing
in our selves, as of our selves, but sin: yea, and all those previous
dispositions, wherewith our hearts are prepared by virtue of common grace, do
not at all enable us to concur by any vital operation, with that powerful
blessed renewing grace of regeneration, whereby we become the sons of God.
Neither is there any disposition unto grace so remote, as that possibly it can
proceed from a mere faculty of nature, for every such disposition, must be of
the same order with the form that is to be introduced, but Nature in respect
of Grace, is a thing of an inferior allay, between which there is no
proportion: a good use of gifts, may have a promise of an addition of more,
provided it be in the same kind. There is no rule, law, or promise, that
should make grace due, upon the good use of natural endowments. But you will
say, here I quite overthrow Free Will, which before I seemed to grant; to which
I answer: That in regard of that object, concerning which now we treat, a
natural man has no such thing as Free Will at all, if you take it for a power
of doing that which is good and well pleasing unto God in things spiritual,
for an ability, of preparing our hearts unto faith and calling upon God, as
our Church Article speaks, a homebred selfe-sufficiencie, preceding the
change of our wills by the Almighty grace of God, whereby any good should be
said to dwell in us, and we utterly deny that there is any such thing in the
world. The will, though in it self radically free, yet in respect of the term
or object, to which in this regard it should tend, is corrupted, enthralled,
and under a miserable bondage, tied to such a necessity of sinning in
general, that though unregenerate men are not restrained to this, or that
sin in particular, yet for the maine, they can do nothing but sin. All
their actions wherein there is any morality, are attended with iniquity, an
evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, even the sacrifice of the wicked, is
an abomination to the Lord. These things being thus cleared from the Scripture,
the former Arminian positions will of themselves fall to the ground, having no
foundation but their own authority, for any pretense of proof they make none
from the word of God. The first two I considered in the last Chapter, and now
add only concerning the third, That the sole cause why the Gospel is sent
unto some, and not unto others, is not any dignity, worth, or desert of it in
them to whom it is sent, more then in the rest, that are suffered to remain in
the shadow of death, but only the sole good pleasure of God, that it may be a
subservient means for the execution of his Decree of Election. I have much
people in this city: Acts 20. I thank thee Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them unto babes, even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight: Mat. 11.
25, 26. So that the Arminian opposition to the truth of the Gospel in this
particular, is clearly manifest.

S. S.
Of our selves we can do nothing, John 15. 5. We are not able of our selves to
think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor. 3. 5. We are by nature children of
wrath, dead in trespasses and sins: Ephesians. 2. 1. Faith is not of our selves, it
is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. Who makes thee differ from another? or what have
thou, that thou have not received? and if thou have received, why boastest
thou, as if thou had not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7 If the Leopard can change his
spots, and the Ethiopian his skin, then can ye do good who are taught to do
evil: Ier. 13. 23. Believing on him who justifies the ungodly: Romans 4. 5.
Being justified freely by his grace, Romans 3. 24. I thank thee Father Lord of
heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent and
revealed them babes; even so O Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight: Mat.
11. 25. 26.
Lib. Arbit.
We retain still after the fall, a power of believing, and of repentance,
because Adam lost not this ability: Rem. Declarat. Sen. in Syn. Faith is said
to be the work of God, because he commands us to perform it: Rem. Apol.
There is no infusion of any habit or spiritual vital principle necessary to
enable a man to believe: Corvin. There is nothing truer then that one man
makes himself differ from another: he who believes, when God commands,
makes himself differ from him who will not: Rem. Apol. I may boast of mine
own, when I obey Gods grace, which it was in my power not to obey, as well as
to obey: Grevinch. True conversion and the performance of good works, is a
condition required on our part before justification: Filii Armin. God sends
the Gospel to such persons or Nations, that in comparison of others, may be
said to be worthy of it: Rem. Apol.


CHAP. XIIII.
Of our conversion to God.
HOw little or nothing at all it is that the Arminians assign to the grace of
God, in performing the great work of our Conversion, may plainly appear from
what I have showed already, that they ascribe to our own free will: So that I
shall briefly pass that over, which otherwise is so copiously delivered in
holy Scripture, that it would require a far larger discussion. A prolixe
confirmation of the truth we profess, will not suit so well with my intention,
which is merely to make a discovery of their errors, by not knowing the depths
whereof, so many are deceived and inveigled.

Two things in this great conjunction of grace and nature, the Arminians
ascribe unto Free Will: First, a power of cooperation and working with grace,
to make it at all effectual. Secondly, a power of resisting its operation, and
making it altogether in effectual: God in the mean time bestowing no grace,
but what awaits an act issuing from one of these two abilities, and has its
effect accordingly. If a man will cooperate, then grace attaines its end; if
he will resist, it returns empty. To this end they feign all the grace of
God bestowed upon us, for our conversion, to be but a moral persuasion by his
word, not an infusion of a new vital principle by the powerful working of the
holy Spirit. And indeed granting this, I shall most willingly comply with them,
in assigning to Free Will one of the endowments before recited, a power of
resisting the operation of grace: but instead of the other, must needs ascribe
to our whole corrupted nature, and every one that is partaker of it, an
universal disabilitie of obeying it, or coupling in that work which God by
his grace does intend. If the grace of our conversion be nothing but a moral
persuasion, we have no more power of obeying it, in that estate wherein we are
dead in sin, then a man in his grave has in himself to live a new, and come
out at the next call. Gods promises, and the Saints prayers in the holy
Scripture, seem to design such a kind of grace, as should give us a real
internal ability of doing that which is spiritually good? but it seems there
is no such matter: for if a man should persuade me to leap over the Thames, or
to fly in the Air, be he never so eloquent, his sole persuasion makes me no
more able to do it, then I was before ever I saw him. If Gods grace be nothing
but a sweet persuasion (though never so powerful) it is a thing extrinsecall,
consisting in the proposal of a desired object, but gives us no new strength
at all, to do any thing we had not before a power to do. But let us hear
them pleading themselves to each of these particulars concerning Grace and
Nature; and first for the nature of Grace.

God has appointed to save believers by grace, that is a soft and sweet
persuasion, convenient and agreeing to their free will, and not by any Almighty
action, says Deus statuit salvare crede^tes per gratia^, id est Ienem ac
suavem liberoque ipsorum arbit^io convenientem seu congruam suasionem, non per
omnipotentem actionem seu motionem: Armin. Antip. fol. 211.
Arminius. It seems something strange, that the carnal mind being enmity
against God, and the will inthralled to sin, and full of wretched opposition
to all his ways, yet God should have no other means to work them over unto
him, but some persuasion that is sweet, agreeable and congruous unto them, in
that estate wherein they are: and a small exaltation it is of the dignity and
power of grace, when the chief reason why it is effectual, as Alvarez
observes, may be reduced to a well digested supper, or an indisturbed sleep,
whereby some men may be brought into better temper then ordinary, to comply
with this congruous grace. But let us for the present accept of this, and grant
that God does call some by such a congruous persuasion, at such a time, and
place, as he knows they will assent unto it. I ask whether God thus calls
all men, or only some? if all, why are not all converted? for the very
granting of it to be congruous, makes it effectual. If only some, then why
they and not others? Is it out of a special intention to have them obedient?
but let them take heed, for this will go near to establish the decree of
election: and out of what other intention it should be, Corvin. ad Molin.
they shall never be able to determine Wherefore Corvinus denies that any such
congruitie is required to the grace whereby we are converted, His ita expositis
ex mente Augustini, etc. Armin. Antip. de elec.
but only that it be a moral persuasion which we may obey if we will, and so
make it effectual. Yea and Arminius himself after he had defended it as far
as he was able, puts it off from himself, and falsely fathers it upon Saint
Austine. So that as they jointly affirm, Fatemur, allam nobis ad actum fidei
eliciendum necessariam gratiam non agnosci quam moralem^ Rem act. Synod. ad
art. 4.
they confess no grace for the begetting of faith to be necessary, but only
that which is moral: which Annuntiatio doctrinae Evangelicae, Popp. August.
port. fol. 110.
one of them interprets, to be a declaration of the Gospel unto us. Right
like their old Master Operatur in nobis velle quod bonum est, velle quod
sanctum est, dum nos terrenis cupiditatibus deditos mutorum more animalium,
tantummodo praesentia diligentes, futurae gloriae magnitudine and praemiorum
pollicitatione succendit: dum revelatione sapientiae in desideriu^ Dei
stupente^ suscitat voluntatem, dum nobis suadet omne quod bonum est. Pelag: ap:
Aug. de great. Chapter cap. 10.
Pelagius, God, says he, works in us to will that which is good, and to will
that which is holy whilst he stirs us up, with promise of rewards, and the
greatness of the future glory, who before were given over to earthly desires,
like bruit beasts loving nothing but things present, stirring up our stupid
wills to a desire of God, by a revelation of wisdom, and persuading us to all
that is good. Both of them affirm the grace of God, to be nothing but a moral
persuasion working by the way of powerful, convincing arguments, but yet
herein Pelagius seems to ascribe a greater efficacy to it, then the
Arminians, granting that it works upon us, when after the manner of bruit
beasts, we are set merely on earthly things: but these, as they confess, that
Vt autem assensus hic eliciatur in nobis, duo in primis necessaria sunt. 1.
Argumenta talia ex part: Dei, quibus nihil very similiter opponi potest cur
credibilia non sint. 2. Pia dociti^as animique probitas: Rem decla. cap. 17.
sect. 1.
for the production of faith, it is necessary that such arguments be proposed
on the part of God, to which nothing can probably be opposed, why they should
not seem credible: so there is (say they) required on our part, a pious
docilitie and probitie of mind. So that all the grace of God bestowed on us,
consists in persuasive arguments out of the word, which if they meet with
teachable minds, may work their conversion.

Secondly, having thus extenuated the grace of God, they affirm, Vt gratia sit
efficax in actu secundo pandet a libera voluntate: Rem. Apol. fol. 164.
That in operation the efficacy thereof depends on Freewill, so the
Remonstrants in their Apology. And Imo ut confidentius agam, dico effectum
gratiae, ordinaria lege, pendere ab actu aliquo arbitrii: Grevin. a Ames. p.
198.
to speak confidently, says Grevinchovius, I say, that the effect of grace,
in an ordinary course depends on some act of our free will. Suppose then that
of two men made partakers of the same grace, that is, have the Gospel preached
unto them by the same means, one is converted, and the other is not; What may
be the cause of this so great a difference? Was there any intention or purpose
in God, that one should be changed rather then the other? No: He equally
desires and intends the conversion of all and every one. Did then God work
more powerfully in the heart of the one, by his holy Spirit then of the other?
No: The same operation of the spirit always accompanies the same preaching of
the word. But was not one by some Almighty action, made partaker of real
infused grace, which the other attained not unto? No: for that would destroy
the liberty of his will, and deprive him of all the praise of believing. How
then came this extreme difference of effects? Who made the one differ from the
other, or what has he, that he did not receive? Why all this proceeds merely
from the strength of his own free will, yielding obedience to Gods gracious
invitation, which like the other he might have rejected. This is the immediate
cause of his conversion, to which all the praise thereof is due. And here the
old Idol may glory to all the world, that if he can but get his worshippers to
prevail in this, he has quite excluded the grace of Christ, and made it nomen
inane, a mere title, whereas there is no such thing in the world.

Thirdly, they teach, That notwithstanding any purpose and intention of God to
convert, and so to save a sinner, notwithstanding the most powerful and
effectual operation of the blessed spirit, with the most winning persuasive
preaching of the word, yet it is in the power of a man, to frustrate that
purpose, resist that operation, and reject that preaching of the Gospel. I
shall not need to prove this, for it is that, which in direct terms they
plead for: which also they must do, if they will comply with their former
principles. For granting all these to have no influence upon any man, but by
the way of moral persuasion, we must not only, grant that it may be resisted,
but also utterly deny, that it can be obeyed. We may resist it I say, as having
both a disability to good, and repugnancie against it: but for obeying it,
unless we will deny all inherent corruption and depravation of nature, we
cannot attribute any such sufficiency unto our selves.

Now concerning this weakness of grace, that it is not able to overcome the
opposing power of sinful nature, one testimony of Arminius shall suffice,
Manet semper in potestate Lib. Arbit. gratiam datam rejicere and subsequentem
repudiare, quae gratia non est omnipotens Dei, action cui resisti a libero
hominis arbitrio non possit. Armin. Antip: fol. 243:
It always remains in the power of Free Will, to reject grace that is given,
and to refuse that which follows, for grace is no Almighty action of God to
which Free Will cannot resist. Not that I would assert in opposition to this,
such an operation of grace, as should as it were, violently overcome the will
of man, and force him to obedience, which must needs be prejudicial unto our
liberty: but only consisting in such a sweet effectual working, as does
infallibly promote our conversion, make us willing, who before were unwilling:
and obedient, who were not obedient, that creates clean hearts, and renews
right spirits within us.

That then which we assert in opposition to these Arminian Heterodoxies is,
that the effectual grace which God uses in the great work of our conversion,
by reason of its own nature, being also the instrument of, and Gods intention
for that purpose, does surely produce the effect intended; without successful
resistance, and solely, without any considerable cooperation of our own wills,
until they are prepared and changed by that very grace. The infallibility of
its effect depends chiefly on the purpose of God, when by any means he
intends a man's conversion, those means must have such an efficacy added unto
them, as may make them fit instruments for the accomplishment of that
intention: that the counsel of the Lord may prosper, and his word not return
empty. But the manner of its operation, that it requires no humane assistance,
and is able to overcome all repugnance, is proper to the being of such an act,
as wherein it does consist. Which nature and efficacy of grace, in opposition
to an indifferent influence of the holy Spirit, a metaphorical motion, a
working by the way of moral persuasion, only proposing a desirable object,
easy to be resisted, and not effectual unless it be helped by an inbred
ability of our own, which is the Arminian grace, I will briefly confirm,
having promised these few things.

First, although God does not use the wills of men in their conversion, as
malign Spirits use the members of men in enthusiasmes, by a violently wrested
motion, but sweetly and agreeably to their own free nature; yet in the first
act of our conversion, the will is merely passive, as a capable subject of
such a work, not at all concurring co-operatively to our turning. It is not, I
say, the cause of the work, but the subject wherein it is wrought, having only
a passive capabilitie for the receiving of that supernatural being which is
introduced by grace. The beginning of this good work is merely from God,
Phil. 1. 6. Yea faith is ascribed unto grace, not by the way of conjunction
with, but of opposition unto our wills: not of our selves, it is the gift of
God: Ephesians. 2. 8. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, our sufficiency is
of God: 2 Cor. 3. 5. Turn thou me, O Lord, and I shall be turned.

Secondly, though the will of man conferreth nothing to the infusion of the
first grace, but a subjective receiving of it, yet in the very first act, that
is wrought in and by the will, it most freely co-operateth (by the way of
subordination) with the grace of God: and the more effectually it is moved by
grace, the more freely it works with it. Man being converted, converteth
himself.

Thirdly, we do not affirm grace to be irresistible, as though it came upon
the will, with such an overflowing violence, as to beat it down before it,
and subdue it by compulsion to what it is no way inclinable; but if that term
must be used, it denotes in our sense, only such an unconquerable efficacy
of grace, as always and infallibly produces its effect. For, Who is it that
can withstand God? Acts 11. 17. As also it may be used on the part of the will
it self, which will not resist it: all that the Father gives unto Christ will
come unto him: Ioh. 6. 37. The operation of grace is resisted by no hard heart,
because it mollifies the heart it self. It does not so much take away a power
of resisting, as give a will of obeying, whereby the powerful impotencie of
resistance, is removed.

Fourthly, Concerning grace it self, it is either common, or special: common
or general grace, consists in the external revelation of the will of God by
his word, with some illumination of the mind to perceive it, and correction of
the affections, not to much to contemn it: and this in some degree or other,
to some more to some less, is common to all that are called: special grace,
is the grace of regeneration comprehending the former, adding more spiritual
acts, but especially presupposing the purpose of God, on which its efficacy
does chiefly depend.

Fifthly, This saving grace, whereby the Lord converteth or regenerateth a
sinner, translating him from death to life, is either external or internal,
external consists in the preaching of the word, etc. whose operation is by
the way of moral persuasion, when by it we beseech our hearers in Christ's
stead, that they would be reconciled unto God, 2 Corinthians. 5. 20. and this in
our conversion is the isntrumental organ thereof: and may be said to be a
sufficient cause of our regeneration, in as much, as no other in the same kind
is necessary: it may also be resisted in sensa diviso, abstracting from that
consideration, wherein it is looked on as the instrument of God for such an end.

Sixthly, internal grace, is by Divines distinguished into the first, or
preventing grace, and the second following cooperating grace, the first is that
spiritual, vital principle that is infused into us by the holy Spirit, that
new creation, and bestowing of new strength, whereby we are made fit and able
for the producing of spiritual acts to believe and yield Evangelicall
obedience: For we are the workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, Ephesians. 2. 10. By this God gives us a new heart, and a new spirit he
puts within us, he takes the stony hearts out of our flesh, and gives us a
heart of flesh, he puts his spirit within us, to cause us to walk in his
statues, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.

Now this first grace is not properly and formally a vital act, but causaliter
only, in being a principle moving to such vital acts within us. It is, the
habit of faith bestowed upon a man, that he may be able to elicate and perform
the acts thereof; giving new light to the understanding, new inclinations to
the will, and new affections unto the heart. For the infallible efficacy of
which grace, it is that we plead against the Arminians, and amongst those
innumerable places of holy Scripture confirming this truth, I shall make use
only of a very few reduced to these three heads.

First, Our conversion is wrought by a divine Almighty action, which the will
of man will not, and therefore cannot resist: the impotency thereof, ought not
to be opposed to this omnipotent grace, which will certainly effect the work,
for which it is ordained: being an action not inferior to the greatness of
his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead,
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. and shall not that power which could overcome hell, and loose
the bonds of death, be effectual for the raising of a sinner, from the death
of sin, when by Gods intention it is appointed unto that work. He
accomplisheth the work of faith with power: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. It is his divine
power, that gives unto us all things that appertain to life and godliness: 2
Pet. 1. 3. surely a moral resistible persuasion, would not be thus often
termed the power of God, which denotes an actual efficacy, to which no
creature is able to resist.

Secondly, That which consists in a real efficiency, and is not at all, but
when and where it actually works, what it intends, cannot without a
contradiction be said to be so resisted that it should not work, the whole
nature thereof consisting in such a real operation: Now that the very essence
of divine grace consists in such a formal act, may be proved by all those
places of Scripture, that affirm God by his grace, or the grace of God,
actually to accomplish our conversion: as Deuteronomy. 30. 6. And the Lord thy God
will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and all thy soul that thou may live. The circumcision
of our hearts, that we may love the Lord with all our hearts, and with all our
souls, is our conversion, which the Lord affirms here, that he himself will
do: not only enable us to do it, but he himself really and effectually will
accomplish it: And again, I will put my Law into them, and write it in their
hearts, Ierem. 31. 33. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me, Chap. 32. 39. he will not offer his fear unto them, but
actually put it into them, and most clearly, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also
will I give you, a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take the stony
heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh: and I will put
my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. Are these
expressions of a moral persuasion only? does God affirm here he will do,
what he intends only to persuade us to? and which we may refuse to do if we
will? is it in the power of a stony heart to remove it self? what an active
stone is this in mounting upwards? what does it at all differ from that heart
of flesh that God promises? shall a stony heart be said to have a power to
change it self into such a heart of flesh as shall cause us to walk in Gods
Statutes? Surely, unless men were wilful blind, they must needs here perceive
such an action of God denoted, as effectually, solely, and infallibly works
our conversion, opening our hearts that we may attend unto the word, Acts 16.
14. Granting us on the behalf of Christ to believe in him, Philip. 1. 29. Now
these and the like places prove, both the nature of Gods grace to consist in a
real efficiency, and the operation thereof to be certainly effectual.

Thirdly, our conversion is a new creation, a resurrection, a new birth. Now he
that creates a man, does not persuade him to create himself, neither can he
if he should, nor has he any power to resist him that will create him, that
is, as we now take it, translate him from some thing that he is, to what he is
not. What arguments do you think were sufficient to persuade a dead man to
rise? or what great aid can he contribute to his own resurrection? neither does
a man beget himself, a new real form was never yet introduced into any
matter by subtle arguments. These are the terms the Scripture is pleased to
use concerning our conversion: If any man be in Christ he is a new creature, 2
Cor. 5. 17. The new man after God is created in righteousness and holiness,
Ephesians. 4. 24. it is our new birth, Except a man be borne again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 3. Of his own will begat he us with the word of
truth, Iam. 1. 18. and so we become borne again, Not of corruptible seed, but
of incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet.
1. 23. it is our vivification and resurrection, The son quickens whom he
will, Ioh. 5. 21. even those dead who hear his voice and live, verse. 25. When
we were dead in sins we are quickened together with Christ by grace, Ephesians. 2.
5. For being buried with him by Baptism, we are also risen with him through
the faith of the operation of God, Coloss. 2. 12. and blessed, and holy is he
that has part in that first resurrection, on such the second death has no
power, but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with
him a thousand years.

(...).

