THE LABOVRING SAINTS Dismission to REST.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL of the Right Honorable HENRY IRETON Lord
Deputy of IRELAND: In the Abbey Church at Westminster, the 6th. day of February
1651.

BY JOHN OWEN, Minister of the Gospel.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.



LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for Philemon Stephens, at the Gilded
Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

To THE HONORABLE, And my very worthy friend Colonel HENRY CROMWELL.
SIR,
THe ensuing Sermon was preached upon as sad an occasion, as on any particular
account has been given to this Nation in this our Generation. It is now
published, as at the desire of very many who love the savor of that perfume
which is diffused with the memory of the Noble person peculiarly mentioned
therein: so also upon the requests of such others, as enables me justly to
entitle the doing of it, Obedience. Being come abroad, it was in my thoughts to
have directed it immediately in the first place to Her, who of any individual
person was most nearly concerned in Him. But having observed how near she
has been to be swallowed up of sorrow, and what slow progress, he who took
care to seal up instruction to her soul by all dispensations, has given her
hitherto toward a conquest thereof: I was not willing to offer directly a new
occasion unto the multitude of her perplexed thoughts about this thing. No
doubt, her loss being as great as it could be upon the account of one subject
to the law of mortality, as many grains of grief and sorrow are to be allowed
her in the balance of the Sanctuary, as God does permit to be laid out and
dispended about any of the sons of men. He who is able to make sweet the
bitterest, waters, and to give a gracious issue to the most grievous trial,
will certainly, in due time, eminently bring forth that good upon her spirit,
which he is causing all these things to work together for. In the mean time,
Sir, these lines are to you: Your near relation to that rare example of
Righteousness, Faith, Holiness, Zeal, Courage, Self-denial, Love to his
Country, Wisdom and Industry, mentioned in the ensuing Sermon, the mutual
tender affection between you whilst he was living; your presence with him in
his last trial and conflict, the deserved regard you bear to his worth and
memory; your design of looking into, and following after his steps and purpose
in the work of God in his Generation, as such an accomplished pattern, as few
ages have produced the like; with many other reasons of the like nature, did
easily induce me hereunto. That which is here printed is but the notes I first
took, not having had leisure since to give them a serious perusal, and upon
that account, must beg a candid interpretation unto any thing that may appear
not so well digested therein as might be expected. I have not any thing to
express concerning your self, but only my desire's that your heart may be fixed
to the Lord God of your fathers, and that in the midst of all your
Temptations and Oppositions wherewith your pilgrimage will be attended, you may
be carried on and established in your inward subjection unto, and outward
contending for the Kingdom of the dearly beloved of our souls; not fainting,
or waxing weary until you receive your dismission to rest, for your lot in the
end of the days.

SIR, Your most humble and affectionate servant JOHN OWEN. Ox. Chapter Chapter
April. 2d.
THE LABORING SAINTS Dismission to REST:
DAN. 12. 13. But go thou thy way till the end be, for thou shall rest, and
stand in the lot at the end of the days.
THe words of my text having no dependence (as to their sense and meaning, but
only as to the occasion of them) on the Verses foregoing, I shall not at all
look backward into the Chapter, but fall immediately upon them, that I be not
hindered from my principal Intendment; being unwilling to detein you long,
though willing to speak a word from the Lord, to such a Congregation gathered
together by such an eminent Act of the Providence of God.

The words are the Lords dismission given to a most eminent servant, from a
most eminent Employment, wherein these four things are observable.

1 The dismission it self in the first words, Go thou thy ways. 2 The term
allotted for his continuance, under that dismission, until the end be. 3 His
state and condition under that dismission, for thou shall rest. 4 The utmost
issue of all this dispensation, both as to his foregoing labor, his dismission
and Rest following, stand in thy lot at the end of the days.
Go thou thy ways, etc.

In the first, I shall consider two things.

1 The person dismissed, (Thou) Go thou thy ways. 2 The dismission it self, Go
thou thy ways.
1 The person dismissed is Daniel, the Writer of this prophecy, who received
all the great visions of God mentioned therein, and I desire to observe
concerning him as to our purpose in hand, two things.

1 His Qualifications. Secondly, his Employment.

For the first, I shall only name some of them that were most eminent in him,
and they are three.

1 Wisdom. 2 Love to his people. 3 Uprightness and Righteousness in the
discharge of that high place whereunto he was advanced.

For the first, the holy Ghost bears ample Testimony thereunto, Dan. 1. 17,
20. As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in all
learning and wisdom, and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.

And in all matters of wisdom, and understanding that the King enquired of
them, he found them ten times better then all the Magicians and Astrologers
that were in all his Realm.

In all matters of wisdom, and understanding none in the whole Babylonian
Empire full of Wisemen and Artists, were to be compared unto Daniel and his
companions, and Ezekiel, 28. 3. rebuking the pride and arrogancy of Tyrus with
a bitter scorn, he says; Behold, Thou art wiser than Daniel, or thou think
thy self so, intimating that none in wisdom was to be compared unto him.

2 Love to his people. On this account was his most diligent enquiry into the
time of their deliverance, and his earnest contending with God upon the
discovery of the season, when it was to be accomplished, Cha. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Hence he is reckoned amongst them, who in their generation stood in the gap, in
the behalf of others, Noah, Daniel and Job. Hence God calls the people of the
Jews, his people, Chapter 9. 24 Seventy weeks are determined on thy people: the
people of thy Affections and desires, the people of whom thou art, and who are
so dear unto thee,

3 For his righteousness in discharging of his Trust and Office, you have the
joint testimony of God and Man: his high place and preferment you have; Chap.
6. 2. he was the first of the three Presidents who were set over the hundred
and twenty other Princes of the Provinces; and the Holy Ghost tells you that in
the discharge of this high Trust and great Employment, he was faithful to the
utmost, Verse 4. Then the Presidents and Princes sought to find occasion
against Daniel concerning the Kingdom, but they could find none occasion nor
fault: forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or fault
found in him. Which also his enemies confessed, Verse 3. Then said these men, we
shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him
concerning the Law of his God.

These qualifications I say amongst others were most eminent in this person,
who here received his dismission from his employment.

Secondly, there is his Employment it self, from which he is dismissed, and
herein I shall only observe these two things.

1 The nature of the Employment it self. 2 Some considerable Circumstances of
it.
For the first, it consisted in receiving from God, and holding out to others
clear and express Visions concerning Gods wonderful providentiall Alterations
in Kingdoms, and Nations, which were to be accomplished, from the days wherein
he lived, to the end of the World. All the Prophets together had not so many
clear discoveries, as this one Daniel concerning these things.

2 For the latter, this is observable, that all his Visions still close with
some eminent Exaltation of the Kingdom of Christ; that is the center where all
the lines of his Visions do meet, as is to be seen in the close almost of every
Chapter, and this was the great intendment of the Spirit in all those glorious
revelations unto Daniel, to manifest the subserviency of all civil revolutions
unto the interest of the Kingdom of the Lord Christ.

This then is the person concerning whom these words were used, and this was
his Employment.

2 There is his dismission it self, Go thou thy ways, Now this may be
considered two ways,

1 Singly, relating to his Employment only. 2 In reference to his Life also.
In the first sense, the Lord discharges Daniel from his further attendance on
him, in this way of receiving visions and Revelations concerning things that
were shortly to come to pass, although happily his portion might yet be
continued in the Land of the living: As if the Lord should say. Thou art an
inquiring man, thou art still seeking for further aquaintance with my mind in
these things, but content thy self, thou shall receive no more Visions; I will
now employ Haggai, Zechariah, and others, thou shall receive no more, but I
cannot close with this sense, for;

1 This is not the manner of God to lay aside those whom he has found
faithful in his service, men indeed do so, but God chaneth not: whom he has
begun to honor with any employment, he continues them in it, whilst they are
faithful to him.

2 Daniel was now above an 100 years old, as may be easily demonstrated by
comparing the time of his captivity, which was in the third year of the Reign
of Jehojakim, Chap. 1. 1. with the time of his writing this prophecy, which is
expressly said to be in the reign of Cyrus the King of Persia, Chap. 10. 1. and
therefore probably his end was very nigh; and after this you hear of him no
more; who had he lived many days, it had been his sin, not to have gone up to
Jerusalem, the decree of Cyrus giving liberty for a return being passed.

It is not then Gods laying him aside from his Office simply, but also his
intimation that he must shortly lay down his mortality, and so come into the
condition wherein he was to rest until the end; This then is his dismission,
he died in his work, life and employment go together, Go thou thy ways.

Obs. 1. There is an appointed season wherein the Saints of the most eminent
Abilities, in the most useful employment, must receive their dismission, be
their work of never so great importance, be their Abilities never so choice and
eminent, they must in their season receive their dismission.

Before I handle this Proposition, or proceed to open the following words, I
shall crave leave to bring the work of God, and the word of God, a little
close together, and lay the parallel betvveen the persons dismissed, the one in
our Text, the other in a present providence, which is very near, only that
the one lived not out half the days of the other.

Three personal qualifications we observed in Daniel, all which were very
eminent in the person of our desires.

1 Wisdom. There is a manifold wisdom, which God imparteth to the sons of
men; there is spiritual wisdom, that by the way of eminency is said to be
from above, Jam. 3. 17. which is nothing but the gracious Acquaintance of the
soul with the hidden wisdom of God in Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 7. and there is a
civil wisdom, or a sound ability of mind for the management of the affairs
of men in subordination to the Providence, and Righteousness of God. Though
both these were in Daniel, yet it is in respect of the latter that his wisdom
is so peculiarly extolled. And though I am very far from assuming to my self
the skill of judging of the Abilities of men, and would be far from holding
forth things of mere common report, yet, upon assured grounds I suppose this
gift of God, Ability of mind, and dextrous industry for the management of
humane Affairs may be ascribed to our departed friend.

There are sundry things that distinguish this wisdom from that policy which
God abhors, which is carnal, sensual and devilish, Jam. 3. 15. though it be
the great darling of the men of the world; I shall name one or two of them.

1 A gracious discerning of the mind of God, according to his appearance in
the Affairs wherein men are employed, Micah 6. 9. the Lords voice cries unto
the City, the man of wisdom shall see thy name, hear the rod, and who has
appointed it. It is the wisdom of a man, to see the name of God, to be
acquainted with his will, his mind, his aim in things, when his providentiall
voice cries to the City. All the works of God have their voice, have their
instruction: those of signal providence speak aloud, they cry to the City;
Here is the wisdom of a man, he is a man of substance, a substantial man,
that can see his name in such dispensations. This carnal policy enquires not
into, but is wholly swallowed up in the concatenation of things among
themselves, applying secondary causes unto events, without once looking to the
Name of God, like Swine following Acorns under the tree, not at all looking up
to the tree from whence they fall.

2 Such acquaintance with the seasons of Providence, as to know the duty of the
people of God in them, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. the children of Issachar, men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do: this it is indeed
to be a man of understanding, to know in any season the duty of Israel, that
they may walk up to Acceptance with God in the performance thereof. A thing
which is neither prescribed in the Rules, nor followed in the practice of men,
wise only with that cursed polity which God abhors: to have a mind suited
unto all seasons and tempers, so as to compass their own selfish ends, is the
utmost of their aim.

Now in both these did this gift of God shine in this deceased Saint.

1 He ever counted it his wisdom to look after the name of God, and the
testification of his will, in every dispensation of providence, wherein he was
called to serve: for this were his wakings, watchings, enquiries; when that was
made out, he counted not his business half done, but even accomplished, and
that the issue was ready at the door; not what says this man, or what says
that man, but what says the Lord? that being evident; he consulted not with
flesh and blood, and the wisdom of it, (whereof perhaps, would he have leaned
to it, he was as little destitute as any in his Generation, I mean the whole
wisdom of a man.) The Name of God was as land in every storm, in the discovery
whereof, he had as happy an eye at the greatest seeming distance when the
clouds were blackest, and the waves highest, as any.

2 Neither did he rest here: what Israel ought to do, in every season, was also
his enquiry; some men have a wisdom to know things, but not seasons in any
measure; surely a thing in season, is no less beautiful then a word in
season: as apples of gold in pictures of silver: there are few things which
belong to civil affairs, but are alterable upon the incomprehensible variety
of circumstances. These alter and change the very nature of them, and make them
good or bad, that is useful or destructive. He that will have the garment that
was made for him one year, serve him and fit him the next, must be sure that he
neither increase nor vvane. Importune insisting on the most useful things,
without respect to alterations of seasons, is a sad sign of a narrovv heart.
He of whom we speak, was wise to discern the seasons, and performed things,
when both themselves, and the vvayes of carrying them on were excellently
suited unto all coincidences of their season. And indeed, what is most wisely
proposed in one season, may be most foolishly pursued in another. It had been
wisdom in Joshua not to have made any compact, but to have slain all the
Gibeonites; but it was a folly sorely revenged in Saul, who attempted to do
the same. He who thinks the most righteous and suitable proposals or
principles, that ever were in the world (setting aside general rules of
unchangeable Righteousness, and Equity compassing all times, places, ways and
forms of Government) must be performed as desirable, because once they were so,
is certainly a stranger to the Affairs of humane kind.

Some things are universally unchangeable and indispensable amongst mem,
supposing them to live answerable to the general principles of their kind: as
that a Government must be, without which, every one is the enemy of every one;
and all tend to mutual destruction, which are appointed of God for mutual
preservation, that in Government some do rule, and some be in subjection, that
all rule be for the good of them that are ruled, and the like principles that
flow necessarily from the very nature of political society.

Some things again are alterable and dispensable, merely upon the account of
preserving the former principles, or the like: if any of them are out of
course, it is a vacuum in nature politic, for which all particular elements
instantly dislodge and transpose themselves to supply, and such are all forms
of Government amongst men, which if either they so degenerate of themselves
that they become directly opposite, or are so shattered by providential
Revolutions as to become useless to their proper end, may and ought to be
changed, and not upon other accounts: but now for other things in Government,
as the particular way, whereby persons shall be designed unto it, the
continuance of the same persons in it, for a less or a greater proportion of
time, the exercise of more or less power by some sorts, or the whole body of
them that are ruled, the uniting of men for some particular ends by bonds and
engagements, and the like occasional emergencies, the universal disposal of
them is rolled on prudence to act according to present circumstances.

2 Love to his people: This was the second qualification, wherein Daniel was so
eminent. And our deceased friend, not to enter into comparison with them that
went before, had clearly such a proportion, as we may heartily desire that
those who follow after, may drink but equal draughts of the same cup; that as
his pains, labor, travel, Jeopards of his life, and all that was dear to him,
Relinquishment of Relations and contentments, had sweetness and life from this
motive, even intensenesse of Affection to his people, the people of whom he
was, and whose prosperity he did desire, needs no further demonstration, then
the great neglect of self and all self-concernments which dwelt upon him, in
all his tremendous undertakings: vicit amor patriae, or certainly he who had
upon his breast and all his undertakings self-contempt so eminently engraven,
could not have persisted wrestling with so many difficulties, to the end of his
days: It was Jerusalem, and the prosperity thereof, which was preferred to his
chief joy. Neither

3 Did he come short in Righteousness in the administration of that high place
whereto he was called? nay, then this, there was not a more eminent stone in
that Diadem which he had in the earth. If he lay not at the bottom, yet at
least he had a signal concurrence in such Acts of Justice, as Antiquity has
not known, and Posterity will admire. Neither was it this or that particular
act that did in this bespeak his praise, but a constant will and purpose of
rendering to every one his due.

I shall not insist upon particulars, in these and sundry other personal
Qualifications, between the persons mentioned a Parallel may lie.

2 As to Employment, that of Daniel was mentioned before: it was the receiving,
and holding out from God, Visions of signal providentiall Alterations,
disposing and transposing of States, Nations, Kingdoms, and Dominions; what he
had in Speculation, was this man's part to follow in Action, he was an eminent
instrument in the hand of God in as tremendous Providentiall Alteration, as
such a spot of the World has at any time received since Daniel, foresaw in
general them all: and this, not as many have been carried along with the
stream, or led by outward motives, and considerations far above their own
principles and desires, but seeingly and knowingly, he closed with the mind of
God, with full purpose of heart, to serve the will of the Lord in his
Generation. And on this account did he see every mountain made a plain
beforehand, by the Spirit of the Lord, and staggered not at the greatest
difficulties, through unbelief, but being steadfast in faith, he gave glory to
God. And to complete the Parallel, as Daniel's Visions were still terminated in
the Kingdom of Christ; so all his actions had the same aim and intendment.
This was that which gave life, and sweetness to all the most dismal and black
engagements that at anytime he was called out unto. All made way to the coming
in of the promised glory. It was all the vengeance of the Lord and his Temple.
A Davidicall preparation of his paths in blood, that he might for ever reign in
Righteousness and Peace; but be he so or so, the truth of our Proposition is
confirmed toward him.

There is an appointed season when the Saints of the most eminent abilities in
the most useful Employments shall receive their dismission, etc.

I shall briefly open the rest of the words, and so take up the proposition
again, which was first laid down.

2 Then, there is the term allotted to him in this state of his dismission,
until the end be.

Three things may be here intended in this word end, until the end be.

1 The end of his life, Go thou thy ways to the end of thy life, and days;
but this we before disallowed, not consenting that Daniel received a dismission
from his Employment, before the end of his life and pilgrimage.

2 The end of the World, Go thy ways to the end of the World: till then thou
shall rest in thy grave; but neither yet does this seem to be peculiarly
intended in these words. The words in the close of the text do expressly
mention that, calling it the end of the days; and in so fevv words, the same
thing is not needlessly repeated: besides, had this expression held out the
whole time of his abode in the state of rest here signified, it must have
been, Go thou thy ways, for thou shall rest until the end be; So that,

Thirdly, the end here is to be accommodated unto the things, whereof the Holy
Ghost is peculiarly dealing with Daniel; and that is the Accomplishment of the
great Visions which he had received, in breaking the Kingdoms of the World,
and setting up the Kingdom of the holy One of God: Daniel is dismissed from
further attendance in this service, he shall not see the actual Accomplishment
of the things mentioned, but is dismissed and laid, aside unto the end of them.
The word, until, in the Scripture is not such a limitation of time, as to
assert the contrary to what is excepted, upon its accomplishment: until the
end, does not signify, that he should not rest after the end of the things
intimated, no more then it is affirmed that Michal had children after her
death, because it is said, that until her death, she had none, 2 Samuel 6. 23.
this then is that end that he is dismissed unto; the appointed season for the
accomplishment of those glorious things which he had foreshovvn.

Obs. God oftentimes suffers not his choicest servants to see the issue and
accomplishment of these glorious things wherein themselves have been most
eminently engaged.

3 The third thing (that we may make haste) is his state and condition, during
the time which he lies under this dismission, in these words, for thou shall
rest.

There is nothing of difficulty in these words, but what will naturally fall
under consideration in the opening of the proposition which they hold out;
which is

Obs. 3. The condition of a dismissed Saint is a condition of Rest, Thou shall
rest until the end be. What this rest is, and from what, with wherein it
consists, shall be afterward explained.

4 The last thing in the Text is; the utmost issue of all these dispensations,
both as to his foregoing labor, and his present dismission, and following
Rest. Thou shall stand in thy lot, etc.

Here are two things considerable in these words, The season of the
accomplishment of what is here foretold, and promised unto Daniel, and that is
in the end of the days, that is, when time shall be no no more, when a period
shall be put to the days of the World: called the last day, the great day, the
day of Judgment; that is the season of the accomplishment of this promise, the
day wherein God will judge the world, by the man whom he has ordained.

Obs. There is an appointed determinate season, wherein all things and persons
according to the will of God will run into their utmost issue and everlasting
condition.

2 The thing foretold, and promised, that is, that he should stand in his lot.

Obs. There is an appointed lot for every one to stand in, and measured
portion, which in the end they shall receive.

2 There is an eminent lot hereafter, for men of eminent employment for God
here.

I shall not be able to handle all these several Truths which lie in the words;
those only which are of most Importance and most suitable, may briefly be
handled unto you, and the first is,

There is an appointed season wherein the Saints of the most eminent abilities,
in the most useful Employments must receive their dismission, Zach. 1. 5. Your
Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever? Fathers, and
Prophets have but their season, and they are not: They have their dismission;
so old Simeon professes, Nunc Dimittis, Luke 2. 29. Now thou give me a
dismission: they are placed of God in their station, as a Sentinel in his
Watchtower, and they have their appointed season, and are then dismissed from
their Watch. The great Captain of their salvation comes, and says, Go thou thy
ways, thou have faithfully discharged thy duty; go now unto thy rest. Some
have harder service: some have harderduty then others: some keep guard in the
Winter, a time of storms and temptations, trials and great pressures: others in
the sunshine, the Summer of a more flourishing estate and condition; yet duty
they all do; all attend in the service; all endure some hardship, and have
their appointed season for their dismission: And be they never so excellent at
the discharging of their duty, they shall not abide one moment beyond the
bounds which He has set them, who says to all his creatures, thus far shall
you go and no further. Oftentimes this dismission is in the midst of their
work, for which they seem to be most eminently qualified.

The three most eminent works of God, in and about his children, in days of
old, were 1 His giving his people the Law, and settling them in the land of
Canaan. 2 His recovering them from the Babylonish Captivity, and 3 His
promulgation of the Gospel unto them. In these three works, he employed three
most eminent persons; Moses. in the first; Daniel in the second, and John
Baptist in the third, and neither of them saw the work accomplished, wherein
they were so eminently employed: Moses died the year before the people entered
Canaan: Daniel, some few years before the foundation of the Temple: and John
Baptist in the first year of the Baptism of our Savior, when the Gospel which
he began to preach, was to be published in its beauty and glory. They had all
but their appointed seasons, though their abilities were eminent: who like unto
them, and their employment excellent, what like it in the earth? yet at their
seasons, they must go their ways to rest, and lie down, till they stand in
their lot at the end of the days.

Reas. 1. The general condition of their mortality does require that it should
be so: It is appointed to all men once to die, Heb. 9. 27. There is a stable
law fixed concerning the sons of men, that is not upon the account of any
usefulness here to be dispensed withal, The number of our months are with
God; he has fixed our bounds, which we shall not pass: our days are as the
days of an hireling, that have a certain prefixed and determinate end: their
strength is not the strength of stones, neither is their flesh of brass, that
they should endure for ever. See Job 14, 10, 11, 12. This (I say) requires that
there should be an appointed season for their Employment, for it is so for
their lives: and yet there is more in it then this: for in the course of 5000
years, God has exempted two persons by his Sovereignty from the condition of
mortality, who walked with him in their generations. So that the bounds fixed
to them were not upon the account of their lives, but merely of the work they
had in hand.

2 God does it, that he may be the more eminently seen in the carrying on his
own works, which in their season he commits to them. Should he leave his work
always on one hand it would seem at length to be the work of the Instrument
only. Though the people opposed Moses at the first, yet it is thought they
would have worshipped him at the last: and therefore God buried him where his
body could not be found. Yet indeed he had but the lot of most, who faithfully
serve God in their generations: despised whilst they are present, idolized
when they are gone. I do not know of any great work, that the Lord carried out
the same persons to be the beginners and enders of. He gave them all their
seasons, that his power and wisdom might the more evidently appear in carrying
it from one hand to another.

3 God makes room as it were in his Vineyard, for the budding, flourishing and
fruit-bearing of other Plants which he has planted. Great Employments call for
great exercise of graces. Even in Employments in and about providentiall
things, there is the exercise of spiritual grace: as much Faith and Prayer, as
much communion with God, walking before him and wrestling with him, may be used
in casting down of Armies, as in setting up of Churches: God exercises all the
graces of his, in the work he calls them out unto. He principles them, by
faith and fellowship with himself, for their Employment; and therefore He gives
each individual, but his appointed season, that others in whose hearts he has
lodged the same spirit wherewith they are endued, may come forth, and show the
fruits thereof. Daniel lies down in the dust, in rest and peace, and why so?
the spirit of prophecy is poured out on Haggai and Ze^hariah, etc. they must
also carry on this work, and bear my name before my people. Consider the use
of this.

Use 1. of Exhortation unto all that are employed in the work of God,
especially such as with eminent Abilities are engaged in eminent Employments,
you have but your allotted season for your work: your day has its close, its
evening: your night comes, wherein none can work: The grave cannot praise the
Lord, death cannot celebrate him, it is the living, the living that are fitted
for that work, Isa. 38. 18, 19. It is true, men may alot you your season, and
all in vain, but your Times are in the hand of God; that which he has
appointed out unto you shall stand; be you never so excellent, never so
useful, yet the days of your service are as the days of an hireling, that
will expire at the appointed season: be wise then to improve the time that is
in your hands; this is the praise of a man, the only praise whereof in this
world he is partaker, that he does the will of God, before he fall asleep: that
he faithfully serves his generation, until he be no more.

For a dying man to wrestle with the rebukes of God, and the complaints of his
own conscience, for meeting with the end of his days, before he has attained
the midst of his duty, is a sad condition.

You have your season, and you have but your season, neither can you lie down
in peace, until you have some persuasion that your work as well as your life
is at an end; what ever then you find to do, do it with all your strength, for
there is neither wisdom, nor power in the grave whither you are going,
Ecclesiast. 9. 10.

Some particular Rules may direct you herein.

1 Compare yonr selves with the Saints of God, who were faithful in their
generations, and are now fallen asleep; What a deal of work did Josiah do in a
short season? what a Light did John set up in a few years? with what unwearied
pains and industry did our deceased friend serve his generation? It is said of
Caesar, that he was ashamed of his own sloth, when he found that Alexander had
conquered the Eastern world, at the age wherein he had done nothing. Behold
here, one receiving his dismission about the age of 40 years, and what a world
of work for God, and the Interest of the Lord Christ did he in that season? and
how well in the close, has he parted with a temporal life for him, who by his
death procured for him an eternal life, And now Rest is sweet unto this
laboring man. Provoke one another by examples.

2 Be diligent to pass through your work, and let it not too long hang upon
your hands: Your appointed season may come before you bring it to the close;
yea search out work for God. You that are entrusted in power, trifle not away
your season. Is there no oppressed person that with diligence you might
relieve? is there no poor distressed Widow or Orphane, whose righteous Requests
you might expedite and dispatch? are there no stout offenders against God and
man that might be chastized? are there no slack and slow Counties and Cities in
the execution of Justice, that might be quickened by your example? No places
destitute of the Gospel that might be furnished and supplied by your industry
and wisdom? can you not find out something of these or the like nature to be
dispatched with vigor and diligence? nay do not innumerable particulars in
each kind lie upon your hands? And is not your performance of them such a
sacrifice as wherewith God is not well pleased? your time is limited and
appointed, you know not how soon you may be overtaken with it; and would it not
be desirable unto you, that you had done these things? will it be bitterness
in the end, that you so laid out your endeavors?

Use 3. All men have but their seasons in any work, only God abides in it
for ever: in every undertaking let your eye still be on him, with whom is the
fullness and the residue of the spirit. Jeremiah's great bewailing of Josiah's
death was doubtless made upon the account of his discerning that none would
come after him to carry on the work which he had begun, but the wickedness of
that people was come to their height: else God can raise up yet more Josiahs:
let him be eyed as the principal and only abiding Agent in any great
undertaking.

In the residue of the observations I shall be very brief. The next is.

Obs. 2 God oftentimes suffers not the choicest of his servants to see the
accomplishment of those glorious things wherein themselves have been most
eminently engaged.

The case of Moses is most eminently known, he had a large share in suffering
the persecutions which were allotted to the people: 40 years banishment he
endured in the Wilderness, under the reproach of Christ 40 years more spent in
wrestling with innumerable difficulties, dangerous perils, mutinies, wars and
contentions. At the close when he comes to look upon the Laud, when the end of
all that dispensation was to be wound up, and the Rest and Reward of all his
toil and labor to be had, which formerly he had undergone for twice 40
years; Go thou thy ways, says the Lord, thou shall rest, take thy dismission,
thou shall not enter into the good Land, lie down here in the Wilderness in
peace.

John Baptist goes and preaches the drawning nigh of the kingdom of God, but
lived only to point out Christ with his finger, cries; Behold the Lamb of God,
I must decrease, and is cut off. David makes the great preparation for the
Temple, but he shall not see so much as the foundation laid. Men must take their
appointed lot. God will send by the hand of him whom he will send. Daniel must
rest until the end be. It is said of some they began to deliver Israel. The
case of Zerobbabel was very rare, who saw the foundation, and also the
top-stone of the Temple laid, and yet the work of Jerusalem was not half
finished in his days, as you may see, Zach. chap. 1.

Reason 1. God oftentimes receives secret provocations from the choicest of his
servants, which moves him to take them short of their desires. Those of his own
whom he employes in great works, have great and close communion with him. God
usually exercises their spirits in near acts of fellowship with himself: they
receive much from him, and are constrained to unburthen themselves frequently
upon him; now when men are brought into an intimacy with God, and have received
great engagements from him, the Lord takes notice of every working and acting
of their souls in an especial manner, and is oftentimes grieved and provoked
with that in them which others can take no notice of: let a man read the story
of that action of Moses, upon which the Lord told him directly he should not
see the finishing of the work he had in hand, nor enter into Canaan, Numb. 20.
7, 8, 11. It will be a hard matter, to find out wherein the failing was: he
smote the Rock with the rod, with some words of impatience, when he should
only have spoken to it, and this with some secret unbelief, as to the thing he
had in hand: God deals with others visibly, according to their outward
Actions, but in his own he takes notice of all their unbelief, fears,
withdrawings, as proceeeding from a frame in no measure answering those
gracious discoveries of himself, which he has made unto them, and on this
account it is, that some are taken off in the midst of their work.

2 To manifest that he has better things in store for his Saints then the best
and utmost of what they can desire or aim at here below. He had a heaven for
Moses, and therefore might in love and mercy deny him Canaan. He employeth some
eminently, their work is great, their end glorious, at the very last step
almost of their journey, he takes off one and another, lets them not see the
things aimed at: this may be thought hard measure, strict severity, exact
justice, yea as Job complains, taking advantages against them; see but what he
calls them to, in calling them off from their greatest Glories and Excellencies
on the earth, and all this will appear to be love, tenderness and favor in
the highest. Whilst you are laboring for a handful of first fruits, he gives
you the full harvest; Whilst you are laboring for the figure here below, he
gives you the substance above. Should you see the greatest work, wherein any
of you were ever engaged, brought to perfection, yet all were but as a few
drops compared with that fullness which he has prepared for you. The Lord then
does it to witness to the children of men, that the things which are seen the
best of them, are not to be compared with the things that are not seen, yea the
least of them, in as much as he takes them whom he will honor, from the very
door of the one, to bear them into the other. The meanest enjoyment in heaven
is to be preferred before the richest on earth, even then when the Kingdom of
Christ shall come in most beauty and glory.

Use 2. You that are engaged in the work of God, seek for a reward of your
service in the service it self. Few of you may live to see that beauty and
glory which perhaps you aim at as the end of all your great undertakings for
God, whereinto you have been engaged. God will proceed his own pace, and calls
on us to go along with him, and in the mean time, until the determinate end
come, to wait in faith, and not make haste. Those whose minds are so fixed on,
and swallowed up with some End (though good) which they have proposed to
themselves, do seldom see good days, and serene in their own souls, they
have bitterness, wrath and trouble all their days: are still pressing to the
end proposed, and commonly are dismissed from their station before it be
attained. There is a sweetness, there is a wages to be found in the work of
God it self: men who have learned to hold communion with God in every work he
calls them out unto, though they never see the maine harvest they aim at in
general, yet such will rest satisfied and submit to the Lords limitation of
their time: they bear their owue sheaves in their bosoms. Seeing God
oftentimes dismisses his choicest servants, before they see, or taste of the
maine fruits of their endeavors; I see not upon what account consolation can
be had in following the Lord in difficult dispensations, but only in that
reward which every duty brings along with it, by Communion with God in its
performance. Make then this your aim, that in sincerity of heart, you do the
work of God in your generation: find his presence with you, his Spirit guiding
you, his Love accepting you, in the Lord Christ, and when ever you receive your
dismission, it will be Rest and peace, in the mean time, you will not make
haste.

2 See a bottom and ground of Consolation, when such eminent Instruments as
this departed worthy, are called off from their station when ready to enter
upon the harvest of all their labors, watchings, toylings, and expense of
blood, God has better things for them in store, abiding things, that they
shall not enjoy for a day or two, which is the best of what they could hope for
here, had they lived to see al their desires accomplished; but such as in the
fullness whereof, they may lie down in peace to eternity. Why do we complain?
for our own loss? is not the residue, and fullness of the Spirit with him,
who gave him his dismission? for his loss, he lived not to see Ireland in
peace, but enjoyes the glory of that eternal Kingdom that was prepared for
him before the foundation of the World, which is the condition held out in the
third observation.

Obs. The condition of a dismissed Saint is a condition of Rest, Go thy way,
until the end be; for thou shall rest. The Apostle gives it in as the issue of
a discourse from a passage in the Psalms, there remains, Therefore a rest
unto the people of God, Heb. 4. 9. it remains, and is reserved for them, this
the Lord has solemnly proclaimed from Heaven, Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them: they go into a
blessed condition of rest; There is not any notion under which the State of a
dismissed Saint, is so frequently described as this, of Rest, which indeed is
the proper end and tendency of all things; their happiness is their rest;
their rest is all the happiness they can be partakers of: Fecisti nos ad te
Domine, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec veniat ad te.

Now Rest holds out two things unto us, 1 A freedom from what is opposite
thereunto, wherein those that are at rest, have been exercised, in reference
whereunto they are said to be at rest. 2 Some thing which suites them, and
satisfies their nature in the condition wherein they are; and therefore they
are at rest, which they could not be, were it not so with them, for nothing can
rest, but in the full fruition, and enjoyment of that which satiates the whole
nature of it in all its extent and capacity. We must then briefly inquire, 1
what it is that the Saints are at rest from, and secondly, what it is that they
are at rest in, which I shall do very speedily.

1 The many particulars which they are at rest from, may be referred unto two
general heads, 1 Sin. 2 Labor, and travel.

1 Sin; this on all consideration, whatever, is the main disquietnesse of the
soul; Temptations to it, Actings in it, troubles for it, they are the very
Egypt of the soul, it is house and place of bondage, and vexation; either the
power of it indwelling, or the guilt of it pressing, are here still disquieting
the soul. For the first, how does Paul complain, lament, yea cry out
concerning it, Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am! and what a sad, restless,
and tumultuating condition upon this account does he describe in the Verses
foregoing? The best, the wisest, the holiest of the Saints, on this account are
in a restless condition.

Suppose a man a conqueror in every battle, in every combat that he is
engaged in, yet vvhilest he has any fighting, though he be never foiled, yet
he has not peace. Though the Saints should have success in every engagement
against sin, yet because it will still be rebelling, still be fighting, it
will disturb their peace.

2 So also does the guilt of it; our Savior testifies, that a sense of it will
make a man to be weary and heavy-laden, Mat. 11. 28. This oftentimes makes the
Inhabitants of Sion, say they are sick, for though an end be made of sin as to
the guilt of it in the blood of Christ, yet by reason of our darkness, folly,
and unbelief, and the hiding of the countenance of God, the conscience is
oftentimes pressed with it, no less then if it lay indeed under the whole
weight and burden of it.

I shall not instance in more particulars, concerning this cause of want of
rest, and disquietnesse, the perplexity of Temptations, buffettings and
winnowings of Satan, Allurements and Affrightments of the World, darkness and
sorrows of unbelief, and the like do all set in against us upon this account.

This in general is the first thing, that the dismissed Saints are at rest
from: They, sin no more, they wound the Lord Jesus no more, they trouble their
own souls no more, they grieve the Spirit no more, they dishonor the Gospel no
more, they are troubled no more with Satan's Temptations without, no more with
their own corruption within, but lie down in a constant enjoyment of one
everlasting victory over sin, with all its Attendants: says the Spirit, They
rest from their labors, Revel. 14. those labors which make them faint, and
weary, their contending with sin to the uttermost; they are no more cold in
communion, they have not one thought that wanders off from God to Eternity:
they lose him no more, but always lie down in his bosom without the least
possibility of disturbance. Even the very Remembrance of sin is svveet unto
them, when they see God infinitely exalted, and admired in the pardon thereof.

They are free from trouble, and that both as to doing, and suffering: fevv of
the Saints, but are called out in one kind or another to both these. Every one
is either doing for God, or suffering for God, some both do and suffer great
things for him: in either of them there is pain, weariness, travel, labor,
trouble, sorrovv-and anxiety of spirit; neither is there any eminent doing or
vvorking for God, but is carried on with much suffering to the outvvard man.

What a life of labor and trouble did our deceased friend lead for many years
in the flesh? how were his days consumed in travel? God calling him to his
foot, and exercising him to understand the sweetness of that promise, that
they that die in him, shall have rest: many spend their days deliciously,
with so much contentment to the flesh, that it is impossible they should have
any foretaste and svveet relish of their Rest that is to come.

The Apostle tells us that there remains a Rest for the people of God; and yet
vvithall, that they who believe are entered into that Rest, those who in their
labors, in their Travels do take in the sweetness of that promise of Rest,
do even in their labor make an entrance thereinto.

This then secondly, they rest from all trouble and anxiety that attend them in
their pilgrimage, either in doing or suffering for God. Heb. 4. 10, 7. They
enter into rest, and cease from their work* God wipes all tears from their
eyes, there is no more watching, no more fasting, no more wrestling, no more
fighting, no more blood, no more sorrow, the ransomed of the Lord do return
with everlasting joy on their heads, and sorrovv and sighing flyavvay. There
Tyrants pretend no more title to their Kingdom; Rebels lie not in vvait for
their blood; they are no more awakened by the sound of the Trumpet, nor the
noise of the Instruments of death: They fear not for their relations, they
weep not for their friends, the Lamb is their Temple, and God is all in all
unto them.

2 This will not complete their Rest, something further is required thereto:
even something to satisfy, everlastingly content and fill them in the state
and condition wherein they are. Free them in your thoughts from what you
please, without this, they are not at rest. This then you have in the second
place, God is the rest of their souls, Psalm. 116. return to thy rest, O my
sou. Dismissed Saints rest in the bosom of God, because in the fruition and
enjoyment of him they are everlastingly satisfied, as having attained the
utmost end whereto they were created, all the blessedness whereof they are
capable. I could almost beg for liberty a little to expatiate in this
meditation of the sweet, gracious, glorious, satisfied condition, of a
dismissed Saint.

But the time is spent, and therefore without holding out one drop of water to
quench the feigned fire of Purgatory, or drawing forth any thing to discover
the vanity of their Assertion, who affirm the soul to sleep, or to be nothing
until the Resurrection; or their's who assigning to them a state of
subsistence and perception, do yet exclude them from the fruition of God,
without which there is no Rest, until the end of all, with such other
by-perswasions, as would disquiet the condition, or abridge the glory of those
blessed souls, which yet were a facile undertaking, I shall draw toward a
close.

There are 3 points yet remaining, I shall speak only to the first of them,
and that as an use of the doctrine last proposed, and I have done.

1 Then you see there is an appointed determinate season, wherein all things
and persons, according to the will of God will run into their utmost issue
and everlasting condition. Thou art going, who ever thou art, into an abiding
condition, and there is a lot appointed for thee, wherein lies an Estate
everlastingly unchangeable. It is the utmost end whereunto thou art designed,
and when once thou art entered into that lot, thou art everlastingly engaged: no
more change, no more alteration, if it be well with thee, it will abide: if
otherwise expect not any relief. In our few days we live for Eternity, in our
mutable estate we deal for an unchangeable condition. It is not thus only in
respect of particulars, but God has appointed a day, wherein he will judge all
the World by the man whom he has ordained. An End is coming unto all that
whole dispensation under which we are. To you who by the riches of free grace
have obtained union and communion with the Lord Jesus, Rest and Peace, when God
shall everlastingly rain snares, fire and brimstone upon the workers of
Iniquity. Some mock indeed, and say, where is the promise of his Coming? but
we know, the Lord is not slack, as some men count slacknesse, but exercises
patience until the appointed season, for the bringing about of his own
glorious Ends, which he has determined concerning his creatures. Why should we
then complain, when any one, perhaps before our expectation, but yet according
to Gods determination, makes an entrance into the end of all? All things work,
to that season. This state of things is not for continuance. That which is
incumbent, is in this uncertain space of time allotted to us, to give all
diligence to make our calling and election sure, as also to serve the Lord
faithfully in our Generations, wherein we cannot be surprised: we have an
example in him who is gone before; It is true, the Lord Jesus is our primitive
pattern and example: but those also who have followed him, wherein they have
followed him, are to be eyed and marked as provocations to the same labor of
faith and love, wherein they were exercised. And that this use may be made by
this Assembly, I shall add one word concerning him from whom is the occasion
thereof.

Every man stands in a threefold capacity. 1 Natural 2 Civil. 3 Religious.
And there are distinct Qualifications, that are suited unto these several
capacities. To the first as the ornaments and perfections of Nature, are suited
some seeds of those Heroical virtues, as courage, permanency in business,
etc. which being in themselves morally indifferent, have their foundations
eminently laid in the Natures of some persons, which yet hinders not, but that
their good Improvement is of grace.

2 To the second, or man's civil capacity, there are many eminencies relating
as peculiar endowments, which may be referred unto the three heads of Ability,
Faithfulness, and Industry, that through them neither by weakness, treachery
nor sloth the works and employments incumbent on men in their civil state and
condition may suffer.

3 Men's peculiar ornament and emprovement in their Religious capacity, lies in
those fruits of the Spirit which we call Christian Graces: of these in respect
of usefulness there are three most eminent, viz. faith, love, and
self-denial. I speak of them upon another account then the Apostle does,
where he places hope amongst the first three of Christian Graces. Now all
these in their several kinds were as eminent in the person deceased in his
several capacities, as perhaps is usually found in any one in a generation. My
business is not to make a Funeral Oration. only I suppose that without
offense I may desire, that in courage and permanency in business, (which I
name in opposition to that unsettled pragmatical shufling disposition which is
in some men) in ability for wisdom and counsel, in faithfulness to his trust
and in his trust, in indefatigable Industry in the pursuit of the work
committed to him, in faith on the promises of God, and Acquaintance with his
mind in his mighty works of providence, in love to the Lord Jesus and all his
Saints, in a tender regard to their Interest, delight in their society,
contempt of himself and all his for the Gospel's sake, with eminent
self-denial in all his concernments, in impartiality and sincerity in the
execution of justice, that in these and the like things we may have many raised
up in the power and spirit wherein he walked before the Lord, and the
Inhabitants of his Nation. This (I say) I hope I may speak without offense he
upnn such an occasion as this; my business being occasionally to preach the
Word, not to carry on a part of a Funeral Ceremony, I shall add no more, but
commit you to him, who is able to prepare you for your eternal condition.

FINIS.

