THE SOULS EXCELLENCY: OR, A sweet Meditation of the preciousnesse of the Soul
of Man. A Subject fit for every man and woman in the world, to fix their best
and choicest thoughts upon: who desire to begin heaven here, and to live with
God in heaven for ever.

By J.O.

Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently,

Deuteronomy. 4 9. Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward, but he that
keeps his soul shall be far from them,

Pro. 22.5 Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell,

Matthew. 10.28. London, Printed for R. W. at the Star under Peter's Church in
Cornhill, 1648.

DEUTERONOMY. 6.7. And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall
talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou sit down, and when thou risest up.


depiction of a teacher listening to a pupil read aloud in a schoolroom

THE SOULS EXCELLENCY, OR A sweet Meditation OF The preciousnesse of the Soul
of Man, etc.
Poor men and women, young and old; your manner is to sooth up your selves in
your own vain fancies and conceits, of something or other here below; wherein
you place a great part of your happiness, and upon which you set your hearts,
and for which you bestow a great deal of pains and time: And you do esteem
most precious of all things else in the world, ye, it is your manner to dote
after these low and empty shadows as though there were some superexcellency in
them.

When God knows the best creature under heaven is but mere vanity, and he that
enjoyes the most of it, does enjoy it but with vexation of spirit: and yet
poor souls you are not willing to be crossed in your hasty pursuit after them,
but run the hazard of soul and body, and all to gain that which is but loss;
and lose that which is the greatest and most happiest gain.

True it is, that the mighty Creator has adorned the World with abundance of
his works of wonder, and has made every thing beautiful in its time, but yet
not comparable, (though all set together) with the least glimps of Gods
countenance to the Soul. Indeed we have a larg book of the creatures in which
we may read much of the Creator, and see much of God in, but we have one more
near, and should be more dear unto us then ten thousand Millions of worlds,
were there so many; which is our dear and most precious souls; which is the
masterpiece of the whole Creation.

And yet poor people how basely do you esteem of your precious souls, that
very hardly can you bestow one hours serious meditation upon the peace and
welfare of your souls in all your life time. Very hardly can you spare out of
that mass of love you have to the world one dram of love or pity to your
poor souls.

O the precious soul can no man value, the price of it is beyond any man's
reach; and the loss of it beyond any man's recovery.

You rich Merchants that fetch your treasures from far and find out the
treasures hid in the sand, and bowels of the earth; did you ever amongst all
your rich jems and precious pearls and costly stones; find out any thing to
counterpoyse the soul: can all your treasures laid together ransom one poor
soul from destruction?

No, here the whole Creation must be silent; the soul is beyond all, nothing is
found in them to be compared to the soul, St. Augustine says, One soul is
worth a thousand bodies; what are ten thousand bodies to one soul?

The body is of much worth, but in comparison of the soul, ten thousand bodies
are worth nothing, they differ as much as flesh and spirit, as light and
darkness, as heaven and earth; and why not as much as heaven and hell? what
are so many bodies without the soul but so many stinking carions, and lothsom
dungeons: S. Augustine is so bold as to say, that the soul of a fly is of more
excellency then the glorious Sun in the firmament; of what worth and excellency
is the soul of man, then think you? o most precious soull what may be compared
to thee? surely nothing, come down to the dust all things in the world then in
comparison of the soul.

Stand by on the left hand, or sit down at my footstool, all you creatures,
yea, the best of creatures, yea, the very heavens, with all their glorious
ornaments, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, with all the Celestial bodies; the
earth with all her wonders, mountains and valleys, pleasant medows and woods,
fruitful trees, birds, beasts, sheep, oxen, lambs, and horses, little or great
beasts, or curious fowls, with all the seas admirable wonders, gold, silver,
precious stones, and what ever the heart of man can conceive to be most
beautiful and glorious; stand by all pleasures beauty; riches, honors,
wisdom, learning, Arts and Sciences, Kingdoms or Empires, yea, all that is on
this side heaven, all created excellencies whatsoever, I say, If I were Lord
Paramount of all these, had them all at my command, what is all this to my
precious immortal soul? true, I may say with David, Psalm. 104.24, 25. O Lord,
how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all, the earth is
full of thy riches, so is the Sea also great and wide etc. But what is all this
tome, if I lose my precious soul? My soul, my soul, is more precious than all
these.

The soul is all in all to us, says Tertullius, The soul is a little
demi-god or Angel, many have so called it, says Clemens Alexandrinus, the
soul is a part of heaven, says Hipparchus.

The soul is the Idea and Sampler of all the world, for excellency and worth,
says Paphinous, and what can be said more to set forth the excellency of the
precious soul.

Yea, farther, Plato is of opinion that the soul is next in degree to the
eternal God of Heaven and earth. Alas, then, what will it profit a man though
he win the whole world, and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26. The very Angels and
Archangels, the Cherubins and Seraphins, and all the powers of heaven are not
so dear to us as our own souls be; alas, if we lose our souls, what are all
they to us?

The soul then it seems is a very precious piece, nothing in the whole
Creation so precious, Oh! what heart is able to think or conceive the
excellency of the soul?

The soul is the best thing in the world, were there as many worlds as there be
sands on the sea shore: as many as the Epicureans Diog: Laert: thought,
infinite of worlds, what could all these profit if we should lose our souls.

Oh! what fools and mad men are we to slight our precious souls, to prefer a
base lust before the precious soul; to take more pains, cost and care about our
poor frail perishing bodies a lump of clay, then about our most dear and
precious fouls, our eternal souls.

The soul is the wonder of wonders, as the Philosopher calls it, and so it is,
says David, I am fearfully and wonderfully made; what tongue can express, or
heart conceive, the excellency and worth of the soul?

Shall we then spend no time to think and meditate of this choice piece, the
immortal soul? shall we be continual drudges and slaves to these vile bodies,
and do nothing for the soul? shall we feed, pamper, and clothe and adorn the
body and let the soul starve and perish? shall we be so nice and choice, and
circumspect about our bodies, that there may not be a pin amiss, and shall the
soul in the mean time go naked and bare, languish and pine away, and no care
be taken for it? or can the soul live and subsist in a spiritual way without
spiritual food and clothing o! no, no, dear friends, be not deceived, the soul
must have spiritual provision, as the body has temporal, or it will starve
and perish for ever (for ever) a sad word: as once a dying man said (thinking
seriously what he was to do; that die he must) o! this word for ever is a sad
word to me, if it were not for that word forever; how well would it be for me.

O the most excellent dear and precious soull what shall I say of thee thou
eternal soul (I had like to a said infinite soul) true it is the soul is not
infinite but though it be not, yet may it be Amplified in the extent of its
faculties, on and on infinitely, says the School, In infinitum, Thom. Aquin.

And seeing then the soul is so great a matter, the Horizon of the visible and
invisible world, says Aquinas, shall we not set a high value upon the soul,
shall we run the hazard of eternal ruin of the soul for toys, shadows,
impostures, vanities and empty lies; for so be all things in the world in
regard of our most precious souls: ye lies, bubbles, vanities, empty vanities,
ye, lighter then vanity it self; and not worthy to be spoken off, in regard of
the soul.

You that would take a serious survey of the souls excellency, to purpose, so
as to prize it in a spiritual way; yea, and to melt at the very heart and
tremble at the loss and ruin of the soul, or highly to prize Divine grace,
consider seriously:

First, the sin of the soul is so great as no tongue can express the
greatness of it; as the Apostle says, Romans 5.12. Wherefore, as by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, etc. Consider well, that sin was not
barren, neither did it enter into the world alone, but death follows close at
the heels of sin, not barely the death of the body, but that which is far
greater, the death of our most precious and immortal souls: so that the most
godly man or woman in the world may justly cry out with Paul, O wretehed man
that I am, who shall deliver me, etc. Yea, and sin though it came by one man,
and that but one sin, only the breach of one Commandment yet is multiplied on
and on to such an infinite numberless number, that passes the skill of the
best Arithmetician in the world to sum up the total of them; consider farther
the nature of the least sin, is to damn the poor souls in hell, and that for
no less time but for eternity; woe to my precious soul, then if God should
charge but one of my least sins, though but a thought, upon it; I might cry
out undone, undone, for ever; if one sin be so great and the curse and
punishment of unexpressible and unsufferable, what may be said of all those
Millions of Millions of sins which one poor soul stands guilty of: who shall
be able to undergo the wrath of God? Isa. 33.14. Who among us shall dwell with
devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

Secondly, the loss of the soul is unrecoverable, it is the greatest loss in
the whole world, the loss of health, friends, goods, lands, honors, good
name, or any other things, ye, life It self is in comparision of the soul,
rather to be accounted gain then loss; though it be a great loss if these
and all that might be named should light upon man, yet all this is nothing to
sin: if all the evil of punishment should fall upon one man, ye, all that has
befallen the whole race of mankind, yet all this were nothing to the evil of
sin, these could only hurt the body; but sin endangers the soul, and many times
damnes the soul forever.

Nothing can defile the soul but sin, sin is the plague of the soul, it infects
where ever it comes, it is the leprosy of the soul, it spreads it self over
all the powers and faculties of the soul: sin is the Canker of the soul, it
frets out every grace; sin is the Gangreen of the soul, it must be cut off: or
it proves, Noli me tangere, and kills the soul; no danger to the danger of sin,
no loss to the loss of the soul, all gain is loss with a witness if the
soul lost for earthly gain: What advantage will it be for a man to gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul, Matthew. 16.26.

Lastly, consider, the excellency of the soul appears chiefly, in the ransom
and price that was paid to redeem it from eternal wrath and misery, it was no
small price; this argues the soul to be a most famous and excellent piece,
that when by sin it lay exposed to eternal wrath, and misery; there could be
none in heaven nor earth found to satisfy Divine Justice, nor to make an
Atonement, but the Lord Jesus Christ must come down from Heaven, and lay down
his life to ransom the soul; nothing less then, then the blood of Christ will
serve to ransom the soul. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or
with ten thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my first born for my
transgression, even the fruit of my body; for the sin of my soul? Mich. 6.7.
No, this will not do, it must be the blood of the Lamb (Christ Jesus) slain
from the foundation of the world; so precious is the soul, the blood of Bulls
Goats, and Lambs, etc. Will not serve turn. O most precious soul, what is there
under heaven to be compared to thee? the soul, the soul; shall I hazard my soul
for a pin, for a trifle, for a shadow, for in comparison of the soul all
created excellency whatsoever are lighter than vanity it self.

You worldlings, that take so much pains rooting in the world to join house to
house and land to land till there be no place, (for the poor to dwell by you)
that you may be placed by your selves in the midst of the earth, Esaias. 5.8. Woe
unto you, says the Lord of Hosts; Let me tell you, your gain is like to
eternal loss with a witness, if you exchange earth for heaven, gain the
world and lose your precious souls: O! my dear friends, be warned betimes, and
make all your worldly employments and your temporal gain to be suborinate to
the eternal peace of your souls, make not earthly employments, heavenly
impediments, use the world no more then may make you more fit for the
spiritual welfare of your Noble and most precious souls.

Woe to you Drunkards, ver. 11. that can rise early to follow drunkenness, and
to you that continue till night, till the wine inflames you; it will be a sad
bargain to you if you drink away your souls, and while you drowned your estates,
and your wits, and health, you drowned your poor souls in the bottomless gulf
of hell.

Woe to you that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as with cart
ropes, ver. 18. surely it will go ill with you one day, if you for the profit
or pleasure of your sin lose your souls: O, my beloved, set a greater prize
upon the soul, then to sin away the eternal blessedness of your souls.

Woe to you who ever you be, that call evil good, and good evil, that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, ver. 20. etc. Will you thus
flatter away the happiness of your immortal souls? o poor people! what will
you do, if you lose your souls?

Woe to you that are wise in your own eyes, ver. 21. etc. your wisdom is but
folly and madness, how many be there that think if they have but wisdom
enough to drive on an earthly design, to be skillful in trading, or in Arts
and Sciences, or the like, think themselves happy enough, though they be as
ignorant for their souls as the beast, and is not the greatest number of poor
mankind in this condition? and yet poor creatures, tell them but of their
gross ignorance, they will be ready to fly in your face and tell you, they
know as much as you can teach them, and they are as wise as your self, and
they scorn to live so long in the world, to be taught what is good for their
souls now, and the like, but alas, all this while the Holy Ghost tells them,
they be but fools, or at the best, there is more hope of a fool then such a
man, Prove. 26.12. And the same spirit of God tells you what you get by reproving
such, Prove. 9.7, 8. alas, poor creatures, will you not pity your own souls? I
pity you, and oh that you would but pity your selves.

Truly the most men take more care for their beasts, a horse, an ox, a sheep,
a hog, or a good dog then for their souls; nay, they take more care for their
old shoos then for their souls, for a pigg or a goose then their souls, for a
cup of ale, or a piece of bread, then for their dear and precious souls:
nothing so base and inferior under the Sun, but it is looked after with far
greater pains, diligence, and industry, then the immortal soul, any thing for
back or belly more then for the soul; hence it is that men are so glad to
hear that the soul dies with the body, that it is not immortal; and some,
that is there no such thing as a day of judgment, or a heaven, or a hell, that
the Scriptures are but men's inventions, that threatenings are but bug-bears to
keep men in awe; and a thousand such things as those, that so they may more
safely and securely sin away their precious time without any thoughts of the
hazard and loss of the soul therefore they can put far from them the evil
day, and make a jest of sin.

But these men shall be no president for me to walk by, seeing the soul is so
precious, and the loss of it so irrecoverable, the price of it so great, and
happiness of it so full of joy unspeakable and full of glory: Worldlings take
your fill, eat drink, get you riches and honors, yea, fill your selves
brimfull with whatsoever the world can afford you, but let not me taste of your
delicates, o my soul, my soul is ten thousand times more precious to me, and
so much the more precious, because it was bought with the precious blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ for whom I account all things loss, and do judge them to be
dung that I may win Christ, and might be found in him, etc. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
this makes my soul leap for joy.

My body is from the earth, my soul from heaven, woe is me, if for transitory
profit or pleasure, or honor, or the like, I should lose my own soul.

Farewell, the world then, there is nothing in thee that can satisfy my soul;
welcome Christ Jesus, in whom satisfaction is made in abundance: Farewell all
earthly pleasure, and treasure, my treasure is in heaven, there lie all my
comforts, there will I treasure up my soul, where Christ my treasure is, Lord
Jesus, thou art my souls refuge, my soul is so much the more precious because
it is in thy keeping, and no man or devil can take it out of thy hands.

Shall the pleasure or profit of sin carryme headlong to destruction? shall I
hazard my precious soul for honor, case, or preferment? shall my own will be
my law, or my own opinion my rule? shall I embrace every false principle in
Religion, and drink in every unsound Tenent, and dangerous and damnable
Doctrine that the world swarms with in these days, to the ruin of my soul?
No, my soul cost more then so; the precious blood of Christ was not thought too
dear for to redeem my soul and shall I cast it away for a straw or a pin?

Beloved, you see how precious a piece the soul is, but you have but a small
glimpse of it at a little crevice, the worth and excellency of the soul appears
not in open view now, while we are in this earthly tabernacle; but here we see
all things darkly as in a glass, but the beauty and excellency shall be most
splendent, when corruption has put on incorruption.

But, I say, thrice happy are you if you now at last will resolve to study the
safety and eternal welfare of your precious souls, neglect no opportunity to
do your souls good.

Besides, consider what has been said. Death gives no warning; As soon comes
a Lambs skin to the market as an old sheeps, it is an old Proverb, which we
see daily verified: Carry this paper daily in your pocket, and the meditation
thereof daily in your hearts, and think of that dreadful sound, Arise ye dead,
and come to judgment.

Consider also the longest day has his night, and Methusalem, had his period,
and our lives are compared to things of the swiftest motion, and shortest
continuance; he that has passed many years, and purchased little profit, has
had a long being, and a short life, for life is more to be measured by well
doing, then by the number of years; seeing that men, ye the most of men by
many days do procure many deaths; and others in a short space attain to the
life of infinite ages.

Consider that the body without the soul is but a corrupt carcass, and the
soul without God, is but a Sepulcher of sin.

Daily study God in Christ, get better acquaintance with him, it will make thee
happy in thy soul, in thy body, in thy family, in thy calling, he that has
Christ shall be a gainer by all things; life, long or short; is gain, riches
or poverty is gain, prosperity, or adversity is gain, liberty, or
imprisonment is gain; good report, or evil report is gain, honor, or
dishonor is gain. What poor soul is there in this wide world that would not
trade in such a commodity that brings in all gain, and no loss. O my dear
soul, soar up daily in Communion with Jesus Christ who is thy true and perfect
gain.

Lastly, Consider that all we do while we live in this vail of tears is, or
should be for eternity, and we hazard the ruin of our poor and precious
souls, for eternity; we would count that man a very fool, and worthy to beg
his bread, that having fair demeanes, and a rich trade that would bring him in
thousands, and with all, a time limited to enjoy it, and after the end of that
term he must be turned out of all, only to live upon what he had formerly
gained and treasured up; or else starve and perish: Now if this man should
squander away his time, wast his demeanes, spend up his stock, run himself
into an unrecoverable debt, and at a certain day be turned out of all naked,
and miserable; truly few or none would pity him.

But poor creatures it is so with the greatest part of the world, the Lord
has given us a limited time here in this world, great demeanes, and a rich
trade that would bring in Millions, and ten thousand Millions, that is, he has
given us his glorious Gospel, which daily reveals more and more, of that
inesteemable treasure, Jesus Christ, here is treasure indeed! Oh, my friends,
trade apace for your souls, for what is all this continuance of Gospel, and
Gospel opportunities, and offers of grace, yea, free grace, and eternal
salvation? but for thee who ever thou art, to trade in, for thy spiritual
advantage. Now, woe unto thee if thou squander away thy time, and wast thy rich
treasures and dye an unrecoverable, nay, an eternal beggar. But thou may
gather honey while some lasts, harken to the voice of Christ while he calls,
lay hold upon him, take him on his own terms, Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that
thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: come ye, buy and
cat, ye come, buy oil and milk without money and without price. Here is Christ
freely tendered with all his graces, and this is your feed-time, he that
expects to reap the benefit of a fruitful harvest, must not sow Tears, and
Thistles, for such as a man sows, such shall he reap. And he that lives under
Gospel disspensations and will continue in unbelief, drudging for the Devil
all his days, let him expect such a harvest at the end of his life.

Friends, in the conclusion let me mind you of one thing that England is now
sensible enough of at this day, in a temporal way, which is that we live in a
hard and pining time, many thousands languish under bodily scarsity: let me
tell you, you have loathed heavenly Manna, and willingly starved your precious
souls, and I must tell that it is just with the Almighty to starve your bodies
first, and then to destroy both, but that his mercy is very large, and he is
unwilling to destroy a people that do not willingly refuse to come in unto him.

These unquiet hard times, should now put us upon making provision for the
safety of our souls, and I hope, it will be your chiefest work, if you have any
care of them; you know not, the youngest of you, how near an end your day is,
make haste, as death leaves you judgment shall find; let this comfort every
poor soul, that you can never be so willing to receive the Lord Jesus, as he is
to embrace you, if you will but lay down the Arms of rebellion and come in unto
him, therefore now whilst he says, Seek my face, say thy face, Lord will I
seek; and when he says, Come unto me all ye that are weary, etc. Say, Come
Lord Jesus come quickly, a day in the house is better then a thousand, etc. My
soul longs, yea, even faints for the courts of the Lord, etc. What will it
profit a man though he win the whole world, if he lose his own soul.

FINIS.

