DIVINE OBSERVATIONS Upon the London-Ministers Letter against TOLERATION:

By his Synoddicall, Priest-byter-all, National, Provincial, Classical,
Congregationall, Superlative, Un-erring, Clericall, Accademicall Holiness,
Reverend Yongue MARTIN MAR-PRIEST, Son, and Heir to Old Martin the
Metrapolitane.

Wherein the Toleration of His Sacred Person with the whole Independent
Fraternity, (by what Name or Title soever dignified or distinguished, whether
Anabaptists, Brownists, or the like,) is justified by the Reasons of the
London-Ministers, which they urge against Toleration; and themselves, by their
own Reasoning, condemned.

Psalm. 7. 15.

They have made a pit, and dug it, and are fallen into the ditch that they
have made.

1 Cor. 1. 20.

Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world?
Has not God made foolishness the wisdom of this world?

The Reverend Author desires such as have received offense at the 6, 7, and 8.
Pages in his Ordinance for TITHES Dismounted, to repair for satisfaction to
the last Clause hereof.

EVROPE, Printed by Martin Claw-Clergy, Printer to the Reverend Assembly of
Divines, and are to be sold by Bartholmew Bang-Priest, at his shop in
Toleration-street, at the sign of the Subjects Liberty, right opposite to
Persecution-Court. 1646.

To Our Reverend, Learned and Religious Brethren, the Prolocutour and the rest
of the Assembly of Divines, now sitting in holy Conspiracy at King Hen^y the
Seventh's Chapel, at Westminster, Cheek by Jowl to the Two Houses of
Parliament; These present.
REverend and Beloved BRETHREN, (for so I have Authority from your own sacred
President.) I cannot but take notice of your indefartigable vigilance, and
unc^ssant endeavors after this endless work of Uniformity; that rather then
you will loose the vantage of an opportunity, out of your supercelestiall
Providence, you can even create Opportunity it self, and then like the Godly,
able, Orthodox of the Land indeed, most Prudently, in all Presbyterian Piety,
lay hold on the advantage, to consumate your endeavored Uniformity: for after
your so many spiritual, mystical Conspiracies, the miraculous result of your
most Seraphicke late Consultations for its present settlement, has struck my
Piety into an holy Admiration, that now I confess your Policy high surpassed
my Sanctity; for upon the first of January, when the Injunctions from the
General Assembly in Scotland came into your grave and Learned Assembly,
against Toleration of Independency in this Kingdom, and was read in your
Reverend Audience, you had so ordered Superior Providence, that even in that
very instant of time, (just is if it had been predestined,) this Most
juditious argumentative Letter of the London Ministers, (from that
Syon-Colledge-conspiracy,) should present it self; whereat the Learned Mr.
Hinderson, forthwith in a Scotch Rapture, cried out of the great Providence of
GOD* saying, Doubtless no other but God was the Father of Two such Blessed
Twins! that at one instant of time, so many godly, Learned and Orthodox of the
2. Kingdoms, should so happily concur and meet with their desires, and advice
for this general Uniformity: Indeed it was a Providence neatly and plausibly
contrived, and doubtless would have done the deed, but that there is one thing
that spoils all, The Lord frustrateth the Tokens of Liars, and makes Diviners
mad, turns Jsai. 44. 25.
wise men backwards, and makes their knowledge foolishness: But here is not
all: The Assembly's Anathama against Toleration, at that instant of time, is
given into the HOUSE. O, there is a Divine Providence indeed: Sure, our Syon
College is even Presbyterializ'd into the p^ Mobile, or else that
supercelestiall Assembly at Westminster, is REFORMED into the Imperial Heaven,
that even Divine Providence it self is thus in their dispose; an exaltation
even into the Throne of God! Where are our Presbyters now? They even are set as
gods (...) the Temple of God, showing themselves that they are gods indeed, by
the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders:
Providence after Providence, etc. to deceive: All which I have here discovered,
and i^ all Dedicatory humility represent unto your venerable perusal those my
Observations upon this Letter; that happily you may take notice therein of a
rea^ Providence of God indeed, that such Godly, Learned, Orthodox Divines, as
the Ministers of the City of London, should be so infatuated in their wisdom,
that their reasons against Toleration should inevitably conclude Toleration,
condemn themselves, and their Presbytry, which I have endeavored to evidence
to the whole world, and leave it to the public Trial, either to stand or to
fall by such their Reasoning, and against this fair proffer, to have our
metal tried by their own touchstone, the Presbyters themselves cannot
except: If I fayl, then let me wear your Churches Livery, which themselves are
pleased to put upon it, a Coat of diverse Colors, page 1. Thus then for the
prizse.

LONDON MINISTERS. When all things are examined by the Word, then that which is
best may be heldfast. Martin. This plainly grants an equity to the holding
fast, or practicing that with all freedom, which every man in his own
understanding, by such examination shall so discover; or otherwise, Wherefore
shall any have liberty of Examination after their understandings, seting
otherwise they cannot examine, if after their understandings, they may not
practice, for what is written, is written for our learning, and consequently
for our Practice; So that your Monopolizing all Liberty and Judgment into your
own hands, is condemned by the equity of your own Argument; If you will be
sole Judges, you may be sole Examiners too, for after we have examined, if
your judgment restrain^ us the practice, we are never the near, for Faith
without Works i^ dead. We may be sure, what ever our Examination discoveret^
which entrencheth upon your Lordliness over your Brethren, your Pomp and
Pre-eminence, your Ordinance for Tithes, your Congregationall, Classical,
Provincial, National Courts, etc. to expect determination concerning the
same, to be of like effect, with that of the Lord Bishops, when it was put to
Vote in the Lords Ho^^, whether the Bishops had a Right by Law to Vote therein;
Or like into your Answer given by your Committee, to Mr. Tombs 1 2. Arguments
against Infants Baptism, specifyed in his Examen. page 2. Or rather more like
unto the Answer which Ananias the High Priest gave unto Paul, when he had
declared, that he had lived in all good Conscience unto that day: Smi^e him on
the mouth, (Acts 23. 1, 2.) with the Presbyerian clutter-fist of iniquity.

Land. Min. The desires and endeavors of the Independents Toleration, at this
time extremely it unseasonable and praeproperous* for, 1. The Reformation of
Religion is not yet perfected and settled among us, according to our Covenant.
And why may not the Reformation be raised up at last to such purity and
perfection, that truly tender Consciences may receive abundant Satisfaction,
for ought that yet appears? Martin. But what Reformation is that, according to
the Covenant, that you intend, till which our endeavors are extremely
unseasonable and praeproperous? Sure we must accept it in your own
Presbyterian sense, and what that is, is evident to the whole world, by your
Pollitick endeavors, both private and public, to be no other, but an absolute
enslaving both of Parliament and People unto your Presbyterian Dictates, in all
matters Evangelicall and Spiritual; which is no other, but the very Spirit,
Marrow, root, and Quinticense of Popery, against which, that very Covenant, in
its genuine intent, expressly does engage us and our Posterity in the
fundamental Extirpation thereof out of the Three Kingdoms; for indeed that
pre-eminence is no other but an absolute Arrogation of Popish Supremacy, and
spirit of Infallability, for plurallity of Persons in that arrogation, does not
alter the nature and essence of the thing arrogated; it is as well Popish
Supremacy in a Synod, Classis, or the like, as in one man.

So that our Covenant does engage us in the total Extirpation of LORD
PRESBYTERS, their Classes, Ordinances, etc. as well as of their Grandfather the
Pope, their Fathers the Lord bishops, their Courts, Cannons, etc. before them:
Will, but it seems till this Popish Prelaticall Prerogative (the perfection of
your Reformation, after your sense of the Covenant) be absolutely
Presbyterizliz'd; you judge it unseasonable and praeproperous: Truly, (
Reverend and beloved Brethren,) I submit unto your judgments herein, for to
nip it in the Bud, to crush the Cockatrice in the shell, to prevent this
approaching Papal Episcopal Tyranny and u^urpation of our Birthrights by the
Independents endeavors for a timely Toleration, before it be absolutely
Presbyterian, will utterly annihilate and frustrate your design, so that in
your sense, it must needs be extremely unseasonable indeed, when our mouths
are sowed up, our hands tied behind us, our feet fettered, then in your
Presbyterian sense, comes in Our Season; for if before it be unseasonable and
preproperous, that implies, that then it will be seasonable; when the Steed is
stoll^^, you will give as leave to shut the Stable door^; Indeed we are obliged
to your venerable Sanctities in the Superlative degree, that you will be but
pleased to fl^p u^ in the mouth with a Fox-tayle: Before, it is too soon, and
after, it will be too late: And thus the truly tender Consciences may receive
abundant satisfaction for ought that yet appears, have their Persons banished
or imprisoned, their goods Plundered and confiscate, their houses pulled down,
and Gibbets made of the Timber to hang their tender Consciences out, to take
the Presbyterian Air; for no better as yet appears, and this is already
evident both in their Writings and Sermons: (See Byseild; Sermon before the
House, latter end of his Book.) And if they thus show their teeth before they
have full power to bite, what will they do, when their power is absolute;
their mercies will be cruelty, if the future may be judged by the present, as
all the mercies of the Wicked are. Prove. 12. 10. And then we shall be sure
(they having all Judgment in their hands) none shall be judged to be of truly
under Consciences, but such as are Presbyteriall, such as will be awed by their
Power and Tyranny; the rest must stand upon their Peril. Well, we must stay
till Reformation, according to the Covenant, be fully settled, and what your
sense is, is evident; but what Reformation is that the Covenant it self does
intend? Is it not a Reformation (after the ^^presse Letter of it) according to
the Word of God? As for your Presbytery, though by your selves, in your late
Petition for it is establishment, you urge and avow it to be the Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, yet in the Judgment of the Parliament, it was Voted false and
scandalous, and the highest title they ever voted upon it, was but jure Human^;
therefore, not jure Divino: and if not jure Divino, then our Covenant which
does engage u^ in a Reformation, according to the Word of God, which i^ such an
one, as is absolutely jure Divino, does not engage (...) at all unto
Presbytrie, which by the Parliaments own confession, is but jure Humano, but
rather to its suppression; and the Parliament themselves, if they will but
practice according to their own Votes, cannot engage us thereto by virtue of
our Covenant, but are to Protect us and our Posterity from it; not suffering
Presbytery no more then Papistry and Prelacy, which are but jure Humano, to
insult and tyrannize over us, our Consciences, Persons or Estates; for if by
our Covenant they be bound to safeguard Us from the incursions of Papistry and
Prelacy, (the Two first divisions of the great City Babylon,) because they are
but jure Humano, then they are equally thereby bound to Protect us from the
Tyranny and Oppression of Presbyters, (the third Division,) for themselves say,
it is but jure humano. And yet, forsooth, you challenge the Precedence, your
turns must be served first, as though you were the Children, and the
Independents the Dogs; The Independents might rather urge, that the
endeavors of the Presbyters are unreasonable and praeproperous, till
Independency be settled; for the Parliament never yet Voted Independency to be
jure Humano, neither are your selves able to prove it so to be.

Lon. Min. 2. It is not yet known, what the Government of the Independents is,
neither would they ever vouchsafe to let the world know what they hold in that
point, etc. Martin. If it be unseasonable (according to your reasoning,) for
such Independents, whose Government is not made known to the World; (for that
is the reason of your Argument, for you state the unseasonablenesse in the
non-knowledge, etc.) then for such whose Government is made known, must needs
be seasonable, after the same reasoning.

But Reverend MARTIN, with his Brethren, whom you dignify and distinguish by
the names of Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. have declared their Discipline to the
whole World, both by their Preachings, Writings, and continued practice, even
unto this day: See the Confession of the 7* Churches. See Mr. Turners model,
entitled, An Heavenly Conference for Syon* Saints. Therefore the endeavors of
Reverend MARTIN, and his Independent Brethren, must now be seasonable, even
from your own reasoning.

But I must needs tell you by the way, you need not much urge the only
seasonablenes of yours from the knowledge thereof: I pray you, what is it? can
you tell your selves? You tell the Independents of their reserves, but what may
they say of yours? for we have yours but in part, and that neither presented,
but by Peece-meals; now a little, and then a little, and still reserves in the
rear, yea innumerable still, for any thing we can perceive, which are but yet
hammaring out to the temper of the People; what they are, is best known to your
selves: what is known, is not so beautiful, as to make all others
unseasonable and praeproperous: If drawn into a Model, I think it will rather
affright then allure; for in the Bulk, it is no other then a Bundle of
Tyrannical Ordinances, and wicked Laws over our Consciences, Persons, and
Estates, to torment us in endless Suits and Appeals from Court unto Court,
Congregationall, Classical, Provincial, National, etc. with merciless
Mulcts and Penalties upon our Persons, as your Thundering Ordinance for the
Covenant, your Plundering Ordinance for Tithes, your Monopolizing Ordinance for
Preaching, your Romish Episcopal Ordinance for Ordaining of Ministers, your
devouring Ordinance for the better establishment of your Directory, your
High Commission, Star Chamber Ordinance for the Lords Supper, etc. witness to
the whole World: and truly, whether this Presbyterian Model of your Government
be so honorable, to make allothers unseasonable, I leave to the woeful
experience of those against whom this Model of Ordinances is in force, yea,
even to the whole World, to judge.

But not to detract from the integrity of those Independents, you here intend;
it is evident, that hitherto the Assembly have suppressed the bringing in of
their Model, that they (by all their unwearied endeavous, could never attain
an equal and just liberty thereunto, either by dispute or otherwise, as the
copy of their Remonstrance touching that business does declare. Now let the
World judge, whether this be fair and reasonable dealing, such as becomes the
Ministers of the City of London. First to suppress the delivery, and then like
Scholast Synodicall Disputants, to urge the non-delivery, as an Argument
against their Toleration. It Is a stout Argument, if but followed; If it be in
force to any, it is to the suppressors not the suppressed.

Lon. Min. Secondly, their desires and endeavors are unreasonable, and
unequal, its diverse regards. 1. Because no such Toleration has been
established (so far a^ we know,) in any Christian state, by the Civil
Magestrate. Martin. It seems Holland, Poland, Transylvania, etc. where free
Toleration of all sorts of Independents is established by Civil Magestrates,
are not Christian States, because they are not wholly Presbyterializ'd,
Tolerating none but Presbyterian* So that in your sense, they are no further
Christian then they are Presbyterian: So that if this Parliament should
tolerate any other but your selves, it seems you make account to Unchristen
them all, your Bull is prepared against them, you have told them what they must
expect, the censure of Infidells, Heathens and Heretics, an Excommunication
ipso facto, for they must not be Christian. But in case there were no such
Toleration in any State professing Christianity, yet that were no Argument
against Toleration, for Evangelicall Precept is not derivative from Humane
President: The practice of Emperors, Kings, States or the like, is no
Evangelicall Rule; for Evangelicall Right, must have Evangelicall Authority,
which one would have thought had been known to Evangelicall Ministers, such as
you style your selves.

Lon. Min. 2. Because some of them have solemnly professed, that they cannot
suffer Presbytry, and answerable hereto is their practice in those places where
Independency prevails; Therefore their Toleration is unreasonable and
unequal. Martin. If their Toleration be unreasonable and unequal, because
some of them solemnly profess, (which I scarce believe,) that they cannot
suffer Presbytry; then by the same reason, the Toleration of Presbytry is much
more unreasonable, and unequal, because all of them do solenmly profess,
that they cannot, neither will they suffer Independency; though Independents
could suffer them, would but the Parliament, according to their own Covenant
and Laws, knock off their Horns, pluck out their Tusks, break their Jaws, pare
their Nails, that they neither Push, goar, crush, bite, scratch or devour any
more: for if it be in force to all, for that deny all by some, it is much more
forceable to all, where all deny: So that, if they deny all of Toleration be a
sufficient Argument, (as it seems according to the Reason of the Lon. Min.)
against the Toleration of such denyers, then what must become of the
Presbyters? The same pit that they have dug for others, they must be content
to fall into it themselves.

Lon. Min. Many mischiefs will inevitably follow upon this Toleration, and
that both upon Church and Commonwealth. First to the Church.

Bitten heart-burnings among Brethren, will be fomented and perpetuated to
Posterity.

Mar. The reason of this Argument is this; That which* will occasion
heart-burnings, foment and perpetuate them to posterity, is not to be
tolerated in a Commonwealth. Therefore, if I prove an Universal Tolleration
will be an occasion of allaying of heart-burnings to posterity, Persecution the
contrary, then by the Argument of the Lon. Min. such Tolleration is lawful,
and that which they so ignorantly prosecute, unlawful.

That which occasioneth murmurings, repinings, fears, jealousies, conspiracies,
insurrections, rebellions, etc. begets heart-burnings, and p^rpetuates them
to Posterity; and so by your Argument, not to be Tolerated: And on the
contrary, That which does not beget murmurings, etc. does not beget
heart-burnings, or perpetuate them to Posterity, but tends to allay them, and
prevent them, and so by your own reasoning to be tolerated.

But Persecution, or Non-Tolleration which you plead for, occasioneth and
begets murmurings, repinings. etc. for it enrageth the Conscience, then
which, nothing is more near and dear unto us, and a wounded Conscience, (says
Solomon,) who is able to bear it? We had rather loose our lives then deny our
Faith; and what will not men do for their lives? this suggesteth and provokes
to Conspiracies, Jnsu^rections, Rebellions, etc. as Holland, France, Germany,
Jreland, Scotland and England, etc. have felt by woeful experience: Nothing is
more desperate and resolute, then an enraged Conscience,* it is of a Lyon-like
nature in its fury, it bears on a man, even to the shedding and laying down
of his life; no dangers, no attempts, though never so difficult, never so
desperate, can bear it down; it will venture, though it perish; and on the
contrary, (to use mine own words in the Arraignment, page 12.) it is a Lamb,
if appeased, and nothing more mild, more gentle and loving then it. Enraged, it
is like the wild Bore out of the Forest; pleased, it is like the Dove frrom
the Arc; no greater friend, no greater foe; Oppression (says the Wise man)
will make a wise man mad; a very worm will turn again, if troad upon; It may
beget wrath, but never can beget Love, and that which does so, must needs beget
heartheart-burnings and perpetuate them to posterity; Therefore by your own
grant, not to be Tolerated: Thus the Fowlers are caught in their own snare.

Land. Min. The life and power of godliness, will be eaten out by frivilous
Disputes, and vain janglings. Mart. The Reason of this Argument, is this, That
which eats out the life and power of godliness, in the judgment of the Lon.
Min. is not to be tolerated. Whence I Reason.

That which preventeth the breaking and spreading forth of Knowledge in the
Word of God, eats up the life and power of godliness.

But Non-tolleratition, your silensing all Disputes, trial of Doctrines, and
confining unto all your Dictates, preventeth and suppresseth the breaking
forth, increase and growth of knowledge; for by fair and equal Reasonings,
and trial of Doctrine, light would daily break forth and increase; as common
experience does witness.

How could you have been converted to Presbytry? How could the Rottenness of
Popery, Episcopacy, etc. have been discovered, and spread through the Kingdom,
had it not been for Preachings, Writings, Disputations, trial of Doctrine, etc.

Therefore your Non-Tolleration, and suppressing of all Disputes, etc. eats
up the life and Power of Godliness; and therefore not to b^ s^tled.

Thus far the London-Ministers and MARTIN are agreed: Surely their Letter is
a close couched Presbyterian Design of coming over to Independency; I Will
promise you, this is a fair step at the first, and pretty cunningly carried:
we gratulate our so happy concurrence; Sirs, You are all heartily welcome to
our Sanctnary in TOLERATION-STREET, and we acknowledge our selves deeply
engaged to the London Ministers, for their good service to our cause: Be
therefore encouraged, Reverend and beloved Brethren, go on and prosper, we
are not offended at your Policy, to Reason thus covertly for us; we well know,
that Rome was not built in a day.

But let us proceed, and see what further Assistance your Reasons affords.

Land. Min. The whole course of Religion in private Families will be
in^^rrupted and undermined. The Reason of which Argument is this. Martin. That
which interrupteth and undermineth the course of Religion, in private Families,
is not to be settled.

The edge of which Reason, I thus turn against you.

That which tends to the making of Hypocrites, Fearers, and pleasers of men
more then of God, must needs interrupt and undermine the purity of Religion in
private Families.

But the coercive Power, which you so plead for, does so; for it makes
multitudes, (as common experience does too much witness,) for fear of bodily
punishment, deprivation of their goods, loss of their Places, Trading, etc. to
dissemble with their Consciences, even practice contrary thereto, and temporize
with the Time, which is an absolute perversion of the power of Godliness in
them* Therefore.

Lon. Min. Reciprocal duties between Persons of nearest and dearest relation,
will be extremely violated. Mar. The reason hereof is, That which is
destructive to reciprocal duties, is to be abominated; the which I thus retort
upon your own heads. That which sets Father against Son, son against
Father, one friend against another, King against Parliament, Parliament against
King, Kingdom against Kingdom, and divides Nations and People amongst
themselves, and enrageth them one against another, extremely violateth
Reciprocal Duties between Persons of nearest and dearest relation.

But so does Persecution; For where this principle is, of forcing the
contrary-minded, will they, nill they, it engendereth and begets fears and
jealousies one of another; and when one knows the other is his mortal enemy,
it makes each other to stand in defyance and defense one against the other,
even to the drawing of the sword, especially when one thinks he can conquer the
other, which makes them lie in wait for blood, witness our Armies of this
Kingdom; and hereupon they wallow in one another blood: Yea, what will not
the oppressed do against the oppressor; Tyranny is the mother of
Conspiracies, Murmurings, Repinings, etc, which at length break forth (after
they have gotten strength,) into open Rebellions, Insurrections, etc. Therefore
Non-Toleration extremely violateth reciprocal duties between Persons of
nearest and dearest Relation.

Lon. Min. 9. 10. All other Sects etc. (See the Letter.) Mar. The marrow of
these two is this, That Independency i^ not to be Tolerated, because other
Sects and Heresies, under that notion, will seek to be tolerated: But in case
they should not, then by the virtue of your Argument, it should be tolerated:
So that, by your own grant, its Toleration is only accidentally unequal; not
absolutely in respect of it self; but casually in respect of others. Therefore,
why are you so hott against the equity of it^ Toleration, seeing from your own
Argument, it is equal. If it be good to tolerate that, and evil to tolerate
Heresies, etc. you must not forbear the good, to avoid the evil, do evil,
that good may come of it, but must do the thing that is just and equal in it
self; that is, tolerate the Independents, whom you title Brethren, godly and
learned, and do to them, as you say of them, what ever becomes of us; we
neither expect nor crave your mercy: If we cannot have Justice on earth, we
appeal unto the God of heaven, and meekly and freely submit, to suffer for his
Name, with our hearts rejoicing, that we can be counted worthy so to do.

L. Min. Secondly, (mischiefs) to the Commonwealth; for thereby the Kingdom
will be weakened by Scand^lls and Divisions, etc. Mart. The reason of this
Argument is, That which tends not to keep all in Peace and Civil Society,
but reduces them to Divisions and scandals, that is not to be established by
your thus reasoning: But Nontoleration keeps not all, but one predominant
Sect in Unity, dividing all others from it; persecuting, reviling, upbraiding,
and reproaching them, though never so honest, godly, conscienscious, sober,
meek, and neighbourly, with lies, scandalls, nicknames, as Anabaptists,
Brownists, Schismatics, Heretics, prodi^ious new wandering Blazing-Starres
and Firebrands, pernicious mutiners, waspish Generation, schismatic,
Anti-Parliamentary, inf^mous, mutinous, daring, presumptuous, scurr^lous^,
libellous, scandalous, seditious, insolent, blasphemous, seditious Trumpetters,
revilers of God, despisers of Government, resisters of Higher power, stirrers
up of Sedition and insurrection, Anabaptisticall Sectaries, New furious
Sectaries, avowed conspiratours, contemners of Parl. Anti-covenanters,
audatious, contemptuous Libellers, New furious Ringleaders of Sedition,
House-creepers, Incendiaries, Railing Rabshakeh's, public contemners,
Affronters of Parl. *blasphemers against the Assembly of Divines, and. (* See
Pryns Fresh Discovery. page 17. Contents of the 4. Sect.) which are no other
then terms of provocation and wrath, of vengeance and ignomy, tending to the
breach of the general Bond of Unity, Peace, and Civil Society, which must
needs extremely weaken the Kingdom, for the Kingdom lies in he Unity of the
People. Therefore your Non-Toleration ought in no wise to be established.

L. Min. It is much to be d^ubted, least the power of the Magestrate, etc. See
Letter. Martin. The reason hereof is, Those that are Anti-Magesteriall, or
weaken the Magesteriall Power, are not to be tolerated: But your intended
Prelaticall Presbytry is Anti Magisteriall: Ergo, you have brought your Hogs
to a fair market, held in Toleration-street, at the sign of the Subjects
Liberty, etc.

Minor proved
Those that would not have all coercive Power in the Magestrates hands, are
Anti-Magesteriall, and weakners of the Magestrates Power.

But Presbytry would not have all coercive Power only in the hands of the
Magestracy, but labors to encroach, as much as possibly it can into its own
hands, as continued practice does evidence. Therefore, by the London Ministers
own reasoning, Presbytry is Anti-Magesteriall, and not to be settled.

On the contrary. Those that would have all Civil Power, preserved entire in
its own proper Magesteriall compass, are not in the least Anti-Magisteriall.

But Reverend MARTIN, with his Independent Brethren, would have it entirely
preserved in its own Magesteriall compass; they would not have it wrested or
perverted to this or that Sect, to this or that Religion, but would have it,
yea, expose their lives to have it preserved precisely in its own property.

Therefore, Reverend MARTIN, and his Brethren are not Anti-Magesteriall: But in
all faithfulness, acknowledge themselves not only ly bound to pray for all in
lawful Authority, but even to spend their Lives and Estates in their Just
Defense, against all opposition, encroachment and usurpation thereof,
whatsoever: And to this our practice, has given Witness, even when Magestracy
was in greatest danger of subvertion; for when the Parliament had no other
help under God, then we stuck closest to them; even, when the King came in a
Hostile manner for the 6. MEMBERS in the House; while the degenerate
Temporizing Presbyters, stood as far off, as from Scotland to Westminster;
and have continued unspotted in our Fidelity to them, even unto this very day.

And this I dare be bold to affirm, That if the King should conquer and
confound the Parliament, the now Parliamentized-Presbyters, even the Clergy in
general, would therewith be Royalized, rather then loose their several
Parsonages; and that which is now Antichristian, Episcopacy, would then be as
Christian as ever it was in their esteems; for they will tell you* That they must
submit unto the Higher Powers, and the Powers that are, are of God; and that
cures all.

If you do but consider, they have even reserved an help at a dead lift, they
tell us now, That a Bishop and a Presbyter is all one, and thereupon retain
their old Ordination, derived from a foreign Power, and so go forth, and
ordain other young Bishops; So that if the King should subdue us, they are
still in their Episcopal Ministry, and a little Royal Reformation would
continue their places. Then they would take Covenants, Preach and pray against
the Parliament, as much as ever they did against the King: Thus, rather then
they would be confounded themselves, they would let true Magesteriall
Parliamentary Government go to confusion; and in that Day of Trial, scarce
any would be found to witness against Him, except the now despised handful of
Separates.

And yet we must be cast out of the Parliaments Protection, by this
Temporizing Faction of Presbyters: Ungrateful inhumanity! Hear O Heavens! and
judge O Earth!

BUt whereas his Holiness, out of a late spiritual Rapture, at that
Inquisition Ordinance of the Supper, has in the 6, 7. and 8. pages of the Ord.
for Tithes Dismounted, even spurned at Synodean prodigy in the Highest O^be;
whereupon, through the weakness of some, and malice of others, I am
misconstructed to be Anti-Parliamentory: I would have such, the Two Honorable
Houses of Parliament, and the whole World know, That there was not, nor is to
this day, the least thought, or intent in my heart against Magesteriall
Government, either therein, or in any thing else that I have written; And of
this I take God to Record, as I shall answer it at the great and Dreadful Day
of Judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Only
respecting Presbyterian deprivation, or corruption too much diffused (to my
hearts grief) into the Two Houses, by the bewitching subtilty, and
over-powering Policy of that prevalent, deceitful, Synodean Faction; and so my
writing there, is not against that High and Honorable Gou^t, or any thing in
their Magesteriall capacity, but simply against the Presbyterian Exorbitancy,
in the Names of the LORDS and COMMONS stretched beyond the limits and Precincts
of their Magesteriall Function. As for the Congregational, Classical,
Provincial, National Courts and grievances, there mentioned, I was forced, in
Equity and Justice, to use them in their Names, in whose they were owned and
published, else how could I have discharged my Duty in the reproof of the one,
or discovery of the other; so that my virulency and bitterings there, is only
against* Presbyterian Competitors, and Intruders into the Office and Royalty of
my most Sovereign Lord, the King of Kings, CHRIST JESUS; against all
tyrannical encroachers, and usurpers of our Birthrights, Liberties, and
freedoms in Persons and Estates, under what pretense, notion or Title soever.

So that in plain English, the proper morrall and genuine intent of those 3.
pages, is a mere contestation and defyance of your Presbyterian Tyranny,
whether in the name of the two Houses, or otherwise gloss'd or presented;
laboring thereby only to brush off the superior Title of the Two Houses from
it, that it might be clearly discovered in its proper ugly Presbyterian shape,
unto the Kingdom; only to pluck off its Parliamentary cloak, that we might the
better discern that Synodean, Presbyteran Monster. That the People, under that
specious Magisteriall vizor, may not entertain that deadly venomous
Presbyterian Serpent into their bosoms, and be destroyed unawares.

Thus I am resolved to oppose Tyranny it self, where ever I find it, maugre
the malice of Devils, and terror of the mighty Rulers of this Earth, yea,
even of the sturdy Presbyters themselves; though I, and all that is mine perish,
I Will do it: were there a Parliament of no less then Emperors, Kings and
Princes competitours with it, I would spare them in my just testimony against
it, no more then I would so many beggars upon a dunghill; for I have not the
truth of my GOD, nor the love of my Country in respect of Persons.

And this my contestation and defyance of Presbytry, is no otherwise against
it, but only as it is Exorbitant, Tyrannical, Prelatticall, Cruel and
Ambitious; as for honest, meek, Evangelicall Presbytry, I am ready, through the
Power of my God, to seal it with my blood, even ou^ of an unfeigned love
thereunto. So that in brief, my emnity is only against Tyranny, where ever I
find it, whether in Emperor, King, Prince, Parliament, Presbyters, or People.

Thus Reader, thou have my own proper sense, as being best expounder of my own
words, for no man knows the heart of man, but himself: All other I utterly
disclaim, and only own that forementioned Sense, and thereto subscribe.

MARTIN MAR-PRIEST.
DOUBT.
Who has won the Coat of Diverse Colors, MARTIN, or the London-Ministers?



FINIS.

