MARTIN'S ECHO: OR A REMONSTRANCE, FROM His Holiness reverend Young Martin
Mar-Priest, responsorie to the late Sacred Synoddicall Decretall, in all
humility presented to the reverend, pious, and grave consideration of the Right
Reverend Father in God, the Universal Bishop of our souls, his superlative
Holiness Sir Simon Synod.
WHereas his Holiness, Reverend Young MARTIN-MAR-PRIEST, taking into his Grave
and Learned consideration, the insufferable Arogancy of our Ambitious aspiring
Presbytrie, their super-Prelaticall Supremacy, their ravenous blood-thirsty
malice against the poor Saints of the most High GOD, their inordinate
insatiable covetousness after the fatt things of the Land, their unparalleled
hypocricy, their plausible pretenses, their incomprehensible policy, craft and
subtilty, their cunning insensible encroachments upon the Privileges of
Parliament, the just Liberties and freedom of the People, their enchanting
delusions, wherewith they bewitch both Parlialiament and multitude, the cruel
Thraldom, inhumane Slavery, insufferable bondage they would Reform us and our
Children into from Generation to Generation, their powerful endeavors to make
the Parliament betray their Trust, break their Oaths, pull down Old Courts of
Tyranny and Opression, to set up new; free us from Episcopal Persecution, to
devour us with Presbyterian cruelty, convey our native Rights and Freedom to
the Pontifical usurpation of the Clergy, that neither we nor our Children
after us, ( notwithstanding the expense of our Estates, ruin of our Families,
effusion of our Blood to redeem them) may live in the Land, without the hazard
of Imprisonment, loss of goods, banishment* hanging, etc. except we be
Presbyterian, these and many other things of high concernment, reveren'd Young
MARTIN taking into his serious and deliberate consideration, and seeing this
eminent irrecoverable ruin, ready to devour both Parliament and people, hang
over their Heads, threatening certain destruction to us and our Posterity, if
not timely and suddenly prevented; Hereupon his Holiness, reverend Young
MARTIN, out of sincerity to God, and natural love unto his distressed Country,
most willingly became servant to your superlative Holiness, to ease your
burden in this your toylsome time of Classical Exaltation, of a little
State-Ambition, and spiritual Supremacy, and as much as in him lies, to
vindicate the Privilege of Parliament, our Birthrights and native freedom
from your divine Spirituallity, ehat you might have the more time to stuff
your guts, extend your panches, cram your bellies, farcinate your ventricles,
snort out Directories, blurt out Ordinances, grin at Christ, and snerle at his
Sectaries, and for his meritorious pious endeavors, MARTIN expected a reward,
as very justly he might; but to cloak your covetousness and ingratitude, you
pick Quarrels against him for some small failings in his Treatise; I hope you
will deal better with Mr. Prynne for his midnight Dreams, his distracted
subitaine apprehensions, I can tell you* he expects it, but MARTIN might have
considered your ingratitude to the Lord Bishops, from whom formerly you
received the Holy Ghost, with all your spiritual Preferments, and were first
put into a capacity of Lording it, as you now do, over the people, whom, like
ungra^ious children, viperous vermin, inhumane Caniballs, notwithstanding
their grace and favor, you have devoured up, and share their inheritance
amongst you; ( O divine pillage! grateful children!) Or if he had considered
your pious providence to make sure the Ordinance for Tithes, before you could
be inspired with the Directory, he would first have had his 400l. per annum,
with the Deane of Paul's house, confirmed by an Ordinance of Parliament, upon
him during his natural life, like as our Brother Burges has ( a
super-Episcopall Induction!) or else dedicated his labors according to your
ancient practice, to some great Lord or other in the Kingdom, in whose hands
was the desposall of some good Church Livings, and then doubtless, the spirit
of his Lord ( like as it was wont to do with you,) would have moved npon Dr.
MARTIN* to lift up his hands, and elevated his eyes unto the skies for his
Lordship, his most honored Lord and Patron, or rather have done, as now in
your divine Wisdoms, you find it expedient to give us example, all Livings
being fallen into the hands of the Parliament, to have Dedicated my Book, To
the Honorable House of Commons, etc. But forasmuch, as instead of a
considerable gratuity, you threaten to deal with him as ill or worse then your
bloody Fathers did with those Worthy and Faithful Servants of God and their
Country, Barrow, Greenwood, Penry, and others, he is resolved to deal with
you according to your Iniquity, yet that you might have nothing against MARTIN,
and that his Holiness ( like yours) might appear immaculate and Infallible to
to the whole World, MARTIN Proclaims and Remonstrates to all persons
Ecclesiastical, by what Name or Title soever dignified or distinguished,
whether Archbishop-Calamies, or other inferior single-sol'd Presbyters, That
his Holiness, Reverend Young MARTIN MAR-PRIEST, freely offers plenary Pardon
and full Remission to that Traiterous blood-thirsty Man-eater, Sir Simon Synod,
for his foul ingratitude, his malicious, mischievous, murtherous Debates,
Consultations and Conclusions, to shed the innocent blood of His Holiness,
Reverend Young MARTIN MAR-PRIEST, and deliver him as a Prey to the monstrous,
Psalm. 58. 6.
huge Iron Fangs, and venomous Boarish Tusks of his son Jack, and his bloody
Crew, (* Break their Teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great Teeth
of the young Lions, O LORD:) if the said salvage barbarous Caniball, Sir Simon
Synod, the next day of Humiliation, after the publishing hereof, shall very
penetentially, ( as if he were to Preach a Fast Sermon) come in unto Reverend
MARTIN, and humbly submit himself to his Holiness at his Sanctuary in
Toleration-street, right opposite to State-opression, and Synodian Tyranny, and
there humbly before Reverend Young MARTIN, confess his evil, acknowledge his
errors, and be heartily sorry for the same, live sociably and quietly amongst
his Neighbors, never molest or injure any man for Conscience, suffer his Teeth
and Nails to be plucked out and pared by an honest Independent Barber, that
hereafter he may never bite nor scratch, and then peaceably return to his
Parochial Charge, render up all the goodly fat Benefices in the Kingdom to
supply the necessities of the State, pay their Arreares in the Army, gratify
their Sick, Lame, and maimed-Souldiers with a Reward more honorable (
according to their deserts) then a Ticket to Beg, supply the calamity,
poverty and misery of poor Widows and Orphans, whose dear Husbands and Fathers
have been slayen in the service of the State, and not ( out of Synodean
State Policy) to save their Charity, subject the innocent Babes to be led by
the Spirit into Indian Deserts and Wildernesses, and under pretense of
Authority, rob the tender Mothers of the fruit of their wombs ( a wickedness
insufferable in a Commonwealth) and to send the Freeborne out of their native
Protection, to Foreign Destruction, least the Cry of the Fatherless and
Widows should call for relief out of their fat Benefices, Pontifical
Revenues, etc. O the Civetousnesse of the Priests, and the Mercy of God (as the
German says) endure for ever, If he shall hereto assent, renounce the
Ordinance of Tithes, be content with the good will of the vulgar, lay down his
State-Ambition, and usurpation of the Civil Power, suffer the Commons of the
Land ( both rich and poor) which are a freeborn people, to enjoy quietly their
own native freedom, that we may freely and unanimously engage our lives,
fortunes and estates in the just defense of the Parliament, whom we have
honored, and are still ready to honor with the sacrifice of our hearts blood
against their Enemies in all fidelity, uprightness and syncerity, for their
just Privileges, and redemption of the Common Liberty of the Common people of
England, etc. and that as we have been faithful, and done better service for
the State then all the English or Scotch Presbyters in the Kingdom have done,
that in justice and honor to the Parliament and Kingdom of England, we may
equally enjoy our Freedoms and Protection with them, and be numbered amongst
the Freeborne of the Land: If Sir Simon shall hereunto freely assent, and
humbly accept of this grace offered, Reverend Young MARTIN-MARPRIEST poclaimeth
unto the whole world, that after the assurement thereof, he will not deride you
any more, but will as freely engage his life and fortunes for honest mild
Presbytry, without any grutch or heartburning for bypast injuries, as for any
other Sect of people whatsoever. But if Sir Simon shall reject this grace and
favor freely offered to him, and to all the Sir John's in the Kingdom by his
Holiness, reverend young MARTIN MAR-PRIEST, out of his divine Clemency thus
graciously extended from his Holiness, that the said MARTIN ( with reverence
be it spoken) Remonstrates and Proclaims to the whole Assembly of Sir John's,
and to the whole Kingdom, that come Bondage, come Liberty, come life, come
death, come what come will, by the grace of God, Young MARTIN is resolved to
unmaske your villainy to Posterity and lay a foundation for a future, if not for
a present recovery of the Privilege of Parliament, and Liberties of the common
People from your Synodicall Classical Presbyterian predominancy, and therefore
Sir Simon be advised betime, accept of this Grace and favor offered, harden
not your hearts, as in the days of the Bishops, least the fierce wrath of the
Lord, even sudden destruction fall upon you, as it did upon them, for be
assured, swift and fearful destruction and ruin does attend you, and the Lord
will avenge his Quarrel at your hands, and as it is done unto your Fathers the
Bishops, so shall it be done unto you, and if your rising ambition be not
suddenly repelled, your rise, reign and fall will be terrible to the Kingdom,
you may delude the people a while, but the time hastneth, that the people will
call you to an account, the Lord grant, it be not as I fear, by the sword.

As for your 400l. (Sir Simon) thy many perish with thee, thou art in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, etc. And MARTIN must have a 1000.
Tyth Goose-egges per annum forsooth, well said Simon Suck-egge: I thought
something was the matter, that made you so lusty, Sir Simon, you have such good
store of Eggs, it is true indeed, the holy Tribe's as venerious as venerable,
but Martin, for the honor of his cloth, will whist there a little.

Well Sr. Simon, if you will not mend your manners, Martin will observe hears
all your Postures, and tells you plainly, that he will not only fall upon your
bones himself, but he will set his Celestial Brother, Christopher Scale-Skie,
his Chatachisticall brother Rowland Rattle-Priest, his divine Brethren, Martin
Claw-Clergy, and Brtholmew Bang-Priest, all upon your back, and amongst us all,
we shall in time turn up the foundation of your Classical Supremacy, and pull
down your Synodean Sphere about your ears; Behold a Troop comes Sir
Simon, MARTIN is of the Tribe of God, though an Host of Sir John's overcome
him, yet he shall overcome at last, yea, he will jeare you out of your Black
Cloaks, and make you ashamed of King Henry the Seventh Chapel, and be glad to
work with your hands, or to be content with the good will of the vulgar, and
then it will be too late to compound with Reverend MARTIN and his Divine
Brethren, therefore consider with your self, Sir Simon, before the Mighty Acts
of the House of Martin come out against you, we do not intend to dally with
you, we will handle you without Mittins, thwack your Cassocks, rattle your
Jackets, stamp upon the Panch of your Villanny, and squeeze out the filth and
garbidge of your Iniquity, till you stink in the nostrills of the
Common People, yea, we will beat you and your Son Jack, gutts and all into a
Mouse-hole, there is not one of the MARTINS Tribe, but's a man of mettle, and
hates a Tyth-devouring persecuting Priest, as he hates the Devil, scorns
their bribes, and bids defiance to their malice: These are to advise you Sir
Simon, turn ye to MARTIN, into Tolerationstreet, ye stiff-necked generation
of Priests, least the fierce wrath, and fore displeasure of Mighty MARTIN fall
upon you, confound you and your whole Sir John generation, Root and Branch;
hearken ye rebellious Assembly unto MARTIN, persecute no more, take no more
Tithes, be content with the good will of the Vulgar.

But to leave off jeasting, on the sudden I am struck with compassion over you,
to remember the great complaints made of diverse of you, that the hedge of your
Vinyard is broaken down, all Government and Discipline of the Church laid in
her grave, Burges, Sermon. Nov. 5. 1641. page 60.
and all the putredinous vermin of bold Schismatics, and frantic Sectaries
glory in her ashes, making their fall their own rising to mount your Pulpits,
etc. and alas ( as old Ephraim says) your poor Church is oppressed, and who
lays hand to help, the plague of Heresy is among you, and you have no power
to keep the sick from the whole; The Wolves that were went to lie in the woods,
are come into your sheepfold, and roar in the holy Congregations. Oh thou
Shepherd of Israel, why have thou broaken down the HEDGE of this thy
Vinyeard, which thy right hand has planted? The Bore of the wood, and the
wild boast out of the field do devour, etc. Heresiog. page 41.

I cannot but very much deplore your grievous loss thereby sustained; But why
did you your selves put to your hands with such violence to break down the
HEDGE by pulling up the Hedge-stakes thereof, the Lord Bishops, etc. as was
evident by your Petitioning and Preaching against them, and therefore if the
Wolves, or the wild Beast of the field, or the Bullock MARTIN roar in your
Congregations, waste and devour your Vinyeard, yet do not you blame the
Parliament for it; what would you have them always to attend you, that as soon
as you, at your pleasures have plucked up the Bishops, the Old stakes, that
they be ready with their Hedging-Betles to knock down the new stiff
Presbyters into their Holes? such has been their good service to the Church
and State, that for my part, it should not much trouble me to see them all well
knocked down; I mean to see to Dr. Burges, and a competent number of his
Brethren, set down upon their Presbyterian Thrones, judging the Tribes of this
our Israel; Oh then our Church would shine most gloriously in their Satin
doublets, and cloakes lined through with Plush, their Wives and Children
Flourish like young Princes, their spits filled with Pigges, Geese and Capons,
their Caldrons with beef, their barnes with Corn, their Pastures with sheep,
their Prisons with Heretics; Widows, Orphans, and Lame Soldiers, standing
with their Pitchers, begging Pottage at others doors, and the Independants,
Brownists and Anabaptists driven into Augure-holes, as it was in the Primative
times -- we have forgot the Chapter and Verse, and so cannot quote the place,
wherefore dear Brethren, for the accomplishment hereof, let me advise you in
good sober-sadnesse, to take MARTINS Counsel: for I have seriously considered
your indefatigable industry, to wrestle through this Great Work of Church
Reformation from Episcopacy to Presbytry, and your difficulties, lets, and
inconveniences to be innumerable, your enemies inexpugnable, desperate and
factious, yet ( Good Sym) be not discouraged, let not your hands be feeble,
your tongues remiss and silent, or your inventions slow and unactive, for a
great part of the people of the land, besides our Scoth Brethren, advanced
lately as far into the South, as from BramptonMo^re to Westmerland for your
assistance, are all yours, by virtue of the Holy League and Covenant, which
they may in no wise falsefie, until they see it convenient for them so to do,
as in your most sacred Exhortation to the taking of the said League and
Covenant you have taught them, page 4.

The Churches Reformation, as has been often declared by our Reverend Brother,
the new Dean of Paul's, by Mr. Sedgewick and others in their learned Sermons,
has ever proved a difficult Work: Nehemiah and the Jews with him at the
re-building of the Wall of the City of Jerusalem was so assaulted by
Sanballet, Tobiah, etc. that in one hand they were feign to hold a weapon,
whilst they wrought with the other; do you every man of you the like, be ye
mounted upon your great Coach-Horses, which trundle you too and fro from London
to Westminster; mount all your New Canons, and advance like mighty men of
Valor, the horsemen and Chariots of Israel, even whole black Regiments of you
into the fields, under the conduct of your Generallissimo Will. Twisse
Prolocutour, and fire all your new cast Ordinances at once in the face of your
enemies, and so finish your Good Work your selves, and trust your Sacred Cause
no longer in the hands of the Profane, nor yet rely upon the help of your
Enemies the Brownists and Anabaptists, (those white noone Devils, as Mr.
Edwards in his Antipol. very virtuously calls them, which now will hardly
ever do you any good, though formerly they intruded themselves into your
service) but obtain an Ordinance to expel them especially, and all their
Tub-preaching out of the Cities of Strength, Garrisons, and several Armies,
yea forth of the Kingdom, to the depopulated Cities in Munster in Ireland, and
so wash your own hands ( Pilate-like) from their blood, by delivering them to
the Rebels, to slaughter them for you, and then there is no fear but your
Work will prosper and go forward, if that withal you be but careful to
continue your zealous course of Fasting, Long Prayers, etc. and in the mean
time, cease not to possess both Parliament and People, that all that oppose
you by word or writing, ( though never so conformable to Truth) are unnatural
enemies and Rebbells to their Country, and insufferable in a Commonwealth,
and that it is not against your Sect and faction they only strike at, but
through your sides all Persons, Laws and Government, both Magisteriall and
Ecclesiastical, even utterly to confound all, and reduce all to confusion and
community, and leave us neither the face of a Church or Commonwealth, as in
your various Sermons and Writings you have in a good measure already performed;
these are only to put you in remembrance of these things; I know you are not
ignorant hereof, let not their writings come into the public against you, and
if they chance like MARTINS, to steal into the world, be sure to blast them
with Nonsense, Ignorance, Blasphemy, Heresy, etc. to prejudicate the people
against them, and make those Sectaries, and all, who like the men of Su^eoth,
and the Inhabitants of Meroz, refuse to come into your assistance against the
mighty, seem odious and contemptible in the affections and estimations of your
hearers, with infamous reproaches, lies, slanders and calumnies, as if they
were the monsters of men, the most vile, blasphemous, and wicked under the
whole heavens, overshadow their good actions with an esteem of Hypocrisy,
Vainglory or the like; if they propose any Course ( though never so
considerable and honest) unto the Parliament, for their Assistance, blast it
with Sedition, brand it with conspiracy, be sure to anticipate their
acceptance, for should they be inclined to their fidelity, it would be very
prejuditiall to your Policy, you know what you have to do, deal wisely with
them, so that they neither see nor perceive it, if any Petitions for redress,
or Remonstrances of their miseries from them be presented to the House, let
them have a courteous and compassionate acceptance, and a friendly compliance
in some trivialls to keep them in hope, and defer their business through
the urgency of present occasion to another time, and like humble moderate men,
they will depart with much content and gratitude for your favorable respect, and
thus suspend the business; and it will bury it self in a small process of
time: But if they shall further persist, and renew their addresses to the
Parliament, be sure to traduce the Promoters and Presenters of such matters, as
too furious and heady, and reward their sticklers and chief men in the
business with a Prison, and then the poor innocent souls will easily let the
suit fall, and you may tread upon them most triumphantly, like mire in the
street.

Further, you must be very vigilant in their conversations, and if you catch
them in any failings or transgression, remember them in your Pulpits, draw them
out to the full length, set them upon the Tentures, aggrevate them to the
utmost; As for their Tenants, sift them, and cull out those that the Vulgar
distaste and speak ill of, and thereon be sure to lay load, so shall you more
easily grind to powder the credit of their faction, and work your wills over
them.

For their opinions that are generally received, and reputed as Orthodox,
christen them with other Names, such as is contemptible and ridiculous in the
vulgar acceptance, and under that Banner you may render them and all that they
hold wicked and intolerable in a Commonwealth, and conquer them as you please.

And in your dealing with them, take your advantage at their several and
various opinions, their controversies and dissentions among themselves, make
their divisions greater, if you can possible, but be sure to present them in a
Multiplying-glasse to the People, that the people may conclude, there is nothing
but madness and confusion amongst them, and be afraid to come near them, thus
maugre their Innocence and uprightness, your designs will be carried on the
more smoothly against them through the people.

These my Instructions and such like chiefly relate unto your Predicatory
practice, wherefore I would have you, according to your lawdible custom,
before you devote them to the Press, pare off such passages as too grossly
betray your policy, or may incite them to a just vindication of themselves,
and a discovery of your knavery, as passages which only in speaking had their
use, the more to inculcate, and the better to set on the matter, Cor. Burges,
Sermon.
but would not have been so grateful in writing, etc.

I speak not this to undervallue you, Nov. 17. 1640.
for I know you are most expert thereat; If you have any Design against them,
conceal your purpose, Epist. Ded. p. 2.
and face your intentions with some show of lenity, or tender respect over
them, be sure of substantial pretenses in the procurement of Laws and
Ordinances against them, observe the temper and humor of the Parliament, which
way it runs, and be sure to comply therewith, magnify them, as if they were
so many Gods, buzze into their ears things suitable to their natures, and so you
shall make them your own, incense them against those that oppose your Ambition
and Covetousness ( as I know you can easily do it) and then they will Vote
for you against them, and an Ordinance will be quickly dispatched to enjoyne
all men under the pain of a Fine, Imprisonment without bail or Mainprise, and
Banishment (except MARTIN) not to speak or write against the Directory, to
engage every one in the forfeiture of -- that abstaineth a month from his
Parish Church, and the like; such like Ordinances, if you will be but wise, you
shall have at your pleasure, and Brethren, I do not blame you of folly, only
as a Brother I advise you: You must not respect what your Adversaries say
against you, you must be instant in season and out of season, never leave
undermining and suggesting with plausible specious pretenses, if one Project
fail, set upon another, never give out, till you obtain your just desires,
your new intended High Commission, I know I miscall it, but you must pardon my
weakness, lapsus linguae non est error mentis, you can never long enjoy the
inheritance of your Fathers without it; What though your Adversaries say, such
Courts are unlawful and destructive to their Liberties, you must not regard
what they say, tell them, Burges, Sermon.
these Whips of Scorpions, the back-breaking, heart-sinking Courts, which are
now broken down and dissolved, Nov. 5. 1641.
were unlawful for the Bishops, but not for the Presbyters, that know how to
use them; you must be careful that your Directory, page 54.
and all other your Ecclesiastical Acts, be with great sanctity and reverence
adored amongst the People, or else your esteem will go down, and this cannot
be done without some severe Laws, Ordinances, and the like to that end, which
you must put the Parliament upon, you know your Power, and Influence upon them,
they will gratify you with such toys, it may be the Sectaries will tell you,
that while they have hearkened unto you, to deal evilly with them, the Lord
has delivered their strength into the hands of the enemy.

While they were in debate how to suppress the Anabaptists, etc. Exeer became
a prey to the enemy.

Another time consulting upon your motion, to send them out of the Land, the
Besiegers at Newark upon Trent were routed, all their Arms taken; etc.

And when you had over-powred the Parliament, and had procured an Ordinance to
be drawn up to suppress them in the Armies and elsewhere, the day before it
was to be drawn up, News came that his Excellency was wholly routed in the
West, bag and baggage, all their Armestaken, and forced to composition for
their lives.

And now being busied to satisfy your cry to fortify your Directory, etc. in
the mean time Lecester is taken, thousands put to the sword, etc.

The Sectaries will tell you these are tokens of Gods wrath to forewarne them
from harkening longer to your delusions, but do not believe them what ever
they say, or can make out against you with unanswerable proof, steel your
hearts against them, make to your selves faces of Brass, and out-brazen them
in your Pulpits, though they manifestly make it appear, that you have been the
fomenters, and are the proroguers of this War, that you intend to enslave the
Kingdom in greater bondage then the Bishops, etc. to confute them before your
hearers, Newcom.
and regaine and retain your esteem, cry to the LORD, if we have done this,
Sermon.
if there be such iniquity in our hands, then let the enemy persecute our
soul, Craft and Cruelty.
and take it; let them tread down our life upon the earth, and lay our Honor
in the dust, etc. and the people will believe you; N^v. 5. 1643.
I need not tell you, you know it by experience, you can wipe off a thousand of
these infamies with a wet eye; you see, I improve my wits for your advance
above the State and People, page 39.
but do not think evilly of me for my loving advise, as some unhappy Varlets
would make me believe, who say that you are intended for a reserve to the City,
least their fatt Beef and Mutton should putrify in the Butchers Shambles, I
hear that you have more mind to eat then to fight, and I partly believe it, I
would it were otherwise; if you think it not yet convenient to restrain the
wicked Anabaptists, Brownists and Independants from spilling their blood, and
ruinating their families, to help forward your Reformation, be careful to
keep them from all places of Command, as you did in the new moulding of your
Army, that so you may be able to crush them at your pleasure, least according
to your practice and Principles for the Preservation of Religion and Liberties,
as dear to them as to your selves, they should having power in their hands,
scramble for a share amongst you. Knit your brows against them, thunder them
in your Pulpits, and especially when you are Victorious against the Kings
party, otherwise be somewhat silent, as if you meant to suffer them to inherit
in the Kingdom their native Birthrights with your selves, keep them in
suspense, least they should be too soon wholly discouraged, and so in your
greatest need desert you, as you know not what may come to pass. Yet
nevertheless, according to your usual customs, in Lords, Knights, Aldermen,
and Gentlemen's houses, you may privately solicit against them, declare them
to be the only disturbers of the Kingdoms Peace, and so keep them under
contempt and ignomie, and though their valor and fidelity be never so
prosperous and successful, yet possess them, That God uses the wicked for
his own ends, and often effects glorious things by them, yet he will destroy
them, and those that are competitours with them in the end, so that though they
suffer some of them to venture their lives in their behalves, yet they must be
wary, that in the end, when the Cavaliers are all killed, holy Presbytry
established, and our Seotch Brethren gone home again, that according to their
Covenant taken for that intent, they conscionably and piously recompense the
remainder of them, with the Gallows, Prison, or banishment.

But some happily will say, that this will be very hard measure, thus to
requite your friends, you may be sure that they are none of your own faction
that so say, and consequently destitute of the Spirit, and so not able to judge
in cases of this nature, for it is the spiritual men, such as your selves,
that judges all things, and these themselves are to be judged of no man, 1
Cor. 2. 15. if of your own party, as why not? for it is an evil Rot, where no
sheep escape; in that tyrant Nero his own family, some were found enemies to
tyranny, then you are to tell them, that you have taken a Covenant, which
according to our dear Brother Edwards his interpretation, binds you thus to
do, as you will as swer it at the last day; and the spirit of all the Prophets
must be subject to the spirit of this Prophet, 1 Cor. 14. 29. according to the
obedient example of Mr. Prinne, in his second dosen of Queries, the last page,
as I take it, and Old Ephraim Pagett, in his Epist. Ded. to his Heresiogr.

And in the mean time, you are also to move, that Order may be taken, that the
Supervisers, whom the Malignants blasphemously and ignorantly call the
Heaven-drivers, because ( as they conceive) by their practice, they drive whole
herds to heaven against their wills, which otherwise (as the Arminians say)
would have run headlong to hell; that they be very zealous in their places,
make diligent search and enquiry after all Conventicles and private meetings,
etc. for they are very dangerous and destructive to your proceedings, for truly
their practice and obedience of Christ, will make your Law and Gospel, your Ord
for Tithes, and your Directory, the two Great Commandments, the fulfilling of
the Law, and the Prophets your Fathers, of none effect.

Wherefere be ye sure, to prepare an Ordinance against all such private
Meetings, to be published after your next great Victory over the King, that
being judged by you, as I conceive by your former proceedings, the most
convenient time, to attempt their total suppression; until which time, seeing
they are a great party, and some of them silken ones too, as was lately
observed by Dr. Bastwick, who perchance have yet some money left, let that be
scraped out of them under one pretense or another, and when they have nothing
left, they are easily suppressed, make them poor, and you may do what you
will with them, Poverty will humble a stout spirit, so that if happily they
chance to beggar, or lie in the streets, the Spirits as happily may steal them
away from you, for your Wisdoms cannot think it safe, to carry your selves
too insolently against them, until first triumphantly you have set your feet
upon your Fathers necks, the Lord Bishops, as the Israelites Captains did upon
the necks of those five wicked Kings. Josh. 10. 24.

One thing I had like to have forgot, which I must needs trouble your patience
with, or else all my Instructions will prove dangerous and prejuditiall to you,
you must not forget to make all the pulpits in London, to ring against MARTIN,
and persuade the people, that he is a Jesuit, and under that notion you will
easily prejudice them against his writings, but you must do it cunningly, with
powerful persuasions, and all Presbyterian subtilty that may be, forewarne
them of him, as of a Serpent, tell them, That wherein he is most rational,
and has the greatest show of truth, therein he is most delusive, latet anguis
in herba, believe him by no means, his seeming Reasons are but wiles to entrap
you, to delude and seduce your understandings, so that you shall persuade them
not to believe their own eyes though they see it never so plainly, tell him
that his immitation of your practice, prosecuting your steps through the
Society of JESV, the villainy of Machiavell, and the taking your sayings into
his mouth, to discover your Hypocrisy, subtilty and Policy is Blasphemy, and
brand him for an Incendiary and a divider of the Two Nations, when it is but of
your villainy from the Parliament and people.

Tell them he is an Agent sent from the Kings Quarters, to foment Principles of
division amongst our selves, to divide us one against another, etc. when as
indeed it is your selves that are the Original of all our Divisions; You first
divided the Kingdom into two desperate Parties, each resolved to devour other,
old soaking Episcopacy, and new upstart frisking Presbytrie, wrestling for
mastery, and now least any beside your selves should reap the benefit of
purchase in this quarrel, you have, as near as you can, made a third party, in
laboring by your Jesuiticall Machiavilian subtilty to devide the Parliament,
contrary to the trust reposed in them from the godly party, who have assisted
them with their Estates and blood, and to deny those their faithful friends of
their just deservings, their purchased freedoms, which should they do, they
would be branded as infamous to posterity, even unfaithful, ungrateful, etc.
at meliora spero, I hope better of them, if your wicked Machiavillian Assembly
were but taken from them, and sent to their particular Charges. Yea, tell the
people, that MARTIN is a Conjurer, and deals with the Devil, and the Spirit
of JESUS CHRIST is not in the least measure to be found in his Writings, but
are stuffed with nothing but profaneness, hypocricy, blasphemy, etc. when by
your favor, good Sym, mutatio nomine de te fabula narratur, they are your
own, which in the personating of your Worship forsooth, he uses, to make a
discovery thereof, that the people might not longer be fed with Glosses,
Pretenses, shaddows, etc.

Thus you may see, MARTIN is very jealous over you, even with an holy jealousy
( and well he may, that has got such a pair of Reverend Horns,) yet
notwithstanding this his pure Advice, elabourately gathered from you forth of
the Schools, the venerable examples of the men of your own Cloth, as also
from a dilligent observation of the course of the present Times, he shall
hardly find either acceptance with you for the same, or any considerable
Reward, the Gallows excepted, etc.

I have many other things to write unto you, which by Pen and ink are not fit
to be revealed, which I shall suspend for the present: for it may be, shortly I
shall see you, and we shall speak face to face, and that of mine own accord
I should have endeavored it, and ere this have come unto you ( even I MARTIN)
once and again, but Satan ( with your Four Hundred Pound) hindered me.
Wherefore I shall leave you for this time, and commit this my Pure Advice to
your sacred Perusal, and apply my self in a word or two to the Common People,
as you call them, and so conclude.

Rejoice! Rejoice, good People, for this blessed Reformation; which is ready,
like an Evening Wolf, to cease upon you, and your loving Friends and
Neighbors, stand still gaping with your mouths, and quietly bow down your
backs, whilst you are bridled and sadled, and let the holy, humble, and gentle
Presbyters get up and ride, they will doubtless deal very meekly with you, and
not put you out of your pace, though the Proverb be, s^t a beggar a hors-back,
and he will ride to the Devil, though they have spurs, yet they will not use
them; you remember how the Bishops poasted you furiously too and fro like Jehu
the son of Nimshy, until with foundring and surbates they had even wearied you
of your lives, the gentle Presbyters will in no wise ride you so hard, though
some Malignants would make you believe, that Sir John will never be off of your
backs, because it is intended he shall have his holy spiritual Courts in
every Parish in the Kingdom, but this benefit you are like to have, that if by
his continual riding, he so gawle your backs and shoulders, that you can no
longer endure, but cry out by reason of your soar oppression, you shall have
Liberty granted you, to leap out of the drying pan into the fire, by making
your appeal to the Common Council of Presbyters forsooth, where when you shall
come with this complaint, Your Fathers the Bishops made our yoke grievous, and
our Parochial Presbyters, (those Lions Whelps,) do add thereto, now do you
ease somewhat the grievous servitude, and heavy yoke put upon us. You may
expect from this Honorable Court, an Answer like unto that of Rehoboams to
those distressed people that cried unto him, Our Fathers made your yoaks heavy,
but we will add thereto; Our Fathers chastised you with whips, but we will
chastise you with Scorpions, and mend your selves as you can, for we are the
divine Power, and consequently the Lawgivers both of Church and State, and
therefore you are to be content, and submit your selves to your Superiors:
your several Presbyters, in your several Parishes, that have the rule over
you, must in no wise be resisted, but as it is meet, be humbly obeyed in all
things, that they shall command you, and their Power is not to be questioned,
for the same Power which lately was resident and confind to the breast of one
man, to wit, an Archbishop, is inherent, and of divine Right in the body of the
Presbytry, and conveyed equally to every particular Presbyter, therefore if
their Episcopal Power be offensive and obnoxious to you, never expect to have
it otherwise, for your Parliaments themselves cannot lawfully help you.

Now have you not cause to rejoice for this Jubilee, this Year of deliverance
from your Antichristian servitude to Egyptian bondage? yes sure; therefore, I
say, Rejoice and be glad, and again rejoice, lift up your heads, for doubtless
your Redemption draws nigh, the Righteous shall be delivered out of trouble,
and the wicked shall come into his stead. Prove. 11. 8.

But in plain terms ( loving Friends, Neighbors and Contrymen,) let us a
little reason together seriously: Have not you borne the brunt and heat of this
unnatural War? Is it not you that pay all the Taxes, Cessments and
Oppressions whatsoever? Is not the whole Burden laid upon your backs? burden
after burden, even till your backs break? How many thousands of you, who were
of great estate, are even reduced your selves, your dear Wives and Children to
misery and extreme Poverty? How many Thousands and Millions have you exhausted;
yea, has not your hands been liberal beyond your abilities? how freely have
you brought in your Gold, your Silver, your Jewels, Rings, etc. which in
London, Midlesex, and Essex, amounted to above 11. Millions, besides Threescore
Millions extracted out of the Counties, with the innumerable sums otherwise
raised, and spent in this service? Has not your blood, the blood of your dear
Children and Friends, been only engaged and spilt, and is it not daily shed in
this quarrel, while the Presbyters clap you on the backs, animate, encourage
and Preach out your very Lives and Estates, and involve you in all these
miseries, and themselves touch it not with the tip of their little finger, you
have your Husbands, your Sons and Servants impressed from you, and forsooth,
a Priest must not be meddled withal, under sacralidge, blasphemy or profanesse
at least; they are freed from all Charges, and Taxations, and all is laid upon
you, and notwithstanding your insufferable misery, your unsupportable charge
and oppression under which you groan, and are fit to expire, those greedy
wretches are not ashamed to exact their Tithes, though they pluck it out of
your Childrens mouths, there had been more need of an Ordinance to have Cess'd
the Priests, and Impressed them to the Wars, for that would have been more
conducent to the Kingdoms good; for should but the King set his Episcopal
Clergy, and the Parliament their Presbyterian Clergy in the forefront of their
Battles, forlorn Hopes, and put them in stead of other honest Innocent
harmless souls, upon all their desperate Attempts, without doubt they would
as zealously preach for Peace, as they do now for war, they would quickly
agree, and turn as they were, rather then loose all, I am confident, this would
prove the most effectual means for our reconsiliation, then any that has yet
been attempted; consider this I beseech you, call to mind all your former
Expenses, Ventures and Cessements for this present War, and the miserable
condition you and the whole Kingdom strugleth in, as it were for life, and are
now all ready to be devoured, your estates are wasted, your men slain, your
hands weakened, and the Kingdom is fit to be over-runne, your strength
decays, and your enemy increases, and all your assistance has been
conveyed through the hands of the Presbyterian Party, they have borne all
Offices, and have had all in their own disposing, but what is become of it?
wise men say, that the Treasures and wealth that has been spent for the
mannaging of this War, would have maintained a greater War seven years
longer, some body have feathered their Nests, though yours are bare; now how
think you it is otherwise possible, but the Kingdom must be ruined, if this
course be con^inued, and to add more certainty of destruction to it, these
men now in this our greatest extremity, labor to divide the Parliament Party
in twain; Before the Synod was Assembled, the cries of the people were heard,
their Petitions answered, miseries redressed, Monopolies removed, Oppression
eased, tender Consciences respected, the servants of God delivered out of
Prisons, Courts of Tyranny and Oppression suppressed, etc. But since their
Session the case is quite altered, nothing but Jesuiticall and Machiavillian
Policy has been on foot, thousands of Petitions of poor Widows, Orphans, and
all manner of distressed, oppressed persons, who Cry daily, and cannot be
heard, and these fatt Priests can have Ordinance upon Ordinance for their ends,
they can have the sweat of other men's brows confirmed upon them by an
Ordinance, whiles others cannot have their just requests for their own Rights
answered, though their wives and children perish, our Prebyters wives must go
like Ladies, with their silks and Taffety, some with their Fans, and silver
Watches forsooth hang by their girdles, to please the Pretty sweet-fac'd
lovelie Mopphets withal; prittie Things, it is pity there is not an Ordinance
all this while for them to wear Rattles: consider this with your selves, and
for what your Estates and blood has been engaged, The Liberties of the
Subject, and the Protestant Religion, now how much, after this vast expense,
this sea of blood, of the Subjects Liberties, have you attained? even thus
much; He that shall open his mouth freely for the vindication of your Native
Liberties, cannot do it without the hazard of his own, yea of his life; I
know that the Priests thirst after my blood; but I call the GOD of heaven to
witness, would it quench their thirst, and be a ransom for our Posterity, I
would freely offer it to the common good: and as for the Protestant Religion,
has it not been locked up in the breasts of the Assembly? has not your faith
been pined upon their sleeve? your estates spent, and your blood shed for the
result of their minds, right or wrong, and so have fought for you know not
what? but it may be you will say, you have engaged for the suppression of Prelacy,
High Commission, etc. you have indeed beat the bush, but the Presbyters have
caught the Hare, in stead of one High Commission, in the whole Kingdom, you
shall have one in every Parish under the name of a Parochial Sessions, besides
the general High Commission called the Common Counsel of Presbyters, now have
you not, to shun the smoke, skipt into the fire? is the matter any thing
amended; sure you have got a worthy Reformation, but it may be you have a
better esteem of these new Courts, then of the Old High Commission; let me ask
you? do you think that they will be better then their pattern? let me give you
a glance of the Proceedings of our Scotch Brethren in Ireland, and I think you
may discern a Bear by his paw: One Timothy Miller, and Adam Lease, Englishmen
of Belfast in Irel being chosen to the eldership there, but through their
ignorance of the Office, and inability to perform their duties therein, they
refused the place, whereupon they were summoned to appear before the
Presbyters of the Scotch Nation at Newtowne, Aug. 7. 1644. Mr. Mackeleand
Minister being Moderatour, where after many eatching Intergatories to entrap
them, Mackeleland demanded, if they had taken the Covenant; their answer was
yea; Mackeleland said, you shall fare the worse for it, and we will deal worse
with you, then with him that has not taken the Covenant: They answered, We
desire to be dealt by as the Covenant was read and explained unto us, it is not
yet determined by the Parl. of England, that the Kirk of Scotland is to be a
pattern to the Church of England and Ireland, we now join with you in hearing,
etc. Mackeleland. We will not let their Church alone till the Parliaments
determination, but see to correct and do what is fitting for present, and the
Parliament is bound to give us thanks for so doing. And all that will not join
with us, and do as we do, shall pack and be gone, etc. and in the conclusion
they were banished, and could not obtain a copy of their Censure, Thus you may
see what you are to rely upon, if in conscience you cannot submit to any thing
they command, you know your wages, you must be banished; and do not our
Presbyters not only labor for the banishment, but for the lives of the
contrary minded to them? and is not this think you, as evil measure as ever
was measured out of the High Commission? wherefore I beseech you friends,
consider what you do, consider the fruit of your bodies, into what slavery you
are fit to enthrawl them, I know you would be loath your children after you
should be deprived of trading or living in the Kingdom, though they should
differ a little in opinion from others. I could wish we might lay down this
Controversy about opinions, and not thus devour, rend and tear one another
about them, every one with violence laboring to exalt himself, and his own,
but with patience bearing one with another, unanimously to join together
against the common Adversary, for the general purchase of our freedoms, etc.
for never was there greater need, we are weakened, and divided, and the enemy is
strengthened; I may be bold to presage certain and sudden destruction to the
Kingdom, if this breach be not healed, and our differences amongst our selves
composed, for how is it possible in all humane judgment, to conquer, or defend
our selves, when our strength is departed? I beseech you therefore, save your
selves from this wicked generation, who have spent your estates, your blood and
all, and you are now worse then ever you were hitherto, all has been in their
disposing, and you are betrayed and daily delivered as a prey to the enemy: The
Lord deliver us, Amen.

Young Martin Mar-Priest.

FINIS.

