The duty of Pastors and People distingushed. OR A BRIEF DISCOVRSE, Touching
the ADMINISTRATION OF THINGS COMMANDED IN RELIGION. ESPECIALLY CONCERNING the
means to be used by the people of God (distinct from Church Officers) for the
increasing of divine knowledge in themselves and others. WHEREIN BOUNDS ARE
PRESCRIBED TO their performances, their liberty is enlarged to the utmost
extent of the dictates of Nature and rules of charity: their duty laid down in
directions, drawn from Scripture-precepts, and the practice of Gods people in
all ages. Together with THE SEVERAL WAYS OF EXTRAORDINARY calling to the
office of public Teaching, with what assurance such teachers may have of their
calling, and what evidence they can give of it, unto others.

By JOHN OWN, M. A. of Q. Col. O.

LONDON, Printed by L. N. for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, and my ever honored friend, Sir EDWARD SCOT, of
Scots-Hall in Kent, Knight of the honorable Order of the BATH.
SIR:
HAving of late been deprived of the happiness to see you, I make bold to send
to visit you; and because that the times are troublesome, I have made choice
of this messenger: who having obtained a license to pass, fears no searching:
he brings no news (at least) to you, but that which was from the beginning,
and must continue unto the end, which you have heard, and which (for some part
thereof) you have practiced out of the word of God. He has no secret messages
prejudicial to the state of Church or Commonwealth; neither I hope, will he
entertain any such comments by the way* considering from whom he comes, and to
whom he goes; of whom, the one would disclaim him, and the other punish him.
Ambitious I am not of any entertainment for these few sheets, neither care
much what success they find in their travel; setting them out merely in my own
defense, to be freed from the continued solicitations of some honest judicious
men, who were acquainted with their contents: being nothing, but an hours
Country-discourse, resolved, from the ordinary pulpit method, into its own
principles: when I first thought of sending it to you, I made full account to
use the benefit of the advantage, in recounting of, and returning thanks for
some of those many undeserved favors which I have received from you. But
addressing my self to the performance, I fainted in the very entrance; finding
their score so large, that I know not where to begin, neither should I know how
to end: only one I cannot suffer to lie hid in the crowd, though other
engagements hindered me from embracing it, viz. your free proffer of an
Ecclesiastical preferment, then vacant, and in your donation. Yet truly all
received courtesies, have no power to oblige me unto you, in comparison of that
abundant worth, which by experience I have found to be dwelling in you. Twice
by Gods providence, have I been with you, when your County has been in great
danger to be ruined, once by the horrid insurrection of a rude godless
multitude; and again, by the invasion of a potent enemy, prevailing in the
neighbor County; at both which times, besides the general calamity justly
feared, particular threatenings were daily brought unto you: under which sad
dispensations, I must crave leave to say (only to put you in mind of your
self, if it should please God again to reduce you to the like straights) that
I never saw more resolved constancy, more cheerful unmoved Christian courage
in any man. Such a valiant heart in a weak body, such a directing head, where
the hand was but feeble, such unwearied endeavors, under the pressures of a
painful infirmity, so well advised resolves in the midst of imminent danger,
did I then behold, as I know not where to parallel. Neither can I say less in
her kind of your virtuous Lady, whose known goodness to al, and particular
indulgences to me, make her (as she is in her self) very precious in my
thoughts and remembrance: whom having named, I desire to take the advantage
thankfully to mention her worthy son, my noble and very dear friend C.
Westrow, whose judgment to discern the differences of these times, and his
valor in prosecuting what he is resolved to be just and lawful, places him
among the number of those very few, to whom it is given to know aright the
causes of things, and vigorously to execute holy and laudible designs. But
further of him I choose to say nothing, because if I would, I cannot but say
too little. Neither will longer detain you from the ensuing Discourse, which I
desire to commend to your favorable acceptance, and with my hearty prayers,
that the Lord would meet you and yours in all those ways of mercy and grace,
which are necessary to carry you along through all your engagements, until you
arrive at the haven of everlasting glory, where you would be: I rest

Your most obliged Servaent in Jesus Christ our common Master: JOHN OWN.

THE PREFACE TO the ensuing Discourse.
THE glass of our lives, seems to run and keep pace with the extremity of
time: the end of those ends of the world 1 Cor. 10. 11 (...). Revel. 10. 6. 1
Epist. Joh. 2. 18.
which began with the Gospel, is doubtless coming upon us, he that was
instructed what should be, till time should be no more, said, it was (...) the
last hour in his time: much sand cannot be behind, and Christ shakes the
glass: Matthew. 24. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 52. Zanch. de fine sec. Mol. acc. proph.
many minutes of that hour cannot remain; the next measure we are to evpect,
is but a moment, the twinkling of an eye, wherein we shall all be changed; now
as if the Horoscope of the decaying age, had some secret influence into the
wills of men, to comply with the decrepit world, they generally delight to run
into extremes: not that I would have the fate of the times to bear the faults
of men, like him who cried, Romans 9. 19.
(...) to free himself, intitling God and fate to his sins; but only to show
how the All-disposing providence of the most Hign, works such a compliance of
times and persons, as may jointly drive at his glorious aims, causing men to
set out in such seasons as are fittest for their travel. This Epidemicall
disease of the aged world, is the cause, why in that great diversity of
contrary opinions, wherewith men's heads and hearts are now replenished: the
truth pretended to be sought with so much earnestness, may be often gathered
up, quite neglected, between the parties litigant; medio tulissimus, is a sure
rule, but that fiery spirits, pyrout Eocus and Aethon quartusque Phlegon, will
be mounting. In the matter concerning which, I propose my weak Essay, some
would have all Christians to be almost Ministers, others none but Ministers, to
be Gods Clergy: those would give the people the keys, these use them, to lock
them out of the Church, the one ascribing to them primarily al Ecclesiastical
power for the ruling of the Congregation; the other abridging them of the
performance of spiritual duties, for the building of their own souls: as
though there were no habitable earth between the valley (I had almost said the
pit) of Democraticall confusion, and the precipitious rock of Hierarchicall
tyranny: when unskilful Archers shoot, the safest place to avoid the arrow, is
the white: going, as near as God shall direct me, to the truth of this matter,
I hope to avoid the strokes of the combatants on every side. And therefore will
not handle it (...) with opposition to any man, or opinion, but (...) briefly
proposing mine own required judgment: the summary result whereof, is, that
the sacred calling may retain its ancint dignity, though the people of God be
not deprived of their Christian liberty; to clear which proposal, somethings
I shall briefly premise,

CHAP. I.
Of the Administration of holy things among the Patriarks before the Law.
1. COncerning the ancient Patriachs; from these, some who would have Judaisme,
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. Ambr. de Sacra. lib. 4. Ephesians 2. 35.
to be but an intercision of christiauity derive the pedigree of christians,
affirming the diference between us and them, to be solely in the name and not
the thing it self: Of this thus much at least is true, that the Law of
Commandments, contained in Ordinances did much more diversifie the
Administration of the Covenant, before, and after Christ, then those plain
moralities, wherewith in their days it was clothed: where the assertion is
dificient, Antiquity has given its authors sanctuary from farther pursuit.
their practice then, were it clear, can be no president for Christians; All
light brought to the Gospel, in comparison of those full and glorious beams,
that shine in it self, is but a Candle set up in the sun: Yet for their
sakes, who found out the former Unity, I will, (not following the conceit of
any, nor the comments of many) give you such a bare naration, as the scripture
will supply me withal, of their administration of the holy things and practice
of their Religion: (as it seems Christianity, though not so called) and doubt
you not of divine approbation, and institution: For all prelacy, at least,
until Nimrod hunted for preferment, was dejure divino: I find then, that
before the giving of the Law, the chief men among the servants of the true God,
did every one in their own families with their neighbors adjoining, of the
same persuasion, perform those things which they knew to be required, by the
Law of nature, tradition, or special revelation (the unwritten word of those
times) in the service of God, instructing their childeren and servants in the
knowledge of their creed concerning the nature and goodness of God, the fall
and sin of man, the use of sacrifices, and the promised seed, (the sum of
their religion) and moreover performing (...) things appertaining unto God.
Genesis 4. 26. cap. 5. 22. cap. 6. 8, 9. etc. 8. 20. cap. 9. 25, 26, 27. cap. 18
18, 19 cap. 19 9. cap. 28. 1, 2. cap. 34. 26. cap. 35. 3, 4, 5. Exo. cap. 3. 1.
Job cap. 1. 5. cap. 42. 8, 9, 10. Tho: 22. ae q. 87. ad 3.
This we have delivered concerning Seth, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Lot, Isaac,
Jacob, Iethro, Job, others: Now whither they did this, as any way peculiarly
designed unto it as an Office, or rather in obedient duty to the prime Law of
Nature, in which, and to whose performance, many of them were instructed, and
encouraged, by divine revelation, (as seems most probable) is not necessary to
be insisted on: To me truly it seems evident, that thert were no determiuate
Ministers of Divine worship before the Law, For, where find we any such Office
instituted, where the duties of those Officers prescribed? or were they of
human invention? God would never allow, that in any regard, the will of the
creature should be the measure of his honor and worship; but the right and
exercise of the Priesthood, say some was in the first borne; but a proof of
this will be for ever wanting. Abel was not Adams eldest son, yet if any
thing were peculiar to such an Office, Jacob Armin. de sacerd. Chapter orat.
it was by him performed, that both the Brothers carried their sacrifices to
their father, is a vain surmize: Who was Priest then, when Adam dyed? neither
can any order of descent be handsomely contrived: Noah had three sons, grant
the eldest only a Priest; Were the eldest sons of his other sons Priests or
no? If not, how many men, feareing God, were scattered over the face of the
earth, utterly deprived of the means of right worship; if so, there must be a
new rule produced, beyond the prescript of nature, whereby a man may be enabled
by generation to convey that to others, which he has not in himself: I speak
not of Melchisedeck, and his extraordinary Priesthood; why should any speak
where the holy ghost is silent? if we pretend to know him, we overthrow the
whole mystery, and run cross to the apostle, afirming him to be (...) without
father, mother, or genealogy; for so long time then, as the greatest
combination of men, was in distinct families (which sometimes were very great)
Genesis 14. 14.
Politickes and Oeconomicks being of the same extent, all the way of
instruction in the service and knowledge of God, was by the way of paternall
admonition: For the discharge of which duty, Abraham is commended Genesis 18. 19.
whereunto the instructers had no particular engagement, but only the general
obligation of the law of nature; what rule they had, for their performances
toward God, does not appear; all positive law, in every kind is ordained for
the good of community: that then being not, no such rule was assigned, until
God gathered a people, and lifted up the standard of circumcision for his
subjects to repair unto: the world in the days of Abraham, beginning
generally to incline to Idolatry and polutheisme, Eccles. malignantum. August.
con. Faust. lib. 19. cap. 11.
the first evident inreconcileable division was made between his people and
the malignants, which before lay hid in his decree, visible signs and
prescript rules, were necessary for such a gathered Church: This before I
conceive to have been supplied by special revelation.

The law of nature a long time prevailed for the worship of the one true God.
The manner of this worship, the generalty had at first (as may be conceived)
from the vocal instruction of Adam, full of the knowledge of divine things;
this afterward their children had from them by tradition; helped forward by
such who received particular revelations in their generation; Per incrementa
temporum crevit divinae cognitionis incrementum Es. Regno. Hom. 16. in Ezekiel. a
med.
such as Noah, thence called a preacher of righteousness: so knowledge of Gods
will increased, until sin quite prevailed, and all flesh corrupted their
ways; all Apostasy for the most part begins in the will, which is more
bruised by the fall, then the understanding. Nature is more corrupted, in
respect of the desire of good, then the knowledge of truth; the knowledge of
God would have flourished longer in men's minds, had not sin banished the
love of God out of their hearts. The sum is, that before the giving of the
Law, every one in his own person, served God according to that knowledge he
had of his Will. Public performances were assigned to none, further then the
obligation of the law of Nature, to their duty in their own familyes. I have
purposely omitted to speak of Melchisedocke as I said before, having spoken
all that I can, or dare concerning him, on another occasion, Only this I will
add, they who so confidently affirm him to be Shem, the son of Noah, and to
have his Priesthood in an ordinary way, by virtue of his Primogeniture, might
have done well to ask leave of the Holy Ghost, for the revealing of that which
he purposely concealed, to setforth no small mystery, by them quite
overthrown. And he who of late makes him look upon Abraham and the four
Kings, all of his Posterity, fighting for the Inheritance of Canaan; (of which
cause of their quarrel the Scripture is silent) robs him at least of one of
his titles, a King of peace; making him neither, King nor peaceable, but a
bloody Grandsire, that either could not, or would not part his fighting
children, contending for that whose right was in him, to bestow on whom he
would. And thus was it with them in the administration of sacred things: There
was no divine determination of the Priestly office on any order of men: when
things appertaining unto God, were to be performed in the name of a whole
family (as afterward 1 Samuel 20. 6.) Perhaps the honor of the performance was
by consent given to the first borne: Further, the way of teaching others, was
by petarnall admonition: (so Genesis 18. 19) motives thereunto, and rules of their
proceeding therein, being the law of nature, and special revelation.
Prescription of positive law, ordained for the good of community, could have no
place,, when all society was domestical. To instruct others (upon occasion)
wanting instruction for their good, is an undeniable dictate of the first
principles of nature; obedience to which, was all the ordinary warrant they
had, for preaching to any beyond their own families, observed by Lot Genesis 19.
7. though his sermon contained a little false doctrine, ver. 81. Again,
special revelation leaves as a great impression on the mind of him to whom it
is made, so an effectual obligation for the performance of what it directs
unto, the Lion has roared, who will not fear; the Lord God has spoken who can
but prophes^e, Amos 3. 8. And this was Noah's warrant for those performances,
from whence he was called a preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. Thus
although I do not find any determinate order of Priesthood by divine
institution, yet do I not thence conclude with Aquin. 12. ae quest. 3. a 1 (if
I noted right at the reading of it) that all the worship of God, I mean for
the manner of it was of humane invention, yea sacrifices themselves: for this
Will worship as I showed before God always rejected, no doubt but sacrifices
and the manner of them were of divine institution, albeit their particular
original, in regard of precept though not of practice be to us unknown; for
what in all this concerns us, we may observe that a superinstitution of a new
ordinance, does not overthrow any thing that went before in the same kind,
universally morrall, or extraordinary; nor at all change it, unless by
express exception, as by the introduction of the ceremonial law, the offering
of sacrafices, which before was common to all, was restrained to the posterity
of Levi: look then what performances in the service of God, that primitive
household of faith was in the general directed unto, by the law of nature, the
same regulated by Gospel light (not particularly excepted) ought the
generallity of christians to perform, which what they were may be collected
from what was fore spoken.

CHAP. II.
Of the same among the Jews, and of the duty of that people distinct from
their church officers.
2. COncerning the Jews after the giving of Moses law, the people of God were
then gathered in one, and a standard was set up for all his to repair unto,
and the Church of God became like a City upon a hill, conspicuous to all; and a
certain rule set down for every one to observe that would approach unto him:
as then before the law we sought for the manner of Gods worship from the
practice of men, so now since the change of the external administration of the
covenant, from the prescription of God; then we ghessed at what was commanded,
by what was done; now at what was done, by what was commanded; and this is all
the certainety we can have in either kind, though the consequence from the
precept, to the performance; and on the contrary, in this corrupted state of
nature, be not of absolute necessity; only the difference is, where things are
obscured, it is a safer way to prove the practice of men by Gods precept,
charitably supposing them to have been obedient, then to wrest the divine rule
to their observation; knowing how prone men are to deifie themselves, by mixing
their inventions with the worship of God: The Administration of Gods providence
toward his Church has been various and the communication of himself unto it,
at sundry times, has been in diverse manners; especially, it pleased him not to
bring it to perfection but by degrees, Mark 4 18.
as the earth brings forth fruit, first the blade, then the ear, then the
full corn in the ear: thus the Church before the giving of Moses law, seems
to have had two maine defects, which the Lord at that time supplied; one in
discipline, or government, in that every family exercised the public worship
of God within it self or a part. (though some do otherwise conclude from Genesis
4. 26.) which was first removed, by establishing a consistory of Elders, the
other, in the Doctrine wanting the rule of the written word being directed by
tradition, the manifold defects whereof, were made up, by special
revelatition: to neither of these defects was the Church since exposed: whether
there was any thing written before the giving of the law, is not worth
contending about: Austine thought Enochs prophecy was written by him; Aug. de
civit. dei. lib 15. cap. 23. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. ca. 3. Sixth. senens. Bib.
lib. 2.
prophecy was written by him; and Josephus afirmes, that there were two
pillars erected, one of stone, the other of brick before the stood, wherein
diverse things were engraven; and Sixtus Senensis, that the book of the wars of
the Lord was a volume ancienter then the books of Moses; but the contrary
opinion is most received, so Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in Mali. after its giving, none
ever doubted of the perfection of the written word for the end to which it was
ordained, until the Jews had broached their Talmud, to oppose Christ, and the
Papists their Traditions, to advance Antichrist; doubtless the sole aim of
the work, what ever, were the intentions of the workmen.

The Lights which God makes, are sufficient to rule the seasons for which they
are ordained; as, in creating of the world, God made two great lights, the
greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; so in
the erection of the new world of his Church, he set up two great lights, the
lesser light of the old Testament, to guide the night, the dark space of time
under the law, and the greater light of the new Testament, to rule the glorious
day of the Gospel, and these two lights do sufficiently enlighten every man
that comes into this new world: There is no need of the false fire of
tradition, where God sets up such glorious lights. This be premised, for the
pronass of men, to deflect from the golden rule, and heavenly polestarre in the
investigation of the truth; especially in things of this nature, concerning
which we treat, wherein ordinary endeavors, are far greater in searching
after what men have done, then what they ought to have done; and when the fact
is once evidenced, from the pen of a Rabbi, or a Father, presently conclude the
right: amongst many, we may take a late treatise for instance, entitled, of
Religious Assemblies and the public service of God, whose author would
prescribe the manner of Gods worship among Christians, from the custom of the
Jews; and their observations, he would prove from the Rabbines; not at all
taking notice, that from such observances, they were long agon recalled, to the
law and to the testamony. Matthew. 5. 6.
And afterward for them sharply rebuked by truth it self: doubtless it is a
worthy knowledge to be able, and a commendable deligence to search into those
coyners of curiosities, but to embrace the fancy's of those wild-heads which
have nothing but noveltie to commend them, and to seek their imposition on
others, is but an abasing of their own ceisure and others industry: The issue
of such a temper, seems to be the greatest part of that treatise, which
because I wait only for some spare hours to demonstrate in a particular
tract. I shall for the present, omit the handling of diverse things there spoken
of, though otherwise they might very opportunately here be mentioned. As the
Office and Duty of Prophets, the manner of gods worship in their Synagogues,
the original and institution of their latter teachers, Scribes and Pharisees,
and. And briefly only observe those things, which are most immediately
conducing to my proposed subject. The worship of God among them, was either
Moral, or Ceremonial and Typical, the performances belonging unto the
latter, with all things thereunto conducing, were appropriated to them, whom
God had peculiarly set a part for that purpose: By Ceromoniall worship, I
understand all Sacrifices and Offerings, the whole service of the Tabernacle,
and afterward of the Temple: all which, were Typical, and established merely
for the present dispensation, not without purpose of their Abrogation, when
that which was to be more perfect, should appear. Now the several Officers
with their distinct employments, in and about this Service, were so punctually
prescribed, and limited by Almighty God, that as none of them might (...)
without presumptious impiety, intrude into the function of others, not allotted
to them, as Numb. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10. So none of their Brethren might presume to
intrude into the least part of their Office, without manifest sacrilege. Josh.
22. 11, 12. True it is, that there is mention of diverse in the Scripture that
offered Sacrifices, or vowed so to do, who were Strangers from the Priests
Office, yea from the Tribe of Levi, as Jepha. Judges, 11. Manoah, Jud. 13.
David, 2. Sam. 6. And again, 2. Sam. 24. Solomon, Kings 3. and again, 1. Kings
9. But following our former rule of Interpreting, the practice, by the precept,
we may find, (and that truly) that all the expresions of their Offerings
signify no more; but, they brought those things to be offered, and caused the
Priests to do, what in their own persons they ought not to perform. Now hence
by the way we may observe, that the people of God, under the new Testament,
contrary distinct from their Teachers, have a greater interest in the
performance of spiritual duties belonging to the worship of God, and more in
that regard is granted unto them, and required of them, then was of the ancient
people of the Jews, considered as distinguished from their Priests, because
their duty is prescribed unto them under the notion of those things which then,
were appropriate only to the Priests; as of offering incense, sacrifice;
oblations, and the like, which in their original institution were never
permitted to the people of the Jews, but yet tralatitiously and by Analogy
are enjoined to all Christians, but of these afterward; the main question is,
about the duty of the people of God, in performances for their own
edification, and the extent of their lawful undertakings for others
instruction; for the first, which is of nearest concernment unto themselves:
The sum of their duty in this kind may be reduced to these two heads; First,
to hear the Word and Law of God read attentively, especially when it was
expounded. Secondly, to meditate therein themselves, to study it day and night,
and to get their senses exercised in that rule of their duty. Concerning each
of which, we have both the precept, and the practice, Gods command, and their
performance. The one, in that injunction given unto the Priest, Daut. 31. 11,
12, 13. When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy God, in the
place that he shall choose, thou shall read this Law before all Israel in
their hearing: Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and
thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may
learn, and fear the Lord your God; and that their children which have not
known may hear and learn. All which we find punctually performed on both
sides, Nehem. 8. 2, 3, 4, 5. Ezra the Priest standing on a Pulpit of wood, read
the Law, and gave the meaning of it, and the ears of all the people were
attentive to the Book of the Law. Which course continued until there was an
end put to the observances of that Law; as Act. 15. 21. Moses of old time has
in every City them that preach him being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath
day: On which ground, not receding from their ancient observations, the people
assembled to hear our Savior teaching with authority, Luke 21. 38. And S.
Paul diverse times took advantage of their ordinary assemblies to preach the
Gospel unto them. For the other, which concerns their own searching into the
Law, and studying of the Word we have a strict command, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9.
And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when
thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up, and thou shall bind them for a sign upon
thy hand, and they shall be as front lets between thine eyes, and thou shall
write them upon the posts of thy house and upon thy gates: which strict charge
is again repeated, cap. 11. 18. summarily comprehending all ways whereby they
might become exercised in the Law: Now because this charge is in particular
given to the King, Chap. 17. verse. 18, 19. The performance of a King in
obedience thereunto, will give us light enough into the practice of the people:
And this we have in that most excellent Psalm of David, viz. 119. which for
the most part, is spent in petitions for light, direction, and assistance in
that study, in expressions of the performance of this duty, and in spiritual
glorying of his success, in his divine Meditations: especially verse. 99. he
ascribes his proficiency in heavenly wisdom and understanding above his
teachers, not to any special revelation, not to that prophetical light
wherewith he was endued (which indeed consisting in a transient irradiation of
the mind, being a supernatural impulsion commensurate to such things as are
connaturall only unto God, does of it self give neither wisdom nor
understanding) but unto his studdy in the testimonies of God. The blessings
pronounced upon, and promises annexed to the performance of this duty, concern
not the matter in hand: only from the words wherein the former command is
delivered, two things may be observed, 1. That the paternall teaching and
instruction of families in things which appertain to God, being a duty of the
Law of Nature, remained in its full vigor, and was not at all impaired, by the
institution of a new order of Teachers for assemblies, beyond domestical then
established: Neither without doubt ought it to cease amongst Christians, there
being no other reason why now it should, but that, which then was not
effectual.

Secondly, that the people of God, were not only permitted, but enjoined also,
to reads the Scriptures, and upon all occasions, in their own houses, and
elsewhere, to talk of them, or communicate their knowledge in them, unto
others: There had been then, no Council at Trent to forbid the one, nor
perhaps was there any strict Canon, to bring the other within the compass of a
Conventicle: But now for the solemn public teaching and instructing of
others, it was otherwise ordained, for this was committed to them in regard of
ordinary performance, who were set apart by GOD; as for others before named: so
also for that purpose, the Author of the Treatise I before mentioned,
concludes that the people were not taught at the public assemblies by
Priests, as such, that is, teaching the people was no part of their office or
duty: but on the contrary, that seems to be a man's duty in the service or
worship of God, which God requires of him, and that appertain to his office
whose performance is expressly enjoined unto him, as such, And for whose
neglect, he is rebuked or punished: now all this we find concerning the
Priests public teaching of the people: for the prof of which the recital of a
few pertinent places shall suffice, Levit. 10. 11. we have an injunction laid
upon Aaron and his sons, to teach the children of Israel all the statutes
that the Lord had spoken to them by the hand of Moses. And of the Levites it is
affirmed, Deuteronomy. 33. 10. They shall teach Jacob thy statutes, and Israel thy
Law. Now though some restrain these places to the discerning of leprosies, and
between holy and unholy, with their determination of difficulty emergent out of
the Law, yet this no way impaires the truth of that I intend to prove by them
for even, those things, belonged to that kind of public teaching, which was
necessary under that administration of the Covenant: but in stead of many, I
will name one not liable to exception: Mil. 2. 7. The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the
messenger of the Lord of Hosts: where both a recital of his own duty, that he
should be full of knowledge to instruct, the intimation of the people, that
they should seek unto him, or give heed to his teaching with the reason of
them both, for he is the Lords messenger, (one of the highest titles of the
Ministers of the Gospel performing the same office) do abundantly confirm,
that instructing of the people in the moral worship of God, was a duty of the
Priestly office, or of the Priests as such. Especially considering the effect
of this teaching mentioned, verse. 9. the turning of many from their iniquity.
The proper end of teaching in assemblies: all which we find exactly
perperformed by an excellent Priest, preaching to the people on a Pulpit of
wood: Nehem. 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. Further, for a neglect of this, the Priests are
threatened with rejection from their office: Hosea 4. 6. Now it does not seem
justice, that a man should be put out of his office, for a neglect of that,
whose performance does not belong unto it; the fault of every neglect, arises
from the description of a duty: until something then of more force, then any
thing as yet I have seen, be objected to the contrary, we may take it for
granted, That the teaching of the people under the Law, in public assemblies,
was performed ordinarily by the Priests, as belonging to their duty, and
office. Men endued with gifts supernatural, extraordinarily called, and
immediately sent by God himself, for the instruction of his people, the
reformation of his Church, and foretelling things to come, such as were the
Prophets, who when ever they met with opposition, staid themselves upon their
extraordinary calling, come not within the compass of my disquisition. The
institution also of the Schools of the Prophets, the employment of the sons
of the Prophets, the original of the Scribes, and those other possessours of
Moses Chair in our Saviors time, wherein he conversed here below, being
necessarily to be handled in my Observations on the forenamed Treatise, I
shall omit until more leisure, and an enjoyment of the small remainder of my
poor Library, shall better enable me. For the present, because treating in
causa facili, although writing without books, I hope I am not besides the
Truth: the Book of Truth, praised be GOD, is easy to be obtained, and GOD
is not tied to means, in discovering the truth of that Book. Come we then, to
the consideration of what duty in the service of GOD, beyond those belonging
unto several families, were permitted to any of the people, not peculiarly set
apart for such a purpose. The Ceremonial part of Gods worship, as we saw
before, was so appropriate to the Priests, that God usually revenged the
trangression of that ordinance, very severely, the Examples of Vzzah and
Vzziah, are dreadful testimonies of his wrath in that kind: 2 Chr. 26. 19.
cast him out, Joh. 9.
It was an unalterable law, by virtue whereof, the Priests excommunicated that
presumptuous King. For that whch we chiefly intend the public teaching of
others, as to some it was enjoined, as an act of their duty, so it might at
first seem, that it was permitted to all, who having ability thereunto, were
called by charity or necessity; So the Princes of Jehoshaphat taught the
people out of the Law of God, as well as the Priests and Levites, 2 Chronicles. 17.
7, 8, 9, 10. so also Nehemiah, and others of the chief of the people are
reckoned among them who taught the people, Nehem. 8. and afterward, when Saint
Paul at any time entered into their Synagogues; Acts 13. 15.
they never questioned any thing but his abilities, if he had any word of
Exhortation to the people he might say on: and the Scribes questioning the
authority of our Savior for his teaching, were moved to it, not because he
taught, but because he taught so, and such things, with authority, and against
their traditions, otherwise they rather troubled themselves, to think how he
should become able to teach: Mark 6. 2, 3. then him, because he did: there are
indeed many sharp reproves in the old Testament of those who undertook to be
Gods Messengers without his warrant, as Jerem. 23. 21, 22. I have not sent
these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.
But if they had stood in my counsel, etc. to which, and the like places it may
satisfactorily be answered, that howsoever by the way of analogy, they may be
drawn into rule, for these times of the Gospel, yet they were spoken only in
reference to them who falsely pretended to extraordinary revelations, and a
power of foretelling things to come: whom the Lord forewarned his people of,
and appointed punishments for them, Deuteronomy. 13. with which sort of pretenders
that nation was ever replenished, for which the very heathen often derided
them: he, who makes it his employment, to counterfeit Gods dispensations, had
then no more glorious work to imitate then that of prophecy, wherein he was
not idle: yet notwithstanding all this, I do not conceive the former discourse
to be punctually true in the latitude thereof: as though it were permitted to
all men, or any men, besides the Priests and Prophets to teach publicly at all
times, and in all estates of that Church. Only I conceive that the usual
answers given to the forecited places, when objected, are not sufficient: take
an instance in one, 2 Chro. 17. of the Princes of Jehoshaphat teaching with the
Priests: the Author of the book before intimated, conceives that neither
Priests nor Princes taught at all in that way we now treat of, but only that
the Priests rode circuit to administer judgment, and had the Princes with them
to do execution; but this interpretation he borrows only to confirm his
(...), that priests did not teach as such, the very circumstance of the place
inforces a contrary sense; and in the 19. Chap. there is express mention of
appointing Judges for the determination of civil causes in every City, which
evidently was a distinct work distinguished from that mentioned in this place:
and upon the like ground I co^ceive it to be no intimation of a moveable
Sanedrim, which although of such a mixed constitution, yet was not itinerant,
and is mentioned in that other place: neither is that other ordinary gloss
more probable, they were sent to teach, that is to countenance the teaching of
the Law; a duty which seldom implores the assistance of humane countenance,
and if for the present it did, the Kings authority commanding it was of more
value then the presence of the Princes. Besides, there is nothing in the Text,
nor the circumstances thereof, which should hold out this sense unto us;
neither do we find any other rule, precept or practice, whose analogy might
lead us to such an interpretation: that, which to me seems to come nearest the
truth is that they taught also, not in a ministerial way, like the Priests and
Levites, but imperially, and judicially declaring the sense of the Law, the
offenses against it, and the punishments due to such offenses; especially in as
much as they had reference to the peace of the commonwealth: which differs not
much from that which I rest upon, to wit, that in a collapsed and corrupted
state of the Church, when the ordinary teachers are either utterly ignorant and
cannot, or negligent and will not perform their duty, gifts in any one to be a
teacher, and consent in others by him to be taught, are a sufficient warrant
for the performance of it: and then this, the places cited out of the old
Testament prove no more. For the proceedings of St Paul in the Synagogues,
their great want of teaching (being a people before forsaken of the Spirit and
then withering) might be a warrant for them to desire it, and his Apostolical
mission for him to do it; It does not then at all from hence appear, that there
was then any liberty of teaching in public assemblies granted unto, or assumed
by any in such an estate of the Church, as wherein it ought to be: when indeed
it is ruinously declining every one of Gods servants has a sufficient warrant
to help or prevent the fall: this latter being but a common duty of zeal and
charity, the former an Authoritative act of the Keys, the Minister whereof is
only an isntrumental agent, that from whence it has its efficacy, residing
in another, in whose stead, (2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.) and under whose person it is
done. Now who ever does any thing in another stead, not by express patent
from him, is a plain impostor; and a grant of this nature made unto all in
general does not appear. I am bold to speak of these things under the notion
of the keys, though in the time of the Law; for I cannot assent to those
Schoolmen, Aquin. Durand.
who will not allow that the keys in any sense, were granted to the legal
Priests; their power of teaching, discerning, judging, receiving in, and
casting out, import the thing, though the name (no more then that of regnum
coelorum, as Hierom and Augustine observe) be not to be found in the Old
Testament. And doubtless God ratified the execution of his own ordinances in
heaven, then, as well as now: What the immediate effect of their services was,
how far by their own force they reached, Tractatu de sacerdotio Christi, contra
Armin Socini: and Papistas, non. dum edito.
and what they typified, how in signification only, and not immediately they
extended to an admission into, and exclusion from the heavenly Tabernacle, and
wherein lies the secret power of Gospel commissions beyond theirs to attain
the ultimate end, I have declared elsewhere.

Thus much of what the ancient people of God distinguished from their Priests
might not do, now briefly of what they might, or rather of what they ought,
and what their obedience and profession declared, that they thought themselves
obliged unto: private exhortations, rebukings, and such dictates of the law of
Nature being presupposed; we find them further, speaking often one to another,
of those things which concerned the fear, and worship of the Lord, Malac. 3.
16. by their lips feeding many with wisdom, Prove. 10. 21. Discoursing of Gods
Laws upon all occasions, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8. By multitudes encouraging each
other to the service of God, Zach. 8. 20, 21. Isa. 2. 3. jointly praising God
with cheerful hearts. Psalm. 42. 4. Giving and receiving mutual consolation,
Psalm. 55. 14. and all this, with much more of the same nature, at their
meetings, either occasional, or for that purpose indicted. Always provided,
that they abstained from fingring the Arc, or meddling with those things which
were appropriated to the office of the Priests: And concerning them hitherto.

CHAP. 3.
Containing a digression concerning the name of Priests, the right of
Christians thereunto by their interest in the Priesthood of Christ, with the
presumption of any particularly appropriating it to themselves.
ANd now the transaction of these things, in the Christian Church, presents it
self, to our consideration; in handling whereof, I shall not at all discourse,
concerning the several Church Officers instituted by Christ and his Apostles,
for the edification of his body: nor concerning the difference between them,
who were partakers at first of an extraordinary vocation, and those who since
have been called to the same work in an ordinary manner, divinely appointed for
the direction of the Church: neither yet does that diversity of the
administration of government in the Churches, then when they were under the
plenitude of Apostolical power, and now when they follow rules prescribed for
their reiglement, come in my way.

Further, Who are the subject of the keys in whom all that secondary
ecclesiastical power, which is committed to men does reside, after the
determination of so many learned men, by clear Scripture light, shall not by
me be called in question: All these though conducing to the business in hand,
would require a large discussion, and such a Scholasticall handling, as would
make it an inconsutilous piece, of this popular discourse: my intent being only
to show, that seeing there are, as all acknowledge, some under the New
Testament, as well as the old, peculiarly set apart by Gods own appointment for
the administration of Christ's ordinances, especially teaching of others by
preaching of the Gospel, in the way of office and duty, what remains for the
rest of Gods people to do, for their own and others edification.

But here before I enter directly upon the matter, I must remove one stone of
offense, concerning the common apellation of those who are set apart for the
preaching of the Gospel: that which is most frequently used for them in the
New Testament is (...), so 1 Cor. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 6. and Chap. 6. 4. and 11.
15, 23. 1 Timothy 4. 6. and in diverse other places; to which add (...), 1 Cor.
41. a word though of another original, yet of the same signification with the
former: and both rightly translated Ministers: the names of Ambassadors,
Stewards and the like, wherewith they are often honored are figurative, and
given unto them, by allusion only, that the former belonged unto them, and were
proper for them, none ever denied but some Rabshakes of Antichrist; another
name there is, which some have assumed unto themselves, as an honor, and
others have imposed the same upon them for a reproach: viz. that of Priest,
which to the takers seemed to import a more mysterious employment, a greater
advancement above the rest of their brethren, a nearer approach unto God, in
the performances of their office, then that of Ministers: wherefore they
embraced it, either voluntarily, alluding to the service of God and the
administration thereof amongst his ancient people the Jews, or thought that
they ought necessarily to undergo it, as belonging properly to them, who are
to celebrate those mysteries, and offer those sacrifices, which they imagined,
were to them prescribed: the imposers on the contrary, pretend diverse reasons
why now that name can signify none but men rejected from Gods work, and given
up to superstitious vanities; attending in their minds, the old Priests of
Baal, and the now shavelings of Antichrist: it was a new Etimologie of this
name, which that learned man cleaved unto, who unhappily was engaged into the
defense of such errors, as he could not but see, and did often confess: Hook:
eccles. polit lib 5. Whitgift. ans. to the Admon.
To which also he, he had an entrance made by an Archbishop; to wit, that it
was but an abbreviation of Presbyters, knowing full well, not only that the
signification of these words, is diverse amongst them, to whom belongs jus and
norma loquendi, but also, that they are widely different in holy writ. Yea
farther, that those who first dignified themselves with this title, never
called themselves Presbyters, by way of distinction from the people, but only
to have a note of distance among themselves: there being more then one sort of
them that were sacrificers, and which eo nomine, accounted themselves Priests:
setting aside then all such evasions and distinctions as the people of God are
not bound to take notice of, and taking the word in its ordinary acceptance, I
shall briefly declare, what I conceive of the use thereof, in respect of them,
who are Ministers of the Gospel: which I shall labor to clear by these
following observations:

1. All faithful Ministers of the Gospel, in as much as they are ingrafted
into Christ, and are true believers, may, as all other true Christians, be
called Priests: but this inasmuch as they are members of Christ, not Ministers
of the Gospel: it respects their persons, not their function, or not them as
such: now I conceive it may give some light to this discourse, Rev. 1. 6. and
5. 10. and 20. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5. etc.
if we consider the grounds and reasons of this metaphorical appellation, in
diverse places of the Gospel, ascribed to the worshippers of Christ; and how
the analogy, which the present dispensation holds with what was established
under the administration of the Old Testament, may take place: for there we
find the Lord thus bespeaking his people, ye shall be unto me a kingdom of
Priests, an holy nation, Exodus 19. 6. so that it should seem that there was
then a twofold Priesthood: a rituall Priesthood, conferred upon the tribe of
Levi, and a royal Priesthood, belonging to the whole people: the first is
quite abrogated and swallowed up in the Priesthood of Christ, the other, is put
over unto us under the Gospel, being ascribed to them and us, and every one in
covenant with God, not directly and properly, as denoting the function
peculiarly so called, but comparatively with reference had to them that are
without; for as those who were properly called Priests, had a nearer access
unto God, then the rest of the people, especially in his solemn worship, so
all the people that are in covenant with God, have such an approximatio^ unto
him by virtue thereof, in comparison of them that are without, that in respect
thereof, they are said to be Prists: now the outward covenant made with them,
who were the children of Abraham after the flesh, was representative of the
Covenant of grace made with the children of Promise, and that whole people
typified the hidden elect people of God; so that of both there is the same
reason. Thus as the Priests the sons of Levi are said to come near unto God,
Deuteronomy. 21. 5. and God tells them that him whom he has chosen, he will cause to
come near unto him, Numb. 16. 5. chosen by a particular calling ad munus to
the office of the rituall priesthood: so in regard of that other kind,
comparatively so called, it is said of the whole people, What nation is there
so great that has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things
that we call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. their approaching nigh unto God made
them all a nation of Priests, in comparison of those dogs and unclean Gentiles
that were out of the Covenant: now this Prerogative is often appropriate to the
faithful in the new Testament: for through Christ we have an access by one
spirit unto the Lord, Ephesians. 2. 18. and 3. 19. We have boldness and access with
confidence: so James 4. 8. Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you:
which access and approximation unto God, seemed as before was spoken to be
uttered in allusion to the Priests of the old Law, who had this Privilege
above others in the public worship, in which respect only things then were
typical. Since because we enjoy that prerogative in the truth of the thing it
self; which they had only in type, we also are called Priests: and as they
were said to draw nigh in reference to the rest of the people; so we, in
respect of them, who are strangers to the Covenant: that now are said to be
afar off, Ephesians. 2. 17. and hereafter shall be without, for without are dogs,
etc. Rev. 22. 15. thus this metaphorical appellation of Priests is in the
first place an intimation of that transcendent privilege of grace and favor,
which Jesus Christ has purchased for every one that is sanctified with the
blood of the Covenant.

2. We have an interest in this appellation of Priests, by virtue of our union
with Christ, being one with our high Priest, we also are Priests: there is a
twofold union between Christ and us: the one, by his taking upon him our
nature, the other, by bestowing on us his Spirit: for as in his Incarnation he
took upon him our flesh and blood by the work of the Spirit, so in our
regeneration he bestows on us his flesh and blood, by the operation of the
same spirit: yea so strict is this latter union, which we have with Christ,
that as the former is truly said to be a union of two natures into one person,
so this, of many persons into one nature; for by it, we are made partakers of
the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. becoming members of his body, of his flesh, and
of his bones, Ephesians. 5. 30. we are so parts of him, of his mystical body, that
we and he become thereby as it were one Christ; for as the body is one, and
has many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one
body, so is Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and the ground of this is, because the same
spirit is in him and us; in him indeed dwells the fullness of it, when it is
bestowed upon us, only by measure: but yet it is still the same spirit; and so
makes us, according to his own prayer, one with him: as the soul of man being
one, makes the whole body with it, to be but one man; two men cannot be one,
because they have two souls; no more could we be one with Christ, were it not
the same spirit in him and us: now let a man be never so big or tall, that his
feet rest upon the earth, and his head reach to heaven, yet having but one
soul, he is still but one man: now though Christ for the present, in respect of
our nature assumed, be never so far remote and distant from us in heaven, yet
by the effectual energie, and inhabitation of the same spirit, he is still the
head of that one body, whereof we are members, still but one with us. Hence
arises to us a twofold right to the title of Priests;

1. Because being in him, and members of him, we are accounted to have done, in
him, and with him, whatsoever he has done for us; we are buried with Christ,
Romans 6. 4. dead with him, v. 8. quickened together with Christ, Ephesians. 2. 5.
being raised up, we sit together with him in heavenly places, v. 6. risen with
him, Colos. 3. 1. now all these in Christ, were in some sense Sacerdotall;
wherefore we having an interest in their performance, by reason of that
heavenly participation, derived from them unto us, and being united unto him,
that in them was so properly, are therefore called Priests.

Secondly, by virtue of this union, there is such an analogy between that
which Christ has done for us as a Priest, and what he works in us, by his
holy spirit, that those acts of ours, come be called by the same name with his,
and we for them, to be termed Priests. Thus because Christ's death, and shedding
of his blood, so offering up himself by the eternal spirit, was a true, proper
sacrifice for sin, even our spiritual death unto sin, is described to be such,
both in the nature of it, to be an offering or sacrifice; for I beseech you
Brethren (says S. Paul) that you offer up your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, etc. Romans 12. 1. and for the manner of it, our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, Romans 6. 6.

Thirdly, we are Priests as we are Christians, or partakers of an holy unction,
whereby we are anointed to the participation of all Christ's glorious Offices;
we are not called Christians for nothing; if truly we are so, then have we an
unction from the holy one, whereby we know all things, 1 Ioh. 2. 20. and thus
also were all Gods people under the old Covenant, when God gave that caution
concerning them, Touch not my CHRISTIANS, and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm.
105. 15. the unction then of the holy spirit, implies a participation of all
those endowments which were typified by the anointing with oil, in the old
Testament; and invests us with the privileges in a spiritual acceptance, of
all the sorts of men, which then were so anointed; to wit, of Kings, Priests
and Prophets: so that by being made Christians (every one is not so that bears
that name) we are ingrafted into Christ, and do attain to a kind of holy and
intimate Communion with him, in all his glorious Offices, and in that regard
are called Priests.

Fourthly, the sacrifices we are enjoined to offer, give ground to this
appellation; now they are of diverse sorts, though all in general,
Eucharisticall; as first, of prayers and thanksgivings, Psa. 116 17. I will
offer unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of
the Lord; And again, Let my prayer be set before thee as Incense, and the
lifting up of my hands be as the evening sacrifice, Psa. 141. 2. so, Heb. 13.
14. Therefore let us offer unto God the sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit
of our lips. Secondly, of good works, Heb. 13. 14. to do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Thirdly,
(...) or self-slaughter, crucifying the old man, killing sin, and offering up
our souls and bodies, an acceptable sacrifice unto God, Romans 12. 1. Fourthly,
the sweet Incense of Martyrdom; yea, and if I be offered up on the sacrifice
and service of your faith, Philip. 2. 17. Now these and sundry other services
acceptable to God, receiving this appellation in the Scripture, denominate the
performers of them priests. Now here it must be observed, that these aforenamed
holy duties, are called Sacrifices, not properly, but metaphorically only, not
in regard of the external acts, as were those under the Law, but in regard of
the internal purity of heart, from whence they proceed. And because pure
Sacrifices by his own appointment, where heretofore the most acceptable service
to Almighty God; therefore now, when he would declare himself, to be very much
delighted with the spiritual acts of our duty, he calls them, Oblations,
Incense, Sacrifices, Offerings, etc. to intimate also a participation with him
in his Offices, who properly and directly is the only Priest of his Church,
and by the communication of the virtue of whose sacrifice we are made Priests,
not having authority in our own names, to go unto God for others, but having
liberty through him, and in his name, to go unto GOD for our selves.

Not to lose my self and Reader in this digression, the sum is, the unspeakable
blessings which the Priesthood of Christ has obtained for us, are a strong
obligation for the duty of praise and thanksgiving, of which that in some
measure we may discharge our selves, he has furnished us with sacrifices of
that kind, to be offered unto God: for our own parts, we are poor, and blind,
and lame, and naked, neither in the field, nor in the fold, in our hearts, nor
among our actions, can we find any thing worth the presenting unto him;
wherefore he himself provides them for us, especially for that purpose,
sanctifying and consecrating our souls and bodies, with the sprinkling of his
blood, and the unction of the holy spirit. Further, he has erected an Altar
(to sanctify our gifts) in heaven, before the Throne of grace, which being
spread over with his blood, is consecrated unto God, that the sacrifices of his
servants may for ever appear thereon: add to this, what he also has added,
the eternal and never expiring fire, of the favor of God, which kindles and
consumes the sacrifices laid on that Altar: and to the end that all this may be
rightly accomplished, he has consecrated us with his blood, to be Kings and
Priests to God for evermore. So that the close of this discourse will be, that
all true Believers, by virtue of their interest in Jesus Christ, are in the
holy Scripture, by reason of diverse allusions, called Priests, which name, in
the sense before related, belonging unto them as such, cannot on this ground,
be ascribed to any part of them, distinguished any ways from the rest, by
virtue of such distinction.

Secondly, the second thing I observe concerning the business in hand, is,
that the offering up unto God, of some metaphorical sacrifices, in a peculiar
manner, is appropriate unto men, set a part for the work of the Ministry: as
the slaying of men's lusts, and the offering up of them being converted by the
preaching of the Gospel, unto God: so Saint Paul of his Ministry, Romans 15. 16.
That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ, unto the Gentiles, ministering
the Gospel of God; That the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable,
etc. Ministers preaching the Gospel, to the conversion of souls, are said to
kill men's lusts, and offer them up unto God, as the fruit of their calling; as
Abel brought unto him an acceptable sacrifice, of the fruit of his flock; and
so also in respect of diverse other acts of their duty, which they perform in
the name of their Congregations. Now these sacrifices are appropriate to the
Ministers of the Gospel, not in regard of the matter, for others also may
convert souls unto God, and offer up prayers and praises, in the name of their
companions: but in respect of the manner, they do it publicly and ordinarily;
others privately, or in extraordinary cases; now if the Ministers, who are thus
Gods instruments for the conversion of souls, be themselves ingrafted into
CHRIST; all the acts they perform in that great work, are but parts of their
own duty, of the same nature in that regard, with the rest of our spiritual
sacrifices: so that they have not by them, any further peculiar interest in the
Office of the Priesthood more then others: But if these Preachers themselves do
not belong unto the Covenant of Grace, (as God oftentimes out of his care for
his flock, bestows gifts upon some for the good of others, on whom he will
bestow no graces, for the benefit of their own souls, men may administer that
consolation out of the Word unto their flock, which themselves never tasted,
preach to others, and be themselves castawaies. Saint Paul tells us that some
Preach Christ out of envy and contention, not sincerely, but on purpose to add
to his affliction; and yet says he whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is
preached, and therein do I. rejoice, yea, and will rejoice, Philip. 1. 16, 17,
18. surely had there been no good effected by such Preaching, Saint Paul would
not have rejoiced in it; and yet doubtless it was no evidence of
Sanctification, to Preach Christ merely out of contention, (and on purpose to
add to the affliction of his servants) but I say if the Lord shall be pleased
at any time to make use of such, as instruments; in his glorious work of
converting souls, shall we think that it is looked upon, as their sacrifice
unto God? No surely, the soul of the Lord is delighted with the Repentance of
sinners; but all the sacrifices of these wicked men are an abomination unto
him, and therefore they have no interest in it; neither can they from hence, be
said to be Priests of God, seeing they continue dogs and unclean beasts,
etc. so that all the right unto this Priestly Office, seems be resolved into,
and be the same with the common interest of all believers in Christ, whereby
they have a participation of his office: whence I affirm;

Thirdly, that the name of Priests is no where in the Scripture attributed
peculiarly, and distinctly to the Ministers of Gospel as such; let any produce
an instance to the contrary, and this controversy is at an end: yea that which
puts a difference between them, and the rest of the people of Gods Holiness,
seems to be a more immediate participation of Christ's Prophetical Office, to
teach, instruct, and declare the Will of God unto men, and not of his
sacerdotall, to offer sacrifices for men unto God. Now I could never observe
that any of those, who wereso forward of late to style themselves Priests, were
at all greedy of the apellation of Prophets; no, this they were content to let
go, name and thing; and yet when Christ ascended on high, he gave some to be
Prophets, for the edification of his body, Ephesians. 4. 11. none as we find to
be Priests: Priests then (like Prelates) are a sort of Church Officers, whom
Christ never appointed; whence I conclude;

Fourthly, that whosoever maintains any Priests of the New stament, as
properly so called in relation to any Altar or Sacrifice, by them to be
offered, does as much as in him lies disanull the Covenant of grace, and is
blasphemously injurious to the Priesthood of Christ; the Priest and the
Sacrifice under the new Testament are one, and the same: and therefore they who
make themselves Priests, must also make themselves Christ's, or get another
sacrifice of their own. As there is but one God, so there is but one Mediator
of God and man, the man Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2. 5. now he became the Mediator
of the New Testament chiefly by his Priesthood, because by the eternal spirit
he offered up himself unto God, Heb. 9. 14. 15. neither is any now called of
God to be a Priest as was Aaron, and without such divine vocation to this
office, none ought to undertake it, as the Apostle argues, Heb. 5. now, the end
of any such vocation, and office is quite ceased; being nothing but to offer
gifts and sacrifices unto God, Heb. 8. 3. for Christ has offered one Sacrifice
for sin for ever, and is sat down at the right hand of God, Heb. 10. 12. yea
by one offering he has perfected them that are sanctified, v. 14. and if that
did procure remission of sins, there must be no more offering for sin, v. 18.
and the surrogation of another makes the blood of Christ to be no better then
that of bulls and goats. Now one of those they must do, who make themselves
Priests, (in that sense concerning which we now treat) either get them a new
sacrifice of their own, For offering the Host or their Christ they pray: Supra
quae, propitio ac sereno vultu respirere digneris, and accepta habere ficut
dignatus es munorae pueri tui justi Abel, and sacrificium Patriarchae nostri
Abrahae: with many more to that purpose.
or pretend to offer Christ again; the first seems to have been the fault, of
those of ours, who made a sacrifice of the Sacrament, yet pretended not to
believe the real presence of Christ in, or under the outward elements or
species of them; the other of the Romanists, whose Priests in their Mass,
blasphemously make themselves Mediators, between God and his Son, and offering
up Christ Jesus for a Sacrifice, desire God to accept him; so charging that
sacrifice with imperfection, which he offered on the Altar of the Cross, and
making it necessary not only that he should annually, but daily, ye hourly
suffer afresh, so recrucifying unto themselves, the Lord of glory. Further,
themselves confessing, that to be a true sacrifice it is required, that that
which is offered unto God be destroyed, and cease to be, what it was, they do
confess by what lies in them, to destroy the Son of God, and by their Mass,
have transubst anciatd their Altars into Crosses, their Temples into
Golgatha's, their Prelates into Pilates, their Priests into Hangmen; tormentors
of Jesus Christ, Concerning them and ours we may shut up this discourse, with
what the Apostle intimates to the Hebrews, viz. that all Priests are ceased,
who were mortal, now small cause have we to believe them to be immateriall
spirits, among whom we find the Works of the flesh to have been so frequent.

And this may give us some light, into the iniquity of those times, whereinto
we were lately fallen; in which Lord Bishops and Priests, had almost quite
oppressed the Bishops of the Lord, and Ministers of the Gospel; how
unthankefull men were we, for the light of the Gospel, men that loved
darkness rather then light. A wonderful, and horrible thing was wrought in
our Land, the Prophets prophesied falsely, the Priests bare rule by their
means, almost the whole people loved to have it so, and what shall we now do
in the end thereof, Ierem. 5. 30. 31. such a hasty Apostasy was growing on us,
as we might justly wonder at, because unparalelled in any Church, of any age:
but our revolters were profound, hasty men and eager in their masters service.
So what an height of impiety, and opposition to Christ, the Roman Apostasy in a
thousand years attained unto, and yet I dare aver that never so many errors
and suspicions in an 100. years crept into that Church, as did into ours of
England in 16. and yet I cannot herein give the commendation of so much as
industry to our Innovators; (I accuse not the whole Church, but particulars in
it, and that had seized themselves of its authority) because they had a
Platform before them, and materials provided to their hand; and therefore it
was an easy thing for them to erect a Babel of Antichristian confusion; when
the Workmen in the Roman Apostasy were forced to build in the plain of
Christianity without any praeexistent materials, but were fain to use brick
and slime, of their own provision; besides they were unacquainted with the
maine design of Satan, who set them on work; and therefore it is no wonder if
those Nimrods oftimes hunted counter, and disturbed each other in their
progress; yea the first mover in Church Apostasy, knows, that now his time
is but short, and therefore it behooves him to make speedy work in seducing,
lest he be prevented by the coming of Christ.

Then having himself a long tract of time granted unto him, he allowed his
agents to take leisure also; but what he does now, must be done quickly, or
his whole design will be quashed: and this made him inspire the present
business, with so much life and vigor. Moreover, he was compelled then to sow
his tares in the dark, while men slept, taking advantage at the ignorance and
imbroylement of the times; if any man had leisure enough to search, and
learning enough to see and find him at it, he commonly filled the world with
clamors against him, and scarce any but his vowed champions durst be his
Advocates; in our time he was grown bold and impudent, working at noone day;
yea, he openly accused and condemned, all that durst accuse him, for sowing any
thing but good Wheat, that durst say that the tares of his Arminianisme and
Popery was any thing but true doctrine: let us give so much way to indignation,
we know Satan's trade what it is, to accuse the brethren, as men are called
after their professions, one a Lawyer, another a Physician, so is he the
accuser of the brethren; now surely if ever he set up a shop on earth, to
practice his trade in, it was our High Commission Court, as of late employed,
but (...).

CAP. 4.
Of the duty of Gods people in cases extraordinary concerning his Worship.
THis being thus determined, I return again to the maine (...), concerning
the duty and privilege of the common people of Christianity, in sacred things:
and first in cases extraordinary, in which perhaps it may be affirmed, that
every one (of those I mean before named) is so far a Minister of the Gospel
as to teach and declare the faith to others, although he have no outward
calling thereunto; and yet in this case every one for such an undertaking must
have a Warrant by an immediate call from God, and when God calls there must be
no opposition, the thing it self he sends us upon, becomes lawful by his
mission, what God has cleansed, that call not thou common, Act. 10. 13. never
fear the equity of what Cod sets thee upon; no excuses of disability or any
other impediment, ought to take place, the Lord can and will supply all such
defects: This was Moses case, Exodus 10. 14. Oh Lord (says he) I am not
eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken to thy servant, but of
a slow speech, and a slow tongue; And the Lord said unto him, who has made
man's mouth, have not I the Lord? So also was it with the Prophet Jeremy, when
God told him, that he had ordained him a Prophet unto the Nations, he replies,
Ah Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a Child; But the Lord (says he)
said unto me, say not I am a Child, for thou shall go to all that I shall send
thee, and whatsoever I command thee, thou shall speak, Jer. 1. 6. Nothing can
excuse any from going on his message, who can perfect his praise, out of the
mouth of Babes and Sucklings. This the Prophet Amos rested upon, when he was
questioned, although he were unfit for that heavenly employment, either by
education or course of life: I was no Prophet, neither was I a prophets son;
but I was an heardman, and a gatherer of Sycamore fruit; and the Lord took me
as I followed the flock, and said unto me, go Prophecy to my people Israel Amos
7. 14, 15. So on the contrary, St. Paul, a man of strong parts, great learning,
and endowments, of indefatigable industry, and large abilities, yet affirms of
himself, that when God called him to preach his word, he conferred not with
flesh and blood, but went on presently with his work. Gal. 1. 16, 17.

CAP. V.
Of the several ways of extraordinary calling to the teaching of others; the
first way.
NOw three ways may a man receive, and be assured that he has received this
divine mission, or know that he is called of God, to the preaching of the Word:
I mean not that persuasion of divine concurrence, which is necessary also for
them, that are partakers of an ordinary vocation, (but which is required in
extraordinary cases to them, in whom all outward calling is wanting.

1. By immediate Revelation.

2. By a concurrence of Scripture rules, directory for such occasions.

3. By some outward acts of providence necessitating him thereunto.

For the first, not to speak of light Prophetical, whither it consists in a
habit, or rather in a transient irradiating motion, nor to discourse of the
Species, whereby supernatural things are conveyed to the natural faculty,
with the several ways of divine Revelation, (for St. Paul affirms it to
have been (...) as well as (...)) with the sundry appellations it received,
from the manner whereby it came; I shall only show, what assurance such a one
as is thus called may have in himself, that he is so called, and how he may
manifest it unto others. That men receiving any revelation from God, had
always an assurance that such it was, to me seems most certain: Neither could
I ever approve the note of Gregory on the 1. of Ezekiel. viz. That Prophets being
accustomed to Prophesying, Sciendum est quod aliquando prophetae sancti dum
consuluntur ex magno usu prophetandi quaedam ex suo spiritu proserunt, et se
hoc ex prophetiae spiritu dicere suspicantur. Gregor: Hom. 1. in Ezekiel.
did oftentimes speak of their own spirit, supposing that it proceeded from
the spirit of Prophecy. What is this but to question the truth of all
prophetical revelations, and to shake the faith that is built upon it: Surely
the Prophet Jeremiah had an infallible assurance of the author of his message,
when he pleaded for himself before the Princes, of a truth the Lord has sent
me unto you, to speak all these words in your ears. Chap. 26. 15. And Abraham
certainly had need of a good assurance whence that motion did proceed, which
made him address himself, to the sacrificing the son of promise; And that all
other Prophets had the like evidence of knowledge, concerning the divine verity
of their revelations is unquestionable; hence are those allusions in the
Scripture, whereby it is compared unto things whereof we may be most certain
by the assurance of sense. So Amos 3. 8. The Lion has roared, who will not
fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but Prophecy? And Jerem. 20. 9. His
word was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, things sensible
enough. Happily Satan may so far delude false Prophets, as to make them suppose
their lying vanities are from above: whence they are said to be Prophets of the
deceit of their own hear, Jerem. 23. 26. being deceived, as well deceivers;
thinking in themselves, as well as speaking unto others, he says, verse. 31.
but that any true Prophets should not know a true Revelation, from a motion of
their own hearts, wants not much of blasphemy. The Lord surely supposes that
assurance of discerning, when he gives that command; the Prophet that has a
Dream, let him tell a Dream, and he that has my Word, let him speak my Word
faithfully; what is the chafe to the wheat? Ierem. 23. 28. Dicebat se
discernere (nescio quo sapore quem verbis explicare non poterat) quid
interesset interdeum revelantem, and animam suam somniantem. Aug. Confess.
He must be both blind and mad, that shall mistake, wheat, for chafe, and on
the contrary, what some men speak of an hidden instinct from God, moving the
minds of men, yet so, as they know not wither it be from him, or no, may
better serve to illustrate Plutarchs discourse of Socrates Demon, then any
passage in holy Writ. St. Austin says, his Mother would affirm, that though
she could not express it, yet she could discern the difference between Gods
Revelation, and her own Dreams: In which relation, I doubt not but the learned
Father took advantage from the good old woman's words of what she could do, to
declare what might be done, of every one that had such immediate revelations.
Briefly then, the spirit of God, never so extraordinarily moves the mind of
man to apprehend any thing of this kind whereof we speak, but it also
illustrateth it with a knowledge, and assurance, that it is divinely moved to
this apprehension. Now because it is agreed on all sides, that light
Prophetical is no permanent habit in the mind of the Prophets, but a
transient impression, of it self, not apt to give any such assurance, it may
be questioned from what other principle it does proceed. But not to pry into
things perhaps not fully revealed, and seeing St. Paul shows us that in such
heavenly raptures, there are some things unutterable of them, and
incomprehensible of us, we may let this rest, amongst those (...), it
apappeareth then from the preceding discourse, that, a man pretending to
extraordinary vocation, by immdiate revelation, in respect of selfe-perswasion,
of the truth of his call, he must be, as ascertained of it, as he could be, of
a burning fire in his bones, if there shut up.

CAP. VI.
What assurance men extraordinarily called, can give to others, that they are
so called in the former way.
THe next thing to be considered, is, what assurance he can give to others, and
by what means, that he is so called. Now the matter, or subject of their
employment may give us some light, to this consideration: and this is either,
the inchoation of some divine work to be established amongst men, by virtue of
a new, and before never heard of Revelation of Gods will; or a restoration of
the same, when collapsed and corrupted by the sin of men. To the first of
these, God never sends any, but whom he does so extraordinarily and
immediately call, and ordain for that purpose, and that this may be manifested
unto others, he always accompanies them with his own almighty power, in the
working of such miracles, as may make them believed, for the very works sake
which God by them does effect. This we may see in Moses, and (after Jesus
Christ anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows to preach the
Gospel) the Apostles: but this may pass; for nothing in such a way, shall ever
again take place, God having ultimately revealed his mind, concerning his
worship, and our salvation; a curse being denounced to man or angel, that shall
pretend to Revelation, for the altering or changing one jot or title of the
Gospel. For the other, the work of Reformation, there being, ever since the
writing of his Word, an Infallible rule, for the performance of it, making it
fall within the duty and ability of men, partakers of an ordinary vocation, and
instructed with ordinary gifts; God does not always immediately call men unto
it: but yet because oftentimes he has so done, we may enquire what assurance
they could give, of this their calling, to that employment. Our Savior Christ
informs us, that a Prophet is often without honor in his own country: The
honor of a Prophet, is to have credence given to his Message; of which it
should seem, Jonas was above measure zealous; yet such is the cursed Infidelity
and hardness of men's hearts, that though they cried, Thus says the Lord, yet
they would reply the Lord has not spoken; hence are those pleadings betwixt
the Prophet Jeremy, and his enemies the Prophet averring of a truth, the Lord
has sent me unto you, and they contesting, that the Lord had not sent him, but
that he lied in the Name of the Lord; now to leave them inexcusable, and
whether they would hear or whether they would forbear, to convince them, that
there has been a Prophet amongst them, as also to give the greater credibility
to their extraordinary message, to them that were to believe their report, it
is necessary that the Arm of the Lord should be revealed, working in and by
them, in some extraordinary manner, it is certain enough, that God never sent
any one extraordinarily, instructed only with ordinary gifts, and for an
ordinary end: the aim of their employment I showed before was extraordinary,
even the reparation of something instituted by God, and collapsed by the sin of
man; that it may be credible, or appear of a truth, that God had sent them for
this purpose, they were always furnished, with such gifts and abilities, as
the utmost reach of humane endeavors, with the assistance of common grace
cannot possibly attain. The general opinion is, that God always supplies
such, with the gift of miracles. Take the Word in a large sense, for every
supernatural product, beyond the ordinary activity of that secondary cause
whereby it is effected, and I easily grant it; but in the usual restrained
acceptance of it, for outward wonderful works, the power of whose production
consists in operation, I something doubt the universal truth of the assertion.
We do not read of any such miracles wrought by the Prophet Amos, and yet he
stands upon his extraordinary immediate vocation; I was neither Prophet nor the
son of a Prophet, but the Lord called me, etc. it suffices then that they be
furnished with a supernatural power either in, 1. Discerning, 2. Speaking, 3.
Working: the power of Discerning according to the things by it discernable, may
be said to be of two sorts, for it is either of things present, beyond the
power of humane investigation, as to know the thoughts of other men's hearts, or
their words not ordinarily to be known, as Elisha discovered the
bed-chamber-discourse of the King of Syria (not that by virtue of their calling
they come to be (...), knowers of the heart, which is Gods property alone, but
that God does sometimes reveal such things unto them, for otherwise no such
power is included in the nature of the gift, which is perfective of their
knowledge, not by the way of habit, but actual motion in respect of some
particulars, and when this was absent, the same Elisha affirms that he knew
not why the Shunamitish woman was troubled) or secondly of things future and
contingent in respect of their secundary causes, not precisely necessitated by
their own internal principle of operation, for the effecting of the things so
foreknown: and therefore the truth of the foreknowledge, consists in a
commensuration to Gods purpose. Now effects of this power, are all those
predictions of such things which we find in the old and new Testament, and
diverse also since: secondly, the supernatural gift in speaking I intimate, is
that of Tongues, proper to the times of the Gospel, when the Worship of God was
no longer to be confined to the people of one nation.

The third in Working, is that which strictly and properly, is called the gift
of Miracles: which are hard, rare, and strange effects exceeding the whole
order of created nature: for whose production God sometimes uses his servants
instrumentally, moving and inabling them thereunto, by a transient impression,
of his powerful grace; of which sort the holy Scripture has innumerable
relations. Now with one of those extraordinary gifts at the least, sometimes
with all, does the Lord furnish those his messengers of whom we treat: which
makes their message a sufficient revelation of Gods Will, and gives it
credibility enough, to stir up faith in some, and leave others inexcusable. All
the difficulty is, that there have been Simon Magusses, and are Antichrists,
falsely pretending to have in themselves, this mighty power of God, in one or
other of the forenamed kinds. The discovery of Pretenders.
Hence were those many false Prophets, Dreamers, and Wizards mentioned in the
old Testament, which the Lord himself forewarnes us of, as also those Agents
of that man of sin, whose coming is after the working of Satan with power and
signs, and lying wonders, 2 These. 2. 9. I mean the juggling Priests and
Jesuits, pretending falsely by their impostures to the power of miracle
vvorking; though their employment be not to reform, but professedly to corrupt
the worship of God: now in such a case as this, we have: 1. The mercy of God to
rely upon, whereby he will guide his into the way of truth, and the purpose
or decree of God, making it impossible that his elect should be deceived by
them. Secondly, humane diligence accompanied with Gods blessing, may help us
wonderfully in a discovery, whither the pretended miracles be of God, or no;
for there is nothing more certain, then that a true and real miracle, is
beyond the activity of all created power, (for if it be not, it is not a
miracle) so that the Devil and all his Emissaries are not able to effect any
one act truly miraculous: but in all their pretenses there is a defect
discernable, either in respect of the thing it self pretended to be done, or
of the manner of its doing, not truly exceeding the power of art or nature,
though the apprehension of it, by reason of some Hell-conceived circumstances,
be above our capacity. Briefly, either the thing is a lie, and so it is easy
to faigne miracles, or the performance of it, is pure juggling, and so it is
easy to delude poor mortals. Innumerable of this sort at the beginning of
the Reformation, were discovered among the Agents, of that Wonder-vvorking man
of sin, by the blessing of God upon humane endeavors; now from such
discoveries, a good conclusion may be drawn, against the doctrine they desire
by such means to confirm: for as God never works true miracles, but for the
confirmation of the truth, so will not men pretend such as are false, but to
persuade that to others for a truth, which themselves have just reason to be
persuaded is a lie; now if this means fail, Thirdly, God himself has set
down a rule of direction for us, in the time of such difficulty, Deuteronomy. 13. 1,
2, 3. If there arise among you a Prophet or Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee
a sign or a vvonder, and the sign, or the vvonder come to pass, wherefore
he spoke unto thee, saying, let us go after other Gods to serve them, thou
shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, for the
Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God, with all
your heart, and all your soul. Ye shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear
him, and keep his Commandments, and obey his voice, and you shall serve him,
and cleave unto him, and that Prophet or Dreamer of dreams shall be put to
death. The sum is, that seeing such men pretend that their Revelations and
Miracles are from Heaven, let us search, whither the Doctrine they seek to
confirm by them, be from heaven, or no; if it be not, let them be stoned,
or accursed, for they seek to dravv us from our GOD, if it be, let not the
curse of a stony heart, to refuse them, be upon us. Where the miracles are
true, the doctrine cannot be false; and if the doctrine be true, in all
probability the miracles confirming it, are not false; and so much of them, who
are immediately called of God from heaven, what assurance they may have in
themselves, of such a call, and what assurance they can make of it to others;
now such are not to expect any ordinary vocation; from men below, God calling
them aside to his work, from the midst of their Brethren: The Lord of the
harvest may send laborers into his field, without asking his Stewards consent,
and they shall speak what ever he says unto them.

CHAP. 7.
The second way whereby a man may be called extraordinarily.
SEcondly, a man may be extraordinarily called to the preaching and publishing
of Gods word by a concurrence of Scripture rules, directory for such occasions,
occurrences, and opportunities of time, place, and persons, as he lives in,
and under. Rules in this kind, may be drawn either from express precept, or
approved practice: Some of these I shall intimate, and leave it to the
indifferent Reader, to judge, whether or no they hold in the application; and
all that in this kind I shall propose, I did with submission to better
judgments.

Consider then,

1. That of our Savior to Saint Peter, Luke 22. 32. When thou art converted,
strengthen the Brethren, which containing nothing but an application of one of
the prime dictates of the Law of nature, cannot, ought not to be restrained
unto men of any peculiar calling as such: not to multiply many of this kind,
(whereof in the Scripture is plenty) add only that of Saint James, Brethren,
if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that
he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul
from death, etc. from these and the like places it appears to me, that

1. There is a general obligation on all Christians, to promote the conversion
and instruction of sinners, and man erring from the right way:

Again, consider that of our Savior, Mat. 5. 15. Men d^ not light a Candle
and put it under a Rushell, but on a Candlestick, and it gives light unto all
that are in the house: to which add that of the Apostle, If any thing be
revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace, 1 Cor. 14.
30. which words, although primarily they intend extraordinary immediate
revelations, yet I see no reason why in their equity and extent, they may not
be directory for the use of things revealed unto us by Scripture light; at
least we may deduce from them, by the way of Analogy, that

2. Whatsoever necessary truth is revealed to any out of the word of God, not
before known, he ought to have an uncontradicted liberty of declaring that
truth, provided that he use such regulated ways for that his declaration, as
the Church wherein he lives (if a right Church) does allow.

Further see Amos 3. 8. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? The Lord God
has spoken, who can but prophecy? And Jer. 20. 9. Then said I, I will not
make mention of his name, but his word was in mine heart, as a burning fire
shut up in my bones, I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay: With
the answer of Peter and John, to the Rulers of the Jews, Acts 14. 19, 20.
Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more then unto God,
judge ye, for we cannot but speak the things that we have seen and heard.

Whence it appears, that

3. Truth revealed unto any, carries along with it an unmovable persuasion of
Conscience (which is powerfully obligatory) that it ought to be published and
spoken to others.

That none may take advantage of this to introduce confusion into our
Congregations, I gave a sufficient caution in the second Rule.

Many other observations giving light to the business in hand, might be taken
from the common dictates of nature, concurring with the many general precepts
we have in the Scripture, but omitting them, the next thing I propose is the
practice, etc.

1. Of our Savior Christ himself, who did not only pose the Doctors when he
was but twelve years old, Luke 2. 46. but also afterward preached in the
Synagogue of Nazareth, Luke 4. 18. being neither Doctor, nor Scribe, nor
Levite, but of the Tribe of Juda (concerning which Tribe it is evident that
Moses spoke nothing concerning the priesthood.)

2. Again, in the eight of the Acts, great persecution arising against the
Church, after the death of Stephen, they were all scattered abroad from
Jerusalem, ver. 1. that is, all the faithful members of the Church, who being
thus dispersed, went every where, preaching the word, ver. 4. and to this their
publishing of the Gospel (having no warrant, but the general engagement of
all Christians, to further the propagation of Christ's Kingdom) occasioned by
their own persecution, the Lord gave such a blessing, that they were thereby
the first planters of a settled Congregation among the Gentiles, they, and their
converts being the first that were honored by the name of Christians, Acts 11.
21. and 26. Neither 3. is the example of Saint Paul altogether impertinent, who
with his companions repaired into the Synagogues of the Jews, taught them
publicly, yea, upon their own request, Acts 13. 15. Apollos also spoke boldly,
and preached fervently, when he knew only the baptism of John, and needed
himself further instruction, Acts 18. 24. it should seem then, in that
juncture of time, he that was instructed in any truth, not ordinarily known,
might publicly acquaint others with it, though he himself were ignorant in
other points of high concernment; yet perhaps now it is not possible that any
occurrences should require a precise imitation, of what was not only lawful,
but also expedient, in that dawning toward the clear day of the last
unchangeable revelation of Gods will. Now in these and the like, there is so
much variety, such several grounds, and circumstances, that no direct rule can
from them be drawn, only they may give strength to what from the former shall
be concluded.

For a further light to this discourse, consider what desolate estate the
Church of God, has been, may be, and at this present, in diverse places is
reduced to: Her silver may become dross, and her wine be mixed with water, the
faithful City becoming an Harlot, her Shepherds may be turned into dumb
sleeping dogs, and devouring wolves, her watchmen may be turned smiters, her
prophets to prophecy falsely, and her priests to bear rule by lies, the
Commandments of God being made void by the traditions of men, superstition,
humane inventions, will worship, may defile and contaminate the service of God;
Ezekiel. 22. 27, 28. etc. 8. 13.
yea, and greater abominations may men possessing Moses Chair by succession
do: Now that the Temple of God has been thus made a den of thieves, that the
abomination of desolation has been set up in the holy place, is evident from
the Jewish and Christian Church: for in the one it was clearly so, when the
government of it was devolved to the Scribes and Pharisees, and in the other,
when the man of sin had exalted himself in the midst thereof. Now suppose a
man, living in the midst and height of such a sad Apostasy, when an universal
darkness had spread it self over the face of the Church, if the Lord be
pleased to reveal unto him out of his word some points of faith, then either
not at all known, or generally disbelieved, yet a right belief whereof is
necessary to salvation; and further out of the same word shall discover unto
him the wickedness of that Apostasy, and the means to remove it, I demand,
Whether that man without expecting any call from the fomenters and maintainers
of those errors, with which the Church at that time, is only not destroyed, may
not preach, publish, and publicly declare the said truths to others (the
knowledge of them being so necessary for the good of their souls) and conclude
himself thereunto called of God, by virtue of the forenamed, and other the
like Rules? Truly for my part (under correction) I conceive he may, nay he
ought, neither is any other outward call requisite to constitute him a Preacher
of the Gospel, then the consent of Gods people to be instructed by him; for
instance, suppose that God should reveal the truth of the Gospel, to a mere
lay man (as they say) in Italy, so that he be fully convinced thereof; what
shall he now do? abstain from publishing it, though he be persuaded in
conscience, that a great door of utterance might be granted unto him, only
because some heretical, symonaicall, wicked Antichristian Prelate, has not
ordained him Minister; who yet would not do it, unless he will subscribe to
those errors and heresies which he is persuaded to be such: truly I think by so
abstaining, he should sin against the law of charity, in seeing (not the Ox or
Ass of his brother falling into the pit, but) their precious souls, sinking
to everlasting damnation, and not preventing it, when he might? and were he
indeed truly angry with his whole Nation, he might have the advantage of an
Italian revenge.

Moreover, he should sin against the precept of Christ, by hiding his light
under a bushel* and napkining up his talent, an increase whereof will be
required of him at the last day: Now with this I was always so well satisfied,
that I ever deemed all curious disquisition after the outward vocation of our
first reformers, Luther, Calvin, etc. altogether needless; the case in their
days being exactly that, which I have laid down.

Come we now to the third and last way, The third way.
whereby men not partakers of any outward ordinary vocation, may yet receive a
sufficient warrant for the preaching and publishing of the Gospel, and that by
some outward act of providence guiding them thereunto; For example, put case a
Christian man, should by any chance of providence, be cast by shipwreck or
otherwise, upon the Country of some barbarous people, that never heard of the
name of Christ, and there by hs goodness that brought him thither, be received
amongst them, into civil humane society; may he not, nay, ought he not to
preach Christ unto them? and if God give a blessing to his endeavors, may he
not become a Pastor to the converted souls? none I hope makes any doubt of it;
and in the Primitive times, nothing was more frequent then such examples; thus
were the Indians and the Moors turned to the faith, as you may see in
Eusebius: yea great was the liberty which in the first Church was used in this
kind, presently after the supernatural gift of tongues ceased amongst men.

CHAP. 8.
Of the liberty and duty of gifted, uncalled Christians, in the exercise of
diverse acts of Gods worship.
ANd thus have I declared, what I conceive, concerning extraordinary calling to
the public teaching of the word; in what cases only it uses to take place,
whence I conclude, that whosoever pretends unto it, not warranted by an
evidence of one of those three ways, that God takes in such proceedings, is
but a pretender, an impostor, and ought accordingly to be rejected of all Gods
people in other cases, not to disuse what outward ordinary occasion from them
who are entrusted by commission from God, with that power, does confer upon
persons so called, we must needs grant it a negative voice, in the admission of
any to the public Preaching of the Gospel, if they come not in at that door,
they do climb over the wall, if they make any entrance at all: It remains
then, to shut up all, that it be declared, What private Christians, living in a
pure, Orthodoxe, well ordered Church may do, and how far they may interest
themselves, in holy souleconcerning affairs, both in respect of their own
particular, and of their brethren in the midst of whom they live: in which
determination, because it concerns men of low degree, and those that
comparatively may be said to be unlearned, I shall labor to express the
conceivings of my mind, in as familiar plain observations as I can; only
thus much I desire may be premised, that the principles and rules of that
Church government, from which, in the following assertions I desire not to
wander, is of that (to which I do, and always in my poor judgment have
adhered, since by Gods assistance, I had engaged my self to the study of his
word) which commonly is called Presbyteriall, or Synodicall, in opposition to
Prelaticall, or Diocesan on the one side; and that which is commonly called
Independent, or Congregationall on the other.

1. Then a diligent searching of the Scriptures, with fervent prayers to
Almighty God, for the taking away that veil of ignorance, which by nature is
before their eyes, that they may come to a saving knowledge in, and a right
understanding of them, is not only lawful and convenient for all men
professing the name of Christ, but also absolutely necessary because commanded,
yea indeed commanded, because the end so to be attained is absolutely
necessary to salvation: to confirm this, I need not multiply precepts out of
the old or new Testament, such as that of Isa. 8. 20. To the law and to the
testimony, and that of Joh, 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, which are inumerable,
nor yet heap up motives unto it, such as are the description of the heavenly
country, whither we are going, in them is contained, Joh. 14. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Revel: 22. 1. etc. the way by which we are to travail laid down, John 5. 39.
and 14. 5, 6. Jesus Christ whom we must labor to be like, painted out, Gal. 3.
1. and the back-parts of God discovered, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. by them only true
spiritual wisdom is conveied to our souls, Iere. 8. 9. whereby we may become
even wiser then our teachers, Psa. 119. in them all comfort and consolation is
to be had, in the time of danger and trouble, Psa. 119. 54. and 71, 72. in
brief the knowledge of Christ which is life eternal Ioh. 17. 3. yea, all that
can be said in this kind comes infinitely short, of those treasures of wisdom,
riches, and goodness, which are contained in them; the law of the Lord is
perfect converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple, Psa. 19. 7. but this duty of the people is clear, and confessed;
the objections of the Papists against it, being for the most part, so many
blasphemies against the holy word of God; they accuse it of difficulty, which
God affirms to make wise the simple, of obscurity, which opens the eyes of
the blind; to be a dead letter, a nose of wax, which is quick and powerful
pearcing to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit; to be weak and
insufficient, which is able to make the man of God perfect and wise unto
salvation; yea that word which the Apostle affirms to be profitable for
reproof, is not in any thing more full, then in reproving of this blasphemy.

2. They may not only (as before) search the Scriptures, but also examine, and
try by them the doctrine that publicly is taught unto them; the people of God,
must not be like children tossed too and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive: Ephesians. 4. 14. all is not presently Gospel, that is
spoken in the Pulpit, it is not long since, that Altar-worship, Arminianisme,
Popery, Superstition, etc. were freely preached in this Kingdom; now what shall
the people of God do in such a case? yield to every breath, to every puff of
false doctrine? or rather try it by the word of God, and if it be not agreeable
thereunto, cast it out like salt that has lost its savor: must not the people
take care that they be not seduced? must they not beware of false Prophets,
which come unto them in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves?
and how shall they do this? what way remains, but a trying their doctrine by
the rule? in these evil days wherein we live, I hear many daily complaining,
That there is such difference, and contrariety among preachers, they know not
what to do, nor scarce what to believe; my answer is, Do but your own duty,
and this trouble is at an end; is there any contrarity in the book of God? pin
not your faith upon men's opinions, the Bible is the touchstone: that there is
such diversity amongst teachers is their fault, who should think all the same
thing; but that this is so troublesome to you, is your own fault, for
neglecting your duty of trying all things by the word: Alas, you are in a
miserable condition, if you have all this while, relied on the authority of
men, in heavenly things; he that builds his faith upon preachers, though they
preach nothing but truth, and he pretend to believe it, has indeed no faith at
all, but a wavering opinion, built upon a rotten foundation: what ever then is
taught you, you must go with it, to the law, and to the testimony, if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them,
Isaiah 8. 20. yea, the Bereans are highly extolled, for searching whether the
Doctrine concerning our Savior, preached by St. Paul, were so, or no, Acts 17.
11. agreeably to the precept of the same Preacher, 1 These. 5. 21. Make trial
of all things, and hold fast that which is good: as also to that of St. John, 1
Epist. 4. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they be of God, because many false spirits ar^ gone out into the world;
prophets then must be tried, before they be trusted; now the reason of this
holds still: There are many false teachers abroad in the world, wherefore try
every one, try his spirit, his spiritual gift of teaching, and that by the
word of God. And here you have a door rule laid down, how you may extricate
your selves from the former perplexity: Nay, St. Paul himself speaking to
understanding Christians, requires them to judge of it, 1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak
as to wise, judge ye what I say: hence are those cautions, that the people
should look that none do seduce them, Matthew. 24. 4. to which end, they must
have their souls exercised, in the word of God, to discern good and evil, Heb.
5. 14. thus also in one place, Christ bids his followers, hear the
Pharisees, and do what they should command, because they sat in Moses chair,
Matt. 23. 2, 3. and yet in another place, gives them a caution to beware of the
Doctrine of the Pharisees, Matr. 16. 12. it remains then, that the people are
bound to hear those, who possess the place of teaching in the Church, but
withal they must beware that it contain nothing of the old leaven, to which
end they must try it by the word of God: when as Saint Paul prays for the
Philippians, that their love might abound yet more and more in knowledge, and
all judgment, that they might approve things that are Excellent, Phil. 1. 9,
10. unless ministers will answer for all those souls they shall mislead, and
excuse them before God, at the day of trial, they ought not to debar them,
from trying their Doctrine; now this they cannot do, for if the blind, lead
the blind both shall fall into the pit of destruction. And here I might have
just occasion of complaint: 1. Of the Superstitious pride of the late Clergy of
this land, who could not endure to have their doctrine tried by their auditors,
crying to poor men with the Pharisees, John 9. you were altogether borne in
sins, and do you teach us? A pretty world it is like to be, when the sheep
will needs teach their Pastors; nothing would serve them, but a blind
submission, to the loose dictates of their cobweb homilies: he saw farther
sure, in the darkness of Popery, who contended that a whole general
Council, ought to give place, to a simple lay man, urging Scripture, or
speaking reason.

Now surely this is very far from that gentleness, meekness, and aptness to
teach, which St. Paul requires in a man of God, a minister of the Gospel:
Secondly, the negligence of the people also, might here come under a just
reproof, who have not labored, to discern the voice of the hireling, from
that of the true shepherd, but have promiscuously followed, the new
fanglednesse, and heretical errors, of every time serving starver of souls.
Whence proceeds all that misery, the land now groaneth under, but that we
have had a people, willing to be led by a corrupted Clergy, freely drinking in
the poison, wherewith they were tainted: the Prophets prophesied falsely, the
Priests bare rule, by their means, the people loved to have it so, but what
shall we now do in the end thereof; who could ever have thought, that the
people of England, would have yielded a willing ear, to so many Popish
errors, and an obedient shoulder, to such a heavy burden of Superstitions, as
in a few years, Vos facite quod Scriptum est, ut unodicente, omnes examinent,
me ergodicente quod sentio, vos discern^te and examinate; Orig. in Josh. Hom.
21.
were instilled into them, and laid upon them: voluntarily by their own sinful
neglect, ensnaring their consciences, by the omission of this duty we insist
upon, of examining by the word what is taught unto them; but this is no place
for complaints, and this is a second thing, which the people distinct from
their Pastors may do for their own edification. now whether they do this
privately, every one apart, or by assembling more together, is altogether
indifferent. And that this was observed by private Christians, in the Primitive
times is very apparent.

Come we in the third place, what either their duty binds them to, or
otherwise by the word, they are allowed to do, in sacred performances, having
reference to others; look then in general upon those things we find them
tied unto, by virtue of special precept: such as are to warn the unruly,
comfort the feeble minded, support the weak, 1 These. 5. 14. To admonish and
reprove offending brethren, Matthew. 18. 15. to instruct the ignorant. Joh. 4.
29. Act. 18. 26. to exhort the negligent, Heb. 3. 15. and 10. 24. 25. to
comfort the afflicted, 1 These. 5. 11. to restore him that falls, Gal. 6. 1.
to visit the sick* Matthew. 25. 36, 40. to reconcile those that are at variance,
Matthew. 5. 9. to contend for the truth, Jude 3. 1 Pet. 3. 15. to pray for the
sinner not unto death, 1 Ioh. 5. 16. to edify one another in their most holy
faith, Jude 20. to speak to themselves in Psalms and hymns, and spiritual
songs, Ephe. 5. 19. to be ready to answer every man, in giving account of their
faith, Col. 4. 6. to mark them that make divisions, Romans 16. 17. with
innumerable others to the like purpose, it remains them to consider:
Secondly, in particular, what course they may take, beyond private conference
between man and man, by indiction of time or place, for the fulfilling of what
by these precepts, and the like is of them required: To which I answer*

1. Lawful things must be done lawfully, if any unlawful circumstance,
attends the performance of a lawful action, it vitiates the whole work, for
Bonum oritur ex integris; for instance, to reprove an offender, is a Christian
duty, but for a private man to do it, in the public congregation, whilst the
Minister is preaching, were instead of a good act, a soul crime, being a
notorious disturbance of Church decency and Order.

2. That for a public, formal, Ministerial teaching, two things are
required in the Teacher: First, gifts from God: Secondly, authority from the
Church (and I speak now of ordinary cases) he that wants either, is no true
Pastor: For the first, God sends none upon an employment, but whom he fills
with gifts for it: 1. not one command in the Scripture made to Teachers 2. Not
one rule for their direction: 3. Not one promise to their endeavors, 4. Not
any end of their unemployment; 5. not one encouragement to their duty, 6. Not
one reproof for their negligence, 7. Not the least intimation of their reward,
but cuts off ungifted: Idol pastors, from any true interest in the calling:
And for the other, that want authority from the Church, neither ought they to
undertake any formal act, properly belonging to the Ministry, such as is,
solemn teaching of the word; For, 1. they are none of Christ's officers, Ephesians.
4. 11. 2. They are expressly forbidden it, Ier. 23. 21. Heb. 5. 4. 3. The
blessing on the word is promised only to sent teachers, Romans 10. 14, 15. 4. If
to be gifted, be to be called, then, 1. Every one might undertake so much in
sacred duties, as he fancies himself to be able to perform. 2. Children (as
they report of Athanasius) might baptize. Eusebius Russ.
3. Every* common Christian, might administer the Communion: but endless are
the arguments that might be multiplied against this fancy; In a word, if our
Savior Christ be the God of order, he has left his Church to no such
confusion.

Thirdly, that to appoint time and place, for the doing of that which God has
appointed indefinitely to be done, in time and place, rather commends then
vitiates the duty; so did Jobs friends in the duty of comforting the afflicted,
they made an appointment together to come and comfort him, Job 2. 11. and so
did they, Zech. 8. 21. and so did David, Psalm. 119. 62.

Fourthly, There is much difference between opening or interpreting the word,
and applying the word upon the advantage of such an approved interpretation, as
also between an authoritative act, or doing a thing by virtue of special
office, and a charitable act, or doing a thing out a motion of Christian love.

Fifthly, It may be observed concerning gifts; First, that the gifts and graces
of Gods Spirit, are of two sorts, some being bestowed for the sanctification of
Gods people, some for the edification of his Church, some of a private alley,
looking primarily inwards, to the saving of his soul, on whom they are
bestowed, (though in their fruits also, they have a relation, and habitude to
others) other some, aiming at the common wealth or profit of the whole Church,
as such: of the first sort, are those mentioned, Gal. 5. 22, 23. The fruit of
the Spirit is love, joy, peace, etc. with all other graces that are necessary
to make the man of God perfect, in all holiness and the fear of the Lord: the
other are those (...), spiritual gifts of teaching* praying, prophe^ying,
mentioned, 1 Cor. 14. and in other places.

Secondly, That all these gifts coming down from the Father of lights, are
given by the same Spirit, dividing to every one as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 11. he
is not tied in the bestowing of his gifts, to any sort, estate, calling or
condition of men, but works them freely, as it pleases him, in whom he will;
the Spirit there mentioned, is that God which works all things, according to
the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. they are neither deserved by our
goodness, nor obtained by our endeavors.

Thirdly, That the end why God bestows these gifts on any, is merely, that
within the bounds of their own calling (in which they are circumscribed, 1
Cor. 1. 24.) they should use them to his glory, and the edification of his
Church, For the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. Christ gives none of his talents to be bound up in
napkins, Eccles. 12. 9.
but expects his own with increase: and from these considerations it is easily
discernable, both what the people of God distinct from their Pastors in a well
ordered Church, may do in this kind, whereof we treat, and how: in general
then I assert,

That for the improving of knowledge, the increasing of Christian charity, for
the furtherance of a strict and holy communion of that spiritual love and
amity which ought to be amongst the brethren, they may of their own accord,
assemble together, to consider one another, to provoke unto love and good
works, to stir up the gifts that are in them, yiedling and receiving mutual
consolation, by the fruits of their most holy faith. Now because there be many
Vzzahs amongst us, who have an itching desire to be fingring of the Arc,
thinking more highly of themselves, then they ought to think, and like the
ambitious sons of Levi, taking too much upon them; it will not be amiss, to
give two cautions, deducted from the former rules: First, that they do not,
under a pretense of Christian liberty and freedom of conscience, cast away all
brotherly amity, and cut themselves off from the communion of the Church;
Christ has not purchased a liberty for any to rent his body: they will prove
at length, to be no duties of piety, which break the sacred bonds of charity.

Men ought not under a pretense, of congregating themselves to serve their God,
separate from their brethren, neglecting the pnblick Assemblies, as was the
manner of some, rebuked by the Apostle, Heb. 10. 25. there be peculiar
blessings, and transcendent privileges annexed to public Assemblies, which
accompany not private men to their recesses; the sharp-edged sword becomes more
keen, when set on by a skillful master of the Assemblies; and when the water
of the word flows there, the spirit of God moves upon the face thereof, to
make it effectual in our hearts: What, despise you the Church of God? 1 Cor.
11. 22.

Secondly, As the Ministry, so also ought the Ministers, to have that regard,
respect and obedience, which is due to their labors in that sacred Calling:
Would we could not too frequently see more puffed up with the conceit of their
own gifts, into a contempt of the most learned and pious Pastors; these are
spots in your Feasts of charity, clouds without water, carried about of winds:
It must doubtless be an evil root, that brings forth such bitter fruit.
Wherefore let not our brethren fall into this condemnation, lest there be an
evil report, raised by them that are without: But remember them who have the
rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God, Heb. 13. 7. there is
no greater evidence, of the heavenly improvement, you make by your recesses,
then that you obey them that are guides unto you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for you souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you, ver. 17.
Let not them who despise a faithful painful Minister in public, flatter
themselves, with hope of a blessing on their endeavors in private: Let them
pretend what they will, they have not an equal respect unto all Gods
ordinances. Wherefore that the coming together in this sort, may be for the
better, and not for the worse, observe these things:

Now for what gifts, (that are as before freely bestowed) whose exercise is
permitted, unto such men, so assembled: I mean in a private family, or two or
three met (...) in one.

And first we may name the gift of prayer, whose exercise must not be exempted,
from such Assemblies, if any be granted: these are the times, wherein the
Spirit of grace and supplications, is promised to be poured out upon the
Jerusalem of God, Zech. 12. 10. Now God having bestowed the gift, and requiring
the duty, his people ought not to be hindered in the performance of it: are all
those precepts to pray in the Scriptures, only for our Closets? when the
Church was in distress for the imprisonment of Peter, there was a meeting at
the house of Mary the mother of John, Act. 12. 12. many were gathered together
praying, says the text: A sufficient warrant for the people of God in like
cases: the Churches are in no less distress now, then at that time, and in
some congregations the ministers are so oppressed, that publicly they dare
not, in others so corrupted, that they will not pray for the prosperity of
Jerusalem: Now truly it were a disconsolate thing, for any one of Gods servants
to say, during all these streights, I never joined with any of Gods children in
the pouring out of my prayer in the behalf of his Church: neither can I see
how this can possibly be prevented, but by the former means; to which add the
council of St. Paul, speaking to themselves, in Psalms, and hymns, and
Spiritual songs, making melody in their hearts unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19.

Secondly, they may exercise the gifts of wisdom, knowledge, and understanding
in the ways of the Lord; comforting, strengthening, and encouraging each other
with the same consolations, and promises, which by the benefit of the public
Ministry, they have received from the word: thus in time of distress the
Prophet Malachi tells us, that they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another, and the Lord hearkened and heard, etc. Chap. 3. 16. comforting (as it
appears) one another in the promises of God, made unto his Church, against the
flourishing of the wicked, and overflowing of ungodliness, the persecution of
Tyrants, and impurity of transgressors.

Thirdly, they may make use of the tongue of the learned (if given unto them)
to speak a word in season to him that is weary, Isa. 50. 4. for being
commanded to confess their faults one to another, James 5. 16. they have power
also to apply to them that are penitent, the promises of mercy: We should never
be commanded to open our wounds, to them who have no balm, to power into them:
he shall have cold comfort, who seeks for Council from a dumb man, so that
in this, and the like cases, they may apply unto, and instruct one another in
the word of God, doing it as a charitable duty, and not as out of necessary
function, even as Aquila, and Priscilla, expounded unto Apollos the word of God
more perfectly then he knew it before, Act. 18. 23. in sum, and not to
enlarge this discourse with any more particulars, the people of God are allowed
all quiet, and peaceable means, whereby they may help each other forward, in
the knowledge of godliness, and the way toward heaven; now for the close of
this discourse, I will remove some objections, that I have heard godly men, and
men not unlearned lay against it, out of a zeal not unlike that of Joshua, for
Moses sake, the constitute Pastors sake, to whom, though I might briefly
answer, with Moses, I would to God all the Lords people were prophets; I
heartily wish that every one of them, had such a plentiful measure of
spiritual endowments, that they might become wise unto salvation, above many
of their Teachers, in which vote, I make no doubt but every one will concur
with me, who have the least experimental knowledge, what a burden upon the
shoulders, what a grief unto the soul of a Minister, knowing, and desiring to
discharge his duty, is an ignorant congregation, of which, thanks to our
Prelates, Pluralists, non-Residents, Homilies, Service Book, and Ceremonies, we
have too toomany in this Kingdom, the many also of our ministers in this
Church, taking for their directory, the laws and penalties of men, informing
what they should not do, if they would avoid their panishment, and not the
precepts of God, what they should as their duty do, if they meant to please
him, and knowing there was no Stature, whereon they might be sued, for (pardon
the expression) the dilapidation of souls, so their own houses were ceiled,
they cared not at all though the Church of God lay wast: I say, though I might
thus answer, with opening my desire for the increasing of knowledge among the
people; of which, I take this to be an effectual means, yet I will give brief
answers, to the several objections.

Then this seems to favor an allowance of licentious Conventicles, 1. Object.
which in all* laces, the Laws have condemned, learned men in all ages have
abhorted, as the seminaries of faction and schism in the Church of God.

That (under correction) I conceive, Answ.
that the Law lays hold of none, as peccant in such a kind, but only those,
who have predeclared themselves to be opposers of the worship of God, in the
public Assemblies of that Church wherein they live: Now the patronage of any
such, I before re^^cted; neither do I conceive, that they ought at all to be
allowed the benefit of private meetings, who wilfully abstain from the
public Congregations, so long as the true worship of God is held forth in
them: Yea, how averse I have ever been, from that kind of confused
licentiousness in any Church, I have somewhile since declared, in an Answer
(drawn up for my own, and some private friends satisfactions) to the
arguments of the Remonstrants, in their Apology, and replies to Vedelius, with
other Treatises, for such a liberty of prophesying, as they term it. If then
the Law account only such assemblies to be conventicles, wherein the
assemblers contemn and despise the service of God in public, I have not
spoken one word in favor of them: and for that Canon which was mounted against
them, whether intentionally, in the first institution of it, it was molded,
and framed against Anapabtists, or no, I cannot tell? but this I am sure, that
in the discharge of it, it did execution oftentimes, upon such as had Christ's
precept and promise, to warrant their assembling, Mat. 18. 19, 20. Not to
contend about words, would to God that which is good, might not be persecuted
into odious appellations, and called evil, when it is otherwise; so to oppose
it to the tyrannical oppression, of the enemies of the Gospel: The thing it
self, rightly understood, can scarce be condemned of any, who envies not the
salvation of souls. They that would banish the Gospel from our houses, would
not much care, if it were gone from our hearts; from our houses I say, for it
is all one whether these duties be performed in one family, or a collection of
more; some one is bigger then ten other; shall their assembling to perform
what is lawful for that one, be condemned for a Conventicle? Where is the law
for that? or what is there in all this more then God required of his ancient
people, as I showed before?

Or must a master of a family, cease praying in his family, and instructing his
children, and servants in the ways of the Lord, for fear of being counted a
Preacher in a Tub? things were scarcely carried with an equal hand, for the
Kingdom of Christ, when orders came forth on the one side, to give liberty to
the profane multitude to assemble themselves at heathenish sports, with
bestiall exclamations, on the Lords own day, and on the other, to punish them,
who durst gather themselves together for prayer, or the singing of Psalms; but
I hope, through Gods blessing, we shall be for ever quit of all such
Ecclesiastical discipline, as must be exercised according to the interest of
idle drones, whom it concerns to see that there be none to try or examine
their doctrine, or of superstitious innovators, who desire to obtrude their
fancies, upon the unwary people; whence comes it that we have such an
innumerable multitude of ignorant stupid souls, unacquainted with the very
principles of Religion? but from the discountenancing of these means of
increasing knowledge; by men who would not labor todo it themselves; oh that
we could see the many swearers, and drunkards, and Sabbath Breakers, etc. in
this nation, guilty only of this crime; would the Kingdom were so happy, the
Church so holy!

Men are apt, 2. Object.
to pride themselves in their gifts, and flatter themselves in their
performances, so that let them approach as nigh as the Tabernacle, and you shall
quickly have them encroaching upon the Priests office also, and by an
overweening of their own endeavors, create themselves Pastors in separate
congregations.

It cannot be, Answer.
but offenses will come, so long as there is malice in Satan, and corruption in
men, there is no doubt, but there is danger of some such thing: but hereof the
liberty mentioned is not the cause, but an accidental occasion only, no way
blameable, gifts must not be condemned, because they may be abused,
God-fearing-men will remember Korah, knowing (as one says well) that Vzzah had
better ventured the falling then the fingring of the Arc, they that truly
love their souls, will not suffer themselves to be carried away by
self-conceit, so far as to help overthrow the very constitution of any
Church by confusion, or the flourishing of it by ignorance, both which, would
certainly follow such courses; knowledge if alone puffs up, but joined to
charity it edifieth.

But may not this be a means for men to vent and broach their own private
fancies unto others? 3. Object.
to foment and cherish errors in one another? to give false interpretations of
the word, there being no way to prevent it?

For interpreting of the word, Answer
I speak not, but applying of it being rightly interpreted; and for the rest,
would to God the complaints were not true, of those things that have for diverse
years in this Church been done publicly, and outwardly according to order:
but that no inconvenience arise from hence, the care rests on them, to whom the
dispensation of the word is committed, whose sedulous endeavor, to reprove and
convince all unsound doctrine, not agreeing to the form of wholesome words, is
the sovereign and only remedy to cure, or means to prevent this evil. For
the close of all, we may observe, that those who are most offended, and afraid,
lest others should encroach upon their callings, are for the most part such, as
have almost deserted it themselves, neglecting their own employment, when they
are the busiest of mortals, in things of this world. To conclude then, for what
I have delivered in this particular, I conceive that I have the judgment and
practice of the whole Church of Scotland, (agreeable to the word of God) for my
warrant; witness that Act of their Assembly at Edinburgh, An. 1641. wherewith
the learned Ruthersurd concludes his Defense of their Discipline, with whose
words I will shut up this Discourse; Our Assembly also, commands goldy
conference at all occasional meetings, or as Gods providence shall dispose, as
the word of God commands, providing none invade the Pastors office, to preach
the word, who are not called thereunto by God and his Church.

(...) FINIS.
I Have perused this Discourse touching The administration of things commanded
in Religion, and conceive it written with much clearenesse of judgment, and
moderation of spirit, and therefore do approve of it to be published in Print.

May 11. 1644. JOSEPH CARYL.


