A SERMON Preached to the Honorable House of COMMONS, IN PARLIAMENT Assembled:
On January 31. A day of Solemn Humiliation.

With a Discourse about TOLERATION, And the Duty of the Civil Magistrate about
RELIGION, thereunto Annexed.

Humbly Presented to them, and all Peace-loving Men of this NATION.

By John Owen, Pastor of the Church of Christ, which is at Coggeshall in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, in Aldersgate Street, 1649.

Die Mercurij, 31. Januarij, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Master Allen, do give the
Thanks of this House, to Master Owen, for the great pains he took in his
Sermon, Preached before this House this day, at Margarets Westminster; And that
he be desired to Print his Sermon at large, wherein he is to have the like
privilege of Printing it, as others in the like kind usually have had.

Hen: Scobell Cler:

To the Right Honorable the Commons of England, Assembled in Parliament.
Sirs,
IT has always suited the wisdom of God, to do great things in difficult
seasons. He sets up walls in troublous times. Dan. 9. 25. His builders must hold
Swords and Spears, as well as Instruments of labor, Neh. 4. 16. Yea while sin
continues in its course here (which began in Heaven, and having contemporized
with the Earth, shall live for ever in Hell.) Great works for God, will cause
great troubles amongst men. The holy, harmless Reconciler of heaven and earth,
bids us expect the Sword, to attend his undertakings for, and way of making
peace, Mat. 10. 34. All the waves in the world, arise to their height and
roaring* from the confronting of the breath of Gods spirit, and the vapors of
men's corruptions. Hence seasons receive their degrees of difficulty, according
to the greatness and weight of the works which in them God will accomplish.
to their worth and excellency is man's opposition proportioned. This, the
instruments of his glory in this generation, shall continually find true to
their present trouble, and future comfort.

As the days approach for the delivery of the decree, Heb. 12. 26, 27
to the shaking of Heaven and Earth, Dan. 7. 27.
and all the powers of the World, Ego nisi tumultus istos viderem, verbum Dei
in mundo non esse dicerem: Luth. de s. A.
to make way for the establishment of that kingdom which shall not be given to
another people (the great expectation of the Saints of the most high before the
consummation of all) so tumults, troubles, vexations and disquietnes, must
certainly grow and increase among the sons of men.

A dead woman (says the Proverb) will not be carried out of her house under
four men. Much less will living men, of wisdom and power, be easily and
quietly dispossessed of that share and Interest in the things of Christ, which
long continued usurpation, has deluded them into an imagination of being their
own Inheritance. This then being shortly to be effected, and the scale being
ready to turn against the man of sin, notwithstanding his ballancing it in
opposition to the witness of Jesus, with the weight and poyse of earthly
power, no wonder if heaven, earth, sea, Isa. 34. 4, 5.
and dry land, be shaken in their giving place to the things that cannot be
moved. Revel. 16. 16.
God Almighty having called you forth (Right honorable) at his entrance to the
rolling up of the Nations heavens like a Scroll, to serve him in your
Generation in the high places of Armageddon, you shall be sure not to want
experience of that Opposition which is raised against the great work of tbe
Lord, which generally swells most, against the visible instruments thereof.

And would to God, you had only the devoted sons of Babel to contend withal,
that the men of this shaking earth were your only Antagonists: that the
Malignity of the Dragons tail, Revel. 12. 4.
had had no influence on the Stars of heaven, to prevail with them to fight in
their courses against you. But jacta est alea, the providence of God must be
served, according to the discovery made of his own unchangeable will, and not
the mutable interests and passions of the sons of men. For verily the Lord of
Hosts has purposed to pollute the pride of all glory, and to bring into
contempt all the Honorable of the Earth, Isa. 23. 9.

The contradictions of sinners against all that walk in the paths of
righteousness and peace, with the supportment which their spirits may receive
(as being promised) who pursue those ways, notwithstanding those
contradictions, are in part discovered in the ensuing Sermon; the foundation of
that whole Transaction of things, which is therein held out, in reference to the
present dispensations of providence (being nothing but an entrance into the
unravelling of the whole Web of Iniquity, interwoven of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Tyranny, in opposition to the kingdom of the Lord Jesus) I
chose not to mention. Neither shall I at present add any thing thereabout, but
only my desire that it may be eyed as the granted Basis of the following
discourse. Only by your very favorable acceptance of the making out those
thoughts, which were the hasty conception, and like Jonah's Gourd, the child of
a night or two (which with prayer for a rooting in the hearts of them to whom
they were delivered, had certainly withered, in their own Leaves, had they not
received warmth and moisture from your commands in general, and the particular
desires of many of you, to give them a life of a few days longer) I am
encouraged to the annexing of a few lines, as a free will offering to attend
the following Product of obedience.

Now this shall not be to the Opposition which you do and shall yet further
meet withal, but as to the Causes, real, or pretended, which are held forth as
the bottom of that contradiction wherewith on every side you are encompassed.

The things in reference whereunto, your proceedence is laden with such
criminations, as these sad days of recompense, have found to be Comets
portending no less then blood, are first Civil, then Religious.

For the First, as their being beyond the bounds of my Calling, gives them
Sanctuary from being called forth to my consideration, so neither have I the
least thoughts with Absalom of a more orderly carrying of of Affairs, might my
desires have any influence into their disposal. Waiting at the throne of
Grace, that those whom God has entrusted with, and enabled for the Transaction
of these things, may be directed and supported in their employment, is the
utmost of my undertaking herein.

For the other, or Religious things, the general interest I have in them as a
Christian, being improved by the super-added Title of a Minister of the Gospel
(though unworthy the one Name, and the other) gives me not only such boldness
as accreweth from enjoyed Favor, but also such a Right as will support me to
plead concerning them, before the most Impartial Judicature.

And this I shall do (as I said before) merely in reference to those
criminations, which are laid by conjecturall presumptions on your Honorable
Assembly, and made a cause of much of that opposition and contradiction you
meet withal. Now in particular, it is the Toleration of all Religions or
invented ways of worship, wherein your Constitutions are confidently Antidated
in many places of the Nation, the thing it self withal, being held out, as
the most enormous apprehension, and desperate endeavor for the destruction of
Truth and Godliness that ever entered the thoughts of men, professing the one
and the other. The contest hereabout, being adhuc sub Judice, and there being
no doubt, but that the whole matter, commonly phrased as above, has (like
other things) sinful and dangerous Extremes. I deemed it not amiss, to
endeavor the pouring a little cold water upon the common flames, which are
kindled in the breasts of men about this thing. And who knows, whether the
words of a weak Nothing, may not by the power of the Fountain of Beings, give
some light into the determination and Establishment of a thing of so great
concernment and consequence, as this is generally conceived to be. What is in
this my weak undertaking, of the Lord, I shall beg of him, that it may be
received, what is of my self I beg of you that it may be pardoned. That God
Almighty would give you to prove All things that come unto you in his way, and
to hold fast that which is good, granting you unconquerable Assistance, in
constant perseverance, is the prayer of,

Your devoted Servant in
Coggeshall, Feb. 28.
A Sermon Preached to the Honorable House of Commons, Jan. 31. 1648.
JEREMIAH 15. Ver. 19, 20. -- Let them return to thee, but return not thou
unto them.

And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brazen wall, and they shall
fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with
thee to save thee, and to deliver thee, says the Lord.


THE words of my Text having a full dependence upon, and flowing out from, the
maine subject matter of the whole Chapter; I must of necessity take a view
thereof, and hold out unto you the mind of God contained therein, before I
enter upon the part thereof chiefly intended: And this I shall do with very
brief Observations, that I may not anticipate my self, from a full opening
and applycation of the words of my Text.

And this the rather are my thoughts led unto, because the whole Transaction of
things between the Lord and a stubbornely sinful Nation, exceedingly
accommodated to the carrying on of the controversy, he is now pleading with
that wherein we live, is set out (as we say) to the life therein.

Of the whole Chapter, there be these five parts.

1. The denuntiation of fearful wasting, destroying, judgments against Judah
and Jerusalem, v. 3. and so on to the 10.

2. The procuring deserving cause of these overwhelming calamities, verse. 4.
and 6.

3. The inevitableness of those judgments, and the inexorablenesse of the
Lord, as to the accomplishment of all the evil denounced, verse. 1.

4. The state and condition of the Prophet, with the frame and deportment of
his spirit, under those bitter dispensations of providence, verse. 10. and 15,
16, 17, 18.

5. The Answer and appearance of God unto him upon the making out of his
complaint, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. and 19, 20, 21.

My Text lies in the last part, but yet with such dependence on the former, as
inforceth to a consideration of them.

1. There is the denuntiation of fearful wasting destroying Judgments to
sinful Jerusalem, verse. 2. and so onwards, with some interposed ejaculations,
concerning her inevitable ruin, as verse. 5, 6.

Here Is death, sword, famine, captivity, verse. 2. banishment, v. 4. unpittied
desolation, v. 5. redoubled destruction, bereaving, fanning, spoiling, etc. v.
6, 7, 8, 9.

That universal devastation of the whole people, which came upon them in the
Babilonish Captivity, is the thing here intended; The means of its
accomplishment by particular Plagues and Judgments, in their several kinds
(for the greater dread and terror) being at large annumerate: The
faithfulness of God also being made hereby to shine more clear, in the
dispersion of that people; doing, not only for the maine, what before he had
threatened, but in particular, executing the Judgments recorded; Luke 26. 14.
etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 15. etc. Fulfilling hereby what he had devised, accomplishing
the word he had commanded in the days of old, Lam. 2. 17.

That which hence I shall observe is only from the variety of these
particulars, which are held out as the means of the intended Desolation.

Gods treasures of wrath against a sinful people, Obs. 1.
have sundry and various issues for the accomplishment of the appointed end.

When God walks contrary to a people, it is not always in one path, he has
seven ways to do it, and will do it seven times, Levit. 26. 24. He strikes
not always with one weapon, nor in one place. As there is with him (...)
manifold and various Grace, 1 Pet. 4. 10. Love and compassion making out it
self in choice variety, suited to our manifold indigencies: So there is, (...)
Romans 2. 5. Stored, treasured wrath, suiting it self in its flowings out, to
the provocations of stubborn sinners.

The first Emblem of Gods wrath against man, was a flaming Sword turning it
self every way, Genesis 3. last: Not only in one, or two, but in all their
paths, he meets them with his flaming Sword.

As a wild beast in a Net, Isa. 51. 20.
so are sinners under inexorable judgments; the more they strive, the more
they are enwrapt, and entangled. They shuffle themselves from under one
calamity, and fall into another; As if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear
met him; or went into the house and leaned his hand upon the wall, and a
Serpent bit him, Amos 5. 19. Oh remove this one Plague, Exodus 10. 17.
says Pharaoh; if he can escape from under this pressure, he thinks he shall
be free: but, When he fled from the Lion, still the Bear met him, and when he
went into the house, the Serpent bit him.

And as the flaming Sword turns every way, so God can put it into every thing:
To those that cry, Give me a King, God can give him in his anger; and from
those, that cry, take him away, he can take him away in his wrath, Hosea 13.
10, 11.

Oh, that this might seal up instruction to our own souls; What variety of
calamities have we been exercised withal, for sundry years? What
Pharoah-like spirits have we had under them? Oh that we were delivered this
once, and then all were well! How do we spend all our thoughts to extricate
our selves from our present pressures? If this hedge, this pit were passed, we
should have smooth ground to walk in! not considering that God can fill our
safest paths with Snares and Serpents: Give us peace, give us wealth, give us,
as we were, with our own, in quietness. Poor creatures! suppose all these
desires were in sincerity, and not as with the most they are, fair colors of
soul and bloody designs; yet if Peace were, and Wealth were, and former
things were, and God were not* what would it avail you? Cannot he Poison your
Peace, and Canker your Wealth? And When you were escaped out of the field from
the Lion and the Bear, appoint a Serpent to bite you, leaning upon the walls of
your own house? In vain do you seek to stop the streams, while the
Fountains are open; turn your selves whither you will, bring your selves into
what condition you can, nothing but peace and reconciliation with the God of
all these judgments, can give you rest in the day of Visitation: You see what
Variety of Plagues are in his hand: Changing of condition will do no more to
the avoiding of them, then a Sick man's turning himself from one side of the
bed to another; during his turning, he forgets his pain by striving to move,
being laid down again, he finds his condition the same as before; this is the
first thing, we are under various judgments, from which by our selves there is
no deliverance.

The second thing here expressed, 2.
is the procuring cause of these various Judgments set down, v. 4.

-- because of Manasseh son of Hezekiah King of Judah, for that which he did
in Jerusalem.

The sins of Manasseh filled the Epha of Judahs wickedness, Zach. 5. 7.
and caused the Talent of Lead to be laid on the mouth thereof. Oftentimes in
the relation of his story, does the holy Ghost emphatically express this;
that, For his sin Judah should surely be destroyed, 2 Kings 21. 11. Yea when
they had a little reviving under Josiah, and the bowels of the Lord began to
work in compassion toward them; yet as it were, remembering the provocation of
this Manasseh, he recals his thoughts of mercy, Est quaedam aemulatio divinae
rei, and humanae, Tertul. Ap.
2 Kings 23. 26, 27. The disposing of divine and humane things, is oftentimes
very oposite. God himself proceeds with them in a diverse dispensation: In the
spiritual body the members offend and the head is punished: The iniquity of us
all did meet on him, Isa. 53. In the civil politic body, the head offends and
the members rue it; Manasseh sins, and Judah must go Captive.

Three things present themselves for the Vindication of the equity of Gods
righteous judgments, in the recompencing the sins of the King upon the people.

1. The Concurrence and Influence of the Peoples power into their Rule and
Government: They that set him up, may justly be called to answer for his
miscarriage. The Lord himself had before made the sole bottom of that
Political Administration to be their own wills. If thou will have a King
after the manner of the Nation, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. 1 Samuel 8. 7. though for
particulars, himself (according to his supreme sovereignty) placed in many,
by peculiar exemption, otherwise his providence was served by their plenary
consent, or by such dispensation of things as you have related, 1 Kings 16. 21,
22. Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts, half of the people
followed Tibni the son of Ginath to make him King, and half followed Omri:
but the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that followed
Tibni; so Tibni dyed, and Omri reigned. Now they, who place men in authority to
be Gods Vicegerents do undertake to God for their deportment in that
authority, and therefore may justly bear the sad effects of their sinful
miscarriages.

2 Because for fear of Manasse's cruelty, or to flatter him in his tyranny for
their own advantage, the greatest part of the people had apostatized from the
ways and worship of Hezekiah, to comply with him in his sin. As at another
time they willingly walked after the Commandment, Hos. 5. 11. And this is
plainly expressed, 2 Kings 21. 9. Manasseh seduced the people to do more evil
then the Nations. When Kings turn seducers, they seldom want good store of
followers: Now if the blind lead the blind, both will, and both justly may
fall into the ditch. When Kings command unrighteous things, and people suite
them with willing compliance, none doubts, but the destruction of them both is
just and righteous. See verse. 6. of this Chapter.

3. Because the people by virtue of their retained* sovereignty, did not
restrain him in his provoking ways. So Zwinglius, Artic. 42. Qui non vetat,
cum potest, jubet: When Saul would have put Jonathan to death, the people would
not suffer him so to do, but delivered Jonathan that he dyed not, 1 Samuel 14.
When David purposed the reducing of the Arc, his speech to the people was; If
it please you, let us send abroad to our brethren every where, that they may
assemble themselves to us, and all the Congregation said that they would do
so, because the thing was right in their eyes, 2 Chronicles. 13. 2. So they bargain
with Rehoboam about their subjection, upon condition of a moderate Rule, 1
Kings 12. By virtue of which power also they delivered Jeremiah from the
Prophets and Priests that would have put him to death, Ier. 26. 16. And on this
ground might justly feed on the fruit of their own neglected duty. See Bilson
of Obed. part 3. page 271.

Be it thus, or otherwise, by what way soever the people had their Interest
therein; certain it is, that for the sins of Manasseh, one way or other,
made their own, they were destroyed: And therefore these things being written
for our example, it cannot but be of great concernment to us, to know what were
those sins which wrapped up the people of God in irrevocable destruction: Now
these the holy Ghost fully manifests in the story of the life and reign of
this Manasseh, and they may all be reduced unto 2. chief heads.

1. False worship or superstition: He built high places, made Altars for Baal,
and a Grove as did Ahab, 2 Kings 25. 2.

2. Cruelty: He shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem
with blood from one end of it to another, verse. 16.

Whether this cruelty be to be ascribed to his Tyranny in civil affairs, and
so the blood shed, is called innocent, because not of Malefactors, or to his
persecution, in subordination to his false worship instituted as before (as the
Pope and his Adherents have devoured whole Nations in ordine ad spiritualia) is
not apparent: See the Appendix at the end of this Sermon.
but this is from hence and other places most evident; That superstition and
persecution, will worship and tyranny are inseparable concomitants.

Nebuchadnezzar sets up his great Image, and the next news you hear, the
Saints are in the furnace, Dan. 3. 20. You seldom see a fabric of humane
invented worship, but either the foundation or top-stone is laid in the blood
of Gods people. The wisdom (Religion, or way of worship) that is from above,
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy, James 3. 17. when the
other is earthly, sensual, devilish, bringging along envying, strife,
contention, and every evil work, verse. 16. Persecution and blood is the
genuine product of all invented worship. I might from hence name, and pursue
other Observations, but I shall only name one, and proceed.

When false worship with injustice by cruelty have possessed the Governors of
a Nation, Obser.
and wrapped in the consent of the greatest part of the people; who have been
acquainted with the mind of God, that People and Nation without unpresidented
mercy is obnoxious to remediless ruin.

Those two are the Bell and Dragon, that what by their actings, what by their
deservings, have swallowed that Ocean of blood which has flowed from the
veins of millions of millions slain upon the face of the earth. Give me the
number of the witnesses of Jesus, Rev. 6. 9, 10.
whose souls under the Altar cry for revenge against their false worshipping
murderers, and the Tale of them, whose lives have been sacrificed to the
insatiable Ambition and Tyranny of blood-thirsty Potentates, with the issues of
Gods just vengeance on the sons of men, for compliance in these two things, and
you will have gathered in the whole Harvest of blood, leaving but a few
straggling gleanings upon other occasions. And if these things have been sound
in England, and the present administration with sincere humiliation, do not
run cross to vnravell this close woven webb of destruction, all thoughts of
recovery will quickly be too late. And thus far, sin and providence drive on
a parallel.

3. The inevitableness of the desolation threatened, and the inexorablenesse of
God in the execution of it, v. 1. is the third thing considerable: Though Moses
and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people.

Should I insist upon this, it would draw me out unto Scripture evidences, of a
Nations traveling in sin, beyond the line of Gods patience, and so not to be
exempted from ruin: but instead thereof I shall make it a part of my daily
supplications, that they may be to our enemies, if Gods enemies, and the
interpretation of them to those that hate us.

In brief, the words contain an impossible supposition, and yet a Negation of
the thing for whose sake it is supposed: Moses and Samuel were men, who in the
days of their flesh offered up strong supplications, and averted many imminent
judgments from a sinful people; As if the Lord should say, All that I can do
in such a case as this, I would grant at the intercession of Moses and Samuel,
or others interceding in their spirit and zeal; but now the state of things is
come to that pass, the time of Treaty being expired, the black flagge hung
out, and the decrree having brought forth, Zeph. 2. 2. that upon their utmost
entreaty it cannot, it shall not be reversed.

There is a time when sin grows ripe for ruin; Observe.
For three transgressions and for four the Lord will not turn away the
iniquity of a people, Amos 1. 9. When the sin of the Amorites has filled the
cup of vengeance, they must drink it, Genesis 15. 16. England under several
Administrations of civil Government, has fallen twice: yea thrice into
Nation-destroying sins; Providence has once more given it another bottom;
If you should stumble (which the Lord avere) at the same block of impiety and
cruelty, there is not another sifting to be made to reserve any grains from
the ground; I doubt not but our three transgressions and four will end in
total desolation, the Lord be your guide, poor England lies at stake.

The greatest difficulty that lies in bringing of total destruction upon a
sinful people is in the interposition of Moses and Samuel; Observe.
If Moses would but have stood out of the gap, and let the Almighty go, he had
broken in upon the whole Host of Israel, Exo. 32. 9, 10. And let it by the way
be observed of the spirit of Samuel, that when the people of God were most
exorbitant, he cries, as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the
Lord in ceasing to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12. 23. Scarce answered by those, who
if their interest be no served, or at best, their reason satisfied, will scarce
yield a prayer for, yea power out curses against their choicest Deliverers: The
Lord lay it not to their charge; For us seeing that praying Deliverers are more
prevalent then fighting Deliverers (it is though Moses and Samuel, not Gideon
and Sampson, stood before me) as some decay, let us gather strength in the
Lord, that be may have never the more rest for their giving over, until he
establish mount Zyon a praise in the earth.

4. Come we now to the fourth thing in this Chapter; the Prophets state and
condition with the frame and deportment of his heart and spirit under these
dispensations, and here we find him expressing two things of himself.

1. What he found from others, v. 10. 2. What he wrestled withal in his own
spirit, v. 15, 16, 17, 18.
1. What he found from others, he tells you, it was cursing and reproach,
etc. I have neither lent on usury, nor have men lent to me on usury yet every
one of them does curse me, v. 10.

Now this return may be considered two ways.

1. In it self, Every one ( says he) of this people curse me. 2. In reference
to his deportment: I have neither borrowed nor lent on usury yet they curse me.
From the First, Observe:

Instruments of Gods greatest works and glory, Obs.
are often times the chiefest objects of a professing peoples curses and
revenges. The return which Gods Laborers meet withal in this Generation, is
in the number of those things, whereof there is none new under the Sun. Men,
that under God, deliver a Kingdom, may have the Kingdoms curses for their
pains.

When Moses had brought the people of Israel out of Bondage, by that wonderful
and unparalled deliverance, being forced to appear with the Lord for the
destruction of Corah and his Associates, who would have seduced the
Congregation to its utter ruin, he receives at length this reward of all his
travel, labor and pains, All the Congregation gathered themselves against
him and Aaron, laying murder and sedition to their charge, telling them they
had killed the people of the Lord, Numb. 16. 41, 42. A goodly reward for all
their travels: If Gods works do not suite with the lusts, prejudices, and
interests of men, they will labor to give his instruments the Devils ways.
Let not upright hearts sink, because they meet with thanklesse men, Bona agere,
and mala pati Christianorum est. A man may have the blessing of God, and the
curse of a professing people at the same time. Behold I and the Children wbom
God has given me, are for signs and for wonders in Israel, Isa. 8. 15. Cum ab
hominibus damnamur, Tert. Apol.
a Deo absolvimur: Man's condemnation and Gods absolution, do not seldom meet
upon the same persons, for the same things: If you labor to do the work of
the Lord, pray think it not strange, if among men, curses be your reward and
detestation your wages.

2. In reference to the Prophets deportment, he had neither lent nor had any
lent to him upon usury; he was free from blame among them, had no dealings with
them, in those things which are usually attended with reproaches, as he shows
by an instance in Usuary, a thing that a long time has heard very ill.

Men every way blameless and to be embraced in their own ways are oftentimes
abhorred and laden with curses, Obs.
for following the Lord in his ways. Bonus vir Cajus sejus, sed malus quia
Christianus; What precious men should many be, would they let go the work of
God in this Generation? No advantage against them, but in the matter of their
God, and that is enough to have them to the Lions, Dan. 6. 5. He that might be
honored for compassing the ends suiting his own Worldly Interest, and will
cheerfully undergo dishonor for going beyond, to suit the design of God,
has surely some impression upon his spirit, that is from above.

2. You have the Prophets deportment, and the frame of his spirit during those
Transactions between the Lord and that sinful people: And this he holds out in
many patheticall complaints, to be fainting, decaying, perplexed, weary of his
burden, not knowing how to ease himself, as you may see at large, v. 15, 16,
17, 18.

In dark and difficult dispensations of Providence, Obs.
Gods choicest servants are oftentimes ready to faint under the burden of
them. How weary was David when he cried out in such a condition, O that I had
wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away and be at rest, Psalm. 55. 6. Long
had he waited for a desired issue of his perplexed state, and had perhaps often
times been frustrated of his hope of drawing to a period of his miseries, and
now finding one disappointment to follow on the neck of another, he is weary
and cries, What nothing, but this trouble and confusion still? Oh that I had
wings like a Dove, a Ship to sail to a foreign Nation (or the like) there to
be at peace. In the like strait another time, see what a miserable conclusion
he draws, of all his being exercised under the hand of God, Psalm. 73. 13.
Verily I have cleansed my heart in VAIN, and wished my hands in innocence; And
again, Psalm. 116. 11. He says in the perturbation of his mind, All men are
liars: That all the promises, all the encouragements, which in his way he had
received from God should fail of their accomplishment.

It is not with them, as it was with that wicked King of Israel, who being
disappointed of peace and del^verance in his own time, cries out, This evil is
of the Lord, why should I wait upon him any longer, 2 Kings 16. 33. The season
of deliverance suited not his exp^ctation; therefore he quite throws off the
Lord and his protection. Not unlike many among our selves, whose desires and
expectations being not satisfied in the closing of our distractions, according
to the way, which themselves had framed for the Lord to walk in, are ready to
cast off his cause, his protection to comply with the enemies of his Name, Si
Deus homini non placuerit, Deus non erit: But it may be observed, that
deliverance came not to that people until Jehoram was weary of waiting, and
then instantly God gives it in; when God has tired the patience of corrupted
men, he will speak peace to them, that wait for him.

Thus is it not with the Saints of God, only being perplexed in their spirits,
dark in their apprehensions, and fainting in their strength, they break out
often times into passionate complaints (as Jeremy for a Cottage in the
Wilderness) but yet for the maine holding firm to the Lord: and the reasons
of this quailing are:

1. The weakness of Faith, when the methods of God's proceedings are unfath
mable to our apprehensions; while men see the paths wherein the Lord walks,
they can follow him through some difficulties; but when that is hid from them,
though Providence so shut up all other ways, that it is impossible God should
be in them, yet if they cannot discern ( so proud are they) how he goes in
that wherein he is, they are ready to faint and give over. God is pleased
sometime to make darkness his pavilion and his secret place, A fire devoures
before him, and it is very tempestuous round about him, Psalm. 50. 3. When once
God is attended with fire, darkness, and tempest, because we cannot so easily
see him, we are ready to leave him: Now this the Lord usually does in the
execution of his judgments, Thy righteousness is like the great Mountains,
thy judgments are a great deep, Psalm. 36. 6. His righteousness, his kindness
is like a great Mountain, that is easy to be seen, a man cannot overlooke it,
unless he wilfully shut his eyes; But his Judgments are like the great Deep;
Who can look into the bottom of the Sea, or know what is done in the depths
thereof? Gods works in their accomplishment are oftentimes so unsuited to the
reasons and apprehensions of men, that very many who have been strong in
desires, and great in expectation of them, upon their bringing forth to light,
have quite rejected and opposed them as none of his, because distant from what
they had framed to themselves: It is evident from the Gospel, that the people
of the Jews were full of expectation and longing for the great work of the
coming of the Messiah, just at the season wherein he came, yet being come,
because not accommodated to their prae imaginations, they rejected him, as
having neither form nor comeliness in him to be desired, Isa. 53. 2. And the
Prophet Amos tells many, Who desired the day of the Lord, that, that day
should be darkness to them and not light, Amos 5. 18, 20. So in every
Generation many desirers of the accomplishment of Gods work, are shaken off
from any share therein, by finding it unsuited to their reasons and
expectations.

Now when the Lord is pleased thus to walk in darkness, many being not able
to trace him in his dispensations, are ready to lie down and sink under the
burden: David seems to profess, that he had nothing at such a time to uphold
him but this, that God must be there, or no where; I had said (says he) that
it was in vain to walk as I do, but that I should have condemned the
generation of thy Children, Psalm. 73. 15. And truly God never leaves us
without to much light, but that we may see clearly where he is not, and so by
recounting particulars we may be rolled where he is, though his goings there be
not so clear. Ask if God be in the Counsels of men, who seek themselves, and
in the ways of those who make it their design to ruin the Generation of the
just. If you find him there, seek no further; if not, let that give you light,
to discern, where he makes his abode, that you turn not aside to the flocks
of Others.

2. A reducing the works of Providence to inbred Rules of our own. But this I
cannot pursue.

Be tender toward Fainters in difficult seasons; Use.
if they leave waiting on the Lord, because the evil is of him, if they cast
in their Lot with the portion of the ungodly, they will in the end perish in
their Gainsaying: But as for such, as what for want of light, what for want of
faith, sit down and sigh in darkness, be not too hasty in laying further
burdens on them: When first the Confederacy was entered into, by the Protestant
Princes in Germany against Charles the fifth, Luther himself for a season was
bewildred, and knew not what to do, until being instructed in the
fundamental Laws of the Empire, he sat down fully in that undertaking,
though the Lord gave it not the desired issue, Sleid. Com. Lib. 8. Our Savior
Christ asks, If when becomes, he shall find faith on the earth, Luke 18. 8.
It is his coming with the spirit of judgment and burning, a day of Trial and
Visitation, he there speaks of: Now what Faith shall he want, which will not be
found in that day? Not the Faith of adherence to himself for spiritual life
and justification, but of actual closing with him in the things he then does;
that shall be rare, many shall be staggered, and faint in that day.

And thus by the several Heads of this Chapter, have I led you through the
very state and condition of this Nation at this Time.

First, Variety of judgments are threatened to us, and incumbent on us, as in
the first part. Secondly, of these, Falsew orship, Superstition, Tyranny, and
Cruelty lie in the bottom, as their procuring causes, which is the second.
Thirdly, These if renewed under your hand, will certainly bring inevitable
ruin upon the whole Nation, which is the third. Fourthly, All which, make many
precious Hearts, what for want of light, what for want of Faith, to fail, and
cry out, for the wings of a Dove, which is the fourth. I come in the fifth place
to Gods direction to you for the future, in this state and condition, which
being spread in diverse Verses as the Lord gives it to the Prophet, I shall
meddle with no more of it, then is contained in the words, which at our
entrance I read unto you.

Let them return, etc.

In the words observe four things,

1. Gods direction to the Prophet, and in him, to all, that do his work in
such a season, as this describe^: Let them return to thee, return not thou to
them.

2. Their assistance and supportment in pursuance of that direction: I will
make thee, to this people, a brazen fenced wall.

3. The opposition, with its success and issue, which in that way, they should
meet withal: They shall fight against thee, and shall not prevail.

4. Their Consolation and success from the presence of the Lord: For I am with
thee to deliver thee, etc.

1. There is Gods direction,

Many difficulties in this troublesome season, was the Prophet intricated
withal: The people would not be prevailed with, to come up to the mind of God,
they continuing in their stubbornness, the Lord would not be prevailed with,
to avert the threatened Desolation; what now shall he do? To stand out against
the bnlke of the people suits not his earthly Interest; to couple with them,
answers not the discharge of his Office; to wait upon them any longer, is
fruitless; to give up himself to their ways comfortless: Hence his
complaints, hence his moanings. Better lie down and sink under the burden,
then always to swim against the stream of an unreformable multitude: In this
strait, the Lord comes in with his direction, Let them return unto thee, etc.
Keep thy station, perform thy duty, comply not with the Children of
Backslyding. But what ever be the essue, if there be any closing wrought, let
it be, by working them off from their ways of Folly. All condescension on thy
part, where the work of God is to be done is in opposition to him; If they
Return, embrace them freely; if not, do thy duty constantly.

That which is spoken immediately to the Prophet, I shall hold out to All,
Acting in the name and Authority of God, in this general Proposition.

Plausible complyances of men in Authority, Obs.
with those, against whom they are employed, are Treacherous contrivances
against the God of Heaven, by whom they are employed.

If God be so provoked, that he curses him, who does his work negligently,
what is he by them that do it Treacherously? when he gives a sword into the
hands of men, and they thrust it into his own Bowels, his Glory and Honor,
those things so dear to him? He that is entrusted with it, and dares not do
Justice on every one, that dares do Injustice, is afraid of the creature, but
makes very bold with the Creator.

Prove. 25. 2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but it is the glory
of a King to find out a matter: That which God aims to be glorious in, to
manifest his Attributes by, is the concealing and covering our Iniquities in
Christ; but if the Magistrate will have glory, if he will not bring upon
himself Dishonor by dishonouring of God, he is to search and find out the
Transgressions, with whose Cognizance he is entrusted, and to give unto them
condign Retribution. If the Lord curse them, who come not forth to his help
against the mighty, Judge. 5. 23. What is their due, who being called forth by
him, do yet help the mighty against him? For a man to take part with the
Kingdoms Enemies is no small crime; but for a Commission-Officer to run from
them by whom he is Commissionated, to take part with the Adversary, is death
without mercy: yet have not some in our days arrived at that stupendous
Impudence, that when as private persons they have declaimed against the Enemies
of the Nation, and by that means got themselves into Authority, they have made
use of that Authority to comply with, and uphold those, by an Opposition to
whom, they got into their Authority? which is no less then an Atheistical
attempt to personate the Almighty, unto such Iniquities as without his
Appearance, they dare not own: But he that justifies the wicked, and
condemns the Just, are both an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17. 15. and
not only to the Lord, but to good men also; He that says to the wicked, thou
art Righteous, him shall the people curse, Nations shall abhor him, Prove. 24.
24.

I speak only as to the General (for me let all particulers find mercy) with
a sad Remembrance of the late workings of things amongst us, with those vile
sordid compliances which grew upon the spirits of Magistrates and Ministers
with those, whose Garments were died with the blood of Gods Saints and precious
ones (as formerly they were called, for now these Names are become terms of
reproach) and would this complying went alone, but Pretenses and Accusations
must be found out against such as fellow with them, when they begin to call
darkness light, they will ere long call light darkness: by which means, our
eyes have seen, men of their own accord laying down the weapons werewith at
first they fought against Opposers, and taking up them, which were used against
themselves, as has happened more then once, to Penmen both in our own, and
our neighbor Nation. Now this Revolting from principles of Religion and
Righteousness, to a compliance with any sinful way or person, is a
Treacherous Opposition to the God of Heaven; for,

1. It cannot be done but by preferring the creature before the Creator,
especially in those things which are the proximate causes of Deviation.

Two principal causes I have observed of this crooked walking.

1. Fear.

2. That Desire of perishing things, which has a mixture of Covetousness and
Ambition. The first makes men wary, what they do against men, the other
makes them weary of doing any thing for God, as whereby their sordid ends are
not like to be accomplished.

1. Fear: when once Magistrates begin to listen after quid sequitur's, and so
to withdraw from doing good, for Fear of suffering evil, paths of wickedness
are quickly returned unto, and the authority of God despised. Let this man go,
and take heed of Caesar, John 19. 12. did more prevail on Pilat's treacherous
heart, then all the other clamours of the Jews; yea, was not the whole
Sanedrim swayed to desperate villainy, for fear the Romans should come and take
away their Kingdom? John 11. 48. When men begin once to distrust that God will
leave them in the briars, to wrestle it out themselves (for unbelief lies at
the bottom of carnal fear) they quickly turn themselves to contrivances of
their own, for their own safety, their own prosperity, which commonly is by
obliging those unto them by compliances, in an opposition to whom they might
oblige the Almighty to their assistance: surely they conclude he wants either
Truth or Power to support them in his employment.

If a Prince should send an Ambassador to a Foreign State to treat about
Peace, or to denounce War; who, when he comes there, distrusting his Masters
Power to make good his undertaking, should comply and wind up his Interest
with them to whom he was sent, suffering his Soveraign^ errant to fall to the
ground, would he not be esteemed as arrant a Traitor as ever lived? And yet
though this be clipped coin among men, it is put upon the Lord every day as
current.

From this principle of carnal fear and unbelief, trembling for a man that
shall dye, and the Son of man that shall be as grass, forgetting the Lord our
maker, Isa. 51. 12. are all those prudential follies, which exercise the minds
of most men in authority, making them, especially in times of difficulties, to
regulate and square all their proceedings, by what suites their own safety and
particular interests, counselling, advising, working for themselves, quite
forgetting by whom they are entrusted, and whose business they should do.

2. A desire of perishing things tempered with covetousness and ambition: Hence
was the sparing of the fat Cattle, and of Agag by Saul, 1. Sam. 15. When those
two qualifications close on any, they are diametrally opposed to that frame
which of God is required in them, viz. That they should be men fearing God, and
hating covetousness: The first will go far, being only a contrivance for
safety; but if this latter take hold of any, being a consultation to exalt
themselves, it quickly carries them beyond all bounds whatsoever. The Lord
grant, that hereafter there may be no such complaints in the Nation, or may be
causeless, as have been heretofore, viz. That we have powered out our prayers,
jeoparded our lives, wasted our estates, spent our blood, to serve the lusts
and compass the designs of ambitious ungodly men.

The many ways whereby these things entrench upon the spirits of men, to
byasse them from the paths of the Lord, I shall not insist upon, it is enough
that I have touched upon the obvious causes of deviation, and manifested them
to be treacheries against the God of all Authority.

Be exhorted to beware of Relapses, Use.
with all their causes and inducements, and to be constant to the way of
Righteousness, and ^his I shall hold out unto you in two particulars.

1. Labor to recover others, even all that were ever distinguished and called
by the name of the Lord, from their late fearful Returning to sinful
Complyances with the Enemies of God and the Nation: I speak not of men's
Persons, but of their ways; For 3. years this people have been eminently
sick of the folly of Back^sliding, and without some special Cordial are like
to perish in it, as far as I know.

Look upon the estate of this People as they were differenced seven years
ago, so for some continuance, and as they are now, and you shall find in how
many things we have returned to others, and not one instance to be given of
their return to us; that this may be clear take some partciulars.

1. In Words and Expressions, those are index animi; turn them over and you
may find what is in the whole Heart. Out of the Abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks. Now is not that Language, are not those very Expressions, which
filled the mouths of the common Adversaries only, grown also terms of Reproach
upon the Tongues of men, that suffered sometimes under them, and counted it
their honor so to do? Hence that common Exprobation, A Parliament of Saints,
an Army of Saints, and such like D^^^sions of Gods ways, now plentiful with
them, who sat sometimes, and took sweet counsel with us* Ah! had it not
been more for the Honor of God, that we had kept our station, until others
had come to us, so to have exalted the name and profession of the Gospel, then
that we should so return to them, as to join with them in making the paths of
Christ a Reproach? Had it not been better for us with Judah to continue Ruling
with God, and to be faithful with the Saints, Hos. 11. 12. then to stand in
the Congregation of the mockers, and to sit in the seat of the scornful?
What shall we say when the Saints of God are as signs and wonders to be spoken
against in Israel? Isa. 8. 18. Oh that men would remember how they have left
their first station; when themselves use those Reproaches unto others, which
for the same cause themselves formerly bare with comfort! It is bitterness to
consider how the Gospel is scandalized by this woeful Return of Ministers and
People, by casting Scripturall Expressions by way of scorn, on those, with whom
they were sometimes in the like kind Companions of Contempt. Surely in this we
are Returned to them, and not they to us.

2. In Actions and those,

1. Of Religion, not only in Opinion, but Practice also, are we here under a
vile Return. We are become the Lions, and the very same thoughts entertained
by us, against others, as were exercised toward our selves. Are not others as
unworthy to live upon their native soil in our judgments, as we our selves in
the judgments of them formerly over us? Are not groans for liberty, by the
warmth of favor, in a few years hatched into Attempts for Tyranny? and for
Practice, what hold has former superstition in observing days and times, laid
hold upon the many of the People again, witness the late solemn superstition,
and many things of the like nature.

2. For Civil things, the closing of so many, formerly otherwise engaged, with
the adverse party in the late Rebellion, with the luke warm deportment of
others at the same time, is a sufficient demonstration of it; And may not the
Lord justly complain of all this, what iniquity have you seen in me, or my
ways, that you are gone far from me, and walked after vanity, and are become
vain, Jer. 2. 4. Why have you changed your glory for that which does not
profit, verse. 11. Have I been a dry heath, or a barren wilderness to you? Oh
that men should find no more sweetness in following the Lamb under wonderful
protections, but that they should thus turn aside into every Wilderness: What
Indignity is this to the ways of God? I could give you many Reasons of it; but
I have done, what I intended, a little hinted, that we are a Returning People,
that so you might be exhorted to help for a Recovery: and how shall that be?

2. By your own keeping close to the Paths of Righteousness; if you Return
not, others will look about again: This Breach, this evil is of you, within
your own walls, was the fountain of our Backesliding. Would you be the
Repairers of Breaches, the Restorers of Paths for men to walk in, do these
two things.

1. Turn not to the ways of such, as the Lord has blasted under your eyes,
and these may be referred to 3. heads.

1. Oppression. 2. Selfe-seeking. 3. Contrivances for persecution.
1. Oppression, how detestable a crime it is in the eyes of the Almighty, what
effects it has upon men, making wise men mad, Eccl. 7. 7. How frequently it
closes in the calamitous Ruin of the Oppressors themselves, are things known
to all. Whether it has not been exercised in this Nation, both in General by
unnecessary Impositions, and in Particular by unwarrantable pressures, let the
mournful cries of all sorts of People testify. Should you now Return to such
ways as these, would not the Anger of the Lord smoke against you? Make it I
bseech you your Design to relieve the whole, by all means possible, and to
relieve Particulars, yea even of the adverse Party where too much overborn. Oh
let it be considered by you, that it be not considered upon you. I know the
things you are necessitated to, are not to be supported by the air. It is only
what is unnecessary as to you, or insupportable as to oaths, that requires your
speedy Reforming; that so it may be said of you as of Nehemiah, Chap. 5. 14,
15. And for Particulars (pray pardon my folly and boldness) I heartily desire a
Committee of your Honorable House might sit once a week, to relieve poor men
that have been oppressed by men, sometimes enjoying Parliamentary Authority.

2. Selfe-seeking, when men can be content to lay a Nation low, that they may
set up themselves upon the heaps and ruins thereof. Have not some sought to
advance themselves under that power, which with the lives and blood of the
People they have opposed? Seeming to be troubled at former things, not because
they were done, but because they were not done by them. But innocent blood will
be found a Tottering foundation for men to build their Honors, Greatness, and
Preferments upon. O return not in this unto any. If men serve themselves of
the Nation, they must expect that the Nation will serve it self upon them. The
best security you can possibly have that the People will perform their duty in
obedience, is the witness of your own consciences, that you have discharged
your duty toward them, in seeking their good, by your own trouble, and not
your own advantages in their trouble. I doubt not but that in this, your
practice makes the admonition a commendation, otherwise the word spoken, will
certainly witness against you.

3. Contrivances for persecution, how were the hearts of all men hardened like
the nether Millstone, and their thoughts did grind blood and revenge against
their Brethren! What colors, what pretenses had men invented to prepare a way
for the Rolling of their garments in the tears: yea blood of Christians. The
Lord so keep your spirits from a compliance herein, that with all the Bow be
not too much bent on the other side, which is not impossible.

Be there a Backsliding upon your spirit to these, or such like things as
these, the Lord will walk contrary to you, and were you as the Signet upon his
hand, he would pluck you off.

2. Return not to the open enemies of our peace: I could here enlarge my self
to support your spirits in the work mentioned, Job 29. 14, 15. but I must on to
the following parts of my Text, and pass from the Direction given, to the
Supportment, and Assistance promised. I will make thee to this people a brazen
and a fenced Wall.

An employed Objection, which the Prophet might put in, upon his charge to keep
so close to the rule of righteousness, is here removed. If I must thus abide
by it, to execute whatsoever the Lord calls me out unto, not shrinking, nor
staggering at the greatest undertakings, what will become of me in the issue?
Will it not be destructive to stand out against a confirmed People? No, says
the Lord, it shall not be: I will make thee, etc.

God will certainly give in prevailing strength, Obs.
and unconquerable defense unto Persons constantly discharging the duties of
Righteousness, especially when undertaken in times of difficulty and
opposition. I will make thee, etc. The like engagement to this you have, made
to Ezekiel, Chap. 3, 8, 9. Neither was it so to the Prophets alone, but to
Magistrates also when Joshua undertook the Regency of Israel in a difficult
time, he takes of his fear and Diffidence with this very encouragement, Josh.
1. 5. He says he will make them a Wall, the best defense against opposition,
and that not a weak tottering Wall, that might easily be cast down, but a
brazen wall, that must needs be impregnable: What Engines can possibly prevail
against a Wall of Brass? And to make it more secure, this brazen wall shall be
fenced with all manner of fortifications, and ammunition; so that the veriest
Coward in the World, being behind such a wall, may without dread or terror
apply himself to that, which he finds to do. God will so secure the
Instruments of his glory against a Backeslyding people in holding up the ways
of his Truth and Righteousness, that all Attempts against them shall be vain,
and the most timorous spirit may be secure, Provided he go not out of the
Lords way; for if they be found beyond the Line, the brazen wall, they may
easily be surprised. And indeed, who but a Fool would run from the shelter of
a brazen wall, to hide himself in a little stubble? And yet so do all who
run to their own wisdom, from the most hazardous engagement that any of
the ways of God can possibly lead them unto. It is a sure word, and for ever
to be rested upon, which the Lord gives in to Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is
with you, while ye be with him: An unbiased Magistracy, shall never want Gods
continued presence: Very Jeroboam himself receives a promise upon condition of
close walking with God in righteous administrations, of having an house built
him like the house of David, 1 Kings 11. 38. What a wall was God to Moses in
that great undertaking of being isntrumental for the delivery of Israel from a
bondage and slavery of four hundred years continuance: Pharaoh was against
him whom he had deprived of his Sovereignty and dominion over the People: and
what a provocation the depriving of Sovereignty is unto Potentates, needs no
demonstration: To the corruption of nature which inclines to Heights and
exaltations, in imitation of the fountain whence is flows; they have also the
corruption of state and condition, which has always inclined to Absoluteness
and Tyranny: All Egypt was against him, as being by him visibly destroyed,
wasted, spoiled, robbed, and at length smitten in the Apple of the eye, by the
loss of their first borne; and if this be not enough, that the King and
People, whom he opposed were his enemies, the very People, for whose sakes he
set himsele to oppose the others, they also rise up against him, yea seek to
destroy him; one time they appeal to God for Justice against him, Exodus 5. 21.
The Lord look upon you and judge. They appeal to the righteous God to
witness, that he had not fulfilled what he promised them, to wit, Liberty,
Safety, and freedom from oppression, but that rather by his means their
Burdens were increased: And in this they were so confident (like some amongst
us) that they appealed unto God for the equity of their complaints. Afterward
being reduced to a strait, such as they could not see how possibly they should
be extricated from, without utter ruin (like our present condition in the
apprehension of some) they cry out upon him for the whole design of bringing
them into the Wilderness, and affirm positively, that though they had
perished in their former slavery, it had been better for them, then to have
followed him in this new and dangerous engagement, Calv. in Number. Cap. 4.
Ex. 14. 11, 12, 13. That Generation being (as Calvin observes) so inured to
bondage, that they were altogether unfit to bear with the workings and pangs
of their approaching Liberty. Afterward, do they want drink? Moses is the
cause; did they want meat? this Moses would starve them, Exodus 15. 24. and 16.
7. He could not let them alone by the Fleshpots of Egypt, for this they are
ready to stone him, Exodus 17. 3. At this day, have we too much Rain, or too
short a Harvest, it is laid on the shoulders of the present Government. It was
no otherwise of old. At length this People came to that height, as being
frightened by the opposition, they heard of, and framed to themselves in that
place whether Moses would carry them, that they presently enter into a
conspiracy and revolt, consulting to cast off his Government, and chose new
Commanders, and with a violent hand to return to their former condition, Numb.
14. 4. an attempt as frequent at fruitless among our selves. When this would
not do, at length upon the occasion of taking off Corah and his company, they
assemble themselves together, and lay (not imprisonment but) murder to his
charge, and that of the people of the Lord, Numb. 16. 41. Now what was the
issue of all those oppositions? What effect had they? How did the power of
Pharaoh, the Revenge of Egypt, the backsliding of Israel prevail? Why God made
this one Moses a fenced brazen wall to them All, he was never in the least
measure prevailed against; so long as he was with God, God was with him, no
matter who was against him.

One thing only would I commend to your considerations, viz. That this Moses,
thus preserved, thus delivered, thus protected, falling into one Deviation, in
one thing, from close following the Lord, was taken off from enjoying the
closure and fruit of all his labor, Numb. 20. 12. Otherwise he followed the
Lord in a difficult season, and did not want unconquerable supportment: Take
heed of the smallest turning aside from God: Oh loose not the fruit of all your
labor for self; for a lust, or any thing that may turn you aside.

Now the Lord will do this, 1. Because of his own Engagement. 2. For our
Encouragement.


1. Because of his own Engagement, and that is two fold, 1. Of Truth and
Fidelity. 2. Of Honor and Glory.


1. His Truth and Veracity is engaged in it. Those that honor him he will
honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. If men honor him with Obedience, he will honor them
with preservation: He will be with them while they are with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.
2. While they are with him in constancy of duty, he will be with them to keep
them in safety, He will never leave them nor forsake them, Josh. 1. 5. No
weapon that is framed against them shall prosper, Isa. 54. 17. Now God is never
as the waters that fail to any that upon his engagements wait for him; he
will not shame the faces of them that put their trust in him. Why should our
unbeleeving spirits charge that upon the God of Truth, which we dare not
impute to a man that is a worm, a liar? Will a man fail in his engagement
unto him, who upon that engagement undertakes a difficult employment for his
sake? The truth is, it is either want of sincerity in our working, or want of
faith in dependence, that makes us at any time come short of the utmost tittle,
that is in any of the Lords engagements.

1. We want sincerity, and do the Lords work, but with our own aims and
ends, like Jehu; no wonder, if we be left to our selves for our wages and
defense.

2. We want Faith also in the Lords work, turn to our own counsels for
supportment; no marvel, if we come short of assistance; If we will not believe
we shall not be established.

Look to sincerity in working, and faith in dependence, Gods truth and
fidelity will carry him out to give you inconquerable supportment: Deflexion
from these, will be your destruction: You that are working on a new Bottom,
work also on new principles, put not new Wine into old Bottles, new designs
into old Hearts.

Secondly, He is engaged in point of Honor, if they miscarry in his way, What
will he do for his great name? Yea so tender is the Lord herein of his Glory,
that when he has been exceedingly provoked to remove men out of his presence
yet because they have been called by his Name, and have visibly held forth a
following after him, he would not suffer them to be trodden down, left the
enemy should exalt themselves, and say, Where is now their God? They shall not
take from him the honor of former Deliverances and protections: In such a
Nation as this, if the Lord now upon manifold provocations should give up
Parliament, People, Army to calamity, and ruin, would not the Glory of former
counsels, successes, deliverances, be utterly lost? would not men say it was
not the Lord, but chance that happened to them?

2. For our Encouragement, the ways of GOD are oftentimes attended with so
many difficulties, so much Opposition, that they must be embraced merely
because his; no other motive in the World can suit them to us. I mean for such
as keep them immixed from their own carnal and corrupt Interests: Now because
the Lord will not take off the hardship and difficulty of them, least he should
not have the Honor of carrying on his work, against tumultuating opposition,
he secures poor weaklings of comfortable assistance, and answerable success,
lest his work should be wholly neglected. It is true, the Lord as our
sovereign Master may justly require a close laboring in all his ways,
without the least sweetning endearments put upon them, only as they are his
whose we are, who has a dominion over us: But yet as a a tender Father, in
which relation he delights to exercise his will toward his own in Christ, He
pittieth our infirmities, knowing that we are but dust: and therefore to invite
us into the dark, into ways laboursome and toylesome to flesh and blood, he
gives us in this security, that we shall be as a fenced brazen wall to the
opposing sons of men.

To discover the Vanity and Folly of all opposition to men called forth of God
to do his work, Use. 1.
and walking in his ways; would you not think him mad, that should strike
with his fist, and run with his head against a fenced brazen wall to cast it
down? Is he like to have any success, but the battering of his flesh, and the
beating out of his brains? What do the waves obtain by dashing themselves
with noise and dread against a rock, but their own beating to pieces? What
prevails a man by shooting his arrows against the Sky, but a return upon his
own head? Nor is the most powerful opposition to the ways of God, like to
meet with better success: God looks no otherwise upon Opposers, then you would
do upon a man attempting to thrust down a fenced brazen wall with his fingers.
Therefore it is said, that in their proudest attempts, strongest assaults,
deepest counsels, combinations, and associations, he laughs them to scorn,
derides their folly, contemns their fury, lets them sweat in vain, until
their day become, Psalm. 2. How birthlesse in our own, as other Generations
have been their swelling conceptions? What then is it that prevails upon men
to break through so many disappointments against the Lord, as they do?
Doubtless that of Isa. 23. 9. Surely the Lord of Hosts has a purpose to
stain the pride of all glory, to bring into contempt all the honorable of the
earth. God gives up men unto it, that he may leave no earthly glory or honor
without pollution or contempt: And therefore has Opposition in our days, been
turned upon so many hands, that God might leave no glory without contempt: Yet
with this difference, that if the Lord will own them, he will recover them
from their opposition, as has happened of late to the Ministry of one, and
will happen ere long to the Ministry of another Nation; when the Lord has a
little stained the pride of their glory; they shall be brought home again by
the spirit of judgment and burning: but if he own them not, they shall perish
under the opposition. And when it has been wheeled about on all sorts of men,
the End will be.

Be wise now therefore O ye Rulers, Use. 2.
be Instructed ye that are Judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling, Psalm 2. 10, 11. See whence your Assistance comes;
see where lie the ^^^s of your salvation, and say, Ashur shall not save us, we
will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any more to the works of our
hands, ye are our Gods, for in thee the fatherless finds mercy, Hos. 14. 3.
It is God alone who is a Sun and a Shield: his ways do good to the upright
in heart. Behold, here is a way to encompasse England with a brazen wall: let
the Rulers of it walk in right ways, with upright Hearts. Others have been
careful to preserve the people to them, and the City to them, oh be you
careful to preserve your God unto you; he alone can make you a fenced wall; if
he departs, your wall departs, your shade departs. Give me leave to insist a
little on one particular, which I choose out among many others: When God leads
out his people to any great things, the Angel of his presence is still among
them: see at large Exodus 23. 20, 21, 22. The Angel of the Covenant, in whom is
the name of God, that has power of pardoning or retaining Transgressions,
Jesus Christ, the Angel that redeemeth his out of all their troubles, Genesis 48.
16. he is in the midst of them, and amongst them; And God gives this
special Caution if we would have his Assistance, that we should beware of him,
and obey him, and provoke him not: Would you then have Gods Assistance
continued, take heed of provoking the Angel of his presence: provoke him not by
slighting of his ways, provoke him not by contemning his Ordinances; if you
leave him to deal for himself, See the Appendix about Tolleration.
he will leave you to shift for your selves: what though his followers are at
some difference (the best knowing but in part) about the Administration of some
things in his Kingdom; the Envious one having also sown some bitter seeds of
persecution, strife, envy, and contention among them? what though some poor
creatures are captivated by Satan, the Prince of Pride, to a contempt of all
his Ordinances, whose souls I hope the Lord will one day free from the snare
of the Devil? yet I pray give me leave (it is no time to contest, or dispute
it) to bear witness in the behalf of my Master to this one Truth, that if by
your own personal practice and observance, your Protection, Countenance,
Authority, Laws, you do not assert, maintain, uphold the order of the Gospel,
and Administration of the Ordinances of Christ, notwithstanding the noise and
clamours of Novell fancies, which like Jonah's gourd have sprung up in a night,
and will wither in a day, you will be forsaken by the Angel of Gods presence,
and you will become an astonishment to all the Inhabitants of the Earth: and
herein I do not speak as one haesitating or dubious, but positively assert it,
as the known mind of God, and whereof he will not suffer any long to doubt,
Psalm 2. ult.

Strengthen the weak hands, Use 3.
and confirm the feeble knees, say to them that are of a fearful heart, be
strong, fear not, behold your God will come with vengeance, even your God with
a recompense, he will come and save you, Isa. 35. 3, 4. Let the most weak and
fearful, the fainting heart, the trembling spirit, and the doubting mind know,
that full and plenary security, perfect peace attends the upright in the ways
of God. You that are in Gods way, do Gods work, and take this cordial for
all your distempers, return not to former provoking ways, and he will make you
a fenced brazen wall.

And so I come to the third thing, which I proposed to consider, the
Opposition, which men cleaving to the Lord in all his ways shall find, with the
issue and success of it, They shall fight against thee, but shall not prevail.

The words may be considered either as a Prediction depending on Gods
praescience, of what will be, or a Commination from his just Judgment, of what
shall be.

In the first sense the Lord tells the Prophet, from the corruption, apostasy,
stubbornness of that People what would come to pass. In the 2d, what for
their sins and provocations, by his just judgment should come to pass. Time
will not allow me to handle the words in both Acceptations: wherefore I shall
take up the latter only, viz. that it is a Commination of what shall be for the
further misery of that wretched People, they shall Judicially be given up to a
fighting against him.

God oftentimes gives up a sinful People to a fruitless contention, Obs.
and fighting with their only supporters, and means of deliverance. They
shall, etc. Jeremiah had labored with God for them, and with them for God,
that if possible peace being made they might be delivered, and to consummate
their sins, they are given up to fight against him.

I cannot now insist upon particular instances, consult the History of the
Church in all Ages, you shall find it continually upon all occasions verified.
From the Israelites opposing Moses, to the Ephraimites contest with Jephte, the
rejecting of Samuel, and so on to the Kings of the earth, giving their power to
the Beast to wage War with the Lamb, with the Inhabitants of the World
combining against the witnesses of Christ, is this Assertion held out. In
following story, no sooner did any Plague or Judgment break out against the
Roman Empire, but instantly, Christianos ad Leones, their fury must be spent
upon them, who were the only supporters of it from irrecoverable ruin. Now
the Lord does this,

1. To Seal up a sinful Peoples destruction. Elie's Sons hearkened not,
because the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2. 25. When God intends Ruin to a
people, they shall walk in ways, that tend thereunto: Now is their a readier
way for a man to have a house on his head, then by pulling away the Pillars
whereby it is supported? If by Moses standing in the Gap, the fury of the Lord
be turned away, certainly if the people contend to remove him, their
desolation sleeps not. When therefore the Lord intends to lay Cities wast
without Inhabitant, and houses without men, to make a Land utterly desolate,
the way of its accomplishment is by making the hearts of the People fat, and
their ears heavy, and shutting their eyes that they should not see, and attend
to the means of their recovery, Isa. 6. 10, 11. So gathering in his peace and
mercies from a provoking people, Jer. 16. 15.

2. To manifest his own power and sovereignty in maintaining a small handful,
oftimes a few single persons, a Moses, a Samuel, two Witnesses against the
opposing rage of a hardened multitude. If those who undertake his work and
business in their several Generations, should have withal, the concurrent
obedience and assistance of others, whose good is intended, neither would his
name be so seen, nor his ways so honored, as now, when he bears them up
against all opposition. Had not the people of this Land been given up (many of
them) to fight against the Deliverers of the Nation, and were it not so with
them even at this time, how dark would have been the workings of Providence,
which now by wrestling through all opposition are so conspicuous and clear.
When then a People, or any part of a people, have made themselves unworthy of
the good things intended to be accomplished by the Instruments of
righteousness and peace, the Lord will blow upon their waves, that with rage
and fury, they shall dash themselves against them, whom he will strengthen with
the munition of Rocks, not to be prevailed against. So that Gods glory and
their own ruin, lie at the bottom of this close working of providence, in
giving up a sinful People to a fruitless contending, with their own
Deliverers, if ever they be delivered.

But is not a Peoples contending with the Instruments, Obj.
by whom God works amongst them, and for them, a sin and provocation to the
eyes of his glory? How then can the Lord be said to give them up unto it?

Avoiding all Scholasticall discourses, Answ.
as unsuited to the work of this day; I shall briefly give in, unto you, how
this is a sinful thing, yet sinners given up unto it, without the least
extenuation of their guilt, or color for charge on the justice and goodness
of God.

1. Then to give up men unto a thing in it self sinful, is no more, but so to
dispose and order things, that sinners may exercise and draw out their sinful
principles, in such a way. This that the Lord does, the Scripture is full of
examples, and has Testimonies innumerable: That herein the Holy one of Israel,
it no ways Co-partner with the guilt of the sons of men, will appear by
observing the difference of these several Agents in these four things.

1. The Principle, by which they work. 2. The Rule, by which they proceed. 3.
The Means, which they use. 4. The End at which they aim.
1. The Principle of operation in God is his own Sovereign will, and good
pleasure. He does what ever he pleases, Psalm. 115. 3. He says his purpose
shall stand, and he will do all his PLEASVRE, Isa. 46. 10. He has mercy on
whom be WILL have mercy, and whom he WILL he hardneth, Romans 9. 13. Giving no
account OF HIS MATTERS, Job. 33. 18. This our Savior rendereth as the only
Principle and reason of his hidden operations: O Father so it seemed good in
thy sight, Matthew. 11. 26. His Sovereignty in doing what he will with his own,
as the Potter with his clay, is the rise of his operations: So that what ever
he does, who can say unto him, what do thou, Job 9. 12. Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Romans 9. 20. And
hence two things will follow.

1. That what he does, is just, and righteous, for so must all acts of supreme
and absolute dominion be.

2. That he can be Author of nothing, but what has existence and being in it
self, for he works as the Fountain of Beings. This sin has not. So that
though every action, whether good or bad, receives its specification from the
working of Providence, and to that, is their existence in their several kinds,
to be Ascribed, yet an evil action, in the evilnesse of it, depends not upon
Divine concourse and influence, for good and evil make not sundry kinds of
Actions, but only a distinction of a Subject in respect of its Adjuncts and
Accidents.

But now the Principle of operation in man, is Nature vitiated and corrupted: I
say Nature, not that he works naturally, being a free Agent, but that these
faculties, will and understanding, which are the principles of Operation are in
nature corrupted, and from thence can nothing flow but evil: An evil tree
brings forth evil fruit: Men do not gather Figs from Thistles: A bitter
fountain sends not forth sweet Waters: Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? If the fountain be poisoned, can the streams be wholesome? What can
you expect of light and truth from a mind possessed with vanity and darkness?
What from a will averted from the chiefest good, and fixed upon present
appearances? What from an heart, the figment of whose imagination is only
evil?

2. Consider the difference in the Rule of operation: Every thing that works
has a Rule work by, this is called a Law. In that thing which to man is
sinful, God works as it is a thing only, Man as it is a sinful thing: And
how so? Why every ones sin is his Aberration from his Rule of operation or
working. (...), is aberrare a scopo. To sin, is, not to collime aright at the
end proposed; (...) is a most exact definition of it: Irregularity is its
form, if it may be said to have a Form: a Privations form, is deformity.
Look then in any Action, wherein an Agent exorbitates from its Rule, that is
sin: Now what is Gods rule in operation? His own infinite wise will alone; he
takes neither Motive, rise, nor occasion for any internal acts, from any thing
without himself; he does what ever he pleases, Psalm. 115. 3. He works all
things according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. That is his
own Law of operation, and the Rule of righteousness unto others: working then
agreeably to his own will, which he always must do, he is free from the
obliquity of any action. What now is the Rule of the Sons of men? Why the
revealed will of God; Revealed things belong to us that we may do them, Deuteronomy.
29. 29. Gods revealed will is the rule of our walking; our working; what ever
suits not, answers not this, is Evil. Sin is the transgression of the Law, 1
John 3. 4. Here then comes in the deformity, the obliquity, the at axy of any
thing, God works and man works; those Agents, have several rules. God
works according to his rule, hence the action is good, as an Action: Man
deviates from his rule, hence it is sinful in respect of its qualifications
and Adjuncts. Man writes fair letters, upon a wet paper, and they run all into
one blot, not the skill of the Scribe, but the defect in the Paper is the cause
of the deformity: he that makes a lame Horse go, is the cause of his going,
but the defect in his joints, is the cause of his going lame: The Sun exhales
a steame from the Dunghill, the Sun is the cause of the exhalation, but the
Dunghill of the unwholesome savor. The first cause is the proper cause of a
things being, but the second of its being Evil.

3. Consider the several operations and actings of God and Man: for instance
in a rebellious peoples fighting against their Helpers under him.

Now the Acts of God herein may be referred to six heads.

1. A continuance of the creatures being and life; Upholding him by the word of
his power, Heb. 1. 3. When he might take him off in a moment: Enduring them
with much long suffering, Romans 9. 22. When he might cut him off as he did she
opposers of Elijah, with fire from heaven, 2 Kings 1. 12.

2. A continuance of power of operation to them, when he could make their hands
to wither like Jeroboams, when they go about to strike, 1 Kings 13. 4. Or
their hearts, to dye within them like Nabals, when they intend to be Churlish,
1 Samuel 25. 37. but he raises them up, or makes them to stand, that they may
oppose, Romans 9. 11.

3. Laying before them a suitable object for the drawing forth their corruption
unto opposition, giving them such Helpers as shall in many things cross their
lusts, exasperate them, thereunto; as Elijab a man of fiery zeal, for a
lukewarm Ahab.

4. Withholding from them that effectual grace, by which alone that sin might
be avoided; a not actually keeping them from that sin by the might of his
spirit and grace; that alone is effectual grace, which is actual; he suffers
them to walk in their own ways:

And this the Lord may do,

First, in respect of them, Judicially, they deserve to be forsaken, Ahab is
left to fill up the measure of his iniquities, add iniquity to iniquity, Psalm.
69. 27.

Secondly, In respect of himself, by way of Soveraignety, doing what he will
with his own, hardening whom he will, Romans 9. 15.

5. He positively sends upon their understandings that, which the Scripture
sets out under the terms of blindness, darkness, folly, delusion, slumber,
a spirit of giddiness, and the like; the places are too many to rehearse. What
secret actings in, and upon the minds of men, what disturbing of their advises,
what mingling of corrupt affections with false carnal reasonings, what givings
up to the power of darkness, in Satan the Prince thereof, this judicial act
does contain, I cannot insist upon: Let it suffice, God will not help them,
to discern, yea he will cause that they shall not discern but hide from their
eyes the things that concern their peace, and so give them up to contend with
their only Helpers.

6. Suitably, upon the will and affections he has several acts; obfirming the
one, in corruption, and giving up the other to vileness, Romans 1. 24, 26.
Until the heart become thoroughly hardened, and the conscience seared: Not
forcing the one, but leaving it to follow the Judgment of practical reason,
which being a blind, yea a blinded guide, whither can it lead a blind Follower,
but into the ditch? Not defiling the other with infused sensuality, but
provoking them to act according to inbred, native corruption, and by suffering
frequent vile actings to confirm them in ways of vileness.

Take an instance of the whole; God gives Helpers and Deliverers to a sinful
people, because of their provocations, some or all of them shall not taste of
the Deliverance, by them to be procured; wherefore though he sustaines their
lives in being, whereby they might have opportunity to know his mind, and
their own peace, yet he gives them a power to contend with their Helpers,
causing their helpers to act such things, as under consideration of
circumstances, shall exceedingly provoke theses sinners: Being so exasperated
and provoked, the Lord who is free in all his dispensations, refuses to make
out to them that healing grace, whereby they might be kept from a sinful
opposition: Yea being justly provoked, and resolved that they shall not taste
of the plenty to come, he makes them foolish and giddy in their reasonings and
counsels, blinds them in their understandings, that they shall not be able to
discern plain and evident things, tending to their own good, but in all
their ways, shall err like a drunken man in his vomit; whence that they may
not be recovered, because he will destroy them, he gives in hardness and
obstinacy upon their hearts and spirits, leaving them to suitable affections,
to contend for their own ruin.

Now what are the ways and methods of sinful man's working in such an
opposition, would be too long for me to declare; what prejudices are erected,
what lusts pursued, what corrupt Interests acted, and followed; how self is
honored, what false pretenses coined, how God is slighted, if I should go
about to lay open, I must look into the Hell of these times, then which
nothing can be more loathsome and abominable: Let it suffice, that sinful
self, sinful lusts, sinful prejudices, sinful blindness, sinful carnal
fears, sinful corrupt interests, sinful fleshly reasonings, sinful
passions, and vile affections do all concur in such a work, are all woven up
together in such a Web.

4. See the distance of their aims, God's aim is only the manifestation of
his own Glory (then which nothing but himself is so infinitely good, nothing
so righteous that it should be) and this by the way of goodness and severity,
Romans 11. 22. Goodness in faithfulness and mercy, preserving his, who are
opposed, whereby his Glory is exceedingly advanced: Severity toward the
Opposers, that by a sinful cursed opposition, they may fill up the measure of
their iniquities, and receive this at the hand of the Lord, that they lie down
in sorrow, wherein also he is glorious.

God forbid, that I should speak this, of all, that for any time, or under any
temptation may be carried to an opposition in any kind, or degree to the
instruments of Gods glory amongst them: Many for a season may do it, and yet
belong to God, who shall be recovered in due time: It is only of men given up,
forsaken, opposing all the Appearances of God with his Saints and people in all
his ways, of whom I speak.

Now what are the ends of this Generation of Fighters against this brazen wall,
and how distant from those of the Lords? They consult to cast him down from
his excellency, whom God will exalt, Psalm. 62. 4. They think not as the Lord,
neither does their heart mean so, but it is in their heart to destroy and to
cut off, Isa. 10. 7. To satisfy their own corrupt lusts, ambition, avarice*
revenge, superstition, contempt of Gods people, because his, hatred of the yoke
of the LORD, fleshly Interests; even for these and such like Ends as these, is
their undertaking.

Thus though there be a concurrence of God and Man in the same thing, yet
considering the distance of their Principles, Rules, Actings, and Ends; It is
apparent that Man does sinfully, what the Lord does judicially; which being an
answer to the former Objection, I return to give in some Uses to the Point.

Let men, Use 1.
constant, sincere, upright in the ways of God, especially in difficult times
know, what they are to expect from many, yea the most of the Generation, whose
good they intend, and among whom they live; Opposition and fighting is like to
be their Lot, and that not only it will be so because of men's lusts,
corruptions, prejudices, but also it shall be so from Gods righteous Judgments
against a stubborn people: They harden their hearts that it may be so to
compass their ends, and God heardens their hearts that it shall be so to bring
about his aims: They will do it to execute their revenge upon others, They
shall do it to execute Gods vengeance upon themselves. This may be for
consolation, that in their contending there is nothing but the wrath of man
against them, whom they oppose (which God will restrain, or cause it to turn
to his praise) but there is the wrath of God against themselves, which who can
bear? This then let all expect, who engage their hearts to God, and follow the
Lamb whither ever he goes.

Men walking in the syncerity of their hearts are very apt to conceive that all
Sheaves should bow to theirs, that all men should cry Grace, Grace, to their
proceedings: Why should any oppose? Quid meruere? Alas! the more upright they
are, the fitter for the Lord by them to break a Gainsaying people: Let men
keep close to those ways of God whereto protection is annexed, and let not
their hearts fail them because of the people of the Land; the storm of their
fury will be like the plague of Hail in Egypt, it smote only the Cattle that
were in the field; those, who upon the word of Moses drove them into the
houses, preserved them alive. If men wander in the field of their own ways,
of self seeking, oppression, ambition, and the like, doubtless the storm
will carry them away; but for those, who keep house, who keep close to the
Lord, though it may have much noise terror and dread with it, it shall not
come nigh them. And if the Lord for causes best known, known only to his
infinite wisdom, should take off any Josiahs in the opposition, he will
certainly effect two things by it.

1. To give them rest and peace. 2. Further his cause and truth by drawing out
the prayers and appeals of the residue, and this living they valued above
their lives.
All you then that are the Lords workmen be always prepared for a storm,
wonder not, that men see not the ways of the Lord, nor the judgments of our
God, many are blinded. Admire not, that they will so endlessely engage
themselves into fruitless oppositions, they are hardened. Be not amazed, that
evidence of truth and righteousness will not affect them, they are corrupted.
But this do, Come and enter into the Chambers of GOD, and you shall be safe
until this whole indignation be overpast.

I speak of All them, and only them who follow the Lord in all his ways with
upright hearts, and single minds, if the Lord will have you to be a Rock and a
brazen wall for men to dash themselves against, and to break in pieces, though
the service be grievous to flesh and blood, yet it is His, whose you are, be
prepared, the wind blows, a storm may come.

Let men set upon opposition make a diligent enquiry, Use. 2.
whether there be no hand in the business, but their own? Whether their
counsels be not leavened with the wrath of God? And their thoughts mixed with a
spirit of giddiness, and themselves carried on to their own destruction? Let
me see the opposer of the present ways of God, who upon his oppostion is made
more humble, more self denying, more empty of selfe-wisedome, more fervent in
supplycations and waiting upon God, then formerly: and I will certainly blot
him out of the Roll of men judicially hardened. But if therewith, men become
also proud, selfish, carnally wise, revengefull, furious upon earthly
Interests, full, impatient, doubtless God is departed, and an evil spirit
from the Lord prevails on them. O that men would look about them before it
be too late, see the Lord disturbing them, before the waves return upon them;
know that they may pull down some Anticks that make a great show of supporting
the Church, and yet indeed are Pargetted posts supported by it; the foundation
is on a rock, that shall not be prevailed against.

See the infinite wisdom and sovereignty of Almighty God, Use. 3.
that is able to bring light out of darkness, and to compass his own
righteous Judgments by the sinful advisings and undertakings of men. Indeed
the Lords Sovereignty and dominion over the Creature does not in any thing more
exalt it self, then in working in all the Reasonings, debates, consultations of
men, to bring about his own counsels through their free workings. That men
should use, improve their wisdom, freedom, choice, yea lusts, not once
thinking of God, yet all that while do his work more then their own: This is
the Lords doing and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Of the last part of my Text I shall not speak at all, neither indeed did I
intend.

OF TOLERATION:
And the Duty of the Magistrate, About RELIGION:
THE Times are busy, and we must be breife. Prefaces, for the most part are at
all times needless, in these, troublesome. Mine shall only be, that (...),
without either Preface or Passion, I will fall to the business in hand. The
thing about which I am to deal, is commonly called Toleration in Religion, or
Toleration of several Religions. The way wherein I shall proceed, is not by
contest, thereby to give occasion: for the reciprocation of a Saw of debate
with any, but by the laying down of such positive observations, as being
either not apprehended, or not rightly improved, by the most, yet lie at the
bottom of the whole difference between men about this business, and tend in
themselves to give light unto a righteous and equitable determination of the
maine thing contended about: And lastly herein, for method, I shall first,
consider the grounds upon which that Non toleration whereunto I cannot consent,
has been and is still endeavored to be supported, which I shall be
necessitated to remove, and then in order assert the positive Truth, as to the
substance of the business under contest: all in these ensuing observations.

1. Although the expressions of Toleration, and Non toleration wherewith the
thing in controversy is vested, do seem to cast the Affirmation upon them
who plead for a forbearance in things of Religion toward dissenting persons,
yet the truth is, they are purely upon the Negation, and the Affirmative lies
fully on the other part: and so the weight of proving (which ofttimes is heavy)
lies on their shoulders. Though non-toleration sound like a negation, yet
punishment, (which terms in this matter are (...)) is a deep Affirmation. And
therefore it suffices not men to say, That they have consulted the mind of
God, and cannot find that he ever spoke to any of his Saints or people to
establish a Toleration of error: And yet this is the first argument to oppose
it, produced in the late Testimony of the Reverend and learned Assembly of the
Church of Scotland. Affirmative precepts must be produced, for a non
Toleration, that is the punishing of erring persons. For actings, of such high
concernment, men do generally desire a better warrant then this, There is
nothing in the Word against them. Clear light is needful for men, who walk
in paths, which lead directly to houses of Blood. God has not spoken of
Non-Toleratin, is a certain rule of Forbearance. But God has not spoken of
Toleration, is no rule of acting in opposition thereunto. (What he has spoken
one way or other, shall be afterward considered.) Positive actings must have
positive precepts, and rules for them, as conscience is its own guide. If then
you will have persons deviating in their apprehensions from the truth of the
Gospel, civilly punished, you must bring better warrant then this, that God
has not spoken against it, or I shall not walk in your ways, but refrain my
foot from your path.

2. That undoubtedly there are very many things under the command of the Lord,
so becoming our duty, and within his promise, so made our privilege, which
yet if not performed, or not enjoyed, are not of humane cognizance, as faith it
self. Yet because the knowledge of the Truth is in that rank of things, this
also is urged as of weight, by the same learned persons, to the business in
hand.

3. Errors, though never so impious, are yet distinguished from
Peace-disturbing enormities. If Opinions in their own nature tend to the
disturbance of the public peace, either that public Tranquillity is not of
God, or God allows a penal restraint of those Opinions. It is a mistake, to
affirm, that those who plead for Toleration, do allow of punishment for
offenses against the second Table, not against the first. The case is the same
both in respect of the one, and the other. What Offenses against the second
Table are punishable? Doubtless not all: but only such as by a disorderly
Eruption pervert the course of public quiet and society. Yea none but such,
fall under humane Cognizance. The warrant of exercising vindictive power
amongst men, is from the reference of Offenses to their common tranquillity.
Delicta puniri, public interest. Where punishment is the debt, Bonum totius,
is the Creditour to exact it. And this is allowed, as to the Offenses against
the first Table, If any of them in their own Nature (not some men's
apprehensions) are disturbances of public peace, they also are punishable.
Only let not this be measured by disputable consequences, no more then the
other are. Let the Evidence be in the things themselves, and Actum est, let who
will plead for them. Hence,

Popish Religion, warming in its very Bowels, a fatal Engine against all
Magistracy amongst us, cannot upon our Concessions plead for Forbearance: It
being a known and received Maxim, that the Gospel of Christ, clashes against
no righteous ordinance of man.

And this be spoken to the third Argument of the forenamed Reverend persons
from the Analogy of delinquencies against the first and second Table.

4. The Plea for the punishment of Erring persons, from the penal constitution
under the Old Testament against Idolaters (which in the next place is urged)
seems not very firm and convincing. The vast distance that is between
Idolatry, and any Errors whatsoever, as merely such, however propagated or
maintained with Obstinacy, much impaireth the strength of this Argumentation.

Idolatry is the yielding unto a Creature the service and worship due to the
Creator: Reinold. de. Idol. li. 2. Cap. 1. S. 1. Idololatria est circa omne
Idolum famulatus and servitus, Tertul. de Pol. The attendance and service of
any Idol. Idololatroe dicuntur qui simulachri eam servitutem exhibent quae
debetur Deo: August lib. 1. de Trinit. Cap. 6. They are Idolaters who give that
service to Idols which is due unto God. To render glory to the Creature as to
God, is Idolatry, say the Papists: Bell. de Eccles, Triump. lib. 2. cap. 24.
Greg. de Valen. de Idol. lib. 1. cap. 1. Suitable to the description of it
given by the Apostle, Romans 1. 25. plainly, that whereunto the Sanction under
debate was added, as the bond of the Law against it (which was the bottom of
the commendable proceedings of diverse Kings of Judah against such) was a
voluntary relinquishment of Jehovah revealed unto them, to give the honor due
unto him to dunghill Idols. Now though Error and Ignorance ofttimes lie as the
bottom of this abomination, yet Error properly so called, and which under the
name of Heresy is opposed, is sufficiently differenced therefrom. That Common
definition of Heresy, that it is an Error, or Errors in or about the
Fundamentals of Religion, maintained with stubbornness and pertinacy after
Conviction (for the maine received by most Protestant Divines) will be no way
suited unto that, which was before given of Idolatry and is at commonly
received; being indeed much more clear, as shall be afterward declared. That
this latter is proper and suitable to those Scripturall descriptions, which we
have of Heresy, I dare not assert: but being received by them who urge the
punishment thereof, it may be a sufficient ground of affirming, that those
things whose definitions are so extremely different, are also very distant and
discrepant in themselves, and therefore Constitutions for the disposal of
things concerning the one, cannot eo nomine, conclude the other. Neither is the
Inference any stronger, then, that a man may be hanged for coveting, because he
may be so for murdering.

The penal Constitutions of the Judaicall policy (for so they were which yet I
urge not) concerning Idolaters, must be stretched beyond their Limits, if you
intend to enwrap Heretics within their Verge. If Heretics be also Idolaters,
as the Papists. (The poor Indians who worship a piece of red cloth, the
Egiptians who adored the Deities, which grew in their own Gardens, ceing not
more besotted with this abomination then they who prostrate their souls unto,
and lavish their Devotion upon a piece of Bread, a little before they prepare
it for the draught, so casting the stumbling block of their iniquities before
the faces of poor Heathens and Jews, causing Averroes to breath out his
soul, in this expression of that scandal, Quoniam Christiani manducant Deum
quem adorant, sit anima mea cum Philosophis.) I say then, the case seems to
me, to have received so considerable an alteration that the Plea of forbearance
is extremely weakened; as to my present apprehension: However for the present,
I remove such from this debate.

5. The like to this also, may be said concerning Blasphemy, the Law whereof is
likewise commonly urged in this cause. The establishment for the punishment of
a Blasphemer is in Lev. 24. 16. Given it was upon the occasion of the
blaspheming and cursing of the Son of an Egyptian, upon his striving and
contending with an Israelite. Being (probably) in his own apprehension wronged
by his Adversary, he fell to Reviling his God. The Word here used to express
his sin, is (...) signifying also to pierce, and is twice so rendered, Isa.
36. 6. Hab. 3. 14. Desperate expressions peircing the honor and glory of the
most High, willingly and wilfully, were doubtless his death deserving crime.
It is the same word that Balack used to Baalam, when he would have persuaded
him to a deliberate cursing and pouring out of the Imprecations on the people
of God, Numb. 23. 13, 14. A resolved peircing of the Name and glory of God,
with cursed reproaches, is the crime here sentenced to death. The Schoolmen
tell us, that to complete Blasphemy of the perverse affection in the Heart in
detestation of the goodness of God, joined with the Reproaches of his Name, is
required. Thom. 22ae. g. 13. a. 1. ad 1 um. Which how remote it is from Error
of any sort (I mean within the compass of them whereof we speak) being a pure
misapprehension of the understanding, embraced (though falsely) for the honor
of God, I suppose is easily conceived: and so consequently that the Argument
for the death of a person erring, because he came off no easier, of old who
blasphemed, is a baculo ad angulum.

If any shall say that Blasphemy is of a larger extent, and more general
acceptance in the Scripture, I shall not deny it. But yet that, that kind of
blasphemy which was punishable with violent death, was comprehensive of any
inferior crime, I suppose cannot be proved. However, Blasphemy in the
Scripture is never taken in any place that I can remember, Acts 26. 11.
for a man's maintaining his own Error, Acts 18. 6.
but for his reviling and speaking evil of the Truth which he receives not, 1 Timothy 1. 13.
and so Paul before his conversion was a Blasphemer.

Now if men to whom forbearance is indulged in bypath of their own, shall
make it their work to cast dirt on the better ways of truth, it is to me very
questionable whether they do not offend against that prime dictate of nature,
for the preservation of humane society, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris; and for such, I will be no Advocate.

Neither can indeed the Law of Blaspbemy, be impartially urged by us in any
case of Heresy whatsoever. For,

1. The paenall Sanctions of the Laws of God are not in England esteemed of
Moral equity, and perpetually indispensable; for if so, why do Adulterers
unmolested, behold the violent death of Stealers.

2. The Blasphemer by that Law was not allowed his Clergy. Dye he must without
mercy, no room being left for the intervention of Repentance, as to the
removal of his temporal punishment. When once the Witnesses Garments were
rent, he was Anathema: But in case of any Heresy, repentance, yea Recantation
is a sure Antidote (at least for once, so it is among the Papists) against all
corporal sufferings.

6. Neither does that place in Zachary, Chap. 13. v. 3. concerning the running
through of the false Prophet, more prove or approve of the punishment of death
to be inflicted for misapprehensions in the matters of Religion (and if it
proves not that, it proves nothing, for slaying is the thing expressed, and
certainly if proofs be taken from the Letter, the Letter must be obeyed, or
we force the Word to serve our Hypothesis) then that place of Joh. 10. He that
enters not by the door is a thief and a robber; which Bellarmine strongly
urges to this very purpose, because Theives and Robbers, are so dealt withal,
righteously: Bell. lib. de Laicis. cap. 21. If such deductions may be allowed
it will be easy to prove, quidlibet, ex quolibet, at any time.

If the Letter be urged, and the sense of the Letter as it lies ( August. de
util. creden. cap. 3. Thom. pp. q. 1 a. 10. Zanch. de SS. q. 12. cap. 2. reg.
10. Tilen. Syntag. Theol. de interpret. S. these. 8. Whitak. de. SS. qu. 5. cap.
2. Armin. disput. pri. These. 9. 1. Ames. Med. Theol. cap. 34. These. 22.
indeed the figurative sense of such places is the proper literal sense of
them) let that sense alone be kept to: Let Parents then pass sentence,
condemn, and execute their Children, when they turn Seducers. And that in any
kind whatsoever, into what Seduction soever they shall be engaged; be it most
pernicious, or in things of less concernment; The Letter allows of none of our
distinctions; be they convinced or not convinced, obstinate or not obstinate,
all is one, so it must be, thrust through, and slain by their Parents, must
they fall to the ground; Only observe, his Father and his Mother that begat
him, must be made Magistrates, Prophets with unclean spirits be turned into
Heretics, only thrusting through, that must be as it is in the Letter; yea
though plainly the Party, of whom it is said, Thou shall not live, v. 3. is
found alive, v. 6. Surely such an Orleans gloss is scarce sufficient to secure
a conscience in slaying Heretics. But when Men please, this whole place shall
directly point at the Discipline of the Churches and their spiritual censures
under the Gospel, curing deceivers and bringing them home to confession and
acknowledgement of their folly: see the late Annot. of the Bible.

7. From the asserting of the authority, and description of the duty of the
Magistrate, Romans 13. the Argument is very easy, that is produced, for the
suppressing, by external force, of erroneous persons: The Paralogisme is so
soul and notorious, in this arguing, he is to suppress evil deeds, Heresy
is an evil deed, therefore that also, that it needs no confutation. That he is
to punish all evil deeds was never yet affirmed. Unbelief is a work of the
flesh; so is Coveting: one the root sin, against the first, the other against
the second Table: Yet in themselves, both exempted from the Magistrates
Cognizance and jurisdiction. The evil doers doubtless for whose terror and
punishment he is appointed, are such as by their deeds, disturb that humane
Society, the defense and protection whereof, is to him committed. That among the
Number of these, are Errors, the depravations of men's understandings, has not
yet been proved.

8. The case of the Seducer, from Deuteronomy. 13. is urged with more show of reason
then any of the others, to the business in hand; but yet the extreme
discrepancies between the proof, and the thing intended to be proved, make any
Argumentation from this place, as to the matter in hand, very intricate,
obscure, and difficult. For,

1. The Person here spoken of, pretends an immediate Revelation from Heaven: he
pretends Dreams, and gives signs and wonders, v. 1. and so exempts his spirit
from any regular trial: Heretics for the most part, offer to be tried by the
Rule that is in Medio, acknowledged of all; a few distempered Enthusiasts
excepted.

2. His business is, to Entice from the worship of Jehovah, not in respect of
the manner but the object, v. 5. All Heretics pretend the fear of that great
Name.

3. The accepting and owning Idol dunghill Gods in his room, is the thing
persuaded to, v. 2, (and those were only Stocks and Stones) and this in
opposition to Jehovah, who had revealed himself by Moses. Heretics, worship
him, own him, and abhor all thoughts of turning away from following after
him, according to their Erroneous apprehensions. Manichees, Marcionites,
Valentinians, and such like names of Infidels, I reckon not among Heretics,
neither will their brainsick Paganish follies, be possibly comprehended under
that definition of Heresy which is now generally received. Mahumetans are
far more rightly termed Heretics, then they.

4. This Seducer was to dye without mercy: And Aynsworth observes from the
Rabbines, that this Offender alone, had traps laid to catch him; and were he
but once overheard to whisper his seduction, though never so secretly, there
was no Expiation of his transgression, without his own blood: but now this
place is urged for all kind of restraint and punishment whatsoever. (Now where
God requires blood, is it allowed to man, to Commute at an inferior Rate?) So
I confess it is urged. But yet what lies at the Bottom, in the Chambers of
their bellyes who plead for the Power of the Magistrate to punish erring
Persons, from those and such like places as these, is too apparent. Blood is
there: swiftly, or slowly, they walk to the Chambers of death.

5. Obstinacy after conviction, Turbulency, etc. which are now laid down, as
the maine weights that turn the Scale on the side of Severity, are here not
once mentioned, nor by any thing in the least intimated. If he have done it,
yea but once, openly, or secretly, whether he have been convinced of the
sinfulness of it, or no, be he obstinate or otherwise, it is not once
inquired, dye he must, as if he had committed Murder, or the like indispensable
death-procuring crime. If the punishment then of erring Persons be urged from
this place, all consideration of their Conviction, Obstinacy, Pertinacy, must
be laid aside: the Text allows them no more Plea in this business, then our
Law does in the case of wilful Murder.

6. Repentance and Recantation will in the judgment of all, reprieve an erring
person from any sentence of any punishment corporal whatsoever; and many
reasons may be given, why they should so do. Here is no such allowance. Repent
or not repent, recant or not recant, he has no sacrifice of Expiation provided
for him, dye he must.

7. This Law contains the Sanction of the third Commandment as the whole, was
a Rule of the Jewish polity in the Land of Canaan: This amongst us is
generally conceived not binding, as such.

8. The formal reason of this Law by some insisted on, because be sought to
turn a man from Jehovah:

1. Is of force only in this case of the object whereunto seduction tends;
viz. strange gods, and no other.

2. Turning from Jehovah respects not any manner of backslyding in respect of
the way of worship, but a falling away from him as the object of worship.

Now there being these and many other discrepancies hindering the cases
proposed from running parallel, I profess for my part, I cannot see how any
such evident deductions can possibly be drawn from hence, as to be made a
bottom of practice and acting in things of so high concernment. What may be
allowed from the equity of those and the like Constitutions, and deduced by
Analogy and proportion to the business in hand, I shall afterward declare.

The sum of what is usually drawn out from holy Writ, against such a
forbearance, as I suppose may be asserted, and for the punishing Heretics with
Capital punishments being briefly discussed, I proceed in the next place to
such other general observations, as may serve to the further clearing of the
business in hand, and they are these that follow.

1. The forbearance of, or opposition unto Errors, may be considered, with
respect either unto Civil or Spiritual Judicature. For the Latter, it is
either Personal or Ecclesiastical, properly so called. Personal forbearance
of Errors in a spiritual sense, is a Moral Toleration or approbation of them.
So also is Ecclesiastical. The Warrant for proceedance against them, on that
hand is plain and evident. Certainly this way, no Error is to be forborne.
All persons who have any Interest and share in Truth, are obliged in their
several ways and stations, to an opposition unto every Error. An opposition
to be carried on by Gospel Mediums, and spiritual weapons. Let them according
as they are called or opportuned, disprove them from the Word, Contending
earnestly for the faith once delivered unto the Saints: Erring Persons are
usually ( Bono animo, says Salvian) very zealous to propogate their false
conceptions; and shall the Children of Truth be backward in her defense.
Precepts unto this as a duty, commendations of it, encouragements unto it, are
very frequent in the Gospel. Alike is this duty incumbent on all Churches
walking to the rule. The spiritual Sword of Discipline, may be lawfully
sheathed in the blood of Heresies. No spiritual Remedy, can be too sharp for
a spiritual disease. When the Cure is suited to the Malady, there is no danger
of the application. And this is not denied by any. He that submits himself to
any Church society, does it ea lege, of being obedient to the Authority of
Christ; in that Church in all its Censures. Volenti non fit injuria. Error is
offensive, and must be proceeded against. Examples and precepts of this, abound
in the Scriptures. The blood of many erring persons (I doubt not) will one day
have a Quo warranto granted them, against their (as to the particulars in
debate) Orthodox slayers, who did it to promote the service of God. Let them
not fear an after reckoning, who use the Discipline of Christ, according to his
appointment.

This being considered, the occasion of a most frequent Paralogisme is removed.
If errors must be tolerated, say some, then men may do what they please,
without control? No means it seems must be used to reclaim them? But! is
Gospel Conviction no means? Has the Sword of Discipline no edge? Is there no
means of instruction in the New Testament established, but a Prison and a
Halter? Are the Hammer of the Word, and the Sword of the Spirit, which in days
of Old, broke the stubbornnest Mountains, and overcame the proudest Nations,
now quite useless? God forbid. Were the Churches of Christ, established
according to his appointment, and the professors of the Truth, so knit up in
the unity of the Spirit and bond of peace, as they ought to be, and were in the
Primitive times; I am persuaded those despised Instruments would quickly make
the proudest Heretic to tremble. When the Churches walked in sweet Communion,
giving each other continual account of their affairs, and warning each other
of all, or any such persons, as either in practice, or doctrine, walked not
with a right foot (as we have examples in Clem. Epist. ad Corinth. the Churches
of Vienna and Lions, to those of Asia: Eusebius. of Ignatius to several persons
and Churches, of Iraeneus to Victor. Eusebius. Dyonisius to Stephen, ibid. and the
like) Heretics found such cold entertainment, as made them ashamed if not
weary of their chosen wanderings; but this is not my present business.

2. There is an opposition, or forbearance, in reference to a civil
Judicature, and proceedence of things, which respects Errors, in a Real
sense, as to the inflicting, or not inflicting of punishment, on Religious
Delinquents. And this is the sole thing under debate, viz.

Whether Persons enjoying civil Authority over others, being entrusted
therewithal, according to the Constitutions of the place and Nation where the
lot of them both, by Providence is fallen, are invested with power from above,
and commanded in the Word of God, to coerce, restrain, punish, confine,
imprison, banish, hang, or burn, such of those persons under their
jurisdiction, as shall not embrace, profess, believe, and practice, that Truth
and way of worship, which is revealed unto them of God, or how far, into what
degrees, by what means, in any of these ways, may they proceed.

The General propositions and considerations of the penal Laws of God, which
were before laid down, have, as I suppose, left this business to a naked
debate from the word of truth, without any such prejudices on either part, as
many take from a misapprehension of the mind of God in them; and therefore by
the Readers patience, I shall venture upon the whole anew, as if no such
arguments had ever been proposed, for the affirmative of the Question in hand,
not declining the utmost weight, that is in any of them, according to equity
and due proportion. And here first I shall give in a few things.

1. To the Question it self. 2. To the Manner of handling it.
1. To the Question it self, for herein, I suppose,

1. That the Persons enjoying Authority, do also enjoy the truth, which is to
the advantage of the Affirmative.

2. That their Power in civil things is jnst and unquestionable, which also
looses favorably on that side.

3. That Non-toleration makes out it self in positive infliction of
punishment, which is so, or is nothing. Casting men out of protection, exposing
them to vulgar violence, is confestly unworthy of men representing the
authority of God, and contrary to the whole end of their trust.

2. To the manner of handling this Question among persons at variance; and
here, I cannot but observe.

1. That if I have taken my aim aright, there is no one thing under debate
amongst Christians, that is agitated with more confidence and mutual animosity
of the Parties Litigant: Each charging other with dreadful inferences,
streams of blood, and dishonor to God, flowing out from their several
persuasions. So that ofttimes, in stead of a fair dispute, you meet on this
subject with a Patheticall outcry, as though all Religion were utterly
contaminated and trampled underfoot, if both these contradictory assertions, be
not embraced. Now seeing that in it self, it is a thing wherein the Gospel is
exceedingly sparing, if not altogether silent, certainly there must be a
further Interest, then of Judgment alone, or else that, very much prejudicated
with corrupt affections, or men could not possibly be carried out with so much
violence, upon supposed selfe-created consequences, wherewith in this cause they
urge one another.

2. That generally, thus much of private Interest appears in the several
contesters that Non-toleration is the Opinion of the many, and these enjoining
the countenance of Authority: Toleration of the Oppressed, who always go
under the Name of the faction or factions, the unavoidable Livery of the
smaller number professing a way of worship by themselves, be it right or wrong.
I do not desire to lay forth the usual deportment, of men, seeking the
suppressing of others differing from them, toward those in Authority. It is
but too clearly made out, by daily experience: If they close with them, they
are Custodes utriusque Tabulae, the Churches Nursing Fathers, etc. what they
please. But if they draw back for want of light or truth to serve them* Logges
and Storks find not worse entertainment from Froggs, then they from some of
them. Such things as these, may, (nay ought to) be especially heeded by every
one, that knows what influence corrupt affections have upon the judgments of
men, and would willingly take the pains to wipe his Eyes for the discerning of
the truth.

These things premised, I assert, That

Non-Toleration in the Latitude, which is for Persons in Authority, enjoying
the truth (or supposing they do enjoy it) to punish in an Arbitrary way,
(according to what they shall conceive to be condign.) men, who will not
forsake their own convictions, about any head, or heads, of Christian Religion
whatsoever; to join with what they hold out, either for belief or worship
(after the using of such ways of persuasion as they shall think fit) is no
way warranted in the Gospel, nor can any sound proof for such a course be
taken from the Old Testament.

The Testimonies out of the Law which I can apprehend to have any color or
appearance of strength in them, with the examples approved of God, that seem to
look this way: I considered at our entrance into this discourse.

I speak of punishing in an Arbitrary way, for all instances produced to the
purpose in hand, that speak of any punishment, mention nothing under death it
self; which yet (at least in the first place) is not aimed at by those that
use them in our days as I suppose. Now some Divines of no small Name,
maintain, that God has not left the imposition of punishment in any measure,
to the wills of men.

Some Arguments for the proof of the former Assertion as laid down, I shall
in due place make use of; for the present, I desire to commend to the serious
pondering of all Christians in general, especially of those in Authority,
these ensuing considerations.

1. That it is no privilege of truth, to furnish it is Assertors, with this
persuasion, that the Dissenters from it, ought forceably to be opposed,
restrained, punished: No false Religion ever yet in the World, did enthrone it
self in the minds of men, enjoining a civil sovereignty over the persons of
others, but it there withal commanded them, under pain of neglect and
contempt of it self, to crush any underling worship, that would perke up in
inferior consciences.

The old Heathens carried their Gods into the War (as did the Philistims, 1 Chronicles. 14. 12. and the Israelites the Arc with Heathenish superstition, 1 Samuel
4. 3.) to whom they ascribed the success they obtained, and in requital of
their kindness, they forced the dunghill Deities of the conquered Nations, to
attend the triumph of their Victorious Idols; and unless they adopted them
into the number of their own Gods, all further worship to them was forbidden.
Hence were these inventions among the old Romans, by spells and Enchantments to
entise away a Deity from any City they besieged, (they being as expert at the
getting of a Devil, as Tobias's Raphael, or the present Romanists at his
fumigation) by which means they shrived into the honor of having 30000
unconquered Idols (as Varro in Augustine de civit. Dei.) and deserved worthily,
that change of their Cities Epithete; from (...), to (...), which it justly
inheriteth to this very day. Rabsheke's provocation to the example of the Gods
of the Nations, 2 Kings 18. 33, 34. and the Roman Senats consultation
concerning the admitting of Christ to a place among their Idols, that he might
have been freely worshipped (their consent being prevented, by his Almighty
providence, who will not be enrolled among the vilest works of his most
corrupted creatures) do both declare this thing.

Now not to speak of Caine, who seems to me, to have laid the foundation of
that cruelty, which was afterward inserted into the Churches Orthodoxies, by
the name of Haereticidium, we find the four famous Empires of the World to have
drunk in this persuasion to the utmost, of suppressing all by force and
violence, that consented not to them, in their way of worship.

Nebuchadnezzar the Crown of the golden Head, sets up a Furnace with an Image,
and a Negative answer to that Quaery, do you not serve my Gods, nor worship my
Image? served to to cast the servants of the living God, into the midst of
the fire, Dan. 3.

Daniel's casting into the Lions Den, Chap. 6. shows that the Persian Silver
breast and arms, did not want Iron hands, to crush or break the Opposers of,
or dissenters from their Religious Edicts.

And though we find not much, of the short-lived founder of the Grecian
Dominion, yet what was the practice of the Branches of that Empire, especially
in the Syrian and Egiptian sprouts, the three Books of the Machabees, Josephus
and others, do abundantly manifest.

For the Romans, though their Judgment and practice, (which fully and wholly,
are given over from the Dragon to the Beast and false Prophet) be written in
the blood of thousands of Christians, and so not to be questioned, yet that it
may appear, that we are not the only men in this Generation, that this
wisdom of punishing dissenters was not born with us, I shall briefly give in,
what grounds they proceeded on, and the motives they had to proceed as they did.

First, then, they enacted it as a Law, that no religious worship should be
admitted or practiced, without the consent, decree, and establishment of the
Senate. Mention is made of a formal Law to this purpose in Tertullian, Apol.
cap. 5. though now we find it not. The foundation of it was doubtless in that
of the twelve Tables: Separatim nemo habessit Deos, neue novos, sed ne Aduenas
nisi public ascitos privatim colunto. Let none have Gods to himself, neither
let any privately worship new or strange Deities, unless they be publicly
owned and enrolled. And that it was their practice and in the counsels of the
wisest amongst them, appears in that advice given by Maecenas to Augustus in
Dio Cassius: (...). Worship ( says he) the divine power thy self, according
to the constitutions of thy Country, always and at all times, and compel
others so to honeur it; not only for the Gods sake, whom yet whosoever contemns,
he will never do any honorable thing, but because, these (not so
worshipping) introducing new Deities, do persuade many to transgress (or to
change affairs) whence are conjurations, seditions, private societies; things
no way conducing to Monarchies.

Hence doubtless was that opposition, which Paul met withal in deverse of the
Roman Territories; thus at Athens, (though as I suppose they enjoyed there,
their own Laws and Customs, very suitable as it should seem to those of the
Romans) preaching Jesus, he was accused to be a setter forth of strange Gods,
Acts 14. for although as Strabo observes of the Athenians, that publicly by
the Authority of the Magistrates, (...), they received many things of foreign
worships, yet that none might attempt any such things of themselves, is
notorious from the case of Socrates, who as Laertius witnesses, was condemned,
as (...). one who thought not those to be Gods, whom the City thought so to be,
but brought in certain new Deities. Hence I say was Paul's opposition, and his
haling to Mars hill: Without doubt also, this was the bottom of that stir
and trouble he met withal about Philippi. It is true, private Interest lay in
the bottom with the chief Opposers, but this Legal Constitution was that
which was plausibly pretended. Acts 16. 21. They teach customs, which are not
Lawful for us to receive, neither to observe being Romans. (...), it is not
lawful for us Romans to receive the Religion they hold out, because Statutes
are made amongst us against all Religious worship not allowed by public
Authority. Let Calvin's short Annotation on that place be seen. Gallio's
refusing to judge between Jews (as he thought) in a Jewish controversy, is no
impeachment of this truth: had it been about any Roman establishment, he would
quickly have interposed. Now this Law amongst them was doubtless, Fundi
Christiani Calamitas.

This then in the first place was Enacted, that no worship should be admitted,
no Religion exercised, but what received Establishment and Approbation from
them, who supposed themselves, to be entrusted with Authority over men in such
things. And this power of the Dragon was given over to the Beast and false
Prophet. The Antichristian power, succeeding into the room of the Paganish,
the Pope and Counsels of the Emperors and Senate, it was quickly confirmed
that none should be suffered to live in peace, who received not his mark and
name, Revel. 13. 16, 17. Whereunto for my part, I cannot but refer, very many
of those following Imperial Constitutions, which were made at first against
the opposers of the Churches Orthodoxisme, but were turned against the witness
of Jesus in the close.

2. This being done, they held out the Reasons of this Establishment. I shall
touch only one, or two, of them, which are still common to them, who walk in
the same paths with them.

Now the first was, that Toleration of sundry ways of worship, and several
Religions tends to the disturbance of the Commonwealth, and that civil
Society, which men under the same Government do, and ought to enjoy. So Cicero
tells us, Lib. 2. de legibus: Suos Deos, aut novos, aut alienigenas coli,
confusionem habet, etc It brings in confusion of Religion, and civil Society.
The same is clearly held out, in that Counsel of Maecenas to Augustus before
mentioned. They (says he) who introduce new Deities, draw many into
Innovations; whence are Conspiracies, Seditions, Conventicles, no way
profitable for the Common wealth.

Their other maine Reason was, that hereby the Gods, whom they owned and
worshipped, were dishonored and provoked to plague them. That this was
continually in their mouths and clamours, all the Acts at the slaying of the
Martyrs, the Rescripts of Emperors, the Apologies of the Christians, as
Tertullian, Justine Martyr, Arnobius, Minutius Felix, do abundantly testify.
All trouble was still ascribed to their Impiety, upon the first breaking out of
any judgment, as though the cause of it had been the Toleration of Christians,
presently the vulgar cry was, Christianos ad Leones. Now that those causes and
reasons, have been traduced to all those, who have since acted the same things,
especially to the Emperors successor at Rome, needs not to be proved: With the
power of the Dragon, the wisdom also is derived; see that great Champion
Cardinal Bellarmine, fighting with these very weapons: Lib. de Laicis. cap.
21. And indeed, however illustrated, improved, adorned, supported, flourished,
and sweetened they are the sum of all that to this day has been said in the
same case.

3. Having made a Law, and supported it with such reasons as these, in
proceeding to the Execution of the penalty of that Law, as to particular
Persons (which penalty being as now, Arbitrary was inflicted, unto Banishment;
Imprisonment, Mine-digging, Torturing in sundry kinds, Mayming, Death,
according to the pleasure of the Judges) they always charged upon those
persons, Profana illic omnia quae apud nos sacra rursum concessa apud illos
quae nobis incesta.
not only the denying and opposing their own Deities, Religion, and Worship,
but also, that, that which they embraced, was foolish, absurd, detestable,
pernicious, sinful, wicked, ruinous to Common^wealths, Cities, Society,
Families, honesty, order, and the like. If a man should go about to delineat
Christian Religion, by the Lines and features drawn thereof, Moses novos Ritus
contrariosque caeteris mortalibus indidit. Provectissima ad libidinem gens
alienarum concubitum abstenint inter se nihil illicitum. Tacitus, de Judaeis
Hist. l. 5. Judeos impulsore Chresto quotidie tumultuames, Roma ex pulit: fasly
and foolishly, Suet. Claud. cap. 25. Quaesitissimis paenis afficiebat, quos per
flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat. Plu. Tac. An. lib. 15. afflicti
suppliciis Christiani, genus hominum superstitionis novae ac Maleficae: Sueton.
in Nerone: cap. 16.
in the invectives and accusations of their Adversaries, he might justly
suppose, that indeed, that was their God, which was set up at Rome with this
Inscription, DEUS CHRISTIANORUM ONONYCHITES. Being an Image with Asses ears,
in a Gown, Claws or Talons upon one foot, with a Book in his hand. Charged
they were, that they worshipped an Asses head, which impious folly, first
fastened on the Jews by Tacitus. Histor. lib. 5. cap. 1. (in these words,
Effigiem animalis quo monstrante, errorem s^^imque depulerant penetrali
sacravere, having before set out a feigned direction received by a company of
Asses) which he had borrowed from Appion a railing Egiptian of Alexandria
(Joseph. ad. App. lib. 1.) was so ingrafted in their minds, that no defensative
could be allowed. The Sun, the Cross, Sacerdotis Generalia, were either really
supposed, or impiously imposed on them, as the objects of their worship. The
blood and flesh of Infants, at Thiestaean banquets, was said to be their food
and provision: promiscuous lust, with Incest, th^^^ chiefest refreshment. Such
as these it concerned them, to have them thought to be, being resolved to use
them, as if they were so indeed: Hence I am not sometimes without some
suspicion, that many of the impure abominations, follies, villainies, which are
ascribed unto the Primative Heretics, yea the very Gnostics themselves (upon
whom the filth that lies, is beyond all possible belief, Epiphan. Tom. 2. lib.
1. Har. 26.) might be ^ained, and imposed, as to a great part thereof. For
though not the very same, yet things as foolish and opposite to the light of
nature, were at the same time, charged on the most Orthodox.

But you will say, they who charged these things upon the Catholics, were
Pagans, enemies of God, and Christ; but these who so charged Heretics were
Christians themselves: And so, say I also, and therefore for reverence of the
name, (though perhaps I could) I say no more. But yet this I say, that Story
which you have in Minutius Felix, or Arnobius 8th. Book Apologeticall, of the
meeting of Christians, the drawing away of the Light by a Dog tied to the
Candlestick, so to make way for Adulteries and Incests: I have heard more then
once, told with no small confidence, of Brownists and Puritans. Has not this
very same course been taken in latter ages? Consult the Writings of Waldensis,
and the rest of his Companions, about Wickleffe and his Followers, see the
occasion of his falling off from Rome, in our own Chronicles, in Fabian of
old, yea and Daniel of late to gratify a Popish Court; of Eckius, Hosius,
Staphylus, Bolsecte, Bellarmine, and the rest who have undertaken to pourtray
out unto us, Luther and Calvin with their followers; and you will quickly see,
that their great design was to put (as they did upon the head of John Huss at
the Council of Constance, when he was lead to the stake) the ugly vizard, of
some Devilish Appearance, that under that form, they might fit them for Fire
and Faggot.

And herein also, is the Polity of the Dragon, derived to the false Prophet,
and a color tempered, for persecutors to imbrue their hands in the blood of
Martyrs.

This was the old Roman Way, and I thought it not amiss to cautionate those,
enjoying Truth and Authority, that if it be possible, they may not walk in
their steps and method: the course accounted so sovereign, for the extirpation
of Error, was as you see, first invented, for the extirpation of Truth.

Secondly, I desire it may be observed, That the general Issue and tendance of
unlimited arbitrary persecution or punishing for conscience sake, because in
all Ages (...), and the worst of men have sat at the upper end of the World,
for the most part, more false Worshippers, having hitherto enjoyed authority
over others, then Followers of the Lamb, has been pernicious, fatal, and
dreadful to the Profession and Professors of the Gospel, little, or not at
all, serviceable to the truth.

I have heard it averred, by a Reverend and Learned Personage, that more blood
of Heretics has been shed by wholesome Severity, in the maintenance of the
truth and opposition unto Errors, then has been shed of the witnesses of
Jesus, by the Sword of Persecution, in the hands of Heretics and false
Worshippers. An assertion, I conceive, under favor, so exceedingly distant
from the reality of the thing it self, that I dare take upon me, against any
man breathing, that in sundry Christian Provinces, almost in every one of the
West, more Lives have been sacrificed to the one Idol Haereticidium, of those
that bear witness to the Truth, in the Belief, for which they suffered, then
all the Heretics properly so called, that ever were slain in all the
Provinces of the World, by men professing the Gospel: And I shall give that
worthy Divine, or any other of his persuasion, his Option, among all the
chiefest Provinces of Europe, to tie me up unto which they please. He that
shall consider that above sixty thousand persons, were in six years or little
more, cut off in a Judicial way, by Duke D' Alua in the Nether-Lands, in
pursuit of the sentence of the Inquisition, will conclude, that there is Causa
facilis in my hand.

The Ancient Contest, between the Homoousians and the Arrians, the first
Controversy the Churches were agitated withal, after they enjoyed a Christian
Magistrate (and may justly be supposed to be carried on to the advantage of
Error, beyond all that went before it, because of the Civil Magistrates
interessing themselves in the Quarrel) was not carried out to Violence and
Blood, before the several persuasions, lighted on several Dominions, and
State Interests: As between the Goths, Vandals, and the rest of their
Companions on one side, who were Arrians, and the Romans on the other. In all
whose Bickerings notwithstanding, the honor of Severity, did still attend the
Arrians, especially in Affricke, where they persecuted the Catholics, with
horrible outrage and fury. Five thousand at one time barbarously exposed to all
manner of cruel Villainy. Some Eruptions of passion had been before among
Emperors themselves, but still with this difference, that they who Arrianized,
carried the Bell for zeal against dissenters. Witness Valens, who gave place
in persecution, to none of his Pagan Predecessors; killing, burning, slaying,
making havoc of all Orthodox Professors: Yea perhaps, that which he did, at
least was done by the countenance of his Authority, at Alexandria upon the
placing in, of Lucius an Arrian in the room of Athanasius, thrusting Peter
besides the Chair, who was rightly placed according to the custom of those
times, perhaps I say, the Tumults, Rapes, Murders, then, and there acted, did
outgoe what before had been done by the Pagans, see Theodorit, Eccles. Hist.
lib. 4. cap. 22. it were tedious to pursue the lying, slandering, invectives,
banishments, deaths, tumults, murders, which attend this counsel all along,
after once they began to invoke the help of the Emperors one against another:
Yet in this space some Magistrates, weary with persecuting ways, did not only
abstain practically from force and violence, as most of the Orthodox Emperors
did, but also enacted Laws, for the freedom of such as dissented from them.
Jovianus a pious man, grants all peace, that will be peacable; offended only
with them, who would offer violence to others. Socrates Eccles. Hist. lib. 4.
cap. 21. Gratianus makes a Law, whereby he granted liberty to all Sects. but
Manichees, Photinians, and Eunomians. Zozo. Eccles. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 1. Many
more the like examples might be produced.

The next difference about the Worship of God (to the Arrian and its Branches)
that was controverted in Letters of blood, was about Images, and their Worship;
in which, though some furious Princes, in opposition to that growing Idolatry,
which by Popes, Bishops, Priests, and especially Monks, was in those days,
violently urged, did mingle some of their blood with their Sacrifices, yet not
to the Tithe almost, of what the Iconolatrae getting uppermost, returned upon
them, and their adherents.

This if occasion were, might be easily demonstrated from Paulus Diaconus and
others. After this, from about the year 850. about which time the Iconolatrae,
having ensnared the West by polity, the posterity of Charles the Great, who
had stoutly opposed the worship of Images, complying with the Popes, the
Fathers of that Worship for their own ends, and wearied the East by cruelty,
that Contest growing toward an End, the whole power of punishing for Religion,
became subservient to the Dictates of the Pope, the Kings of the Earth giving
their power to the Beast, (unto which point things had been working all along)
from thence I say, until the death of Servctus in Geneva, the pursuit of
Gentilis Blandeata, and some other mad men in Helvetia, for the space well nigh
of 700 years, the chiefest season of the Reign of Satan and Antichrist, all
punishing for Religion, was managed by the Authority of Rome, and against the
poor witnesses of Jesus, prophesying in sackcloth, in the several Regions of
the West. And what streams of blood were poured out, what Millions of Martyrs
slain in that space, is known to all. Hence Bellarmine boasts that the
Albigenses were extinguished by the Sword. De Laic. cap. 22. It is true there
were Laws enacted of old by Theodosius, Valentinian, Martian, as C. de
haereticis, L. Manichaeis, L. Arriani. L. Vnicuique; which last provideth for
the death of Seducers, but yet truly, though they were made by Catholics, and
in the favor of Catholics, yet considering to what end they were used, I can
look upon them no otherwise, but as very bottom stones of the Tower of Babel.

This, then in its Latitude proving so pernicious to the profession of the
Gospel, having for so long driven the Woman into the Wilderness, and truth
into corners, being the maine Engine whereby the Tower of Babel was built, and
that, which at this day they cry Grace unto, as the foundation stone of the
whole Antichristian Fabric ( see Becanus de fide baereticis servanda, Bell. de
Laicis, etc.) we had need be cautious, what use we make (as one terms it
well) of the Broom of Antichrist, to sweep the Church of Christ. Whither that
we are in the Truth, and they blinded with Error, of whom we have spoken, be
a sufficient Plea, we shall see anon. In the mean time, we may do well to
remember, what Jews the twelth of France said, yea swore concerning the
Inhabitants of Mirindoll, whom by the instigation of his Prelates he had
ordered to be slain, when news was brought him, what was their conversation
and way of life, Let them be Heretics if you please (says he) but assuredly
they are better then me, and my Catholics. Take heed least the punished, be
better then the punishers.

Let me add to this Observation only this, that the attempt to suppress any
Opinions whatsoever by Force, has been for the most part fruitless; for
either some few particular persons, are proceeded against, or else greater
multitudes: If some particulars only, the Ashes of one, has always proved the
seed of many Opinionatiists: Examples are innumerable, take one, which is
boasted of, as a pattern of severity taken from Antiquity. About the year
390. Priscillianus, a Manichee, and a Gnosticke, by the procurement of Ithacius
and Idacius, two Bishops, was put to death by Maximus, an usurping Emperor,
who ruled for a season, having slain Gratianus; (as that kind of men, would
always close with any Authority, that might serve their own Ends.) Now what
was the issue thereof; Martinus a Catholic Bishop renounces their Communion
who did it: The Historian, that reports it, giving this censure of the whole,
Sic pessimo exemplo, sublati sunt homines luce indignissimi, though the men (
Priscillian and his Companions) were most unworthy to live, yet their sentence
to death, was most unjust. But no matter for this, was not the Heresy
suppressed thereby? See what the same Historian, who wrote not long after, and
was able to testify the event, says of it (it is Severus Sulpitius, lib. 2.
Eccles. Hist.) Non solum non repressa est haeresis (says he) sed confirmata,
and Latius propagata est, etc. The heresy was so far from being suppressed
hereby, that it was confirmed and propagated: His followers who before honored
him as a Saint, now adore him as a Martyr: The like in all Ages has been the
issue, of the like endeavors.

But now, if this course be undertaken against Multitudes, what is or has been
the usual End of such undertakings? Take some examples of late days: Charles
the fifth, the most mighty Emperor of Germany, undertakes by violence to
extirpate the Lutherans and Calvinists out of the Empire. After a tedious
War, the death of many thousands, the wasting of the Nation, in the close of
all, himself is driven out of Germany; and the business left much where it
begun: Sleid. Com. Philip of Spain will needs force the Inquisition upon the
Netherlands? What is the issue? After the expense of an Ocean of blood, and
more Coin then would have purchased the Country twice over, his Posterity is
totally deprived of all Sovereignty over those Parts.

Patrick Hamilton, and George Wishard are put to death in Scotland, by the
procurement of a Cardinal; the Cardinal is instantly murdered by some
desperate young men, and a war raised there about Religion, which was never
well quieted, until having hunted their Queen out of her native Kingdom, she
had her head chopped off in England: History of Reformation in Scotland. The
Wars, Seditions, Tumults, Murders, Massacres, Rapes, Burnings, etc. that
followed the same attempt in France, cannot be thought of, without horror and
detestation. Neither knew those things any End, until the present forbearance,
was granted. Instances might be multiplied, but these things are known to all.
If any shall say, all these Evils followed, the attempting to suppress Truth
not Error, I shall answer him another time, being loath to do it, unless
compelled: Only for the present I shall say, that Error has as much right,
to a forceable defense, as Truth.

6. To stir us up yet further, to a serious consideration of the grounds and
reasons which are laid down, for the inflicting of punishment upon any, for
Exorbitancies in things of Religion (upon what has been said) the perpetual
coincidence of the causes by them held forth, who pretend to plead for just
severity, with their pretenses who have acted unjust persecution, would be well
heeded.

The Position is laid down in General on both sides, that Erring persons are
so, and so, to be dealt withal. That such is the power and duty of the
Magistrate in such cases. The definition of Heresy is agreed on for the maine;
only the Papists place the Churches determination, where others thrust in the
Heretics conviction (a thing much more obscure to bystanders and Judges also.)
The appellations wherewith truth persecuted, and error pursued, are clothed,
still the same. The consequents urged on all sides, of dishonor to God,
trouble to the State, and the like not at all discrepant. The arguments for the
one, and other, for the most part the same. Look what Reasons one Sect gives
for the punishing of another, the names being changed are retorted. He
blasphemeth to the Heretic, who charge blasphemy upon him. We use no other
Arguments, cite no other Texts, press no other consequencies for the punishing
of other Heretics, then the Papists the wisest Heretics breathing, do for
the punishment of us.

No color, no pretense, but has been equally used in all hands: None can say,
this is mine. To Luthers objection, that the Church of Christ never burned an
Heretic, for Husse, and Hierome were none; Bellarmine answers, they were
Heretics to them Catholics, which did suffice: de Laic. cap. 21. And indeed
this Vicissitude of things is very pernicious. All Christians almost are
Heretics to some enjoying Authority: (as Salvian said the case was, between
the Homoousians and Arrians in his time) and most of those enjoying authority,
are persuaded it is their duty, to suppress them whom they account Heretics;
and answerably have more or less acted, according to this persuasion, until
by blood, Wars, and horrid devastations of Nations, some of them have been
wearied: From the first Ceraysado against the Albigenses, through the War of
the Hussites under Zifea and the Procopij, those dreadful Massacres, before
recounted, what a stage of blood, has Europe been made upon this account? I
desire that to this point the Declaration of the Netherlands, at the beginning
of their Troubles (whom Bellarmine affirms to have Petitioned for Liberty of
Conscience, as he was writing de Haereticidio, the thing being long before
granted at Spira, at the Convention of the States of the Empire, in the year
1526.) may be seriously considered.

7. For the necessity of courses of extremity, against erroneous Persons, for
the upholding the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and the keeping the
Churches in peace, it does not appear to me to be so urgent as is pretended;
for three hundred years, the Church had no assistance from any Magistrate
against Heretics: and yet in all that space, there was not one long-lived, or
farre-spreading Heresy in comparison of those that followed. As the disease is
spiritual, so was the remedy which in those days was applied; and the Lord
Jesus Christ, made it effectual. The Christians also of those days,
disclaimed all thoughts of such proceedings. The expressions of the most
Ancient, as Policarpus, Ignatius, Iraenaeus, concerning Heretics are sharp
and cutting: Their avoiding of them being admonished, precise and severe; their
confutations of them, laborious and diligent; their Church censures, and
Ejections, peircing and sharp: Communion amongst the Churches, close, exact,
and carefully preserved; so that a stubborn Heretic was thrust out of
Christian society. But for corporal punishment to be inflicted on them, in
their writings, not a syllable. Until Augustine was changed from his first
resolution and persuasion, by the madness of Donatisticall Circumcellions,
this Doctrine had poor footing in Antiquity. And whether his reasons as to
this point be convincing, let any impartial man, read his Epistle 50, and
determine. What some say, the Christians would have been of another mind, had
they enjoyed Christian Magistrates, is so suited to our present frame and
temper, but so unworthy of them, that I should wrong them by a Defensative.
What was their sense of them in a spiritual way is clear. John they say would
not abide in a Bath, where Cerinthus the Heretic, infected wtih Judaisme and
Paganism was; saying, let us depart lest the building fall on us, where
Cerinthus is: Iraen. lib. 3. cap. 3. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 25.
Marcion meeting Polycarpus, and asking him whether he knew him or acknowledged
him, his answer was, Yea, to be the first borne of the Devil, Eusebius. lib. 4.
cap. 14. Ignatius his Epistles are full of the like expressions. Iraeneus
says, he would have no words with them, lib. 3. cap. 3. Tertullians Books
testify for him at large, with what keenesse of spirit he pursued the
Heretics of his days (though before the End of them; he had the unhappiness
to be almost one himself.) Cyprian cries out, Nulla cum talibus convivia, nulla
colloquia, nulla commercia misceantur: Epist. 3. ad Cornel. Neither eat, nor
talk, nor deal with them. Antonius the Hermit leaves Testimony when he was
dying, That he never had peaceable conference with them all his days, Vita
Anton* inter Oper. Athan. Surely, had these men perceived the mind of God for
their Bodily punishment, they would not have failed to signify their minds
therein; but truly their expressions hold out rather the quite contrary.
(...): says Ignatius, Epist. ad Philad. Count them enemies and separate from
them, but for beating or persecuting them, that is proper to the Heathen who
know not God, nor our Savior, do not you so. Tertullian in very many places,
lays down general maxims tending to more Liberty then is now pleaded for;
one or two places may be jointed at. Videte ne and hoc ad irreligiositatis
elogium concurrat, adimere libertatem religionis, and interdicere Optionem
divinitatis, ut non liceat mihi colere quem velim, sed cogar colere quem nolim.
Nemose ab invito coli vellet, ne homo quidem: Apol. cap 23. And again to
Scopula the Governor of Carthage to dissuade him from the Persecution he
intended. Tamen humani juris and naturalis potestatis est unicuique quod
putaverit colere: nec alii obest aut prodest alterius Religio: sed nec
Religionis est, cogere Religionem, quae sponte, suscipi debeat, non vi; cum and
hostiae ab animo libenii expostulantus; ita and si nos compuleritis ad
sacrificandum, nihil praestabi is diis vestris, ab invitis enim sacrificia non
disiderabunt. And I desire to know, whether that which he makes to be the Plea
of Christians, may not also be used by all erring persons. Totum quod in nos
potestis, nostrum est Arbitrium. Certe si velim, Christianus sum, tunc ergo me
damnabis si damnari velim. Cum vero quod in me potes, nisi velim, non potes,
jam meae voluntatis est quod potes, non tuae potestatis. Apol. cap. ult. Hence
was that Quaere of Lactantius: Quis imponet mihi necessitatem aut credendi quod
nolim, aut quod velim non credendi: And long after these Gregory of Rome, Lib.
2. Ep. 52. tells us, Nova and inaudita est ista praedicatio, quae verberibus
exigit fidem: To bea^e in Faith with stripes, was then, a new kind of
Preaching. These and the like, were their Expressions.

It is true, in the three first Centuries, many fond, foolish, corrupt
Opinions, were broached by sundry brain sick men; but they laid little hold of
the Chrches, kept themselves in the breasts of some few disorderly Wanderers,
and did very little promote the Mystery of Iniquity: But afterward, when the
Roman Emperors, and the Great men of the Earth, under, and with them, began to
interpose in the things of Religion, and were mutually woed, instigated, and
provoked by the Parties at variance (as indeed it is a shame to consider upon
all meetings, assemblies, disputes councels, what running, what flattering,
what insinuation at Court were used on all hands) what Root did diverse
Heresies take (how far were they propagated? Witness Arrianisme, which had
almost invaded the whole World.

Furthermore, by the ways which were invented often from the Rule, for the
extirpation of Errors, when by the Instigation of Prelates, the Emperors were,
(to their own ruin) persuaded to them, the Man of sin walked to his Throne.
Those very Laws, Edicts, and Declarations, which were obtained against erring
Persons, did the Bishops of Rome invert and use against all the Witnesses of
Jesus. The Devil durst not be so bold, as to employ that his grand Agent in
his Apprentiship against the Saints: But he first suffers him, to exercise his
hand against Heretics, intending to make use of him afterward to another
purpose. In most of those contests, which the Roman Pontists had with their
fellow Bishops, by which they insensibly advanced their own supremacy, it was
the defense of Catholics they undertook, as in the case of Athanasius and
others.

Neither did the Christians of old, at once, step into the persuasion of
punishing corporeally in case of Religion. Constantine makes a Decree at first,
(...), that Liberty of worship is not to be denied, and therefore the
Christians as others, should have Liberty to keep the faith of their Religion
and heresy, Eusebius. Eccles Hist. lib. 10. cap. 5. And in the same Edict he
says (how truly I know not, but yet Great Constantine said it) That it is
most certain, that this is conducing to the peace of the Empire, that free
Option and choice of Religion he left to all. Afterward, when he begun a
little further to engage himself in the business of Religion, being indeed
wearied with the Petitions of Bishops and their Associates, for the persecution
of one another, what troubles in a few years did he intricate himself
withal, perplexed he was in his spirit to see the untoward revengefulnesse of
that sort of people; insomuch that he writes expressly to them, being assembled
in Counsel at Tire, That they had neither care of the truth, nor love to
peace, nor conscience of scandal, nor would by any means be prevailed on to
lay down their malice and animosities; Socrat. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 22. At
length an Arrian Priest curryes favor with his Sister Constantia: She gets
him into the Esteem of her Brother; after some insinuations of his, new
Edicts, new Synods, new recallings, new Banishments of other persons, follow
one upon the neck of another. Ruffin. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 11. And when
this knack was once found out, of promoting a Sect by Imperial favor, it is
admirable to consider how those good Princes, Constantine and his Sons, were
abused, misled, enraged, engaged into mutual Dissensions, by the Lies,
flatteries, equivocations of such as called themselves Bishops, Ruff. lib. 1.
cap. 15, 16, etc. As also how soon with the many, the whole business of
Religion was hereupon turned into a matter, of external Pomp and Dominion.
But it is besides my purpose, to raze into that Hell of confusion, which by
this means, brake in upon the Churches in succeeding Ages. Only, for the
following Imperial Edicts and Constitutions in the behalf of the faith
Catholic, and for the punishing of Erring Persons, I desire to observe,

1. That the Emperors were stirred up to them, by Turbulent Priests, and
aspiring Prelates; let the Popes letters to them witness this, Leo Epist. 75,
etc.

2. That they were still bottomed, upon such, and such, counsels, that were
not to be opposed or spoken against, when all of them were spent for the most
part, about things quite besides and beyond the Scripture (as feastings, and
fastings, and Bishops jurisdictions) and some of them, were the very ulcers,
and impostumations of Christian Religion, as those of Nice and Ephesus, both
the second; and in general all of them the Sea, upon which the Whore exalted
her seat and throne; and these things did those good men, either deceived by
the craft of Heretics, or wearied by the importunity of the Orthodox.

And yet notwithstanding all this (as I shall afterward declare) I cannot
close with that counsel which Themistius a Philosopher gave to Valens the
Emperor, and am most abhorrent from the Reason of his Counsel, viz. That he
should let all Sects alone, because it was for the glory of God, to be
honored with diversities of Opinions, and ways of Worship: Yet though this
Reason be false and impious, yet the advice it self was well conducing at that
time, to the peace of the Churches, something qualifying the spirit of that
Heretical Emperor, who before had cruelly raged, against all Orthodox
professors of the Deity of Christ, Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 27.

8. Lastly, add unto all that has been said ( vice coronidis) for the use of
such as enjoying Authority, may have misapprehensions of some truths of Christ,
a sad consideration concerning the End and Issue, which the Lord in his
righteous Judgment has in all Ages given to Persecutors and Persecution. Nero
(of whom says Tertullian, tali Dedicatore gaudet sanguis Christianus) who was
the first that employed the Sword against our Religion, being condemned by the
Senate to be punished More Majorum, slew himself with this exprobration of his
own sordid Villainy, Turpiter vixi, turpius Morior: Sueton. in Nero: Domitian
the inheritor of his rage and folly, murdered in his own House, by his
Servants, Idem in Domit. Trajan by a resolution of his Joints, nummednesse of
body, and a choking Water, perished miserably, Dion Cassius de Tra. This is he
whose order not to seek out Christians to punishment, but yet to punish them
appearing, you have in his Epistle to Pliny a provincial Governor under him,
Plin. Epist. 97. which though commended by Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap.
30. yet is canvassed by Tertullian, as a foolish, impious, wicked Constitution,
Apol. cap. 2. Hadrian perishing, with a Flux and casting of blood, paid some
part of the price of the Innocent blood which he had shed, Aelius Spart. in
Had. Severus poisoned himself, to put an end to his tormenting pains, Jul.
Capitol. Maximinus, with his Son yet a Child, was torn in pieces of the
Soldiers, all crying out, That not a whelpe was to be left of so cursed a
stock. Decius having reigned scarce two years, was slain with his Children,
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 1. Valerian being taken by Sapores King of Persia, was
carried about in a Cage, and being 70 years old, was at length flayed alive,
Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 9. Another Valerian, of the same stamp, with his Brother
and Kindred, was murdered at Millan. Diocletian being smitten with madness,
had his Palace consumed with fire from Heaven, and perished miserably. The
City of Alexandria in the time of Gallienus, was for its persecution, so wasted
with variety of destroying Plagues and Judgments, that the whole number of its
Inhabitants, answered not the Grayheaded old men that were in it before,
Dyonis. apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 20. What was the End of Julian, is known to
all. Now truly of many of these, we might well say (as one of old did) Quales
Imperatores? as Trajan, Hadrian, Severus, Julian, what excellent Emperors had
they been, had they not been Persecutors. And all this says Tertullian is come
to pass, that men might learn, (...). He that desires to see more of this,
let him consult, Tertull. Apol. and ad Scap. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 7. cap.
21. August. de civit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 52. Eutrop. lib. 8. It would be
tedious to descend to examples of latter Ages, our own and the neighbor
Nations, do so much, too much abound with them; let this that has been spoken
suffice, to cautionate mortal men, how they meddle with the Vessels of the
Sanctuary.

But now, Ob.
may some say, What will be the Issue of this discourse; do you then leave
every one at Liberty in the things of God? Has the Magistrate nothing to do,
in, or about Religion? Is he to depose the care thereof? Shall men exasperated
in their spirits by different persuasions, be suffered to devour one another
as they please? etc.

I have only showed the weakness of those grounds, Ans.
which some men make the bottom of their Testimonies, against the toleration
of any thing but what themselves conceive to be Truth; as also taken away the
chief of those Arguments, upon which, such a proceeding against Erring Persons
is bottomed, as tends to blood and death: What positively the Civil
Magistrate, may, nay ought to do, in the whole business of Religion, comes in
the next place to be considered, being the third and last part of our
discourse: Now my thoughts unto this, I shall hold out under these three heads.

1. What, is the Magistrates duty, as to the truth, and persons professing it.

2. What, in reference to the Opposers and Revilers of it.

3, What, in respect of Dissenters from it.

And I shall begin with the first, which to me, is, much of chiefest importance.

His power, or rather his duty herein, I shall hold out in these ensuing
Propositions.

1. As all men in General, so Magistrates, even as such, are bound to know the
mind and will of God, in the things which concern his Honor and Worship.
They are bound I say, to know it. This obligation lies upon all creatures,
capable of knowing the Creator, answerably to that light, which of him they
have, and the means of Revelation which they do enjoy. He of whom we speak,
is supposed to have that most Sovereign and supreme of all outward Teachings,
the Word of God, with such other helps, as are thereby revealed, and therein
appointed. So as he is bound to know the will of God, in every thing him
concerning; wherein he fails, and comes short of the truth, it is his sin;
the defect being not in the manner of the Revelation, but in the corruption of
his darkened mind. Now that he is to make this inquiry, in reference to his
calling, is evident from that of David, 2 Samuel 23. 3. He that rules over men
must be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord: This fear is only taught by
the Word. Without a right knowledge of God and his mind, there can be no true
fear of him. That command also, for the Jewish Magistrate, to study it day and
night, and to have the Book of the Law continually before him, because it was
the Rule of that civil Polity, whereof he was under God the head and
preserver, by Analogy confirms this truth, Deuteronomy. 18.

2. If he desire this wisdom sincerely, and the Lord intend him, as a light
of the morning, as a rising Sun, a morning without clouds, to his people,
doubtless he will reveal himself to him, and teach him his mind, as he did
David and Solomon, and other holy men of Old. And as to this, I shall only
with due reverence, cautionate the sons of men, that are exalted in
Government over their Brethren, that they take heed of a lifted up spirit, the
greatest closer of the heart against the truth of God. He has promised, to
teach the humble and the lowly in mind; the proud he beholds a far off. Is
not this the great reason, that the Rulers believe not on him, and the Nobles
lay not their necks to the yoke of the Lord, even because their hearts are
lifted up within them, and so lie in an unteachable frame before the Lord.

3. The truth being revealed to them, and their own hearts made acquainted
therewith, after their personal engagements, to the practice of the power of
godliness, according to the Revelation of God in the face of Jesus Christ;
three things are incumbent on him in reference thereunto.

1. That according to the measure of its Revelation unto him, he declare, or
take care that it be declared unto others, even all committed to his governing
charge. The general equity, that is in the obligation of, strengthening others,
when we are confirmed, desiring them to be like our selves, in all
participations of grace from God, the nature of true zeal for the glory and
Name of the Lord, are a sufficient warrant for this, yea demand the performance
of this duty. So Jehoshaphat being instructed in the ways of God, sent Princes
and Priests to teach it in all the Cities and Towns of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 17. 8,
9, 10. As also did Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 30. 6, 7, 8. Let this then be our first
Position.

1. It belongs to the duty of the supreme Magistrate, the Governor, or
Shepherd of the People in any Nation, being acquainted with the mind of God,
to take care that the truth of the Gospel be Preached to all the people of
that Nation, according to the way appointed, either ordinary, or extraordinary.

I make no doubt but God will quickly reject them from their power, who knowing
their Masters will, are negligent herein.

2. As he is to declare it, so he is to protect it from all violence, whatever.
Jesus Christ, is the great King of Nations, as well as the holy King of Saints.
His Gospel has a right to be preached in every Nation, and to every creature
under heaven. Who ever forbids or hinders the free passage of it, is not only
sinful and impious toward God, but also injurious toward men. Certainly the
Magistrate is to protect every one, and every thing, in their own right, from
the violence and injury of unruly men. In the preaching and receiving the
Gospel, there is a right acted, superior to all earthly privileges whatever.
In this then the Magistrate is to protect it, that under him the professors
thereof, may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.
And for this cause, they to whom the Sword is committed, may with the sword
lawfully defend the Truth, as the undoubted right, and privilege of those who
do enjoy it, and of which they cannot be deprived without the greatest injury.
Jephthah laid it down as the ground of the equity of the wars he waged
against the Ammonites, That they would possess what the Lord their God gave
them to possess; the defense whereof, he pursued to the subversion of their (at
first) invading enemies: Judge. 11. 24. 33. (it is no new thing to begin in
defense, and end in offense). Now, if the truth be given us of the Lord our
God, to possess, certainly it may be contended for, by those who owe
protection thereunto; And if this were not so, we may pray, and prevail for the
prosperity of those in Authority; and yet when we have done, not have a right
to a quiet and peaceable life; Let this then be the second assertion.

The Gospel being preached, 2 Pos.
and declared as of right it ought to be, it is the duty of the Magistrate, by
the power wherewith he is entrusted, to protect and defend it against all, or
any persons, that by force, or violence shall seek to hinder the progress, or
stop the passage of it under what pretense soever.

And that a neglect of this also, will be attended with the anger of the Lord,
and the kindling of his wrath, shall not long be doubted of any.

Thirdly, the protecting, assisting, and supporting of all the professors of
it, in that profession, and in ways of truths appointment, for the practice of
that which is embraced, and the furtherance of it, toward them who as yet
embrace it not, is also required, and of this there are sundry parts.

1. That seeing Christ Jesus has appointed his disciples to walk in such
societies, and requires of them such kind of worship, as cannot be performed
without their meeting together (...), in one place, that he either provide, or
grant being provided, the use of such places under his protection, as may in
all, or any kind be suited, and fitted for that end and purpose. And the
ground of this is:

1. From the Right which the Gospel of Christ has to be received amongst men,
according to his own appointment; whether that be the appointment of Christ, or
no, amongst us, is no question.

2ly, Because the Magistrate has the sole power of all public places, and the
protection of them, is committed to him alone, by virtue of that consent into
government which is among any people. This proved as above.

2ly, A protection in the use of those places, and all things exercised in
them, answerable to that which he does and is bound to grant unto men in their
own private dwellings, and families. The Reason why I am protected from all
hurt or violence in my family, is because I have a Right to dispose of all
things in my family being mine own, and so has not another; It was asserted
before, that Christians have a Right to the ordinances of Christ, and Truth a
Right to be at liberty. And therefore, if any shall invade, disturb, or
trouble them in their rights, and liberties, he is bound ex officio to give
them a protection, not bearing the sword in vain.

Now being in my family, in my private house the assistance of those in
Authority is due: 1. In respect of them without. 2. In respect of them within.


1. For them without, if any one will against my consent, intrude himself upon
my family enjoyments, to share with me, or violently come to take away that is
mine, or distub me in the quiet possession of it, the Magistrate takes
cognizance of such disturbances, and punishes them according to equity.
Suteably, if any person or persons whatsoever, shall with violence put
themselves upon the enjoyments of such ordinances as those enjoying the Rights
of the Gospel have obtained to themselves, or shall come in their celebration
of them, to cause disturbance, certainly, that Magistrate protects not every
one in his undoubted Rights, who does not accommodate the wronged parties, with
the assistance of his power to the punishment of the transgressors.

2. For house dwellers, servants, or any others, who may break out into such
offenses, and incorrigiblenesse, as the amendment thereof, may be beyond what I
am entrusted to do, to any, by Law of God or man, and shall not the Magistrate
here also interpose? is not his assistance here abundantly required and always
granted?

From parity of Reason is it not as due for their protection, who in the
enjoyment of their public religious Rights may receive disturbance, and be
under force, from some, incorrigible by any Rule among themselves. For
instance, suppose, a person justly excommunicated, and ejected any society of
Christians as to any spiritual communion, yet will with outward force and
violence, put himself upon them in their closest acts of communion, doubtless
their Rights, are here to be by power preserved.

3. That whereas the Preachers of the Gospel are now to be maintained in an
ordinary way, and to expect their supportment in an usnall course of
providence, and seeing that many to whom we have proved that the Gospel is to
be declared, by the care of the Magistrate, will not, or cannot make such
provisions for them as is needful, in these last evil days of the world, it
is incumbent on those nursing Fathers, to provide for them, who because of
their continual labors in the work of the Lord, are dis-inabled, to make
provision for themselves. Where Churches are settled according to the Rule of
the Gospel, and not too much straightned by reason of want, there may be an
alteration as to this proposal. That this engagement lies first upon the
Churches, was seen of old; Hence that caution or Canon, of the Council of
Chalcedon, cap. 6. (...), let none be ordained at large: Ne dicatur, mendicat
in palaestra infoelix Clericus, says the Scholiast: lest he should be driven
to beg for want of maintenance.

This being the sum of what as to this head, I have to assert, I shall give
in the proofs of it, and then draw some further Positions.

1. The bottom of the whole, arises from that right which the Gospel has to
be preached to all Nations and people, and that right paramount to all civil
sanctions and constitutions, which every soul has to receive it in the
profession thereof. And all this flows from the donation of the Father unto
Jesus Christ, whereby he is made heir of all things. Hebr. 1. 3. Having the
Nations given him for his inheritance, the utmost parts of the earth for his
possession: Psalm. 2. 8. Being also Lord of lords, and King of kings, acting
nothing in taking possession of his own, but what his sovereignty bears him out
in.

2. All this tends to the apparent good, of those committed to his charge, that
they may lead their lives in godliness and honesty, which is the very chief
end of Magistracy committed unto men. This is directly intended, all other
things come in by accident, and upon suppositions.

3. No person living can pretend to the least injury by this, none is deprived,
none wronged.

4. The precepts given unto them, and the promises made concerning them, do
abundantly confirm all that has been asserted. Psalm. 2. 10, 11. they are
commanded as Kings and Judges to serve the Lord, in promoting the kingdom of
the Lord Jesus Christ. And it is promised, Isa. 49. 23. that they shall be
nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to the Church of Christ, even then, when
she shall suck the breasts of Kings (earthly things are the milk of kingly
breasts) when her officers shall be peace, and her exactors righteousness: Isa.
60. 16, 17. This at least, reaches to all we have ascribed to them. All is but
bowing the knee of Magistracy at the Name of Jesus.

Hence are these Positions.

The providing or granting of places requisite for the performance of that
worship which in the Gospel is instituted, 3. Pos.
is the duty of the Christian Magistrate.

Protection as to peace and quietness, 4 Pos.
in the use of the ordinances, of the Lord Jesus Christ, from violent
disturbers, either from without, or within, is also incumbent on him.

Supportment and provision as to earthly things, 5 Pos.
where regularly failing, is of him required.

And in the neglect of any of these, that takes place, which is threatened, Isa.
60. 12. Two or three consectaries added hereunto, shall close this part of the
Magistrates power, or rather duty about the things of Religion: as,

Positive actings by way of supportment and assistance, Con: 1.
maintenance, allowance of public places, and the like, in the behalf of
persons deviating from the truth, in those things wherein they deviate, is
contrary to the rule of the Word, and duty of them in Authority. For,

Error has neither right, nor promise, nor is any precept given in the behalf
thereof.

The defense and protection of erring persons, Con: 2.
from violence and injury, in those things wherein they have a right, is no
acting of his duty about religious things; but a mere dealing for the
preservation of humane society, by the defense of persons, not acting against
the rules thereof.

Every particular minute difference, Con: 3.
among the professors of the truth, For this cause the Emperors of old still
allowed the Novatians the liberty of worship.
cannot be proved to come under the cognizance of the Magistrate, he being to
attend the worship which for the main is acceptable to God in Christ, neither
do any testimonies extend his duty any further: Hence

Corola: The present differences about Church society, and the subject or seat
of discipline, which are between those dissenters, who are known by the names
of Presbyterians, and Independents, as they are in themselves (not heightened by
the prejudices, lusts, corruptions, and interests of men) hinder not at all,
but that the Magistrate is bound to the performance of the duties before
mentioned unto both parties. And the Reasons of this are, because

1. The things wherein they are agreed, are clearly as broad, as the
Magistrates duty can be stretched to cover them.

2. Neither party (I am persuaded) in their retired thoughts, dare avow the
main of the worship by their dissenters embraced, to be as such, rejected of
the Lord.

3. No example in the world, can be produced out of the old Testament, or New,
or Ecclesiastical History, of a forcible decision of such minute differences.
See Socrat: Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 20.

2. Corol: All the plea of persons erring in doctrine or worship, is not, from
what the Magistrate must do, but from what he may not do.

And this for the first part shall suffice.

Secondly, there is another part of the Magistrates power, the other side of
his sword to be exercised toward the opposition of that truth which he has
embraced: and this has a twofold object.

1. Things. 2. Persons. Things are of 2. sorts: 1. Ways of worship. 2. Outward
Appearances, Monuments, Accommodations and Declarations of those ways. Of the
first, I shall speak afterward.

By the second, I mean, all the outward attendencies of any false or erroneous
worship, which are either helps to, or declarations of the superstition,
idolatry, error, or falsenesse of it; as Temple for idolatrous service,
Crosses, pictures, and the like abused Relics of old unwarranted zeal.

Now concerning these, I affirm.

1. That the Magistrate ought not to make provision of any public places for
the practice of any such worship as he is convinced to be an abomination unto
the Lord. When I say he ought not to make provision, I understand, not only a
not actual caring that such be, but also a caring that such may not be. He
should not have a negation of acting as to any thing of public concernment.
His not opposing, here is providing. For instance; He must not allow, that is,
it is his duty to oppose, the setting apart of public places, under his
protection for the service of the Mass, (as of late in Sommerset House) or for
any kind of worship in it self disallowed, because not required, and so, not
accepted. This were to be bound to help forward sin, and that such sin whereof
he is convinced, which is repugnant to the whole revealed will of God. A
Magistrate, I told you before, is not to act according to what he may do, but
what he must do: Now it cannot be his duty to further sin.

2. Outward monuments, ways of declaring and holding out false and idolatrous
worship, he is to remove: as the Papists Images, Altars, Pictures, and the
like, Turks Mosckes, Prelates Service book. Now these are of two sorts.

1. Such things as in their whole use and nature, serve only for the carrying
on of worship, in it self wholly false, and merely invented. As Altars, Images,
Crosses.

2. Such as were used for the carrying on of worship true in it self, though
vilely corrupted, as praying, and preaching; such are those places commonly
called, Churches.

The first are to be abolished, the latter aright used. (I speak as to public
appearances, for private disquisitions after such things, I may be otherwise
minded.) The Reason of this difference, is evident to all.

Thus in days of old, Constantine shut up Pagans Temples: Eusebius. de vita
Constant. lib. 4. cap. 23, 24. and demolished some of the most filthy of them:
lib. 3. cap. 52. Theodosius utterly cast them to the ground, though not without
some blows and bloodshed. Socrat: Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. ca. 16. The command of
God for the abolishing all monuments of Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 12. 1, 2, 3. with the
commendation of those Kings of Judah who accordingly performed this duty, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. and 30. 14. are enough to confirm it, and to bottom this
Position.

It is the duty of the Magistrate not to allow any public places for (in his
judgment) false and abominable worship, 6 Pos.
as also to demolish all outward appearances and demonstrations of such
superstitions, idolatrous and unacceptable service.

Let Papists who are Idolaters, and Socinians who are Anthropolatrae, plead for
themselves.

Now secondly for persons, there seems something more of difficulty, yet
certain clear rules may be proposed concerning them also, to hold out when they
and their proceedings come under the cognizance of the Civil Magistrate, and
are obnoxious to the sword which he bears. And they are these.

1. Such persons, as having embraced any false principles and persuasion in, or
about things concerning God and his worship, do pursue the upholding or
propagating of such principles, in a disorderly manner to the disturbance of
civil society, are doubtless under his restraining power, to be acted and put
forth in such ways as to other persons, running out into the same, or the like
compass of disorder, upon other grounds, and from the instigation of other
lusts. The pretense of disturbance and confusion upon the bearing with
differences in opinion about things commanded in Religion, we before rejected
as a color fitted chiefly for the waring of persecution. But actual
disturbances indeed, must have actual restraints. For instance; If a man being
persuaded that the power of the Magistrate, is in Christian Religion,
groundless, unwarrantable, unlawful, should thereupon stir up the people to
the abolishing, and removal of that power, such stirrings up, and such actings
upon that instigation, are, as opposite to the Gospel of Christ (which opposes
no lawful regiment among the sons of men) so also prejudicial to humane
society, and therefore to be proceeded against by them who bear not the sword
in vain. This case we know happened once in Germany, and may do so again in
other places. If such as these suffer, it is as murderers, or thieves, or evil
doers, or busybodies in other men's matters; which is a shameful thing, no
way commendable or praise worthy. 1 Pet. 4. 15.

2. If any persons whatsoever, under any pretense whatsoever, shall offer
violence or disturbance to the professors of the true worship of God, so owned,
established, and confirmed as above said, in, and for the profession of that
true, so owned worship, service and declaration of the mind of God, such
persons are to fear that power, which is the minister of God, and a revenger
to them that do evil. Let us suppose of them, what they suppose, and for their
own justification and support in irregular ways, bear out of themselves, that
they enjoy the truth, others walking in paths of their own; yet then, this
practice is contrary to that prime dictate of nature, which none can pretend
ignorance of, viz: Do not that to another, which thou would not have done
unto thy self; If men that would not think it equitable to be so dealt with, as
they deal with others, supposing themselves in their conditions, do yet so deal
with them, they are (...), and do pronounce sentence against themselves, out of
their own mouths. This then deserves punishment, and breaking out to the
disturbance of public order, ought to be punished. We before proved the
protection of public places to belong to the Magistrate: so that he not only
may, but if he will not be false to him by whom he is entrusted, he must put
forth his Authority for the safe guarding and revenging of them. Yea also and
this rule may pass, when some things in the way publicly established, are
truly offensive. What the ancient Christians thought of the zeal of Audas a
Christian Bishop, who would needs demolish a Pagan Temple in Persia, I know
not, but I am sure his discretion is not much extolled, who by that one fiery
act of destroying (...), or Temple of slain, occasioned a cruel persecution of
30. years continuance. Theod. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 139.

3. When any have entertained any singular opinion, in matters of great weight
and importance, such as nearly concern the glory of God, and the minds of
Christians in reverence of his holy name, are most tenderly affected withal,
so that without much horror of mind, they can scarce hear those errors,
whereby those grand truths are opposed, yet those persons, who have entertained
such uncouth opinions, shall not be content, so to have done, and also in all
lawful ways (as to civil society) endeavored to propagate the said opinions
to others, but in the pursuit of this their design of opposing truth, shall
publicly use such expressions, or perform such acts, as are fit to power
contempt and scorn upon the truth which they do oppose, reviling it also, or
God himself so represented, as he is in the truth they abominate, with odious
and execrable appellations, (as for instance, the calling the holy Trinity,
Tricipitem Cerberum) if the ^uestion be put, whether in this case the
Magistrate be not obliged to vindicate the honor of God, by corporal
restraints, in some degrees at least upon the persons of those men, truly for
my part, I incline to the affirmative. And the Reason hereof is this; Though
men, through the incurable blindness of their minds, falling into error of
judgment, and mis-interpretation of the Word, may dis-beleeve the Deity of
Christ, and the holy Spirit, yet that any pretense from the Word, persuasion of
conscience, or dictate of Religion, should carry them out to reviling
opprobrious speeches of that, which of God* is held out contrary to their
apprehensions, is false and remote from Reason it self. For this cause Paul
says he was a blasphemer, not because being a Jew, he dis-beleeved the Gospel,
but because so dis-beleeving it, he moreover loaded the truths thereof, with
contumelious reproaches. Such expressions indeed differ not from those piercing
words of the holy name of God which he censured to death: Levit. 24. 15. but
only in this, that there seems in that to be a plain opposition unto light,
in this not so. The like may be said of a Jew's crucifying a dog.

4. There are a sort of persons termed in Scripture, (...), 1 These. 5. 14.
(...), Act. 17. 5. (...), 2 These. 3. 2. (...), 1 Timothy 1. 9. and the like,
disorderly; vagabond, wandering, irregular persons, fixed to no calling, abiding
in no place, taking no care of their families, that under a pretense of
teaching the truth, without mission, without call, without warrant,
uncommanded, undesired, do go up and down, from place to place, creeping into
houses, etc. Now that such ways as these, and persons in these ways, may be
judicially inquired into, I no way doubt. The story is famous of Sesostris King
of Egypt, who made a Law, that all the Subjects of his kingdom, should once a
year give an account of their way and manner of living, and if any one were
found to spend his time idly, he was certainly punished; and the Laws of most
Nations have provided that their people shall not be wanderers, and whosoever
has not a place of abode, and employment, is by them a punishable vagabond.
And in this by much experience of the ways, walking and converse of such
persons, I am exceedingly confirmed in. I did as yet never observe any other
issue upon such undertakings, but scandal to Religion, and trouble to men in
their civil relations.

5. When men by the practice of any vice or sin, draw others to a pretended
Religion, or by pretense of Religion draw men to any vice or known sin, let
them be twice punished, for their real vice, and pretended Religion. The truth
is, I have been taught exceedingly to dis-beleeve all the strange imputations
of wickedness and uncleanness, that are imposed upon many, to be either the
end or the medium of the practice of that communion in Religion which they do
profess and embrace: I remember that when I was a boy, all those stories were
told me of Brownists and Puritans, which afterward, I found it to have been
long before, the forgeries of Pagans, and imposed on the primitive Christians.
I dare boldly say I have heard stories of them an hundred times, holding out
that very thing, and those deeds of darkness, which Minutius Felix holds out
in the tongue of an Infidel concerning the Christians of those days; but yet
because sundry venerable persons to whom Antiquity has given sanctuary from
being arraigned in the point of false testimony, have left it upon record of
sundry Heretics in their days, as the ( Gnostics and others) that they were
conjoined into societies tessera pollutionis, and some assert that the like
iniquities are not wholly buried, I made the supposition, and hope that if they
depose themselves from common sense and reason, the Magistrate will never exalt
them to the privilege and exemption of Religion.

In these, and such like eases as these, when men shall break forth into
disturbance of common order and enormities against the light of nature, beyond
all positive command of any pretended Religion whatsoever, that the Magistrate
ought to set hedges of thorns in their ways, sharpened according to their
several delinquencies; I suppose no man not abhord of common sense, can once
hesitate or doubt. And I am the more inclined to assert a restraint to all such
as these, because it may be established to the height, without the least
prejudice unto the truth, though persons erring should enjoy the place of
authority.

That which now remains in this head, to be considered, is concerning persons
maintaining and upholding any great and pernicious errors, but in such ways,
as are not by any of the former disorders to be brought under the cognizance of
the Civil Magistrate, but good, honest, allowable, and peaceable in
themselves, not at all to be questioned, but in reference to the things that
are carried on, -- in and by those ways; as communication by discourse, and
private preaching, and the like. Now concerning these, it is generally
affirmed, that persons maintaining any error in or against any fundamental
Article of faith, or Religion, and that with obstinacy or pertinacie, after
conviction, ought to be proceeded against, by the authority of the civil
Magistrate, whether unto death or banishment, imprisonment or confiscation of
goods.

Now unto this, supposing, what I have written heretofore, concerning the
incompetency of all, and the non-constitution of any Judge in this case, with
the Answers -- given at the beginning of this Treatise, to the most of the
places, produced usually for the affirmative, reserving the consideration of
pressing conformity to the next head, to be handled: I shall briefly give in my
thoughts: and,

1. That I cannot but observe, that in the question it self, there are sundry
things, gratis assumed: as,

1. That it is known and confessed, what Articles in Religion are fundamental;
and this also to the Magistrate: when no one thing among Christians is more
questionable; most accounting them so, (be they what they will) wherein they
differ from others. So that one way or other, all dissenters shall be hooked
in, directly or indirectly to clash upon fundamentals. In this, Papists are
secure, who make the Churches Propositions sufficient to make an Article
fundamental.

2. That the persons holding the error are convinced, when perhaps they have
been only confuted: between which two there is a wide difference; he that
holds the truth may be confuted, but a man cannot be convinced but by the
truth. That a man should be said to be convinced of a truth, and yet that truth
not shine in upon his understanding, to the expelling of the contrary error, to
me is strange. To be convinced, is to be over-powred by the evidence of that,
which before a man knew not; I my self, once knew a Scholar invited to a
Dispute with another man, about something in controversy in Religion; in his
own, and in the judgment of all the bystanders the opposing person was
utterly confuted: and yet the Scholar within a few months, taught of God, and
clearly convinced, that it was an error which he had maintained, and the truth
which he opposed. And then, and not till then, did he cease to wonder, that the
other person was not convinced by his strong Arguments, as before he had
thought. May not a Protestant be really worsted in a Dispute by a Papist? has
it not so ere now fallen out? If not, the Jesuits are egregious liars. To say
a man is convinced, when either for want of skill, and ability, or the like, he
cannot maintain his opinion, to, and against, all men, is mere conceit. The
truth is, I am so far from this morose severitie of looking upon all erring
persons as convinced, that have been confuted, that I rather in charity incline
to believe, that no erring person whilst he continues in his error, is
convinced. It will not easily enter into my dull apprehension, how a man can be
convinced of an error (that is enlightened with a contrary truth) and yet hold
that error still: I am loath to charge more corrupt and vile affections upon
any, then do openly appear; That of Paul affirming that some men are
self-condemned, is quite of another nature: I think a person is said to be
convinced, not when there is a sufficiency in the means of conviction, but when
there is such an efficacy in them, as to lay hold upon his understanding.

5. That they are obstinate and pertinacious is also a cheap supposall, taken
up without the price of a proof. What we call obstinacy, they call constancy:
and what we condemn them for, as pertinacy, they embrace as perseverance: as
the conviction is imposed, not owned, so is this obstinacy, if we may be judges
of other men's obstinacy, all will be plain: but if ever they get uppermost,
they will be judges of ours: Besides, I know not what good it will do us, or
how it will advantage our cause, to suppose men obstinate and convinced before
we punish them: no such qualifications being any where in the book of God urged
in persons deserving punishment: if they have committed the crime, whereunto
the penalty is annexed, be they obstinate or not, they shall be punished.

But now supposing all this, that we are clear in all fundamentals that we are
convinced, that they are convinced, and doubt not but that they are obstinate,
if they keep themselves in the former bounds, what is to be done? I say,
besides what we spoke at the entrance of this discourse, I shall as to any
ways of corporal coaction and restraint, oppose some few things.

1. The non-constitution of a Judge in case of heresy, as a thing civilly
criminal. As to spiritual censures and an Ecclesiastical judgment of
errors, and false doctrines, we find them appointed, and a lawful Judge as to
the determining concerning them, divinely instituted: so that in such ways,
they may be warrantably proceeded against. Revel. 21. 3. But now, for any Judge
that should make disquisition concerning them, or proceed against them as
things criminal, to be punished with civil censures, I conceive the Scripture
is silent: And indeed, who should it be? The custom of former ages was, that
some persons of one sort, should determine of it as to right, viz: that such or
such a thing, was heresy, and such or such a one, an Heretic, (which was the
work of Priests and Prelates) and persons of another sort, should de facto
punish, and determine to be punished, those, so adjudged by the former: and
these were as they called them the secular Magistrates, officers of this world.
And indeed, had not the God of this world blinded their eyes, and the God of
the spirits of all flesh hardened their hearts, they would not have so given up
their power, to the Man of sin as to be made so sordidly isntrumental to his
bloody cruelty: We read Jer. 26. 10, 11. that the Priests and Prophets assemble
themselves in judgment, and so pronounce sentence upon the Prophet Jeremy that
he should dye for a false Prophet, v. 12. Jeremy makes his appeal to the
secular Magistrate and all the people, who taking cognizance of the cause,
pronounce sentence in the behalf of the condemned person, against the Priests
and Prophets, and deliver him whether they will or not, v. 16. I spare the
Application of the story: but that Princes and Magistrates should without
cognizance of the thing, or cause, proceed to punishment or censure of it, upon
the judgment of the Priests, condemning such or such a man for an heretic, or
a false prophet, blessed be the Lord, we have no warrant: Had this proceeding
been regular, Jeremy had dyed without mercy for a false prophet, as thousands
since, standing before the Lord in his spirit have done. This course then, that
the civil Magistrate should proceed to sentence of corporal punishment, upon
others judging of the fault, is vile, sordid, unwarrantable, and exceedingly
unworthy of any rational man, much more such as are set over the people of the
Land: that the same persons must determine of the cause, and appoint the
punishment is clear: Now who must these be? are they the Ministers of the
Gospel? of all others, they are the most likely to be the most competent Judges
in spiritual causes: let it then be so; but then also, they must be the
determiners and inflicters of the punishment upon default: now let them power
out upon obstinately erring persons, all the vengeance, that God has betrusted
them withal. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, etc. By this course, Admonition, Avoiding, Rejection, Excommunication,
will be the utmost that can be inflicted on them: which for my part I desire
may be exercised to the utmost extent of the rule. Of Judgments.
2ly, shall the Magistrate be made Judge of the cause, as well as of the
person? is he entrusted to determine, what is error, what not; what heresy,
what not; who is an Heretic, who not; and so what punishment is due to such,
and such errors, according to the degrees, wherein they are? Why first, I
desire an institution of this ordinance in the Church? where is the Magistrate
entrusted with such a power? where are rules prescribed to him, in his
proceedings? 2ly, is not a judiciary determination concerning truth and error
(I mean truths of the Gospel) a mere Chruch act? and that Church power, whereby
it is effected? must not then the Magistrate qua talis be a Church officer?
will men of this mind, tolerate Erastianisme? 3ly, if there be a twofold
judicature appointed for the same person, for the same crime, is it not because
one crime may in diverse respects fall under several considerations? and must
not these considerations be preserved immixed, that the formal reason of
proceeding in one Court, may not be of any weight in the other? We proved
before, and it is granted of all, that the Church is Judge in case of heresy
and error, as such, to proceed against them, as contrary to the Gospel; their
opposition to the faith delivered to the Saints, is the formal reason upon
which that proceeds to censure: if now this be afterward brought under
another sentence, of another Judicature, must it not be under another
consideration? Now what can this be, but its disturbance of civil society,
which when it does so, not in pretense, but really and actually, none denies it
to be the Magistrates duty to interpose with his power. 4ly, if the Magistrate
be Judge of spiritual offenses, and it be left to him to determine, and
execute judgment in such proportion, as he shall think meet according to the
quality and degrees thereof; it is a very strange and unlimited arbitrarinesse
over the lives and estates of men: and surely they ought to produce very clear
testimonies, that they are entrusted from the Lord herewith, or they can have
no great quiet in acting. 5ly, it seems strange to me, that the Lord Jesus
Christ should commit this Architechtonicall power in his house, unto
Magistrates, foreseeing of what sort the greatest number of them would be, yea
determining that they should be such, for the trial and affliction of his own.
View the times that are past, consult the stories of former ages, take a
catalogue of the Kings and Rulers that have been, since first Magistrates
outwardly embraced Christian Religion in this, and other Nations, where the
Gospel has been planted, and ask your own consciences whether these be the
men, to whom this high trust in the house of God is committed. The truth is,
they no sooner left serving the Dragon in the persecution of the Pagans, but
presently in a very few years, they gave up their power to the beast, to set up
another State in opposition to the Lord Jesus Christ and his Gospel: in the
supportment whereof, the most of them continue laboring till this very day.
Hae manus Trojam exigent? What may be added in this case, I refer to another
opportunity.

2. Gospel constitutions in the case of heresy or error, seems not to favor
any course of violence; I mean of civil penalties. Foretold it is, that
heresies must be, 1 Cor. 11. 19. but this, for the manifesting of those that
are approved, not the destroying of those that are not; I say destroying, I
mean with temporal punishment, that I may add this by the way; for all the
arguments produced for the punishment of heretics, holding out capital
censures, and these being the tendance of all beginnings in this kind, I
mention only the greatest, including all other arbitrary penalties, being but
steps of walking to the utmost censures. Admonitions, and Excommunication upon
rejection of admonition, are the highest constitutions (I suppose) against such
persons: Waiting with all patience upon them that oppose themselves, if at any
time God will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth:
imprisoning, banishing, slaying is scarcely a patient waiting; God does not so
wait upon unbeleevers. Perhaps those, who call for the sword on earth are as
unacquainted with their own spirits, as those that called for fire from heaven,
Luke 11. And perhaps the parable of the tares gives in a positive rule as to
this whole business: occasion may be given of handling it at large: for the
present I shall not fear to assert, that the answers unto it, borrowed by our
Divines from Bellarmine, will not endure the trial: we hope that spiritual
quiet, and inoffensivenesse in the whole mountain of the Lord, which is wrapped
up in the womb of many promises, will at length be brought forth to the joy of
all the children of Sion.

3. Sundry other arguments taken from the nature of faith, heresy, liberty of
Conscience, the way of illumination, means of communication of truth, nature of
spiritual things, pravitious tendence of the doctrine opposed, if it should be
actually embraced by all enjoying authority, and the like; I thought at present
to have added, but I am gone already beyond my purposed resting place.

Come we in a few words to the last thing proposed (wherein I shall be very
brief, the main of what I intended, being already set down) the power of the
Magistrate to compel others, to the embracing of that Religion and way of
worship, which he shall establish and set up, which for the greater advantage
we shall suppose to be the very same, both for the things proposed to be
believed, and also practiced, which God himself has revealed, and requires
all men every where to embrace. What is to be done, for the settling and
establishing of the profession of the Gospel, and the right apprehension of the
mind of God therein, contra-distinct from all those false and erroneous
persuasions, which in these, or former days are, or have been held forth in
opposition thereunto, was before declared; how it is to be supported,
maintained, protected, defended, safe-guarded, from all oppositions,
disturbances, blasphemings, was then, and there set down.

Now supposing, that sundry persons living under the power and owning civil
obedience to the Magistrate, will not consent to sound doctrine, nor receive,
in some things, ( fewer or more, less, or greater), that form of wholesome
words, which he holds forth, and owns as the mind of Christ in the Gospel, nor
communicate with him, in the worship, which by the Authority of those words, or
that truth, he has as before established, it is inquired what is the duty of
the Magistrate in reference to the bringing of them into that subjection which
is due unto, and acknowledgement of, the truth; And to this I shall briefly
give in my Answer in these following Positions.

1. In reference unto us, in this Nation, the greatest difficulty in giving a
full return to this question, arises from the great disorder of the Churches
of God amongst us: were the precious* distinguished from the vile, Churches
rightly established, and Church discipline exercised, that Christians were
under some orderly view, and men might be confidered, in their several
capacities wherein they stand, an easy finger would unty the knot of this
quaere; but being in that confusion, wherein we are, gathering into any order
being the great work in hand, I suppose under favor, that the time is scarce
come, for the proposal of this question: but yet something may be given in
unto it though not so clear, as the former supposall being effected, would
cause it to be.

2. The constant practice of the Churches in former ages, in all their meetings
for advise and counsel, to consent into some form of wholesome words, that
might be a discriminating tessera of their communion in doctrine, being used in
prime Antiquity, as is manifest in that ancient Symbol commonly esteemed
Apostolical, of the chief heads whereof mention in the like Summary is made in
the very first writers among them, having also warrant from the Word of God,
and being of singular use to hold out unto all other Churches of the world, our
apprehensions of the mind of God, in the chief heads of Religion) may be
considered: If this be done by the authority of the Magistrate, I mean if such
a declaration of the truth, wherein the Churches by him owned and protected, do
consent, be held out as the confession of that truth which he embraces, it
will be of singular use unto, yea indeed must necessarily precede any
determination of the former question: of the nature and use of confessions,
etc. so much has of late been learnedly disputed, that I shall not power out
any of mine own conceptions for the present about them, in that hasty
tumultuary manner, wherein I am enforced to expose this essay.

3. Those who dissent from the truth so owned, so established, so decreed, do
so, either in less matters of small consequence,, and about things, generally
confessed not fundamental, or in great and more weighty heads of doctrine,
acts of worship, and the like: both agreeing in this, that they will not hold
communion as either to all, or some parts and duties thereof, which those
Churches and persons who do embrace the truth, so owned, as before, and act
accordingly.

For the first of these, or such as dissent about things of no great
concernment in comparison of those other things wherein they do agree, with
them, from whom they do dissent, I am bold positively to assert, that, saving
and preserving the Rules and qualifications set down under the second head, the
Magistrate has no warrant from the Word of God, nor command, rule, or precept
to enable him, to force such persons to submit unto the truth as by him
established, in those things, wherein they express a conscientious dissent, or
to molest them with any civil penalty in case of refusal or non-submission:
nor yet did I ever in my life meet with any thing in the shape of Reason to
prove it, although the great present clamor of this Nation, is punctually as to
this head: what ever be pretended, this is the Helena about which is the great
contest.

What I pray will warrant him then to proceed?

Will the Laws against Idolatry and Blasphemy? with their sanctions toward the
persons of blasphemers, and idolaters (for I must ingenuously confess, all
that which in my poor judgment looks with any appearance, of pressing toward
Haereticidium, is the everlasting equity of those judicial Laws: and the
Arbitrarinesse of Magistrates, from a divine rule in things of the greatest
concernment, to the glory of God if free from them) and that these Laws I doubt
will scarcely be accommodated unto any thing under contest now in this age of
the world among Christians) but shall I say, a warrant taken from hence for the
compelling of men, sound in so many fundamentals, as were it not for the
contest with them, we would acknowledge sufficient for the entertainment of the
Lord Jesus in their bosoms, to subject to, and close with, the things contrary
to their present light and apprehension, (though under a promise of being
taught of God) or to inflict penalties upon a refusal so to do? Credat Apella.

Shall the examples of extraordinary judgments upon Idolaters, false Prophets,
by sword and fire from heaven, (on Magitians, Apostates, and the like) be here
produced? Though such arguments as these have made thousands weep tears of
blood, yet the consequence in reason, cannot but provoke laughter to all men
not wholly forsaken of directing principles.

What then shall be done, Qu:
they will say? they have been admonished, rebuked, convinced, must they now be
let alone?

Something as to this I shall add, Ans:
in the close of this discourse; for the present let learned Whitaker answer
for me: and first, to the first, of their being confuted. Possunt quidem
controversiae ad externum forum deferri, and ibi desiniri: sed conscientia in
eo foro non acquiescit, non enim potest conscientia sedari sine Spiritu sancto.
Let controversies (says he) be determined how you please, until the
conscience be quieted by the holy Spirit, there will be little peace. Unto
which I shall not add any thing, considering what I said before of conviction:
and to the latter of letting them alone, to their own ways. Ecclesiae quidem
optatius est levibus quibusdam dissensionibus ad tempus agitari, quam in
perfida pace acquiescere; non ergo sufficit aliquo modo pacem conservari nisi
illam esse sanctam pacem constiterint: Whit: con: 4. de Rom: Pont: qu: 1. cap.
1. sec: 2. Better some trouble, then a perfidious, compelled peace: see him
handle this more at large, with some excellent conclusions to this purpose.
Con: 4. de Romans Pont. q. 1. cap. 1. s. 19. pa. 48. and 50.

For these then, (and under this head I compare all such persons as keeping in
practice within the bonds before laid forth, do so far forth hold the
foundation, as that neither by believing what is not, or dis-beleeving what
indeed is, they do take in, or keep off, any such thing as wherewithal being
embraced, or without which, being rejected, the life of Christ cannot in any
case possibly consist, nor salvation by him be obtained) as the Magistrate is
not bound by any rule or precept to assist and maintain them, in the practice
of those things, wherein they dissent from the truth, so he is bound, to
protect them in peace and quietness in the enjoyment of all civil rights and
liberties; nor has he either warrant, or allowance, to proceed against them,
as to the least penalty for their dissent in those things, they cannot receive.
Attempts for uniformity among Saints, or such as for ought we can conclude,
either from their opinions or practices may be so, by external force are
purely Antichristian.

Now for those that stand at a greater distance from the publicly owned and
declared truths, such as before we spoke of, the orderly way of dealing with
such, is in the first place to bring them off from the error of the way, which
they have embraced: and until that be done, all thoughts of drawing in their
assent to that, from which at such a distance they stand, is vain and
bootlesse. Now what course is to be taken for the effecting of this? spiritual
ways of healing are known to all, let them be used, and in case they prove
fruitless, for ought that yet I can perceive, the person of men so erring must
be left in the state and condition we described under the second head.

And now to drive on this business any further by way of contest I will not;
my intention at the beginning, was only positively to assert, and to give in
briefly the scripturall and rational bottoms, and proofs of those assertions;
wherein I have gone aside, to pull, or thrust a line of debate, I have
transgressed against my own purpose; I hope it will be pardoned: though I am
heartily desirous any thing which passes my pen, may be brought to the test,
and my self reduced where I have gone amiss, yet my spirit faints within me,
to think of that way of handling things in Controversy, which some men by
reciprocation of answers, and replies have wound themselves into Bolsecte, and
Staphylus, and Stapleton seem to live again, and much gall from beneath to be
powered into men's ink. Oh the deep wounds, the Gospel has received by the
mutual keen invectives of learned men: I hope the Lord will preserve me, from
being engaged with any man of such a frame of spirit: what has been asserted
may easily be cast up in a few Positions, the intelligent Reader will quickly
discern what is aimed at, and what I have stood to avow.

If what is proposed, be not satisfactory, I humbly offer to the Honorable
Parliament, that a certain number of learned men, who are differently minded as
to this business of Toleration, which almost every where is spoken against,
may be desired and required to a fair debate of the matter in difference,
before their own Assembly, that so, if it be possible, some light may be given
to the determination of this thing of so great concernment, in the judgments
of all men, both on the one side and on the other, that so they may try all
things, and hold fast that which is good.

Corol: That Magistrates have nothing to do, in matters of Religion, (as some
unadvisedly affirm) is exceedingly wide from the truth of the thing it self.

2. Corporal punishments for simple error, were found out to help build the
tower of Babell:

Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.

