OF SCHISM The True Nature of it Discovered and Considered, With Reference to
the present Differences in Religion.

By JOHN OWEN D. D.

OXFORD, Printed by L. L. for T. ROBINSON, Anno Dom. M.DC.L.VII.

OF SCHISM.
CAP. I.
Aggravations of the Evil of Shisme, from the Authority of the Ancients. Their
incompetency to determine in this case; instanced in the sayings of Austine and
Hierome. The saying of Aristides. Judgment of the Ancients subjected to
disquisition. Some men's Advantage in charging others with Schism. The Actors
part privileged. The Romanists interest herein. The charge of Schism not to
be despised. The iniquity of Accusers justifys not the Accused. Several
Persons charged with Schism on several accounts. The design of this
discourse in reference to them. Justification of differences unpleasant.
Attempts for peace and reconciliation considered. Several persuasions
hereabouts, and endeavors of men to that End. Their Issues.

IT is the manner of men of all persuasions,. 1.
who undertake to treat of Schism, to make their entrance with Invectives
against the evils thereof, with aggravations of its heinousness. All men
whether intending the Charge of others, or their own acquitment, esteem
themselves concerned so to do. Sentences out of the Fathers, and
determinations of Schoolmen, making it the greatest sin imaginable, are
usually produced to this purpose. A course this is which men's Apprehensions
have rendered useful, and the state of things in former days easy. Indeed
whole volumes of the Ancients, written when they were Actors in this Cause,
charging others with the guilt of it, and consequently with the vehemence of
men, contending for that, wherein their own interest lay, might (if it were to
our purpose) be transcribed to this end. But as they had the happiness to deal
with men evidently guilty of many miscarriages, and for the most part absurd ad
foolish, so many of them having fallen upon such a notion of the Catholic
Church and Schism, as has given occasion to many woeful mistakes, and much
darkness in the following Ages, I cannot so easily give up the nature of this
evil to their determination and judgment. About the aggravations of its
sinfullnesse I shall not contend. 2.


The evidence which remains of an indulgence in the best of them, (...) in
this business especially, deters from that procedure. From what other
principle were those words of Augustine; Obscurius dixerunt Prophetae de
Christo qua^ de Ecclesia: puto propterea quia videbant in spiritu contra
Ecclesiam homines facturos esse particulas: Et de Christo non tantam litem
habitutos, de Ecclesia magnas contentiones excitaturos. Conc. 2. ad Psalm. 30.
Neither the Affirmation it self, nor the reason assigned can have any better
root. Is any thing more clearly and fully prophesied on then Christ? Or was it
possible that good men should forget with what contests the whole Church of God
all the World over had been exercised from its infancy about the Person of
Christ? Shall the tumultuating of a few in a corner of Africa, blot out the
remembrance of the late diffus^on of Arrianisme over the world? But Hierom has
given a Rule for the interpretation of what they delivered in their polemicall
engagements; telling us plainly in his Apology for himself to Pammachius,
That he had not so much regarded what was exactly to be spoken in the
Controversy he had in hand, as what was fit to lay load upon Jovinian. And if
we may believe him, this was the manner of all men in those days. If they were
engaged they did not what the truth only, but what the defense of their cause
also required. Though I believe him not as to all he mentions, yet doubtless
we may say to many of them, as the Apostle in another case; (...). Though
Aristides obtained the name of just, for his uprightness in the management of
his own private affairs yet being engaged in the Administration of those of
the Commonwealth, he did many things professedly unjust; giving this Reason,
he did them (...).

Besides,. 3.
the Age wherein we live, having by virtue of that precept of our Savior, Call
no man Master, in a good measure freed it self from the bondage of subjection
to the dictates of men (and the innumerable evils with endless intanglements
thence ensuing) because they lived so many hundreds of years before us; that
course of procedure, though reteining its facility, has lost its usefullnesse,
and is confessedly impertinent. What the Scripture expressly says of this
sin, and what from that it says, may regularly and rationally be deduced
(whereunto we stand and fall,) shall be afterward declared. And what is spoken
suitably thereunto by any of Old, or of Late, shall be cheerfully also
received. But it may not be expected that I should build upon their Authority,
whose principles I shall be necessitated to examine. And I am therefore
contented to lie low, as to any expectation of success in my present
undertaking, because I have the prejudice of many Ages, the interest of most
Christians, and the mutual consent of Parties at variance (which commonly is
taken for an unquestionable evidence of truth) to contend withal. But my
endeavors being to go, non qua itur, sed qua eundum est, I am not sollicitous
about the event.

In dealing about this business among Christians,. 4.
the Advantage has been extremely hitherto on their part, who found it their
interest to begin the charge. For whereas perhaps themselves were, and are of
all men most guilty of the Crime, yet by their clamarous Accusation, putting
others upon the defense of themselves, they have in a manner clearly escaped
from the trial of their own guilt, and cast the issue of the Question purely
on them, whom they have accused. The Actors or Complainants part was so
privileged by some Laws and Customs, that he who had desperately wounded
another, chose rather to enter against him the frivolous plea, that he received
not his whole Sword into his body, then to stand to his best defense, on the
complaint of the wounded man. An accusation managed with the craft of men
guilty, and a confidence becoming men wronged and innocent, is not every ones
work to slight and wave. And he is in ordinary judgments immediately
acquitted, who averrs that his charge is but recrimination. What advantage the
Romanists have had on this account, how they have expatiated in the aggravation
of the sin of Schism, whilst they have kept others on the defense, and would
feign make the only thing in Question to be, whether they are guilty of it or
no, is known to all. And therefore ever since they have been convinced of their
disability to debate the things in difference between them and us, unto any
advantage, from the Scripture, they have almost wholly insisted on this one
business, wherein they would have it wisely thought, that our concernment only
comes to the trial, knowing that in these things their defense is weak, who
have nothing else. Nor do they need any other Advantage. For if any party of
men can estate themselves at large in all the privileges granted and promises
made to the Church in general, they need not be sollicitous about dealing with
them that oppose them; having at once rendered them no better then Jews Solis
nosse Deos and Coeli numina nobis and Mahumetans, -- out solis neseire datum.
Heathens or Publicans, by appropriating the Privileges mentioned unto
themselves. And whereas the parties litigant, by all rules of Law and Equity,
ought to stand under an equal regard, until the severalls of their
differences have been heard and stated; one party is hereby utterly condemned
before it is heard: and it is all one unto them, whether they are in the right
or wrong. But we may possibly in the issue state it upon another foot of
account.

In the mean time it cannot be denied,. 5.
but that their vigorous adhearing to the advantage, which they have made to
themselves (a thing to be expected from men wise in in their Generation) has
exposed some of them, whom they have wrongfully accused, to a contrary evil;
whilst in a sense of their own innocence, they have insensibly slipped (as is the
manner of men) into slight and contemptible thoughts of the thing it self
whereof they are accused. Where the thing in question is but a name or term of
reproach, invented amongst men, this is incomparably the best way of defense.
But this contains a crime; and no man is to set light by it. To live in
Schism, is to live in Sin; which unrepented of, will ruin a man's Eternal
condition; Every one charged with it must either desert his station, which
gives foundation to his charge, or acquit himself of the crime, in that
station. This latter is that, which in reference to my self, and others, I do
propose: assenting in the gross to all the Aggravations of this sin, that
with any pretense from Scripture or Reason are heaped on it.

And I would beg of men fearing God,. 6.
that they would not think, that the iniquity of their Accusers does in the
least extenuate the crime whereof they are accused. Schism is Schism still,
though they may be unjustly charged with it; and he that will defend and
satisfy himself by prejudices against them, with whom he has to do, though
he may be no Schismatic, yet if he were so, it is certain he would justifye
himself in his state and condition. Seeing men on false grounds and self
interest may yet sometimes manage a good cause, which perhaps they have
embraced upon better principles, A conscientious tenderness and fear of being
mistaken, will drive this business to another issue. Blessed is he who fears
always.

It is well known how things stand with us in this world;. 7.
as we are Protestants we are accused by the Papists to be Schismatics. And
all other pleas, and disputes neglected, this is that which at present (as is
evident from their many late Treatises on this subject, full of their wonted
confidence, contempt, reviling, and scurrility) is chiefly insisted on by them.

Farther,. 8.
among Protestants; as being Reformatists, or as they call us Calvinists, we
are condemned for Schismatics by the Lutherans and Sacramentarian Sectarys,
for no other crime in the world, but because we submit not to all they teach;
for in no instituted Church Relation would they ever admit us to stand with
them; which is as considerable an instance of the power of prejudice, as this
Age can give. We are condemned for separation, by them who refuse to admit us
into Union. But what has not an irrational attempt of enthroning opinions put
men upon?

The differences nearer home about Episcopal government,. 9.
with the matter of fact, in the rejecting of it, and somewhat of the external
way of the worship of God, formerly used amongst us, has given occasion to a
new charge of the guilt of the same crime on some; as it is not to be supposed,
that wise and able men, suffering to a great Extremity, will oversee or omit
any thing, from whence they may hope to prevail themselves against those, by
whose means they think they suffer. It cannot be helped (the engagement being
past) but this account must be carried on one step farther. Amongst them who in
these late days have engaged (as they profess) into Reformation (and not to
believe that to have been their intention is fit only for them, who are
concerned, that it should be thought to be otherwise, whose prejudice may
furnish them with a contrary persuasion) not walking all in the same light as
to some few particulars, whilst each party (as the manner is) gathered together
what they thought conduced to the furtherance and improvement of the way,
wherein they differed one from another, some unhappyly to the heightening of
the differences, took up this charge of Schism against their brethren; which
yet in a small process of time, being almost sunk of it self, will ask the
less pains utterly to remove and take off. In the mean time, it is amongst
other things (which is to be confessed) an evidence that we are not yet arrived
at that inward frame of spirit, which was aimed at Phil. 3. 15, 16. whatever we
have attained as to the outward Administration of Ordinances.

This being the state of things,. 10.
the concernment of some of us, lying in all the particulars mentioned, of all
Protestants in some, it may be worth while to consider, whether there be not
general principles of irrefragable evidence, whereon both all and some may be
acquitted from their several concernments in this charge, and the whole guilt
of this crime put into the Ephah, and carried to build it an house in the Land
of Shinar, to establish upon its own base.

I confess I would rather,. 11.
much rather, spend all my time and days in making up and healing the breaches
and Schisms that are amongst Christians, then one hour in justifying our
divisions, even therein, wherein on the one side they are capable of a fair
defense. But who is sufficient for such an attempt? The closing of differences
amongst Christians is like opening the Book in the Revelation: there is none
able or worthy to do it in Heaven or in Earth, but the Lamb: When he will put
forth the greatness of his power for it, it shall be accomplished, and not
before. In the mean time a Reconciliation amongst all Protestants is our duty,
and practicable; and had perhaps ere this been in some forwardness of
accomplishment, had men rightly understood, wherein such a Reconciliation
according to the mind of God does consist. When men have labored as much in
the improvement of the Principle of forbearance, as they have done to subdue
other men to their opinions, Religion will have another appearance in the world.

I have considered and endeavored,. 12.
to search into the bottom of the two general ways, fixed on respectively by
sundry Persons for the compassing of peace, and union among Christians, but in
one nation, with the issue and success of them in several places: namely,
that of enforcing uniformity by a secular power on the one side, as was the
case in this Nation not many years ago, (and is yet liked by the most,) being
a suitable judgemement for the most,) and that of Toleration on the other,
which is our present condition. Concerning them both I dare say; that though
men of a good zeal, and small Experience, or otherwise on any account full of
their own Apprehensions, may promise to themselves much of peace, Union, and
Love, from the one or the other, (as they may be severally favored by men of
different interests in this world, in respect of their conducinges to their
ends,) yet that a little Observation of Events, if they are not able to
consider the causes of things, with the light and posture of the minds of men
in this Generation, will unburden them of the trouble of their expectations. It
is something else, that must give peace unto Christians, then what is a product
of the prudentiall considerations of men.

This I shall only add as to the former of these,. 13.
of enforcing Uniformity; as it has lost its reputation of giving temporal
tranquillity to States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths (which with some is only
valuable, whatever became of the souls of men, forced to the profession of
that, which they did not believe) the readiest means in the world to root out
all Religion from the hearts of men) the letters of which plea are in most
Nations in Europe washed out with rivers of blood, (and the residue wait their
season for the same issue) so it continues in the possession of this advantage
against the other, that it sees, and openly complains of the evil, and
dangerous consequences of it; when against its own, where it prevails, it
suffers no complaints to lie. As it is ludicrously said of Physicians, the
Effects of their skill lie in the Sun, but their mistakes are covered in the
Churchyard: So is it with this persuasion; what it does well, whilst it
prevails, is evident: the anxiety of Conscience in some, hypocrisy,
formality, no better then Atheism in others, wherewith it is attended, are
buried out of sight.

But as I have some while since ceased to be moved by the clamours of men,. 14.
concerning bloody persecution on the one hand, and cursed, intolerable
toleration on the other, by finding all the world over, that Events and
Executions follow not the Conscientious embracing of the one or other of these
decryed Principles, and persuasions, but are suited to the Providence of God,
stating the civil interests of the Nations; so I am persuaded, that a general
Alteration of the State of the Churches of Christ in this world, must determine
that controversy: which when the light of it appears, we shall easily see the
vanity of those Reasonings, wherewith men are entangled, that are perfectly
suited to their present condition of Religion But hereof I have spoken
elsewhere.

Farther,. 15.
let any man consider the proposals and attempts, that have been made for
Ecclesiastical peace in the world, both of old, and in these latter days; let
him consult the rescripts of Princes; the Edicts of Nations, Advices of
Politicians, that would have the world in quietness on any terms,
Consultations, Conferences, Debates, Assemblies, Counsels of the Clergy, who
are commonly Zelots in their several ways, and are by many thought to be
willing rather to hurl the whole world into confusion then to abate any thing
of the rigor of their opinions, and he will quickly assume the liberty of
affirming concerning them all, that as wise men might easily see flawes in all
of them, and an unsuitablenesse to the end proposed, and as good men might see
so much of carnal interest, self, and Hypocrisy in them, as might discourage
them from any great Expectations, so upon many other accounts a better issue
was not to be looked for from them, then has been actually obtained; which
has for the most part been this, that those, that could dissemble most deeply
have been thought to have the greatest Advantage. In Disputations indeed the
truth for the most part has been a gainer; but in attempts for Reconciliation,
those that have come with the least Candor, most Fraud, Hypocrisy, secular
baits for the subverting of others, have in appearance for a season seemed to
obtain success. And in this Spirit of craft and contention are things yet
carried on in the world.

Yet I suppose the Parties at variance are so well acquainted at length with
each others Principles,. 16.
Arguments, Interests, Prejudices, and real distance of their causes, that
none of them expect any Reconciliation, but merely by one Parties keeping its
station, and the other coming over wholly thereunto. And therefore a Romanist in
his Preface to a late Pamphlet about Schism to the two Vniversitys, tells us
plainly, that, If we will have any peace, we must without limitation submit to,
and receive those (...), those Commanding Oracles which God by his holy Spouse
propounds to our Obedience; The sense of which expressions we are full well
acquainted with. And in pursuit of that principle he tells us again. p. 238.
That suppose the Church should in necessary points teach error, yet even in
that case every child of the Church must exteriorly carry himself quiet and
not make commotions (that is, declare against her) for that were to seek a cure
worse then the disease; Now if it seem reasonable to these Gentlemen, that we
should renounce our sense and Reason, with all that understanding, which we
have, or at least are fully convinced that we have, of the mind of God in the
Scripture, and submit blindly to the commands, and guidance of their Church,
that we may have peace, and union with them, because of their huge interest and
advantage, which lies in our so doing, we profess our selves to be invincibly
concluded under the power of a contrary persuasion, and consequently an
impossiblity of Reconciliation.

As to attempts then for Reconciliation between parties at variance about the
things of God,. 17.
and the removeall of Schism by that means, they are come to this issue among
them, by whom they have been usually managed, namely Politicians and Divines;
that the former perceiving the tenaciousnesse in all things of the latter,
their promptness and readiness to dispute, and to continue in so doing with
confidence of success, (a frame of Spirit that indeed will never praise God,
nor be useful to bring forth truth in the world) do judge them at length not
to have that prudence, which is requisite to advise in matters diffused into
such variety of concernments as these are, or not able to break through their
unspeakable prejudices and interests to the due improvement of that wisdom,
they seem to have; and the latter observing the facile condescension of the
former in all things that may have a consistency with that peace and secular
Advantage they aim at, do conclude that, notwithstanding all their pretenses,
they have indeed in such consultations little or no regard to the Truth;
whereupon having a mutual diffidence in each other, they grow weary of all
endeavors to be carried on jointly in this kind; the one betaking themselves
wholly to keep things in as good state in the world, as they can, let what will
become of Religion; the other to labor for success against their Adversaries,
let what will become of the world, or the peace thereof. And this is like to be
the state of things, until another Spirit be powered out on the professors of
Christianity, then that wherewith at present they seem mostly to be acted.

The only course then remaining to be fixed on,. 18.
whilst our divisions continue, is to enquire wherein the guilt of them does
consist, and who is justly charged therewith; in especial what is, and who is,
guilty of the sin of Schism? And this shall we do, if God permit.

It may I confess seem superfluous to add any thing more on this subject,. 19.
which has been so fully already handled by others. But as I said, the present
concernement of some fearing God, lying beyond what they have undertaken, and
their endeavors for the most part having tended rather to convince their
Adversaries of the insufficiency of their charge and Accusation, then rightly
and clearly to state the thing or matter contended about, something may be
farther added as to the satisfaction of the Consciences of men injustly accused
of this Crime, which is my aim, and which I shall now fall upon.

CAP. II.
The nature of Schism to be determined from Scripture only. This principle by
some opposed. Necessity of abiding in it. Parity of Reason allowed. Of the name
of Schism. Its constant use in Scripture. In things Civil and Religious. The
whole Doctrine of Schism in the Epistles to the Corinthians. The case of that
Church proposed to consideration. Schism entirely in one Church. Not in the
separation of any from a Church. Nor in substraction of obedience from
Governors. Of the second Schism in the Church of Corinth. Of Clemens Epistle.
The state of the Church of Corinth in those days: (...) who: (...) what.
(...). paracia. To whom the Epistle of Clemens was precisely written. Corinth
not a Metropoliticall Church. Allowance of what by parity of Reason may be
deduced from what is of Schism affirmed. Things required to make a man guilty
of Schism. Arbitrary definitions of Schism rejected. That of Austin
considered: as that also of Basil. The common use and acceptance of it in
these days: Separation from any Church in its own nature not Schism.
Aggravations of the evil of Schism ungrounded. The evil of it from its
proper nature and consequences evinced Inferences from the whole of this
discourse. The Church of Rome, if a Church, the most Schismatic Church in
the world. The Church of Rome no Church of Christ: A complete image of the
Empire. Final acquitment of Protestants from Schism on the Principle evinced.
Peculiarly of them of the late Reformation in England: False notions of Schism
the ground of sin and disorder.

THe thing whereof we treat being a disorder in the instituted worship of
God,. 1.
and that which is of pure Revelation, I suppose it a modest request to desire,
that we may abide solely to that discovery and description, which is made of it
in Scripture; that, that alone shall be esteemed Schism, which is there so
called, or which has the entire nature of that, which is there so called;
other things may be other crimes; Schism they are not, if in the Scripture
they have neither the name nor nature of it attributed to them.

He that shall consider the irreconcilable differences that are among
Christians all the world over about this matter,. 2.
as also what has passed concerning it in former Ages, and shall weigh what
prejudices the several parties at variance are entangled with, in reference
hereunto, will be ready to think, that this naked appeal to the only common
principle amongst us all, is so just, necessary and reasonable, that it will be
readily on all hands condescended unto But as this is openly opposed by the
Papists, as a most destructive way of procedure, so I fear, that when the
tendency of it is discovered, it will meet with reluctance from others. But let
the Reader know, that as I have determined (...), so to take the measure of it
from the Scripture only. Consue^udo sine veritate est vetustas erroris (Cyp.
Ep. ad Pomp.) and the sole measure of Evangelicall Truth, is this word, of whom
it was said (...). Id verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, id ab initio
quod ab Apostolis, says Tertul: It is to me a sufficient answer to that fond
question, where was your Religion before Luther? Where was your Religion in the
days of Christ and his Apostles? My thoughts to this particular are the same
with Chrysostomes on the general account of Truth, (...). Homil. 3. in Acta.

But yet least this should seem too straight,. 3.
as being at first view exclusive of the learned debates and disputes, which we
have had about this matter, I shall after the consideration of the precise
Scripture notion of the name and thing, wherein the Conscience of a Believer is
alone concerned, propose and argue also what by a parity of Reason may thence
be deduced, as to the Ecclesiastical common use of them, and our concernment
in the one and the other.

The word which is Metaphorical,. 4.
as to the business we have in hand, is used in the Scripture, both in its
primitive, native sense, in reference to things Natural, as also in the
tralatitious use of it about things Politic and Spiritual or Moral. In its
first sense we have the Noune Mat. 9. 16. (...) (...) (in the cloth) it (...)
Verb. Mat. 27. 51. (...) veil of the Temple (...) (...) and the (...) noting
an interruption of (...) external power in things me (...) this is the first
sense of (...) or division of parts before ^ontinued, by force, or violent
dissol^^ (...) The use of the world in a Political sense is also frequent:
Joh. 7. 43 (...), there was a division among the multitude; some being of one
mind, some of another; Joh. 9. 16. (...), there was a division amongst them:
and cap. 10. 19. likewise. So Act. 14. 4. (...), the multitude of the City was
divided: and cap. 23. 7. There arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the
Sadduces, (...), the multitude was divided, some following one, some another of
their leaders in that dissension; the same thing is expressed by a word
answering unto it in Latin,

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus And in this sense relating to
civil things it is often used. (...). Chronic. Antioch. Joh. Male: p. 98. A.
MS. Bib. Bod.


This being the next posture of that word,. 5.
from whence it immediately slips into its Ecclesiastical use, expressing a
thing moral or spiritual; there may some light be given into its importance,
when so appropriated, from its constant use in this state and condition to
denote differences of mind and judgment with troubles ensuing thereon, amongst
men met in some one Assembly about the compassing of a common end and design.

In the sense contended about it is used only by Paul in his first Epistle to
the Corinthians,. 6.
and therein frequently: cap. 1. 10. I exhort you (...), that there be no
Schisms amongst you: cap. 11. 18. when you meet in the Church (...), I hear
there be Schisms amongst you: cap. 12. 25. The word is used in reference to
the natural body, but with an application to the Ecclesiastical. Other words
there are of the same importance, which shall also be considered, as Romans 16.
17, 18. Of Schism in any other place, or in reference to any other persons,
but only to this Church of Corinth, we hear nothing.

Here then being the principal foundation (if it has any) of that great
Fabric about Schism,. 7.
which in latter Ages has been set up, it must be duly con^^^ered; that if it
be possible, we may discover by what secret engines or Artifices the discourses
about it, which fill the world, have been hence deduced, being for the most
part, universally unlike the thing here mentioned: or find out, that they are
built on certain prejudices and presumptions, nothing relating thereto. The
Church of Corinth was founded by Paul Act. 18. 8, 9, 10. with him there was
Aquila and Priscilla v. 2, 18. After his departure, Apollos came thither, and
effectually watered, what he had planted 1 Ep. cap. 3. 6. It is probable that
either Peter had been there also, or at least that sundry persons converted by
him were come thither, for he still mentions Cephas and Apollo with himself
cap. 1. 12. and 3. 22. This Church thus watered and planted came together for
the worship of God (...) cap. 11. 20. and for the administration of Discipline
in particular, cap. 5. 4. After a while through the craft of Satan, various
evils in Doctrine, Conversation, and Church Order crept in amongst them; For
Doctrine, besides their mistake about eating things offered to Idols cap. 8. 4.
some of them denied the Resurrection of the Dead, cap. 15. 12. In Conversation
they had not only the eruption of a scandalous particular sin amongst them
cap. 5. 1. but grievous sinful miscarriages, when they came together about
holy Administrations cap. 11. 21. these the Apostle distinctly reproves in
them: their Church Order, as to that Love, peace, and union of heart and mind,
wherein they ought to have walked, was woefully disturbed with divisions and
sidings about their Teachers, cap. 1. 12. And not content to make this
difference the matter of their debates and disputes from house to house, even
when they met for public worship, or that which they all met in, and for, they
were divided on that account cap. 11. 18. This was their Schism the Apostle
dehorts them from, charges them with, and shows them the evil thereof. They
had differences amongst themselves about unnecessary things; on these they
engaged into disputes and sidings, even in their solemn Assemblyes; when they
came all together for the same worship about which they differed not. Probably
much vain jangling, alienation of affections, exasperation of spirits, with a
neglect of due offices of love ensued hereupon. All this appears from the
entrance the Apostle gives to his Discourse on this subject. 1 Epist. chap. 1.
v. 10. (...), I beseech you that you all speak the same thing. They were of
various minds, and opinions, about their Church affairs; which was attended
with the confusion of disputings: let it not be so, says the Apostle; (...),
and let there be no schisms among you; which consist in such differences and
janglings: he adds, (...); but that you be perfectly joined together in the
same mind, and the same judgment. They were joined together in the same Church
order and fellowship, but he would have them so also in oneness of mind and
judgment, which if they were not, though they continued together in their
Church Order, yet Schisms would be amongst them. This was the state of that
Church, this the frame and carriage of the members of it, this the fault and
evil, whereon the Apostle charges them with Schism, and the guilt thereof.
The grounds, whereon he mannageth his reprose, are their common interest in
Christ, cap. 1. 13 The nothingnesse of the instruments of preaching the
Gospel, about whom they contended, cap. 1. 14. cap. 3. v. 4, 5. their Church
order instituted by God, cap. 12. 13. of which afterward.

This being as I said the principal seat of all that is taught in the
Scripture about Schism,. 8.
we are here, or hardly at all to learn, learn, what it is, and wherein it
does consist; The Arbitrary Definitions of men, with their superstructions, and
inferences upon them, we are not concerned in. At least I hope I shall have
leave from hence to state the true nature of the thing, before it be judged
necessary to take into consideration what by parity of Reason may be deduced
from it. In things purely moral, and of natural equity, the most general
notion of them is to be the rule, whereby all particulars claiming an interest
in their nature are to be measured, and regulated; In things of Institution,
the particular instituted is first and principally to be regarded: How far
the general reason of it may be excluded, is of after consideration; And as is
the case in respect of duty, so it is in respect of the evils that are
contrary thereto. True and false are indicated, and tried by the same Rule.
Here then our foot is to be fixed; what compass may be taken to fetch in
things of a like kind, will in its proper place follow. Observe then,

1. That the thing mentioned is entirely in one Church,. 9.
amongst the members of one particular society. No mention is there in the
least of one Church divided against another, or separated from another, or
others; whether all true, or some true, some false, or but pretended. Whatever
the crime be, it lies wholly within the verge of one Church, that ^et together
for the worship of God, and Administration of the Ordinances of the Gospel;
And unless men will condescend so to state it upon the evidence tendered, I
shall not hope to prevail much in the process of this discourse,

2. Here is no mention of any paticular man,. 10.
or any number of men's separation from the Holy Assemblyes of the whole Church,
or of subduction of themselves from its power, nor does the Apostle lay any
such thing to their charge, but plainly declares, that they continued all in
the joint celebration of that worship, and performance together of those
duties, which were required of them in their Assemblyes; only they had
groundless, causeless differences amongst themselves, as I shall show
afterward. All the divisions of one Church from another, or others, the
separation of any one or more persons from any Church or Churches, are things
of another nature, made good or evil by their circumstances, and not that at
all, which the Scripture knows and calls by the name of Schism; And therefore
was there no such thing or name, as Schism, in such a sense, known in the
Judaicall Church, though in the former it abounded. All the different sects to
the last, still communicated in the same carnal Ordinances; and those who
utterly deserted them, were Apostates, not Schismatics; so were the body of
the Samaritans, they worshipped they knew not what, nor was Salvation among
them, Joh. 4.

3. Here is no mention of any substraction of obedience from Bishops or Rulers
in what degree soever,. 11.
no exhortation to regular submission unto them, much less from the Pope or
Church of Rome; nor does the Apostle thunder out against them, you are departed
from the Amity of the Catholic Church, have rent Christ's seamelesse Coat, set
up Altar contra altar, have forsaken the visible head of the Church, the
fountain of all unity; you refuse due subjection to the Prince of the
Apostles; Nor, you are Schismatics from the National Church of Achaja, or
have cast off the Rule of your Governors; with the like language of after
days; but, when you come together, you have divisions amongst you: Behold, how
great a matter a little fire kindles.

A condition not unlike to this befalling this very Church of Corinth,. 12.
sundry years after the strifes now mentioned were allayed by the Epistle of
the Apostle, does again exhibit us the case and evil treated on. Some few
unquiet persons among them drew the whole society (upon the matter) into
division and an opposition to their Elders. They, who were the causes (...), a
Clement tells them in the name of the Church at Rome, were (...) a few men,
acted by pride and madness: yet such power had those persons in the
Congregation, that they prevailed with the multitude to depose the Elders and
cast them out of office: So the same Clement tells them; (...). What he intends
by his (...) etc. he declares in the words foregoing, where he calls the
Elders, that were departed this life, happy and blessed, as not being subject
or liable to expulsion out of their offices; (...)* Whether these men, who
caused the differences and sedition against those Elders that were deposed,
were themselves by the Church substituted into their room and place, I know
not. This difference in that Church, the Church of Rome in that Ep. of Clement
calls every where Schism, as it also expresses the same things, or the evil
frame of their minds and their actings by many other words: (...), are laid to
their charge. That there was any separation from the Church, that the deposed
Elders, or any for their sakes withdrew themselves from the communion of it, or
ceased to assemble with it for the celebration of the Ordinances of the
Gospel, there is not any mention: only the difference in the Church is the
Schism whereof they are accused. Nor are they accused of Schism for the
deposition of the Elders, but for their differences amongst themselves, which
was the ground of their so doing.

It is alleged indeed, that it is not the single Church of Corinth,. 13.
that is here intended, but all the Churches of Achaia, whereof that was the
Metropolis: which though as to the nature of Schism, it be not at all
prejudicial to what has been asserted, supposing such a Church to be; yet
because it sets up in oposition to some Principles of Truth, that must
afterward be improved, I shall briefly review the arguments whereby it is
attempted to be made good.

The title of the Epistle in the first place is pretended to this purpose:. 14.
It is (...) wherein (as it is said) on each part the (...) or whole Province, as
of Rome, so of Corinth, the Region and Territory, that belonged to those
Metropoli's, is intended: But as I have formerly elsewhere said, we are
beholding to the frame and fabric of Church affairs in after Ages for such
interpretations as these; the simplicity of the first knew them not; They who
talked of the Church of God, that did (...) at Rome, little then thought of
Province or Region (...), is as much as (...) Act. 8. 1. (...) is a man that
dwells at such a place, properly one that dwells in another house, or soil,
or that has removed from one place, and settled in another; whence it is often
used in the same sense with (...), he is such an inhabitant, as has yet some
such consideration attending him, as makes him a kind of a forreigner to the
place where he is; so Ephesians. 2. 19. (...) and (...) are opposed. Hence is (...),
which as Budaeus^ says differs from (...), in that it denotes a temporary
habitation; this a stable and abiding. (...) is so to inhabit, to dwell in a
place, where yet something makes a man a kind of a stranger. So it is said of
Abraham (...) Heb. 11. 9. 1* Pet. 2. 11. joined with (...): (hence this word by
the learned publisher of this Epistle is rendered peregrinatur, diversatur) and
more clearly Luke 24. 18. (...), which we have rendered, are you only a stranger
in Jerusalem: whether (...) and paroecia is from hence or no, by some is
doubted, (...) is convivator; and (...) praebitio, Gloss. vetus: So that
parochi^ may be called so from them, who met together to break bread, and to
eat: Allow parochia to be barbarous, and our only word to be paroecia from
(...), then it is as much as the Voisinage, men living near together for any
end whatever. So says Budaeus (...) are (...); thence Churches were called
(...), consisting of a number of them, who were (...) or (...) the Saints of
God expressing the place which they inhabited, and the manner, as Strangers,
said of the Churches whereof they were (...) and (...): this is now made to
denote a Region, a Territory, the adjacent Region to a Metropolis; and such
like things, as the poor primitive pilgrims little thought of. This will
scarcely as I suppose evince the Assertion we are dealing about; there may be a
Church of God dweling at Rome or Corinth, without any adjacent Region annexed
to it, I think. Besides, among those who first used the word in the sense now
supposed, did not understand a Province by (...), which was with them (as
originally) the charge of him that was a Bishop, and no more. (...) was with
them a Province that belonged to a Metropolitan; such as the Bishop of Corinth
is supposed to be. I do not remember where a Metropolitan Province is called
his (...), there being many of these in every one of them. But at present I
will not herein concern my self.

But it is said,. 15.
that this Epistle of Clement was written to them, to whom Paul's Epistles were
written; which appears, as from the common title^, so also from hence, that
Clement advises them to whom he writes, to take and consider that Epistle,
which Paul had formerly wrote to them, Now* Paul's Epistle was written to all
the Churches of Achaia, as it is said expressly in the second, To the Church
of God which is at Corinth, with all the Saints, which are in all Achaia: Cap.
1. 1 And for the former, that also is directed (...), and the same form is
used at the close of this, (...), wherein, all places in Achaia (and every
where therein) not Absolutely are intended; for if they should, then this
Epistle would be a Catholic Epistle, and would conclude the things mentioned
in it, of the letter received by the Apostle etc. to relate to the Catholic
Church.

Ans. It is confessed,. 16.
that the Epistles of Paul, and Clement, have one common Title; so that (...),
which is Clements expression, is the same with (...), which is Paul's in both
his Epistles, which adds little strength to the former Argument from the word
(...), as I suppose, confining it thither. It is true, Paul's second Epistle,
after its Inscription (...) adds (...). He mentions not any where any more
Churches in Achaia then that of Corinth, and that at Cenchrea; nor does he
speak of any Churches here in this salutation, but only of the Saints. And he
plainly makes Achaia and Corinth to be all one 2 Cor. 9. 2. so that to me it
appears, that there were not as yet, any more Churches brought into order in
Achaia, but that mentioned; with that other other at Cenchrea, which I suppose,
comes under the same name with that at Corinth; nor am I persuaded, that it was
a completed Congregation in those days. Saints in Acha^a that lived not at
Corinth, there were perhaps many; but being scattered up and down, they were
not formed into Societies, but belonged to the Church of Corinth, and assembled
therewith (as they could) for the participation of Ordinances: So that there is
not the least evidence, that this Epistle of Paul was directed to any other
Church, but that of Corinth. For the first, it can scarce be questioned; Paul
writing an Epistle for the instruction of the Saints of God, and Disciples of
Christ in all Ages, by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, Salutes in its
beginning and ending all them, that on that general account are concerned in
it. In this sense all his Epistles were Catholic, even those he wrote to
single Persons. The occasion of writing this Epistle was indeed from a
particular Church, and the chief subject matter of it was concerning the
Affairs of that Church. Hence it is in the first place particularly directed
to them; and our present enquiry is not after all that by any means were, or
might be concerned in that, which was then written, as to their present or
future direction, but after them, who administered the occasion to what was so
written, and whose particular Condition was spoken to: This I say was the
single Church of Corinth. That (...), all in every place, should be all only in
Achaia, or that Clement his (...), should be with them, that are called in
Achaia, I can yet see no ground to conjecture. Paul writes an Epistle to the
Church of Ephesus. and concludes it, (...): the extent of which Prayer is
supposed to reach farther then Ephesus, and the Region adjacent. It does not
then as yet appear that Paul wrote his Epistles peculiarly to any other, but
the particular Church at Corinth. If concerning the latter, because of that
expression with all the Saints which are in all Achaia, if it be granted there
were more Churches then that of Corinth with its Neighbor Cenchrea (which
whether it were a stated distinct Church or no, I know not) yet it will not at
all follow (as was said before) that Clement attending the particular occasion
only, about which he and the Church of Rome were consulted, did so direct his
Epistle, seeing he makes no mention in the least, that so he did. But y^^ by
the way there is one thing more, that I would be willingly resolved about in
this discourse; and that is this, seeing that it is evident that the Apostle by
his (...): and Clemens, by his (...), intend an enlargement beyond the first
and immediate direction to the Church of Corinth, if by the Church of Corinth,
as it is pleaded, he intend to express that whole Region of Achaia, what
either the Apostle, or Clemens do obtain by that enlargement, if restrained to
that same place.

It is indeed said,. 17.
that at this time there were many other Episcopal Sees in Achaia; which
until it is attempted to be put upon some kind of proof, may be passed by: It
is granted that Paul speaks of that which was done at Corinth, to be done in
Achaia Romans 15. 28. as what is done in London is without doubt done in England:
But that which lies in expectation of some light or evidence to be given unto
it, is, that there was a Metropoliticall See at Corinth, at this time,
whereunto many Episcopal Sees in Achaia were in a subordination, being all the
(...) of Corinth, all which are called the Church of Corinth, by virtue of
their subjection thereunto; when this is proved, I shall confess some
principles I afterward insist on, will be impaired thereby.

This then is added by the same Author,. 18.
That the Ecclesiastical estate was then conformed to the Civil: where ever
there was a Metropolis in a Civill-politicall sense, there was seated also a
Metropoliticall Church; now that Corinth was a Metropolis, the Proconsul of
Achaia Keeping his residence there, in the first sense is confessed. And
besides what follows from thence, by virtue of the principle now laid down,
Chrysostom calls it a Metropolis relating to the time wherein Paul wrote his
Epistle to the Church there in the latter sense also.

The plea about Metropoliticall Churches,. 19.
I suppose will be thought very impertinent to what I have now in hand, so it
shall not at present be insisted on. That the state of Churches in after Ages
was molded and framed after the pattern of the civil Government of the Roman
Empire is granted; And that conformity (without offense to any be it spoken) we
take to be a fruit of the working of the mystery of Iniquity. But that there
was any such order instituted in the Churches of Christ, by the Apostles, or
any instituted by the Authority from the Lord and Ruler, is utterly denied; nor
is any thing, but very uncertain conjectures from the sayings of men of after
Ages, produced to attest any such order, or constitution. When the order,
spirituality, beauty, and glory of the Church of Christ shall return, and men
obtain a light, whereby they are able to discern a beauty and excellency in
the inward, more noble spiritual part, indeed life and soul of the worship of
God, these disputes will have an issue. Chrysostom says indeed, that Corinth
was the Metropolis of Achaia, but in what sense he says not; the Political is
granted, the Ecclesiastical not proved; nor are we enquiring what was the
state of the Churches of Christ in the days of Chrysostom, but of Paul. But
to return.

If any one now shall say,. 20.
will you conclude, because this evil mentioned by the Apostle is Schism,
therefore nothing else is so?

I Answer, that having before asserted, this to be the chief and only seat of
the Doctrine of Schism, I am inclinable so to do: and this I am resolved of,
that unless any man can prove that something else is termed schism by some
divine writer, or blamed on that head of account by the Holy Ghost elsewhere,
and is expressly reproved a^ another crime, I will be at Liberty from admitting
it so to be.

But yet for what may hence by a parity of Reason be deduced,. 21.
I shall close with, and debate at large, as I have professed.

The Schism then here described by the Apostle,. 22.
and blamed by him, consists in causeless differences, and contentions amongst
the members of a particular Church, contrary to that of love, prudence, and
forbearance, which are required of them to be exercised amongst themselves and
toward one another; which is also termed (...) Act. 15. 21. and (...) Romans 16.
13. And he is a Schismatic that is guilty of this sin of Schism, that is,
who raises, or entertained, or persisteth in such differences; nor are these
terms used by the Divine writers in any other sense.

That any men may fall under this guilt,. 23.
it is required;

1. That they be members of, or belong to some one Church, which is so, by the
institution and appointment of Jesus Christ. And we shall see, that there is
more required hereunto, then the bare being a Believer or a Christian.

2. That they either raise or entertain. and persist in causeless differences
with others of that Church more or less, to the interruption of that Exercise
of love* in all the fruits of it, which ought to be amongst them; and the
disturbance of the due performance of the duties required of the Church, in the
worship of God. As Clement in the forementioned Epistle, (...).

3. That these differences be occasioned by, and do belong to some things in a
remoter or nearer distance appertaining to the worship of God; their
differences on a Civil account are elsewhere mentioned, and reproved, 1 Ep.
cap. 6. for therein also there was from the then state of things an (...) v. 7.

This is that Crime,. 24.
which the Apostle rebukes, blames, condemns under the name of Schism, and
tells them that were guilty of it, that they showed themselves to be carnal,
or to have indulged to the flesh and the corrupt principle of self, and their
own wills, which should have been subdued to the obedience of the Gospel. Men's
definitions of things are for the most part Arbitrary and loose; fitted and
suited to their several apprehensions of Principles and conclusions; so that
nothing clear or fixed is generally to be expected from them; from the
Romanists description of Schism, who violently without the least color or
pretense thrust in the Pope, and his Head ship, into all that they affirm in
Church matters, least of all. I can allow men that they may extend their
definitions of things unto what they apprehend of an alike nature to that,
which gives rise to the whole disquisition, and is the first thing defined. But
at this I must profess my self to be somewhat entangled, that I could never
yet meet with a definition of Schism, that did comprize, that was not
exclusive of that, which alone in the Scripture is affirmed so to be.

Austins Definition contains the sum of what has since been insisted on;. 25.
says He, Schisma ni fallor est eadem opinantem, and eodem ritu utentem solo
Congregationis delectari dissidio G^n. Faust. lib. 20. cap. 3. by dissidium
congregationis he intends separation from the Church into a peculiar
Congregation; a definition directly suited to the cause he had in hand, and was
pleading against the Donatists. Basil in Epist. ad Amphiloch. Con. 44.
distiguisheth between (...), and (...): and as he makes Schism to be a
division arising from some Church controversies suitable to what those days
experienced, and in the substance true; so he tells us that (...) is when
either Presbyters, or Bishops, or Laics hold unlawful meetings, Assemblyes or
Conventicles, which was not long since with us the only Schism.

Since those days Schism in general has passed for a causeless separation
from the communion and worship of any true Church of Christ,. 26.
(the Catholic Church says the Papist) with a relinquishment of its society,
as to a joint celebration of the ordinances of the Gospel; how far this may
pass for Schism, and what may be granted in this description of it, the
process of our discourse will declare. In the mean time I am most certain,
that a Separation from some Churches true or pretended so to be is commanded in
the Scriptures; so that the withdrawing from, or relinquishment of any Church
or society whatever, upon the plea of its corruption, be it true or false, with
a mind and resolution to serve God in the due observation of Church
institutions, according to that light which men have received, is no where
called Schism, or condemned as a thing of that nature, but is a matter that
must be tried out, whether it be good or evil, by virtue of such general
rules and directions, as are given us in the Scriptures for our orderly and
blameless walking with God in all his ways.

As for them,. 27.
who suppose all Church power to be invested in some certain Church Officers
originally (I mean that which they call of Jurisdiction) who on that account
are Eminenter, the Church, the union of the whole consisting in a subjection to
those Officers according to Rules, Orders and Canons of their appointment,
whereby they are necessitated to state the business of Schism on the
rejection of their Power and Authority, I shall speak to them afterward at
large. For the present, I must take leave to say, that I look upon the whole of
such a fabric, as a product of prudence and necessity.

I cannot but fear least some men's surmisings may prompt them to say,. 28.
that the evil of Schism is thus stated, in a compliance with that, and them,
which before we blamed: and seems to serve to raise slight and contemptible
thoughts of it, so that men need not be shaken though justly charged with it.
But besides that sufficient testimony, which I have to the contrary, that will
abundantly shelter me from this Accusation* by an assurance that I have not the
lea^ aim (...), I shall farther add my apprehension of the greatness of the
evil of this sin, if I may first be borne with a little in declaring what
usual aggravations of it I do either not understand, or else cannot assent
unto.

Those, who say it is a renting of the seamelesse coat of Christ (in which
Metaphorical expression men have wonderfully pleased themselves) seem to have
mistaken their aim;. 29.
and instead of an Aggravation of its evil, by that Figure of Speech, to have
extenuated it; A rent of the Body well compacted, is not heightened to any ones
apprehension, in its being called the renting of a seamelesse coat: But men may
be indulged the use of the most improper and groundless expressions, so they
place no power of Argument in them, whilst they find them moving their own,
and suppose them to have an alike efficacy upon the affections of others. I can
scarce think that any ever supposed, that the coat of Christ was a Type of his
Church; his Church being clothed with Him, not He with it. And therefore with
commendation of his Success, who first invented that Allusion, I leave it in
the possession of them, who want better arguments to evince the evil of this
sin.

It is most usually said to be a sin against Charity, as Heresy is against
Faith. Heresy is a sin against Faith (if I may so speak) both as it is
taken for the doctrine of Faith, which is to be believed, and the assent of the
mind whereby we do believe. He that is a Heretic (I speak of him in the
usual acception of the word, and the sense of them, who make this comparison,
in neither of which I am satisfied) rejects the doctrine of faith; and denies
all assen^ unto it. Indeed he does the former by doing the latter. But is
Schism so a sin against Charity? does it supplant, and root out Love out of
the heart? is it an affection of the mind attended with an inconsistency
therewith? I much question it.

The Apostle tells us,. 30.
that love is the bond of perfection Col. 3. 14. because in the several and
various ways whereby it exerts it self, it maintains and preserves
notwithstanding all hindrances and opposition^, that perfect and beautiful
order, which Christ has appointed amongst his Saints, wherein men by Schism
are kept off, and withheld from the performance of any of those offices and
duties of love, which are useful, or necessary for the preservation of the
bond of perfection, then is it, or may in some sense be said to be a sin
against Love.

Those,. 31.
who have seemed to aim nearest the apprehension of the true nature of it in
these days, have described it to be an open breach of Love, or Charity. That
that expression is warily to be understood, is evident in the light of this
single consideration. It is possible for a man to be all, and do all, that
those were, and did, whom the Apostle judges for Schismatics, under the power
of some violent temptation, and yet have his heart full of love to the Saints
of the Communion disturbed by him. It is thus far then in its own nature a
breach of Love, in that in such men, Love cannot exert it self in its utmost
tendency in wisdom and forbearance for the preservation of the perfect order
instituted by Christ in his Church. However I shall freely say, that the
Schoolmens notion of it, who insist on this as its nature, that it is a sin
against Charity, as Heresy is against Faith, is fond and becoming them; and
so will others also, shall be pleased to that consider, what they intend by
Charity.

Some say It is a Rebellion against the Church,. 32
that is, the Rulers and Officers of the Church. I doubt not but that there
must be either a neglect in the Church in the performance of its duty, or of
the Authority of it in so doing, wherever there is any Schism, though the
discovery of this also have innumerable intanglements attending it. But that to
refuse the Authority of the Church is to rebel against the Rulers, or Guides
of it, will receive farther light, then what it has done, when once a pregnant
instance is produced, not where the Church signifies the Officers of it, but
where it does not signify the body of the Congregation in contradistinction
from them, or comprising them therein.

Add unto these,. 33.
those who dispute whether Schismatics do belong to the Church or no, and
conclude in the Negative; seeing according to the discovery already made, it is
impossible a man should be a Schismatic, unless he be a Church member. Other
crimes a man may be guilty of on other accounts; of Schism, only in a Church.
What is the formal reason of any man's Relation to a Church, in what sense
soever that word is used, must be afterward at large discussed.

But now this foundation being laid,. 34.
that Schism is a causeless difference or division amongst the members of any
particular Church, that meet together, or ought so to do, for the worship of
God, and celebration of the same numericall Ordinances to the disturbance of
the order appointed by Jesus Christ, and contrary to that exercise of love in
wisdom and mutual forbearance, which is required of them, it will be easy to
see, wherein the iniquity of it does consist, and upon what consederations its
Aggravations do arise.

It is evidently a despising of the Authority of Jesus Christ,. 35.
the great sovereign Lord, and head of the Church. How often has he commanded
us to forbear one another, to forgive one another, to have peace among our
selves, that we may be known to be his Disciples, to bear with them that are
in any thing contrary minded to our selves. To give light to this
consideration, let that which at any time is the cause of such hateful
divisions, rendered as considerable as the prejudices, and most importune
Affections of men can represent it to be, be brought to the Rule of Love, and
forbearance, in the latitude of it, as prescribed to us by Christ, and it will
evidently bear no proportion thereunto. So that such differences though
arising on real miscarriages and faults of some, because they might otherwise
be handled, and healed, and ought to be so, cannot be persisted in without the
contempt of the immediate Authority of Jesus Christ. If it were considered,
that he stands in the Congregation of God Ps. 82. 1. That he dwells in the
Church in glory as in Sinai in the Holy place Ps. 68. 17, 18. walking in the
midst of the Candlesticks Rev. 1. 13. with his eyes upon us as a flame of fire
v. 14 his presence and Authority would perhaps be more prevalent with some,
then they seem to be.

Again!. 36.
His wisdom, whereby he has ordered all things in his Church, on set purpose,
that Schism and divisions may be prevented, is no less despised. Christ who
is the Wisdom of the Father. 1 Cor. 1. 24. The stone on which are seven eyes,
Zech 3. 9. upon whose shoulders the government is laid, Is. 9. 6, 7. has in
his infinite wisdom so ordered all the Officers, Orders, Gifts,
Administrations of, and in his Church, as that this evil might take no place.
To manifest this, is the design of the Holy Ghost, Romans 12, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. The consideration in particular
of this Wisdom of Christ, suiting the Officers of his Church, in respect of
the places they hold, of the Authority wherewith from him they are invested,
the way whereby they are entered into their Function, distributing the Gifts of
his Spirit in marveilous variety, unto several kinds of usefulness; and such
distance, and dissimilitude in the particular members, as in a due
correspondencie and proportion, give comeliness and beauty to the whole,
disposing of the order of his worship, and sundry ordinances in especial, to
be expressive of the highest Love and Union, pointing all of them against such
causeless divisions, might be of use, were that my present intendment.

The Grace and Goodness of Christ,. 37.
whence he has promised to give us one heart, and one way, to leave us peace,
such as the World cannot give, with innumerable others of the like importance,
are disregarded thereby. So also is his prayer for us; with what Affection and
Zeal did he power out his soul to his Father for our union in love. That
seems to be the thing his heart was chiefly fixed on, when he was leaving this
World, Joh. 17. what weight he lays thereon, how thereby we may be known to be
his Disciples, and the World be convinced, that he was sent of God, is there
also manifested.

How far the exercise of Love and Charity is obstructed by it,. 38.
has been declared. The consideration of the Nature, Excellency, Property,
Effects, Usefulness of this Grace in all the Saints in all their ways, its
especial designation by our Lord and Master, to be the bond of union and
perfection, in the way and Order instituted for the comely celebration of the
Ordinances of the Gospel, will add weight to this aggravation.

Its constant growing to farther evil,. 39.
in some to Apostasy it self; its usual and certain ending in strife,
variance, debate, evil surmisings, wrath, confusion, disturbances public and
private, are also to be laid all at its door. What farther of this nature and
kind may be added (as much may be added) to evince the heinousnesse^ of this
sin of Schism, I shall willingly subscribe unto; so that I shall not trouble
the Reader in abounding in what on all hands is confessed.

It is incumbent upon him,. 40.
who would have me to go farther in the description of this evil, then as
formerly stated, to evince from Scripture, another notion of the name or thing,
then that given, which when he has done, he shall not find me refractory. In
the mean time I shall both consider what may be objected against that, which
has been delivered, and also discuss the present state of our divisions on
the usual principles, and common acception of Schism; if first I may have
leave to make some few inferences, or deductions from what has already been
spoken, and as I hope, evinced.

On supposition that the Church of Rome is a Church of Christ,. 41.
it will appear to be the most Schismatic Church in the World. I say or
supposition that it is a Church, and that there is such a thing, as a
Schismatic Church, (as perhaps a Church may from its intestine differences,
be so not unfitly denominated) that is, the state and condition thereof. The
Pope is the head of their Church, several nations of Europe are members of it.
Have we not seen that head taking his flesh in his teeth, tearing his body and
his limbs to pieces? Have some of them thought on any thing else, but, arise
Peter, kill and eat, all their days! Have we not seen this goodly head, in
disputes about Peter's Patrimony, and his own Jurisdiction, wage war, fight,
and shed blood, the blood of his own members? Must we believe Armies raised,
and battles fought, Towns fired, all in pure love, and perfect Church order?
not to mention their old altar contra altar, Anti-Popes, Anti-Councells; look
all over their Church, on their Potentates, Bishops, Friars, there is no end of
their variances. What do the Chiefest, choicest pillars, eldest sons, and I
know not what of their Church at this day? do they not kill, destroy, and
ruin each other, as they are able? let them not say these are the divisions of
the Nations, that are in their Church, not of the Church; for all these Nations
on their hypothesis are members of that one Church. And that Church, which has
no means to prevent its members from designed, resolved on, and continued
murdering one of another, nor can remove them from its society, shall never
have me in its communion, as being bloudily Schismatic. No^ is there any
necessity, that men should forgo the respective civil interests, by being
members of one Church. Prejudicate apprehensions of the nature of a Church, and
its Authority, lie at the bottom of that difficulty; Christ has ordained no
Church, that enwraps such interests, as on the account whereof, the members of
it may murder one another. Whatever then, they pretend of Unity, and however
they make it a note of the true Church (as it is a property of it) that which
is like it amongst them, is made up of these two ingredients, subjection to the
Pope, either for fear of their lives, or advantage to their livelihood, and a
conspiracy for the destruction, and suppression of them, that oppose their
interests, wherein they agree like those, who maintained Jerusalem in its last
Siege by Titus; they all consented to oppose the Romans, and yet fought out all
other things among themselves. That they are not so openly clamorous about the
differences at present, as in former Ages, is merely from the pressure of
Protestants round about them However, let them at this day silence the Jesuits
and Dominicans, especially the Baijans and the Jansenians on the one part, and
the Molinists on the other: Take off the Gallican Church from its Schismatic
refusal of the Council of Trent; Cause the King of Spain to quit his claim
to Sicilie, that they need not Excommunicate him every year; compel the
Commonwealth of Venice to receive the Jesuits; stop the mouths of the
Sorbonists about the Authority of a general Council above the Pope, and of
all those, whom opposing the Papal omnipotency they call Politicians; quiet
the contest of the Franciscans and Dominicans about the Blessed Virgin; burn
Bellarmines books, who almost on every Controversy of Chapter Religion gives an
account of their intestine divisions, branding some of their opinions as
haereticall, as that of Medina about Bishops and Presbyters, some as
Idolatricall, as that of Thomas about the worship of the Cross with latria,
etc. and they may give a better color to their pretenses, then any as yet it
wears.

But what need I insist upon this supposition; when I am not more certain,. 42.
that there is any instituted Church in the World, owned by Christ as such,
then I am, that the Church of Rome is none, properly so called. Nor shall I be
thought singular in this persuasion, if it be duly con^idered* what this
amounts unto. Some Learned men of latter days in this Nation, pleading in the
justification of the Church of England, as to her departure from Rome, did
grant that the Church of Rome does not err in Fundamentalls, or maintained no
errors remedilesly pernicious and destructive of Salvation. How far they
entangled themselves by this concession I argue not: The foundation of it lies
in this clear truth, that no Church what ever, universal, or particular, can
possibly err in Fundamentalls, for by so doing it would cease to be a Church.
My denying then the Synogogue of Rome to be a Church, according to their
principles, amounts to no more then this: The Papist^ maintain in their
public Confessions, fundamental errors; in which Assertion its known I am
not alone.

But this is not the principle, at least not the sole nor maine principle,. 43.
whereon I ground my judgment in this case: but this, that there was never any
such thing in any tolerable likeness or similitude, as that which is called
the Church of Rome, allowing the most skillfull of its Rabbis to give in the
Characters and delineations of it, instituted in reference to the worship of
God by Jesus Christ. The truth is, the whole of it is but an imitation and
exemplar of the old Imperial Government: one is set up in chief and made (...)
in Spiritualls, as the Emperors were in civil things; from him all power
flows to others; and as there was a communication of power by the Emperors, to
the Civil state Praefects, Proconsulls, Vicars, Presidents, Governors of the
lesser and greater Nations, with those under them, in various civil
subordinations, according to the dignity of the places, where they did bear
rule and preside, and ni the military to Generals, Legates, Tribun's and the
inferior Officers; so is there by the Pope, to Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, in their several subordinations, which are as his civil state; and to
Generals of Religious orders, Provincialls, and their dependants, which are as
his military. And it is by some (not in all things agreeing with them)
confessed, that the Government, pleaded for by them in the Church, was brought
in and established, in correspondency and accommodation to the civil Government
of the Empire; which is undeniably evident and certain: now this being not
thoroughly done till the Empire had received an incurable wound, it seems to me
to be the making of an image to the beast, giving life to it, and causing i^to
speak. So that the present Roman Church is nothing else, but an image or
similitude of the Roman Empire, set up in its declining among and over the same
persons in succession, by the craft of Satan, through principles of deceit,
subtilty and Spiritual wickedness, as the other was by force and violence,
for the same ends of power, dominion, fleshlinesse, and persecution with the
former.

The exactness of this correspondency in all things,. 44.
both in respect of those, who claim to be the stated body of his
Ecclesiastical Commonwealth, and those, who are merely dependent on his will,
bound unto him professedly by a military Sacrament, exempted from the ordinary
Rules and Government of his fixed Rulers in their several subordination^, under
Officers of their own immediately commissionated by him, with his mannagement
of both those parties to balance and keep them mutually in quiet and in order
for his service (especially confiding in his men of war, like the Emperors of
old) may elsewhere be farther manifested.

I suppose it will not be needful to add any thing to evince the vanity of
the pretensions of the Romanists or others against all or any of us,. 45.
on the account of Schism, upon a grant of the principles laid down, it lies
so clear in them without need of farther deduction; and I speak with some
confidence, that I am not in expectation of any hasty confutation of them, I
mean, that which is so indeed. The earnestness of their clamours, importuning
us to take notice of them by the way, before I enter upon a direct debate of
the cause, as it stands stated in reference to them, I shall only tell them,
that seeking to repose our consciences in the mind of God revealed in the
Scriptures, we are not at all concerned in the noise, they make in the world.
For what have we done? wherein does our guilt consist? wherein lies the
peculiar concernment of these (...)? let them go to the Churches, with whom we
walk, of whom we are, and ask of them concerning our ways, our Love, and the
duties of it? Do we live in strife, and variance? Do we not bear with each
other? do we not worship God without disputes and divisions? have we
differences and contentions in our Assemblies? do we break any bond of Union,
wherein we are bound, by the express institutions of Jesus Christ? if we have,
let the righteous reprove us, we will own our guilt, confess we have been
carnal, and endeavor Reformation. If not, what have the Romanists, Italians,
to do to judge us? knew we not your design, your interest, your lives, your
Doctrines, your Worship, we might possibly think, that you might intermeddle
out of Love, and mistaken zeal, but ad populum Phaleras: you would be making
shrines, and thence is this stir, and uproare. But we are Schismatics in
that we have departed from the Catholic Church; and for* our own Conventicles,
they are no Churches, but styes of beasts* But this is most false. We abide in
the Catholic Church under all the bonds, wherein by the will of Christ we
stand related* unto it. Which if we prove not with as much evidence, as the
nature of such things will bear, though you are not at all concerned in it,
yet we will give you leave to ^riumph over us. And if our own Congregations* be
not Churches, whatsoever we are, we are not Schismatics; for Schism is an
evil amongst the members of a Church, if S. Paul may be believed. But we have
forsaken the Church of Rome. But Gentlemen, show first how we were ever of it.
No man has lost that which he never had; nor has left the place or station
wherein he never was. Tell me when or how we were members of your Church? We
know not your language, you are Barbarians to us. It is impossible we should
assemble with you. But your Forefathers left that Church, and you persist in
their evil. Prove that your Forefathers were ever of your Church in any
communion instituted by Christ, and you say somewhat. To desert a man's station,
and relation, which he had on any other account, good, or bad, is not Schism;
as shall farther be manifested.

Upon the same principle,. 46.
a plea for freedom from the charge of any Church, real, or pretended, as
National, may be founded, and confirmed; either we are of the National Church
of England, (to give that instance) or we are not; if we are not, and are
exempted by our Protestation, as before; whatever we are, we are not
Schismatics; if we are fatally bound unto it, and must be members of it,
whether we will or no, being made so we know not how, and continuing so we know
not why, show us then what duty, or office of Love is incumbent on us, that we
do not perform? Do we not join in external acts of worship in Peace with
the whole Church? Call the whole Church together, and try what we will do? Do
we not join in every Congregation in the Nation? This is not charged on us;
nor will any say, that we have right so to do, without a Relation to some
particular Church in the Nation; I know where the sore lies. A National
Officer, or Officers* with others acting under them in several subordinations,
with various distributions of power, are the Church intended. A non-submission
to their rules and constitutions, is the Schism we are guilty of.

Quem das finem Rex magne laborum! But this pretense shall afterward be sifted
to the utmost. In the mean time let any one inform me, what duty I ought to
perform toward a National Church, on supposition there is any such thing, by
virtue of an Institution of Jesus Christ, that is possible for me to perform,
and I shall (...) address my self unto it.

To close these considerations with things of more immediate concernment,. 47.
Of the divisions that have fallen out amongst us in things of Religion, since
the last Revolutions of this Nation, there is no one thing has been so
effectual a promotion (such is the power of Tradition, and prejudice, which
even bear all before them in humane affairs) as the mutual charging one
another with the guilt of Schism. That the notion of Schism, whereon this
charge is built by the most, if not all, was invented by some of the Ancients,
to promote their plea, and advantage them with them with whom they had to do,
without due regard to the simplicity of the Gospel, at least in a
suitableness to the present state of the Church in those days, is too
evident. For on very small foundations have mighty fabrics, and (...) in
Religion been raised. As an Ability to judge of the present posture and
Condition of affairs, with counsel to give direction for their order and
mannagement, toward any end proposed, not an Ability to contri^e for events,
and to knit on one thing upon another, according to a probability of success
for continuance, which is almost constantly disturbed by unexpected
providentiall interveniences, leaving the Contrivers at a perplexing loss,
will be found to be the sum of humane wisdom; so it will be our wisdom in
the things of God, not to judge according to what by any means is made present
to us, and its principles on that account rendered ready to exert themselves,
but ever to recoile to the original, and first institution. When a man first
falls into some current, he finds it strong, and almost impassable; trace it to
its fountain, and it is but a dribling gutter* Paul tells the members of the
Church of Corinth, that there were divisions amongst them, breaches of that
Love and Order, that ought to be observed in Religious Assemblies. Hence there
is a sin of Schism raised; which when considered as now stated, does no more
relate to that treated on by the Apostle, then Simon Son of Jonas, love
thou me, does to the Popes Supremacy; or Christ's saying to Peter of John, If I
will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee, did to the report, that
went afterward abroad, that that Disciple should not die. When God shall have
reduced his Churches to their Primitive Purity and institution, when they are
risen, and have shaken themselves out of the dust, and things of Religion
return to their native simplicity, it is scarce possible to imagine, what
Vizards will fall off, and what a contrary appearance many things will have, to
what they now walk up and down in.

I wish that those, who are indeed really concerned in this business,. 48.
namely, the members of particular Churches, who have voluntarily given up
themselves to walk in them according to the appointment of Christ, would
seriously consider, what evil lies at the door, if they give place to
causeless differences, and divisions amongst themselves. Had this sin of
Schism been rightly stated, as it ought, and the guilt of it charged in its
proper place, perhaps some would have been more careful in their deportment in
their Relations. At present, the dispute in the World relating hereunto, is
about Subjection to the Pope, and the Church of Rome, as it is called: And this
managed on the Principles of Edicts of Counsels, with the practices of
Princes, and Nations, in the days long ago past, with the like
considerations, wherein the concernment of Christians is doubtless very small.
Or of Obedience, and conformity to Metropolitan and Diocesan Bishops in their
constitutions, and ways of worship jointly, or severally prescribed by them.
In more Ancient times, that which was agitated under the same name, was about
persons or Churches, renouncing the Communion and Society of Saints with all
other Churches in the World, consenting with them in the same Confession of
Faith, for the substance of it. And these differences respectively are handled,
in reference to what the state of things was, and is grown unto in the days,
wherein they are managed. When Paul wrote his Epistle, there was no occasion
given to any such Controversies, nor foundation laid making them possible* That
the Disciples of Christ ought every where to abound in love and forbearance
toward one another, especially to carry all things in union and Peace in those
Societies, wherein they were joined for the Worship of God, were his
Endeavors, and Exhortations: Of these things he is utterly silent: Let them,
who aim to recover themselves into the like state and condition, consider his
commands, exhortations, and reproves. Things are now generally otherwise
stated, which furnishes men with objections against what has been spoken, to
whose removal, and farther clearing of the whole matter, I shall now address
my self.

CHAP. III.
Objections against the former discourse proposed to consideration: Separation
from any Church in the Scripture not called Schism. Grounds of such
separation. Apostasy, irregular walking, sensuality. Of separation on the
account of Reformation. Of commands for separation. No Example of Churches
departing from the communion of one another. Of the common notion of Schism,
and the use made of it. Schism a breach of Union. That Union instituted by
Christ.

THat which lies obvious to every man against what has been delivered,. 1.
and which is comprehensive of all the particular objections, to which it
seems liable and obnoxious, is, that according to this description of Schism;
separation of any man or men from a true Church, or of one Church from others,
is not Schism; Seeing that is an evil only amongst the members of one Church,
whilst they continue so to be: which is so contrary to the judgment of the
generality of Christians in this business, that it ought to be rejected as
fond, and absurd.

Of what has been the judgment of most men in former Ages,. 2.
what it is in this, what strength there is in an Argument deduced from the
consent pretended; I am not as yet arrived to the consideration of Nor have I
yet manifested, what I grant of the General notion of Schism, as it may be
drawn by way of Analogy or proportion of Reason, from what is delivered in the
Scripture concerning it.

I am upon the precise signification of the word and description of the thing,.
3.
as used and given by the Holy Ghost: In this sense I deny that there is any
relinquishment, departure, or separation from any Church, or Churches
mentioned, or intimated in the Scripture, which is, or is called Schism, or
agrees with the description by them given us of that term. Let them that are
contrary minded attempt the proof of what they affirm. As far as a negative
Proposition is capable of evidence from any thing, but the weakness of the
opposition made unto it, that laid down will receive it by the ensuing
considerations.. 4.


All blameable departure from any Church or Churches, or relinquishment of them
mentioned in the Gospel, may be reduced to one of these three Heads or Causes:
1. Apostasy, 2. Irregularity of walking. 3. Professed sensuality.

1. Apostasy or falling away from the faith of the Gospel; and thereupon
forsaking the Congregations or Assemblyes for the worship of God in Jesus
Christ is mentioned Heb. 10. 25. (...), not wholly deserting the assembling our
selves, as is the manner of some* A separation from, and relinquishment of the
Communion of that Church, or those Churches, with whom men have assembled for
the worship of God, is the guilt here charged on some by the Apostle. Upon what
account they so separated themselves is declared v. 26. they sinned wilfully,
after they had received the knowledge of the truth; thereby shipping out their
necks from the yoke of Christ, v. 28. and drawing back to perdition v. 29. that
is, they departed off to Judaisme. I much question, whether any one would think
fit to call these men Schismatics? or whether we should so judge, or so speak
of any, that in these days should forsake our Churches, and turn Mahumetans;
Such a departure makes men Apostates not Schismatics. Of this sort many are
mentioned in the Scriptures. Nor are they accounted Schismatics, because the
lesser crime is swallowed up and drowned in the greater, but because their sin
is wholly of another nature.

Of some,. 5.
who withdraw themselves from Church communion, at least for a season, by their
disorderly and irregular walking we have also mention. The Apostle calls them
(...) 1 These. 5. 14. unruly, or disorderly persons, not abiding in obedience to
the order prescribed by Christ in, and unto his Churches: and says, they
walked (...) 2 Thessalonians. 3 6. out of all Church order: whom he would have warned
and avoided: so also (...) 2 Th. 3 2. persons that abide quietly in no place or
station, but wandered up and down; whom whatever their profession be, he denies
to have faith. That there were many of this sort in the Primitive times, who
through a vain and slight spirit neglected, and fell off from Church
Assemblyes, when yet they would not openly renounce the faith of Christ, is
known. Of such disorderly persons we have many in our days wherein we live,
whom we charge not with Schism, but vanity, folly, disobedience to the
Precepts of Christ in general.

Men also separated themselves from the Churches of Christ upon the account of
sensuality,. 6.
that they might freely indulge to their lusts and live in all manner of
pleasure all their days Jude 19. these are they that separate themselves,
sensual, having not the spirit; Who are these? they that turn the grace of
God into lasciviousness and that deny the Lord God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, v. 4. that defile the flesh after the manner of Sodom and Gomorrah, v.
7, 8. that spoke evil of things they knew not, and in things they knew
naturally as bruit beasts they corrupted themselves v. 10. Sinning openly like
beasts against the light of nature, so v. 12, 13, 16. these says the Apostle
are they that separate themselves, men given over to work all uncleanness
with delight and greediness in the face of the Son, abusing themselves and
justifying their Abominations with a pretense of the grace of God.

That there is any blameable separation from,. 7.
or relinquishment of any Church or Churches of Christ, mentioned in the
Scripture; but what may be referred to one of those heads, I am yet to learn.
Now whether the men of these Abominations are to be accounted Schismatics, or
their crime in separating themselves to be esteemed Schism, it is not hard to
judge: If on any of these accounts, any persons have withdrawn themselves from
the Communion of any Church of Christ, if they have on any motives of fear, or
love apostatized from the faith of the Gospel, if they do it, by walking
disorderly and loosely in their conversations, if they give themselves up to
sensuality and uncleanness, and so be no more able to bear the society of
them, whom God has called to holiness and purity of life, and worship, they
shall assuredly bear their own burden.

But none of these instances are comprehensive of the case inquired after;. 8.
so that for a close of them, I say, for a man to withdraw or withhold himself
from the communion external and visible of any Church or Churches, on the
pretension and plea, be it true or otherwise, that the worship, Doctrine,
discipline instituted by Christ is corrupted among them, with which corruption
he dares not defile himself, it is no where in the Scripture called Schism,
no^ is that case particularly exemplified, or expressly supposed, whereby a
judgment may be made of the fact at large; but we are left upon the whole
matter, to the guidance of such general principles and Rules, as are given us
for that end and purpose.

What may regularly, on the other hand,. 9.
be deduced from the commands given to turn away from them, who have only a
form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. to withdraw from them that walk disorderly, 2
These. 3. 6. not to bear, nor endure in communion, men of corrupt principles,
and wicked lives, Rev. 2. 14. but positively to separate from an Apostate
Church, Rev. 18. 4: that in all things we may worship Christ according to his
mind and appointment, what is the force of these commands (...), and the like,
is without the compass of what I am now treating about.

Of one particular Church* departing from that communion with another,. 10.
or others, be it what it will, which it ought to hold, unless in the
departing of some of them, in some things, from the common Faith, which is
supposed not to relate to Schism, in the Scripture, we have no example.
Diotrephes assuming an Authority over that Church, wherein he was placed, 3 John 9, 10. and for a season hindering the brethren from the performance of the
duty incumbent upon them, toward the great Apostle and others, makes the
nearest approach to such a division: but yet in such a distance, that it is not
at all to our purpose in hand. When I come to consider that communion, that
Churches have, or ought to have among themselves, this will be more fully
discussed. Neither is this my sense alone, that there is no instance of any
such separation as that, which is the matter of our debate, to be found in the
Scripture. It is confessed by others differing from me, in and about Church
affairs. To leave all ordinary communion in any Church with dislike, where
opposition, or offense offers it self, is to separate from such a Church in
the Scripture sense; such separation was not in being in the Apostles time, say
they, Pap^^accom. p. 55. But how they came to know exactly the sense of the
Scripture in and about things not mentioned in them, I know not. As I said
before, were I unwilling, I do not as yet understand how I may be compelled to
carry on the notion of Schism any farther: Nor is there need of adding any
thing to demonstrate how little the conscience of a godly man, walking
peaceably in any particular Church society, is concerned in all the clamarous
disputes of this Age about it; being built on false Hypotheses, presumptions,
and notions, no other way considerable, but as received by tradition from our
Fathers.

But I shall for the sake of some carry on this Discourse to a fuller issue;.
11.
There is another common notion of Schism, which pleads to an original from
that spoken expressly of it, by a parity of reason, which tolerable in it
self, has been and is injuriously applied, and used, according as it has
fallen into the hands of men, who needed it as an engine to fix or improve
them in the station wherein they are, or were; and wherewith they are pleased.
Indeed being invented for several purposes, there is nothing more frequent
then for men, who are scarce able to keep off the force of it from their own
heads, whilst managed against them by them above; at the same time vigorously
to apply it for the oppression of all under them. What is on all hands
consented unto, as its general nature, I shall freely grant, that I might have
liberty and advantage thence to debate the restriction and application of it to
the several purposes of men, prevailing themselves thereon.

Let then the general demand be granted,. 12.
that Schism is (...), the breach of Union; which I shall attend with one
reasonable postulatum, namely, that this union be an union of the appointment
of Jesus Christ; The consideration then of what, or what sort of union in
reference to the worship of God according to the Gospel, is instituted and
appointed by Jesus Christ, is the proper foundation of what I have farther to
offer in this business. Let the breach of this if you please be accounted
Schism, for being an evil, I shall not contend by what name or title it be
distinguished. It is not pleaded, that any kind of relinquishment or desertion
of any Church or Churches, is presently Schism, but only such a separation, as
breaks the bond of Union instituted by Christ.

Now this union being instituted in the Church, according to the various
acceptions of that word, so is it distinguished. Therefore for a discovery of
the nature of that which is particularly to be spoken to, and also its
contrary, I must show

1. The several considerations of the Church, wherein, and with which, union
is to be preserved.

2. What that union is, and wherein it does consist, which according to the
mind of Christ we are to keep and observe with the Church, under the several
notions of it respectively.

3 And how that union is broken, and what is that sin whereby it is done.

In handling this triple proposal, I desire that it may not be expected that I
should much insist on any thing that falls in my way, though never so useful
to my end and purpose, which has been already proved and confirmed by others
beyond all possibility of control; and such will many, if not most of the
principles, that I proceed upon, appear to be.

CAP. IV.
Several Acceptations in the Scripture of the name Church. Of the Church
Catholic properly so called. Of the Church visible. Perpetuity of particular
Churches. A mistake rectifyed. The nature of the Church Catholic evinced.
Bellarmine his description of the Church Catholic. Union of the Church
Catholic wherein it consists. Union by way of consequence. Unity of Faith. Of
Love. The Communion of the Catholic Church in, and with itsselfe. The breach
of the Union of the Church Catholic, wherein it consists. Not morally
possible. Protestants not guilty of it. The Papal world out of interest in the
Church Catholic. As partly profane. Miracles no evidence of Holiness. Partly
ignorant. Self Justitiaries. Idolatrous. Worshippers of the Beast.

TO begin with the first thing proposed.. 1.
The Church of Christ living in this world (as to our present concernment) is
taken in Scripture three ways.

1. For the Mystical body of Christ, his Elect, Redeemed, Justified and
Sanctified ones throughout the world, commonly called the
Church-Catholick-Militant.

2. For the Universality of men throughout the world, called by the preaching
of the word, visibly professing and yiedling obedience to the Gospel; called
by some the Church-Catholick visible.

3. For a particular Church of some place, wherein the instituted worship of
God in Christ is celebrated according to his mind.

From the Rise and nature of the things themselves,. 2.
does this distinction of the signification of the word Church arise; for
whereas the Church is a society of men called out of the world, It is evident
there is mention of a twofold call in Scripture, one effectual, according to
the purpose of God Romans 8. 28. the other only external. The Church must be
distinguished according to its answer, and obedience to these calls, which
gives us the two first states and considerations of it. And this is confessed
by the ordinary gloss, ad Romans 8. Vocatio exterior fit per Praedicatores, and
est communis bonorum, and malorum, interior vero tantum est Electorum. And
whereas there are Laws and external rules for joint communion, given to them
that are called, (which is confessed) the necessity of Churches in the last
acceptance, wherein obedience can alone be yielded to those Laws, is thereby
established.

In the first sense the Church has as such,. 3.
the properties of perpetuity, invisibility, infallibility, as to all necessary
means of Salvation attending of it; not as notes whereby it may be known,
either in the whole, or any considerable part of it, but as certain Adjuncts
of its nature, and existence. Neither are there any signs of less or more
certainty, whereby the whole may be discerned, or known as such; though there
are of the Individualls, whereof it does consist.

In the second,. 4.
the Church has perpetuity visibility, and infallibility as qualifyed above,
in a secondary sense; namely, not as such, not as visible and confessing, but
as comprizing the individualls whereof the Catholic Church does consist. For
all that truly believe, profess; though all that profess, do not truly
believe.

Whether Christ has had always a Church in the last sense,. 5.
and Acceptance of the word, in the world, is a most needless enquiry: nor
are we concerned in it, any farther then in other matters of fact, that are
recorded in story: though I am apt to believe, that although very many in all
Ages kept up their station in, and Relation to the Church in the two former
acceptations, yet there was in some of them scarce any visible Society of
worshippers, so far answering the institution of Christ, as to render them fit
to be owned and joined withal, as a visible particular Church of Christ: but
yet, though the notions of men were generally corrupt, the practice of all
professors throughout the world, whereof so little is recorded, at least of
them that did best, is not rashly to be determined of. Nor can our Judgment be
censured in this, by them who think, that when Christ lay in the Grave, there
was no Believer left, but his Mother, and that the Church was preserved in that
one person: So was Bernard minded Tractat. de pass. Dom. (ego sum vitis) s^la
per illud triste sabbathum stetit in fide, and salvata fuit Ecclesia in ipsa
sola. Of the same mind is Marsilius in Sent. Quaest 20. Art. 3. as are also
others of that sort of men, see Bannes in 2. 2. Thom. Quaest. 1. Art. 10. I no
way doubt of the perpetual existence of innumerable Believers in every age,
and such as made the profession, that is absolutely necessary to salvation one
way or other: though I question a regular association of men, for the
celebration of instituted worship, according to the mind of Christ. The 7000 in
Israel, in the days of Elijah, were members of the Church of God, and yet did
not constitute a Church state among the ten Tribes. But these things must be
farther spoken to.

I cannot but by the way reminde a learned Person,. 6.
with whom I have formerly occasionally had some debate in print, about
Episcopacy, and the state of the first Churches, of a mistake of his, which he
might have prevented with a little enquiry into the judgment of them, whom he
undertook to confute at a venture. I having said, that there was not any
ordinary Church Officer instituted in the first times, relating to more
Churches in his Office, or to any other Church then a single particular
Congregation; He replies, that this is the very same, which his memory
suggested to him out of the Saints Belief, printed 12 or 14 years since,
where instead of that Article of the Apostolic Symbol, the holy Catholic
Church, this very Hypothesis was substituted. If he really believed that in
professing I owned no instituted Church with Officers of one denomination in
Scripture, beyond a single sense v. 24. says the Apostle, I fill up that
Congregation, I renounced the Catholic Church, or was any way necessitated so
to do, I suppose he may by what has now been expressed, be rectifyed in his
Apprehension. If he was willing only to make use of the advantage, wherewith he
supposed himself accommodated by that expression, to press the persuasion
owned in the minds of ignorant men, who could not but startle at the noise of
denying the Catholic Church, it may pass at the same rate, that most of the
reports in such discourses are to be allowed at.. 7.
But to proceed.

In the first sense the word is used Mat. 16. 28. upon this rock will I build
my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; this is the
Church of the Elect, redeemed, justified, sanctified ones, that are so built on
Christ; and these only, and all these are interested in the promise made to the
Church, as such in any sense, but is peculiarly made therein, to every one,
that is truly and properly a part, and member of that Church. Who, and who
only are interested in that promise Christ himself declares Joh. 6. 40. Joh.
10 28, 29. Joh. 17. 20, 24. they that will apply this to the Church in any
other sense must know that it is incumbent on them to establish the promise
made to it unto every one that is a true member of the Church in that sense
which whatever be the sense of the promise, I suppose they will find difficult
work of. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word, that he might present it to himself a Glorious Church not having spot,
or wrinkle, or any such thing. He speaks only of those, whom Christ loved
antecedently to his dying for them, whereof his love to them was the cause; who
they are is manifest, Joh. 10. 15. Joh. 17. 17. And those on whom by his death
he accomplished the effects mentioned, of washing, cleansing and sanctifying
bringing them into the Condition promised to the bride the Lambs wife, Rev. 19.
8. which is the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 2. of elected and saved ones v. 27.
Col. 1. 18. contains an expression of the same light and evidence; Christ is
the head of the body the Church; not only a governing head, to give it Rules
and Laws, but as it were a Natural head unto the body, which is influenced by
him with a new spiritual life, which Bellarmine professes against, as any
requisite condition to the members of the Catholic Church, which he pleads
for: In that same which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for
his bodies sake* which is the Church: which assertion is exactly parallel to
that of 2 Timothy 2. 10. Therefore I endure all things for the Elects sake, that
they may obtain Salvation; so that the Elect and the Church are the same
persons under several considerations; and therefore even a particular Church,
on the account of its participation of the nature of the Catholic, is called
Elect, 1 Pet. 5. 13. and so the Church Mat. 16. 18. is expounded by our Savior
himself Mat. 22. 24. But to prove at large by a multiplication of Arguments
and testimonies, that the Catholic Church, or Mystical body of Christ
consists of the whole number of the Elect, as Redeemed, Justified, Sanctified,
Called, Believing, and yiedling obedience to Christ throughout the world (I
speak of it as Militant in any one Age) and of them only, were as needlessly
actum agere, as a man can well devise. It is done already, and that to the
purpose uncontroulably, terque quaterque. And the substance of the doctrine is
delivered by Aquinas himself p. 3. Q. 8. A. 3. In brief, the sum of the
inquiry upon this head, is concerning the matter of that Church, concerning
which such glorious things are spoken in Scripture; namely, that it is the
Spouse, the Wife, the Bride, the Sister, the only one of Christ, his D^ve
undefiled, his Temple, Elect, Redeemed, his Sione, his Body, his new Jerusalem;
concerning which inquiry, the Reader knows where he may abundanly find
satisfaction.

That the asserting the Catholic Church in this sense is no new Apprehension,.
8.
is known to them, who have at all looked backward to what was past before us.
Omnibus consideratis (says Austin) puto me non temere dicere, alios ita esse
in domo dei, ut ips^ etiam sint eadem domus Dei, quae dicitur aedificari supra
petram, quae unica columba appellatur, quae sponsa pulchra sine macula, and
ruga, and hortus conclusus, fons signatus, patens aquae vivae, paradisus cum
fructu pomorum, alios autem ita constat esse in domo, ut non pertineant ad
compagem domus -- Sed sicut esse palea dicitur in frumentis. de Bapt. lib. 1.
cap. 51. who is herein followed by not a few of the Papists: hence says Biel.
accipitur etiam Ecclesia pro tota multitudine praedestinatorum. in Canon. Miss.
Lec. 22. In what sense this Church is invisible, was before declared. Men
elected, redeemed, justified, as such are not visible, for that which makes
them so, is not: But this hinders not but that they may be so upon other
Consideration; sometimes to more, sometimes to fewer, yea they are so always
to some. Those that are may be seen; and when we say they are visible, we do
not intend that they are actually seen by any that we know,. 9.
but that they may be so.

Bellarmine gives us a description of this Catholic Church (as the name has
of late been used at the pleasure of men, and wrested to serve every design
that was needful to be carried on) to the interest which he was to contend
for, but in it self perfectly ridiculous. He tells us out of Austine that the
Church is a living Body, wherein is a body and a soul, thence says he the
soul is the internal graces of the spirit, Faith, Hope, and Love: the body is
the external profession of Faith; some are of the soul and body perfectly
united to Christ by faith, and the profession of it; some are of the soul that
are not of the body, as the Catechumeni, which are not as yet admitted to be
members of the visible Church, but yet are true believers. Some says he, are
of the body, that are not of the soul, who having no true grace, yet out of
hope or temporal fear, do make profession of the faith, and these are like
the hair, nails, and ill humors in an humane body. Now says, Bellarmine our
definition of a Church comprizeth only this last sort, whilst they are under
the head the Pope; which is all one, as if he had defined a man to be a dead
creature, composed of hair, nails, and ill humors, under an hat:. 10.
but of the Church in this sense so far.

It remains then, that we enquire what is the Union which the Church in this
sense has, from the wisdom of its head Jesus Christ. That it is one, that
has an union with its head, and in it self, is not questioned. It is one
sheepfold, one Body, one spouse of Christ, his only one as unto him, and that
it might have oneness in it self, with all the fruits of it, our Savior
prays, Joh. 17. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. the whole of it is described Ephesians. 4. 15,
16. may grow up into him in all things, which is the head even Christ, from
whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted, by that which every
joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, makes increase of the body, to the edifying it self in love. And of the
same importance is that of the same Apostle, Col: 2. 19. not holding the head,
from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the increase of God.

Now in the union of the Church in. 11.
every sense, there is considerable, both the formalis ratio of it, whence it
is, what it is, and the way, and means, whereby it exerts it self, and is
useful and active in communion* The first, in the Church, as now stated,
consists in its joint holding the head, and growing up into him by virtue of
the communication of supplies unto it therefrom, for that end and purpose. That
which is the formal Reason, and cause of the Union of the members with the
Head, is the formal Reason and Cause of the Union of the members with
themselves. The Original Union of the members is in and with the Head; and by
the same have they union with themselves as one body. Now the inhabitation of
the same Spirit in him and them, is that which makes Christ Personal, and his
Church, to be one Christ mystical, 1 Cor. 12. 12. Peter tells us, that we are
by the promises made partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. we are (...),
we have communion with it; that (...) is no more but (...), I cannot easily
consent. Now it is in the person of the Spirit whereof we are by the promise
made partakers: he is the Spirit of promise Ephesians. 1. 13. promised by God to
Christ, Act. 2. 33. (...), and by him to us Joh. 14. 16. being of old the great
promise of the Covenant Is. 59. 21. Ezekiel. 11. 17. cap. 26. 36. Now in the
participation of the Divine nature consists the Union of the Saints with
Christ. Ioh. 6. 5. our Savior tells us, that it arises from eating his flesh
and drinking his Blood: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells
in me, and I in him. This he expounds v. 63. it is the spirit that quickneth,
the flesh profits not. By the quickening Spirit, inhabitation in Christ, and
Christ in it, is intended. And the same he manifests in his prayer that his
Church may be one in the Father, and the Son, as the Father is in him, and he
in the Father Ioh. 17. 21. for the Spirit being the Love of the Father, and of
the Son, is vinculum Trinitatis: and so here of our Union in some resemblance.

The unity of members in the body natural with one head is often chosen to set
forth the union of the Church 1 Cor. 12. 12. 1 Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians 5. 23. Col. 1.
19. now every man can tell,. 12.
that, union of the head and members, whereby they become all one body, that
and not another, is oneness of soul; whereby the whole is animated, which
makes the body, be it less or greater, to be one body. That which answers
hereunto, in the mystical body of Christ, is the animation of the whole by his
spirit, as the Apostle fully 1 Cor. 15. 45. The union between husband and wife
is also chosen by the Holy Ghost to illustrate the union between Christ and his
Church. For this cause shall a man forsake his Father and his Mother and cleave
to his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh; this is a great mystery, but I
speak concerning Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5. 31, 32. The union between man
and wife we have Genesis 2. 24. they be no more twain but one flesh; of Christ
and his Church that they are one spirit. For he that is joined to the Lord is
one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. See also another similitude of the same importance
Ioh. 15. 5. Romans 11. 16, 17. This I say is the fountain radical union of the
Church Catholic in its self, with its head and formal reason of it.

Hence flows a double consequentiall Union that it has also.. 13.
1. Of Faith. All men, united to Christ by the inhabitation of the same Spirit
in him and them, are by it from, and according to the word, taught of God, Is.
54. 13. Ioh. 6. 45. so taught every one of them, as to come to Christ v. 46.
that is by bilieving, by faith. They are so taught of God, as that they shall
certainly have that measure of knowledge and faith, which is needful to bring
them to Christ, and to God by him. And this they have by the unction or Spirit,
which they have received 1 Ioh. 2. 21, 27. accompaning the Word by virtue of
Gods Covenant with them, Is. 59. 29. And hereby are all the members of the
Church Catholic, however divided in their visible profession, by any
differences among themselves, or differenced by the several measures of gifts
and graces they have received, brought to the perfection aimed at, to the unity
of the Faith, and to the acknowledgement of the Son of God, to a perfect man,
to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13.

Nor was this hidden from some of the Papists themselves.. 14.
Ecclesia sancta corpus est Christi una spiritu vivificata, unita fide una, and
sanctificata. says Hugo de Victore, de sacram lib. 2. as he had said before in
the former Cap. sicut scriptum est qui non habet Spiritum Christi, hic non est
ejus: qui non habet Spiritum Christi, non est membrum Christi: in corpore uno
Spiritus unus, nihil in corpore mortuum, nihil extra corpus vivum. See to the
same purpose Enchirid. Council Colon in Symbol.

With peculiar reference to the members themselves,. 15.
there is another necessary consequence of the union mentioned; and that is the
mutual love of all those united in the head as before toward one another, and
of every one toward the whole, as so united in the head Christ Jesus; There is
an increase made of the body to the edifying it self in love Ephesians. 4. 16. And
so it becomes the bond of perfectness to this body of Christ. I cannot say,
that the members or parts of this Church have their union in themselves by
Love; because they have that with, and in Christ, whereby they are one in
themselves Ioh. 17. 21, 23. they are one in God even in Christ, where their
life is hid Col. 3. 3. but it is the next and immediate principle of that
communion, which they severally have one with another, and the whole body, in
and with it self. I say then that the communion which the Catholic Church,
the mystical body of Christ, has, with and in it self, springing from the
union, which it has in and with Christ, and in it self, thereby, consists in
love, exerting it self in inexpressible variety, according to the present
state of the whole, its relation to Christ, to Saints and Angels, with the
conditions and occasions of the members of it respectively, 1 Cor. 12. 26, 27.

What has been spoken concerning the union and communion of this Church,. 16.
will not I suppose, meet with any contradiction. Granting that there is such a
Church, as that we speak of, Coetus praedestinatorum credentium, the Papists
themselves will grant that Christ alone is its head, and that its union arises
from its subjection to him, and dependence on him. Their modesty makes them
contented with constituting the Pope in the room of Christ, as he is as it
were a political head for government; they have not as yet directly put in
their claim to his office as a mystical Head, influencing the body with Life
and Motion: though by their figment of the Sacraments communicating grace, ex
opere operato, and investing the original power of dispencing them in the Pope
only, they have contended fair for it. But if any one can inform me of any
other union, or communion of the Church, described as above, then these laid
down, I shall willingly attend unto his instructions: In the mean time, to
carry on the present discourse unto that which is aimed at, it is manifest,
that the breach of this union must consist in these two things.

1. First,. 16.
the casting out, expelling, and looseing that spirit, which abiding in us,
gives us this union.

2. The loss of that love, which thence flows into the body of Christ, and
believers, as parts and members thereof.

This being the state of the Church under the first consideration of it,. 17.
certainly it would be an extravagancy scarcely to be paralleled, for any one
to affirm a breach of this union as such, to be Schism under that notion of
it, which we are enquiring after. But because there is very little security to
be enjoyed in an expectation of the sobriety of men in things wherein they are,
or suppose they may be concerned, that they may know before hand, what is
farther incumbent on them, if in reference to us, they would prevail
themselves of any such notion, I here inform them that our persuasion is, that
this union was never utterly broken by any man taken into it, or ever shall be
to the end of the World; and I suppose they esteem it vain to dispute about
the Ad^uncts,. 18.
of that which is denied to be.

But yet this persuasion being not common to us, with them with whom we have to
do in this matter, I shall not farther make use of it, as to our present
defense. That any other union of the Catholic Church, as such, can possibly be
fancyed or imagined by any* (as to the substance of what has been pleaded)
leaving him a plea for the ordinary so^ndnes of his Intellectualls, is denied.

Let us see now then what is our concernment in this discourse;. 19.
unless men can prove that we have not the spirit of God, that we do not
savingly believe in Jesus Christ, that we do not sincerely love all the
Saints, his whole body, and every member of it, they cannot disprove our
interest in the Catholic Church. It is true indeed, men that have so great a
confidence of their own Abilities, and such a contempt of the World, as to
undertake to dispute them out of conclusions from their natural senses, about
their proper Objects, in what they see, feel, and handle, and will not be
satisfied, that they have not proved there is no motion, whilst a man walks for
a conviction under their eye; may probably venture to disprove us, in our
spiritual sense and experience also, and to give us Arguments, to persuade us
that we have not that communion with Christ, which we know we have every day.
Although I have a very mean persuasion of my own Abilities, yet I must needs
say, I cannot think that any man in the world can convince me, that I do not
love Jesus Christ in sincerity, because I do not love the Pope, as he is so.
Spiritual Experience is a security against a more cunning Sophister, then any
Jesu^^te in the world, with whom the Saint^ of God have to deal all their
lives, Ephesians. 6. 12. And doubtless through the rich grace of our God, help will
arise to us, that we shall never make a Covenant with these men for peace, upon
conditions for worse then those that Nahash would have exacted on the men of
Jabesh Gilead^, which were but the loss of one eye with an abiding reproach:
they requiring of us, the deprivation of whatsoever we have to see by, whether
as men, or Christians, and that with a reproach, never to be blotted out.

But as we daily put our Consciences upon trial as to this thing 1 Cor. 13. 5.
and are put unto it by Satan;. 20.
so are we ready at all times to give an account to our Adversaries of the
hope that us in us. Let them sift us to the utmost, it will be to our
advantage. Only let them not bring frivolous objections, and such as they know
are of no weight with us; speaking (as is their constant manner) about the Pope
and their Church, things utterly foreign to what we are presently about,
miserably begging the thing in Question. Let them weigh (if they are able) the
true nature of Union with Christ, of faith in him, of Love to the Saints;
consider them in their proper Causes Adjuncts and Effects with a sprituall eye,
laying aside their prejudices and intolerable impositions; if we are found
wanting as to the truth and sincerity of these things, if we cannot give some
account of our translation from death to life, of our implantation into Christ,
and our participation of the Spirit, we must bear our own burden: if
otherwise, we stand fast on the most noble and best account of Church Union
what ever; and whilst this shield is safe, we are less ^mxious about the
issue of the ensuing contest. Whatever may be the apprehensions of other men, I
am not in this thing sollicitous (I speak not of my self, but assuming for
the present the person of one concerning whom these things may be spoken,)
whilst the efficacy of the Gospel accomplisheth in my heart all those divine,
and mighty effects; which are ascribed unto it as peculiarly, it works toward
them that believe; whilst I know this one thing, that whereas I was blind, now
I see, whereas I was a servant of sin, I am now free to righteousness and at
liberty from bondage unto death, and instead of the fruits of the flesh, I find
all the fruits of the Spirit brought forth in me to the praise of Gods glorious
grace; whilst I have an experience of that powerful work of conversion, and
being borne again, which I am able to manage against all the accusations of
Satan, having peace with God upon justification by faith, with the love of God
shed abroad in my heart by the Holy Ghost investing me in the privileges of
Adoption, I shall not certainly be moved with the disputes of men, that would
persuade me, I do not belong to the Catholic Church, because I do not follow
this, or that, or any part of men in the world.

But you will say, this you will allow to them also with whom you have to do,.
21.
that they may be members of the Catholic Church; I leave other men to stand
or fall to their own Master: only as to the Papal multitude on the account of
several inconsistencies between them, and the members of this Church, I shall
place some swords in the way, which will reduce their number to an invisible
scantling; I might content my self by affirming at once, that upon what has
been spoken, I must exclude from the Catholic Church all, and every one, whom
Bellarmine intends to include in it as such; namely those, who belong to the
Church as hairs and ill humors to the body of a man. But I add in particular.

1. All wicked and profane persons, of whom the Scripture speaks expressly
that they shall not enter into the Kingdom of God,. 22.
are indisputably cut off: Whatever they pretend in show at any time in the
outward duties of Devotion, they have neither faith in Christ, nor love to the
Saints: and so have part and fellowship neither in the union nor communion of
the Catholic Church.

How great a proportion of that Synogogue,. 23.
whereof we are speaking, will be taken off by this sword; of their Popes,
Princes, Prelates, Clergy, Votaries, and people, and that not by a rule of
private surmises, but upon the visible issue of their being servants to sin,
^aters of God, and good men, is obvious to all. Persons of really so much as
reformed lives amongst them are like the berries after the shaking of an Olive
tree 1 Cor 6. 7, 8, 9, 10. Rev. 22. 15.

I find some persons of late appropriating holiness and Regeneration to the
Roman party,. 24.
on this account, that among them only miracles are wrought; Ille Coetus
Christianorum qui solus in orb clare^ regeneratis est ecclesia; solus Coetus
Christianorum papae subditorum Claret regeneratis; ergo. prob. apud illas solos
sunt qui miracula faciunt. ergo. Val Mag.
which is say they the only proof of true Holiness. But these men err as
their Predecessors, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. Amongst
all the evidences that are given in Scripture of Regeneration; I suppose they
will scarcely find this to be one; and they who have no other assurance that
they are themselves borne of God, but that some of their Church work miracles,
had need maintain also that no man can be assured thereof in this life. They
will find that a broken reed if they lean upon it. Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2.
Will it evince all the members of their Church to be Regenerate, Mat. 7. 22,
23.
or only some? Exodus 3. 7.
if they say all; I ask then what becomes of Bellarmin's Church, which is made
up of them, who are not Regenerate, If some only I desire to know on what
account the miracles of one man may be an evidence to some in his society that
they are Regenerate and not to others? Or whether the foundation of that
distinction must not lie in themselves; but the truth is, the miracles now
pretended are an evidence of a contrary condition to what these men are willing
to own 2 Thessalonians 2. 11, 12.

2. All Ignorant persons,. 25.
into whose hearts God has not shined to give them the knowledge of his Glory
in the face of Jesus Christ, are to be added to the former account. There is a
measure of knowledge of absolute and indispensable necessity to Salvation,
whereof how short the most of them are, is evident. Among the open Abominations
of the Papal combination, for which they ought to be an abhorrencie to
mankind, their professed design of keeping the people in ignorance is not the
least, Hos. 4. 6. That it was devotion to themselves, and not to God, which
they aimed to advance thereby, is by experience sufficiently evinced: But that,
whose Reverence is to be preserved by its being hid, is in it self
contemptible. What other thoughts wise men could have of Christian Religion in
their mannagement of it, I know not. Woe to you Romish Clergy, for you have
taken away the key of knowledge, ye entered not in your selves, and them that
were entering in you hindered. The people has perished under your hands for
want of knowledge, Zech: 11. 15, 16, 17. The sigment of an implicit faith, as
managed by these men, to charm the spirits and Consciences of poor perishing
creatures with security in this life, will be found as pernicious to them in
the issue, as their Purgatory, invented on the same account,. 26.
will be useless.

3. Add to these all Hypocritical selfe-justiciaries who seek for a
Righteousness as it were by the works of the Law, which they never attained
to Romans 9. 31, 32. though they take pains about it Chap. 10. 15. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9,
10, 11. by this sword will fall the fattest cattle of their Herd. How the hand
of the Lord on this account sweeps away their Devo^ionists, and therein takes
down the pride of their glory, the day will discover; yet besides these, there
are two other things that will cut them down as the grass falls before the
since of the Mower.

1. The first of these is Idolatry:. 27.
be not deceived, no Idolaters shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Without are Idolaters, Rev. 22. 15. this added to their lives has made
Christian Religion, where known only as by them professed, to be an abomination
to Jews and Gentiles. Some will one day besides himself answer for Averroes
determining of the case as to his soul. Quoniam Christiani adorant quod
comedunt, anima mea sit cum Philosophis. Whether they are Idolaters or no,
whether they yield the worship due to the Creator to the Creature, has been
sisted to the utmost, and the charge of its evil, which the jealous God does
of all things most abhore, so fastened on them beyond all possibility of
escape, that one of the wisest of them has at length fixed on that most
desperate and profligate refuge, that some kind of Idolatry is lawful, because
Peter mentions abominable Idolatries, 1 Pet. 4. 5. who is therein so far from
distinguishing of several sorts and kinds of it to any such purpose as that he
aggravates all sort, and kinds of it with the Epithet of Nefarious, or
abominable.

A man may say,. 28.
what is there almost that they have not committed lewdness in this kind
withal; on every hill, and under every green tree is the filth of their
abomination found; Saints and Angels in Heaven; Images of some that never
were, of others, that had been better they never had been; bread and wine,
Cross and nails, Altars, wood, and iron, and the Pope on earth are by them
adored. The truth is, if we have any assurance left us of any thing in the
world, that we either see or hear, feel or taste and so consequently that we
are alive, and not other men, the poor Indians who worship a piece of red
cloth, are not more gross Idolaters then they are.

2. All that worship the Best set up by the Dragon,. 29.
all that receive his mark in their hands, or forehead, are said not to have
their names written in the book of life of the Lamb Rev. 13 8. which what
aspect it bears toward the visible Roman Church time will manifest.

All these sorts of persons we except against,. 30.
as those, that have no interest in the union of the Catholick-Church. All
profane, ignorant, selfe-justiciaries, all Idolaters, worshippers, or adorers
of the Papal power, if any remain among them, not one way or other visibly
separated from them, who fall not under some one or more of these Exceptions;
as we grant they may be members, of the Catholick-Church, so we deny, that they
are of that which is called the Roman. And I must needs inform others by the
way, that whilst the course of their conversation, ignorance of the mystery of
the Gospel, hatred of Good men, contempt of the spirit of God, his gifts and
graces, do testify to the Consciences of them, that fear the Lord, that they
belong not to the Church Catholic, it renders their rebuking of others, for
separating from any instituted Church National, (as is pretended) or more
restrained, very weak, and contemptible. All discourses about meats, have a
worm at the root, whilst there is a beam lies in the Eye. Do men suppose
that a man who has tasted how gracious the Lord is, and has by grace obtained
communion with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, walking at peace with
God, and in a sense of his love all his days, filled with the Holy Ghost, and
by him with joy unspeakable and glorious in believing, is not strengthened
against the rebukes, and disputes of men, whom he sees and knows by their
fruits, to be destitute of the spirit of God, uninterested in the fellowship of
the Gospel, and communion thereof.

CHAP. V.
Of the Catholic Church visible. Of the Nature thereof. In what sense the
Universality of Professors is called a Church Amiraldus his Judgment in this
business. The Union of the Church in this sense wherein it consists. Not the
same with the Union of the Church Catholic. Nor that of a particular
instituted Church. Not in relation to any one officer, or more, in
subordination to one another. Such a subordination not proveable. (...) of the
Nicene Synod. Of general Counsels. Union of the Church visible not in a
general Council. The true Unity of the Universality of professors asserted.
Things necessary to this union. Story of a Martyr at Bagdat. The Apostasy of
Churches from the unity of the Faith. Testimony of Hegesippus Vindicated Papal
Apostasy. Protestants not guilty of the breach of this Unity. The Catholic
Church in the sense insisted on, granted by the Ancients. Not a Political body.

THe Second general notion of the Church,. 1.
as it is usually taken, signifies the Universality of men professing the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and obedience to God in Christ, according to it,
throughout the World. This is that, which is commonly called the visible
Catholic Church, which now together with the union, which it has in its
self, and how that Unity is broken, falls under consideration.. 2.


That all Professors of the Gospel throughout the World, called to the
knowledge of Christ by the Word, do make up, and constitute his visible
Kingdom, by their professed subjection to him, and so may be called his
Church, I grant. That they are precisely so called in Scripture is not
unquestionable. What relation it stands in to all particular Churches, whether
as a Genus to its Species, or as a Totum to its parts, has lately by many been
discussed. I must crave leave to deny that it is capable of filling up, or of
being included in, any of these denominations and Relations. The Universal
Church we are speaking of, is not a thing that has as such, a specificative
form, from which it should be called an Universal Church; as a particular
has for its ground of being so called. Its but a collection of all that are
duly called Christians in respect of their profession; nor are the several
particular Churches of Christ in the world, so parts and members of any
Catholic Church, as that it should be constituted, or made up by them and of
them, for the order and purpose of an instituted Church, that is the
cellebration of the worship of God, and Institutions of Jesus Christ according
to the Gospel; which to assert, were to overthow a remarkable difference
between the economy of the Old Testament and the New Nor do I think that
particular Congregations do stand unto it in the Relation of Species unto a
Genus, in which the whole nature of it should be preserved and comprised, which
would deprive every one of membership in this Universal Church, which is not
joined actually to some particular Church or Congregation, then which nothing
can be more devoid of truth. To debate the thing in particular, is not my
present intention, nor is needful to the purpose in hand.

The sum is,. 3.
the Universal Church is not so called upon the same account that a particular
Church is so called. The formal Reason constituting a particular Church to be a
particular Church, is, that those of whom it does consist, do join together
according to the mind of Christ in the exercise of the same numericall
Ordinances for his worship: And in this sense the Universal Church cannot be
said to be a Church, as though it had such a particular form of its own; which
that it has, or should have, is not only false but impossible. But it is so
called, because all Christians throughout the world (excepting some individual
persons providentially excluded) do upon the enjoyment of the same preaching of
the word, the same Sacraments administered in specie, profes one common faith
and hope; but to the joint performance of any exercise of Religion, that they
should hea^e one Sermon together, or partake of one Sacrament, or have one
Officer for their Rule and Government, is ridiculous to imagine; nor do any
profess to think so, as to any of the particulars mentioned, but those only,
who have profit by the fable. As to the description of this Church, I shall
acquiesce in that lately given of it by a very learned Man. Says he, Ecclesia
Vniversalis* est communio, seu societas omnium coetuum (I had rather he had
said, and he had done it more agreeable to principles by himself laid down)
omnium Fidem Christianam profitentium (sive illi ad Ecclesias aliquas
particulares pertineant, sive non pertineant) qui Religionem Christianam
profitentur, consistens in eo, quod tamet^^ neque exercitia pietatis uno numero
frequentent, neque Sacramenta eadem numero participent, neque uno eodemque
omnino ordine regantur, and gubernentur, unum tamen corpus in eo constituunt,
quod eundem Christum Servatorem habere se profitentur, uno in Evangelio
propositum, iisdem promissionibus comprehensum, quas obsignant, and confirmant
Sacramenta, ex eadem institutione pendentia. Amyrald. These. de Eccles. nom and
defin The. 29.

There being then in the World a great multitude,. 4.
which no man can number, of all Nations, Kindreds, people, and languages,
professing the doctrine of the Gospel, not tied to mountains, or hills, Joh.
4. but worshipping (...). 1 Cor. 1. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Let us consider what union
there is amongst them as such, wrapping them all in the bond thereof, by the
will and appointment of Jesus Christ; and wherein the breach of that union does
consist, and how any man is or may be guilty thereof.

I suppose this will be granted:. 5.
That only Elect believers belong to the Church in this sense considered, is a
Chimaera feigned in the brains of the Romanists, and fastened on the Reformed
Divines. I wholly assent to Austins dispute on this head against the Donatists:
and the whole entanglement, that has been about this matter, has arisen from
obstinacy in the Papists in not receiving the Catholic Church in the sense
mentioned before; which to do, they know would be injurious to their interest.

This Church being visible and professing,. 6.
and being now considered under that constituting difference, that the union of
it cannot be the same with that of the Catholic Church before mentioned, it is
clear from hence, that multitudes of men belong unto it, who have not the
Relation mentioned before to Christ and his body; which is required in all
comprehended in that union; seeing many are called, but few are chosen. Nor can
it consist in a joint Assembly, either ordinary or extraordinary, for the
celebration of the Ordinances of the Gospel, or any one of them, as was the
case of the Church of the Jews, which met at set times in one place, for the
performance of that worship, which was then required, nor could otherwise be
accomplished. For as it is not at all possible, that any such thing should ever
be done, considering what is, and shall be, the estate of Christ's visible
Kingdom to the end of the World; so it is not (that I know of) pleaded, that
Christ has made any such appointment: yea it is on all hands confessed, at
least cannot reasonably be denied, that there is a supersedeas granted to all
supposalls of any such duty, incumbent on the whole visible Church, by the
Institution of particular Churches, wherein all the Ordinances of Christ are
duly to be administered.

I shall only add,. 7.
that if there be not an institution for the joining in the same numericall
Ordinances, the Union of this Church is not really a Church Union; I mean of an
Instituted Church, which consists therein but something of another nature.
Neither can that have the formal Reason of an instituted Church as such, which
as such can join in no one act of the worship of God instituted to be
performed in such societies: So that he that shall take into his thoughts, the
condition of all the Christians in the world: their present state, what it has
been for 1500 years, and what it is like to be (...), will easily understand,
what Church state they stand in, and relate unto.

3. It cannot possibly have its union by a Relation to any one Officer given to
the whole,. 8.
such an one as the Papists pretend the Pope to be. For though it be possible
that one Officer may have Relation to all the Churches in the World, as the
Apostles severally had (when Paul said the care of all the Churches lay on him)
who by virtue of their Apostolical commission were to be received, and
submitted to in all the Churches in the World, being antecedent in office to
them, yet this neither did, nor could make all the Churches one Church; no more
then in one man were an Officer or Magistrate in every Corporation in England,
this would make all those Corporations to be one Corporation. I do not suppose
the Pope to be an Officer to the whole Church visible as such, which I deny to
have an union or order capable of any such thing, but suppose him an Officer to
every particular Church, no union of the whole would thence ensue. That which
is one Church must join at least in some one Church act, numerically one. So
that though it should be granted, that the Pope were a general Officer unto
all and every Church in the World, yet this would not prove, that they all made
one Church, and had their Church-union in subjection to him, who was so an
Officer to them all; because to the constitution of such an Union, as has been
showed, there is that required, which in reference to the universal society of
Christians, is utterly and absolutely impossible. But the non-institution of
any such Officer ordinarily to bear rule in, and over all the Churches of God,
has been so abundantly proved by the Divines of the Reformed Churches, and he
who alone puts in his claim to that prerogative so clearly manifested to be
quite another thing, that I will not needlessely go over that work again;
something however shall afterward be remarked, as to his pretensions, from the
principles, whereon I proceed in the whole business.. 9.


There is indeed by some pleaded a subordination of Officers in this Church,
tending toward an union on that account; as that ordinary Ministers should be
subject to Di^cesan Bishops, they to Archbishops or Metropolitans, they again
to Patriarchs; where some would bound the process, though a parity of Reason
would call for a Pope. Nor will the Arguments pleaded for such a subordination
rest, until they come to be centred in some such thing.

But [1] before this plea be admitted,. 10.
it must be proved; that all these Officers are appointed by Jesus Christ; or
it will not concern us, who are enquiring solely after his will, and the
settling of conscience therein. To do this with such an evidence, that the
Consciences of all those, who are bound to yield obedience to Jesus Christ, may
appear to be therein concerned, will be a difficult task, as I suppose. And to
settle this once for all; I am not dealing with the men of that lazy
persuasion, that Church affairs are to be ordered by the prudence of our Civil
Superiors and Governors, and so seeking to justify a non submission to any of
their constitutions, in the things of this nature, or to evidence, that the so
doing is not Schism; nor do I concern my self in the order and appointment
of Ancient times, by men assembled in Synods and Counsels, wherein whatever
was the force of their determinations in their own Seasons, we are not at all
concerned, knowing of nothing that is obligatory to us, not pleading from
Sovereign Authority, or our own consent; but it is after things of pure
Institution that I am enquiring. With them who say there is no such thing in
these matters, we must proceed on other principles, then any yet laid down.

Also it must be proved,. 11.
that all these Officers are given, and do belong to the Catholic Church as
such, and not to the particular Churches of several measures, and dimensions,
to which they relate; which is not as yet, that I know of, so much as pretended
by them, that plead for this order. They tell us indeed of various arbitrary
distributions of the World, or rather of the Roman Empire into Patriarchats,
with the dependent Jurisdictions mentioned; and that all within the precincts
of those Patriarchats must fall within the lines of the subordination,
subjection, and communication before described; but as there is no
subordination between the Officers of one denomination in the inferior parts;
no more is there any between the Superior themselves, but they are independent
of each other. Now it is easily discernable, that these Patriarchats (how many
or how few soever they are) are particular Churches, not any one of them the
Catholic, nor altogether comprising all that are comprehended in the precincts
of it, (which none will say that ever they did) and therefore this may speak
something as to a combination of those Churches, nothing as to the union of the
Catholic as such, which they are not.

Supposing this Assertion to the purpose in hand (which it is not at all) it
would prove only a combination of all the Officers of several Churches,. 12.
consisting in the subordination and dependence mentioned, not of the whole
Church it self, though all the members of it should be at once imagined or
fancied (as what shall hinder men from fancying what they please) to be
comprised within the limits of those distributions, unles it be also proved,
that Christ has instituted several sorts of particular Churches Parochial,
Diocesan, Metropoliticall Patriarchall (I use the words in the present vulgar
acceptance, their signification having bin somewhat otherwise formerly;
paroecia being the care of a private Bishop, Provincia of a Metropolitan, and
Diocesis of a Patriarch) in the order mentioned, and has pointed out which of
his Churches shall be of those several kinds throughout the world; which that
it will not be done to the disturbance of my principles, whilst I live I have
some present good security.

And Because I take the men of this persuasion to be charitable men,. 13.
that will not think much of taking a little pains for the reducing any person
whatever from the error of his way, I would entreat them that they would
inform me what Patriarchate according to the institution of Christ, I (who by
the providence of God live here at Oxon) do de jure belong unto; that so I may
know how to preserve the union of that Church, and to behave my self therein;
And this I shall promise them, that if I were singly, or in conjunction with
any others, so considerable, that those great Officers should contend about,
whose subjects we should be, (as was done heretofore about the Bulgarians,)
that it should not at all startle me about the truth and excellency of
Christian Religion, as it did those poor Creatures, who being newly converted
to the faith, knew nothing of it but what they received from men of such
Principles.

But that this constitution is humane,. 14*
and the distributions of Christians in subjection unto Church Officers, into
such and such divisions of Nations and Countries prudentiall and aobitrary, I
suppose* will not be denied. The (...) of the Nicene Synod intends no more; nor
is any thing of institution, nor so much as of Apostolical tradition pleaded
therein. The following ages were of the same persuasion. Hence in the Council
of Chalcedon the Archiepiscopacy of Constantinople was advanced into a
Patriarchat, and many provinces cast in subjection thereunto, wherein the
Primates of Ephesus and Thrace were cut short of what they might plead (...)
for. And sundry other alterations were likewise made in the same kind Socrat
lib. 5. cap. 8. The ground and reason of which procedure, the Fathers assembled
sufficiently manifest in the reason assigned for the advancement of the Bishops
of Constantinople, which was for the Cities sake (...) Can. 3. Con. Constan.
And what was the judgment of the Council of Chalcedon upon this matter may be
seen in the composition and determination of the strife between Maximus Bishop
of Antioch, and Invenalis of Jerusalem Ac. 7. Con. Call. with translation of
Provinces from the Jurisdiction of one to another. And he that shall suppose
that such Assemblys as these were instituted by the will and appointment of
Christ in the Gospel, with Church Authority for such dispositions and
determinations, so as to make them of concernment to the unity of the Church,
will if I mistake not, be hardly bestead in giving the ground of that his
supposall.

4. I would know of them who desire to be under this Law,. 15.
whether the power with which Jesus Christ has furnished the Officers of his
Church come forth from the supreme mentioned Patriarchs and Archbishops, and
is by them communicated to the inferiors, or vice-versa; or whether all have
their power in an equal immediation from Christ; if the latter be granted,
there will be a greater independency established then most men are aware of,
(though the Papalins understood it in the Council of Trent) and a wound given
to successive Episcopal Ordination, not easily to be healed. That power is
communicated from the inferiors to the Superiors will not be pleaded. And
seeing the first must be insisted on, I beseech them not to be too hasty with
men not so sharp sighted as themselves, if finding the names they speak of
Barbarous and foreign as to the Scriptures, and the things themselves not at
all delineated therein, (...).

5. The truth is,. 16.
the whole subordination of this kind, which de facto has been in the world,
was so clearly an humane invention, or a prudentiall constitution (as has been
showed) (which being done by men professing authority in the Church, gave it as
it was called vi^ Ecclesiasticam) that nothing else in the issue is pleaded for
it. And now though I shall, if called thereunto manifest both the
unreasonablenesse and unsuitablenes to the design of Christ for his worship
under the Gospel, comparative noveltie, and mischievous issue of that
constitution; yet at the present, being no farther concerned but only to evince
that the union of the General visible Church does not therein consist, I shall
not need to add any thing to what has been spoken.

The Nicene Council,. 17.
which first made toward the confirmation of something, like somewhat, of what
was afterward introduced in some places, pleaded only (as I said before) the
(...), old usage for it, which it would not have done, could it have given a
better Original thereunto. And whatever the Antiquities then pretended might
be, we know that (...). And I do not fear to say, what others have done
before me, concerning the Canons of that first and best general Council, as
it is called, they are all hay and stubble; Nor yet does the laying this
custom on (...), in my apprehension, evince their judgment of any long
prescription. Peter speaking of a thing that was done a few years before,
says, that is was done (...), Act. 15. 7. somewhat a greater Antiquity, then
that by him intended, I can freely grant to the custom by the Fathers
pretended.

But a General Council is pleaded with the best color and pretense for a
bond of union to this General and visible Church.. 18.
In Consideration hereof, I shall not divert to the handling of the rise, right
use, Authority, necessity of such Counsels; about all which, somewhat in due
time toward satisfaction may be offered to those, who are not in bondage to
Names and Traditions. Nor shall I remark what has been the mannagement of the
things of God in all Ages in those Assemblies, many of which have been the
stains and ulcers of Christian Religion: Nor yet shall I say, with what little
disadvantage to the Religion of Jesus Christ, I suppose a loss of all the
Canons of all Counsels that ever were in the world, since the Apostles days,
with their acts and contests (considering what use is made of them) might be
undergone. Nor yet shall I digress to the usefulness of the Assemblies of
several Churches in their representatives, to consider and determine about
things of common concernment to them, with their tendencie to the preservation
of that communion, which ought to be amongst them; but as to the present
instance only offer

1. That such General Counsels,. 19.
being things purely extraordinary and occasional, (as is confessed) cannot be
an ordinary standing bond of union to the Catholic Church; and if any one
shall reply, that though in themselves, and in their own continuance they
cannot be so, yet in their Authority, Laws, and Canons they may! I must say,
that besides the very many Reasons I have to call into question the Power of
Lawmaking for the whole Society of Christians in the World, in all the General
Counsels that have been, or possibly can be on the Earth; the dispute about
the Title of those Assemblies, which pretend to this honor, which are to be
admitted, which excluded, are so endless; the Rules of judging them so dark,
lubricous, and uncertain, framed to the interest of contenders on all hands;
the Laws of them, which de facto have gone under that Title and Name, so
innumerable, burdensome, uncertain, and frivolus, in a great part so grossly
contradictory to one another, that I cannot suppose that any man upon second
thoughts, can abide in such an assertion; If any shall, I must be bold to
declare my affection to the doctrine of the Gospel maintained in some of those
Assemblies, for some hundreds of years, and then to desire him to prove, that
any General Council, since the Apostles fell asleep, has been so convened,
and managed, as to be enabled to claim that Authority to it self, which is,
or would be due to such an Assembly, instituted according to the mind of Christ.

That it has been of Advantage to the Truth of the Gospel,. 20.
that Godly Learned men, Bishops of Churches, have convened, and witnessed a
good Confession, in reference to the Doctrine thereof, and declared their
abhorrencie of the Errors, that are contrary thereunto, is confessed. That any
man, or men, is, are, or ever were entrusted by Christ with Authority so to
convene them, as that thereupon, and by virtue thereof, they should be invested
with a new Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction, at such a convention, and thence
should take upon them to make Laws and Canons, that should be Ecclesiastically
binding to any Persons, or Churches, as theirs, is not as yet to meattended
with any convincing evidence of Truth. And seeing at length it must be spoken,
I shall do it with submission to the thoughts of good men, that are any way
acquainted with these things, and in sincerity therein commend my Conscience to
God; that I do not know any thing that is extant, bearing clearer witness to
the sad degeneracy of Christian Religion in the profession thereof, nor more
evidently discovering the efficacy of another Spirit, than what was powered out
by Christ at his Ascension, nor containing more hay and stubble, that is to be
burned and consumed, then the stories of the Acts and Laws of the Counsels and
Synods, that have been in the World.

2. But to take them as they are, as to that alone wherein the first Counsels
had any evidence of the presence of the Holy Ghost with them,. 21.
namely, in the declaring the doctrine of the Gospel; it falls in with that
which I shall give in for the bond of union unto the Church in the sense
pleaded about.

3. Such an Assembly arising cumulative out of particular Churches,. 22.
as it is evident that it does, it cannot first and properly belong to the
Church General, as such; but it is only a means of communion between those
particular Churches as such, of whose representatives (I mean vertually, for
formally the persons convening for many years ceased to be so) it does consist.

4. There is nothing more ridiculous then to imagine a General Council,. 23.
that should represent the whole Catholic Church, or so much as all the
particular Churches that are in the World; and let him that i^ otherwise
minded, that there has been such an one, or that it is possible there should
be such a one, prove by instance, that such there have been since the Apostles
times; or by Reason, that such may be in the present Age, or be justly expected
in those that are for to succeed, and we will, as we are able, crown him for
his discovery.

5. Indeed I know not how any Council, that has been in the World these 1300
years and somewhat upwards,. 24.
could be said to represent the Church in any sense, or any Churches whatever;
Their convention, as is known, has been always by Imperial or Papal
Authority: the persons convened such, and only they, who as was pretended, and
pleaded, had right of suffrage, with all necessary Authority in such
conventions, from the Order, Degree, and Office, which personally they hold in
their several Churches. Indeed a Pope or Bishop sent his Legate or Proxy, to
Represent, or rather personate him, and his Authority. But that any of them
were sent, or delegated by the Church wherein they did preside, is not so
evident.

I desire then,. 25.
that some man more skilled in Laws and Common usages then my self, would
inform me, on what account such a convention could come to be a Church
Representative, or the persons of it to be representatives of any Churches;
General grounds of Reason and Equity I am persuaded, cannot be pleaded for it.
The Lords in Parliament in this Nation, who being summoned by Regal Authority,
sat there in their own personal right, were never esteemed to represent the
body of the people; supposing indeed all Church power ^^n any particular
Church, of whatever extract, or composition, to be solely vested in one single
person; a collection of those persons (if instituted) would bring together the
Authority of the whole. But yet this would not make that Assembly to be a
Church Representative, if you will allow the name of the Church to any, but
that single person: But for men, who have but a partial power and Authority in
the Church, and perhaps, separated from it, none at all, without any delegation
from the Churches to convene, and in their own Authority to take upon them to
represent those Churches, is absolute presumption.

These several pretensions being excluded,. 26.
let us see wherein the Unity of this Church, namely, of the great society of
men professing the Gospel, and obedience to Christ, according to it,
throughout the World, does consist; this is summoned up by the Apostle Ephesians. 4.
5. one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, It is the Unity of the doctrine of Faith,
which men profess, in subjection to one Lord Jesus Christ, being initiated
into that profession by Baptism; I say, the saving doctrine of the Gospel of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, and obedience through him to God as professed by
them, is the bond of that union, whereby they are made one body, are
distinguished from all other societies, have one head Christ Jesus, which as to
profession they hold, and whilst they do so, are of this body, in one
professed hope of their calling.

Now that this Union be preserved,. 27.
it is required that all those grand and necessary Truths of the Gospel,
without the knowledge whereof no man can be saved by Jesus Christ, be so far
believed, as to be outwardly and visibly professed in that variety of ways,
wherein they are, or may be called out thereunto. There is a proportion of
Faith Rom: 12. 6. an Unity of Faith, and of knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians
4. 13. a measure of saving Truths, the explicit knowledge whereof in man,
enjoying the use of Reason within, and the means of grace without, is of
indispensible necessary to Salvation, without which it is impossible that any
soul in an ordinary way should have communion with God in Christ, having not
light sufficient for converse with him, according to the tenor of the Covenant
of Grace. These are commonly called Fundamentalls, or first Principles, which
are justly argued by many to be clear, perspicuous, few, lying in an evident
tendency to obedience. Now look what truths are savingly to be believed, to
render a man a member of the Church Catholic invisible; that is, whatever is
required in any one, unto such a receiving of Jesus Christ; as that thereby he
may have power given to him to become the Son of God, the profession of those
Truths is required, to enstate a man in the unity of the Church visible.

2. That no other internal principle of the mind,. 28.
that has an utter inconsistency with the real belief of the Truths
necessary to be professed, be manifested by the Professors. Paul tells us of
some, who, though they would be called Christians, yet they so walked, as that
they manifested themselves to be Enemies of the cross of Christ, Phil 3. 18.
certainly those, who on one account, are open and manifest enemies of the
Cross of Christ, are not on any, members of his Church: there is one Lord, and
one Faith required, as well as one Baptism* And a protestation contrary to
evidence of fact, is in all Law, Null. Let a man profess 10000 times, that he
believes all the saving truths of the Gospel, and by the course of a wicked
and profane conversation evidence to all, that he believes no one of them,
shall his protestation be admitted? shall he be accounted a servant in, and of
my family, who will call me Master, and come into my house* only to do me and
mine a mischief, not doing any thing I require of him, but openly and
professedly the contrary? Paul says of such Tit. 5. 15, 16. They profess that
they know God, yet in works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and
unto every good work reprobate; which though peculiarly spoken of the Jews,
yet contains a general Rule, that men's profession of the knowledge of God,
contradicted by a course of wickedness, is not to be admitted, as a thing
giving any privilege whatever.

3. That no thing;. 29.
opinion, error, or false doctrine, everting or overthrowing any of the
necessary saving Truths professed, as above, be added in and with that
profession; or deliberately be professed also. This principle the Apostle lays
down and proves Gal. 5. 3, 4. notwithstanding the profession of the Gospel,
he tells the Galatians, that if they were bewitched to profess also the
necessity of Circumcision, and keeping of the Law for Justification, that
Christ or the profession of him would not profit them. On this account the
Ancients excluded many Heretics from the name of Christians, so Justin of the
Marcionites and others (...) (...)*

We are at length then arrived to this issue;. 30.
the belief and profession of all the necessary saving truths of the Gospel,
without the manifestation of an internal principle of the mind, inconsistent
with the belief of them, or adding of other things in profession, that are
destructive to the truths so professed, is the bond of the unity of the visible
professing Church of Christ. Where this is found in any man or number of men,
though otherwise accompanied with many failings sins and errors, the unity of
the faith is by him or them so far preserved, as that they are thereby
rendered members of the visible Church of Christ, and are by him so esteemed.

Let us suppose a man by bare Reading of the Scriptures,. 31.
brought to him by some providence of God (as finding the Bible in the high
way) and eviden^ing their Authority by their own light, instructed in the
knowledge of the Truths of the Gospel, who shall thereupon make profession of
them amongst them, with who^ he lives, although he be thousands of miles
distant from any particular Church, wherein the Ordinances of Christ are
administered; nor perhaps knows there is any such Church in the world, much
less has ever heard of the Pope of Rome (which is utterly impossible he
should, supposing him instructed only by reading of the Scriptures) I ask
whether this man, making open profession of Christ according to the Gospel,
shall be esteemed a member of the visible Church in the sense insisted on or no?

That this may not seem to be such a fiction of a case,. 32.
as may involve in it any impossible supposition, which being granted will hold
a door open for other absurdities, I shall exemplify it in its most material
postulata by a story of unquestionable truth.

Elmacinus, who wrote the story of the Saracens, being Secretary to one of the
Caliphs at Bagdat, informs us, that in the year 309 of their Hegira, about
the year 921 of our account, Muctadinus the Caliph of Bagdat by the Counsel of
his wise men, commanded one Huseinus the son of Mansor to be crucified for
certain Poems, whereof some verses are recited by the Historian, and are thus
rendered by Erpenius

Laus ^i qui manifestavit humilitatem suam, celavit inter nos divinitatem suam
permeantem donec coepit in creatura sua apparere sub specie edentis and
bibentis;

Jamque aspexit cum Creatura ejus, sicuti supercilium obliquum respiciat
supercilium.

From which remnant of his work it is easily to perceive, that the crime
whereof he was accused, and for which he was condemned and crucified, was the
confession of Jesus Christ the Son of God. As he went to the cross he added,
says the same Author, these that follow,

Compo^ur men's nihil plane habet in se iniquitatis, bibendum mihi dedi^ simile
ejus quod bibit secit hospitem in hospite.

And so dyed constantly (as it appears) in the profession of the Lord Jesus.

Bagdat was a City built not long before by the Saracens, wherein it is
probable there were not at that time any Christians abiding: Add now to this
story what our Savior speaks Luck. 12. 8. I say unto you whosoever shall
confess me before men, him shall the Son of man confess before the Angels
of God; and considering the unlimitednesse of the expression as to any outward
consideration, and tell me whether this man, or any other in the like
condition, be not to be reckoned as a subject of Christ's visible Kingdom; a
member of this Church in the world.

Let us now recall to mind what we have in design;. 33.
granting for our process sake, that Schism is the breach of any unity
instituted and appointed by Christ* in what sense soever it is spoken of, our
inquiry is, whether we are Guilty in any kind of such a breach, or the breach
of such an Unity. This then now insisted on being the union of the Church of
Christ, as visibly professing the word, according to his own mind, when I have
laid down some general foundations of what is to ensue, I shall consider
whether we are guilty of the breach of this Union and argue the several
pretensions of men against us, especially of the Romanists on this account.

1. I confess that this union of the general visible Church was once
comprehensive of all the Churches in the world;. 34.
the Faith once delivered to the Saints being received amongst them. From this
unity it is taken also for granted, that a separation is made, and it continnes
not as it was at the first institution of the Churches of Christ, though some
small breaches were made upon it, immediately after their first planting. The
Papists say, as to the Europaean Churches wherein their and our concernment
principally lies) this breach was made in the days of our forefathers; by
their departure from the common faith in those Ages, though begun by a few
some Ages before. We are otherwise minded, and affirm, that this secession was
made by them, and their Predecessors in Apostasy, in several generations by
several degrees; which we manifest, by comparing the present profession and
worship, with that in each kind, which we know was at first embraced, because
we find it Instituted. At once then, we say this Schism lies at their doors,
who not only have deviated from the common faith themselves, but do also
actually cause, and attempt to destroy temporally and eternally all that will
not join with them therein. For as the mystery of iniquity began to work in
the Apostles days; so we have a testimony beyond exception in the complaint of
those that lived in them, that not long after, the operation of it became more
effectual, and the infection of it to be more diffused in the Church: This is
that of Hegesyppus in Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 26. who affirms that
the Church remained a Virgin (whilst the Apostles lived) pure and uncorrupted,
but when that sacred Society had ended it is pilgrimage, and the generation that
heard and received the word from them were fallen asleep, many false doctrines
were preached and divulged therein.

I know who has endeavored to elude the sense of this complaint,. 35.
as though it concerned not any thing in the Church, but the despisers and
persecutors of it, the Gnostics. But yet I know also, that no man would so do
but such a one, as has a just confidence of his own ability to make passable
at least, any thing that he shall venture to say or utter. For why should that
be referred by Hegesyppus to the Ages after the Apostles and their hearers were
dead, with an exception against its being so in their days; when if the person
thus expounding this testimony may be credited, the Gnostics were never more
busy nor prevalent then in that time which alone is excepted from the evil
here spoken of. Nor can I understand how the opposition and persecution of the
Church should be insinuated to be the deflowring and violating of its chastity,
which is commonly a great purifying of it; so that speaking of that broaching
and preaching of errors, which was not in the Apostles times, nor in the time
of their Hearers, the chiefest time of the rage and madness of the Gnostics;
such as spotted the pure and incorupted Virginity of the church, which nothing
can attain unto that is foreign unto it, and that which gave original unto
sedition in the Church: I am of the mind, and so I conceive was Eusebius that
recited those words, that the good man intended corruptions in the Church, not
out of it, nor oppositions to it.

The process made in after Ages,. 36.
in a deviation from the unity of the faith, till it arrived to that height
wherein it is now stated in the Papal Apostasy, has been the work of others
to declare; therein then I statet the rise and progress of the present Schism
(if it may be so called) of the visible Church.

2. As to our concernment in this business,. 3^.
they that will make good a charge against us, that we are departed from the
Unity of the Church Catholic it is incumbent on them to evidence, that we
either do not believe and make profession of all the Truths of the Gospel
indispensably necessary to be known, that a man may have a communion with God
in Christ and be saved. Or

2. That doing so, in the course of our lives we manifest and declare a
principle, that is utterly inconsistent with the belief of those Truths, which
outwardly we profess; or

3. That we add unto them, in opinion or worship, that, or those things, which
are in very deed destructive of them; or do any way render them insufficient
to be saving unto us. If neither of these three can be proved against a man, he
may justly claim the privilege of being a member of the visible Church of
Christ in the World, though he never in all his life be a member of a
particular Church: which yet if he have fitting opportunity and Advantage for
it, is his duty to be.

And thus much be spoken as to the state and condition of the visible Catholic
Church!. 38.
and in this sense we grant it to be, and the unity thereof. In the late
practice of men, that expression of the Catholic Church has been an
Individuum Vagum, few knowing what to make of it: A Cothurnus that every one
accommodated at pleasure to his own principles and pretensions. I have no
otherwise described it, then did Irenaeus of old; said he, judicabit omnes eos,
qui sunt extra veritatem, id est, extra Ecclesiam. Lib 4. cap. 62. and on the
same account, is a particular Church sometimes called by some, the Catholic.
Quandoque ego Remigius Episcopus de hac luce transiero, tu mihi Haeres esto,
Sancta and venerabilis Ecclesia Catholica urbis Remorum. Flodoardus lib. 1.

In the sense insisted on,. 39.
was it so frequently described by the Ancients.

So again Irenaeus; Etsi in mundo loquelae dissimiles sunt, sed tamen virtus
traditionis una and eadem est, and neque hae, quae in Germania sunt ^undatae,
Ecclesiae aliter credunt, aut aliter tradunt, neque hae, quae in Hibernis sunt,
neque hae quae in Celtis, neque hae, quae in Orient, neque hae quae in
Aegypto, neque hae quae in Lybia, neque hae quae in medio mundi constitutae:
Sed sicut sol Creatura Dei in universo mundo unus and idem est, si^ and lumen
and praedicatio veritatis ubique lucet. lib. 1. cap. 3. to the same purpose
Jus^in Martyr, (...)* Dialog. cum Tryphone.

The generality of all sorts of men worshipping God in Jesus Christ, is the
Church we speak of: whose extent in his days Tertullian thus related: In quem
alium crediderunt Gentes universae, nisi in ipsum, qui jam venit? Cui enim
alii, Gentes crediderunt, Parthi, Medi, and Elamitae, and qui habitant
Mesopotamiam, Armeniam, Phrygiam, and immorantes Aegyptum and regionem Africae,
quae est trans Cyrenem Romani, and incolae tunt, and in Jerusalem Iudei and
Gentes caeterae, ut jam Getulonum varietates and Maurorum nulli fines
Hispanarum omnes termini, and Galliarum diversae Nationes and Britanorum
inaccessa loca Romany, Christo vero subdita and Sarmatarum and Dacorum and
Germanorum and Seytharum and abditarum multarum Gentium and Provinciarum and
Ins^larum multarum nobis ignotarum, and quae enumerare non possumus, in quibus
omnibus locis Christi nomen, qui jam venit, regna^ ad Iudaeos.. 40.


Some have said, and do yet say, that the Church in this sense, is a Visible,
Organicall, Political body. That its visible is confessed, both its matter and
farm bespeaks visibility, as an unseparable Adjunct of its subsisting. That
it is a body also in the general sense wherein that word is used, or a society
of men embodyed by the profession of the same Faith, is also granted.
Organicall, in this business, is an ambiguous term. The use of it is plainly
Metaphorical taken from the members, instruments and Organs of a natural
body. Because Paul has said that in one body there are many members, as eyes,
feet, hands, yet the body is but one; so is the Church: It has been usually
said, that the Church is an Organicall body: What Church Paul speaks of in
that place is not evident: but what he alludes unto, is. The difference he
speaks of, in the individual persons of the Church, is not in respect of
Office, Power, and Authority; but gifts or graces, and usefullnesse on that
account; such an Organical body we confess the Church Catholic visible to be;
in it are persons endued with variety of gifts and graces for the benefit and
ornament of the whole.

An Organicall Political body,. 41*
is a thing of another nature; a Politic body or Commonwealth, is a Society of
a certain portion of mankind, united under some form of Rule, or government,
whose supreme and subordinate administration is committed to several persons,
according to the Tenor of such Laws and Customs as that Society has, or does
consent unto. This also is said to be Organicall on a Metaphorical account,
because the Officers and Members that are in it, and over it, hold proportion
to the more noble parts of the body. Kings are said to be Heads, Counselors
(...): to the constitution of such a Commonwealth dist^^ctly, as such, it is
required that the whole has the same Laws; but not that only. Two Nations most
distinct and different, on the account of other ends and interests, may yet
have the same individual Laws and customs, for the distribution of Justice,
and preservation of peace among themselves. An entire form of Regiment and
government peculiar thereunto, is required for the constitution of a distinct
Political Body. In this sense we deny the Church whereof we speak, to be an
Organicall, Political Body* as not having indeed any of the requisites
thereunto. Not one Law of Order? the same individual Moral Law, or Law for
Moral duties it has, but a Law given to the whole, as such, for Order,
Polity, Rule, it has not; All the members of it are obliged to the same Law of
Order and Polity in their several Societies; But the whole, as such has no
such Law* it has no such head or Governor as such: Nor will it suffice* to
say, that Christ is its head: for if as a visible Political body ^t has a
Political Head, that Head also must be visible. The Commonweal of the Jews was
a Political body; of this God was the Head and King; hence their Historian
says their Government was (...); and when they would choose a King, God said
they rejected him, who was their political Head; to whom a sickle was paid
yearly as Tribute, called the sickle of the Sanctuary. Now they rejected him,
not by asking a King, simply, but a King after the manner of the Nations; yet
that it might be a visible Political Body, it required a visible supreme
Magistrate to the whole^; which when there was none, all Polity was dissolved
amongst them. Judge. 21. Christ is the head of every particular Church, its
Lawgiver and Ruler: but yet to make a Church a visible, Organicall, Political
Body, it is required that it has visible Governors and Rulers, and of the
whole; Nor can it be said, that it is a Political body, that has a supreme
Government and Order in it; as it is made up and Constituted of particular
Churches; and that in the Representatives convened does the supreme visible
power of it consist; for such a Convention in the judgment of all, ought to be
Extraordinary only; in ours is utterly impossible, and de facto was not among
the Churches for 300 years, yea never: besides, the visible Catholic Church is
not made up of particular Churches as such; for if so, then no man can be
member of it, but by virtue of his being a Member of some visible Church, which
is false; profession of the Truth* as before stated, is the formal Reason and
Cause of any Persons Relation to the Church visible, which he has thereby,
whether he belong to any particular Church or no.

Let it be evidenced,. 42.
that the Universal Church whereof we speak, has any Law or Rule of Order
and Government, as such, given unto it; or that it is in possibility as such,
to put any such Law or Rule into execution, that it has any homogeneous Ruler
or Rulers that have the care of the Administration of the Rule and Government
of the whole, as such, committed to him or them by Jesus Christ; that as it
has the same common spiritual, and known Orders and Interests, and the same
Specificall Ecclesiastical Rule given to all its Members, so it has the same
Political interest, Order and Conversation, as such, or that it has any one
cause constitutive of a Political Body, whereby it is such, or has at all the
form of an Instituted Church, or is capable of any such form, and they that
do so, shall be farther attended to.

CHAP. VI.
Romanists charge of Schism on the account of separation from the Church
Catholic proposed to consideration. The importance of this plea on both sides.
The sum of their charge. The Church of Rome not the Church Catholic, Not a
Church in any sense. Of Antichrist in the Temple. The Catholic Church how
entrusted with interpretation of Scripture. Of intepretation of Scripture by
Tradition. The interest of the Roman Church herein discharged. All necessary
truths believed by Protestants* No contrary principle by them manifested.
Profane persons no members of the Church Catholic Of the late Roman
Proselyts. Of the Donatists. Their business reported and case stated. The
Present state of things unsuited to those of old. Apostasy from the Unity of
the Church Catholic charged on the Romanists. Their claim to be that Church
sanguinary: false. Their plea to this purpose considered. The blasphemous
mannagement of their plea by some of late. The whole dissolved. Their
inferences on their plea practically prodigious. Their Apostasy proved by
instances. Their grand Argument in this cause proposed: Answered. Consequences
of denying the Roman Church, to be a Church of Christ, weighed.

LEt us see now what as to conscience,. 1.
can be charged on us, (Protestants I mean) who are all concerned herein, as
to the breach of this union. The Papists are the persons that undertake to
manage this Charge against us. To lay aside the old Plea subesse Romano
Pontifici; and all those ^eats, wherewith they jugled, when the whole world
sa^e in darkness, which they do not now use at the entrance of their charge.
The sum of what they insist upon firstly, is The Catholic Church is
entrusted with the interpretation of the Scriptures, and declaration of the
Truths therein contained, which being by it so declared, the not receiving of
them implicitly, or explicitly, that is the disbelieving of them as so
proposed and declared, cuts off any man from being a member of the Church;
Christ himself having said, that he that hears not the Church is to be as an
Heathen man or Publican; which Church they are, that is certain. It is all one
then what we believe, or do not believe, seeing that we believe not all that
the Catholic Church proposes to be believed, and what we do believe, we
believe not on ha^ account.

Ans. Their insisting on this plea so much as they do,. 2.
is sufficient to evince their despair of making good by instance our faylure
in respect of the way and principles by which the unity of the visible Church
may be lost or broken. Fail they in this, they are gone; and if they carry
this plea, we are all at their disposal. The sum of it is, the Catholic
Church is entrusted with sole power of delivering what is truth, and what is
necessary to be believed. This Catholic Church is the Church of Rome; that is,
the Pope, or what else may in any juncture of time serve their interest. But as
it is known

1. We deny their Church, as it is styled,. 3.
to be the Catholic Church, or as such, any part of it, as particular Churches
are called or esteemed. So that of all men in the World, they are least
concerned in this Assertion. Nay I shall go farther; Suppose all the members
of the Roman Church to be found in the Faith, as to all necessary: Truths, and
no way to prejudice the Advantages and privileges, which acc^^e to them by the
profession thereof, whereby the several individualls of it, would be true
members of the Catholic Church, yet I should not only deny it to be the
Catholic Church, but also abideing in its present Order and Constitution,
being that which by themselves it is supposed to be, to be any particular
Church of Christ at all; as wanting many things necessary to constitute them
so, and having many things destructive utterly to the very Essence and being of
that Order, that Christ has appointed in his Churches.

The best plea that I know for their Church state,. 4.
is, that Antichrist sits in the Temple of God. Now although we might justly
omit the Examination of this pretense, until those, who are concerned in it,
will professedly own it, as their plea; yet as it lies in our way, in the
thoughts of some, I say to it, that I am not so certain, that (...), signifies
to sit in the Temple of God; seeing a Learned man long ago thought it rather
to be a setting up against the Temple of God. Aug. de Civitate Dei lib. 10.
cap. 59. But grant the sense of the expression to be, as it is usually received,
it imports no more, but that the man of sin shall set up his power against
God, in the midst of them, who by their outward visible profession have right
to be called his Temple, which intitles him, and his Copartners in Apostasy, to
the name of the Church; as much as changing of money, and selling of Cattle,
were Ordinances of God under the old Temple, when by some men's practicing of
them in it, it was made a den of Thieves.

2. Though as to the plea of them,. 5.
and their interest, with whom we have to do, we have nothing requiring our
Judgments in the case, yet ex abundanti, we add, that we deny, that by the
will and appointment of Jesus Christ, the Catholic Church visible is in any
sense entrusted with such an interpretation of Scripture, as that her
declaration of Truth should be the measure of what should be believed; or that,
as such, it is entrusted with any power of that nature at all, or is enabled to
propose a Rule of Faith to be received, as so proposed, to the most
contemptible individual in the world; or that it is possible that any voice of
it should be heard or understood, but only this, I believe the necessary saving
Truths contained in the Scripture; or that it can be consulted with all, or is,
as such, entrusted with any Power, Authority, or Jurisdiction; nor shall we
ever consent, that the Office, and Authority of the Scriptures, be actually
taken from it, on any pretense. As to that of our Savior, of telling the
Church; it is so evidently spoken of a particular Church, that may immediately
be consulted in case of difference between Brethren; and does so no way relate
to the business in hand, that I shall not trouble the Reader with a debate of
it. But do we not receive the Scripture it self upon the Authority of the
Church? I say if we did so, yet this concerns not Rome, which we account no
Church at all. That we have received the Scripture from the Church of Rome at
first, that is, so much as the Book its self, is an intolerable figment. But
it is worse, to say, that we receive and own their Authority, from the
Authority of any Church, or all the Churches in the World. It is the expression
of our Learned Whitaker, Qui Scriptur^^^ non credit esse divinam, nisi propter
Ecclesiae vocem, Christianus non est. To deny, that the Scripture has
immediate force and efficacy to evince its own Authority, is plainly to deny
them: on that account being brought unto us, by the providence of God, (wherein
I comprize all subservient helps of humane Testimony) we receive them, and on
no other.. 6.


But is not the Scripture to be interpreted according to the Tradition of the
Catholic Church, and are not those interpretations so made to be received?

I say among all the figments that these latter Ages have invented; I shall
add, amongst the true stories of Lucian, there is not one more remote from
Truth then this Assertion; That all, that any one Text of Scripture may be
interpreted according to the universal Tradition of the Catholic Church, and
be made appear so to be, any farther then that in General the Catholic
Church has not believed any such sense to be in any portion of Scripture,
which to receive, were destructive of Salvation. And therefore the Romanists
tell us, that the present Church (that is theirs) is the keeper and interpreter
of these Traditions: or rather, that its Power, Authority, and Infability,
being the same that it has been in former Ages, what it determines, is to be
received to be the Tradition of the Catholic Church; for the trial whereof,
whether it be so or no, there is no rule but its own determination: which if
they can persuade us to acquiesce in, I shall grant, that they have acquired
such an absolute dominion over Us, and our Faith, that it is fit, that we
should be Soul and Body at their disposal.

It being then the work of the Scripture,. 7.
to propose the saving Truths of Christ, (the belief and profession whereof,
are necessary to make a man a member of the Church) so as to make them of
indispensable necessity to be received; if they can from them convince us, that
we do not believe and profess all and every one of the Truths or Articles of
Faith, so necessary as expressed, we shall fall down under the Authority of
such conviction: If not, we profess our Consciences to be no more concerned in
the Authority of their Church, then we judge their Church to be in the
privileges of the Church Catholic. But,

2. It may be we are chargeable with manifesting some principles of
Profaneness,. 8.
wherewith the belief of the Truth, we profess, has an absolute
inconsistency; For those, who are liable and obnoxious to this charge, I say,
let them plead for themselves. For let them profess what they will, and cry
out 10000 times, that they are Christians, I shall never acknowledge them for
others then visible enemies of the Cross, Kingdom, and Church of Christ.
Traitors and Rebels are not de facto Subjects of that King or Ruler, in
reference to whom, they are so. Of some, who said they were Jews, Christ said
they lied, and were not, but the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2 9. Though such as
these say they are Christians, I will be bold to say, they lie, they are not,
but slaves of Satan. Though they live within the Pale (as they call it) of the
Church, (the Catholic Church being an enclosure as to profession, not place,)
yet they are not within it, nor of it, any more then a Jew, or Mahumetan within
the same precinct: suppose they have been Baptized, yet if their belly be their
God, and their lives dedicated to Satan, all the Advantage they have thereby,
is, that they are Apostates and Renegadoes.

That we have added any thing of our own,. 9.
making profession of any thing in Religion absolutely destructive to the
fundamentalls we profess, I know not that we are accused, seeing our crime is
asserted to consist in detracting not adding. Now unless we are convinced of
failing on one of these three accounts, we shall not at all question, but that
we abide in the unity of the visible Catholic Church.

It is the common cry of the Romanists that we are Schismatics.. 10.
Why so? because we have separated our selves from the communion of the
Catholic Church: what this Catholic is, and how little they are concerned in
it, has been declared How much they have prevailed themselves with ignorant
souls by this plea, we know* Nor was any other success to be expected in
respect of many, whom they have won over to themselves, who being persons
ignorant of the righteousness of God, and the power of the Faith, they have
professed, not having had experience of communion with the Lord Jesus, under
the conduct of them, have been upon every provocation and temptation, a ready
prey to deceivers.

Take a little view of their late Proselyts,. 11.
and it will quickly appear what little cause they have to boast in them. With
some by the craft and folly of some Relations they are admitted to treat, when
they are drawing to their dissolution. These for the most part having been
persons of dissolute and profligate lives, never having tasted the power of any
Religion, whatever they have professed, in their weakness, and disturbed
dying thoughts, may be apt to receive any impression, that with confidence and
violence is imposed upon them. Besides, it is a far easier proposal to be
reconciled to the Church of Rome, and so by Purgatory to get to Heaven, then
to be told of Regeneration, Repentance, Faith, and the Covenant of Grace,
things of difficulty to such poor Creatures. Others that have been cast down
from their hopes and Expectations; or out from their enjoyments by the late
revolution in these Nations; have by their discontent, or necessity, made
themselves an easy prey to their zeal. What has been the residue of their
Proselytes? What one who has ever manifested himself to share in the power of
our Religion, or was not prepared by principles of superstition almost as deep
as their own, have they prevailed on? But I shall not farther insist on these
things. To return

Our communion with the visible Catholic Church is in the unity of the faith
only.. 12.
The breach of this union, and therein a relinquishment of the communion of the
Church, lies in a relinquishment of, or some opposition to, some or all of the
saving necessary truths of the Gospel. Now this is not Schism, but Heresy or
Apostasy; or it is done by an open profligatenesse of life: so that indeed this
charge is nothing at all to the purpose in hand: though through Grace in a
confidence of our own innocence we are willing to debate the guilt of the crime
under any name or title whatever.

Unto what has been spoken,. 13.
I shall only add the removeall of some common objections, with a recharge on
them, with whom principally we have as yet had to do, and come to the last
thing proposed. The case of some of old, who were charged with Schism for
separating from the Catholic Church on an account wholly and clearly distinct
from that of a departure from the faith, is an instance of the judgment of
antiquity lying in an opposition to the notion of departure from the Church now
delivered. Does not Augustine, Do not the rest of his Orthodox contemporaries,
charge the Donatists with Schism, because they departed from the Catholic
Church? And does not the charge rise up with equal efficacy against you as
them? At least does it not give you the nature of Schism in another sense then
is by you granted.

The Reader knows sufficiently,. 14.
if he has at al taken notice of these things, whereto find this cloud
scattered, without the least annoyance or detriment to the Protestant cause, or
of any concerned in that name, however by lesser differences diversified among
themselves. I shall not repeat what by others has been at large insisted on.
In brief, put the whole Church of God into that condition of liberty and
soundness of Doctrine, which it was in when the great uproare was made by the
Donatists, and we shall be concerned to give in our judgments concerning them.

To press an example of former days,. 15.
as binding unto duty, or convincing of evil, in respect of any now, without
stating the whole substratum of the business, and complete cause, as it was in
the days and seasons, wherein the example was given, we judge it not equal.
Yet although none can with ingenuity press me with the crime they were guilty
of, unless they can prove themselves to be instated in the very same
condition, as they were against whom that crime was committed, which I am fully
assured none in the world can; the communion of the Catholic Church then
pleaded for, being in the judgment of all an effect of men's free liberty, and
choice, now pressed as an issue of the Tyranny of some few; yet I shall freely
deliver my thoughts concerning the Donatists, which will be comprehensive also
of those other, that suffer with them in former and after ages, under the same
imputation.

1. Then I am persuaded,. 16.
that in the matter of fact, the Donatists were some of them deceived, and
others of them did deceive, in charging Caecilianus to be ordained by
Traditores: which they made the maine ground of their separation, however they
took in other things, (as is usual) into their defense afterward. Whether any
of themselves were ordained by such persons, as they are recharged, I know not.

2. On supposition that he was so,. 17.
and they that ordained him were known to him to have been so; yet he being not
guilty of the crime, renouncing Communion with them therein, and themselves
repenting of their sin, as did Peter, whose sin exceeded theirs, this was
no just cause of casting him out of Communion, he walking and acting in all
other things, suitable to principles by themselves acknowledged.

3.. 18.
That on supposition they had just cause hereupon to renounce the Communion of
Caecilianus, which according to the principles of those days, retained by
themselves was most false; yet they had no ground of separating from the Church
of Carthage, where were many Elders not obnoxious to that charge. Indeed to
raise a jealousy of a fault in any man, which is denied by him, which we are
not able to prove, which if it were proved, were of little or no importance,
and on pretense thereof to separate from all, who will not believe what we
surmise, is a wild and unchristian course of proceeding.

4. Yet grant farther,. 19.
that men of tender consciences, regulated by the principle then generally
received, might be startled at the communion of that Church, wherein
Caecilianus did preside; yet nothing but the height of madness, pride, and
corrupt fleshly interest, could make men declare hostility against all the
Churches of Christ in the world, who would communicate with, or did not
condemn that Church, which was to regulate all the Churches in the world by
their own fancy, and imagination.

5.. 20.
Though men out of such pride and folly might judge all the residue of
Christians to be faulty and guilty in this particular of not condemning and
separating from the Church of Carthage; yet to proceed to cast them out from
the very name of Christians, and so disanull their privileges, and ordinances,
that they had been made partakers of, as manifestly they did, by rebaptizing
all that entered into their communion, was such unparalleld Pharisaisme, and
Tyranny, as was wholly to be condemned, and untollerable.

6. The Divisions,. 21.
Outrages, and Enthusiasticall furies and Riots that befell them, or they fell
into, in their way, werein my judgment tokens of the hand of God against them:
so that upon the whole matter, their undertaking, and enterprise, was utterly
undue, and unlawful.

I shall farther add,. 22.
as to the mannagement of the cause by their Adversaries, that there is in
these writings, especially those of Austin (for the most part) as sweet and
gracious spirit, breathing, full of zeal for the glory of God, Peace, Love,
Union among Christians; and as to the issue of the cause under debate, it is
evident, that they did sufficiently foil their Adversaries on principles then
generally confessed, and acknowledged on all hands, though some of them seem to
have been considering, Learned, and dexterous men.

How little we are at this day, in any contests that are managed amongst us,
about the things of God, concerned in those differences of theirs, these few
Considerations will evince; yet notwithstanding all this, I must take liberty
to profess, that although the Fathers justly charged the Donatists with
disclaiming of all the Churches of Christ, as a thing wicked and unjust, yet
many of the principles whereon they did it, were such, as I cannot assent unto.
Yea I shall say, that though Austin was sufficiently clear in the nature of
the invisible Church Catholic, yet his frequent confounding it with a mistaken
notion of the visible general Church, has given no small occasion of
stumbling, and sundry unhappy intanglements to diverse in after Ages. His own
book De unitats Ecclesiae, which contains the sum and Substance of what he
had written elsewhere, or disputed against the Donatists, would afford me
instances enough to make good my assertion, were it now under consideration or
proof.

Being then thus come off from this part of our Charge and accusation of
Schism,. 23.
for the relinquishment of the Catholic visible Church, which as we have not
done, so to do, is not Schism, but a sin of another nature and importance;
according to the method proposed, a recharge on the Romanists in reference to
their present Condition, and its unsuitablenesse to the Unity of the Church,
evinced, must briefly ensue.

Their claim is known to be no less,. 24.
then that they are this Catholic Church, out of whose Communion there is no
salvation: (as the Donatists was of old) that also the union of this Church
consists in its subjection to its head the Pope, and worshipping of God
according to his appointment, in and with his several qualifications and
attendencies. Now this claim of theirs to our apprehension, and Consciences, is

1. Cruel, and sanguinary; condemning Millions to hell, that invocate and call
on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, believing all things that are written in
the Old and New Testaments, for no other cause in the World, but because they
are not convinced, that it is their duty to give up Reason, Faith, Soul, and
all to him, and his disposal, whom they have not only unconquerable
presumptions against, as an evil and wicked Person; but are also resolved* and
fully persuaded in their Consciences, that he is an enemy to their dear Lord
Jesus Christ, out of Love to whom, they cannot bear him. Especially will this
appear to be so, if we consider their farther improvement of this principle,
to the killing hanging, torturing to death, burning of all that they are able,
who are in the condition before mentioned. This upon the matter is the great
Principle of their Religion. All persons that will not be subject (at least in
spiritual things) to the Pope, are to be hanged or burned in this World, or by
other means destroyed, and damned for ever hereafter. This is the substance of
the Gospel they Preach, the center wherein all the lines of their writings do
meet; and to this must the holy, pure word of God be wrested to give
countenance. Blessed be the God of our Salvation, who as he never gave
merciless men power over the Souls, and eternal condition of his Saints; so
he has began to work a deliverance of the outward condition of his people,
from their Rage and cruelty; which in his good time he will perfect in their
irrecoverable ruin. In the mean time, I say, the guilt of the blood of
millions of innocent persons, yea Saints of God, lies at their doors. And
although things are so stated in this Age, that in some Nations they have left
none to kill; in others are restrained, that they can kill no more; yet
reteining the same principles with their Forefathers, and justifying them in
their paths of blood, I look upon them all as guilty of Murder, and so not to
have eternal life abiding in them; being as Cain of that wicked one, who slew
his Brother. I speak not of individualls, but of those in general, that
constitute their governing Church.

2. Most false,. 25.
and such as nothing but either judiciary hardness from God, sending men
strong delusions, that they might believe a lie; or the dominion of cursed
lusts, pride, ambition, covetousness, desire of Rule, can lie at the bottom
of* For,

1. It is false, that the union of the Catholic Church, in the notion now
under consideration, consists in subjection to any Officer or Officers; or that
it has any peculiar form, constituting one Church in Relation to them, or in
joint participation of the same individual Ordinances whatever, by all the
members of it; or that any such oneness is at all possible; or any unity
whatever, but that of the Faith, which by it is believed, and of the Truth
professed.

2. It is most ridiculous,. 26.
that they are this Catholic Church, or that their communion is comprehensive
of it in its latitude. He must be blind, uncharitable, a judge of what he
cannot see* or know, who can once entertain a thought of any such thing. Let
us run a little over the foundations of this Assertion.

First, Peter was the Prince of the Apostles. It is denied; Arguments lie clear
against it. The Gospel, the Acts of the Apostles, all confute it. The express
testimony of Paul lies against it; our Savior denies it, that it was so, gives
Order that it should not be so. The name and thing is foreign to the times of
the Apostles. It was a Ministry, not a Principality they had committed to them;
therein they were all equal. It is from that Spirit, whence they enquired
after a Kingdom and Dominion, before they had received the Spirit of the
Gospel, as it was dispensed after Christ's Ascension, that such assertions are
now insisted on. But let that be supposed, what is next? He had an Universal
Monarchical Jurisdiction committed to him over all Christians. For Christ
said, Tues Petrus, tibi dabo claves, and pasce oves meas. But these terms are
barbarous to the Scripture; Monarchy is not the English of vos autem non sic.
Jurisdiction is a name of a right, for the exercise of civil power. Christ
has left no such thing as Jurisdiction, in the sense wherein it is now used,
to Peter or his Church. Men do but make sports, and expose themselves to the
contempt of considering persons, who talk of the institution of our Lord, in
the languages of the last Ages; or expressions suitable to what was in practice
in them. He that shall compare the fraternall Church admonition and censures of
the primitive institution, with the Courts, Powers, and Jurisdictions, set up
in pretense and color of them in after Ages, will admire at the likeness and
correspondency of the one with the other. The administration of Ecclesiastical
Ju^isdiction in the Papacy, and under the Prelacy here in England, had no more
relation to any institution of Christ, (unless it be, that it effectually
excluded the exercise of his institutions,) then other civil Courts of Justice
among Christians have. Peter had the Power and Authority of an Apostle in and
over the Churches of Christ, to ^each, to instruct them, to ordain Elders in
them by their consent wherever he came: so had the rest of the Apostles. But as
to this Monarchy of Peter's over the rest of the Apostles, let them show what
Authority he ever exercised over them, while he and they lived together; We
read that he was once reproved by one of them, not that he ever reproved the
meanest of them. If Christ made the grant of preheminencie to him, when he said
Tu es Petrus, why did the Apostles enquire afterward, who among them should be
greatest? And why did not our Savior on that dispute, plainly satisfy them,
that Peter was to be chief? But chose rather to so determine the Question, as
to evince them of the vanity of any such enquiry? And yet the determination of
it, is that, that lies at the bottom of the Papal Monarchy. And why does Paul
say, that he was in nothing inferior to any of the Apostles, when, (if these
Gent: say true) he was in many things inferior to Peter? What special place
has the name of Peter, in the foundation of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 14.?
What exaltation has his Throne among the Twelve, whereon the Apostles judge
the World, and house of Israel, Mat. 19. 28. What Eminency of commission for
teaching all Nations, or for, giving sins? What had his keys more then those
of the rest of the Apostles, Joh. 20. 3.? What was peculiar in that triple
command of feeding the sheep of Christ, but his triple denial, that preceded?
Is an injunction for the performance of duty, a grant of new Authority? But
that we may make some progress, suppose this also; Why, this Power,
Privilege, and Jurisdiction of Peter, was to be transferred to his successors,
when the power of all the other Apostles, as such, dyed with them. But what
pretense, or color of it, is there for this Assertion? What one title or (...)
is there in the whole book of God, giving the least countenance to this
imagination? what distinction between Peter and the rest of the Apostles on
this account, is once made, or in any kind insinuated? Certainly this was a
thing of great importance to the Churches, to have been acquainted with it,
When Paul so sadly tells the Church, that after his departure grievous Wolves
would spoil the flock, and many among themselves would arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw Disciples after them; why did he not give them the
least direction, to make their address to him, that should succeed Peter in
his Power and Office, for relief and redress? Strange! that it should be of
necessity to Salvation, to be subject to him, in whom this power of Peter was
to be continued, that he was to be one, in whom the Saints were to be
consummated; that in Relation to him, the Unity of the Catholic Church to be
preserved under pain of damnation, should consist; and yet not a word spoken
of him in the whole Word of God.

But they say,. 27.
Peter had not only an Apostolical power with the rest of the Apostles; but
also an ordinary power that was to be continued in the Church. But the
Scripture being confessedly silent of any such thing, let us hear what proof
is tendered for the establishment of this uncouth Assertion. Herein then thus
they proceed. It will be confessed that Jesus Christ ordained his Church
wisely, according to his infinite wisdom, which he exercised about his body;
Now to this wisdom of his, for the prevention of innumerable evils, it is
agreeable, that he should appoint some one person with that power of declaring
truth, and of Jurisdiction to enforce the receiving of it, which we plead for.
For this was in Peter, as is proved from the texts of Scripture before
mentioned, therefore it is continued in them, that succeed him. And here lies
the great stresse of their cause; That to prevent evils and inconveniences, it
became the wisdom of Jesus Christ to appoint a person, with all that
Authority, power and infallibility, to continue in his Church to the end of the
world. And this plea they manage variously with much Sophistry, Rhetoric and
Testimonies of Antiquity. But suppose all this should be granted; yet I am full
well assured, that they can never bring it home to their concernment by any
Argument, but only the actual claim of the Pope wherein he stands singly now
in the world: which that it is satisfactory to make it good de fide, that he is
so, will not easily be granted. The truth is, of all the attempts they make
against the Lord Jesus Christ, this is one of the greatest, wherein they will
assert, that it became his wisdom to do, which by no means they can prove
that he has done: which is plainly to tell us, what in their judgment he
ought to have done, though he has not; and that therefore it is incumbent on
them to supply what he has been defective in. Had he taken the care he should
of them; and their Master, that he and they might have ruled and reviled over,
and in the house of God, he would have appointed things as now they are, which
they affirm to have become his wisdom. He was a King that once cried, Si Deo
in creatione adfuissem, mundum melius ordinassem. But every Friar or Monck can
say of Jesus Christ, had they been present at his framing the world to come,
(whereof we speak) they would have told him what had become his wisdom to
do. Our Blessed Lord has left sufficient provision against all future
emergencies and inconveniences in his word and Spirit given and promised to his
Saints. And the one Remedy which these men have found out with the contempt
and blaspemy of him and them, has proved worse then all the other evils and
diseases, for whose prevention he made provision; which he has done also for
that remedy of theirs, but that some are hardened through the righteous
judgment of God and deceitfulness of sin.

The mannagement of this plea by some of late is very considerable;. 28.
say they Quia non de verbis solum Scripturae, sed etia^ de sensu plurima
co^troversia est, si ecclesiae interpretatio non est cert^ intelligendi norma,
ecquis erit istiusmodi Controversiae judex? sensu^ enim suu^ pro sua virili
quisque defendet: quod si in Exploranda verbi Dei intelligentia nullus est
certus judex, audemus dicere nullam rempublicam fuisse stultius constitutam.
Sin autem Apostoli tradiderunt Eccclesiis verbum Dei sine intelligentia verbi
Dei, quomodo praedicarunt Evangelium omni Creaturae? quomodo decuerunt omnes
Gentes servare quaecunque illis fuerunt a Christo commendata. Non est puerorum
aut Psittaeorum praedicatio, qui sine mente dant, accipiuntque sonum.
Walemburg. Con. 4. Number. 26.

It is well,. 29.
that at length these men speak out plainly. If the Pope be not a visible
supreme Judge in and over the Church, Christ has in the constitution of his
Church, dealt more foolishly, then ever any did in the constitution of a
Commonwealth. If he have not an infallible power of determining the sense of
the Scriptures, the Scripture is but an empty, insignificant word, like the
speech of Parats or Popyniaies. Though Christ has by his Apostles given the
Scriptures, to make the man of God wise unto Salvation, and promised his spirit
unto them that believe, by whose assistance the Scripture gives out its own
sense to them, yet all is folly, if the Pope be not Supreme and Infallible.
The Lord rebuke them, who thus boldly blaspheame his word and wisdom. But let
us proceed.

This Peter thus invested in power,. 30.
that was to be traduced to others, went to Rome, and Preached the Gospel
there. It is most certain, nor will themselves deny it, that if this be not so,
and believed, their whole fabric will fall to the ground. But can this be
necessary for all sorts of Christians and every individual of men among them,
to believe, when there is not the least insinuation of any such thing in the
Scripture: certainly, though it be only a matter of fact, yet being of such
huge importance and consequence; and such a doctrine of absolute, and
indispensable necessity to be believed, as is pretended, depending upon it, if
it were true, and true in reference to such an end and purpose, as is pleaded,
it would not have been passed over in silence; there, where so many things of
inconceivable less concernment to the Church of God (though all in their
respective degrees tending to edification are recorded. As to what is recorded
in story; the order and series of things, with the discovery afforded us of
Peter's course, and place of abode in Scripture, do prevail with me, to think
steadfastly, that he was never there, against the self contradicting
testimonies of some few, who took up vulgar reports then, when the mystery of
iniquity had so far ^p^rated at least, that it was judged meet, that the
chief of the Apostles should have lived in the chief City of the World.

But that we may proceed, grant this also, 31.
that Peter was at Rome, which they shall never be able to prove: and that he
did Preach the Gospel there; yet so he did, by their own Confession, at other
places, making his residence at Antioch for some years; what will this avail,
toward the settling of the matter under consideration? There Christ appointed
him to fix his Chair, and make that Church, the place of his residence: (...).

Of his meeting Simon Magus at Rome, who in all probability was never there,
(for Seem Sangus was not Simon Magus, nor Sanctus, nor Deus Magnus) of the
conquest made of him, and his Devils, of his being instructed of Christ not to
go from Rome, but tarry there, and suffer, some thing may be said from old
Legends. But of his chair, and fixing of it at Rome, of his confinement, as it
were, to that place, in direct opposition to the tenor of his Apostolical
commission, who first told the story I know not; but this I know, they will one
day be ashamed of their Chair, Thrones, and Sees, and Jurisdictions, wherein
they now so please themselves.

But what is next to this?. 32.
The Bishop of Rome succeeds Peter in all that Power, Jurisdiction,
Infallibility, with whatsoever else was fancied before in him, as the ordinary
Lord of the Church, and therefore the Roman Church is the Catholic; quod erat
demonstrandum Now though this inference will no way follow upon these
Principles, though they should all be supposed to be true, whereof not one is
so much as probable; and though this last Assertion be vain and ridiculous,
nothing at all being pleaded to ground this Succession; no Institution of
Christ, no Act of any Council of the Church; no Will nor Testament of Peter;
but only it is so fallen out, as the world was composed of a casual
concurrence of Atoms: yet seeing they will have it so, I desire a little
farther information in one thing, that yet remains; and that is this, The
Charter, Patents, and Grant of all this power, and right of succession unto
Peter, in all the Advantages, privileges and Jurisdiction, before mentioned,
being wholly in their own keeping, whereof I never saw letter or title, nor
ever conversed with any one, no not of themselves, that did; I would be gladly
informed, whether this grant be made to him absolutely, without any manner of
condition whatever; so that, who ever comes to be Pope of Rome, and possessed
of Peter's Chair the^e by what means soever he is possessed of it, whether he
believe the Gospel or no, or any of the saving Truths therein contained, and
so their Church must be the Catholic Church, though it follow him in all
Abominations; or whether it be made on any condition to him, especially that of
cleaving to the doctrine of Christ revealed in the Gospel? If they say the
first, that it is an absolute grant, that is made to him without any condition
expressed or necessarily to be understood, I am at an issue, and have nothing
to add, But my desire that the Grant may be produced; for whilst we are at
this variance, it is against all Law and Equity, that the parties litigant
should be admitted to plead bare Allegations, without proof. If the latter,
though we should grant all the former monstrous suppositions, yet we are
perfectly secure against all their pretensions, knowing nothing more clearly
and evidently, then that He and they have broken all conditions, that can
possibly be imagined, by corrupting and perverting almost the whole doctrine of
the Gospel.

And whereas it may be supposed,. 33.
that the great condition of such a grant would consist in his diligent
attendance to the Scriptures the Word of God; herein does the filth of their
Abominations appear above all other things. The guilt that is in that society
or combination of men, in locking up the Scriptures in an unknown tongue,
forbidding the people to read it, burning some men to death for the studying of
it, and no more, disputing against its power, to make good its own Authority,
charging it with obscurity, imperfection, insufficiency, frighting men from the
perusal of it, with the danger of being seduced, and made Heretics by so
doing, setting up their own Traditions in an equality with it, if not exalting
them above it, studying by all means to decry it as useless and contemptible,
at least comparatively with themselves, will not be purged from them for ever..
34.


But you will say, this is a simple question. For the Pope of Rome has a
promise that he shall still be such an one, as is fit to be trusted with the
power mentioned; and not one that shall defend Mahumet to be the Prophet of God
sent into the world, or the like Abominations; at least, that be he what he
will, placed in the chair, he shall not ^^re, nor mistake in what he
delivers for Truth. Now seeing themselves (as was said) are the sole keepers
of this promise and grant also, which they have not as yet showed to the world.
I am necessitated to ask once more; whether it be made to him merely upon
condition of mounting into his Chair, or also on this condition, that he use
the means appointed by God to come to the knowledge of the Truth? If they say
the former, I must needs say, that it is so remote from my apprehension, that
God who will be worshipped in spirit and in truth only, should now under the
Gospel promise to any persons, that be they never so wicked and abominable,
never so openly and evidently sworn enemies of him and his Anointed, whether
they use any means or not by him appointed, that they shall always in all
things speak the truth, which they hate, in love, which they have not, with
that Authority which all his Saints must bow unto; especially not having
intimated any one word of any such promise in the Scripture, that I know not
whatever I heard of in my life, that I cannot as soon believe. If they say the
latter, we close then as we did our former enquiry.. 35.


Upon the credit and strength of these sandy foundations, and principles, which
neither severally nor jointly will bear the weight of a feather, in a long
continued course of Apostasy have men conquered all Policy, Religion, and
honesty, and built up that stupendous fabric coupled together with subtle and
scarce discernable joints and ligaments, which they call the Catholic Church..
36.


1. In despite of policy they have not only enslaved Kings, Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, Nations, and People to be their vassalls, and at their
disposal; but also contrary to all Rules of government, beyond the thoughts and
conjectures of all, or any that ever wrote of, or instituted a Government in the
world, they have in most Nations of Europe set up a Government, Authority, and
Jurisdiction, within another Government and Authority settled on other
accounts, the one independent on the other, and have brought these things to
some kind of consistency; which that it might be accomplished never entered
into the heart of any wise man once to imagine; nor had ever been by them
effected, without such advantages, as none in the world ever had, in such a
continuance but themselves. Si quis aut privatus, aut populus eorum decret^^
non stetit, sacrificiis interdicunt. Haec paena apud eos est gravissima; quibus
ita est interdictum, ii numero impiorum, and sceleratorum habentur, ab iis
omnes decedunt, aditum eorum sermonemque defugiunt, ne quid ex contagione
incommodi accipiant; neque iis petentibus jus redditur, neque honos ullus
communicatur: His autem omnibus Dr^dibus praeest unus; qui summam inter eos
habet Authoritatem: hoc mortus, si quis ex reliquis excellit dignitate,
succedit: at si sunt plures, suffragio Druidum adlegitur: Nonnunquam etiam de
principatu armis contendunt. Caes. lib. 6. de Bell. Gal.
Unless the Druids of old in some Nations obtained some such thing.

2. In despite of Religion it self,. 37.
they have made a new Creed, invented new ways of worship given a whole sum
and system, of their own, altogether alien from the Word of God, without an
open disclaiming of that word, which in innumerable places bears testimony of
its own perfection and fullness.

3. Contrary to common Honesty,. 38.
the first principles of Reason, with violence to the evident dictates of the
Law of nature, they will in confidence of these principles have the word and
sentence of a Pope, though a beast, a witch, a Conjurer, as by their own
confession many of them have been, to be implicite^y submitted to in and about
things which he neither knows, nor loves, nor cares for: being yet such in
themselves as immediately, and directly concern the everlasting condition of
the souls of men. And this is our second return to their pretense of being
the Catholic Church; to which I add

3. That their plea is so far from truth,. 39.
that they are, and they only the Catholic Church, that indeed they belong not
to it, because they keep not the Unity of the faith, which is required to
constitute any person whatever a member of that Church, but fail in all the
conditions of it. For

1. To proceed by way of instance,. 40.
they do not profess nor believe a Justification distinct from
Sanctification, and acceptance thereof; the Doctrine whereof is of absolu^e and
indispensable necessity to the preservation of the Unity of the Faith; and so
fail in the first condition of professing all necessary Truths. I know what
they say of Justification, what they have determined concerning it in the
Council of Trent, what they dispute about it in their books of Controversies.
But I deny that which they contend for, to be a Justification; so that they do
not deny only Justification by Faith, but positively over and above, the
infusion of Grace, and the acceptance of the obedience thence arising; that
there is any Justification at all consisting in the free and full absolution of
a sinner, on the account of Christ.

2. They discover principles corrupt and depraved,. 41.
utterly inconsistent with those truths, and the receiving of them, which in
general by owning the Scriptures they do profess. Herein to pass by the
principles of Atheism, wickedness, and profannesse, that effectually work
and manifest themselves in the generality of their Priests and People; that of
self ^ighteousnes that is in the best of their Devotionists is utterly
inconsistent with the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, and all saving Truths
concerning the mediation of Jesus Christ therein contained.

3. That in their Doctrine of the Popes supremacy,. 42.
of merits, satisfaction, the mass, the worshipping of Images, they add such
things to their profession, as enervate the efficacy of all the saving truths
they do profess, and so fail in the third condition; This has so abundantly
been manifested by others, that I shall not need to add any thing to give the
charge of it upon them any farther evidence or demonstration.

Thus it is unhappily fallen out with these men,. 43.
that what of all men they most pretend unto, that of all men they have the
least int^erest in* A^haeneus tells us of one Thros^^aus an A^henian, who being
phrenetically distempered, whatever ships came into the Pyraeum he looked on
them and thought them his own, and rejoiced as the Master of so great wealth,
when he was not the owner of so much as a boat: such a distemper of pride and
folly has in the like manner ceased on these persons, with whom we have to
do; that where ever in Scripture they meet with the name Church, presently as
though they were intended by it, they rejoice in the privileges of it, when
their concernment lies not at all therein.

To close this whole discourse I shall bring the grand Argument of the
Romanists (with whom I shall now in this Treatise have little more to do)
wherewith they make such a noise in the world,. 44.
to an ^ssue. Of the many forms and shapes whereinto by them it is cast, this
seems to be the most perspicuously expressive of their intention.

Voluntarily to forsake the communion of the Church of Christ, is Schism, and
they that do so are guilty of it;

You have voluntarily forsaken the communion of the Church of Christ:

Therefore You are guilty of the sin of Schism.

I have purposely omitted the interposing of the term Catholic,. 45.
that the reason of the Argument might run to its length; for upon the taking
in of that term, we have nothing to do but only to deny the Minor
Proposition; seeing the Roman Church, be it what it will, is not the Church
Catholic; but as it is without that limitation called the Church of Christ
indefinitely, it leaves place for a farther and fuller Answer.

To this by way of inference,. 46.
they add, that Schism, as it is declared by S. Austin and S Thomas of Aquin,
being so great and damnable a sin; and whereas it is plain^, that out of the
Church, which as Peter says is as Noah's Arc, 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. there is no
salvation, it is clear you will be damned. This is the sum of their plea.

Now as for the forementioned Argument,. 47.
some of our Divines answer to the Minor Prop. and that both as to the terms
of voluntary forsaking, and that also of the Communion of the Church. For the
first, they say they did not voluntarily forsake the communion of the Church,
that then was, but being necessitated by the command of God to reform
themselves in sundry things, they were driven out by bell, book, and Candle;
cursed out, killed out, driven out by all manner of violence, Ecclesiastical
and Civil; which is a strange way of men's becoming Schismatic.

2. That they forsook not the communion of the Church,. 48.
but the Corruptions of it, or the communion of it in its corruption, not in
other things, wherein it was Lawful to continue communion with it.

To give strength to this Answer, they farther add, that though they grant the
Church of Rome to have been at the time of the first separation, a true Church
of Christ, yet they deny it to be Catholic Church, or only visible Church then
in the World; the Churches in the East claiming that title, by as good a right
as she. So they Others principally answer to the Major Prop. and tell you,
that separation is either causeles, or upon just ground and cause; that it is a
causeles separation only from the Church of Christ, that is Schism; that there
can be no cause of Schism, for if there be a cause of Schism materially, it
cease to be Schism formally: and so to strengthen their answer in Hypothesi,
they fall upon the Idolatrys, Heresies, Tyranny, and Apostasy of the Church of
Rome, as just causes of Separation from her; nor will their plea be shaken to
eternity: so that being true and popular, understood by the meanest, though it
contain not the whole Truth, I shall not in the least impair it.

For them,. 49.
who have found out new ways of justifying our separation from Rome, on
principles of limiting the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome to a peculiar
Patriarchat, and granting a power to Kings or Nations, to erect a Patriarchate
or Metropolitan, within their own Territories, and the like; the Protestant
cause is not concerned in their Plea; the whole of it on both hands, being
foreign to the Scripture, relating mostly to humane constitutions, wherein
they may have liberty to exercise their Wits and Abilities.

Not receding from what has by others solidly been pleaded,. 50.
on the Answers above mentioned; in answer to the principles I have hitherto
evinced, I shall proceed to give my account of the Argument proposed.

That we mistake not, I only premise, that I take Schism in this Argument, in
the notion and sense of the Scripture precisely, wherein alone it will reach
the Consciences, and bear the weight of inferring damnation from it.

1. Then I wholly deny the Major Prop. as utterly false,. 51.
in what sense soever that expression, True Church of Christ is taken. Take it
for the Catholic Church of Christ, I deny that any one, who is once a true
member of it, can utterly forsake its communion; no living member of that body
of Christ can perish! and on supposition it could do so, it would be madness
to call that crime Schism: nor is this, a mere denial of the Assertion; but
such as is attended, with an invincible Truth for its maintenance.

Take it for the general visible Church of Christ;. 52.
the voluntary forsaking of its communion, which consists in the profession of
the same faith, is not Schism, but Apostasy, and the thing it self is to be
removed from the question in hand; And as for Apostates from the faith of the
Gospel, we question not their damnation; it sleeps not: who ever called a
Christian, that turned Jew or Mahumetan a Schismatic?

Take it for a particular Church of Christ, I deny,

1. That Separation from a particular Church, as such, as merely separation, is
Schism, or ought to be so esteemed; though perhaps such separation may proceed
from Schism, and be also attended with other evils.

2. That however, separation upon jus^ cause, and ground, from any Church, is
no Schism: This is granted by all Persons living. Schism is causeless say
all men however concerned. And herein is a truth uncontrollable, Separation
upon just cause is a duty; and therefore cannot be Schism, which is always a
sin. Now there are 500 things in the Church of Rome whereof every one,
grafted, as they are, there into the stock and principle of imposition on the
practice and confession of men* is a sufficient cause of separation from any
particular Church in the world; yea from all of them, one after another; should
they all consent unto the same thing, and impose it in the same manner; if
therebe any Truth in that Maxim; It is better to obey God then man.

2* I wholly deny the Minor Proposition also,. 53.
if spoken in reference to the Church of Rome; Though I willingly acknowledge
our separation to be voluntary from them; no more being done, then I would do
over again this day (God assisting me) were I called unto it. But separation
in the sense contended about, must be from some s^ate and condition of Christ's
Institution, from communion with a Church, which we held by his appointment;
otherwise it will not be pleaded, that it is a Schism, at least not in a
Gospel sense. Now though our Forefathers, in the faith we profess, lived in
sub ection to the Pope of Rome (or his subordinate engines) yet they were not
so subject to them, in any way, or state instituted by Christ; so that the
relinquishment of that State can possibly be no such separation, as to be
termed Schism. For I wholly deny; that the Papacy exercising its power in its
supreme and subordinate Officers, which with them is their Church, is a Church
at all of Christ's appointment, or any such thing. And when they prove it is so,
I will be of it. So that when our Forefathers withdrew their neck from his
Tyrannical yoke, and forsook the practice of his abominations in the worship
of God, they forsook no Church of Christ's institution, they relinquished no
communion of Christ's appointment. A man may possibly forsake Babylon, and yet
not forsake Sion.

For the Aggravations of the sin of Schism,. 54.
from some Ancient Writer^, Austin and Optatus men interested in the contests
about it, Leo and Innocent gaining by the notion of it, then growing in the
World, Thomas Aquinas and such vassalls of the Papacy, we are not concerned in
them; what the Lord speaks of it, that we judge concerning it. It is true, of
the Catholic^ Church always, that out of it no salvation, it being the Society
of them that shall be saved; and of the visible Church in general, in some
sense and cases: Seeing with the heart man believes to Righteousness, and
with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation; But of a particular Church in
no sense, unless that of contempt of a known duty; and to imagine Peter to
speak of any such thing, is a fancy.

The consequence of this devesting the Roman Synogogue of the privileges of a
true Church in any sense,. 55.
arising in the thoughts of some to a denial of that ministry, which we have
at this day in England, must by the way a little be considered. For my part (be
it spoken without offense) If any man has nothing to plead for his ministry,
but merely that successive Ordination which he has received through the Church
of Rome, I cannot see a stable bottom of owning him so to be; I do not say, if
he will plead nothing ^lse; but if he has nothing else to plead. He may have
that, which indeed constitutes him a Minister, though he will not own^ that so
it does. Nor does it come here into enquiry, whether there were not a true
Ministry in some, all along under the Papacy, distinct from it, as were the
thousands in Israel in the days of Elijah; when in the ten Tribes, as to the
public worship, there was no true Ministry at all. Nor is it said, that any
have their Ministry from Rome, a^ though the Office, which is an Ordinance of
Christ, was instituted by Antichrist: But the question is, whether this be a
sufficient and good basis and foundation of any man's interest in the office of
the Ministry, that he has received Ordination in a succession, through the
administration of, not the woman flying into the Wilderness under the
persecution of Antichrist, not of the two witnesses prophesying all along under
the Roman Apostasy, not from them to whom we succeed in doctrine, as the
Waldenses, but the Beast it self, the persecuting Church of Rome, the Pope and
his adherents, who were certainly Administrators of the Ordination pleaded for:
So that in doctrine we should succeed the persecuted Woman, and in Office the
perse^uting Beast. I shall not plead this at large, professedly disclaiming all
thoughts of rejecting those Ministers, as Papal and Antichristian, who yet
adhere to this Ordination* being many of them eminently gifted of God, to
dispense the word, and submitted unto by his people in the Administration of
the Ordinances, and are right worthy Ministers of the Gospel of Christ. But

I shall only remarke some thing on the plea,. 56.
that is insisted on by them, who would, (if I mistake not) keep up in this
particular, what God would have pulled down. They ask us why not Ordination
from the Church of Rome, as well as the Scripture? In which enquiry, I am sorry
that some do still continue. We are so far from having the Scripture from
the Church of Rome, by any Authority of it, as such, that it is one cause of
daily praising God, that by his providence he kept them from being either
corrupted or destroyed by them. It i^ true; the Bible was kept among the people
that lived in those parts of the World where the Pope prevailed: so was the Old
Testament by the Jews; the whole by the Eastern Christians: By none so
corrupted as by those of the Papal Territory. God forbid we should say we ^ad
the Scriptures from the Church of Rome as such; if we had, why do we not keep
them as she delivered them to us, in the vulgar Translation, with the
Apochryphall additions? The Ordination pleaded for, is from the Authority of
the Church of Rome, as such: The Scriptures were by the providence of God
preserved under the Papacy for the use of his People; and had they been found
by chance, as it were, like the Law of old, they had been the same to us, that
now they are. So that of these things there is not the same Reason.. 57.


It is also pleaded, that the granting true Ordination to the Church of Rome
does not prove that to be a true Church. This I profess I underst^and not:
they who ordained had no power so to do, but as they were Officers of that
Church; as such they did it; and if others had ordained, who were not Officers
of that Church, all would confess that Action to be null. But they who will
not be contented that Christ has appointed the Office of the Ministry to be
continued in his Churches, that he continues to dispense his gifts of the
Spirit for the Execution of that Office when men are called thereunto, that he
prepares the hearts of his people to desire and submit unto them in the Lord,
that as to the manner of entrance upon the work, they may have it according to
the mind of Christ, to the utmost in all circumstances, so soon as his
Churches are shaken out of the dust of Babylon with his Glory shining on them,
and the Tabernacle of God is thereby once more placed with men, shall have
leave for me to derive their interest in the ministry through that dark
passage, wherein I cannot see one step before me; if they are otherwise
qualified and accepted as above, I shall ever pay them that honor which is
done to Elders laboring in the word and doctrine.

CHAP. VII.
Of a particular Church: its nature. Frequently mentioned in Scripture.
Particular Congregations acknowledged the only Churches of the first
Institution. What ensued on the multiplication of Churches. Some things
premised to clear the unity of the Church in this sense. Every Believer
ordinarily obliged to join himself to some particular Church: Many things in
instituted worship answering a natural principle. Perpetuity of the Church in
this sense. True Churches at first planted in England. How they ceased so to
be. How Churches may be again reerected. Of the Union of a particular Church in
its self. Foundation of that Union twofold. The Union its self. Of the
communion of particular Churchers one with another. Our concernment in this
Union.

I now descend to the last consideration of a Church in the most usual
Acceptance of that name in the New Testament;. 1.
that is, of a particular instituted Church. A Church in this sense I take to
be a Society of men, called by the word to the obedience of the Faith in Christ
and joint performance of the worship of God in the same individual Ordinances,
according to the order by Christ prescribed. This general description of it
exhibits its nature so far as is necessary to clear the subject of our
present disquisition. A more accurate definition would only administer farther
occasion of contesting about things, not necessary to be determined as to the
enquiry in hand. Such as this was the Church at Jerusalem, that was persecuted
Act. 8. 1. The Church whereof Saul made havoc v. 3. The Church that was vexed
by Herod Act. 12. 1. Such was the Church at Antioch, which Assembled together
in one place Act. 13. 14. wherein were sundry Prophets Act. 13, 1. As that at
Jerusalem consisted of Elders and Bretherren Act. 15. 22. The Apostles or some
of them being there then present, which added no other consideration to that
Church then that we are now speaking of. Such were those men's Churches wherein
Elders were ordained by Paul's appointment Act. 14. 23. As also the Church of
Coesarea Act. 18. 22. and at Ephesus Act. 20. 14. 28. As was that at Corinth 1
Cor. 1. 2. c. 6. 4. and 11. 12. and 14. 4, 5. 12. 19. 2 Cor. 1* 1. And those
mentioned Rev. 1. 2, 3. All which Paul calls the Churches of the Gentiles Romans
16. 4. in contradistinction to those of the Jews, and calls them indefinitely
the Churches of God, v. 16. or the Churches of Christ, 1 Cor. 7. 17. 2 Cor. 8
18. 19. 23. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4. and in sundry other places. Hence we have mention of
many Churches in one Country, as in Judaea Act. 9. 1. in Asia. 1 Cor. 16. 19.
in Macedonia 2 Cor. 8. 1. in Galatia Gal. 1. 2. the seven Churches of Asia Rev.
1. 11. and unto (...) Act 16. 4. (...) answers v. 5. in the same Country.

I suppose that in this description of a particular Church I have not only the
consent of them of all sorts,. 2.
with whom I have now to do, as to what remains of this discourse, but aso
their acknowledgment that these were the only kinds of Churches of the first
Institution. The Reverend Authors of the Jus Divinum Ministerii Anglicani p. 2
c. 6. tell us, that in the Beginning of Christianity the number of Believers
even in the greatest Citys were so few, as that they might all meet (...) in
one and the same place. And these are called the Church of the City, and the
Angel of such a City was Congregationall not Diocesan; which discourse
exhibits that state of a particular Church, which is now pleaded for, and which
shall afterward be evinced, allowing no other, no not in the greatest Cities.
In a rejoinder to that Treatise, so far at the case of Episcopacy is herein
concerned, by a person well known by his labors in that cause, this is
acknowledged to be so. Believers (says he) in great Cities were not at first
divided into Parishes, whilst the number of Christians was so small, that they
might well assemble in the same place, Ham Vind. p. 16. Of the Believers of one
City meeting in one place, being one Church, we have the like grant p. 18. In
this particular Church, He says, there was one Bishop, which had the Rule of
it, and of the Believers in the villages adjacent to that City; which as it
sometimes was not so, Romans 16. 1, 2. so for the most part it seemed to have
been the case; and distinct Churches upon the growth of the number of
Believers, were to be erected in several places of the Voisinage.

And this is the state of a particular instituted Church which we plead for.. 3.
Whether in process of time, believers multiplying, those who had been of one
Church met in several Assemblies, by a settled distribution of them, to
celebrate the same Ordinances specifically, and so made many Churches; or met
in several places in parties, still continuing one body, and were governed in
common by the Elders, whom they increased and multiplied, in proportion to the
increase of believers; or whether, that one or more Officers, Elders, or
Bishops of that first single Congregation, taking on him or them, the care of
those inhabiting the City, wherein the Church was first planted, designed, and
sent some fitted for that purpose, upon their desire and choice, (or otherwise)
to the several lesser companies of the Region adjacent, which in process of
time became dependent on, and subject to the Officer and Officers of that first
Church, from whence they came forth, I dispute not. I am satisfied, that the
first plantation of Churches was as has been pleaded. And I know what was done
afterward on the one hand, or the other, must be examined, as to our
concernment, by what ought to have been done. But of those things afterward.

Now according to the course of procedure hitherto insisted on,. 4.
a Declaration of the Unity of the Church in this sense, what it is, wherein it
does consist, with what it is to be guilty of the breach of that Unity, must
ensue; and this shall be done after I have premised some few things previously
necessary thereunto.

I say then

1. A man may be a member of the Catholic Church of Christ,. 5.
be united to him by the inhabitation of his Spirit, and participation of his
life from him, who upon the account of some providentiall hinderance, is never
joined to any particular Congregation, for the participation of Ordinances all
his days.

2. In like manner may he be a member of the Church considered as professing
visibly.. 6.
Seeing that he may do all that is of him required thereunto, without any such
conjunction to a visible particular Church. But yet,

3. I willingly grant,. 7.
that every believer is obliged, as in a part of his duty, to join himself to
some one of those Churches of Christ; that therein he may abide in Doctrine,
and Fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and Prayer, according to the order of
the Gospel, if he have advantage and opportunity so to do; for,

1. There are some duties incumbent on us,. 8.
which cannot possibly be performed, but on a supposition of this duty
previously required, and submitted unto. Math. 18. 15, 16, 17.

2. There are some Ordinances of Christ,. 9.
appointed for the good, and benefit of those that believe, which they can
never be made partakers of, if not related to some such society. As public
Admonition, Excommunication, Participation of the Sacraments of the Lords
Supper.

3 The care that Jesus Christ has taken,. 10.
that all things be well ordered in these Churches, giving no direction for the
performance of any duty of worship merely and purely of sovereign Institution,
but only in them, and by them, who are so joined, sufficiently evidence his
mind, and our duty herein. Rev. 2. 7. 11. 29. Rev. 3. 6. 7. 12. 1 Cor. 11.

4. The gathering, planting,. 11.
and settling of such Churches by the Apostles, with the care they took in
bringing them to perfection, leaving none, whom they converted, out of that
Order, where it was possible for them to be reduced unto it, is of the same
importance, Act. 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5.

5. Christ's institution of Officers for them,. 12.
Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 11. 28. calling such a Church his Body v. 29. exactly
assigning to every one his duty in such Societies, in respect of the place he
held in them, with his care for their preservation from confusion, and for
Order, evinces from whom they are, and what is our duty in reference unto them.

6. The judging and condemning them by the Holy Ghost,. 13.
as disorderly blameable persons, who are to be avoided, who walk not according
to the Rules and Order appointed in these Churches, his care that those
Churches be not scandalized, or offended with innumerable other considerations,
evince their institution to be from Heaven, not of men, or any prudentiall
considerations of them whatever.

That there is an instituted worship of God to be continued under the New
Testam.. 14.
until the second coming of Christ, I suppose needs not much proof. With
those with whom it has so, I am not now treating, and must not make it my
business to give it evidence, by the innumerable Testimonies which might be
alleged to that purpose. That for the whole of his worship, matter, or
manner, or any part of it, God has changed his way of proceeding, and will now
allow the will, and Prudence of Man, to be the measure, and rule of his Honor
and Glory therein, contrary to what he did, or would allow under the Law, is so
prejudicial to the perfection of the Gospel* infinite Wisdom, and
All Sufficiency of Christ, and so destructive to the whole obligation of the
second Commandment, having no ground in the Scripture, but being built merely
on the conceit of men, suited to one carnal interest or other, I shall
unwillingly debate it. That as to this particular under consideration, there
were particular Churches instituted by the Authority of Jesus Christ, owned and
approved by him; that Officers for them were of his appointment, and furnished
with gifts from him for the Execution of their employment; that Rules,
Cautions, and Instructions for the due settlement of those Churches, were given
by him; that these Churches were made the only seat of that worship, which in
particular he expressed his will to have continued until he came, is of so
much light in Scripture, that he must wink hard, that will not see it.

That either he did not originally appoint these things,. 15.
or he did not give out the gifts of his Spirit, in reference to the right
ordering of them, and exalting of his Glory in them, or that having done so
then, yet that his institutions have an end, being only for a season* and that
it may be known when the efficacy of any of his institutions cease, or that
he does not now dispense the gifts and graces of his Spirit, to render them
useful, is a difficult task for any man to undertake to evince.

There is indeed in the institutions of Christ,. 16.
much that answers a natural principle in men, who are on many accounts formed
and fitted for society. A Confederation and consultation to carry on any
design, wherein the concernment of the individualls does lie, within such
bounds, and in such order as lies in a ready way to the end aimed at, is
exceeding suitable to the principles whereby we are acted and guided as men.
But he that would hence conclude, that there is no more but this, and the
acting of these principles, in this Church constitution, whereof we speak, and
that therefore men may be cast into any prudentiall form; or appoint other
ways and forms of it, then those mentioned in the Scripture, as appointed,
and owned, takes on himself the demonstrating that all things necessarily
required to the Constitution of such a Church society, are commanded by the Law
of nature, and therefore allowed of, and approved only by Christ, and so to be
wholly moral, and to have nothing of instituted worship in them; and also he
must know, that when on that supposition, he has given a probable Reason, why
never any persons in the world fixed on such societies in all Essential things
as those, seeing they are Natural, that he leaves less to the Prudence of men
and to the ordering and disposing of things concerning them, then those, who
make them of pure institution, all whose circumstances cannot be derived from
themselves; as those of things purely moral may. But this is not of my present
consideration.

2. Nor shall I consider,. 17.
whether perpetuity be a property of the Church of Christ in this sense; that
is, not whether a Church that was once so, may cease to be so, which it is
known I plead for in the instance of the Church of Rome, not to mention others;
but whether by virtue of any promise of Christ, there shall always be
somewhere in the world, a visible Church, visibly celebrating his Ordinances.
Luc. 1. 33. He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end; is pleaded to this purpose. But that any more,
but the spiritual reign of Christ in his Catholic Church, is there intended,
is not proved* Mat. 16. 18. upon this Rock will I build my Church, is also
urged; but to intend any but true Believers, and that as such, in that promise,
is wholly to enervate it, and to take away its force and efficacy. Mat. 18. 18,
20. declares the presence of Christ with his Church where ever it be, not that
a Church in the regard treated of, shall be. To the same purpose are other
expressions in the Scripture. As I will not deny this in General; so I am
unsatisfyed as to any particular instance for the making of it good.

It is said,. 18.
that true Churches were at first planted in England; how then, or by what
means did they cease so to be? How, or by what Act did God unchurch them? They
did it themselves Meritoriously by Apostasy and Idolatry, God Legally by his
Institution of a Law of rejection of such Churches. If any shall ask, How then
is it possible, that any such Churches should be raised a new? I say, that the
Catholic Church mystical, and that visibly professing, being preserved
entire, he that thinks there needs a miracle, for those who are members of
them, to join in such a Society, as those now spoken of, according to the
Institution of Christ, is a person delighting in needless scruples.

Christ has promised,. 19.
that where two or three are gathered together in his name, he will be in the
midst of them, Mat. 18. 20. It is now supposed, with some hope to have it
granted, that the Scripture being the power of God to Salvation, has (Romans 1.
16.) a sufficient efficacy and energie in it self, as to its own kind, for the
conversion of Souls; yea let us, till opposition be made to it, take it for
granted, that by that force and efficacy it does mainly and principally evince
its own Divinity, or divine Original. Those, who are contented for the honor
of that word, which God delights to magnify, to grant this Supposition, will
not I hope, think it impossible, that though all Church state should cease in
any place, and yet the Scripture by the providence of God be there in the hand
of individualls preserved, two or three should be called, converted, and
regenerated by it. For my part, I think, he that questions it, must do it on
some corrupt principle of a secondary dependent Authority in the word of God as
to us; with which sort of men I do not now deal. I ask whether these
converted persons may nor possibly come together, or assemble themselves in the
name of Jesus? may they not upon his command, and in Expectation of the
accomplishment of his promise, so come together, with Resolution to do his
will, and to exhort one another thereto, Zech. 3. 10. Mal. 3. 10. Truly I
believe they may, in what part of the world soever their lot is fallen. Here
lie all the difficulties, whether being come together in the name of Christ
they may do, what he has commanded them, or no? whether they may exhort, and
stir up one another to do the will of Christ. Most certain it is, that
Christ will give them his presence, and therewithal his Authority, for the
performance of any duty, that he requires at their hands. Were not men angry,
troubled, and disappointed, there would be little difficulty in this business.
But of this elsewhere.

3. Upon this supposition, that particular Churches are Institutions of Jesus
Christ, which is granted by all, with whom I have to do; I proceed to make
enquiry into their Union and Communion, that so we may know wherein the bonds
of them do consist.

1. There is a double foundation,. 20.
fountain, or cause of the Union of such a Church; the one external,
procuring, commanding; the other internal, inciting, directing, assisting. The
first is the Institution of Jesus Christ, before mentioned, requiring Peace,
and Order, Union, Consent, and Agreement, in and among all the members of such
a Church; all to be regulated, ordered, and bounded, by the Rules, Laws,
Prescripts, which from him they have received, for their walking in those
Societies.

The Latter is that Love without dissimulation, which always is, or which
always ought to be, between all the members of such a Church, exerting it
self in their respective duties one toward another, in that holy combination,
whereunto they are called and entered for the Worship of God: whether they are
those, which lie in the level of the equality of their common interest of
being Church Members, or those which are required of them in the several
differences, whereby on any account whatever, they are distinguished one from
another amongst themselves; for love is the bond of perfectness. Col. 3. 14.

Hence then it appears, what is the Union of such a Church, and what is the
communion to be observed therein, by the appointment of Jesus Christ. The joint
consent of all the members of it, in obedience to the command of Christ, from a
principle of Love, to walk together in the universal celebration of all the
Ordinances of the worship of God, instituted and appointed to be celebrated in
such a Church, and to perform all the duties, and offices of Love, which in
reference to one another, in their respective stations and places, are by God
required of them; and doing so accordingly. See Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. cap. 4. 1, 2,
3. 1 Cor: 1. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Romans 15. 5.

Whereas there are in these Churches, some Rulers,. 21.
some Ruled; some eyes, some hands in this Body, some parts visibly comely,
some uncomely; upon the account of that variety of gifts and graces which is
distributed to them; in the performance of duties, regard is to be had to all
the particular Rules, that are given with respect to men in their several
places and distributions. Herein does the Union of a particular Church consist;
herein have the members of it communion among themselves, and with the whole.

4. I shall farther grant,. 22.
and add hereunto: Over and above the Union that is between the members of
several particular Churches, by virtue of their interest in the Church
Catholic, which draws after it a necessity of the occasional exercise of
duties of Love one toward another, and that Communion they have, as members of
the general Church visible, in the profession of the Faith once delivered unto
the Saints; There is a Communion also to be observed between these Churches, as
such, which is sometimes, or may be exerted in their Assemblies by their
Delegates, for declaring the sense, and determining things of joint concernment
unto them. Whether there ought to be an ordinary combination of the Officers of
these Churches, invested with the Power for the disposal of things and
Persons, that concern one or more of them, in several subordinations, by the
institution of Christ; as it is not my judgment that so there is, so it
belongs not unto my present undertaking at all to debate.

That which alone remains to be done,. 23.
is to consider, what is our concernment as to the breach of this Union, which
we profess to be appointed by Jesus Christ; and that both as we are
Protestants, as also farther differenced according to the intimations given at
the entrance of this Discourse. What has already been delivered about the
nature of Schism, and the Scripture Notion of it, might well suffice, as to
our Vindication in this business from any charge that we are, or seem
obnoxious unto. But because I have no^ reason to suppose, that some men will be
so favorable unto us, as to take pains for the improvement of principles,
though in themselves clearly evinced on our behalf; The application of them
to some present cases, with the removal of objections that lie against my
intendment, must be farther added.

Some things there are,. 24.
which upon what has been spoken, I shall assume and suppose as granted in
Thesi, until I see them otherwise disproved, then as yet I have done. Of these
the first is. That the departing or secession of any man or men, from any
particular Church, as to that communion, which is peculiar to such a Church,
which he or they have had therewith, is no where called Schism, nor is so in
the nature of the thing it self, (as the general signification of the word is
restrained by its Scripture use) but is a thing to be judged, and receive a
little according to the causes and circumstances of it.

2. One Churches refusing to hold that communion with another,. 25.
which ought to be between them, is not Schism properly so called.

3. The departure of any man or men,. 26.
from the Society or Communion of any Church whatever, so it be done without
strife, variance, judging, and condemning of others, because according to the
light of their Consciences, they cannot in all things in them worship God
according to his mind, cannot be rendered evil but from circumstances taken
from the persons so doing, or the way and manner, whereby and wherein they do
it.

Unto these I add,. 27.
that if any one can show and evince that we have departed from, and left the
communion of any particular Church of Christ, with which we ought to walk
according to the order above mentioned, or have disturbed and broken the Order
and Union of Christ's Institution, wherein we are or were inwrapped, we put our
selves on the mercy of our judges.

The Consideration of what is the charge on any of us, on this account, was the
first thing aimed at in this Discourse, and as it was necessary from the Rules
of the method wherein I have proceeded, comes now in the last place to be put
to the issue and trial, which it shall in the Next Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Church of England. The charge of Schism in the name thereof. Proposed
and considered: Several considerations of the Church of England. In what sense
we were members of it. Of Anabaptisme. The subjection due to Bishops. Their
power examined. Its orginall in this Nation. Of the Ministerial power of
Bishops. Its present continuance. Of the Church of England what it is. Its
description. Form peculiar and constitutive. Answer to the charge of Schism,
on separation from it, in its Episcopal constitution How and by what means it
was taken away. Things necessary to the constitution of such a Church proposed:
and offered to proof. The second way of constituting a national Church:
Considered. Principles agreed on and consented unto between the parties at
variance, on this account. Judgment of Amiraldus in this case. Inferences from
the common principles before consented unto: The case of Schism in reference
to a National Church in the last sense, debated. Of particular Churches, and
separation from them. On what accounts Justifiable. No necessity of joining to
this or that. Separation from some so called, required. Of the Church of
Corinth. The duty of its members. Austins Judgment of the practice of Elijah.
The last objection waved. Inferences upon the whole.

THat which first presents it self,. 1.
is a plea against us, in the name of the Church of England, and those
entrusted with the Reiglment thereof, as it was settled and established some
years since, the sum whereof (if I mistake not) amounts to thus much.

You were sometimes members and Children of the Church of England,. 2.
and lived in the communion thereof; professing obedience thereunto, according
to its Rules and Canons; you were in an orderly subjection to the
Arcsh-Bishops, Bishops, and those acting under them in the Hierarchy, who were
officers of that Church; in that Church you were baptized, and joined in the
outward worship celebrated therein; but you have now voluntarily, and of your
own accord forsaken and renounced the communion of this Church, cast off your
subjection to the Bishops and Rulers; rejected the form of worship appointed
in that Church, that great bond of its communion; and set up separated Churches
of your own, according to your pleasures, and so are properly Schismatics.

This I say,. 3.
if I mistake not, is the sum of the charge against us, on the account of of
our late attempt for Reformation, and reducing of the Church of Christ to its
primitive institution, which we profess our aim in singleness of heart to
have been, and leave the judgment of it unto God.

To acquit our selves of this imputation,. 4.
I shall declare

1. How far we own our selves to have been, or to be members or Children (as
they speak) of the Church of England, as it is called, or esteemed.

2. What was the subjection whein we, or any of us stood, or might be supposed
to have stood to the Prelates or Bishops of that Church. And then I shall

3. Put the whole to the issue, and enquiry, whether we have broken any bond or
order, which by the institution and appointment of Jesus Christ, we ought to
have preserved entire, and unviolated: not doubting but that on the whole
matter in difference, we shall find the charge managed against us, to be
resolved wholly into the Pru^ence, and interest of some men, wherein our
Consciences are not concerned.

As to the first proposal;. 5.
the several considerations that the Church of England may fall under, will
make way for the determination of our Relation thereunto.

1. There being in this Country of England, much people of God, many of his
Elect called and Sanctified, by and through the Spirit and blood of Christ,
with the washing of water and the Word, so made true living members of the
mystical body, or Catholic Church of Christ, holding him, as a spiritual
Head, receiving influences of life and grace from him continually, they may be
called, (though improperly) the Church of England, that is, that part of
Christ's Catholic Church militant, which lives in England. In this sense it is
the desire of our souls, to be found and to abide members of the Church of
England, to keep with it, whilst we live in this world, the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of Peace. Jerusalem which is above, is the Mother of us all; and
one is our Father, which is in Heaven; one is our Head, Sovereign, Lord, and
Ruler, the dearly beloved of our Souls, the Lord Jesus Christ. If we have
grieved, offended, troubled the least member of this Church, so that he may
justly take offense at any of our ways, we profess our readiness to lie at
his or their feet for Reconciliation, according to the mind of Christ. If we
bear not love to all the Members of the Church of England in this sense,
without dissimulation, (yea even to them amongst them, who through mistakes and
darkness, have on several accounts designed our harm and ruin) if we
rejoice not with them, and suffer not with them, however they may be
differenced in and by their opinions, or walkings, if we desire not their good,
as the good of our own Souls, and are not ready to hold any communion with
them, wherein their and our Light will give and afford unto us peace mutually,
if we judge, condemn, despise any of them, as to their Persons, Spiritual
state and Condition, because they walk not with us, let us be esteemed the
vilest Schismatics, that ever lived on the face of the Earth. But as to our
membership in the Church of England on this account, we stand or fall to our
own master.

2. The Rulers,. 6.
Governors, Teachers, and Body of the People of this Nation of England, having
by Laws, Professions, and public Protestations, cast off the Tyranny,
Authority, and Doctrine of the Church of Rome, with its Head the Pope; and
jointly assented unto, and publicly professed the doctrine of the Gospel, as
expressed in their public Confession, variously attested and confirmed,
declaring their profession by that public confession, Preaching, Laws and
Writings suitable thereunto, may also be called on good account, the Church of
England. In this sense, we profess ourselves members of the Church of England,
as professing and adhering to that Doctrine of Faith in the Unity of it, which
was here established and declared, as was before spoken. As to the attempt of
some, who accuse us for everting of fundamentalls, by our doctrine of Election
by the free grace of God, of effectual Redemption of the Elect only,
conversion by the irresistible efficacy of Grace, and the associate doctrines,
which are commonly known, we suppose the more sober part of our Adversaries
will give them little thanks for their pains therein: If for no other Reason,
yet at least, because they know the cause, they have to manage against us, is
weakened thereby. Indeed it seems strange to us, that we should be charged with
Schism from the Church of England, for endeavoring to reform our selves, as
to something relating to the worship of God, by men everting, and denying so
considerable a portion of the Doctrine of that Church, which we sacredly
retain entire, as the most urgent of our present Adversaries do. In this
sense I say we still confess our selves members of the Church of England; nor
have we made any separation from it, but do daily labor to improve, and carry
on the light of the Gospel, which shines therein, and on the account whereof,
it is renowned in the world.

3. Though I know not how proper that expression of Children of the Church may
be under the New Testament,. 7.
nor can by any means consent unto it, to the urging of any obedience to any
Church or Churches whatsoever on that account; no such use being made of that
consideration by the Holy Ghost, nor any parallel unto it insisted on by him;
yet in a general sense, so far as our receiving our Regeneration, and new
birth, through the grace of God by the preaching of the Word, and the saving
truths thereof, here professed, with the seal of it in our baptism, may be
signified by that expression, we own our selves to have been, and to be
Children of the Church of England, because we have received all this by the
administration of the Gospel here in England, as dispensed in the several
Assemblyes therein: And are contented, that this concession be improved to the
utmost.

Here indeed are we left by them,. 8.
who renounce the Baptism they have received in their infancy, and repeat it
again amongst themselves. Yet I suppose, that He, who upon that single account
will undertake to prove them Schismatic, may find himself entangled. Nor is
the case with them exactly as it was with the Donatists. They do the same
thing with them, but not on the same Principles. The Donatists rebaptized
those, who came to their societies, because they professed themselves to
believe, that all Administration of Ordinances not in their Assemblyes was
null: and that they were to be looked on as no such thing. Our Anabaptists do
the same thing, but on this plea, that though baptism be, yet infant baptism
is not an Institution of Christ, and so is null from the nature of the thing it
self, not the way of its Administration: but this false not within the verge of
my defense.

In these several considerations we were,. 9.
and do continue members in the Church of God in England; And as to our
failing herein, who is it, that convinces us of sin?

The second thing inquired after is,. 10.
what subjection we stood, or were supposed to have stood in, to the Bishops?
Our subjection being regulated by their power, the consideration of this,
discovers the true state of that.

They had,. 11.
and exercised in this Nation, a twofold Power; and consequently the subjection
required of us, was twofold.

1. A power delegated from the supreme Magistrate of the Nation, conferred on
them, and invested in them, by the Laws, Customs, and Vsages of this
Commonwealth, and exercised by them on that account. This not only made them
Barons of the Realm, and members of Parliament, and gave them many Dignities
and Privileges, but also was the sole fountain, and spring of that
Jurisdiction, which they exercised by ways and means, such as themselves will
not plead to have been purely Ecclesiastical, and of the Institution of Jesus
Christ. In this respect we did not cast off our subjection to them; it being
our duty to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lords sake.
Only when ever they commanded things unlawful in themselves, or unto us, we
always retreated to the old safe Rule, whether it be meet to obey you or God,
judge ye. On this foundation I say, was all the Jurisdiction, which they
exercised among, and over the People of this Nation, built. They had not leave
to exercise that, which they were invested in, on another account, but received
formally their Authority thereby. The tenor whereby their Predecessors held
this Power before the Reformation, the change of the tenor by the Laws of this
Land, the investitu^e of the whole original right thereof in another person,
then formerly, by the same means, the Legal Concession and Delegation to them
made, the enlarging or contracting of their Jurisdiction by the same Laws, the
civil process of their Courts in the exercise of their Authority,
sufficiently evince from whence they had it. Nor was any thing herein any more
of the Institution of Jesus Christ, then the Courts are in Westminster Hall Sir
Edward Cook, who knew the Laws of his Country, and was skilled in them to a
miracle, will satisfy any in the rise and tenor of Episcopal Jurisdiction: De
Jure Regis Eccles. What there is of Primitive institution, giving color and
occasion to this kind of Jurisdiction, and the exercise of it, shall farther
(God assisting) be declared, when I treat of the state of the first Churches,
and the ways of their degeneracy; Let them, or any for them, in the mean time
evince the Jurisdiction they exercised, in respect whereunto our subjection in
the first kind was required, to derive its original from the pure Institution
of Christ in the Gospel, or to be any such thing as it was, in an imagined
separation from the humane Laws, whereby it was animated; and more will be
asserted, then I have had the happiness as yet to see. Now I say, that the
subjection to them due, on this account, we did not cast off; but their whole
Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction was removed, taken away, and anull'd, by the
people of the Land assembled in Parliament.

But this,. 12.
they reply, is the state of the business in hand; the Parliament, as much as
in them lay, did so indeed as is confessed, and by so doing made the Schism,
which you by adhering to them, and joining with them in their several places,
have made your selves also guilty of.

But do these men know what they say,. 13.
or will it ever trouble the Conscience of a man in his right wits, to be
charged with Schism on this account? the Parliament made Alteration of
nothing, but what they found established by the Laws of this Nation, pleading
that they had power committed to them, to alter, abrogate, and anull Laws for
the good of the people of the Land. If their making Alterations in the Civil
Laws and Constitutions, in the Political Administrations of the Nation be
Schism, we have very little security, but that we may be made new Schismatics
every third year, whilst the constitution of a Trienniall Parliament does
continue. In the removal then of all Episcopal Jurisdiction founded in the
Laws and usages of this Nation, we are not at all concerned. For the Laws
enforcing it, do not press it as a thing necessary on any other account, but
as that which themselves gave rise and life unto. But should this be granted,
that the Office was appointed by Christ, and the Jurisdiction impleaded annexed
by him thereunto; yet this, whilst we abide at diocesans, with the several
divisions apportioned to them in the Nation, will not suffice to constitute a
National Church, unless some Union of those Diocesans, or of the Churches
whereunto they related, into one society and Church, by the same appointment,
be proved, which to my present Apprehension, will be no easy work for any one
to undertake.

2. Bishops had here a power as Ministers of the Gospel,. 13.
to Preach, administer the Sacraments, to join in the Ordination of Ministers,
and the like duties of Church Officers. To this we say, let the individualls of
them acquit themselves, by the qualifications mentioned in the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, with a sedulous exercise of their duty in a due manner,
according to the mind of Christ to be such indeed, and we will still pay them
all the respects, reverence, duty, and obedience, which as such, by virtue of
any Law or Institution of Christ, they can claim. Let them come forth, with
weapons that are not carnal, evidencing their Ministry to the Consciences of
Believers, acting in a Spirit and Power received from Christ, and who are they
that will harm them?

I had once formerly said thus much.. 14.
Let the Bishops attend the particular flocks over which they are appointed,
preaching the word, administering the holy Ordinances of the Gospel in and to
their own flock, there will not be contending about them. It was thought meet
to return by one concerned, I shall willingly grant herein my suffrage, let
them discharge them (and I beseech all, who have any way hindered them, at
length to let and quietly permit them) on condition he will do this as
carefully as I, I shall not contend with him concerning the nature of their
task, be it as he says the attending to the particular Churches over which
they are appointed (the Bishop of Oxford over that flock or portion, to which
he was, and is appointed, and so all others in like manner) be it their
preaching and their administering the holy ordinances of the Gospel in and to
their ^wn flock and whatever else of duty and ratione officii belongs to a
rightly constituted Bishop; and ^et all that have disturbed this course so duly
^^tled in this Church, and in all Churches of Christ ^^nce the Apostles
planting them, discern their ^^^rour, and return to that peace and Unity of
the Church, from whence they have causelessly and inexcusably departed.

Though I was not then speaking of the Bishops of England,. 16.
yet I am contented with the application to them; there being amongst them men
of piety and learning, whom I exceedingly honor and reverence: Amongst all the
Bishops, He of Oxford is I suppose peculiarly instanced in, because it may be
thought, that living in this place, I may belong to his Jurisdiction. But in
the condition wherein I now am by the providence of God, I can plead an
exemption on the same foot of account, as he can his Jurisdiction. So that I am
not much concerned in his exercise of it, as to my own person. If he have a
particular flock at Oxon, which he will attend according to what before I
required, he shall have no let or hindrance from me; but being he is, as I
hear he is, a Reverend and Learned person, I shall be glad of his
Neighborhood and acquaintance. But to suppose that the Diocese of Oxon as
legally constituted and bounded, is his particular flock or Church, that such a
Church is instituted by Christ, or has been in Being ever since the Apostles
times, that in his presidency in this Church he is to set up Courts, and
exercise a Jurisdiction in them, and therewith a power over all the inhabitants
of this Diocese or Shire (excepting the exempt peculiar jurisdiction) although
gathered into particular Congregations, and united by a participation of the
same Ordinances; and all this by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, is
to suppose what will not be granted. I confess, as before, there was once such
an Order in this place, and that it is now removed by Laws, on which
foundation alone it stood before: And this is that where in I am not concerned.
Whether we have causelessly and inexcusably departed from the Unity of the
Church, is the matter now in enquiry. I am sure, unles the Unity can be fixed,
our departure will not be proved. A law Unity I confess, an Evangelicall I am
yet in the disquisition of. But I confess it will be to the prejudice of the
cause in hand, if it shall be thought, that the determination of it depends on
the controversy about Episcopacy: for if so, it might be righteously expected
that the Arguments produced in the behalf, and defense thereof, should be
particularly discussed. But the truth is, I shall easily acknowledge all my
labor to no purpose* if have to deal only with men, who suppose that if it be
granted, that Bishops, as commonly esteemed in this Nation, are of the
appointment of Christ, it will thence follow, that we have a National Church
of Christ's appointment: between which indeed there is no Relation or connection.
Should I grant as I said diocesan Bishops, with Churches answerable to their
supportment, particled into several Congregations, with their inferior
Officers, yet this would be remote enough, from giving subsistence and Union to
a National Church.

What then it is which is called the Church of England,. 17.
in respect whereto we are charged with Schism, is nextly to be considered.

Now there are two ways whereby we may come to the discovery of what is
intended by the Church of England: or there are two ways, whereby such a thing
does arise.

1. Descendendo, which is the way of the Prelates.

2. Ascendendo, which is the way of the Presbyterians.

For the first,. 18.
to constitute a National Church by descent; it must be supposed that all
Church power is vested in National Officers viz. Archbishops, and from them
derived to several Diocesians by a distribution of power limited in its
exercise to a certain portion of the Nation, and by them communicated by
several engines to Parochial Priests in their several places. A man with
half an eye may see that here are many things to be proved.

Thus their first Church is National,. 19.
which is distributed into several greater portions termed Provinces, those
again into others, now called Diocesses, and those again subdivided into
Parochial or particular Congregations. Now the Union of this Church consists
in the due observance of the same worship specifically by all the members of
it, and subjection according to Rules of their own appointment (which were
called commonly Canons) by way of distinction unto the Rulers before mentioned
in their several capacities. And this is that, which is the peculiar form of
this Church. That of the Church Catholic absolutely so called is its Unity
with Christ, and in its self by the one Spirit, whereby it is animated. That
of the Church Catholic visibly professing, the Unity of the Faith, which they
do profess, as being by them professed. That of a particular Church as such,
its observance, and performance of the same Ordinances of worship numerically,
in the confession of the same faith, and subjection to the same Rules of Love
for edification of the whole. Of this National, as it is called, in the
subjection of one sort of Officers unto another, within a precinct limited
Originally, wholly on an account foreign to any Church state whatever. So that
it is not called the Church of England, from its participation of the nature of
the Catholic Church, on the account of its most noble members; nor yet from
its participation of the nature of the invisible Church in the world, on the
account of its profession of the Truth; in both which respects we profess our
Unity with it; nor yet from its participation of the nature of a particular
Church, which it did not in its self, nor as such, but in some of its
particular Congregations; but from a peculiar form of its own, as above
described, which is to be proved to be of the Institution of Jesus Christ.

In this description given of their Church state,. 20*
with whom we have now to do; I have purposely avoided the mention of things
odious and exposed to common obloquy which yet were the very ^ies and ligaments
of their order, because the thing, as it is in its self being nakedly
represented, we may not be prejudiced, in judging of the strength and utmost of
the charge, that lies against any of us, on the account of a departure from it.

The communion of this Church they say we have forsaken,. 21*
and broken its Unity, and therefore are Schismatics.

I answer in a word, laying aside so much of the Jurisdiction of it mentioned
before, and the several ways of its administration, for which there is no
color or pretense that it should relate to any Gospel institution; pass by
also the consideration of all those things which the men, enjoying Authority
in, or exercising the pretended power of this Church, did use all their
Authority and power to injoyne and establish, which we judge evil; let them
prove that such a National Church, as would remain with these things pared
off, that is in its best estate imaginable, was ever instituted by Christ, or
the Apostles in his name in all the things of absolute necessity to its being
and existence, and I will confess my self to be what they please to say of me.

That there was such an Order in things relating to the worship of God
established by the Law of the Land,. 22.
in and over the people thereof, that the worship pleaded for was confirmed by
the same Law, that the Rulers mentioned had power, being by the Magistrate
assembled to make Rules and Canons to become binding to the good people of the
Common wealth, when confirmed by the supreme A^thority of the Nation, and not
else; that penaltys were appointed to the disturbers of this Order by the same
Law, I grant. But that any thing of all this, as such, that is, as a part of
this whole, or the whole it self, was instituted by the will and appointment
of Jesus Christ, that is denied. Let not any one think, that because we deny
the constitution pleaded about, to have had the stamp of the Authority of Jesus
Christ that therefore we pulled it down and destroyed it by violence. It was
set up before we were borne, by them who had power to make Laws to bind the
People of this Nation, and we found men in an orderly legal possession of that
power, which exerting its self several ways, maintained and preserved that
constitution, which we had no call to eradicate. Only whereas they took upon
them to act in the name of Christ also, and to interpose their orders, and
Authority in the things of the worship of God, we entreated them, that we might
pass our pilgrimage quietly in our native Country (as Israel would have gone
through the Land of Edonie, without the disturbance of its inhabitants) and
worship God acording to the light which he had graciously imparted to us, but
they would not hearken. But herein also was it our duty to keep the word of
Christ's patience. Their removal, and the Dissolution of this National Church,
arose, and was carried on, as has been declared, by other hands, on other
acounts.

Now it is not to any purpose,. 23.
to plead the Authority of the Church, for many of the institutions mentioned:
for neither has any Church Power, or can have, to institute and appoint the
things, whereby it is made to be so; as these things are the very form of the
Church, that we plead about; nor has any Church any Authority, but what is
answerable to its Nature: if it self be of a civil prudentiall constitution,
its Authority also is Civil and no more. Denying their Church in that form of
it, which makes it such, to be of the institution of Christ; it cannot be
expected that we should grant, that it is, as such, invested with any Authority
from Christ, so that the dissolution of the Unity of this Church, as it had its
rise on such an account, proceeded from an alteration of the humane
Constitution, whereon it was built; and how that was done, was before declared.
Then let them prove,

1. That Ordinary Officers are before the Church, and that in Ecclesia
instituta, as well as instituenda, which must be the foundation of their work:
(we confess Extraordinary Officers were before the Church, not considering the
way of men's coming to be joined in such Societies; was it possible it should be
otherwise? but as for ordinary Officers, they were an exurgency from a Church,
and serve to the completion of it. Act. 14. 23, 24. Tit. 1. 5.)

2. That Christ has appointed any National Officers,. 24.
with a plenitude of Ordinary power, to be imparted, communicated, and
distributed to other recipient Subjects, in several degrees within one Nation,
and not elsewhere. I mean such an Officer or Officers, who in the first
instance of their power, should on their own single account relate unto a whole
Nation.

3. That he has instituted any National Church, as the proper correlatum of
such an Officer; concerning which also I desire to be informed, whether a
Catalogue of those he has so instituted, be to be obtained; or their number be
left indefinite? Whether they have limits and bounds prescribed to them by him,
or are left to be commensurate to the civil dominion of any Potentate, and so
to enjoy, or suffer the providentiall enlargements or straights, that such
dominions are continually subject unto? Whether we had seven Churches here in
England, during the Heptarchy of the Saxons, and one in Wales or but one in the
whole? If seven, how they came to be one? If but one, why those of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, were not one also; especially since they have been under
one Civil Magistrate? or whether the difference of the Civil Laws of these
Nations be not the only cause, that these are three Churches? and if so,
whether from thence any may not discern whereon the Unity of the Church of
England does depend?

Briefly,. 25.
when they have proved Metropolitan, Diocesan Bishops in a firstnesse of power,
by the Institution of Christ, a national Church by the same institution in the
sense pleaded for; a firstnesse of power in the National Officers of that
National Church to impose a form of worship upon all being within that Nation
by the same institution, which should contain the bond of the Union of that
Church; also that every man, who is borne, and in his infancy babtized in that
Nation, is a member of that National Church by the same institution, and shall
have distinguished clearly in and about their Administrations, and have told us
that they counted to be of Ecclesiastical power, and what they grant to be a
mere emanation of the civil Government of the Nation, we will then treat with
them about the business of Schism. Until then, if they tell us, that we have
forsaken the Church of England in the sense pleaded for by them; I must answer,
that which is wanting cannot be numbered. It is no crime to depart from nothing;
we have not left to be that, which we never were; which may suffice both us and
them, as to our several respective concernments of conscience and Power. It
has been from the darkness of men, and ignorance of the Scriptures, that some
have taken advantage to set up a product of the prudence of Nations, in the
name of Jesus Christ, and on that account to require the Acceptance of it. When
the Tabernacle of God is again well fixed amongst men, these shaddows will fly
away: in the mean time we owe all these disputes, with innumerable other
evils, to the Apostasy of the Roman Combination, from which we are far as
yet from being clearly delivered.

I have one thing more to add upon the whole matter,. 26.
and I shall proceed to what is lastly to be considered.

The Church of England as it is called, (that is, the people thereof) separated
herself from the Church of Rome. To free herself from the imputation of
Schism, in so doing, as she (that is, the learned men of the Nation) pleaded
the errors and corruptions of that Church, under this especial consideration
of their being imposed by Tyranny; so also by professing her design to be
nothing, but to reduce Religion, and the worship of God, to its original
purity, from which it was fallen. And we all jointly justify both her and all
other reformed Churches in this plea.

In her design to reduce Religion to its primitive purity, she always
professed, that she did not take her direction from the Scripture only, but
also from the Counsels and examples of the four or five first Centuries, to
which she labored to conform her Reformation. Let the question now be,
whether there be not corruptions in this Church of England, supposing such a
national state to be instituted. What I beseech you shall bind my Conscience
to acquiesce in what is pleaded from the 4 or 5 first Centuries consisting of
men, that could, and did err; more then that did hers, which was pleaded from
the 9. or 10. Centuries following? Have not I liberty to call for Reformation
according to the Scripture only? or at least to profess that my Conscience
cannot be bound to any other? The sum is, the business of Schism from the
Church of England, is as a thing built purely and simply on Political
considerations so interwoven with them, so influenced from them, as not to be
separated. The famous advice of Moecenas to Augustus mentioned in Diocassias,
is the best Authority I know against it.

Before we part with this Consideration;. 27.
I must needs prevent one mistake, which perhaps in the mind of some may arise
upon the preceding discourse: for whereas sundry Ordinances of the worship of
God are rightly to be administered only in a Church and Ministers do evidently
relate thereunto, the denying of a National Church state seems to deny that
we had either Ministers or Ordinances here in England. The truth is, it seems
so to do, but it does not; unless you will say, that unless she be a
National Church state, there is no other; which is too absurd for any one to
imagine. It follows indeed, that there were no National Church Officers, that
there were no Ordinances numerically the same to be administered in and to the
Nation at once, but that there was not another Church state in England, and on
the account thereof, Ordinances truly administered by lawful Ministers it does
not follow. And now if by this discourse I only call this business to a
review, by them who are concerned to assert this National Church I am
satifyed. That the Church of England is a true Church of Christ, they have
hitherto maintained against the Romanists, on the account of the Doctrine
taught in it, and the successive ordination of its officers, through the Church
of Rome its self, from the primitive times. About the constitution and nature
of a national Church, they have had with them no contention. Therein the
parties at variance were agreed The same grounds and principles, improved with
a defense of the external worship and Geremonies established on the Authority
of the Church they managed against the non-conformists, and separatists at
home. But their chief strength against them, lay in Arguments more forcible,
which need not be repeated. The constitution of the Church now impleaded,
deserves as I said the review: Hitherto it has been unfurnished of any
considerable defensative.

2. There is another way of Constituting a national Church,. 28.
which is insisted on by some of our brethren of the Presbyterian way. This
is, that such a thing should arise from the particular Congregations, that are
in the Nation united by sundry Associations and subordinations of Assemblies in
and by the representatives of those Churches. So that though there cannot be an
Assembly of all the members of those Churches in one place, for the performance
of any worship of God; nor is there any Ordinance appointed by Christ to be so
celebrated in any Assembly of them, (which we suppose necessary to the
constitution of a particular Church) yet there may be an Assembly of the
representatives of them all by several elevations for some end and purpose.

In this sense,. 29.
a Church may be called National, when all the particular Congregations of one
Nation, living under one Civil Government, agreeing in doctrine and worship,
are governed by their greater and lesser Assemblies, (Jus Divinum Minist.
Anglic. p. 12) but I would be loath to exclude every man from being a member of
the Church in England, that is, from a share in the profession of the faith,
which is owned and professed by the people of God in England; who is not a
member of a particular Congregation. Nor does subjection to our civil
Government and agreement on the same doctrine and worship specifically either
jointly or severally constitute one church as is known even in the judgment of
these brethren. It is the last expression of lesser, and greater Assemblies
that must do it; but as to any such institution of Christ, as a standing
Ordinance, sufficient to give Unity yea or denomination to a Church, this is
the (...). And yet this alone is to be insisted on. For as was showed before,
the other things mentioned contribute nothing to the form, nor Union of such a
Church.

It is pleaded,. 30.
that there are prophesies and promises of a National Church, that should be
under the New Testament, as Ps. 32. 10, 11, 12. Is: 2. 2. Is. 10. 18, 19, 24,
25. That it is foretold and promised that many whole Nations shall be converted
to the faith of the Gospel, and thereby become the people of God, who before
were no people, is granted; but that their way of worship shall be by National
Churches governed by lesser and greater Assemblys does not appear. And when
the Jews shall be converted, they shall be a National Church, as England is:
but their way of worship shall be regulated according to the institution of
Christ in the Gospel. And therefore the publishers of the life of Dr Gouge
have expressed his judgment found in a paper in his study, that the Jews on
their calling shall be gathered together into Churches, and not be scattered,
as now they are. A Nation may be said to be converted, from the professed
subjection to the Gospel of so many in it, as may give demonstration to the
whole: But the way of worship for those so converted, is peculiarly instituted.
It is said moreover, that the several congregations in one City, are called a
Church, as in Jerusalem Act. 6. 1. Act. 12, 1, 3. Act. 15. 14, 22. so also may
all the Churches in a Nation be called a National Church. But this is (...);
nor is that allowed to be made a medium in another case, which at the same time
is sub Iudice in its own. The like also may be said of the Church of Ephesus,
Act. 20. 17. Rev. 2. 1. Nor is it about a mere denomination that we contend;
but the Union and form of such a church: and if more Churches then one were
together called a Church, it is from their participation of the nature of the
general visible Church, not of that which is particular, and the seat of
Ordinances. So where Paul is said to persecute the Church of God Gal. 1. 13. it
is spoken of the Professors of the Faith of Christ in general, and not to be
restrained to the Churches of Iudaea of whom he speaks v. 22, 23. seeing his
rage actually reached to Damascus a City of another Nation Act. 22. 5, 6. and
his desigue was (...). That by the Church mentioned 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Cor. 10.
32. Ephesians. 3. 21. is intended the whole visible Church of Christ, as made up into
one body or Church, by a collection of all particular Churches in the world by
lesser and greater Assemblies, (a thing that never was in the world, nor ever
will be) is denied and not yet by any that I know proved; not that I am
offended at the name of the Church of England, though I think all professors as
such, are rather to be called so, then all the Congregations. That all
professors of the truth of the Gospel, throughout the world, are the visible
Church of Christ, in the sense before explained, is granted. So may on the same
account all the professors of that truth in England, be called the Church of
England. But it is the institution of lesser and greater Assemblies, comprising
the representatives of all the Churches in the world, that must give Being and
Union to the visible Church in the sense pleaded for throughout the world, or
in this Nation, and that bounded to this relation by virtue of the same
institution, that is to be proved.

But of what there is,. 31.
or seems to be of Divine Institution in this order and fabric, what of
humane Prudent Creation, what in the matter, or manner of it, I cannot assent
unto, I shall not at present enter into the consideration; but shall only as to
my purpose in hand, take up some principles, which lie in common between the
men of this persuasion and my self, with some others otherwise minded. Now of
these are the ensuing Assertions.

1. No man can possibly be a member of a National Church in this sense,. 32.
but by virtue of his being a member of some particular Church in the Nation;
which concurrs to the making up of the National Church. As a man does not
legally belong to any County in the Nation, unless he belong to some Hundred
or Parish in that County; this is evident from the nature of the thing it self,
Nor is it pleaded, that we are one National Church, because the people of the
Nation are generally baptized, and do profess the true faith, but because the
particular Congregations in it are ruled, and so consequently the whole, by
lesser and greater Assemblies. I suppose it will not be on second thoughts
insisted on, that particular congregations, agreeing solemnly in Doctrine and
worship under one civil Government, do constitute a national Church; for if
so, its form and unity as such, must be given it merely by the civil
Government.

2. No man can recede from this Church,. 33.
or depart from it, but by departing from some particular Church therein. At
the same door that a man comes in, he must go out. If I cease to be a member
of a National Church, it is by the ceasing or abolishing of that, which gave
me original right thereunto, which was my relation to the particular Church,
whereof I am.

3. To make men members of any particular Church or Churches,. 34.
their own consent is required. All men must admit of this, who allow it free
for a man to choose where he will fix his habitation.

4. That as yet,. 35.
at least since possibly we could be personally concerned who are now alive, no
such Church in this Nation has been formed. It is impossible, that a man
should be guilty of offending against that, which is not: We have not separated
from a National Church in the Presbyterian sense, as never having seen any
such thing; unless they will say, we have separated from what should be.

5. As to the state of such a Church as this,. 36.
I shall only add to what has been spoken before, the judgment of a very
Learned and famous man in this case, whom I the rather name, because
professedly engaged on the Presbyterians side. It is Moses Amyraldus the
present professor of Divinity a^ Saumur, whose words are these that follow.
Scio nonnunquam appellari particulare^ Ecclesiam communionem, ac veluti
confoederationem plurium ejusmodi societatum, quas vel ejufdem linguae usus,
vel eadem Rei-pub. forma (the true spring of a National Church) una cum
ejusdem disciplinae regimine consociavit: Sic appellatur Ecclesia Gallicana,
Anglicana, Germanica particularis, ut distinguatur ab Universally illa
Christianorum societate; quae omnes Christiani nominis nationes complectitur:
At uti supra diximus, Ecclesiae nomen non proprie convenire societati omnium
Christianorum, eo modo quo convenit particularibus Christianorum coetibus; sic
consequens est, ut dicamus, Ecclesiae nomen non competere in eam multarum
Ecclesiarum particularium consociatione^ eodem plane modo. Vocetur ergo certe
Ecclesia^u^ quae sunt in Gallia Communio inter ipsas, and Ecclesia si Ecclesia,
est multarum Ecclesiarum confoederatio non si nomen Ecclesiae ex usu Scripturae
sacrae accipiatur. Paulus enim varias Ecclesias particulares, quae erant in
Achaia, Ecclesia Achaiae nuncupat, non Ecclesiam Achajae vel Ecclesiam
Achaicam. Amyral. Disput. de Ecclesiae Nom. and Defin. These. 28.

These being,. 37.
if I mistake not, things of mutual acknowledgenent. (for I have not laid down
any principles peculiar to my self, and those with whom I consent in the way
of the worship of God, which yet we can justly plead in our own defense) this
whole business will be brought to a speedy issue.

Only I desire the Reader to observe,. 38.
that I am not pleading the right, liberty and duty of gathering Churches in
such a state of professors, as that of late, and still amongst us, which is
built on other principles, and Hypotheses, then any as yet I have had occasion
to mention; but am only in general considering the true notion of Schism, and
the charge managed against us on that single account, which relates not to
gathering of Churches, as simply considered; I say then

1. Either we have been members by our own voluntary consent,. 39.
according to the mind of Christ, of some particular congregations in such a
National church, and that as de facto part of such a church or we have not? If
we have not been so, (as it is most certain we have not) then we have not as
yet broken any bond, or violated any Unity, or disturbed any peace, or order of
the appointment of Jesus Christ; so that whatever of trouble or division has
followed on our way, and walking, is to be charged on them who have turned
every stone, to hinder us our Liberty. And I humbly beg of them, who acting
on principles of Reformation according to the (commonly called) Presbyterian
platform, do accuse us for separation from the Church of England that they
would seriously consider what they intend thereby? Is it that we are departed
from the Faith of the people of God in England? they will not sustain any such
crimination: Is it that we have forsaken the Church of England as under its
Episcopal constitution? have they not done the same? have they not rejected
their National Officers, with all the bonds, ties and ligaments of the Union
of that pretended Church? have they not renounced the way of worship,
established by the Law of the Land? do they not disavow all obedience to them
who were their legal Superiors in that constitution? do they retain either
matter or form, or any thing, but that naked name of that Church? And will
they condemn others in what they practice themselves? As for a Church of
England, in their new sense, (which yet in some respects is not new but old)
for what is beyond a voluntary consociation of particular Churches, we have not
as yet, had experience of it.

That we shall be accused of Schism,. 40.
for not esteeming our selves made members of a particular Church against our
wills, by buying or hireing an habitation within such a precinct of ground, we
expect not; especicially considering what is delivered by the chief Leaders of
them, with whom now we are treating, whose words are as follows We grant,
that living in parishes is not sufficient to make a man a member of a
Particular Church. A Turk, or Pagan, or Id^later may live within the precincts
of a Parish, and yet be no member of a Church. A man must therefore in order of
nature, be a member of the Church visible, and then living in a Parish, and
making profession of Christianity may claim admission into the society of
Christians within those bounds, and enjoy the privileges and ordinances which
are there dispensed. Ans of Cammil p. 105. This is also pursued by the Authors
of Jus Divinum Ministerii Anglicani p 9, 10. whereafter the repetition of the
words first mentioned, they add that all that dwell in a Parish and constantly
hear the Word, are not yet to be admitted to the Sacraments, which excludes
them from being fideles, or Church Members and makes them at best as the
Catechumeni of old, who were never esteemed members of the Church.

If we have been so members by our own voluntary consent,. 41.
and do not continue so to be; then this Congregation whereof we were so
members was reformed according to the mind of Christ (for I speak now to them
that own Reformation, as to their light) or it was not. If it were reformed,
and that a man were a member of it so reformed by his own voluntary consent, I
confess it may be difficult how a man can leave such a congregation without
their consent, in whose power it is to give it to him, without giving offense
to the Church of God. Only I say, let all by-respects be laid aside, on the one
hand, and the other, all regard to repute and advantage, let Love have its
perfect work, and no Church knowing the end of its being and constitution to
be the Edification of Believers, will be difficult and tenacious as to the
granting a dismission to any member whatever, that shall humbly desire it; on
the account of applying himself to some other Congregation, wherein he
supposes and is persuaded that he may be more effectually built up in his most
holy Faith.

I confess this to be a case of the greatest difficulty,. 42.
that presents it self to my thoughts in this business. Suppose a man to be a
member of a particular Church, and that Church to be a true Church of Christ,
and granted so by this person, and yet upon the account of some defect, which
is in, or at least he is convinced and persuaded to be in that Church, whose
Reformation he cannot obtain, he cannot abide in that Church to his spiritual
advantage and edification: suppose the Church on the other side cannot be
induced to consent to his secession and relinquishment of its ordinary
external communion, and that person is hereby entangled; what course is to be
taken? I profess for my part, I never knew this case fall out, wherein both
parties were not blamable. The person seeking to depart, in making that to be
an indispensable cause of departure from a Church, which is far short of it;
and the Church in not condescending to the man's desire, though proceeding from
infirmity, or temptation. In general, the rule of forbearance and
condescension in Love, which should salve the difference, is to give place to
the Rule of obeying God in all things according to our light. And the
determining in this case, depending on circumstances in great variety, both
with reference to the Church offending, and the person offended. He that can
give one certain Rule in, and upon the whole, shall have much praise for his
invention. However I am sure this cannot be rationally objected by them, who
esteeming all Parishes, as such, to be Churches, do yet allow men on such
occasions to change their habitations, and consequently their Church Relations
Men may be relieved by change of dwelling, Subcom. of Div. p. 52. And when a
man's leaving the ordinary external communion, of any particular Church for his
own edification to join with another whose Administrations he is persuaded in
some things more, or fewer, are carried on more according to the mind of
Christ, is as such proved to be Schism, I shall acknowledge it.

As then the not giving a man's self up unto any way,. 43.
and submitting to any establishment pretended, or pleaded to be of Christ,
which he has not light for, and which he was not by any act of his own
formerly engaged in, cannot with any color or pretense of reason be reckoned
unto him for Schism, though he may, if he persist in his refuseall, prejudice
his own Edification; So no more can a man's peaceable relinquishment of the
ordinary communion of one Church in all its relations, to join with another,
be so esteemed. For instance of the first case; suppose by the Law of this
Nation the several par^chiall Churches of the Land, according to arbitrary
distributions made of them, should be joined in Classical Associations, and
those again in the like arbitrary disposal into Provincial, and so onward;
(which cannot be done without such interveniences as will exonerate conscience
from the weight of pure institution:) or suppose this not to be done by the Law
of the Land, but by the voluntary consent of the Officers of the Parochial
Churches, and others joining with them; the Saints of God in this Nation, who
have not formerly been given up unto, or disposed of, in this order, by their
own voluntary consent, nor are concerned in it any farther, then by their
habitation within some of these different Precincts, that by public Authority,
or consent of some amongst them, are combined as above: nor do believe such
Ass^ciations to be the institutions of Christ, whatever they prove to be in the
issue; I say they are by their dissent and refusal to subject themselves to
this Order, not in the least liable to the charge of Schism; whatever they
are, who neglecting the great duty of Love, and forbearance, would by any means
whatever impose upon them a necessity of so doing. For besides what they have
to plead, as to the Non-institution of any such ordinary Associations, and
investiture of them with power and Authority in, and over the Churches, they
are not guilty of the disturbance of any order, wherein they were stated
according to the mind of Christ: nor of the neglect of any duty of Love, that
was incumbent on them.

For the latter;. 44.
suppose a man stated in a particular Church, wherewith he has walked for a
season; He discovers that some perhaps of the Principles of its constitution
are not according to to the mind of Christ, something is wanting or redundant,
and imposed in practice on the members of it, which renders the communion of
it, by reason of his doubts and scruples, or it may be clear convictions, not
so useful to him, as he might rationally expect it would be, were all things
done according to the mind of Christ; that also he has declared his judgment
as he is able, and dissatisfaction; if no reformation do ensue, This person I
say is doubtless at liberty to dispose of himself, as to particular Church
Communion, to his own best advantage.

But now suppose this Congregation whereof a man is supposed to be a member,.
45.
is not reformed, will not, nor cannot reform it self; (I desire that it may
be minded with whom I have to do, viz. those, who own a necessity of
Reformation, as to the Administration of Ordinances, in respect to what has
been hitherto observed in most Parochial Assemblyes.) Those I have formerly
dealt withal are not be imposed on with this Principle of Reformation: they
acknowledge none to be needful; but they are not concerned in our present
enquiry. Their charge lies all in the behalf of the Church of England, not of
particular Assemblyes or Parishes, which it is not possible that according to
their principle, they should own for Churches, or account any separation from
any of them to be balm worthy, but only as it respects the Constitutions of
the Church National in them to be observed. If any claim arise on that hand,
as to Parochial Assemblyes, I should take liberty to examine the foundation of
the plea, and doubt not, but that I may easily frustrate their attempts. But
this is not my present business; I deal, as I said, with them, who own
Reformation; and I now suppose of the Congregation, whereof a man is supposed
to be a member on any account whatever, not to be reformed.

In this case I ask, whether it be Schism or no, for any number of men to
reform themselves, by reducing the practice of worship to its original
institution, though they be the minor part lying within the Parochial
precinct; or for any of them to join themselves with others for that end and
purpose not living within those precincts. I shall boldly say, this Schism is
commanded by the Holy Ghost, 1 Timothy 6. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 5. Hos. 4. 15. Is this yoke
laid upon me by Christ, that to go along with the multitude where I live, that
hate to be reformed, I must forsake my duty, and despise the privileges, that
he has purchased for me with his own precious blood? Is this an unity of
Christ's Institution, that I must for ever associate my self with wicked and
profane men in the worship of God, to the unspeakable detriment and
disadvantage of my own soul?

I suppose nothing can be more unreasonable, then once to imagine any such
thing.

However,. 46.
not to derive this business any farther, but to put it to its proper issue.
When it is proved, that this is the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, that
every Believer, who lives within such a precinct allotted by Civil
Constitutions, wherein the people or Inhabitants do, or may usually meet for
the celebration of the worship of God, or which they have light for, on any
account whatever do make profession of, how profane soever that part of them
be from whom the whole is denominated, how corrupt soever in their worship, how
dead soever, as to the power of Godliness, must abide with them and join with
them in the Administration and worship, and that indispensably; this business
may come again under debate. In the mean time, I suppose the people of God
are not in any such subjection. I speak not this, as laying down this for a
principle, that it is the duty of every man to separate from that Church,
wherein evil and wicked men are tolerated (though that opinion, must have
many other attendances, before it can contract the least affinity with that of
the same sound, which was condmned in the Donatists) but this only I say, that
where any Church is over borne by a multitude of men wicked and profane; so
that it cannot reform it self, or will not according to the mind of Christ,
a Believer is so far at liberty, that he may desert the Communion of that
society, without the least guilt of Schism. But this state of things is now
little pleaded for.

It is usually objected about the Church of Corinth,. 47.
that there was in it many disorders and enormous miscarriages, divisions, and
breaches of Love: miscarriages through drink at their meetings; gross sins in
the incestuous person tolerated; false doctrine broached; the Resurrection
denied; and yet Paul advises no man to separate from it, but all to perform
their duty in it.

But how little our present plea and defensative is concerned in this
instance,. 48.
supposed to ly against it, very few considerations will evince.

1. The Church of Corinth was undoubtedly a true Church, lately instituted
according to the mind of Christ, and was not fallen from that privilege by
any miscarriage, nor had suffered any thing destructive to its being; which
wholly differences between the case proposed in respect of many particulars, and
the instance produced. We confess the abuses, and evils mentioned had crept
into the Church, and do thence grant, that many abuses may do so into any of
the best of the Churches of God. Nor did it ever enter into the heart of any
man to think, that so soon as any disorders fall out, or abuses creep into it,
it is instantly the duty of any to fly out of it, like Paul's Mariners out of
the ship, when the storm grew hazardous. It being the duty of all the members
of such a Church untainted with the evils and corruptions of it, upon many
accounts to attempt and labor the remedy of those disorders, and rejection of
these abuses to the uttermost; which was that, which Paul advised the
Corinthians all and some unto, in obedience whereunto they were recovered. But
yet this I say, had the Church of Corinth continued in the condition before
prescribed, that notorious, scandalous sins had went unpublished, unreproved,
drunkenness continued, and practiced in the Assemblies, men abiding by the
denial of the Resurrection, so overturning the whole Gospel, and the Church
refusing to do her duty, and exercise her Authority to cast all those
disorderly persons upon their obstinacy out of her communion; It had been the
duty of every Saint of God in that Church, to have withdrawn from it, to come
out from among them, and not to have been partaker of their sins, unless
they were willing to partake of their plague also; which on such an Apostasy
would certainly ensue.

I confess Austin in his single book against the Donatists,. 49.
post collationem, cap. 20. affirms, that Elijah and Elisha communicated with
the Israelites in their worship, when they were so corrupted, as in their
days, and separated not from their Sacraments (as he calls them,) but only
withdrew sometimes for fear of persecution; a mistake unworthy so great and
wise a person as he was. The public worship of those 10 Tribes in the days of
those Prophets was Idolatrous, erected by Jeroboam, confirmed by a Law, by
Omri, and continued by Ahab. That the Prophets joined with them in it, is not
to be imagined. But earnestness of desire for the attaining of any end,
sometimes leaves no room for the examination of the Medium's, offering their
service to that purpose.

Let us now see the sum of the whole matter and what it is that we plead for
our discharge as to this crime of Schism,. 50.
allowing the Term to pass in its large and usual acceptance, receding for
the sake of the Truths farther ventilation from the precise propriety of the
word annexed to it in the Scripture: The sum is, we have broken no bond of
Unity, no order instituted or appointed by Jesus Christ, have causelessly
deserted no station, that ever we were in, according to his mind, which alone
can give countenance to an accusation of this Nature. That on pure grounds of
conscience we have withdrawn, or do withhold our selves from partaking in some
ways, engaged into upon mere grounds of Prudence we acknowledge.

And thus from what has been said,. 51.
it appears in what a fair capacity notwithstanding any principle or practice
owned by us, we are to live peaceably, and to exercise all fruits of Love
toward those who are otherwise minded.

There is not the least necessity on us,. 52.
may we be permitted to serve God according to our light, for the acquitting
our selves from the charge, which has made such a noise in the world, to
charge other men, with their failings, great, or small, in or about the ways
and worship of God. This only is incumbent on us, that we manifest, that we
have broken no bond, no obligation, or tie to communion, which lay upon us by
the will and appointment of Jesus Christ our Lord, and Master: what is
prudentially to be done in such a Nation as this, in such a time as this, as to
the worship of God, we will treat with men at farther leisure, and when we are
lawfully called thereto.

It may be some will yet say,. 53.
(because it has been often said) there is difference between reforming of
Churches already gathered and raised, and raising of Churches out of mere
materials. The first may be allowed, but the latter tends to all manner of
Confusion.

I have at present,. 54.
not much to say to this objection, because as I conceive, it concerns not the
business we have in hand: Nor would I have mentioned it at all; but that its
insisted on by some on every turn, whether suited for the particular cause,
for which it is produced, or no. In brief then.

1. I know no other reformation of any Church, or any thing in a Church, but
the reducing of it to its primitive Institution, and the order allotted to it
by Jesus Christ. If any plead for any other Reformation of Churches, they are
in my judgment to blame.

And when any society,. 55.
or Combination of men, (whatever hitherto it has been esteemed) is not
capable of such a Reduction and Renovation. I suppose I shall not provoke any
wise and sober person, if I professes I cannot look on such a society, as a
Church of Christ, and thereupon advise those therein, who have a due right to
the privileges purchased for them by Christ, as to Gospel Administrations, to
take some other peaceable course to make themselves partakers of them.. 56.


2. Were I fully to handle the things pointed to in this Objection, I must
manage Principles, which in this Discourse I have not been occasioned to draw
forth at all, or to improve. Many things of great weight and importance must
come under debate and consideration, before a clear account can be given of
the case stated in this Objection; as

1. The true nature of an instituted Church under the Gospel,. 57.
as to the matter, form, and all other necessary constitutive causes, is to be
investigated and found out.

2. The nature,. 58.
and form of such a Church is to be exemplifyed from the Scripture, and the
stories of the first Churches, before sensibly infested with the poison of that
Apostasy which ensued.

3. The extent of the Apostasy under Antichrist,. 59.
as to the ruining of instituted Churches, making them to be Babylon, and their
worship Fornication, is duly and carefully to be examined.

Hic labor, Hoc opus.

Here lies our disorder and division; hence is our darkness and pollution of
our garments, which is not an easy thing to free our selves of; though we may
arise, yet we shall not speedily shake our selves out of the dust.

4. By what way and means God begat anew and kept alive his Elect,. 60.
in their several Generations, when Antichristian darkness covered the Earth;
and thick darkness the Nations, supposing an intercision of instituted
Ordinances, so far as to make a nullity in them, as to what was of simple and
pure Institution; what way might be used for the fixing the Tabernacle of God
again with men, and the setting up of Church worship according to his mind,
and will. And here the famous case of the united Brethren of Bohemia would come
under consideration; who concluding the whole Papacy to be purely
Antichristian, could not allow of the Ordination of their Ministers by any in
communion with it; and yet being persuaded of a necessity of continuing of that
Ordinance in a way of succession, sent some to the Greek and Armenian Churches,
who observing their ways returned with little satisfaction; so that at the
last committing themselves, and their cause to God, they chose them Elders from
among themselves, and set them apart by fasting and prayer; which was the
foundation of all those Churches, which for piety, zeal, and suffering for
Christ, have given place to none in Europe.

What was the way of the first Reformation in this Nation,. 62.
and what principles the Godly Learned men of those days proceeded on, how
far, what they did may be satisfactory to our Consciences, at the present, as
to our concurrence in them, who from thence have the Truth of the Gospel
derived down to us,

Whether ordinary officers be before or after the Church,. 63.
and so whether a Church state is preserved in the preservation of Officers, by
a power foreign to that Church, whereof they are so; or the Office be
preserved, and consequently the Officers, inclusively in the preservation, and
constitution of a Church. These I say, with sundry other things of the like
importance, with inferences from them, are to be considered to the bottom,
before a full Resolution can be given to the enquiry coucht in this objection,
which, as I said, to do, is not my present business.

This task then is at its issue and close;. 64.
some Considerations of the manifold miscarriages that have insued for want of
a due and right apprehension of the thing we have now been exercised in the
Consideration of, shall shut it up.. 65


It is not impossible, that some may, from what has been spoken, begin to
apprehend, that they have been too hasty in judging other men. Indeed none are
more ready to charge highly, then those who when they have so done, are most
unable to make good their charge; si accusasse sufficiat, quis erit innocens?
what real Schisms in a moral sense have ensued among brethren, by their
causeless mutual imputation of Schism in things of institution, is known.
And when men are in one fault, and are charged with another, wherein they are
not, it is a ready way to confirm them in that, wherein they are. There is
more darkness and difficulty in the whole matter of instituted worship, then
some men are aware of: not that it was so from the beginning, whilst
Christianity continued in its naked simplicity: but it is come occasionally
upon us by the customs, darkness and invincible prejudices, that have taken
hold on the minds of men by a secret diffusion of the poison of that grand
Apostasy. It were well then, that men would not be so confident, nor easily
persuaded, that they presently know how all things ought to be, because they
know how they would have some things to be, which suite their temper and
interest. Men may easily perhaps see, or think they see, what they do not
like, and cry out Schism and Separation, but if they would a little consider
what ought to be in this whole matter; according to the mind of God, and what
evidences they have of the grounds and principles, whereon they condemn
others, it might make them yet swift to hear, but slow to speak, and take off
from the number of Teachers among us; some are ready to think, that all that
join not with them are Schismatics; and they are so, because they go not
with them, and other reason they have none: being unable to give any solid
foundation: of what they profess; what the cause of Unity among the people of
God, has suffered from this sort of men, is not easily to be expressed.

2. In all differences about Religion to drive them to their rise and spring,.
66.
and to consider them as stated originally, will ease us of much trouble and
labor. Perhaps many of them will not appear so formidable, as they are
represented. He that sees a great River, is not instantly to conclude that all
the water in it comes from its first rise and spring; the addition of many
brooks showers and landfloods, have perhaps swelled it to the condition
wherein it is: every difference in Religion is not to be thought to be as big
at its rise, as it appears to be when it has passed through many Generations,
and has received additions and aggravations from the disputings and
contendings of men, on the one hand, and the other, engaged. What a flood of
Abominations does this business of Schism seem to be, as rolling down tous
through the writings of Cyprian, Austin, and Optatus of old: the Schoolmen,
decrees of Popish Counsels with the contrivances of some, among our selves,
concerned to keep up the swelled notion of it! Go to its rise, and you will
find it to be, though bad enough, yet quite another thing, then what by the
pre^udices accrewing by the addition of so many generations, it is now
generally represented to be. The great maxim, To the Law and to the
Testimony, truly improved, would quickly cure all our distempers: in the mean
time, let us bless God, that though our outward man may possibly be disposed
of, according to the apprehension that others have of what we do, or are, our
Consciences are concerned only in what he has appointed. How some men may
prevail against us, before whom we must stand or fall according to their
corrupt notion of Schism, we know not: the Rule of our Consciences, in this,
as in all other things, is eternal and unchangable. Whilst I have an
uncontrolable faithful witness, that I transgress no limits prescribed to me
in the Word, that I do not willingly break, or dissolve any Unity of the
Institution of Jesus Christ, my mind as to this thing is filled with perfect
peace. Blessed be God, that has reserved the sole soveraingty of our
Consciences in his hand, and not in the least parcelled it out to any of the
sons of men, whose tender mercies being oftentimes cruelty it self, they would
perhaps destroy the soul also, when they do so to the body, seeing they stay
there, as our Savior witnesses, because they can proceed no farther; Here
then I profess to rest; in this does my Conscience acquiesce: whilst I have
any comfortable persuasion, on grounds infallible, that I hold the Head, and
that I am by faith a member of the mystical body of Christ, whilst I make
profession of all the necessary saving Truths of the Gospel, whilst I disturb
not the peace of that particular Church, whereof by my own consent I am a
member, nor do raise up, nor continue in any causeles differences with them,
or any of them, with whom I walk in the fellowship and order of the Gospel,
whilst I labor to exercise faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ, and love
toward all the Saints, I do keep the Unity, which is of the appointment of
Christ; and let men say, from principles utterly foreign to the Gospel, what
they please, or can, to the contrary, I am no Schismatic.

3. Perhaps the discovery,. 67.
which has been made, how little we are many of us concerned in that, which
having mutually charged it on one another, has been the greatest ball of
strife, and most effectu-all engine of difference, and distance between us, may
be a means to reconcile in Love them that truly fear God, though engaged in
several ways as to some particulars. I confess I have not any great hope of
much success on this account; for let principles and ways be made as evident,
as if he that wrote them carried the Sun in his hand; yet whilst men are
forestalled by prejudices, and have their affections, and spirits engaged
suitably thereunto, no great alteration in their mind and ways, on the
clearest conviction whatever, is to be expected. All our hearts are in the hand
of God; and our expectations of what he has promised, are to be proportioned
to what he can effect, not to what of outward means, we see to be used.

4. To conclude;. 68.
what vain janglings men are endlesly engaged in; who will lay their own false
hypotheses, and preconceptions, as a ground of farther procedure, is also in
part evident, by what has been delivered. Hence (for instance) is that doubty
dispute in the world; whether a Schismatic does belong to the Church, or not?
which for the most part is determined in the Negative; when it is impossible a
man should be so, but by virtue of his being a Church Member. A Church is that
alienum solum, wherein that evil dwells. The most of the enquiries that are
made, and disputed on, whether this or that sort of men belongs to the Church
or no? are of the same value and import. He belongs to the Church Catholic,
who is united to Christ by the spirit, and none other: And he belongs to the
Church General visible, who makes profession of the faith of the Gospel, and
destroys it not by any thing of a just inconsistency with the belief of it:
And he belongs to a Particular Church, who having been in a due order joined
thereunto, has neither voluntarily deserted it, nor been judicially ejected
out of it. Thus one may be a member of the Church Catholic, who is no member
of the general visible Church, nor of a particular Church, as an elect infant,
sanctified from the womb, dying before baptism; and one may be a member of the
Church general visible, who is no member of the Church Catholic, nor of a
particular Church, as a man making profession of the true faith, yet not united
to Christ by the Spirit, nor joined to any particular visible Church; or he may
be also of the Catholic Church, and not of a particular; as also of a
particular Church; and not of the Catholic. And a man may, every true believer
walking orderly, ordinarily is a member of the Church of Christ in every sense
insisted on: of the Catholic Church, by a Union with Christ the head; of the
visible General Church, by his profession of the Faith, and of a particular
Congregation, by his voluntary assotiating himself therewith, according to the
will and appointment of our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
Reader, In the Authors absence many errors and mistakes obscuring or
perverting the sense of the places where they are, have escaped the press;
which thou art desired to correct according as here directed.

Page 2. l. 20. r. and, p. 3. l. 14. man. p. 5. l. 22. clamorous p. 7. l. 6.
vobis, p. 9. l. 19. Lutherans; Sacramentarian, p. 11. l. 21 establish it, p.
13. l. 8. conducingnesse, p. 15. l. 2. the present, p. 16. l. 12. Yea I, p. 22.
l. 18. His word p. 24. l. 8. Scissure, p. 29. l. 18. extended, is of, p. 31. l.
17. unity of the, p. 36. l. 5. dele among, l. 13. Metropolitans p. 39. l. 22.
dele if, p. 42. l. 1. instructed by Authority from their, p. 43. l. 2. and is
not, p. 50. l. 26. that shall be pleased to consider, p. 54. l. 18. other
promises, p. 60. l. 24. in the civil state to, p. 64. l. 22. our forefathers,
p. 73. l. 13. dele of, l. 25. scriptures, p. 75. l. 7. nor are they not at all,
l. 16. (...), p. 38. l. 24. (...), p. 88. l. 1. dele sense v. 24. says the
Apostle I fill up that, l. 12. repartees l. 21. Church; there is no promise
made to the Church, p. 90. l. 1. sense v. 24. says the Apostle I fill up that,
p. 91, l. 4. Sion, p. 93. l. 10. that it has an, p. 101. l. 13. dispute men,
p. 102. l. 19. is in -- * p. 110. l. 28. moats p. 124. l. 28. Juvenalis. p.
126. l. 3. (...), p. 131. l. 20. has been, p. 133. l. 18. summed up, p. 134.
l. 15. men p. 146. l. 15. ad: Judaeos, p. 155. l. ult. Scripture, p. 160. l.
13. Catholic Church, p. 166. l. 20. their writing, l. 21. a sweet, p. 168. l.
28. have not only, p. 169. l. 24. begun, p. 172. l. 6. sport, l. 8.
institutions, l. 9. language, p. 173. l. 18. Gentlemen, p. 176. l. 15. do that,
p. 180. l. 9. (...), p. 185. l. 19. another, p. 186. l. 10. to its, p. 189. l.
2. Athenaeus. l. 3. Thrasilaus, p. 192. l. 13. Patriarchs, or Metropolitans, l.
29. Conscience, p. 194. l. 13, 14. are there p. 198. l. 15. Scriptures, p. 199.
l. 24, 25. the gifts of his spirit. p. 200. l. 14. due to Elders, p. 202. l. 7.
those many Churches p. 204. l. 1. it seems, 205. l. 17. dele his, p. 215. l.
18. is the union enquired after, p. 216. l. 17. their sense, l. 21. dele the,
p. 218. l. 2. a Title, p. 229. l. 24. your several, p. 234. l. 13. if I have,
p. 236. l. 16. the unity consists, l. 25. visible Church, p. 240. l. 21. nor
conc: p. 242. l. 1. any man may, p. 244. l. 24. dele as, p. 245. l. 1. Dio
Cassius l. 15. there be a, p. 247. l. 23. one civil, p. 256. l. 20. commit, p.
264. l. 2. drive, l. 10. or on any, l. 17. their administrations.


