The Fear of God: What it is, And EXHORTED TO As one of the Great Lessons God
calls upon men to learn by his great Dispensations in the last days.

In a Sermon Preached unto the Church of Christ meeting in Petty France London,
the Tenth day of the Sixth Month. Anno 1656.

By that faithful Servant of Christ John Pendarves a little before his Death.

LONDON: Printed by R. I. for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at the Crown
in Pope's Head Alley. 1657.

TO THE Church of God, WHICH He has purchased with his own Blood, meeting at
ABINGDON
Precious and Beloved:
THis Sermon is especially commended to your view, as being those which I judge
have most right unto it, because of that near relation which was between you
and the Author of it, a taste of whose savoury spirit you may here behold, near
his Death, which you have often heard and seen in his Life; it is doubtless a
loss, yea a very great loss, as to Sion in general, so especially to you in
particular, to have such a painful Labourer taken out of the Vineyard, but I
hope you have learned as in other things, so in this, to say, Act. 21.14.
the Will of the Lord be done; this is our comfort, that God Mal. 2.15.
has a residue of the Spirit, and he will never want Instruments to do his
work by; if he take away Moses he will raise up a Josh. 1.1, 2.
Joshua, and if he take away an Elijah, he will 2 King. 2.9:
double his Spirit upon some Elisha; and who knows but God may take away such
tall Cedars, that some low Shrubs may grow up, and be active for God, in their
generation. Surely, every such Dispensation, as it is a spectacle of our
Mortality, so it loudly calls us to our duty to Joh. 9.4.
work whiles it is day, that with Paul, we may have 2 Timothy 4 7.
fought our fight before we shall finish our course; and with David, Acts 13.36.
we may serve our generation, (by the Will of God) before we fall asleep.

As touching the Work it self, which you are here presented with, it treats
concerning the fear of God, (a Subject) which I desire may be as profitable, as
it is seasonable in this our day; wherein though Gods Judgments Isa. 26.9
have been abroad in the earth, yet the inhabitants of the World will not learn
Righteousness, Psa. 36.1
and the transgressions of the wicked do plainly declare, that there is no
fear of God before their eyes; and if we look into the Lives of Professors, we
have cause to fear that there is but little of this filial fear to be found
among them, which should cause them to Psa. 4.4.
stand in awe, and not sin; and too many there are that profess to fear God,
that yet fear not to sin, against him; but how much soever, this being
neglected, yet it appears to be our duty, and that which God calls for from
us, by virtue of his Supremacy over us: If I be a father, where is mine
honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of Hosts,
Malachy 1.6. but I shall not Expatiate upon this point, but refer you to the
Discourse it self; for further information, concerning which the Reader is to
be further premonished, that this Sermon being not intended by the Author for
the Press, nor his Notes left behind him, neither being alive to correct it, it
may want somewhat of that luster, which otherwise might have attended it; yet
however, to satisfy the desire of some godly Friends, as also for the general
profit, it is here presented to Public view, as fully as it could be taken out
of one Shorthand Copy, written from his mouth, and I desire that the Deuteronomy.
33.16.
blessing of him that dwelt in the Bush, may go along with it; that the fear
of God may hereby be wrought where it is not, and increased where it is, that
those that fear not God, may be made to fear him, and those that do fear God,
may fear him more, and more.

And now (Dear Brethren) I shall leave it with you, as the words of your dying
Pastor, not doubting but it will be of weight upon your spirits, and some
satisfaction to you, to read his Works, when you cannot hear his words; this
only I shall add, as my desire to you, and of you, that you would not only
read the words, but do the works, that his words may be read in your works,
and your Lives may be as so many Volumes of his Labors; that as on Earth you
were his joy, so in Heaven you may be his Crown; and as he is gone before,
you may follow after, and at last meet together, and sit down together in the
Kingdom of Glory; to which place, and portion, that you with my self may have
a safe Conduct, is the ardent desire, and prayer of

Yours in our Head Christ, JOHN COX

The Fear of God: Opened, and exhorted too, from Revel. 15. the former part of
the fourth verse. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name!
BEfore I come to speak more particularly to these words, I shall offer
something in a more general way in relation to this Book of the Revelations;
which we find commended especially, to the Churches of Christ, as you may see
in Chap. 1. verse. 11. What thou see write in a Book, and send it to the seven
Churches, etc. You may take notice of the way, and order, wherein the Spirit of
God walked in the discovery of Truth to the Saints under the Gospel: and it is
worthy your observation, how that first the Spirit of Jesus Christ, being
poured out upon the Apostles, did in the first place by them, instruct the
people to whom they preached, touching those foundation truths (as I may so
call them) which did especially set forth Gospel-faith; and you may observe,
how the Wisdom of God is very glorious in this way, and method, wherein the
Lord did lead forth the Apostles, those Primitive Preachers of the Gospel, and
those that were under the conduct of the Apostles in their days.

First, The Lord made known to them, the Doctrine of Grace, in order to their
believing in the Lord Jesus Christ: And then,

Secondly, They were instructed in the Doctrine of Baptism, and after this,

Thirdly, They were gathered into Church Order, to wait upon God for further
discoveries of truth.

Fourthly, After God had by the Apostles, and others in their days, set the
Churches of Christ in order; then Jesus Christ sends this Book of the
Revelation to them, and I find it not given to them till then; and doubtless
that confusion that overspread that part of the World called Christendom,
has sprung very much from those that have preached truth, in that they did not
first lay down those foundations, truths of Faith, and Order.

And though I would not ascribe over much to order, yet you must know it is not
without infinite wisdom in God, which dispenses his Truths in such an order
to the Sons of men.

And though I would not hold you long (in the Preface) yet I would speak a
little further to this, because I see many in this day at a great loss, for
want of observing the order of truth, that God has laid down in his Word;
some are very much troubled about Baptism, before they are really settled upon
Jesus Christ; and some are very much busying themselves about the matters of
Worship, before they close with Christ, the foundation; and so having not
closed with Jesus Christ, they build as men without a foundation; Others
again, when they come to be instructed in matters of Faith, are apt to mind
other Ordinances that are further off, as Breaking of Bread; whereas the order
of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, is, that the very next thing after believing,
is, to be Baptized, in the Name of the Lord Jesus; which persons not observing,
but missing the true way of God, they are tossed to and fro, and know not where
to fix, not taking notice of the due order: wherein the Lord lays down truth in
his blessed Word.

And possibly some (also) may be under the temptation, of neglecting those
truths, which concern the foundation in matters of Faith, and Order (nay it
is frequently so seen of many (of whom I desire to speak tenderly, supposing
they do it weakly) that they are busying themselves in the understanding of the
highest discoveries of God in this Book of the Revelations) and yet are not
settled upon the foundation of the Gospel, nor brought into the order of it; and
therefore as to many that are soaring high in these things, I desire they would
consider, whether they have not unadvisedly leaped over those foundation
truths, which they should have minded in their going on to those glorious
Truths, revealed in the Revelation.

I will not say God is tied up to this order, but yet I say, this is the way,
God would have his people wait upon him in; and God bringing his people out of
Babylon, will (I doubt not) lead them, to observe truth in that order wherein
it was laid down, in the first dispensation of the Gospel.

And (therefore) I being now to speak unto a Church of Christ already planted
in the Faith, and order of the Gospel, I hope none will be offended at my
making choice of a portion of Scripture in this Book of the Revelations, if any
be, I may make my Apology from the eleventh verse of the first Chapter, which
holds forth unto us: that this Book, with the things therein revealed, is sent
unto the Churches; I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify these things in the
Churches, and he that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches; which you have several times repeated in the second and third
Chapters of this Book, so that you see, the things held forth in this Book, are
such as the Churches of Christ are specially to hearken unto, because Christ
has in a special manner commended these things to the Churches.

And let me add, that this Book has a glorious blessing annexed to the
reading and hearing of it, and the keeping those things which are written
therein, you have not such a Blessing annexed to every Book as to this; and oh!
that it were not the Sin of many Churches, that they are so backward in looking
into the things written in this Book of the Revelations, when as God sends it
especially, and particularly unto them.

And indeed, I judge it is a matter of duty, especially for the Angels,
Messengers, and Pastors of Churches, to be diligently searching into (in order
to the finding out of) those Truths that are written therein, and according to
the measure of the gift of Christ, to hold them forth to the Churches; for
truly, I grieve to think how much Church Members are unacquainted with many
things written therein, as what the Beast is, what is his Mark, and the Number
of his Name, when as such dreadful Judgments are pronounced against such as
worship the Beast, or his Image, or receive his Mark in their foreheads, or in
their hands; yet alas! how few Members in Churches are there, that labor to
be informed in these things, surely he that knows not of a danger, where it
is, and how it lies: is in danger of falling into it unawares.

But to come to my Text, in this fifteenth Chapter you read of a Victory
obtained over the Beast, and not only so, but over his Image, Mark, and the
number of his Name, by a Party standing on the Sea of Glass, having the Harps
of God, verse. 2. their Song follows; and they sang the Song of Moses, the
Servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy
Works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints, who
shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?

Before I come to the words themselves, I would in a general way lay down
something for your information from the Context; that which I suppose will be
the great inquiry upon the view of this Scripture, is, what the Beast is, and
who they are that get the victory over him, his Mark and Image? and therefore I
shall briefly hint something concerning this Beast, and the conquering Party
that shall prevail over him.

That which to me is the best help to discover the Beast, his Mark, and Image:
especially the Beast, what he is, are the several qualifications of those which
get the victory over him; you may partly know the Beast by his opposites, those
which rejoice at the overcoming of him, now who they are that have had, and
maintained a controversy with this Beast, you may see described in the second,
third, and fourth verses of this Chapter, and their frames, and qualifications
may be judged, by several Characters given to them.

1 They are a People attained to some measure of purity, therefore set forth
standing upon a Sea of Glass.

2 They are a People bent to praise God for his great Works, they have the
Harps of God, and they sing, etc. They are a people that dare not slight Gods
great Works, if God bring them out of Egypt they have it much upon their
hearts, and they sing the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb, like those
in Exodus 15. and you know upon what account it was that Moses sang that Song,
it was when Gods Israel was brought out of Egypts bondage, and the Egyptians
destroyed; whence it appears,

3 That these are a people seriously minding of, and much affected with Gods
wonderful Works, in their deliverance from Spiritual Egyptian bondage, and
therefore they cry out, Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty.

4 They are a People that ascribe all to God, and give him the praise of all
his Works. I suppose all will grant, that the great Works God is to do in the
World, will be done by Instruments, yet this people do not extol man in this
work, but cry out, Great and mavelous are THY Works, Lord God Almighty.

5 They are a People that justify God in all his Works, and ways, both of
deliverance to his People, and judgment upon his enemies; which shows that
they are such as compare Gods Word, and his Works together, and have also been
seriously exercised in the observation of the sins of the Enemy, that they thus
justify God in his Judgments toward them, it being what they had deserved,
and he had spoken, and therefore they cry out [Just and true] are thy ways.
But,

6 They acknowledge Christ to be King of Saints, Thou King of Saints.

7 They are a People truly fearing God, and standing up for the glory of his
Name, and this you have in the Text, Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy name? they are a people of serious spirits, truly fearing God, and
such as stand for the glory of God, and not their own advantages in the world,
but that God may have glory; this is that which they have most in their eye,
and upon their hearts, that God may have a great Name in the world; Who shall
not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? So that you see, those which
shall get the victory over the Beast, are not a People of a loose and wanton
conversation; I take Antichrist his Power, and false Ministry, which have
stood up in Christendom, (so called) for many Generations, to be the
Offspring of those, which Peter, and Jude spoke of in their Epistles, which
you have there described, but those that shall get the victory over them are
persons of a contrary spirit -- But again

8 It appears they are a People of great Light, and much Faith in the
Prophesies, concerning the coming in of the Nations to Worship God, and own
Jesus Christ, for this is a part of their Song, All Nations shall come and
worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made manifest; they are not a
narrow spirited People (which contest with the Beast) such as only desire that
Christ should be exalted in the Nations, Cities, or places wherein they live,
or in their own Church, but throughout all the earth; so zealous are they for
the honor of Christ above their own private, and personal interests: These are
their qualifications.

And therefore if you consider where these qualifications are most to be found,
and who they are that oppose them, it may help you to find out the Beast, in
his most Refined Habit.

But to return to that part of the Song that I propounded to speak unto, in
these words, Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name?

Two things there are which are very much upon the heart of this People, that
get victory over the Beast; the

First is, to Fear the Lord.

Secondly, To exalt the greatness of his name, and this upon the account of his
Judgments being made manifest; so that the observation I shall give you from
the words is this:

Obs. That the two great Lessons that God calls upon men to learn by his great
Dispensations in the last days, when he brings his Judgments upon the wicked,
is, to fear God, and give glory to his name.

This may be concluded from this holy Expostulation of theirs, in their
Spiritual rejoicing, this they had learned themselves, and this they rejoice
in, that others should learn to fear God, and give glory to his name; so that I
say, these are the two Lessons God would learn the Sons of men, when he is
bringing Judgments upon his enemies, namely, to fear him, and glorify his
name.

That this is so, you may see clearly in Revel. 14.6, 7. And I saw another
Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to preach to
them that dwell upon the earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue,
and People, saying, Fear God, and give glory to him. (Why so) for the hour of
his Judgment is come; so that you see these are the two great Lessons that God
calls upon men to learn, when his Judgments are going forth in the earth; as
if (indeed) in these two things were summed up the whole duty of man in the
last days.

But I shall briefly lay before you some things further to clear this truth,
that these are the two Lessons God calls men to learn, from the Dispensation of
his great Works in the last days; and it may further appear upon this ground.

Reas. 1. Because these are the two Lessons, which being learned, do very much
serve to fit and prepare men for those great designs which God has to bring
to pass in the last days; now, those qualifications God especially looks after,
and requires of the Sons of men, (at any time and season) which may best fit
them for the Work God has to do at such a season: Now, what qualifications
are there that more fitly serve for the carrying on of Gods great Works, than
to fear God, and have respect unto his name?

1 For the fear of God, you shall find, when God had any Work to do of old,
this was one chief qualification that God looked at, if it were but to a Civil
Office, between men and men, God requires this, that they should be men fearing
God; consider that counsel that was given by Jethro (the Prophet of the Lord)
to Moses, Exodus 18, 21. Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the people,
able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such
over them, Rulers of hundreds, of fifties, and tens, and let them judge the
people [to wit, Israel] at all seasons; (and oh that men would walk after the
Laws of this blessed people, whose Laws were extolled by God above all Laws
given to any Nation under heaven, Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation is there (says God)
so great that has Statutes, and Judgments so righteous, as all this Law which
I set before you this day) and the truth is, men of great abilities, that have
not the fear of God in their hearts, they are but the greater enemies to the
great Designs, and Works of the God of heaven.

And therefore this is a sweet and blessed qualification, that God would have
in every one that shall be set up for him; see 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. which are the
words of the Spirit of the Lord by his servant David, and this is often
inculcated, The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue;
The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, he that rules over
men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God.

And this has been (formerly) much set upon the hearts of many, that have been
great instruments, in the work of God in this Nation, that if they put any in
place or office in the Nation, they should be men fearing God; And has not
God made way for such to Rule, having converted so many in the Nation.

But again, consider, That this glorious qualification of the fear of God,
fitted Christ for the great work of his Mediatorship, Mal. 2.5. My Covenant was
with him of life and peace, for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was
afraid before my Name: And in Isaiah 11.2, 3. which is a Prophecy of Christ,
it is said, The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge,
and of the fear of the Lord: And doubtless this is a most blessed
qualification, to fit a man for any work for God, he that has the fear of God
in his heart, dares not take the gain of oppression, nor do any thing that is
evil, and unrighteous: See it in good Nehemiah, Chap. 5. verse. 15. speaking of
the former Governors, how they oppressed and tyrannized over the people; but
(says he) So did not I, because of the Fear of God: That man that truly fears
God, trembles before him, and stands in awe of the Great God continually: And
thus you see how this Fear of God, fits men to serve Gods designs, in their
generation, and therefore this is one lesson, that God would have men to learn,
by his great works in these last days. -- But,

Secondly, The other is like to this, viZ. To have respect to the glory of Gods
Name; God has always laid aside a people that were selfish and did not mind
the advancement of his Name: See Mal. 1.10, 11. says God, Who is there even
among you, that would shut the door for naught, neither do you kindle a fire on
my Altar for naught, [What follows?] I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord
of Hoasts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand, [Why so] For from
the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same, my NAME shall be great
among the Gentiles, etc. as if God should say, These are not a people, which
will be seeking my Name, and my glory, and will do nothing in my service,
without a present reward, therefore I will shake them off, and will not accept
an offering from their hand.

A narrow hearted self-seeking man, is unfit to follow God in his great works,
for those which will honor God, and give glory to his Name, they must trust
God for their daily bread, and above all things mind the hallowing and
advancing of Gods Name, and if they will make it good in earnest, that they are
followers of Christ, they must be ready to follow the Lord, to the loss of ALL.
For says Christ, He that hates not father and mother, wife, and children,
brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple, Luke
14.26.

And this is made by God, the distinguishing difference between those that fear
God, and those that fear him not, Mal. 3.14, 15, 16. you may there read of a
people, that though they gave God some outward service, yet they looked not at
the glory of God, but their own advantage, and therefore they cry out, It is in
vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances?
etc. And this is that which a hypocrite looks at, in his serving God, even his
own profit and advantage: And here I would a little note to you the practice of
this Nation, especially their Ministry, that Ordinances which brings no profit
to the Ministers, as namely the great Ordinance of Excommunication, which tends
to vindicate the Name of God in the earth, and to distinguish the precious,
from the vile; yet because this Ordinance of casting out, brings them no
profit; how have they cast it out from among them, whiles other things that
bring them in profit, they appear zealous for. And are there not many that seem
ready to serve God, and his cause? but if we look thoroughly upon them, is not
their Eye rather upon their own profit, than Gods glory?

But to return to Malachy, you have also mention there made of a people that
Feared the Lord, and what they did in that day, verse 17. of which one thing
is, That they thought upon Gods Name.

And you may see what notice God takes of it, and how he will reward them for
it; and this is the distinguishing difference between the righteous, and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, verse. last.

And thus you may see how these blessed qualifications of the Fear of God and
Respect to his Name, will fit persons to be used in the great works God has
to do in the last days; and therefore they are the two great Lessons he
requires of them.

I might for further demonstration of the truth of the point, add a

2 Reason, Grounded upon Gods severity against persons for the neglect of these
things; Gods great controversy with men all along, has been upon this score,
for not fearing him, and giving glory to his Name, because they did not fear
God before all, and honor God above all. See Jeremiah 5.24. etc. Neither say
they in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God, etc. And at the 29.
verse, see what God says, Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord,
and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? So Mal. 3.5. I will
be a swift witness against Sorcerers and Adulterers, and false swearers, and
those that turn aside the stranger from their right, and Fear not me, says
the LORD of Hosts.

And that the judgments of God in the latter days shall come upon men for
this, see that forecited text, Rev. 14.7. Fear God, and give glory to him, for
the Hour of his Judgment is come; and therefore the way to escape the just
Judgments of God that are coming forth, Is to fear God, and give glory to his
Name.

Quest. But some may ask, as to the first thing God requires, What this fear of
God is, which is so often spoken of in the Scriptures, as that which God does
so much delight in.

Answ. I shall at present, tender you with some description of it, according to
that light, and experience, (which I hope I may truly say) the Lord has
communicated to me; and you may take it as follows.

Description, It is a precious effect of the Spirit of Christ, in the heart of
a Believer, whereby (through the discovery of the glory of God in his word, and
works by Christ, and in consideration of the vast disproportion between God and
the creature) he is made to think highly of God in all his Attributes, and to
have respect unto all his Commandments.

The definition is something long, but I shall prove the particulars to you, and

1 I say, It is a precious effect of the Spirit of Christ in the heart of a
Believer, he is the subject of it, and there is none else, that has this fear
of God in him, the Apostle speaking of the wicked, Romans 3.18. says, There is
no fear of God before their eyes; And David tells us the like, Psalm. 36.1. they
have not this true Son-like fear, natural men are unacquainted with it.

2 That this fear comes by union with Christ, and his Spirit, that is the cause
of it, you may see, Psalm. 86.11. Unite my heart to fear thy name; this fear of
God it comes by virtue of an union with Jesus Christ by faith, for the spirit
of the fear of the Lord it is given to Christ, Isa. 11.2. And he received of
that annoynting to shed it abroad amongst his Members, and to give it to those
that are united to him, and no further then we live in union with Christ by
faith, can we be partakers of this gracious frame of spirit, to fear the Lord
in truth; this is a Lesson which the Spirit teaches, and therefore it was by
the Spirit that David cries out, Come ye children and hearken unto me, and I
will teach you the fear of the Lord, Psa. 34.11, and this God has promised to
give to his people, Jerem. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, and they
shall not depart from me. But if you ask me, how the Spirit works this in the
heart of a Believer?

3 I say, it is through the discovery of the glory of God, in his Word and
Works by Christ; by the Glory of God I understand his Attributes; when Moses
desired to see Gods Glory, he shows him his Attributes, in Exodus 34.5, 6. he
proclaimed the Name of the Lord; and what is it? why, The Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. This
is the discovery of Gods Glory, the discovery of his Name.

1 He begins with his Attribute, that denotes his Sovereignty, and Dominion
[The Lord] Solomon tells us, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom;
and [indeed] until a Soul understands something of the Sovereignty and Dominion
of God over him, he never comes to make a right use of Gods love, and
goodness, for until the Soul comes to see, that God orders all things in Heaven
and Earth, and that he is in the hands of the great God, to dispose of him as
he will, and that he can destroy him, and cast him to Hell if he pleases; he
cannot find any sweetness in the tenders of Grace in the Gospel, nor apply his
Soul in reality to them; and therefore I find that when the Prophets of God,
of old time, brought Gods Message to the Sons of men, they usually spoke to
them as from the Lord, saying, Thus says the Lord; you have it sometimes twice
in a verse, setting forth Gods right of Sovereignty over them to whom they
delivered their Message; and this is that which is exceeding needful to be set
upon the hearts of the Sons of men, when they come to hear Gods Word, or have
any thing to do in his Works; when the Soul considers Gods Sovereignty over
him, it causes him to stand in awe, and fear before him; and therefore by this
you may try your selves, whether this fear of God be in you or no; Did the Lord
ever show himself to you, as the Sovereign Lord? and make you to lie at his
feet as dust and ashes? and as clay in the hands of the Potter? for if ever God
have wrought this fear in your heart this was your frame, I know many have a
notional knowledge of Gods Sovereignty, and are able to write Books of it; but
are your hearts really affected with it, so as to lie low before the Lord in
the apprehensions of it; I find it hard in every action, to know this God to
be the Sovereign Lord of all, and that he rules in all things, and we are to
obey him in thought, word, and deed, and to fear continually before him. But,

2 There is Gods goodness, which is another thing wherein his glory appears, he
is the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, and this following the former, much
conduces to fear him, when the Soul considers, that the great God (that made
the Heavens, and the Earth, and before whom all Nations are but as the drop of
a Bucket) should offer tenders of Grace and Mercy, to be reconciled to such a
poor sinful Creature; this inclines the heart to hearken to him, and fear
before him, knowing this, that he is the Lord that exercises loving kindness,
judgment, and righteousness in the earth, Jerem. 9.24. and that he is good to
all those that fear him, Psalm. 34.9, 10, 11. this brings the heart over to God
indeed, when Gods greatness and goodness is displayed before the Soul together,
this works up the heart in reality toward God; O how does David admire Gods
love, when he considers the great Works of God, in Psalm. 8.3. When I consider
the heavens, the works of thy fingers, the Moon, and the Stars which thou have
made, what is man that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of man that thou
visitest him? and at verse. 9. O Lord! how excellent is thy name in all the
earth. he could not but admire, and fear; and fear, and admire Gods great name:
-- But again,

3 Let us also consider Gods power, which much conduces in the hand of the
Spirit, to work this fear of God, in our hearts, and therefore you shall find
when God calls upon his people to hearken to him, he uses such kind of
expressions as these, Thus says the Lord, that made the heavens, and laid the
foundations of the earth, that they cannot be moved: And what a strong
influence it has, you may see in Jer. 10.6.7.10, 12, 13. There is none like
unto thee, Oh Lord, thou art great, and thy Name is great in might, Who would
not Fear thee, thou King of Nations, the Lord is the true God, and the
everlasting King, at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the Nations shall
not be able to abide his indignation, he has made the earth by his power, he
has established the world by his wisdom, and has stretched forth the heavens
by his discretion, he makes lightning with rain, and brings forth the wind
out of his treasures. Very gloriously you see the Prophet sets forth the
greatness of Gods power, when he comes to declare a message to the people from
him.

So also the Prophet Isaiah in the 40. Chap. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. sets forth
Gods Power, as he has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted
out heaven with a span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure,
and weighed the Mountains in scales, and the Hills in a balance; Behold the
Nations before him, are but as the drop of a bucket, and as the small dust of
the balance, he takes up the Isles as a very little thing, and all Nations
before him are as nothing: And (if that be not enough) he tells you, They are
counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. So verse. 22. It is he that
sits upon the Circle of the earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as
grasshoppers, that stretches out the Heavens as a curtain, and spreads them
out as a tent to dwell in; That brings Princes to nothing, and makes the
Judges of the earth, as vanity. Thus you see Gods Power which is another of his
Attributes; and did but persons consider this, who would not fear and tremble
before him.

Again, This fear of God is very much kept in the hearts of the children of
God, by eying the Providence of God, and the Works of God (as it is in the
description) there is a hand of God in all things that come to pass in the
world: But oh, how many are there that live in the world like Atheists, not
eying God at all, or else perhaps a little at morning and evening (I do not
speak against this) but their fault is, they do not eye God continually, and
therefore if they have got a little of the fear of God upon their hearts after
prayer in the morning, they quickly lose it by going out into the world; and
therefore it is of excellent use to keep the fear of God alive in the heart, to
see God in every business we are employed in, with David, to set the Lord
always before us; and you may see in that 107. Psalm at large, how excellently
the Providence of God are set forth, relating to various conditions, to raise
up the hearts of persons to fear him, and love him, and praise him: Oh then,
what is the reason that Professors are found so light and vain in their
conversations, but because they do not eye God in his Providence, the fear of
the Lord is not really in their hearts, and continually before their eyes: if
it were, they durst not be so light and vain in their spirits, as oft-times
they are; and so also the great work of Redemption, is that which causes souls
indeed to fear God, as I might abundantly show you; but I must hasten, and
therefore shall pass on to a

4 Thing in the description, which (further) relates to the manner how this
fear of God is wrought in the heart, and that is by the consideration of the
vast disproportion which is between God and the Creature, this is that which
tends much to the begetting of the fear of God in the heart, consider those
expressions used by that Servant of the Lord, Abraham, in his drawing nigh to
God, in Genesis 18.27. Behold! now I have [taken upon me] to speak unto the Lord,
which am but dust and ashes; he did not look upon it as a small matter, to come
and pray to God, and speak to God, as too many poor Creatures do, that come to
God without that reverence of him in their hearts, and such a gesture in their
bodies (both publicly and in their Families, and Closets) as becomes persons
in their drawing nigh to God by prayer, and so Solomon presses us to
reverence, and fear, upon this account, Eccles. 5.2. Be not rash with thy
mouth, nor let thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is in
heaven, and thou art upon earth, therefore let thy words be few; and also that
forementioned place, Isa. 40. sets forth the disproportion between God and the
creature, Behold all Nations before him are but as the drop of a bucket, and as
the small dust of the balance, he takes up the Isles, as a very little
thing: And therefore if men, did but consider, what this great God is, they
durst never walk proudly before him, nor speak proudly against him, but would
even cast themselves upon the ground, as those of old did, when they spoke to
God. And oh! that the consideration of Gods greatness, and that vast
disproportion that is between him and us, were more upon our hearts, that so we
may fear before him continually, and so I shall come in the

Fifth place to speak to this fear of God, with respect to the nature of it,
and the fruits and effects of it, which is set forth in the Description by two
things,

First, A thinking highly of God in all his Attributes.

Secondly, A having respect to all his Commandments.

1 This fear of God is that whereby the soul is made to think highly of God in
all his Attributes, it brings a soul to think highly of Gods Name, which is
his Attributes; see it in David, a man fearing, God, Psalm. 111.9, 10. Holy and
Reverent is his Name, and he subjoyns, The fear of the Lord, etc.

2 This fear of God causes the soul to have respect to all Gods Commandments,
the man that truly fears God, he trembles at the word of God, has God said
it, it shall be done, says the poor humble soul, what ever it be, that God
commands, though it bring never so much loss, or shame, or suffering upon me,
yet if the fear of God be in my heart, I shall do it: A soul that truly fears
God, will endeavor to avoid in thought, word, or deed, what ever offends God,
and dishonours God, as he would avoid hell: And therefore Solomon tells us,
The fear of the Lord is to depart from evil, Prove. 3.7. Yea to hate evil,
Prove. 8.13. And therefore take a soul that has the fear of God upon his heart,
and he looks upon it as a dreadful thing to sin against God, and to dishonor
God in thought, word, or deed, and therefore as much as may be, such a soul
will avoid the occasions of sin; you may see it in Agur, in Prove. 30.8, 9.
says he, Give me neither poverty, nor riches; and why? because both those
states were dangerous temptations to sin against God, and the best way to avoid
the sin, is to avoid the temptation: But alas! How many are there in this our
day, that are bold and venterous upon temptations, that will rush in upon them
without fear; How few are there that have this in their prayers to God, Lord
give me not riches, but on the contrary, how do many run into multitude of
business in the world, which so takes up their time, and hearts, that they are
not fit to serve God in their Generation: Not considering that of our Savior,
How hardly shall they that have riches, enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? But
the fear of God it teaches the soul to avoid the occasions of sin, and to
abstain from all appearances of evil, according to that of Paul, in 1 Thessalonians.
5.22. And surely, if we are to pray, Not to be led into temptation, then we
are not to lead our selves into temptation; But first to seek the Kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added unto
you: And thus the Fear of God teaches to abstain from what God has forbidden,
and to do what God has required, to think highly of God in all his
Attributes, and to have respect to all his Commandments.

And thus you have the Description opened, and proved, concerning the fear of
God, I cannot come to the other duty of giving glory to his name, and therefore
shall make some Application of what has been spoken to our own souls.

Use. If it be so that the fear of God is one of those great Lessons God calls
upon men to learn by his great Works in the latter days, Then let me exhort,
and beseech you all to learn this blessed Lesson of the Fear of God: It is
surely a very desirable thing; It may be many of you will take it in scorn to
be taught this, and be ready to say, What, are we yet to learn this? Let me
tell you, it is much to be feared, That many that have made a long profession
of God, are yet void of this true filial fear of the Name of God; and therefore
to help you a little in it, I shall give you but some Motives, and some
Directions, and so conclude.

Motive 1. Consider the excellency of the fear of God, it is Prove. 1.7. Psalm.
111.10. the beginning of wisdom; and it is good for persons to observe a
method and order in what they do; whiles thou art void of this fear, thou art
void of true spiritual wisdom; and therefore Job also tells us, That the
fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, Job 28. last v. And therefore you that are
void of spiritual wisdom, and have not the fear of God imprinted upon your
hearts, the first lesson you are to learn, is the fear of God, and as you would
be wise men, and women, take heed of light and vain spirits, for Solomon tells
us, A fool is known by much laughter, Eccles. 7.6.

Motive 2. Consider that this fear of God, is that which will fit Saints for
that glorious state God will bring them into; and by the signs of Christ's
coming it seems to be nigh; that distress that is upon the Nations, speaks
something to it: Oh friends, we are not fit for that familiarity, Saints shall
then have with God if this fear of God be not upon our hearts. Notions of love
will but lead to vanity, and lightness, without they be balanced by this
fear, and therefore to fit, and prepare persons for Christ's appearing, and that
familiarity, we shall have with him at his coming, this fear of God is
absolutely necessary; and therefore those that profess to be most enlightened
in the truth of Christ's appearing, and Kingdom, ought much to live in this
fear; for you shall find this is the use David makes of it in Psalm. 2. Having
treated of the Kingdom of Christ, and the subjection of the Nations to him,
he concludes with this, verse. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling.

Motive 3. Consider, The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, Psalm.
147.11. Gods delight is in such a man, and he reckons such among his Jewels,
Mal. 3.17, 18. So when God would triumph of a man, as he did of his servant
Job, saying, There is none like him in all the earth, one that [Feareth God]
and escheweth evil, Job 1.8. But on the contrary, God takes notice of light,
and proud, and vain professors, they are not worthy of a name in his book by
way of Approbation: And when that discerning time comes spoken of in Malachy
3.18. When God makes up his Jewels, then shall men discern between them that
fear God, and those that fear him not; The fear of God, and the love of his
Name, are the two great things, by which souls shall then be distinguished;
that soul that can trust God for his daily bread here, and for eternal life,
and glory hereafter, and the carnal Professor shall then, be distinguished,
each from other; and when Saints come to have a more discerning spirit, they
shall see that none are rightly spirited for God, but those which have this
Fear of God, and can look at Gods glory above all things; and the people of God
shall be much known by this, that they are willing to forbear any thing that
tends to their own advantage, when it may dishonor Gods Name, because they
fear God, and love Gods Name; and I believe God will put such a difference
between Ishmael and Isaac, and their children, between Professors and
Professors, that they shall be much discerned, and discovered by this very
thing, the one of seeking alone Gods glory, and the advancement of his Name
above all; and the other seeking the enriching themselves, and only minding
their own advancement in the earth, such as these, God will manifest his
displeasure against; But he takes pleasure in them that fear him. -- Again as
a

4 Motive, To press you to this fear of God, consider the judgments threatened
against those that fear him not; for let me tell you, That notwithstanding all
your outward Profession of the Name of God, yet if this fear of God, be not in
your hearts, you will not be able to escape, the great judgments of the great
God against those that fear him not, I will be a swift witness against them
that fear not me, says the Lord, Mal. 3.5. But to this man will he look even
to him that trembles at his word, Isa. 66.2. And therefore as a

5 Motive, Consider the many precious promises God has made to them that fear
him, They shall be mine, says the Lord, and when he makes up his Jewels, he
will remember those that fear him; Yea he has his book of remembrance for such
souls, he will be sure not to forget them, Mal. 3.16, 17. And blessed is the
man that fears always, Prove. 28.14. And you may find David pressing to the
fear of God upon this account, Psalm. 34 9, 10. O fear the Lord, all ye his
Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him, the young Lions shall lack
and suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord shall want no good thing.

And you may further note, That the great reward that will be given at the
last day, is promised unto those that have this fear: See it in Rev. 11.18. He
will reward his servants the Prophets, and those that fear his Name, small and
great; And it is for some singular goodness manifested to them that they are
called upon to praise God, in Rev. 19.5. Praise our God all ye his servants,
and those that fear him both small and great: And so God has promised to hear
the prayers, yea to fulfill the desires of them that fear him, Psalm. 145.19.
And are not these great privileges, which are promised to those that fear God?
And therefore let all these Motives be useful to work the fear of God where
it is not, and to increase it where it is.

Quest. But perhaps some may say, This fear of God is an excellent thing, but
how shall we come by it, we are not able to plant this plant in our own
souls.

Answ. It is true, This fear of God is a flower that does not grow in Natures
garden; but it is a precious effect of the Spirit of Christ in the heart, as I
showed you in the Description, but let me say this to you, That since the fear
of God is so excellent a thing, take heed that you do not slight it, that you
are not like those that in Prove. 1.29. hated knowledge, and did not choose the
fear of the Lord. But if you do really desire to fear God, to help you forward
in it, I shall give you somewhat by way of Direction, which if you observe, and
practice, may be useful by Gods blessing to work this fear in your hearts.

Direct. 1. Then be much in the consideration of Gods Sovereignty, and power
over thee, and his great Works of Creation and Redemption, and Preservation,
what a God he is with whom you have to do, and the vast disproportion that is
between you and him; consider his absolute Power, and Authority over you, how
you are in his hands, who can do with you what he pleases; and as soon as thou
have had any vain thought, or spoke any vain word, or done any sinful action,
he can, if he pleases, send thee immediately to Hell, without giving thee
leave for one moment longer to breathe in the world; and therefore consider
this, and this may cause you to stand in awe of him, and to fear to offend him.
But again,

Direct. 2. That which will further conduce to the working of this fear is the
serious consideration of Gods goodness, For there is mercy with him that he may
be feared, Psalm. 130.4. And indeed the soul cannot have a true filial fear
without this, but when the soul sees the great God in whose hands he is, to
invite him to be reconciled to him, and tendering grace to his soul, promising
him forgiveness if he will but fear him, this melts the heart. Oh! to consider
that the great God of Heaven and Earth, should offer to give himself to poor
souls with all his fullness for a supply of their wants, if they will but fear
him; surely this, if believed, and considered, will cause you to love God, and
serve God, and fear to offend this God, which is so good and gracious unto you.

Direct. 3. Again, If thou would have the fear of God wrought in thy heart,
Go to the Word of God, be much in reading, and hearing, and meditating of it,
that will show you your duty, and the many arguments to it; and possibly hereby
God may work this fear.

Direct. 4. Be also much in the observation of Gods hand of Providence abroad,
and at home, labor to eye God in every dispensation that befalls our selves or
others; see God in mercies, and eye God in afflictions when his chastising hand
is upon us, for were our hearts in such a frame, as to eye God continually, it
would much work, and increase this fear; But then,

Direct. 5. In the next place, go to God for this fear, cry to him, and pray to
him to work, and increase this holy fear; This was David's prayer, Psalm. 86.11.
Unite my heart to fear thy Name: And therefore all you that have any buddings
of the Spirit in you, in any measure make it your continual request to God, to
put this fear in your hearts, and therefore be diligent in the use of all these
means, in order to the begetting and increasing of this fear, and I shall
conclude with that of Solomon, Prove. 2.4, 5. If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for bid treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of
the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

Quest. But perhaps some tender hearts that have the fear of God, in truth, may
be apt to say, I much question, whither yet I have the fear of God in my heart
in truth?

Answ. Now, as this question may proceed from some tender hearts, and
conscientious souls that have the fear of God in them, I would apply that word
in Nehemiah, which I have found much comfort in, to my own soul, and would
commend it unto you, it is in the first of Nehem. the last verse, Let now thy
ear be attentive unto thy Servant, that [desires] to fear thy name; Nehemiah a
good man, yet when he comes before the Lord, he durst not own that he feared
him, but his desires was that he might fear him; and therefore if thou can
not take the comfort of such Promises as are made to those that fear the Lord,
yet if thou have desire in thy soul to fear him, and pressest after this fear
of God, thou may take comfort in the saying of this good man Nehemiah, who
was one that had a desire to fear Gods name.

But let none deceive himself with this, for every common Protestant will say
that he desires to fear God; but if you desire it in truth, your souls will
be much in seeking to God for it, and endeavoring after it, and to such
souls, I would commend that word in Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their
hearts, and they shall not depart from me; which promise belongs not to the
Jews only, but to the Gentiles also, who are fellow heirs with them, and
partakers of the promise in Christ by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6. and therefore apply
this promise to thy soul: It may be thou have a light vain spirit, and art apt
to forget what thou hear, and to turn aside and depart from God; but God
has promised to put his fear into the hearts of his people; and then (says
he) They shall never depart from me.

The fear of God, it will keep a soul from a backsliding spirit, and therefore
if thou would have this fear, look upon this promise, and pray over it, as
David did upon a word of God, as you may see, 1 Chronicles. 17.25. For thou, Oh my
God, have told thy servant, that thou will build him an house, therefore thy
servant has found in his heart to pray before thee. And if we would have our
hearts brought into a praying frame, we must fasten upon the promises, and see
what promises God has made, that suit our condition, and plead the promise
with him; and when you find free promises made through Christ without any
worth on merit in the creature.

Oh come to God by faith in those promises, and plead them with God; ask God
what his ways are, wherein he will make good his promises, and wait upon him
therein, and particularly as to the matter in hand concerning the fear of God,
say as David did in another case, Lord thou have promised to put thy fear into
my heart, and therefore thy servant has found in his heart to pray unto thee;
Good Lord, let it be according to thy word: Will thou put thy fear in my
heart, that I may never depart from thee?

And now let me beseech you, to receive this Exhortation, as in the fear of
God; and apply your hearts with all your might, to learn this great Gospel
Lesson of the Fear of God. Consider that Promise and Prophecy in Hosea 3.
last. where it is said of a people, They shall fear the Lord and his goodness
in the latter days: And oh that the fear of the Lord may rest upon every heart
that hears before him this day: Surely his judgments call upon us to fear him,
and his mercies call upon us to fear him, 1 Samuel 12.24. Only fear the Lord and
serve him, in truth, and with a perfect heart, for consider how great things
he has done for you.

Oh that you might now go away with serious spirits, weighty spirits (for God
weighs the spirits) that you may be no more light, and vain, but may make
this your first prayer to God, how you may most honor God, and bring glory to
him in your Generation.

But so much for this time.
FINIS.

