PEMBROOKES PASS FROM Oxford to his Grave.
HEnce Mountebancke of honor, hence away,
And seek some Caverne, where the cheerful day
Nere made enquiry, where continued night
May not expose thee to the shame of light;
The Owl from the Birds chidings shall be free,
When seen by all men, thou reproach't shall be;
Base property of State, time serving thing,
Thy Servants Slave, yet Rebel to thy King.
Thou Puppet, who can neither speak nor move,
If Say or Oldisworth teach not, or approve,
For which Records to after times will show
Thee an ungrateful Fool in Folio.
O! how would Pembrooke thy brave Brother grieve
To see his Heir to play the under-Shreeve,
And force the Dwellings of the Muses Sons
To give the Unlettered their Possessions:
And with a borrowed dress of Power sit
To cry up Ignorance, and banish Wit,
In which thine Honor, as thy Soul, is tainted,
Compard with thee Manchester may be Sainted;
Had Martin don't, or Mildmay, who in evil
Are listed Iourney-workers to the Devil.
Or had thy sacrilegious Tutor, Say,
Or Cromwell made the find an Holy Day,
By such an Act as must his Realm advance,
And perish this by growth of Ignorance,
It might be borne: nor should we cozened be
From such impostors, when such arts we see,
But that good Pembrooke, who in no man's hearing,
Was e're condemned but for the switch and spurring.
One who (we know) had never been dipped in Treason,
Had he been left unto his proper reason,
A mere concurring Rebel, that does cry
Like a half entered whelp for company:
For the great Doctors of so great a School
To be confuted by so great a Fool,
There lies the wonder, which thus solved must be,
This Age produces naught but Prodigy;
A hundred Horse his Lord ship had to boot*
He knew his own wit never else could do it:
Arms are a powerful Ergo, and make Schism
And Folly good, Maugre a Sillogisme;
Had thou but sense of wit, thou would be slain
With the just Rymes composed in thy disdain;
And to each angry Muse an Object stand
Till Rym'd to death, like Rats in Ireland.
But we will bridle Fancy, nor let loose
Too much brave fury on so tame a Goose:
No, thou shall feel the chastening Rod,
First of the abused King, next of thy God;
And when just Heaven shall due vengeance take,
And to ingrate thee an Example make;
Apolloes Sons shall in a Chorus laugh,
And fix upon thy Tomb this Epitaph.
The Epitaph.
PEmbrooke here lies under-lay'd,
Who his God and King betrayed:
To which sins, he joined this other,
To commit Rape upon his Mother.
Who so unto this Gravestone goes,
And reads, is prayed to stop his nose:
His very name thus blasted, must
Be more nautious then his dust.

