Parnassi Puerperium: OR, Some Well-wishes TO INGENUITY, IN THE Translation of
Six Hundred, of Owen's Epigrams; Martial de Spectaculis, or of Rarities to be
seen in Rome; and the most Select, in Sir Tho. More. To which is annexed A
Century of Heroic Epigrams, (Sixty whereof concern the Twelve Caesar's; and the
Forty remaining, several deserving Persons.) By the Author of that celebrated
Elegy upon CLEEVELAND: THO. PECKE of the Inner Temple, Gent.

Ista tamen mala sunt. Quasi nos manifesta negemus:
Haec mala sunt: sed Tu, non Meliora facis.
Mart. l. 2. Ep. 8. My Stock of Wit is small; let them who flout
My Poverty; be pleased, to bear Me out.
Printed at London by J. Cottrel, for Tho. Bassett in St. Dunstans Churchyard
in Fleet Street, 1659.

To the Ingenious READERS.
THat a Chain of Gold, could be fastened to the Neck of a Flea; was heretofore
such a Rarity, that it obtained a Memorial in the Chronicle; and could not
purchase Belief, at an easy Rate, until it was rendered undeniable, by the
verdict of Quotidian Experience. The facetious Epigrammatist, can boast a wit,
capring hither, and as fast retreating; conscious of no greater Crime, then
under (...) fictitious Name, to Flea-bite some particular Persons: And draw^
after it such a Golden Chain of Invention, as challenges not only applause
from the most Cynical Morosity; but is irradiant with the two Poetical Jewels;
Profit, and Pleasure. In the Translation of Owen, it was not necessary to be
curious, in electing here and there an Epigram; by reason He carries an even
strain: and if I had omitted some in the first three Books; I could not have
inserted more ingenious. I made it my devoir to be Brief; Perspicuous. And I
hope from six hundred Penfulls of Ink, not many blots have fallen upon my
Author. Out of ^artial, I selected his most Heroic ^^ok, of Rarities to be
seen at ^^me. And because Variety is delectable; I have subjoyned forty out of
Sir Tho. More; And a Century of my Own. Although no part of Poetry, but is at
my command: I have made choice of Epigrams, as the very Nerves of this
exquisite Art. For if a Poem be good, it consists of nothing else, but various
Epigrams; cemented by a dexterous sagacity. And not only Verse, but Prose, is
dull, and languishing, unless the sparkling Genius of the Epigrammatist, be
artificially interwoven. That Plaudit, the World were pleased to vouchsafe my
Elegy, upon the unparalleld Poet Mr. Cleeveland; forbids me to complain of
that carping humor, notoriously predominant in English men; in relation to any
Authors of their own Country. The candid acceptance granted me then, I have no
reason to suspect now; from ingenious, and deserving Persons of all sorts. And
as for a Generation of Sciolists, that make it their recreation to slight
others, either natural, or acquired endowments; I crave at their hands, to give
the World as ample a Testimony of their abilities, as I have done of mine. And
then if they think my Epigrams routed; I shall desire them to try their
valor, upon my Satyrs.

T. P.

Amico mihi magnopere colendo Juvenique tam propter morum suavitatem
acutissimam ingenii indolem, and Prosapiae antiquissimae generositatem
honorando Dom. THOMAE PECKO Armigero, etc.
In Poemata, etc.
QUis tua Maeonio roravit pectora succo
Peckiadum gentilis honos? Quae Musa per auras
Enthea Sydereas Te sustulit, alta sonantem,
Atque inspiratos afflavit Fulmine sensus?
Dum teneros Annos meditor, canumque cerebrum
Impubes mihi Nestor eris, virtutibus annos
Qui superas, calamoque senes, Sic gaudet Apollo
Imberbi comes ire Pater, dum spectat ephebum,
Et vix vestitas rosea lanugine malas.
Quod si ver tenerum tot jam produxit amoenos
Florum fasciculos, quae tum maturior aestas
Incrementa dabit, nostroque obsonia seclo,
Et Nascendorum Delectamenta Nepotum?
Scilicet auspiciis primum foelicibus orsus
Cleevelando monumenta struis, Musaque parentas
Manibus, altisono gradiens super astra Cothurno.
Nec veluti nostri Juvenes, proh tempora! perdis
Crescentes sine fruge dies: Quodcunque sopori
Temporis eximitur, studiis adjicitur, unde
Concoquis Authors, lectosque in sanguinis usum
Et Succi convertis edax. Testabitur orbi
Illud opus sapido, quantum praecesseris. Ipse
Historicas, quantumque tumens Maeonidis aestro
Ebrius Aeonios dudum Potaveris amnes.
I decus Aeonidum, Famamque extend per anglos
PECKE Tuos, ut Te felix Norfolcia natum
Vendicet, utque itidem te doctus Chamus alumnum
Jactet, uti patulus quandam discordibus orbis
Vocibus, Indigenae Cunas jactabat Homeri.
Haec in amicitia Tesseram Profudit P. Piscator.

OWEN'S EPIGRAMS: THE FIRST BOOK.
1. To the most Illustrious, the Lady Mary Nevill, my ever honored Patroness.
I Want no Patrons, for to vouch my Books;
No places Rudeness, denies gracious Looks.
My Papers to the Reader, I shall vow;
The Dedication of my self, take you.
2. To the Reader.
IF you applaud what ever I have writ,
I must deride your Indigence of Wit:
If you praise nothing, (then the cause stands thus)
Your epithet shall be, The Envious.
3. To Counselor Hoskins concerning his Book.
THis Book is the Mad World; these verses Men:
Choose Man or verse; scarce one found good in ten.
4. To the Lady Mary Nevill.
SUppose Pythagoras the white did kiss,
When he talked of a Metemsychosis;
The proof is facile, that you are the same
with Pallas, Juno* and the Lemnian Dame.
For Three rich Virtues shine in you, alone;
When many Threes, cannot lay claim to One.
5. To the same.
AS Phoebus revels in the arched sky,
And with him light, quarters her Majesty:
So adored Virtue proclaims it a Grace;
That she is incumbent to your charming Face.
Whoever tell-tale Fame invites to see
Your Ladyship, bows to captivity:
If he evade your Beauties Fetters; yet,
Inward endowments cast a faithful Net.
6. To her Ladyships Son, Mr. Tho. Nevill.
YOur Genius is so eminent, that due
Belief is banished; though the story's true.
He that will praise a Child, does Hope commend,
And not the Merits; which must crown the end:
Not Hope, but real Worth does magnify
The happy Torrent, of the Ingenie.
7. To her Ladyships Daughter Caecilia.
THE Mother you are like: when I say this,
Avaunt as useless, all Periphrasis.
8. Nosce teipsum, upon Harpalus.
TO some this (know your self) were good advice;
But in the application, be you nice:
You are not worthy Knowledge; seek abroad,
Something that is, may once fall in thy road.
9. To the Lawyer.
IF he be happy that can Causes scan,
You ken to plead our Causes: Oh brave Man!
10. Upon John Protus.
I Well remember Protus, you did threat,
That shortly, nothing should your wedding let:
Your Latin phrase, in my breast creates strife;
It signifies to Marry; Lead a wife.
When Ale has Crippled you, but in small stead
You Will stand, your Wife, or any one to lead:
Nay, shun such thoughts; and get a sober Spouse;
Who in the dark may lead you; find your House.
11. Upon Aulus, an ignoble Nobleman.
FOR Honor (sordid Aulus) which you share,
To Predecessors, you indebted are.
But your base Spirit has contrived to let
Posterity, from living in your debt.
12. Upon Hernicus.
YOU Hernicus, did disburse twenty pounds
To buy a Fool, what squander without bounds?
In time, thy lavish Error, prithee see;
I would not give, such a large Price for Thee.
13. Venus.
Sour is the Exit, though sweet the address,
Of the salacious Cyprian Emperess.
She dresses up the first salutes with Joy;
Till the sad parting proves her a Decoy.
So sweet and dulcid Rivers, when they thrust
Themselves on Neptune, borrow salt disgust.
14. To Doctor Gilbert.
YOu say the earth does move; what wonders slip
From your sage mouth! writ you this in a Ship?
15. To the Physicians, and the Lawyers.
OUR Sickness is thy Health, O Galen: prise
Our folly Plowden; for that makes ye wise.
16. O Times! O Reformation!
REnowned Scaliger, in the worlds Eye,
Was the Refiner of Chronology:
The shrivel'd Face of Time is washed. The Man
That will correct the Manners; find who can.
17. The Judgment of Paris.
WHen Pallas, Juno, Venus, did refer
Their cause to Paris, chose him Arbiter;
At first, his dazzled eyes could not descry,
Which radiant Beauty, did the rest outvy.
The Majesty of Juno, yet at last,
And Pallas Wisdom, mist the winning-cast.
The golden Apple's Venus Trophie. Love,
On earth is Victor; rules the Gods above.
Were Judgment now reverst, the Golden Lump
Would win: and Juno Money turn up Trump.
18. The German Truth.
MErry Democritus, affirmed Truth did
In some deep Hogs-head (from Men's view) lie hid.
Grant but the Adage true, that Truth's in Wine;
Upstarts the Dutchman, and swears, Truth is mine.
19. To Linus.
LInus has his Study filled; but what then?
Not Books, but Bags, make the most learned Men.
20. To a certain young Nobleman.
THat until hoary Hairs you spin out Breath,
All your acquaintance wish; but none your Death:
Conjoynt desires, will afford a disease;
As for the Cure, to wish that none will please.
21. To a certain poor Medic.
YOU who of late came to our City Poor,
Now cleanse the pores; ('it is not as heretofore)
Physic you give the Sick; the sick gives Gold:
You cure his New disease; and he, your Old.
22. Upon a certain Woman.
YOur Beauty begot Fame: but soon, alas,
The Mother, by the Daughter, murdered was;
Whilst a loose Carriage, threw Ink on your Name;
And a good Face, was scratched, by a bad Fame.
23. Upon Marcus.
WHY durst you offer Marcus to aver,
Nature abhorred a vacuum? confer
But with your empty skull; then you will agree,
Nature will suffer a vacuitie.
24. Upon the Writers of our times. To the Reader.
WHether our Scriblers vent more Lies, would know,
In an Octavo, Quarto, Folio?
Thousands of Lies are nothing; in an Age,
Time bound in the Decimo-sexto Page:
If that the Sixteenth part, such knacks can do;
What can a sheet's, Gigantine Folio?
25. Upon Phyllis.
THE world cannot bribe Phyllis to kiss; But she
Will receive millions; if they profer'd be:
For cunning tricks, pray let this Lass alone;
Give, and Receive, she understands all one.
26. Upon the same.
IF Love be fire, (as Proverbs talked of old)
Accursed am I! 'cause your fire burns so cold.
27. The impious Atheist.
SNatch instant Time; use things whilst in their prime;
The time will be, when thou shall have no Time.
Resume let Grammar, Have been, Shall be; I,
To secure Is, will fix my industry.
28. The Epitaph of the Atheist.
HE died, as if there were no Future state;
And lived, as one invincible by fate.
29. The Optative Mode.
THE Mode called Optative's the same welnigh,
With that Mode, cousin to Infinity:
Instance in those, of most contented mind,
Yet such, an end of wishing, never could find.
30. Upon Alanus.
ALL the day-long Alanus, now a wife;
Rails like a Bedlam, at a wedded life.
After so many brawlings; in the night,
They that think Marriage a fine thing, think right.
31. Prophets, Poets.
THE Prophets predict true, what is to come:
Poets, in Fictions sing, what has been done.
32. Upon Life, and Death.
LIfe hurries on to Death; the foaming flood
Of Neptune, so, is Rivers period:
We ruminate on Life, as a sweet notion;
But to all tastes, Death is a bitter portion.
33. Of Vulcan.
MOst glorious armor, was by Vulcan made,
For the fierce god of war; Mars drives a trade,
And gives him no less famous horns: How now,
Take Horns for Steel? not such a fool, I trow.
34. The Grammar in English.
THings only proper unto Males;
The Female Sex claim, as their Vales.
35. Free Will.
FRee Will, the nurse of sublunary Strife;
A man is cheated of, by his own Wife.
36. Of Life, and Venus.
ALL actions labor, to atchieve their ends;
But Life, and Venus, are to it no friends.
37. The Elysian Fields.
GRand-sire Aenaeas, (thank Poets) did come,
And view the levels of Elysium:
But in those times, he gave Elisa due
Benevolence; the fiction proved true.
38. The Cuckold, and Cuckold-maker. The Cuckold.
THis Wife I married; she does me forsake:
Not for your selves, O Bees! you honey make.
Cuckold-maker.
THese Boys I got; another reaps the praise:
Not for your selves, O Birds! do you nests raise.
39. The new Rhetoric.
HE that wants money, labors but in vain,
In disputations for to squeeze his brain:
Not he, who knows to speak; but who, to give;
Under the roof of Rhetoric, shall live.
40. Upon Cotta, lately turned a Monk.
COtta, vexed with his treble-tongued Wife;
Betook himself to a Monastic life:
To see this hour, it is happy you were born;
If putting on a Hood, you put off Horn.
41. The Arms of Geneva.
GEneva Bears the Eagle; and the key:
The first proclaims, Emperial Majesty;
Unto the last, the Mitre, is right Heir,
Which is successor to St. Peter's Chair.
Of pure Geneva's Arms, what will become,
If Caesar takes the Eagle; the Key, Rome?
42. Upon the Poet Borbonius his toys.
YOU call your verses Trifles; be they so?
Ask your self privately, and you will hear, No.
I shall refrain my verdict; yet I may
Take leave to think, what you thought good to say.
43. Faith.
FIdes, for Fiddle-strings, is Plural; when
It Faith denotes, it is singular; say then,
Our Predecessors were Emphatical:
They held a single Faith; that Faith was all.
44. Upon Paulinus the Physician.
CALL you a sick-man Patient, since he
Is so impatient, of his Pains, and Thee?
With much ado, you are endured: you may,
That he is your Patient, positively say:
His spirits by his sickness, are much spent;
But it is the Doctor, which does him torment.
45. Upon Cottula.
IF Delphos did not flatter Socrates;
The attribute of Wise, claim when you please;
Proud Plato's Master may stand in your Row:
You know for certain, that you nothing know.
46. Upon Fabiana.
LAnd bearing much, was fruitful called of yore;
Good Fabiana! Thou have born great store.
47. A Joque, upon the Covetous.
What foolish humor, makes men so intent,
Natures contentedness to complement?
Whilst on the other side, but few are nice,
To cast stones at flint-hearted Avarice.
But little Nature craves; well, you will grant us,
That nothing will suffice the Covetous.
48. To a Lover of his Country.
It Is Honor to dye for my Country; fit:
Suppose Death may my Country benefit.
Yet to Live for my native Country, I
Humbly conceive more pleasant, then to Dye.
49. The World.
NO certainty; the world's turned upside down:
What wonder then, that there no good is known?
50. Upon Aretine.
THings have their scantlings; but out trials find,
A measure hateful to fair Venus mind.
Lust has invented 1000 tricks; a part,
May Nature challenge; but the greater, Art.
51. Upon Silius.
PApists you might not be; nor could you love
The Protestants; thus Atheist did you prove.
52. Upon Atheists.
NO house stands without owner; and will you,
Unto the worlds great House, no Lord allow?
53. The Physician.
SIr Mountebank will take gold, but none gives;
Physic will give, himself, without it lives.
The paunch Quack empties; his Pouch the diseased;
One thing, to crave another help, is pleased.
54. The Counselor.
LAwyers by Law, are Jurisprudents named;
By their great wisdom, Bumkin's title's lamed;
Let who will smart, they for themselves provide;
No greater prudence, in the world beside.
55. The Courtier.
IF you be Good already, then in time,
You will be better; but scarce higher climb:
If you be great already, in time you,
May become greater; but scarce better grow.
56. Upon one-ey'd Marc.
ONe-eye wants honest Marc; one may suffice;
Discern more things, not better, can two eyes.
I have two ears; yet with those never could
Hear truth of things: two eyes; yet see no good.
57. Upon Paul.
LEst that your Name should perish, edify
You will a tomb, fond man! that tomb, must die.
58. A Receipt against Baldness. To Bithynicus.
NO fear in age you should be Bald-pate called;
Your youth (O happy Man) has made you Bald.
59. Upon Theodorus
THeodore marrying, was of the mind,
That now he heavens narrow way should find.
After experiment, the owl could say,
He found the road to Hell: the cursed, Broad-way.
60. Apollo and the Muses
FEmales are the Muses; Apollo Male:
Nine Muses can he single, counter-vale.
61. Upon Alanus now grown old.
ALanus wishing his cold limbs no harm,
Desires his wife to turn; his place is warm.
Here Is wit at will; Girls must not at Age spurn:
But last night Alan's wife had a good turn.
62. New-years-Day.
TO the Rich, Olus sends no New-years-Gifts;
Lest they should think he were put to his shifts.
Sending the poor it is Prudence to neglect;
From them, requital he can scarce expect.
Quintus to send, makes it his yearly task:
What he is ashamed to beg, his Gifts shall ask.
63. Upon Pontia.
HIs Wife told Pontius, there was a Law,
All Cuckolds should be thrown, where Surges aw
The Mariner; Pontia in love to him,
Cried out, For God-sake Husband! learn to swim.
64. The Work of Darkness.
TO preserve species from winged decay,
Then Individuums what is fitter pray?
Yet nothing more mischievous is, then these
Soft Individuums, to Species.
65. You Lie.
BEware to Soldiers, lest you give the Lie;
There Is no disgrace like this indignity.
You Lie, it seems, is a detested phrase:
To Lie, you love; that is little, no disgrace.
66. Upon an Hypocrite.
ALL Swearers, Superstitious you will control;
Yet Lie all weathers; a religious Soul!
67. Upon an Hermaphrodite.
ANdrogynus may boast himself the Race
Of Mercury, and Venus, by his Face.
Not Male nor Female; (Bless me!) what is he then?
Ask Maids, a Man; a Woman, ask but Men.
68. Venus.
LOve has his Flux, and Reflux; Venus bred
Was in the soil where Tethys lays her head.
No credit Venus merits; her descry
You may, 'twixt Sol, and seduced Mercury.
The Planets are her Cronists: none so far
Can scout from sense, to call her fixed star.
69. Upon Rivals.
ALL Suitors, Phyllis would appropriate:
Call you it Love? it is Envy at this rate.
70. A Woman.
IN that rich Language, which victorious Rome,
Bequeathed to those, Caesar's did overcome;
A Woman drew her name from Softness; 'cause
Man's brawny hardness they excel; by the Laws
Of benign Nature. Why so? it is well known,
Eve was not Adams Flesh, but his hard Bone.
71. The Relation betwixt Physicians and Lawers.
THE Lawyer, and Physician, for their pains;
Pick out of others Losses, legal Gains.
The Medic, heals the Body: Lawyers prate,
To cure the Falling Sickness of Estate.
Both will assist each moment, whilst you live;
If you subsist, each moment to Give, Give.
72. To Philip concerning Pamphilus.
NAture defies a Vacuum: We see
How sweetly She and Pamphilus agree.
73. To Bald-pate.
TRees regain Hair; and Fields the verdant Grass:
But when will your Head Leaf'd be, as it was?
74. Nilus in my Eyes, Aetna in my Breast.
A Briny Nilus overflowes my Eyes;
Whilst with Aetnaean flames, my scorcht heart fryes.
Rivers of Tears, quench not my ardent Heat:
Nor my Loves Fire, dries up my Brains salt sweat.
Water and Fire, in temper disagree;
Yet will accord, so they may torture me.
75. If all things be alike. Upon Camilla.
TWo Swashes did the fair Camilla court;
The one was handsome, but in stature short;
The other Features could not boast at all;
But (like a May Pole) was exceeding tall.
Camilla being questioned, which would do?
Exactly viewed them both, from top to toe.
Observing in the one, a Roman Nose;
Long legs, long arms, she prudently him chose:
And modestly replied, None can mislike
The proper man, if all things be alike.
76. Of Giants and Dwarfs.
TWo monstrous creatures, land at Natures wharf;
The Giant, is an Ox; a Dolt, the Dwarf.
77. Upon the spurious Offspring of an Abbot.
When you pray with the Covent; O how true
Is Abba Father, when pronounced by you!
78. To Parsons.
A Priest, by marriage, did himself great wrong:
For wifes before did to his Tithes belong.
79. A Participle.
A Verb is Eras; Mus, a Noun; pray pass
Your Censure Reader, what Erasmus was.
80. A Cause for the Lawyers.
A Goatish man, led his own wife by chance,
(Supposing her his neighbors) Cupid's dance:
Admit a Child the product of this Fate;
Is it a Bastard, or Legitimate?
81. The Morning.
IS it a wonder, light breaks forth before,
Phoebus begins, to blazon mountains Or?
Light as an elder Brother, did outrun,
By three days journey, the life-giving Sun.
82. Of Day.
LEt night with Argos have an hundred eyes:
Yet more with one, a duskish day descryes.
83. Of Night.
Has Night no other gown, but black array?
Alas poor Widow! dead's her Husband-Day.
Were not Stars Lanthorns, to the mourning night;
We likewise might be vexed, before Daylight.
84. Upon Marcus.
YOur Verses praise me, Marc; I know these ways;
You are so kind, that I, your verse might praise.
85. Death.
PEtty thieves may restore; nay highway men:
Death never will; what a Jade is she then!
86. To his Friend.
HAlf you, your Mistress claims; your self I fear,
The other half; what part falls to my share?
I read you mine, in Complements thick sown;
But are you Mine, when you are not your Own?
87. A good Man.
IF scarcity will estimation bring;
Beleev't, a good Man is a precious thing.
88. Upon a certain old Man.
YOur beard, once black, cold age has frosted gray;
Your mind, once white, is turned to black, they say.
89. Upon Paulinus.
WHatever old acquaintance beg of you;
Yes, yes, to morrow; Paulin will it do.
Must I be grateful, for the Gifts you send?
My thanks, until to morrow; I Will suspend.
90. Upon painted Dames.
YOU who delight to paint, need not forbear
To cry with Horace; Shadows, dust, we are.
91. Upon Cotta.
COtta his Wife is wholly; but not sole:
Camilla soly his; I cannot say, whole.
92. The Politician.
DIssemble what you know; let falsehood range*
To find the yielding grain of every change.
Feel the pulse of all times; that all may be,
To thy desires subservient; good to thee.
93. Upon Venus.
VEnus and Mars, play the unlawful game;
Because in lawful sporting, Vulcan's lame.
94. Upon two Masters.
NO man can serve two Masters; I confess,
Marinus says, I serve two Mistresses.
95. Upon Marc.
YOur beard grows fast, hairs fall off; thence is it,
Your beard becomes so long; so short your wit.
96. To Jo. Hoskins.
AT Winchester, a Boy; at Oxford, I
Being a youth; found your Fidelity.
In doubtful matters, you showed sincere love:
And sans deceit, to your trust true did prove.
Of sending this small gift, Love was the ground;
To me, Love tied you; Me to you has bound.
97. Of Death: To Epicharmus.
EPicharm will not die; yet his own Breath
Wishes exhaled; would die; but not by Death.
Sorrows bring death; Death sorrows makes to fly:
Far worse then death, is grating Misery.
98. Upon Phyllis.
THe Parthians flying, backward cast their darts:
By flying, Phyllis wounds her Lovers hearts.
99. Upon Hallus the Grammaticastre.
HAllus, whilst hungry, cried, I Am hugely famed;
I Am hugely full; when his guts were reclaimed.
100. Of the Lodestone.
AS from all Iron, Load-stones do exact
Coition: so, Lords all the Gold, attract.
Courtiers I ask ye nothing: for ye are
Stingy in giving; what ye ask, never care.
You give for your own ends; I cannot see
Gifts retrograde; I shall scarce ask of ye.
101. Death.
ASk Me what Death is? pray stay till I die;
Come ask me then, your suit I shall not deny.
102. The Client.
CLients returning, before theefs may sing:
For back from London they cannot money bring.
103. Upon Zoilus.
I Blame bad manners; Zoilus you repine;
Perhaps misdoubting, that, I aimed at thine.
Then all the world, you are more fearful grown;
When I chide Vices, I may mean my own.
104. Children and fools tell Truth.
THe English Proverb, calls such Fools, as tell
The very Truth; a Liar bears the Bell.
Therefore if you speak Truth, to English Men;
You may be for your labor, Fool called, then.
105. Upon Bald-pate.
YOu had a thing, called forehead, when shook down,
The leaves were not, from your well-shaded crown.
But since the hair fell off; (with reverence,)
'Twixt head, and forehead, there is no difference.
In jumbling head and face, age has mistook:
No credit can be given to your Look.
106. To the same.
HOW many hairs I have, I cannot divine:
Nor you, (for all are lost) can number thine.
107. An Apology for Fortune.
BAD Fortune is a fancy; she is just:
Gives the poor, Hope; and sends the rich, Distrust.
108. Upon Cotta.
COtta went to a Bawd, to be befriended;
But did not return with his business ended.
109. Upon Procillus. A Noble.
IF you, Procillus! would no Liars hear:
That hellish brood, your presence would revere.
110. To Paul, the Lawyer.
YOur practice eats the year; your worships salf,
If for your own, you Register, one half
Your Wife will claim Vacations; by all Laws,
You must be vacant, to attend her Cause.
The other part's ingrost; when as a Quirk,
Non-suits your Wife; succeeds your Clients work.
The years most busy months, are called aright,
A term: They terminate your Wifes delight.
111. To the same.
A Lawyer, Terms; Vacations, never sees:
But always finds the Leisure to take Fees.
112. To Marinus.
AS often as your abused Wife, bewails
Your impotency; you shall feel her nails.
In vain you flatter; good words nothing can;
She must, and will have Satisfaction, Man!
113. The Surgeon.
MY Trade will flourish; Jove send peace, send war:
Venus, and Mars, both my kind patrons are.
114. The Venereal Disease.
BOrn an Italian; bred in France; quoth Fame,
Which Country strives, to give the Pox a name?
115. Calumniators. Flatterers.
OLD Anaxagoras, that snow was black,
Related; most like him, love truth to wrack.
Old Reynards suffrage, the Crow white decreed:
How many thousand Foxes, Our age breed!
116. Upon Ponticus.
YOu have repented: I shall not credit it;
None can repent, but they must have some wit.
117. An Herculean labor.
IF strong Alcides, his wifes tongue could tame;
A thirteenth labor, might augment his fame.
118. War, Death.
WAr brings forth famine; famine is the cause,
That thrusts poor mortals, on the plagues sharp jaws:
Then plague, or famine, two-edged war is worse:
The humane glutton, supreme Jove's choice curse.
War is the Alpha, of succeeding Woe;
Death the Omega of all trouble: so,
When Canons thunder, to fly Mars counts cheap,
From Alpha, to Omega, at one leap.
119. Upon Cynthia.
THe gods conform your Nature, to your shape:
And to your Lilly-hand, be your mind, Ape.
120. Upon Gellia.
YOu sin unseen; that is a feigned pretense:
You never sin, but some give Evidence.
121. Upon Albinus.
O Albin! Felix cried, your neighbor burn;
Home, home, with speed; for next will be your turn.
Albin surprised his Horn-maker, at home;
And cried, Wise Felix! Faith my turn is come.
122. Upon Claudius, the raw Philosopher.
GOod, has three species; which are inclined,
To sojourn in the body, estate, mind.
Sick, poor, and silly, Claudius we see;
He cannot challenge one, among these three.
123. Upon Bardella, the Mantuan Thief.
A Monk, Bardella, to be hanged cheered up;
And said, To night in heaven thou shall sup.
Bardel replied; This, I keep fasting-day,
If you please to accept my place, you may.
124. Upon lascivious Flora.
YOu tell of all your Bed-fellows; and so,
More hurt by prating, then by acting, do.
125. Upon Quintil.
QUintil's friend can get nothing; Quintil's Lass,
Has got himself; and what ever worth he was.
126. To Aulus; concerning old Quintius.
Cannot Quintius marry, at decrepit years;
But Aulus, you must sting him, with your jeers?
Why Epigrams? Epitaphs, best befit,
Old doting Lovers, that have lost their wit.
An Elegy, (in all haste) let him have;
For he has dig'd already, his own grave.
127. Upon Costus.
SCotfree he sins; that is all Costus can plead:
But this failed, when, you know what lost its head.
128. An Answer to Cynthia's Letter.
YOu sent white paper, but black was your Letter:
Your heart, and body; nothing express better.
129. To Sextilianus, A spurious Brat.
YOur Father, never purposed to create
You, Sextil! But himself, to recreate:
If we not Gifts, but Donors minds, respect;
To Thank him for your Life, you may neglect.
130. Upon Portia, an Hypocrite.
FIe! fie! your wit is bawdy: Good now grant
My Book that; which your Husband must not want.
131. Saturn's three Sons.
THE corrupt Lawyer; dubious Divine;
Cheating Physician; the whole world enshrine.
132. Of single-life, to a certain married Man.
THE wisest King, says, Woe to him alone:
Follow St. Paul, and Wives ye shall have none.
The wedded Man, cries, Woe to us; whilst he,
Who stays a Bachelor, cries, Woe to me:
Our woe is single; but yours is not so:
You, and your Wife, must share a double Woe.
133. Upon Corneus.
HEar, see, say nothing; observe for thy Life:
Since thou have got a wag-tail to thy wife.
134. Upon Caius.
WHen lean Informers, Caius did epsy,
To have two Wives; the Court they certify.
Caius confessed; and resolute, them told,
What they condemned, he did most lawful hold:
One Wife, St. Paul, a Bishop will allow;
I hope then, I, a Layman, may have two.
135. Upon Pomponia.
POmponia sets her self to Farm; who is able
To praise her joining Sweet, to Profitable?
136. Upon Pinotus, sick of the Cholick.
PInotus regained health; by losing wind:
A Life, in that, which others kills; you find.
137. Upon Pomponia.
LOok how the Feather, daunces on her Hat;
'Twas Mars his badg; but Venus now gives that.
It Is to grace Mars; Venus it deigns to wear:
This shows how friendly, Mars, and Venus are.
The Crow thinks her young ones fair.
Cicero Juscul. Quaes. lib. 5.
138. To H. L.
YOur neighbors wife, best contents you; and he,
Counts yours most fair; thus nobly ye agree.
Tully to prove his words, may now despair;
Some Birds (it seems) think their own chick's not fair.
139. Venus.
YOu may hire Wenches, as well as buy Wines:
Why has then Bacchus; and not Venus, signs?
140. Things of worth, are hard to come by. To Marinus.
IF that fair Girls are nice, I Will choose the coy.
You may take leave, the coming to enjoy.
141. Upon Theodorus.
TO marry, Gospel will not you allow:
Not a pin-matter; the old Law will though.
But you have transgrest Moses Law, before:
Your last wife was a widow; first, a whore.
Lev. 21. 7, 13, 14.
141. New-years-Day, to Germanicus.
I Send you verses, instead of a gift:
Return me gifts; verses, you off may shift.
143. Sara.
SHe that will let her Husband kiss her maid;
We shall scarce match, (good Sara) I Am afraid.
144. To D. T.
YOu are your very Scholars servant; and
As your Lords Schoolmaster, you may command:
Whilst thus you serve as Low; command as High;
Your Titles I both pity, and envy.
145. Upon Paula, the Atheist.
A Maid, two husbands, or a man two wifes,
Whether should have; to solve it Paula strives:
If you grant not a maid two Husbands; how,
Can in one flesh consist, the Plural two?
146. Virtue consists in a Mean.
A Superb woman, praunc'd betwixt two men;
Virtue her Medium had banished then.
147. Upon Acerra.
TO's Father Acer, single did aver;
Happy is he, whom others horns deter.
148. To Pinotus.
What Lass is for my Money? such an one,
As all would buy, but vendible to none.
149. Upon Quintus, and Quintina.
QUintus kneels to his wifes commands, as though
Commission from the Gods, she could avow.
Her words are Laws; poor Quintus trots about;
Thinks himself blessed, his eyes are not scratcht out.
It Is against nature, manners, vulgar speeches;
Good Priscian never give, women, the breeches.
150. A Paradox. To his absent Friend.
I Burn in Love; the more flames my desire;
By how much further, I go from the Fire.
151. Upon Paulina.
PAulina her first husband, made a Stag;
Nor had the last, any great cause to brag.
She was as hard as horn, to first, and last;
But all the Interregnum, she was chaste:
Yet not for virtues Love, but her own sake;
Knowing her Tinder, would but touch and take.
Although most urgent Gamesters, came apace;
In her Vacation, she would give no Place.
152. Upon Gellia.
IF to take Gifts for Benefices, be,
(Or such like things) accounted Simonie;
Then you are guilty; who no fault at all,
Count to sell Love: for love's spiritual.
153. Upon a certain Woman.
WIth wondrous speed, in stature, large you grow:
Omicron the last year; Omega now.
154. A Riddle.
TO find this creature, whither should I sail,
Whose Father is a Woman; Mother, Male?
155. To Ponticus.
IT Startled me, when your two eyes, I spied:
Since that your Father, Mother, were one-ey'd.
156. Upon Mr. Calf.
I Shall not say that horns sprout on your skull;
But this I Will swear to; that you are a Bull:
What though a Bull? I shall not call you mad;
Although of late, your Cow, 3 Calves has had.
157. To a certain man, concerning a Dactyl.
Would Latin verses to thy Mris. show?
It Is worth the while, what foot will please to know.
All women love, men should in Dactyls court;
Which have one long syllable, and two short.
158. Love Descends.
LOve begins in the eye, by the mouth descends;
Until at last, she in her center ends.
159. Upon a stammering Woman.
BAlba took leave, of Phi-phi-philip, thus;
Make quick return, and Cuc-cuc-comfort us.
160. A problem for the Lawyers, concerning Theft.
TO take a thing without the Lords consent,
Is Theft; what if the Lady be content?
161. To Ponticus.
YOu promised fair, but nothing will give me:
Galen gives nothing; yet cries, Recipe.
162. Upon Cerellia, married to Gallus, an Eunuch.
HAd not we (fools) the Spartan fashion loathed;
Then parties naked, should have bin betrothed.
Cerel in thought, had married a game-cock;
But Cock, proved Capon; craven'd by a Smock.
163. Of Horns: A Problem.
A Wife is light, her husband wears the Horn;
Why so? He is her head; it must be born.
164. On New-years-Day, to Germanicus.
YOur gifts, or else my Verses, let me have:
Upon that same condition I them gave.
165. Christ-Church College in Oxford.
IMperfect you were left, in Wolsey's days;
Yet you may claim, a Quadrangle of Praise.
166. Upon Phyllis.
PHyllis with pleasure, does my Rythms rehearse;
But she loves Venus, better then a Verse.
167. Of Himself.
I Spend the Time in trifling; and lest those
Years of my Life, should perish; I them lose.
168. To the Reader, concerning himself.
I Think this Brevity, my Fame cannot hurt;
It Is not a little Labor, to be curt.
The vulgar talk much, to small purpose; I,
Perhaps talk Idle; yet use Brevity.
169. Upon Thraso, the Braggadocio.
DOn't Thrasos gingling Heels, make a fierce show?
Glory to all, is an huge Spur; you know.
170. Of Himself.
JAmes the Apostle says, Ask, and Receive:
O that K. James to me, would grant like leave.
171. The Court-Musick for two Voices.
^ One Courtier cried,
When others climb, I shall my Self advance.
^ The Other replied,
My Rise must be, A Favorites mischance.
172. To the Reader.
LEt not my Book, Tobacco light; but rather,
Let it the Refuse, of your Close-stool, gather.
173. To his Book.
MY Life perhaps, may my Books years, outvie;
The Son, before the Father often does die.
But whether it dies first, or sees Me Rot;
I understand, A Mortal, I begot.
OWEN'S EPIGRAMS: THE SECOND BOOK.
1. To the Reader.
LEt my Verse not please Fools; the world is full;
I would not be the Darling, of a Gull.
Few Readers will suffice; grant me but one;
If no body me like, I Am pleased with None.
2. To the Lady Mary Nevill.
OThers Renown, is but the Poets praise.
Your splendid glory, your own Merits raise.
3. To the same.
IF you have Enemies, they need not fear;
To oblige friends, you make your chiefest Care:
This you observe; Friends, never to Forget:
Never to Remember, with Foes, to cry Quit.
4. To the same.
THat a fair Face, might beauty keep alive;
The curious Pencil, helps it to survive.
I though a stranger, to the Limners Trade;
To keep your Fame alive, in Verse essayed:
Although Apelles Pencil, one Divine,
Should Draw: Apollo's Verses her enshrine.
5. To Mr. J. H.
NO whit portentous, but a Poet I:
You are no Poet; but a Prodigy.
6. What News?
ALL that know Me, my Patience thus abuse;
Good Mr. Owen! hear you any News?
I Answer, I know None; and tell them True:
Of all I know, for I know nothing New.
7. The Court.
HE, who to all Men's Humors, cannot stoop down;
Has got a foolish Humor; for his own.
8. Upon Aulus.
WHy were you made a Knight? because that more,
Your wife might love you, then she did before?
But you mistook your self; Sir Aulus, she,
Will love her self, the better; but not thee.
Former expense must double every year:
You shall have cause, to call your Lady, Deer.
9. Upon the Chemist.
IT is the silly Chemists doting Fate,
To seek for Gold, and Lose his whole Estate.
None must Elixar have, but He alone;
Till all away is squandred; Stick, and Stone.
10. A Trojan.
AFter Troy's burning, the Trojans grew wise:
In this, True Trojan, who Himself denies?
11. The Cure of Love.
BY frequent Fastings, take wood from the Fire:
Let not a Ladies Glance kindle desire.
If still, your Fervor will not let you rest;
A Wife will quench the Flame. Probatum est.
12. Troynovant. To the Londoners.
NO Phoenix beautifies, the gilded East;
Before Sol lights her Mothers fragrant Nest:
So decimated Troy, the Grecians burn:
Majestic London, sprouts from Troy's pale Urn.
13. The Lawyers God.
A Deity called Term, Rome did adore:
But now at Westminster He Is Worshipped more.
14. The Earth.
TO charm our Tongues, the middle has a Spell;
For there we think, the golden Mean does dwell.
Therefore in play for Praise, earth throws an Ace,
Above the Heavens: here is the Middle place.
15. To King James, De. of the Faith
YOu are Faiths chiefest Guardian; to entrust,
Her, with your sacred self, Envy thinks Just.
16. To the Lord Treasurer.
A Treasurer, whom Virtue makes to hold,
Vulturian Talons, from the Regal Gold:
Is Himself greater Treasure, then can shine,
In the Rich womb of an Exchequers Mine.
17. To the Kings chief Secretary.
THe Secrets of three Florid Nations lie,
Committed to your Tested Secrecy.
The Kings thoughts are not safe, till in the Chest,
They be locked up; of your most Tacid Breast.
18. To the Venetians.
A Fair laid your Foundations, at the first.
Neptune, turned Foster-father; and them nursed.
Nor shall mute Fish, the Sea Monopolize;
Your Palaces, make proud waves pay excize.
The Sea now fettered, gives a City Birth;
Art baffling Nature, water turned to Earth.
Your Empire survives time; waves ebb, and flow:
Yet never dare unconstant prove, to you.
It is not strange, Venice her self, loves Laws;
Since she, the out-lawed Ocean, over-awes.
19. To the Lord Chancellor.
LEst that the Quirks, or Rigor of the Laws,
Should accidentally, Injustice cause;
Deservedly it in your power does lie,
To bridle Common Law, with Equity.
20. To the Lord Richard Sacvil, Earl of Dorchester.
YOur Ancestors were Noble; you, we see,
The glory of renewed Nobility.
For you, (which was a Wonder in old time,
Seems now Prodigious, to our vicious Clime)
Rewards attending Merits, disrespect;
Love prudent Laws; devasting Arms neglect.
To prefer Virtue, before Power, think good;
And Learning's Jewel, before Noble Blood.
21. Cecil Lord Treasurer. 1597.
ARms abroad are invalid; unless that
Prudence at Home, and Cecil, steer the State.
Cecil, is Atlas Brother; born Above:
Cecil, Props up Elisa; Atlas, Jove.
22. Upon the Lord William Cecil's Motto.
Virtute Duce, Comite Fortuna:
Virtue my Leader, Fortune my Companion.
DIvine Elizabeth, Fortune did grace,
(Your wished Companion) with an Earls high place:
Since there was None, her Pleasure durst Rebuke;
Why made She not, Virtue your Leader, Duke?
23. To Richard Vaughan, Bishop of London.
YOu British Honor! are the first from Wales,
Arrived at Londons Sea; through happy Gales.
24. To the same.
THose Doctors always pleased me, who account,
Their good Lives, their good Sermons to surmount.
Most learned Bishop! you, not only teach,
Others their duty, but by Life do Preach.
25. To Tho. Bilson, Bishop of Winchester.
YOu were my Schoolmaster; let who will, know;
All these I write, I to your Precepts owe.
26. The Life of William of Wicham, formerly Bishop of Winchester; published in
Latin, by Tho. Martin, Doctor of the Civil Law.
THat a dead Man, a Person should have freed,
From deaths black Dungeon; few will make their creed.
Had you not don this work, in Lethe's Brook
You had bin drowned; now both, live by this Book.
27. Winchester College.
EUrope's chief School, our Winchester appears;
Where I was honored to spend younger years*
To give her the first place, Zoilus is bound;
Suppose he knows, great Wicham, did her Found.
28. Sir Philip Sidney.
BEcause old Homer did his Praises sing,
Achilles was thought happy, by the King,
Of large Aemathia, Poor wretch am I,
Whose Muse cannot divine Philip, Deifie.
29. To the same.
Who acts things, worthy to be writ, or writes,
Things worth the Reading; on no small bliss lights.
No Plummet sounds your Repute; who alone,
By a rare Genius make these Two, but One.
Readers your Writings covet; every Act,
Might all Historians Table-books, exact.
Your writings prove you Learned; Deeds attest,
That Prowess Anchors, in your noble Breast.
30. Upon the Marriage of William Earl of Pembrook; and Mary, Daughter to the
Earl of Salisbury, 1605.
FOr Nature, Wisdom, Beauty, Age, Estates,
Nobility, ye are most equal Mates:
Yet Sir, I this confess; you have not wed
So Nobly, as deserved, your Bridal-bed.
And I acknowledge Madam; that you are,
Worthy a Husband, yours, excelling far.
31. To Elizabet, Countess of Rutland, Daughter to Sir Philip Sidney.
RAre Philip's Praise, did not on Error trip;
Since he was Father, to your Ladyship.
That was his Honor: Yours is for to be
Daughter, to such Heroic Chivalrie.
32. To Lucia Countess of Bedford.
LIght gave (as God-mother) your honor Name;
That through the world might shine, your Lucid Fame,
You for your Birth, to noble Parents owe;
But wit, and Virtue, you the Light, did show.
33. The Knights Ring. To Sir Henry Goodyear.
LEt Honor be the Gold, Virtue the Stone;
Until that Ring, your Finger leaves alone.
34. To Mr. J. H.
YOur Verses deserve well, yet want Applause:
Some Writers are much praised, for little cause.
35. To D. B.
IF he who keeps things close lives well, then you:
You hide your Faculties, they greater show.
36. To Th. M. the Princes Tutor.
TO a Decorum, you the Prince do bring,
Will make him of himself; as Britains King,
Rule of himself, all other will outvie;
This one, excels the Fourfold Soveraigntie.
This one laid in the Balance, will weigh down
Babylon, Persia, Grecia, Romes proud Crown.
37. To the same.
NOw Age makes our Prince docil, his green youth
Imbibes grave Precepts from your learned mouth:
O Teach him so! that future times may say,
Our King is great, good, learned; which bears sway?
38. To Mr. Walter Gwyn.
YOu make the Princes happiness complete,
By Prophesies In an Anagram, that Mr. Gwyn made in Scotland, before the Union
of it, with England.
, flourish in Arthur's Seat.
Nature has given Parts; let Fortune be
As much profuse, in her Indulgencie.
And as the Prince grows bigger, I wish you,
May swell in Honor, and still greater grow.
39. Francis Drake. 1581.
DRake has embraced the Word; and did espy,
Both Polar Tenter-hooks, which hold the sky.
If men be silent, Stars will blaze thy Fame:
And So^ will Trumpet, his Dear Comrades Name.
Drake did but bait at Calpe; and may cry,
Great was Alcides; true, but Greater I.
40. Britains Strength. To the Prince.
HAvens, are England's Gates; the Navy, Walls;
Sea, Tents; works, Bodies; and Hearts, Admirals.
41. The Terrestrial Globe.
WAter, and Earth, make but one Globe; it is strange;
For Earth moves not; the waters, always range.
42. The mad way to Health.
THe more Healths in your Belly swim; the less
Shall your drowned Body, dwell with healthfulness:
I envy not your thousand Healths; to me,
A single Health, is a sufficiency.
It is the only Health, no Healths to drink:
In drinking Healths, there is no Health; I think.
43. The Divine.
YOur knowledge, is a Cipher, without you,
To light your Brothers Candle, it allow.
The Politician.
MY Brother shall be hanged first, before I,
Reveal one tittle, of my Mystery.
44. All things desire that which seems Good.
Does Optimus from Opto steal its Name?
The Best, to Wish; in Latin never the same.
Why may not this be so, since none can rest
From Wishing; (except Fools) what they think Best?
45. A Black Swan.
A Maid of Burgundy, lean as a Rake
Made by Green Sickness; was advised to take
Sedum minus 2 M. which some vow,
As rare an Herb, as can in Gardens grow.
The Pious Maid, her Doctor did deny:
Chose before sin, Sins wages; and would Die.
46. Democritus, and Heraclitus.
DEmocritus, laughed at what ever befell:
Plague, Famine, Murders; still the World went well.
At Feasts, at Weddings, brewing brinish Tears;
Sad Heraclitus, with sore eyes appears.
Shall we weep for Heraclitus? or thus,
Shall we laugh at merry Democritus?
47. Upon Langa.
LAnga a Papist, wedded to a Man,
That did Profess himself a Lutheran.
To prevent Future strife, Husband! said she,
I Will make (for once) this fair offer, to Thee:
Grant me but Free Will; and then there is an end:
About the other Points, I shall not contend.
48. King Arthurs Round Table.
Why did Heroic Arthur, so much care
For a Round Table; and rejected square?
Not without Reason; for Gods work is Round:
But humane heads, the Quadrature have found.
49. To Theophila. B. C.
HE must be zealous; in Brains no whit dull;
Who can ye Love; or praise unto the full.
50. Upon Hernicus.
HIs Soul to Heaven, Body, to the Grave,
Commended Hernicus; about to leave
This sinful world: but hearing that his Wife,
Would quickly period her Widows Life;
In very anger, he recal'd his Breath:
But before that, he was resolved for Death.
51. Of Love, and Faith.
LOve, and Faith, are divorced; we know it thus;
Faith is suspected; Love, suspicious.
52. The Lover.
UNcertain Hope, short Pleasures, constant Fears,
Joy-grief, sweet Pains, fall to poor Lovers shares.
53. The Golden Age.
WHen to fill Bags with Gold, men did not rage;
Why did they call such Times, the Golden Age?
54. Upon Alana.
NAture ordained you, to Lie under; yet,
At Table uppermost, be sure, you will sit.
Thus Man, and Wife, find out Pacifique ways;
He rules the Roast, by Night; She rules the Days.
55. The German Death. To Polynicus.
NOt to be, Death; grave Seneca did think:
But Germany supposes, Not to drink.
56. Upon Philodemus.
OF scarce Commodities you hate the Price;
But to take common (if cheap) are not Nice.
I Will tell you what, (because a friend of Mine)
A cheap costs more, then a dear Concubine.
57. Upon Long-tongue.
BAttus talks like a fool; and then of course
Comes out; Pray pardon Sir, my long Discourse.
No want of Pardon, should to you belong;
If you could learn the Art to hold your Tongue.
58. The Gordian Knot.
WAS the strained Gordian Knot, rather untied
By the Kings Wit; or did his Sword divide?
Without wit you may untye this Knot: but,
Were Alexander here; He could not Cut.
59. Love.
WAr, Peace; Peace, War; such faults are found in Love:
For Love, from strife; does seldom far remove.
60. The Laws. The loss of Quiet. To the Lawyers.
STrife, breeds Laws; Laws, Strife; without strife, no Man
Uses to live; without the Laws none can.
61. The Covetous, and the Prodigal.
THe Prodigal affects high, polisht strains;
Nothing but Rhetoric, coms near his Brains.
The Covetous, in Logic, takes delight:
And scrapes up Syllogisms, day, and night.
For Avarice, Logicks close fist, we call
Suadas broad Palm, denotes the Prodigal.
62. (...). Labor, or Trouble.
PAin, was scarce Labor; to most Active Rome:
To Idle Greece, Labor was Troublesome.
63. A Good man, Valiant, Wise.
GOod men, have seldom wealth; or stout men, wit:
And to Believe a Wise Man, few think fit.
64. The Order, of the Golden-Fleece.
FRom Philip Duke of Burgundy, says Fame;
The Order of the Golden-Fleece, first came:
His Heir, now wears, Rich Peru's Regencie:
This was no Order, but a Prophecy.
65. Tho. Earl of Dorchester's Motto.
Nec Temere, nec Timide.
Not Rashly, not Cowardly.
WIsely Despair of all things; Boldly Hope:
Beware of all things; yet scorn fear to cope.
66. Sir Tho. Nevil's Motto.
Ne vile velis.
Scorn Baseness.
LEt not vain, or Vile things thy Honor stain:
Vile things are worth but little; Nothing vain.
67. To Sir Phil. Sidney, concerning his Arcadia.
YOu did at Death, (witness your wife) command,
That your Arcadia, through some bloody hand,
Should give a Treat, to the Impartial flame:
And like a Phoenix Nest, perfume thy Name.
But if the Crime be fatal, that hot Fires,
Were by it kindled, in Lovers desires;
Those queint Lines, by more Justice had been sent
A present, to the watery Element.
But let your Book be sentenced; every vote,
Proclaims your wit, shall reach times highest Note.
68. To the most learned Gentlewoman, Mris. Jane Owen.
I Never heard of, nor did ever see,
Those Sisters, a Fifth Father, gave to Thee.
Therefore how many, and how Qualified;
By unacquaintance, could not be descried.
Yet what they are, (Dear Jane!) I full well know;
If It be their happiness, to be like you.
69. To his Friend.
THough I hate none, I Will not be twice a Friend:
My Friendship once begun, shall never have End.
70. The Usurers Grammar.
TAke Bird, Beast, Fish, or any creeping thing;
This, that, all these, acknowledge Love their King.
Yet Mr. Gold, Dame Plate, a thing called Cash;
Compared with Love; proves that proud Victor, Trash.
71. To one, like neither of his Parents.
WHy do you neither Parent represent;
Since Both at your conception, gave consent?
Not Fathers, Mothers Features, can you show:
For Both, strove jointly, when they begot you.
72. To two concealing their Names, at their Return from Venice.
YOu went to Venice, to seek fourfold Gains,
To fill your purses; and reward your pains.
Since ye got good; your friends were well content,
That ye returned; though to their detriment.
73. Adultery, and Fornication.
THe idle Fornicator, Pray, how far,
Differs he from the loose Adulterer?
I shall resolve this Question, if I can:
As much as Comic, and Tragoedian.
74. Concerning Hercules. To C. D.
NO Monster could Alcides hurt; yet Love,
Trampled upon him; and sat Queen above.
A Lion could not; a Lass made him yield:
Not Beasts with Four, but Two Legs, won the field.
75. A friendly Salute.
I Desire Phyllis, three kisses to have;
At least as many as your Lips, I crave.
She lends Me one; is paid; yet denies Two:
Take thine, or give me mine; why this ado?
76. A Problem to the Naturalist concerning a Kiss.
EIther a Kiss, to taste, belonging is;
Or why most proper, by the Mouth, to Kiss?
77. To Labiemus.
THis is Promotion; Heaven, waits on Me;
Quoth Labiemus, at the Gallow-Tree.
78. Upon Alexander.
TO Philip's Son, a world, gave not content:
Though he Ruled North, South, West, the Orient.
Though we the world, vastly dilated find;
It was too narrow, to contain his Mind.
To Philip's Son, the world proved much too vast;
For his long Arms to clasp it in the wast.
Though he was Great, by Actions; Great, by Birth:
Yet this Great Man, was Lesser then the Earth.
79. To Firmicus, against Aulus.
YOu Believe none; yet Firmicus, I see
No Man such Skeptic, but will Believe, thee.
What others tell, you Aulus, suck all in:
But for your News, no Man would give a Pin.
80. Upon a certain Versifier.
YOu drink, as if, none could a Poet be;
Without from Ale, they learn the Mystery.
You swill, as if, the Muses lend an Hand
To none; but those, whom Beer forbids, to stand.
When drunk, you Rhythm, without all wit, or Fear:
You may love drink; your self, an Hogs-head are.
81. Upon certain Lying Letters.
I Frequenly receive Lines you endite:
But seldom, never, do you Gospel write.
82. Physician, heal your self. To Gilbert.
I Bid you, mind your self; yet might Neglect:
You for your self, have singular Respect.
83. Upon a certain Usurer.
IN a good Mood, you lent an Hundred Pound,
To Flava; now ask Use; but on what Ground?
If you get Principal, it is an Abuse,
To require more; her Body, paid you Use.
Quod non habet in Aere, luat in Corpore.
84. Upon an Hypocrite.
QUite through your life, you dissemble; or feign:
Though Fiction is a Labor; the other, Pain.
85. Erasmus his Encomium Moriae.
ERasmus was the First, writ Folly's Praise:
Folly requited, and his Fame did raise.
86. The Anagrammatist.
WHat a stir here is with Vowels? here, and there,
The Letters fly; to light, I know not where.
So by Augustus Favor; to their Coats,
Thyrsis drove Sheep; and Corydon, the Goats.
87. To a certain silly Doctor.
BEardless of late, and very weak, in Parts;
You seemed a Master, of the Seven Arts.
But now you are a Doctor; no Beard want:
But yet hang Him, that is more Ignorant.
88. Love is Naked.
NAture clothes Fields, with Grass; and Beasts, with Hair:
Birds have their Plumes; Sheep, warm in Fleeces are.
What ever Animal, is Born; or Bred;
By Nature; or by Art, is covered:
But why should Love, to Nakedness, be sold
Alone? because it Naked, feels least cold.
89. Concerning the Exchequer. To Sir Will. Pits.
MOney collected, runs into the chinks,
Of the Exchequer; so Sea, Rivers drinks.
Money dispersed, flies from't as fast; as though,
A thousand Rivers, from the Sea should flow.
And yet the Sea, is not full satisfied:
Nor lavish streams of Crystal Rivers dried.
90. Upon one Perfidious.
I Was too creculous; that made me Heir,
To Unbelief: False Hopes, taught me Despair.
91. The sin of the Silver Age.
ALL Saturn's gilded Reign, Whores did defy:
Till Jove was King; the world, wooed Purity.
92. A Baud.
YOur Body is all sold; and you much scoul,
Because you want a Chapman, for your Soul.
Who buys a Soul! but none is so unwise,
(Except Don Beelzebub) to give your Price.
93. Upon Self-Love.
He Is the third Person; Second, Thou; first, I:
No Third, but loves the First's, Supremacy.
94. Wisdom.
Who Is Rich? a Wise Man; who is Poor? Unwise:
Therefore if I have wit; my Bags will rise.
Who Is Wise? a Rich man; who is a Fool? one Poor:
Either I must be Rich, or Fool, therefore.
95. The Etymology of Venus.
VEnus, A Veniendo, De Not. Deorum. Lib. 2.
Tully says;
Because to all she comes, without delays.
But in another sense, her Name I hold;
'Cause she comes often to Markets; to be sold.
96. To a certain Pox-catcher.
IF Gold were as much Drunk, as Coveted;
Thy Guts would make a Royal Mine; indeed!
97. To Polla.
YOu deny Kisses unto None; none Kiss:
But to their Mouths, your Cheek, reverted is.
The Name of New, and Old, is not the same:
Your newfound Kissing, should have a new Name.
98. A Friend. A Wife.
SOuls are most Dear; hence Friends, love not to part:
But how comes thy Wife, so? she is thy deer Heart.
99. Anger.
BEcause it Virtue spurns, I conjecture;
The Stagyrite miscalled it, Virtues Spur.
100. The Roman Flora.
TAxes on the whole World, were by Rome laid;
Yet this Great City to the Tribute paid.
For what, for Hackney-hire, was given you;
Was but as Tribute, to your Beauty due.
101. The Etymology of Anger.
ONe Angry, is perplexed; so says the Name:
Anger, and An-gor, are almost the same.
102. Of Himself.
Whilst light things, I touch soberly; I may
Be rightly said; to study; as I Play:
Whilst I write sober things, with a Light Pen;
My Play, may be to Study compared, then.
103. Women's Titles of Honor.
LEt an Earl take to wife, a Country Girl;
She is a Countess; because He, an Earl.
But let a Countess marry meanly; She,
Adds not one Atom, of Gentilitie.
So Phoebus gilds, the Lady of the night;
But scorns to vapor, in a Borrowed Light.
104. Upon Zoilus.
HE that will others praise, and bears an heart,
Brim-full with Love; shall himself, help to part
The Stakes, with Men beloved; and praised: commend;
Thou can not want Requital; in the end.
105. The middle Age is unknown.
BEfore the last Line of our Life shall trace
The Grave; no Line, designs the Middle space,
What to be called the Middle Age, is grown,
Through Custom; before Death, cannot be known.
106. To a Dyer waxing Gray.
YOur Beard was Black; but now it is turned to Gray:
Not Art, but Nature, found out this fine way.
107. To the Courtier.
PRoud Rome, Superbus, to disgrace did bring;
What wonder? Pride, did never love a King.
Kings have not many friends; a Reason why?
Because the Scepter, detests Parity.
108. Bed.
WHat English call a Bed, the Welsh call Grave:
A Bed, and Tomb, Death, Sleep; Resemblance have.
109. Rider's Bibliotheca.
COnceited Rider, merited great Blame;
When he his Book, a Library did Name.
One Book, cannot make a Library; Grave on
His heap of words, the Title, Lexicon.
110. Money.
Does Latin, from (...), Greek;
To derive Nummus, and Numisma, seek?
Nummus denotes Money told out; Upon
This Fancy, Number, will give Etymon.
But I can derive't better; Money is,
In all Men's Thoughts; the chief of Goddesses:
This once premised, it falls into our Road;
Nummus a Numine; As Gold, from God.
111. Upon Covetous I. S.
YOur Gates are Iron; you in Iron, hoard
Your Gold; your House is Iron; Iron, its Lord.
112. Of Roman Flora. To the Grammarians.
TO Flora, Rome, did Flowers sacrifice;
And her the goddess of Flowers, devise.
But she, of a good Name, was Prodigal;
And therefore never brought forth fruit, at all:
But being wanton, in her youthful Flower;
Flower, and Fruit, that Canker did devour.
113. Upon John Protus.
AS tepid Autumn, by severer Blasts;
Trees verdent Beauty, on the low ground, casts:
So Calvus had a trick, to shake his Crown;
Till he shak'd fair; for every hair, fell down.
114. Upon Theodorus.
WHen as King David was, Threescore, and Ten;
A florid Virgin warmed his cold sides, then.
You to do like him, who a Prophet was;
Have clapped at your old back, a plump young Lass.
115. To a certain Gentlewoman.
WEre Fortune to you so Propitious, as
Nature Profuse, in your endowments was:
Had your Commands, Troy fastened to the Stake;
It would have kissed the flames; 'cause for your sake.
116. The great Pestilence. 1603.
SO many Souls, this Sickness, sent to Styx;
There is scarce room, for a new plague to fix.
117. Upon a perjured person, convicted, by his own Handwriting.
IN vain by Oath, did you confirm a Lie;
Since your Hand detects, which you cannot deny,
That Deeds, might exceed Words; God only gave
Your Bodies Form, to challenge one mouth leave.
Since God gave but one Tongue; and yet, Hands Two:
What makes Hand, single; your Tongue double so?
118. Upon Cottula, the Grammaticastre.
THe Greek word Labyrinth, you well expound;
By telling us, Labour-in-it is found.
119. The Anagram of Roma. To the Carthaginians.
HAnnibal took not Luck, when 'twas his course:
Not well considering, the Roman Force.
The way to Conquer, was known to this Man;
But (though he were a subtle African)
He was found Ignorant, to use his Lot.
So, many strike not whilst the Iron's hot.
Roma, by Mora; Little Delay, More
Then fit; made Rome as Great, as once before.
120. To a certain Great Clerk.
Where is Concoction, in a sick man's Feast?
You know much, I confess; Nothing, digest.
121. Upon one Davis.
TO boast your self of Cockney, you think good;
Lest some should say, you were of British Blood.
You refuse that, (which would a Wise Man grace)
To procure descent, from an obscure Race.
You, and your Country, Ill; yet well, Agree:
You are ashamed of that; and that, of Thee.
122. Upon Aulus.
FOols, count thee wise; Wise Men, A Fool in the Height:
What art I prithee, in thine own Conceit?
123. Upon Doctor Linus.
YOu wholly Act Formalities; but why,
Do you slight Learning? Form gives Entity.
If any dare, this Axiom's Truth invade;
I prove it thus; Form, Linus, Doctor made.
124. Upon Thais.
Would Handsomeness were less; or Goodness more:
Nothing is worser, then a Beauteous Whore.
125. Upon a great Scribler, ashamed to affix his Name.
WHen cruel Hunger, did gag up thy Jaws;
And untamed thirst, to cry Fire, gave the cause;
You like a Mad man, Idle Pamphlets made:
What Is your excuse? Ah! Hunger, did persuade.
Cursed Poverty, makes you like Tereus Sup;
You beget Children; and then, eat them up.
126. Upon Mr. No-Hair.
ON this side, that side, before, and behind;
I search your Head: yet not one Hair can find.
Since Every Hair, has its Plantation fled;
What can you next lose Calvus? what? My Head.
127. To Claudius, and Linus.
NOthing wants to make Claudius good; but Will:
Nothing but Power; to make Linus, Ill.
128. To George.
IF you will be in my Book, which you see,
Guilty enough of lazy Poetry;
If the Praise of your Family, I take
For Theme; of you I Will seldom mention make:
Or if to give ye thanks, my verse should strive;
To you (as you deserve) I cannot Give.
My Love, and liking do to you belong;
'Cause you are not accused in any Song.
Or noble George! shall I upon you call?
Then you must sit, inferior to all.
And to spin out longer Discourse, with you;
My Muse is willing: but she knows not how.
129. Every Lover, is a Soldier.
Wenches to Soldiers, Aulus did compare:
Men please Mars armed; Venus, when naked are.
130. The Military Oath.
THe Latins call that Oath, a Sacrament;
Which to New Leaders, Times of war present.
If that a Sacrament, be but just so;
The Pope is right: for there are more then Two.
131. Upon Covetous and Cripled Alanus.
ARe Gifts to maimed Alanus, gratis sent?
He then, Briareus can represent.
But if you think, a Recompense to see;
His hundred Hands, prove Lame; immediately.
132. The Condition of Kings.
ONe loves not to tell Truth; Another fears:
This greatest Misery, falls to Kings shares.
133. Vis. Jus. The Anagram of Jus, the Law, is Vis, Force.
THe Law disgusteth Force; Force, Law; both be
In Name, good Friends; but Natures disagree.
134. Upon Marcus.
With Wifes, with Widows, Chamber-maids, your Life
Is lewdly spent; but a Fig for your Wife.
Let who will Ask, your Back, scorns to say no:
Any thing, but what is Lawful; you will do.
135. Desperate Debt.
MEn are bound to their wifes; but who dares say,
He has enough, the Total sum to pay?
For though some to have paid, may make pretense;
Yet they still owe, a due Benevolence.
136. Upon Culianus.
A Wise Man is a Cicero de Diu. lib. 2.
Miracle; but now,
They are all ceased; our Times no wise Man know.
But Culian you have wit; I cannot devise,
If Miracles be ceased; you should be Wise.
137. Upon Beautiful Marc.
VEnus did Fire, your Tenement of Lust:
In all Spectators eyes, you are Venust,
138. Upon Adrian the Fifth.
YOur silly Epigrams; your dull Verse, fears
It should endure the sting, of acute Jeers.
Though they are not Facetious; Readers smile,
And laugh to see no Wit come, all the while.
139. I, Thou, He.
SElf-Love's the Quarry, at which all Birds fly
From hence the first of Persons, must be, I.
You can both flatter, and Back-bite; thus see,
He stands next, Thou; and Thou, the nearest me.
140. Ask, and you shall Receive.
WE read in Scripture; Ask, you shall Receive:
But it is performed only to those, who Give.
Give your Acquaintance, first; then They Will give you:
No Chinke, no Drink; Nothing is Gratis now.
Give, and it shall be Given you.
141. Husband, and Wife; Parents, Children.
HUsband, and Wife, are both one Flesh; although,
Before the sacred Union, They were Two.
Father, and Son, were both one Body; yet,
They cannot their Horses, in one Stable set.
142. Upon Marc the Lawyer.
YOu plead your own, in your poor Clients Cause:
He Bags no Gold; for all is seized by your Claws.
To you the Law is certain; Not to him:
He is as sure to Sink; as you to Swim.
143. To his Father.
BY how much Man, surpasses Woman; I,
By being Male, excel the Female Fry.
144. The Italian.
THe Latin like a Lord, commands his Wife;
And forces her, to lead a Prisoners Life.
This Man, or none; acts Gods curse over again:
O Woman! I will multiply thy Pain.
145. What kind of Wife.
LEt Virtue, Beauty, be in Her conjoined;
Let her be courted; yet bear a chaste Mind.
Rivals I like in Love: For I, alone;
Should be a Fool, to Fancy any One.
146. To one complaining, that he could Beget no Children, like Himself.
FIrst get a Wife, in Visage, much like Thee:
Then draw thy Picture, on Posterity.
147. To Husbands concerning Conjugal Affection.
WHen happy Adam, took Eve for his Bride;
He loved her more, then the whole world Beside.
He was the first, of Husbands; and the best:
To serve Eve, in his room; now, Love is pressed.
148. The Epitaph of Sir Francis Drake.
SUppose Queen Mary's Reign, once more return;
You may rest certain; Malice, cannot you Burn.
You did complot, your Corpse from Fire to save;
When you elected such a watery Grave.
149. An Epitaph, upon a Youth, dying before Father's or Grandfather.
DEath's no Logician; not Methodical:
To make young Sons, before old Parents, fall.
150. The Epitaph of Maurus.
THy Soul, does want a Body; Body, Soul:
You nothing have, but Name: you, want the whole.
151. The Epitaph of Pyramus, and Thisbe.
GRief did contrive your Death, Death like a Friend,
Revenged the wrong; and brought Grief to its end.
152. Sir Tho. More at his Execution.
What though Head was, from Body severed?
More would not let Body be cut from Head.
153. Three Languages were Crucified.
THe Grecian Tongue, Porter of Wit, and Art:
The Regal Roman: That, God did impart.
154. Don Antonio, King of Portugal.
A Late Divorce, the Kingdom from you rent;
Though to the Bill, you never gave consent.
You may well say (now from the Throne you're hurled),
With Christ; My Kingdom, is not of this World.
155. Alexander, and Aristotle.
THe greatest King; the man, to wonder, wise;
Under their Notions, these two Names comprise.
Great was Macedo; but the Stagyrite,
As much outshin'd; as bright Day, Cypress Night.
The Sages Learning did direct the King:
But the Kings Greatness, could no honor bring.
156. Plato.
THose Bees, which chose thy sweet Mouth for their Hive;
To gather Honey from thy Works, survive.
157. Virgil's Georgicks.
THose Verses, which you sent, to hold the Plough;
The Readers fallow Wits, both Till, and Sow.
158. The Poet Persius.
I Read your Satyrs; but cannot understand:
An Oedipus fetch, Readers! out of hand.
159. Tacitus.
Virtue, made you speak True; Nature, made Wise;
Shortness, Obscure; and Gravity, Concise.
160. To Martial.
YOu loved to speak of Things; but persons spare:
Your Jests want Spleen; and sweet as Honey are.
161. To Petrarch.
WHilst Laura may be viewed; thy burnisht strains;
Start boundless disputes, in the Gazors Brains;
Whether fair Laura, is more due to Thee;
Or the Prostration, of the Laurel-Tree.
162. Pliny Translated into English by Doctor Holland.
PLiny is Long, 'cause many things he writes;
Pliny is short, much Matter, He endites.
Holland is Longer; Shorter; because He,
Has Writ more full; has shunned Obscurity.
163. Concerning Cicero. To Catullus.
NOne could of falsehood, Catullus convict;
Nor that, which he of Tully, did Predict.
164. To the Historians of our Age.
BEcause of old, Historians would not Lie;
They were rewarded with an Eulogie.
But now He all Competitors outvies;
Whose Pen is fertile, with the Rampant Lies.
What one Protests, others defy; how can
Posterity confide, in this; that Man?
No Sciolist to Blot his Species spares:
Scarce any Modern Author, Truth reveres.
165. The King. His Subjects.
A Prince, Imprudent; Subjects will confound;
As the Feet stumble, when the Brains are drowned.
166. The Parliament.
THe King, is King, alone; unto him Sole,
Why not Affairs, committed in the Whole?
Because of Justice, this makes him the Fount;
That though he Rules; He must give an Account.
167. To the Historian.
YOu noting Story, without harm, commence.
Expert in Things; which sad experience,
The Learned taught. What would be long to Try;
Is quickly known from Classick History.
168. Concerning Diet. To J. H.
IF you would shun old Age; be sure to Use,
Moderate Physic: or not to abuse
Your self, with Feastings. If you should like Meat,
Take Physic; it is the way, not long to eat:
But if; as upon Physic, you Meals make;
Thin Diet's Healthful: and there is no Mistake.
169. The Peers of France.
NOt at all Equals! yet sometimes, we see
Unequal Concord; equals disagree.
170. Publius Magnus. Cato Major. Fabius Maximus.
THe greatest was less, then the Great; yet still,
Made the Greater, under wing keep his Bill.
Now you have read the Riddle, Answer Me;
Which was the very Greatest, of the Three?
171. To T. S.
MY Wit, and judgment, serve not to rehearse,
Thy rare Endowments, in a polisht verse.
Your Judgment, Wit; over all Arts prevail:
Unless both Wit, and Judgment, in Me fail.
But though my Wit, and Judgment, little be:
Yet I have Judged the Truth; concerning Thee.
172. Of Himself.
NO wonder that my Epigrams, are Lead:
I never bite my Nails, nor scratch my Head.
173. The five Senses.
DO the five servant-Senses, more assist
Us, in our Wills, and Pleasure; or resist?
174. Seeing.
TO pleasing Objects, Sight, conveys the Mind;
And as her Vassal, does it strongly bind.
175. Hearing.
SWeet Sounds, make in our Ears, but little stay;
They come like Air; like Air, they fly away.
176. Smelling.
THe Nose is placed betwixt the Mouth and Eyes:
In Bodies; Spirits; does Sent exercise.
177. Tasting.
THat you may disgust nothing, you should Eat:
Let Hunger, give the Hogoo, to your Meat.
178. Feeling.
A Touch may Tickle; or give bare Delight:
The first, is young; the last, is old Men's Right.
179. The Objects of the Senses.
THe things I see, Hear, Smell, Taste, Touch; pretense,
Make to affect; but do infect, my Sense.
180. Touch and Taste.
SOme are devoid of Smell; some Deaf, we find:
And it is no Rarity, to see men Blind.
But with want of Taste, Touch; the Fates never strike:
By Taste I live; by Touch, beget my Like.
181. An Epigram. A Satyr.
AN Epigram may aptly styled be,
The long-ledg'd Satyrs, brief Epitomie.
A Satyr bears equal Respect; and is
An Epigram, with a Periphrasis.
Satyrs, without their Stings; are hissed by all:
So Epigrams, if not Satirical.
182. Upon one Dumb.
HE moves his Lips, yet speak I cannot him hear:
Fetch Apollonius, for Interpreter.
183. The Blind, and Deaf.
THe one, his Sight; the other, Hearing prise:
One sees with Ears; the other hears with Eyes.
184. Dentes, the Teeth; Lingua, the Tongue.
DEns, quasi Edens; 'cause it helps to Eat:
Lingua, quod Lingit; 'cause it licks the Meat.
Thus to derive these words, Grammarians please;
From special duties; distinct Offices.
185. The Phoenix, and the Viper.
THe Melancholy Phoenix when she dies;
Brings forth a Daughter in her Obsequies.
The fatal Viper, when she brings forth young,
Dies gnawn, run through; with poisonous Teeth, and Tongue.
186. The Silkworm.
I Perish by my Art; dig mine own Grave:
I spin my Thread of Life; my Death, I weave.
187. The Right Hand.
IF Give, Receive, I still use my Right Hand;
My Right Hand Acts; my Left, shall not understand.
188. The Left Hand.
THe Left Hand had its Name; because one Day,
All Right Hands wrought, whilst Left, left Work, for Play.
189. Sunday.
IN the first day, there was no Sun at all:
Then what makes people Sunday, it to call?
190. Terra di Lavoro.
OF old, Campania, was a pleasant Land:
Why now, does Labor old demerits brand?
191. Clothes.
THe Modes now in Request, were once thrown by:
Old Fashions revive, for their Novelty.
192. Wine.
OVer a Glass of Wine, who can be Sad?
It Is that unchains my Soul; makes my Heart glad.
193. A Sheep.
FLesh, Skin, Lambs, Dung, Dice, Lute-strings, Milk, and Wool:
The harmless Sheep, affords us to the full.
194. The Dunging of Arable Land.
DUng is not useless, though base Excrement:
For it helps forward, my best nutriment.
195. Harmony.
DIscords make sweetest Music: By this Fate,
Husband, and Wife, do Children Procreate.
196. A Parret.
IF to invert the Name, you will leave give me;
Then Parret turned a Prater you shall see.
197. Ink, and Paper.
INk's black Patch, to affect the Readers sight;
Uses to Borrow, from the Paper, white.
198. A Comedy.
WHat we Act secretly, comes to the Stage:
Fiction, hits True, the Vices of our Age.
199. A man in a Cloak.
THough I trample the Earth; my vaulting Cloak,
Scorns Goodwife Tellus, durty cheeks to stroke.
A Scholar in a Gown.
THough my Gown kiss the ground, Thoughts come not near.
They make a Footstool of old Saturn's Sphere.
200. A Satyr.
VIce begot Satyrs; Vice begot the Law:
The end of both, is to keep Men in awe.
201. An Eunuch.
THough I want what some have; yet brag I can*
There Is a false-witness left, to prove Me, Man.
202. The Hourglass.
THe cheating Hourglass, at Time right may guess;
Because its Hole is bigger, and Sand, less.
203. The Merchant.
I Cannot call him Rich, or Poor; whose Estate,
Upon deluding Waters, fluctuate.
204. Lasciviousness.
THat in the Night, deformed seem Fair; you must
Not blame the Dark; but fault your stone-blind Lust.
205. Donna.
NOne keep their Wifes more under; yet none less
Forget, then He; to call them Mistresses.
206. A Soldier.
THough armed Mars, is cruel without bounds;
Yet naked Venus, gives Thee deeper wounds.
207. What an Army usually is.
A Multitude, disloyal, rude, Hair-brained;
And perhaps Hands, with guiltless Bloodshed stained.
208. The Tears of Lovers.
AS from the wood, Sap is expelled by fire:
So Tears, are from the Head, by hot Desire.
209. The Stars.
LOve you Imparity? Believe me; God,
When He created Stars; created Odd.
210. Venice.
AS Waters make the Sea; as Stars, the Sky:
So Riches, the Venetian Seignory.
211. The Lute.
CAn there be many strings; and yet no Jars?
And are not men ashamed of dismal wars?
212. The Fowler.
WHat must the Fire, be on your errand sent?
Your will's observed, by Every Element.
213. The Echo.
ASk Art to paint a voice; you it confound:
The Echo can Limn voice; on hollow ground.
214. A Looking-Glass.
APelles could not depaint Motion; you
Excel his colors: To give you, your Due.
215. The Echo and the Looking-glass.
NO Sign of Life, but Sound; to Echo grant:
Mirrors would Live; did they not voices want.
216. Music.
THe Muses, Name to Music, do impart;
But scorn to Grace so much another Art.
217. Albion. To the King.
THe Saxons had their Heptarchie. A while,
Nine large Partitions did dissect this Isle.
But Albion, Olbion, you have made to be;
Happy in her Dear Sisters, Unity.
OWEN'S EPIGRAMS: THE THIRD BOOK.
1. To the Lady Mary Nevill.
THough I delight to praise you; greatest spite,
Cannot convict Me, for a Parasite.
Madam, all sorts commend; yet you express,
By humble Carriage; that none wish it less.
Applause you seek not, though desert soars high:
Of all your Praise, this is the Summary.
2. To the same Lady.
YOu were a Burden, to your Mothers womb:
Now her great Weight of Glory, are become.
3. To the Reader.
I Dread the Candid, may dislike my Book.
I fear that Fools, may giv't a scornful Look.
4. The Offspring of the Virgin-Queen Elizabeth. 1602.
ENgland, and Scotland's, blessed Unity;
The Issue was, of your Virginity.
She is more glorious, who Unites two States,
Then She, who like the Vulgar Generates.
So you, great Queen! A Virgin pleased to die:
And happy Mother, to Posterity.
5. To the Hollander, 1602.
THat Minerva did help you; must be said,
Whilst England's Pallas, did your Hogans aid.
Thus were you happy; but now Fate throws down*
Your haughty Actings, with a churlish Frown.
Of late Death, Death; Ulysses did become:
And stole your Pallas, and Palladium.
6. To King James.
NOw are the Golden Days; long since foretold:
When one Kings head, Brute's double Crown, should hold.
Our Islands; thought the By-blow, of the World:
By Peace, have now, their golden Tresses, Curled.
So that who hate stern Mars; must Echo this;
That the cold Owen Tewder, the Grandfather of Henry the 7* came out of North
Wales: King James, out of Scotland; the North part of Great Britain.
North, is Donour of their Bliss.
7. To the Prince.
O You Great Britain's Hope! Lord of a Part,
Both of a King, and Queens, most Royal Heart.
Nobilities Exemplar; although Few,
Can write after so rare a Copy, true.
But though select devoirs, you are above;
Your Subjects crave a pardon, with their Love.
Did great James this, ex Traduce, infuse?
Or Fair Annes Milk? I cannot tell which to choose.
8. Basilicon doron. To the King.
NO need to give the Author, or Book, Praise:
For here is Reciprocation, of the Bayse.
9. To the Lady Mary Nevill.
THe glass, attests you fair; modest, cries Fame:
Your Glass speaks true; and Report does the same:
Though Fame be a swift evil; yet it spares
Your Ladyship: not to vent slanders, dares.
10. Of Caecilia, Daughter to that Lady.
NO Limner can, Qualities shadow forth:
And yet you have, a Picture, of your worth.
11. To the Candid Reader.
WHat I make Good, you Praise; my worst wit, may
Pass for indifferent: Thus you please to say.
12. To the Envious Reader.
IF I make any Bad; none can be Worse:
If tolerable; them, you likewise Curse.
Hercules his two ways.
MOst men can err in four ways; some, in three:
Alcides lost his way in two; we see.
13. Concerning Virtue.
Virtue, slights Praise; yet Praise, resolves to be,
Constant Retainer, to her Family.
Glory, waits upon Merit; as the shade*
Upon that Body; which it, perchance made.
Virtue is real; Honor is not; thus,
Substance are we: not the shade, waits on Us.
14. Life's Dial.
MY Days verge upon West; lost are the Best:
Nor shall I see again, the vanished East.
I had my Birth last night; Live, just this Day:
Find me to Morrow, in the Grave; you may.
15. Of God.
THy Omnipresence, Euclid's Rules confutes:
Plato's Scholar; knew not, thy Attributes.
16. The Atheist.
THat there is no God; the Psalmists Fool avers:
But the most simple, to Believe it fears.
If no, Fool denies God; what creature's He,
Called Atheist? One that wish, no God should be.
17. Charity.
NO Wife is Faithful, but Love makes her so:
Where Faith resideth; Charity dwells too.
18. Dives, and Lazarus.
DIves is put in the Gospel, without Name:
But Poor, were then called Lazers; still, the same.
19. Increase, and multiply.
POor Man created was at first, alone:
But shortly after, Woman added one.
When Adam married Eve; then, as before;
The World was Ruled by One; and not one more.
After Creation, Man did multiply:
God conjoined Eve: so came posterity.
20. Union.
FRom Hell sprung Discord; Union, is Divine:
God is but One. Hells Quotient, none assign.
21. The three Tempters.
THe World, and Flesh, will flatter; Devil, Lie:
They Oratory use; He Sophistry.
22. The Spirit and the Flesh.
WHat the Spirit command, the Flesh control:
Thus Grace, and Sin, divide my wretched Soul.
Would Flesh, and Spirit, but conclude a Peace;
Revenge, Jars, Wars; quite through the world should cease.
23. A man was a God to another: Is now a Wolf.
MAn, like a God his Brother did defend:
Man, like a Wolf, his Brother now will rend.
Christ, to be God, to Man, came from on high:
But Adam practiced, Wolfish cruelty.
24. Gods Word.
PRaescience belongs to God; to Man, mistakes:
Vain Man talks much, God only one Word makes.
25. The Narrow way.
TO the broad Streets of Heaven, Scripture has
Commanded Us; to choose the narrow Path.
The straight way, leads to Heavens Palaces:
Or Broad way, puts ye, in Hells Little-ease.
26. St. John the Baptist.
AS the Suns approach, is foretold by Light:
John before Christ, saluted mortals Sight.
27. Of Autumn.
AUtumn shakes off the Leaves, and brings Fruit too:
I wish we could, like gelid Autumn do.
28. The Miseries of Life.
ALL wish to Live, though they be sickly, poor;
Small Griefs, will not suffice; they wish for more.
The forlorn Irus, desires not, to Die;
That is; is loath to part with Misery.
29. Of Nature, and Grace.
NAture dispelleth Darkness, like the Moon:
But Grace, is like the Sun; at exact Noon.
30. A Catechism.
TWelve Articles of Faith, you must believe;
That you may not, the Holy Spirit Grieve.
If you desire, effectually to Pray;
Christ's seven Supplications; use, you may.
Duties incumbent on all sorts of Men:
Have their Sum total, in the Number Ten.
31. The Rich Man.
WHy go few Rich to Heaven? why? because,
They grieve for Breaking Sums; but not God's Laws.
32. O Treacherous Hope!
RAther fallacious World; for Hope will stay,
Till extreme Ruin, sign our fatal Day.
33. Upon our Redeemer.
AS one Man's sin, did Death on all entail:
So one Man's Death, our souls from Hell did Bail.
The falsest Calumnies were meekly born:
Adam offended; Christ was made a scorn.
34. The Holy Ghost.
TO white Dove-houses, Pigeons take their flights:
In candid Hearts, God's Spirit, much delights.
35. Valor.
THe Wise Man knows, the Just will render right:
He which joins Courage, is the Man of might.
36. Of the King.
LAws, without King, in a Parallel run,
With duskish light, discarded by the Sun.
King without Laws, is Phoebus in the Night;
What though there be a Sun? we see no Light.
The People chose their King; they both made Laws.
Hence Laws; hence Lords; the Royal Scepter awes.
37. The Welsh.
WAles is not sole Heir, to the British Name:
For England, Scotland; answer to the same.
38. The English-Scot.
THese Nations differ in their Customs; how
Came they espoused to an Union, now?
The Law, Predominant, in every Land;
(The Kingdom's safety) joined them, hand in hand.
39. Roses were united by Henry: Kingdoms by James. To the King.
THe superb Red, and White Rose; might Revie
Fraternal wounds; with Cadmus Progeny.
Like Leda's Twins; they disdained to appear
Consuls of the same unequal Hemisphere.
But as the Argent Day, routs Sable Night;
Then the Earth's shadow captivates the Light:
York should no longer, an Occasion have;
Then till Lancastrian Prowess, could Enslave.
Until the Isle of Man, (whence British be,
Ambitious to derive their Pedigree;)
Until this high-priz'd Isle, (which vaunts a Name,
By Tacitus, put in the Rolls of Fame;)
So happy was, as to bring Thewder forth:
A (...); both by Name, and worth.
This Gift of God, to him was near Allied;
Who in a Gordian Knot, two houses tied.
Whose Red-rose Birth, (Thanks Hymen) did unite
The ^lister'd Discord, of the Red, and White.
But les^ disgust should think Divorce to sue:
Henry, betrothed Roses; Kingdoms, you,
40. John Napiers Revelation.
NInety, and two years hence, the World shall end:
Is it at your disposal, my Good Friend?
But why would you, no shorter Time devise?
What, to be called a Liar? you are Wise.
God, and Man.
GOd could not suffer Death; and Man could not,
Over the Crave, a Victory have got:
But Christ could Die, and Vanquish; because, He,
Had Godhead; joined to Humanity.
42. Death.
DEath, sought by Good; shunned by such as offend:
Ends Evils; or brings those which have no End.
43. God.
GOd is Immense; because nothing can fly,
Commensuration, by Omnisciency.
Numbers Perfection, is by Him, outgone:
The Dual, begins Number; God's but One.
44. A Miracle.
THe Vulgar admire Miracles; to Me,
Nothing is Marveilous; O God! but Thee.
45. Adam's Disobedience.
GAlen, Justinian, Aquinas, and all:
Might have been spared, but that for Adam's Fall.
46. To Adam.
THe Devil, to deceive Thee, lent Eve skill:
She gave Good Morrow; but did mean to kill.
47. To the Divine.
THe Country Horologe, first claps his wings;
Before he News, of grateful Daylight brings:
Thou that would have, thy Preaching take effect;
What thy own Life is, first of all; reflect.
48. The Tempter.
AS nibling Mice, use to deal with old Chests:
The Devil finds, or makes ways; into Breasts.
49. Mortification.
UNless Sin Dies, no hope of Life; then try
In time, to make it facile, for to Die.
50. To Day.
THis instant time, Men yesterday did call,
To Morrow: what strange Name will it befall,
To Morrow? the Name of Yesterday, then
Shall be put on it; by all kind of Men.
Cras is near, yet never comes: I shall say
Upon these Thoughts; To Morrow, is to Day.
51. Against thee only have I sinned
A Subject sins, against God; Law, and King:
None, but a Prince; can such an excuse bring.
52. Prayer.
AS Christ came in, although the doors were shut:
So into Heaven; Fervent Prayers get.
53. Upon Mary Magdalen.
WHat faults her eyes were guilty of, in years
Of wantonness; she blots out, with her tears.
A faculty to weep, resides in eyes:
For by their Treachery; most sins surprise.
54. Concerning Hope and Fear.
RIches, and Fears, are huge Concomitants;
Hope a Companion, unto him that wants:
Yet Hope is thought, a comfortable thing;
But fear darts through the Soul a forked sting.
Hope belongs to the Poor; to wealthy, Fears:
You may take Hope; I fancy, Golden Cares.
55. Methusalem is dead.
NOt to have Lived, but to Live; Life, implies!
If Man lives many years; at last He Dies.
56. Of Laws, and Justice.
MEn the Laws Path, more then Astraeas track:
Yet Justice they find quick; and the Law, slack.
57. Intemperance.
THe Universal wish, is to Live long:
Yet Luxury, may freely, lead us wrong.
We destroy, what we wish for; Life must be,
A debtor to Physicians; not to Thee.
58. To Ponticus.
It Is hard to become Rich; since you are Poor.
If you were Rich, 'twere nothing, to get more.
59. The Pharisees.
THeir Life was foul, Speech fair; our Age likewise;
To cloud Hypocrisy; are grown precise.
But if you credit, what Grammarians tell;
Faith comes from Fio; delights to do well.
60. Liberty.
It Is Happiness, what I wish, to acquire;
Why then do Men, destructive things desire?
Goodness, is the grand Freedom; only they
Live to content, whom Virtue teach the way.
61. What Country Christ was of.
Conceived A Nazaret, Born, Bethlemite:
But to Two Countries; Nature, pretends Right.
62. Christ's Crucifixion.
CHrist was a Life, to such sad Souls, as knew
The Second Death, was wages, to them due;
To sick, a Cure; a Way, to them at Loss;
Death, unto Death; a Torment, to the Cross.
63. Christ's Cross.
THe Cross bare Christ; Christ the Cross up did take:
Thus Mercy moved Him; for distressed Man's sake,
64. Upon Religion.
IN Pious Hearts, a Tree must Grafted be;
Whose Fruit, is Honor; whose Root, Industry.
That Fear made Gods, I readily assent;
For godly Fear, is Graces Instrument.
Although the Root of Piety, speaks Gall;
Yet She is Honey, uppermost of all.
Fear is the Fount; the River which thence springs,
Is Love: whose every Drop, much sweetness brings.
65. Upon the Prodigal, and Covetous.
THe Miser, not one Farthing gives, till Death:
Spend-thrift has nothing to give; more then Breath.
66. Man, and Wife.
LEt Husbands Love their Wifes; Wifes, recompense
Their Husbands Love; with strict Obedience.
As Husband is the Head; let the wife be
Heart, to her Head; in mere humanity.
67. Study.
SOme lose their wits, by Study; but never they
Grow mad; who study Virtue, Night, and Day.
68. Memento Mori. Think on Death.
THe Hour of Death is dubious; and yet
A certain Time, by Destiny is set.
No Man is far remote from West; from East:
Yet when we think on them, it is but in Jest.
69. The Virgin Mary.
GOd's Spouse, her Fathers Mother might be styled
A Daughter, to her own Celestial Child.
She was a Virgin, and yet Married: She,
A Mother was; yet kept Virginity.
That which is Rare, is not always Dear. A Paradox.
VIce is a Disease, Epidemical;
Yet it is held Dear: Its price will never fall.
Though seldom humane Eyes, Virtue behold:
Yet for all that, at easy Rates it is sold.
71. A Beast.
ON Future things, not on those which are past;
Is it the fashion, Hopes Anchor to cast.
Things Vanishing, Hope Dies; or, hopes appear;
But where is the enjoyment? that is not near.
Times Past, the Future; both do Tyrannize:
The Beast takes what is present; He is wise.
72. Reason.
NAture is Mother; Reason, Queen of things:
Nature begets; Reason, to Order brings.
73. Nature.
REason, is Natures Child; and therefore says:
If you will be Happy; follow Natures ways.
74. I must take leave to talk my Mind.
ALas poor Creature! all your Freedom's gone;
For you no more, may rave against the Throne.
But Liberty of Tongue, will never cease;
If you can obtain Leave, to hold your Peace.
75. To Marcus. A Problem.
WHat if you take a Bad, or honest Course?
For Bad, by Law are punished; Good, by Force.
76. Upon Antiquarians, and Novators.
It Is foolish Envy, to pass all things by;
But what are moudly, with Antiquity.
It Is Envious Folly, all things to explode;
But what are adorned, with the newest Mode.
77. What Death is to a Christian.
THrough Death, at Life eternal, we arrive:
It Is not an End, but Beginning to Live.
78. To Christ.
LOrd! thou Hopes Anchor art; which never fails;
A Sea of Love; the Ship, where our Faith sails.
Thou art Salt to the Earth; Sun, to the Sky:
The Ransom, paid for Souls captivity.
Destruction was destroyed; Death by thee slain:
Who thought, Death could have suffered Deadly Pain?
79. Self-Love.
THey who see others Faults; and not their own:
For others, Wise; for themselves, Fools are grown.
80. The Life's of Saints.
NOt to read Life's of Saints, but such to Live;
Is that which in the end will Profit give.
To turn Leaves over, no Advantage brings:
Strive not to Read, but Relish, Holy things.
81. A man's Country.
A Good Man always is at Home; a wise,
Under the fear of Banishment never lies.
A valiant Son of Mars, where ever he be:
Converts that Place, into his own Country.
Where we cannot Thrive; we there, as exiles dwell:
My Country is, where ever I am well.
A Good Man's Country, from him cannot be rent.
The wicked always, are in Banishment.
82. Against the Atheist.
TIme past cannot Avail; Future, cannot Open
To such a Reprobate; the door of Hope.
Thy choice desires, only on that reflect;
Which for this moment; does the Sense affect.
83. Upon Heretics.
FRom Ennius dunghill, Virgil scrapt up Gold:
Heretics Dung; from Truths most precious Mold.
84. The effect of Praise.
GOod Men, are made Better; Bad, worse by Praise:
Crafty, More sly; 'twill the Fools folly, raise.
85. Not too Fast.
A Good Man is not quickly built; take heed,
Though in plain way; you make not too much speed:
Prudent Advice those slight, which are in have:
First thy self Collect; then correct at last.
86. The Envious, and the Fool.
THe one wants Honesty, the other wit:
One cannot see; the other, thinks not fit.
87. (...). Reason.
It Is Reason which God speaks; and which we Pray.
Thus God, and Man; both, Rationally say.
88. Opinion.
NOne will Believe; as Friendship; so Men Try
Their Reputations; by Utility.
89. Art.
GOd did in Natures Bosom, place the Arts:
That Man might have a Touchstone for his Parts.
90. Adam's Apology.
FOr sin's first Author, Men have flings at Me:
Did not Eve pull the Apple, from the Tree?
91. The Serpents Answer.
THis Allegation prove you never can:
To Tempt you, (but your self) there was no Man.
92. Always the same.
GOd always was, is, shall be thought but One:
Why came not Faith down to the world, alone?
One Faith, as well as Day, gives Light a Birth:
There Is but one Sun, in Heaven; God, on Earth.
93. Cordial Prayer.
SInce your Breast, is the Church; let it be pure:
The Holy Ghost, for Minister procure.
And because God, for uprightness will look;
Make a clean Heart, thy devout Prayer Book.
94. The five Wounds.
CHrist's Wounds; we soveragn Emplaisters find*
They heal the Ulcers* of a troubled Mind.
95. Friendship delineated.
WHen Sol puts on his splendid Robes of State;
Our Bodies Shadow turns Associate.
When Solar Beams, yield to a churlish sky;
Our Shadows vanish, with Celerity.
Whilst Fortune smiles upon ye, never fear
The want of Friends; thou shall have some to spare.
When the Stern Fates, turn to storms, serene Day;
Friends will, as much as shadows, Post away.
96. Virtue.
NOt Talk, but Actions, Virtues Pearls comprise:
Faith, Hope, and Love; are Real Entities.
97. Rachel.
WHat weep, because Children are from you torn?
Had you not Grief enough, when they were Born?
98. Solomon.
SO many wise Men, as the world can cull;
So many things are in it wonderful.
Solomon died; before Greece, seven nursed:
He was not the eighth Wiseman; but the first.
99. Hope.
I Cannot prevent, what must fall to my share:
I Will neither Hope for Good; nor Evils fear:
Yet Hope will do me all the Good she can:
Expectancy draws out, my Life's short Span.
100. Humane Ignorance.
I Scarcely know what Life is; how should I
Tell, what it is to be Born; and what to Die?
101. Christ is the Way.
Can not thou the straight way to Heaven, see?
Behold! the Way it self, comes down to thee.
102. Of Fame.
DO well; and crouch not to Plebeian Fame:
It Is but an empty Adjunct to thy Name.
103. Faith.
AMongst Opinions, Faith had most Respect;
From the Tongue-tyed, Pythagorean Sect.
For whatsoever the old Samian knew;
An ipse dixit, did confirm it true.
104. Indifferency.
BE Death far off, be the fatal stroke nigh:
It Is culpable to wish; or fear, to Die.
105. The freshest Date.
IF I mistake not, I may boldly say;
That the first Age, was the Worlds New Years Day.
Then studious Reader, let me crave of you;
Are the Times we now live in; Old, or New?
106. The Will.
WOuld you be Good? Virtue, you may acquire:
He will enable; who made you desire.
107. To the Sun.
TWice eighty times, Astronomies express,
Sol bigger then the Earth; yet seems much less.
If you a Pygmie, Sol! appear to Me,
A little Worm; how small seem I, to Thee!
108. Probity.
GOod Men, are often outwitted; and what then;
Since they excel in Virtue, wiser Men?
109. A Man.
THe chief Ingredient to Man's heart, is Care;
Foul, noysom Carcasses; our Bodies are:
Birth, is but sickness; and that Life we have,
Frequently found a passage to the Grave.
110. Concerning Loquacity. To the Preacher.
SO many Sermons your bad Life denote:
For what need words, if Men your Deeds* might quote?
111. Death is both contrary, and according to Nature.
IF you would follow Nature, cruel Death!
You should snatch Parents, before Childrens Breath.
To Natures Dictates, we obsequious be:
For Life, and Death; are both by her Decree.
112. Eloquence.
GReat Talkers are not always Eloquent;
A few neat Fancies, Auditors content.
Nor is that field thought Fruitful; whence proceeds,
A thousand Cart-loads full, of stinking weeds.
113. God.
AS Clouds permit not, Heaven to descrie;
So none see God, 'cause Mists on their minds lie.
None have seen God; but few, did ever hear:
Hence Faith comes by Hearing.
Faith is scarce; but Love by Sight.
Love is much more Rare.
114. To Ponticus.
YOu would think Me unkind, should I deny,
To tell you how many years old, am I:
Since my Age is, this Moment; I say None;
For the years I have Lived, away are flown.
115. Love and Friendship. To Charles.
WHat space betwixt Nature, and Habits, lie;
So far is Love, distant from Amity.
116. Princes.
HUgely Religious, ye seem to be;
And very Zelots, as to Piety:
It Is not Love of Religion, makes ye thus;
But thirst of honor, Sanctimonious.
117. O the wickedness of our Times!
LEt the worst Vices happen to be named;
Innocent Time, is certain to be Blamed.
Yet we cannot prove him guilty of such Crimes:
Men are not undone by; but in the Times.
118. Philosophy.
THe World loves to know much; but few things, will
Believe: hence comes great Faith, and little skill.
119. Evils are innumerable.
WE Die, a thousand ways; are Born but One:
Thousand Diseases push at Health, alone.
120. Upon Controversies.
WIll Divines everlastingly contend?
Would they were pleased, a Judge, the strife might End.
Concerning who should be the Judge, they Brawl;
I wish sincerely, that dispute were all.
Might I contemplate once within my Life!
As great a strife of Love; as Love of Strife.
121. Christ upon the Cross.
BEtwixt two Thiefs, Christ filled the empty space:
Now Virtue had, if ever, Middle Place.
122. The Daughter of Time.
TRuth lies along Time hid; yet comes to Light:
Greece calls her (...); 'cause she flies sight.
123. Law and Physic.
IF Men would Live, as Prudent Nature teach;
They should climb quickly, out of Galen's reach:
If Men were wise, they would not so long Jar;
Till they are witnest Fools, by the whole Bar:
But Bartolus, should then despair to please;
And Mice might comment, on Hippocrates.
124. Husband and Wife.
When Angry, a whole House cannot us contain;
A Bed can hold; when we are friends again.
125. The shortest Day.
OUr Life's last day, does the most short, appear;
Quite through that Day, the end is very near.
126. Virtues Complaint.
LOve has few servants; who will Virtue own?
Credit, and honor; extreme dear are grown.
Riches are sold; Money, made Merchandise:
Virtue, for her Rewards; must pay Excise.
127. The Rigid Father.
THe Avaritious Father, is most Free:
The more he scrapes, the more He leaves to thee.
128. A Prayer to God in time of Sickness.
NAtures great Parent! when as thou shall please,
My Soul from flesh, Her Prison, to release;
Let Grace, with thy afflicting Hand comply:
When I want strength to Live; give will to Die.
129. To the Pleader.
WHere Judges Favor not; they invent flaws:
It Is not your Eloquence, secures a Cause.
Throw Reports by; and Study Day, and Night:
What to turn Lawyer? No; but Favorite.
130. Upon Brunonius.
OUr Ancestors ordained Fasting-daies;
That Flesh might obey Spirit; that God Praise:
Your Table turns Fasts, into Feasts, We see;
That Spirit might serve Flesh; and Flesh, serve Thee.
131. Time.
TIme sweeps all things away; as well as brings:
As all things have their Times; Time has, all Things.
132. Upon Miracles.
IS Gods Hand shortened, that Miracles cease?
Is it not rather caused by Faith's decrease?
133. To Irus.
YOu would Live ever; ever you cannot Live:
Yet you can wish you ever might survive.
But since you are so Poor; I wonder, still:
Though you may wish to Live; that Live, you will.
134. Science.
IN my Judgment, Happy are they alone,
Who all things know: or they, who know not one.
135. Christ.
AUrora expels Night: and Day, begins:
Christ was Death's Ruin; a Fount to purge sins.
136. Who art Thou?
MY eyes fail, when they should themselves behold;
My mind, in Mental Scrutinies, is cold.
If noblest Parts pass unknown; I may cry,
To the next Comer; Sir! Pray, who am I?
137. The Kingdom of Heaven.
THough Heaven's large; Most have an Hellish Doom:
Perhaps the straight way gives no Elbow-room.
138. pain, and Pleasure.
PResent Grief stabs; Future holds in suspense,
The fearful Soul; yet delights, when gone hence.
Dolorous Pleasures, please; when Smart is past:
It Is Sad; if Pleasure fades, whilst Sorrows last.
139. St. Peter.
CAiphas was last High Priest, in that Place, where
Jehovah's Temple, Jury* did Revere.
Kephas was first High Priest, whose Chair did rest;
Where the Emperial Eagle, built her nest.
140. Sleep.
BY Metaphors of Death, we sleep express:
The more Men sleep, it is sure, they Live the less.
141. Rome.
THe World was scarce of Age, when Envious Cain,
His Brother Abel, in the Field had slain.
Princely Rome, was no sooner Edified;
But Remus Blood, her walls in Crimson Dyed.
Cain's cruel Murder, did the World pollute:
Rome, the worlds Mistress; his steps prosecute.
142. Man's Perfection.
It Is the Perfection of every thing,
To return to that, whence it first did spring.
Frail flesh, will my accomplishment adjourn;
Till I to Earth, and Heaven shall return.
143. Lord increase our Faith, Luke 17.
OUr Age shall not need, after this form to Pray;
We rather, Lord diminish, Faith, may say.
As numerous as Men, Religions are:
Though Faiths be many, Faithfulness is rare.
Lord decrease our Faiths.
144. Upon a Covetous Person.
HErcules traveled, till the furthest West,
Stopped his Career; and gave his wanderings rest.
The Covetous go further; their desire,
Is always Errant; and can never Tire.
145. Good transcends.
NO Genus, no bounds, Good, can comprehend:
No Mundane Creatures, do to Goodness tend.
146. Omnia Vanitas. All is Vanity.
What showers of Tears! had Heraclitus seen,
Our times: Democritus had burst his spleen.
But one Democritus cannot suffice,
To Laugh at such mad Tricks, as men devise.
And Heraclitus eyes approach not nigh;
Due Lamentations, for our Misery.
147. Upon the Voluptuous.
I Often hear young men complain, how short
The pleasures are, of the Venereal sport.
I often hear Gray Headed Sirs, thus cry;
O what a curse, is vital Brevity!
Life's Pleasure, Pleasures Life, are short: who prize
Them both at little, may be termed wise.
148. Works.
Virtuous, and Vicious Persons, when they Die;
Carry their Works with them, for company.
149. The beginning of Wisdom.
NOne desire Heaven, but those who fear Hell:
Dread of the worst, makes prudent Men, Hope well.
150. Upon one delighting in Tautologies.
HOw you torment good Scholars, I let pass;
And how your Tales, run quite beyond the Glass.
When you have killed your Hearers, in this sort;
You exclaim; But I see the Time is short.
Return to Oxford, and Distinctions learn;
Till you long Prating, from short Time discern.
151. Upon the same.
TUlly's Orations, cannot be too long:
Who thy short Sermons fault, their Judgment wrong.
152. Upon those who imagine many Gods.
O Foolish People, have ye lost your wits?
Over one World; one God, as Ruler sits.
153. Concerning Ingenuity and Study.
NEglect of Study, renders wit obtuse;
So Swords will rust, by reason of disuse.
Study, wits Ladder; wits downfall, has bin:
As Grind-stones sharpen knives; they wear them Thin.
154. Know your Self.
NOne understand themselves: yet a young Man,
The years of Childhood, well remember can:
And an old Father, troubles much his Tongue;
To relate what he did, when He was young.
155. Art is long, and Life is short.
LIfe is too short, to make us truly wise:
Death creeps behind, and unawares surprise.
156. To old Moranus.
AS you have many things, for to acquire;
So to Unlearn: if goodness you desire.
But how should you do either, since you lie;
Under old Ages Incapacity?
157. To D. T.
'CAuse you have happy been, you must needs lie
Under a double weight, of Misery.
Happy is he who has had heretofore,
Adversity; for the Storm is blown o'r.
158. Every one as they like.
THe Laick seeks not Christ; but his own Gains:
Not to get Christ, but Tithes; Parsons take Pains.
159. Upon Brunonius.
THat Plagues are Gods sharp Arrows, you confess;
Whence comes then Bruno; your great Health-fulness?
The Reason's ready: for a Plague like you;
Your Country disclaims, that she ever knew.
160. Reflect upon your End.
RAther foresee thy end; reflect on Birth:
Look up to Heaven; and look down on Earth.
161. Sense, Reason, Faith, Charity, God.
SEnse without Reason, is worth little; and
Reason's unruly; unless Faith command.
What is Faith, without Love? Love cannot be,
Advantage; till, my God! it fix on Thee.
162. Of Prudence.
OUr Actions are jejune; unless address
Be made to Prudence; Virtues School-mistress:
She teaches what to choose; what to eschew,
In Life: as in Art, Logic tells what is true.
163. To my Parents.
DEar Father, I am part of you; and part
Of you, dear Mother; cast Lots for my Heart.
You two, yet but one flesh; my Body make:
What dangers fear I; be they for your sake?
164. Prudence, and Fortitude.
PRudence foresees Evils; valor can bear:
One seeks Prevention; the other slights Fear.
165. In the sweat of thy Face.
HE who commands Labor, for daily Bread;
Will deny Manna, to the drowzie Head.
166. Of Faith, and Charity.
BEfore there be a Tree, who Fruit expect?
Above all Virtues, we must Faith respect.
Love joined to Faith, do Life beget: the Poor,
Cannot live by Hope; but they must labor more.
Faith is the Chieftain; but Love is the King:
As well as Faith; we must Affections bring*
167. If thy right Eye offend thee, etc.
IF as often as they Sin, Men were inclined,
To pluck out eyes; the World would be stark blind.
168. Christian Adverbs.
NOt Adjectives; Adverbs, please the most High:
When we do good; we must do it Cordially.
169. The shortness of Life.
TO unborn Infants, all things equal are:
For what is past, grave Seniors seldom care.
If past, and future Times, I should substract:
What a small number; Present hours exact!
170. Lex Talionis. To Aulus.
YOu peruse not, the Ancient History:
Expect like Justice; from Posterity.
171. Time.
TIme devours Things; His Sith our Legs will hit.
We have our pastimes: Time and we are Quit.
172. Abundance of Caution, hurts not.
BE not afraid, yet look, before you leap:
Be not rash; count no opportune Time, cheap.
To fearful Nature, Prudence lends a Shield:
None dangers dread, who their Ambush beheld.
173. Sir, mind the matter in hand.
What though Philosophers on the Face fly?
One word will vanquish them; say, I deny.
174. Justification.
Does God us Justify, by Works, or Faith?
By both together; holy Scripture says.
175. The Day of Judgment.
IF all, this Day; their large Accounts must clear;
St Barnabie, will be too short, I fear.
176. To Marianus.
GOod Men for Virtues sake, do detest Vice:
But now a Days, there is few that are so Nice.
Goodness is so contemned, in our Time;
That to be Good, is thought an heinous Crime.
177. Mary Magdalens Sorrow.
ONe Mountain here, two well-fed Springs can show:
From whence, two Rivers of Salt water flow.
178. Upon the Soul.
THe Soul is not infused; for if it were,
It would be mortal; as our Bodies are.
179. To Marcus.
When to Pray, you at any Time shall please;
You institute your Bed, Chapel of ease.
You might well think, Heaven would exclude thence,
Prayers; presented with irreverence.
Till wandering thoughts, rude gestures, you forbear:
God Audience gives; but is not pleased to Hear,
180. Hell.
WHo can reduce Cloth dyed Black to White?
What Damned Soul, enjoyed again the Light?
181. To his poor Friend.
YOur bad Estate, I wish worse for your sake:
On extreme evils; Fate, may pity take.
182. Europe, Asia, Africa, America.
THe worlds division, is into Four parts:
So many distinct The Jewish, Christian, Mohammedan, Pagan.
Faiths possess Men's hearts.
183. The causes of Discord.
WHen Sense, and Reason, be enslaved to Will;
They prove the Source, of segregating Ill.
Will, Brethren sets at distance; for we see;
When Will consents, Kindred do well agree.
184. The Liberal Man.
THe Just, to every Man, his own allow:
Let Rich, have Justice; to poor, Mercy show.
185. The Temperate.
WHo know things Causes, who Times supervise:
Bridle their Passions, Actions rule; are Wise.
186. A Wise Man.
FAte governs Fools; a wise Man, curbs the Stars:
His Wisdom shields him, from intended scars.
187. Upon an Infant dying before Baptism.
ALas! I died, before pure Water could,
Mark me, A Lamb; belonging to Christ's Fold.
The Church implores, my Savior would not look,
For Name: Lord! write me Nameless, in thy Book.
Though I want Name, yet am I known to Thee*
For thy Names-Sake; be Merciful to Me.
188. The Flatterer, and Envious.
ENvy, and Flattery, are both content;
To fall under, the same Predicament.
Zoilus hates Good Men's Virtue: Gnatho will
Labor; of Goodness, to defraud the Ill.
189. Love, and Friendship.
WIth Prudence, Friendships Knot may be untied,
To purchase Love; but on the other side:
It were a foolish Fancy, to remove
For fickle Friendship; a well-grounded Love.
190. St. Peter, and Paul.
EMpire, the Sword; Wealth, the Key signifies;
Peter's Richer then Paul; as I surmise:
That Paul was Poor, his Epistles record;
But Peter's Pen let slip, not one such Word.
191. Socrates.
YOu nothing know; and you know only this:
To know, that you know nothing; something is:
Yet that something, you understand; I shall
According to directions, Nothing call.
192. A Man.
NO sooner Born, but you began to cry:
Since Life's no Pleasure; why is it Grief to Die?
193. To Paulus, after Burial.
THough you were at Birth naked; now you have,
An Holland sheet; to sleep on in the Grave*
You carry that away, you did not bring:
Thank not your Mother Earth; for any thing.
194. To such Courtiers, as shall please to Read.
MOst touch upon the Schools; but few them court.
Observe my humor, to divide my sport.
195. Prudent simplicity.
MOrality, endeavor to improve,
To Innocence; as candid as the Dove.
But lest good Nature, should to Mischiefs lead;
To Dovelike Hands; annex the Serpents Head.
196. The eyes of the Commonwealth.
LAw, and Religion, are the Nations Eyes:
One forbids Sins; the other, Injuries.
197. To John Gifford, Doctor of Physic.
NO wonder, Gifford knows Apollo's Art:
Of his own Body, He knows every part.
Though Know your self, was not Galen's command;
To that Advice, Apollo set his Hand.
198. The Daw.
WHich Sister of the Grove, dares make pretense,
To excel Me; in nimble Eloquence?
The Goose.
FOr some things, I my Self, may be turned loose:
Though you Prate more; you write less then a Goose.
199. The Afflictions of Job.
IF you on Riches, Children, or Health look;
The Devil, (by Gods Leave) away these took.
When all was gone, his Wife was left behind;
Lest some small Comfort, should refresh Job's mind.
200. Paul's, and Westminster-Abbey.
THe Pleading Place, Exchequer, and White Hall;
Are Neighbors to St. Peters-Abbey, all.
The Learned Preachers, make St. Paul's to sound;
And furnished Stationers encompass round.
The two Apostles, very well agree:
Most Gold, has Peter; Paul, Divinity.
201. Against the Conspirators, upon Tuesday, the Fifth of November, 1605.
TO make low Earth, challenge the lofty Sky;
And sordid Dust, oppose the Deity*
What is this, but for to revoke the Hour,
And Architecture, of Confusions Tower?
'Twere to make wanton Ilium, once more Burn;
And antiquated Chaos, should return.
202. Upon the same.
Would ye have thrust fair Troy into the Fire;
And Millions thrown upon the Fatal Pyre?
Were ye bewitched, to pitch on such a Day?
Tuesday was never made Ash Wednesday.
203. The King, to his Kingdoms.
NEws of my Death, swollen Fame did lately bring:
I am not dead; By the Word of a King.
204. To England, concerning the Union.
WE shall enjoy Thrice-Happy Peace; since Three,
Are Married to, a lasting Unity.
Wales is your Wall; every Scot, is your Scout:
You are secure, O England! without doubt.
205. To Tho. Nevill, an Ingenious young Gentleman.
YOu are Branched from, the Noble Nevil's Race;
Nature has Limn'd both Parents, in your Face:
But what of that? She likewise thought not fit,
You should want Mothers, Virtues; Fathers Wit.
206. Upon the Death of Charles Blunt, Earl of Devonshire. 1606.
SHall I to pin upon thy Hearse, devise
Eternal Praises; or weep Elegies?
Fame has of you, a double-tongu'd Report:
Your Death was Good Men's Sorrow; Bad Men's Sport.
207. To the Reader.
MY Epigrams are short, and also few:
From many short, Longitude would ensue.
Reader, these few, are short; for were they Long;
Few, would prove Many; and thy Patience wrong.
208. The Difference betwixt Words, and Writings.
VOice is alive; Writing's Inanimate:
Yet the Tongue, before Quill; resigns to Fate.
Libellus de Spectaculis: Or, an Account of the Most memorable Monuments of the
ROMAN GLORY. Composed by the ever-celebrated Epigrammatist, M. Val. Martial:
And now Periphrastically Translated into English Verse; By T. P. of the Inner
Temple, Gent.

Non cuivis Lectori, Auditorive placebo;
Lector and Auditor, non mihi quisque placet.
Owen. l. 3. Printed at London, 1659.

Libellus de Spectaculis: Or, an Account of the Most memorable Monuments of the
ROMAN GLORY.
1. Upon the Caesarean Amphitheater.
NO more let Sunburned Cayro vaunt, that She,
Bequeaths her wonders, to Eternity.
Let not Euphrates, in a superb Style,
Brag her Wall, Girdle, unto sixty Mile.
Who lends Diana confidence, to tell;
Her Cedar-Statues, scorn a Parallel?
What if Apollo's horned Altar, stands
Unimitable, by Lysippus Hands?
Let Carian Impudence, presume so far;
As to make Mausoleum, kiss a Star.
Dame Tellus! and thy Prodigies confer;
They must kneel to the Amphitheater.
This Miracle, Graced by Vespasian's Name:
Has the Monopoly, of checkered Fame.
2. Upon the Magnificent Structures built by Caesar.
HEre stands a Regal Coloss; whose high Head,
Is by the fixed Stars, embellished.
By sumptuous Pageants, the Streets are become
Accurate Emblems, of Elysium.
Cursed Nero's Court, foiled the most serene days;
By the emission of her golden Rays.
And with Reluctance, we did lately see;
The Tyrants Palace, Romes Epitome.
That which was then an incommodious Lake,
Is made a Theater; for the Champions sake.
Where tepid Baths, the sinews recreate;
Was once a Victim, to the Monsters Hate.
Claeudius Porch, so celebrious for shade,
Of the last Part, of the Domo was made.
Romes Resurrection, is ascribed to you;
Great Emperor! your Sports, Plebeians owe.
3. The general Congratulation used to Caesar.
MOst potent Sir! what Region is so rude;
From whence, into your City, None intrude?
The Rhodopeian Farmer, leaves cold Thrace;
And to Banquet his Eyes, elects this Place.
Tartarians, who quaffe Horses Blood at Home;
Are much Impatient, till they have viewed Rome.
They who first give a Welcome to the Nile:
And they, on whom, sweet Zephyrus does smile.
Both the Arabia's, are in rapid Have:
For perfumed Water, Asia comes not last.
Shall we omit Knot-hair'd Sicambrians;
And Natures frisled Aethiopians?
Their Languages are discrepant; yet All,
The Father of your Country, can you call.
4. To the Emperor Titus, upon his Banishing Sycophants.
THose Caterpillars of the Commonwealth,
The Poor Man's Wolf, whose livelihood was Stealth;
Growing too Numerous, are shipped away;
To Feast the Lions, of Getulia:
And those Informers, who have many sent
Into Exile; now suffer Banishment.
5. Upon the same occasion.
THe Head of Italy, Caesar acquits
From Sycophants: New days; Fresh Benefits!
6. Upon Pasiphae.
THat Minos lustful Wife, Trepan'd a Bull;
Now we have seen it, is not wonderful:
Let not Antiquity, her Fictions boast:
We fancy most, they should the Stage accost.
7. The Conflict of a Woman, with a Lion: As it was performed in the
Amphitheater.
CAesar's Munificence, 'twill not suffice;
That virile Hands, should grasp the crimson Price.
Delicate Body, cannot Fair Cypria shield:
As well as Mars, She conquers, or is Killed.
Alcides killed a Lion, and it is
Blown through the world by Fame, with Emphasis.
Be silent Authors! For Caesar's command;
Made this Achievement, of a Female hand.
8. The punishment of Laureolus.
PRometheus to cold Caucasus is chained;
Whilst by his Entrails, Vultures are sustained:
Wretched Laureolus, a Northern Bear;
Very sincerely, did asunder tear.
Every Vein, to weep Blood was inclined:
Strict search in's Carcass, could no Body find.
Thus one that stabbed his Master, must have died;
Or Actors of infernal Parricide.
This Torment is his due, who dares Rome Fire;
Or who deflowres, the Gods most sacred Quire.
Obsolete Mischiefs, resalute the Stage:
Fables prove True; in this our conscious Age.
9. Upon Daedalus.
SInce Bears impartial Teeth, thy Bones must Grind;
I wish poor Daedalus, his wings could find.
10. The Rhinocerite.
ANd will the de bonair Rhinocerite;
For Caesar's pleasure rush into a fight?
O how excessive, is his Angers flame!
'Twas Recreation, a mad Bull to tame!
11. Upon a Lion, that killed his Keeper.
WIth deep Ingratitude, a Lion flew
At's Keepers Throat; thus his Acquaintance slew.
But he received his Wages; since he could
Endure no Blows; the Hunting-spears, he should.
Men must be cau^elous in Carriage; since,
Beasts are taught Morals; by our Gracious Prince.
12. Upon a Bear.
A Bear rol'd Barrels on the bloody Sand;
And was Arrested, at Bird-limes command.
There Is no more need to throw, the lethal Spear;
Or that a Lance, should forbid coming near*
Hunts-men may chase the Birds, unto a Bay*
If Fowlers to catch Beasts; conceive fair Play.
13. Upon a Sow, who cast her Pigs, by reason of a Wound.
AMongst the Various Game, that Caesar found;
A nimble Spear, happened a Sow to wound.
One of the Wiser Pigs, did make a shift
To escape through the Gash; at a dead lift.
These were hard Throws; yet the Sow for her part;
To save her Babies, wished the other Dart.
Who will dispute, Tun-belli'd Bacchus cut,
From's Mother; since a Sow probatum put?
14. On the same Accident.
A Fatal Javelin, dig'd through the Sows side;
But in a sort, She lived; as well as Died.
O what unerring Hand, gave such a Blow?
None but Lucina, could so certain throw.
Diana did here Hunt; yet was Midwife:
A Pig was preserved; the Sow lost her Life.
15. The third part, to the same Tune.
A Sow, now great with Pig, died of a wound;
Through which her Litter, tumbled to the Ground.
When the Dam Staggered, that staid not behind:
Distress will force a Pig; some wit to find.
16. Upon the Hunts-Man Carpophorus.
CAn Meleager, Glory in his Boar;
What may Carpophorus, who dares do more?
His furbisht spear, did bore a deadly hole,
In that Bears Heart; known to the Arctick Pole.
One of his Trophyes, is a Lions skin;
As large as that, Alcides vapour'd in.
A vaulting Libard, was by his hand slain:
And these, (though wonders) He can do again.
17. Concerning Hercules, Riding to Heaven, upon a Bull.
THat the Bull was snatched up into the sky;
Seems not a Pageant, but true Piety.
On a Bulls back, Europa rid at ease;
But not to Heaven; as did Hercules.
Let Jove, and Caesar's Bulls, for credit Vie:
Jove's did but swim; and Caesar's Bull could fly.
18. Of an Elephants kneeling down.
THat devout Elephant, did ye adore;
O Caesar! which, worsted a Bull before.
None taught him Homage; but by instinct, he
Kneeled down to you; because a Deity.
19. Of a Tiger, and a Lion.
A Fierce Hircanian Tiger, which is rare;
Used to lick his Masters Hands; did dare,
Upon the dreaded King of Beasts to fly:
And to Amazement, won the Victory.
In the thick woods, he never Triumphed thus:
Our Company, made him Magnanimous.
20. Upon the Fight of the Bull, and Elephant.
When the strong Bull, enraged by Fire, did Eye
Puppies, like Men; He mounted them on High:
But dreaming thus, an Elephant to toss;
He was struck Dead, by the flinty Proboss.
21. Of two Fencing-Masters.
HAlf the Spectators, Triumphus did crave;
Half implored, they stout Myrinus might have.
Caesar was pleased to tell them with both hands;
He condescended, to both their demands.
Vulgar Resentments, were quenched quickly, thus:
O our great Lords, accomplished Genius!
22. Upon Orpheus.
WHat ever Haemus polisht Vales comprise;
The Theater vouchsafes to Caesar's Eyes.
The Rocks creep from their place; Woods give the start:
Splendid as Aegles, in the Western Part.
The Wolf, and Lamb, the Hound, and Hare desist
From enmity; to hear this Lutanist.
Rare Philomel, and the Cock-Linnet, fly
Hither to learn, Orphean Harmony:
Yet he was rent, by an unthankful Bear:
Let Thrace choose Fictions; at Rome, Truths the^e are.
23. The Rhinocerite.
TRembling Keepers, prick the Rhinocerite;
Desirous speedy Fury, to excite.
When expectation began to tire;
The Beasts disturbed Calmness, fell on fire:
And showed his Horns, could hoyst a Bear at Ease;
As Bulls toss untried Mastives, when they please.
24. Upon Carpophorus.
What Beast is so well Armed, as not to fear;
Young Carpophorus, his approved spear?
His strange Dexterity, Two Bulls pulled down;
Two thick-skin'd Buffs, had no more Favor shown.
He made a Lion leap into the Toil:
So much Time lost, the Vulgar can assoyl.
25. Upon a Sea Fight.
FOreign Spectators, perchance present be;
Whose Eyes did never, Caesar's Bounty see:
Naval Bellona, shall not Equivocate;
In Neptunes Throne, Ceres did sit of late.
But want ye Faith? after the Fight; you will vow
That is firm Land, which was Sea, even now.
26. Upon Leander.
LEander wonder not, curled Waves thee spare;
These inoffensive Surges, Caesar's are.
When Tethys stopped, Lovesick Leander's Breath;
And some few drops, would hurry him to Death.
Thee poor Wretch begged; O waft Me safe to ground:
When I have seen my Dear; let me be Drowned.
27. Upon the excellent Swimmers.
THe docil Crew of Watery Nymphs did Vie
To paint the Waves; with their Vivacitie.
A threatening Trident, Anchor, scalding Oar;
A stately Ship; we beheld from the Shore.
Castor, and Pollux, the Pilots delight;
And tumid Sail-cloaths, gratified our Sight.
To whose Invention, should we this refer;
Did Thetis instruct us, or we, teach Her?
28. He Flatters Caesar.
IF the old World Carpophorus had bred;
The worst of Monsters must have hid its Head.
With Greece, Cretaean Bulls would have complied;
Nor had Nemaeas Lion, terrified.
Arcadia had contemned the tusked Bore;
Had He struck Hydra; she had never stirred more.
The triple-form'd Chimaera, at one Blow;
Had perished; Medaea should not show
Her Sorceries, the fiery Bulls to charm;
Hesio, and Andromede, from Harm;
By him alone, had been preserved. Account
Hercules Labors; they Twelve tantamount.
But is that such a wonder? At one Play,
Twenty wild Beasts, Carpophorus did slay.
29. Upon a Sea Fight.
THe Palm of Glory, to Augustus yield;
For framing Sea, into a pitched Field.
How then may Caesar Triumph? Such Beasts are,
Guests to the Waves, as Seagreen Thetis scare.
Swift Chariots track the Main; at whose approach,
Triton cried out; Here coms King Neptune's Coach.
Whilst Nereus for the Skirmishes provides;
And a Whales Back, victoriously Bestrides.
What Caesar's pleasure, shall the Circk command;
The Floods React; as Mimicks to the Land.
On Claudius; Nero's Lake; let Scorn reflect:
Domitian's shows, merit entire Respect.
30. Of the Champions, Pristus, and Verus.
WHen Pristus, Verus, did protract their Fight;
Uncharacterized by Mars with equal Spite:
For their Discharge, a joint Consent applied,
It self to Caesar; by whom 'twas Denied.
It wash the Fashion so long to contend,
Till the vanquished made Signs the Fight should end.
And to detain the People to the last,
Gifts were provided; and a slight Repast:
Even wounds the Sword-players did engrave;
They Fought alike; on equal scores did leave.
Caesar acquitted both; gave both the Palm:
Thus Prowess, for her Cure, acquired Balm.
Before your Reign Caesar, who thought to see;
When Champions Fight, that both should Victors be!
Certain Select EPIGRAMS, Translated Out of the Works of that upright Lord
Chancellor, and facetious Poet, Sr. THO. MORE, etc.

Did they Acceptance find, which went before?
To speak of wit; these have Forty times MORE.
Printed at London, for Thomas Bassett, in St. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleet Street. 1659.

Certain Select EPIGRAMS.
1. To King Henry the Eighth.
PLato asserts, that whatsoever was,
Did but revive; shall come again to pass.
As Spring and Winter, through the various Climes,
Make their Appearance, at appointed Times:
So after Six and thirty thousand Year,
All things shall be the same, which once they were.
After the Golden, came the Silver Age:
Then came the Brass; and Iron the last Stage.
The Golden Age is revolved, to your Reign:
I now conceive, that Plato did not feign.
2. Upon the Union of the York, and Lancaster Roses.
THe White Rose was died purple, by hot Jars:
The Red grew pale, as let Blood, by fierce wars.
But now the Roses, mutually make One;
The Strife was quenched, by this knack alone.
Both Roses bud, and flourish, lively still:
Although Subjected, to a single Will.
One Species includes both; and both agree
Copartnership, in Beauty; Majesty.
They who were Parties unto either side;
Shall need no more, well-wishes to divide.
And He who Envies, in the Quag-mire Sticks:
Astonished when he feels, the Rose has Pricks.
3. Upon an ignorant Rhetorician.
FIve absurd Phrases, I let Flaccus have;
To requite my Good Will, he Fifty gave.
Take these in Hand, said He; Beyond the Seas,
When I have been; you shall have what you please.
4. Upon Suspicion.
OPinion bears great Sway; although I do
No hurt, I pay for it; if men count it so.
So Philolaus, was by Grecians killed:
Although a Tyrant, He was falsely held.
5. Upon the accurate Picture, of a pitiful Orator.
SExtus is silent; Hark! his Picture speaks:
For Oratory that his credit breaks.
6. Upon a blind, and a lame Beggar.
There Is nothing more commodious, then a Friend;
Who at a pinch, may his assistance lend.
A Beggar who had lost his eyes, did frame
A League of Friendship, with another, Lame.
The blind Man's shoulders, Lame Giles did bestride:
Whose Eyes directed, which way, He might ride.
Concord to Cottages, sometimes resorts;
When it cannot be found, in Princes Courts.
7. The complaint of a Ship, sunk in a Storm.
SInce when I grew, strong blasts could make me trip;
What fool devised, to slice Me to a Ship?
I could not promise safety, from the Land;
How then could I, the raging Sea withstand?
8. Upon a Ships being Burnt.
THe daunting Ship, has quit the foaming waves;
The churlish Haven, it of life bereaves.
Now it is on fire, ye might it Water grant:
Before this time, it never used to want.
9. Upon a Rabbet, who having escaped a Weasel, fell into the Hayes.
I But just now got from a Weasel Free;
And must I suffer worse Captivity?
When from one danger, I did safe evade;
A prey to Dogs, I dreamed not to be made.
When Tumblers Teeth, force me to curse my Birth.
The tearing out my Bowels, affords Mirth.
O ye hard Hearts of Men! who in this Sort,
Rage more then Brutes; what, make my death a Sport?
10. Innocence, is obnoxious to Injury.
THe fearful Mouse, dares venture for to bite,
The vicious Man: Tush! Proverbs say not right.
A Mouse dares bite the Innocent; a Knave,
Out of a Dragons Mouth, himself can save.
11. Upon the Quality of Death.
IF all the Kings, were by you captive led;
Of all the Lands, Alcides traveled;
Yet your victorious Body, needs not have,
More Elbow-room, then is in Irus Grave.
Reflect on him; for you as poor shall die:
And in your Heirs, not your own Ground, must lie.
12. Upon a Niggard.
SIr, Sir! you're Poor; say others what they please:
Use, Riches makes; says Apollophanes.
Whilst you use your Estate, so long it is thine:
That ceasing, your Heir may cry; This is Mine.
13. The Spiders Hunting.
A Busy Fly, laying aside due Care;
Was fast entangled, in a cobweb Snare.
The Spider Thanks good Fortune, now she is sure
To have a Dinner; Be not too secure.
Arachne's Stomach, did her Anger whet;
She leaps to seize the Fly, and breaks the Net.
The Spiders fall, making her very faint;
Away flies Spoyl-meat, from her loathed restraint.
Under the very Ax, Hope may remain:
A thousand Guards, to wickedness; are vain.
14. Upon a Cynick, indiscreetly abstinent.
A Stubborn, and grave Cynick, set his best
Side outward, by this carriage at a Feast.
None could persuade him, Radishes to Eat;
Virtue abhors, such kind of luscious Meat.
Casting about his dull, unpleasant Eye;
He chanced fine tender Onions to epsy:
He snaps up those. Though Radishes a'nt Good;
It seems that Onions, are a virtuous Food.
15. Upon a Chambermaid deceased.
HEr Body served; Her soul was always Free
Kind Death has set, that too; at Liberty.
16. Upon a Fisherman, who was fallen in Love withal.
A Fisher, intent on the dropping Net;
Cast it so well, He did a Sweetheart get.
It was a Rich man's Daughter; so that He,
Proved Master of much Wealth, immediately.
Said He, Our Trade is Gainful! In retort,
His wife made Answer; who may you thank for it?
17. Upon Mediocrity.
PIndar tells us, envied Felicity,
Sur passes far, lamented Misery.
The Rich are hated; the Poor scorned; God grant,
I either may abound, nor suffer Want.
Avaunt Extremes! the Mean is best of all:
Peasants are kicked; Lords, cannot prevent their fall.
18. Fear is altogether unprofitable.
ANd why so stupid, as to lend an Ear,
To the false Alarms, of amazing Fear?
If evils come not, then our Fears are vain:
And if they do; Dread, will increase the Pain.
19. A Cause, finely pleaded.
A Certain cause, was come to Trial; where,
Plaintiff, Defendant, and the Judge, Deaf were.
The Plaintiff pleaded; that He had much wrong;
His Cash was due, Five Months since. All night long,
Said the Defendant, my Mill went. Why strive,
Replied the Judge? your Mothers are alive.
20. Upon the uncertainty, of the Hour of Death.
I Weep not for those, conquered by Fate;
I weep the fear of Death, should Macerate.
21. Upon the same.
YOu would bewail, next Month to meet chill Death:
And can you laugh? next Hour, may stop your Breath.
22. Upon a certain Ridiculous Astrologer.
CVmaean Sybils, could not more descry;
Although enlightened from Divinity;
Then our Astrologer: whose profound Art,
Could through the Stars, a thing, when past, impart.
23. Upon the same.
THe Prophet counseled by the Stars; did cry,
No Man so happy in a Wife, as I!
Looking again, when She was run away:
He gravely foretold, that unlucky Day.
24. On the same.
SAturns far distance, makes him think all hush:
He cannot discern a Hare, from a Brake-Bush.
Thy Bashful Moon, adventures not to see,
Actions; improper, for Virginity.
Great Jove, Europa loved. Kind Venus led,
Stout Mars a Captive, to her wanton Bed.
Sol courted Daphne. Lovely in the eye,
Dame Hyrce was, of crafty Mercury.
Thy Wife securely, may spread forth her Sails:
For their own Honors, Planets cannot tell Tales.
25. Death not to be feared.
WHat Madness it is for Sickness, Poverty,
To refuse Death; the end of Misery?
That only once, inflicts a short-lived Pain;
And that endured, it troubles not again.
But some Diseases, are, so rude, that they,
Revisit; where they lodged, but the other day.
26. Upon a certain Covetous, and sordid Bishop.
IF old Methusalem I should outvie;
The Bishops Bounty, claims my Memory.
He Is vastly Rich; does many Cities owe:
To his Commands, an Hundred Servants bow.
Yet when, I of mean Rank, did him approach;
He kindly spoke; and chid not for Encroach.
Nay more, he searched both Pockets, for the Key
Of's Wine-Cellar: saying, You may be Dry.
27. Upon the Inconstancy of Fortune.
FOrtune observes no Method; for throughout
Humane Affairs, her Wheel is turned about
With great Inconstancy. Low things arise;
High are confounded, by her quick surprise.
Good Fortune, is transmuted into Ill;
For to make Evil, Good; is at her will.
Let not them grieve, who under hard Fates lie:
Good Fortune's near at Hand: for shame don't die.
28. Upon Death.
THey who brag themselves Rich, shall quickly see;
When Death casts their Accounts; how Poor they be.
29. Upon a Rabbet, that was caught twice.
I Fled from a Man's hands, into a Net:
Ah sad Escape! must I pay twice, a Debt?
30. Concerning Wifes.
ALl Men exclaim, they never in their Life's,
Met such great Crosses, as their brawling wifes.
Talk, is, but Talk; for should the sixth wife die;
The seventh should succeed her, presently.
31. On the same Subject.
A Wife afflicts; yet She may useful be:
If she will die quickly; and leave all to thee.
32. Upon an Emperick, who sold a Drop of Balsam, very Deer.
SIr Q^ack, his Patient told, nothing could cure*
The stubborn Fever; did He not endure,
To pay for precious Balsam; to be found,
With none but Him; One Drop, would cost ten Pound.
Five I require, to have laid down, in Hand:
The other, when you're well; I shall demand.
But about this, there scarce can be a strife:
What is ten pound, to secure a Man's Life?
The Bargain's made; from a well-cover'd Glass,
A Grain of this Elixar, taken was.
The sick craved all; as willing to be sound:
No; the Remainder's worth, an hundred pound.
Besides the present Dose, would stand instead:
And so it did; for He was quickly dead.
Unhappy Bargain! what will not the Fates do?
Life was not only lost; but Balsam too.
33. Upon a Picture, much resembling the Party.
YOur shadow, for your self, might almost pass:
It Is not your Picture, but your Looking-Glass.
34. Upon a Picture, unlike.
I Going lately to a Painters Shop;
Thy Pourtraicture, my wandering eyes did stop.
I am persuaded, that He did compact,
You should sit three Days; for to mak't exact.
At the first view, I understood 'twas you:
For I believed the Limner; swearing so.
35. Upon a Ridiculous Prognostication.
A Famed Astrologer, all Ears did fill;
Saying, This year, the King of France, lies still.
New Almanacks were scarcely come in Date;
Before the Christian King resigned to Fate.
The Prophet persists in Defense, of 's ill
Roving; and asks, does not France, now lie still?
The vulgar made his speech, a common Jest;
Often repeating, The French King's at rest.
This Pill, the Stars Interpreter did choke;
Therefore in Anger, He them thus bespoke.
Ye simple Souls! are all your skulls of Lead?
Does not the King lie still; now he is dead?
36. Upon a Roman Nose.
PRoclus cannot blow his Nose; but must confess,
Though his Hand's great; yet then his Nose it is less.
Nor when he sneezeth, can He Himself hear:
His Nostrils are so remote, from his Ear.
37. On a certain Fool.
FLea-bitten Morio, put out the Light:
Lest Fleas should see to find Him, every night.
38. Aristotle's Judgment, concerning Sleep.
HAlf of our Life's, to grateful Sleep we spare;
Thus half Their Time, Rich, and Poor, equal are.
Croesus, and Irus, Rich alike, are found:
When silken slumbers, have their senses bound.
39. The difference betwixt a good Prince, and a Bad.
A Good Prince, like a Shepherd, does defend
His Flock: The Bad, like Wolfs their Sheep do rend.
40. Upon a good King, and virtuous Subjects.
THe Kingdom is a Man; the King's his Head:
Subjects as Members, to it fastened;
Make the Compositum. Who knows what smart,
It Is for a King, with one of 's Limbs, to part?
The King's requited; for by filial dread:
No single Subject, but adores his Head.
ACcept this Banquet; and for it refer
Gordial Thanks; to the Just Lord Chancellor.
Our entertainment, may please every Guest:
Forty choice Dishes; make a Noble feast.
HEROIC EPIGRAMS, Upon Some choice Passages in the LIVES of the Twelve
CAESAR'S, And other worthy Subjects. By T. P. Gent.

Printed at London, for Thomas Bassett, in St. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleet Street. 1659.

HEROIC EPIGRAMS.
1. Caesar, quaesi celsus; because he was cut out of his Mothers Womb.
LVcretia's Rape did such an Odium bring;
That warlike Rome, could not digest a King.
Vice undermines the Greatest; Rome no Place,
(Much less a Throne) would grant the Tarquin Race.
When the Republic had regained her Health;
Consuls were chose, to steer the Commonwealth.
Who, when the Waves did rage, guided their ship,
By the sure Card, of a Dictatorship.
Which was to last, till the Empress of the Night,
Six times had glori'd, in a globous Light.
Only thy Sword, Great Julius! sealed to Thee
That Honor, and its Perpetuity.
The Picture of thy Mind, was Limn'd by Strife;
Thy Body before Birth, was Cut to the Life.
2. Upon Caesar's Epilepsie, or Fallen-sicknesse.
THat Emperor whose Universal Awe,
Prescribed both Tybur, and the Thames a Law.
He whose Sword sent some Myriads of Souls,
To that dark Den, where Cerberus grins, and Houls.
In spite of Throne, was cast upon the Ground;
His sense benighted, in a sudden Swound.
He who was Victor, over what He pleased;
Could not evade the Title, of Diseased:
Such Physic was to's Tympany applied;
The Fallen-sicknesse, is the Scourge of Pride.
3. Upon his Motto; Caesar, ex utroque.
CAesar was pleased, himself for to express;
By the Heroic, and revered Impresse;
Of a Sword, and a Book. Can it be thus,
That Tents, and Studies, are Synonimous?
He needs must Triumph, over every Part:
Who takes Auxiliaries, from Arms, from Art.
4. Venite huc.
IT is no News; that some Commanders will,
Only in Bushes, Saw-pits, show their skill.
How stands our Case? as Caesar did command,
So from the Hilt, He stirred not his own Hand.
What Breast is so benumbed, as to count light,
The General should say; Come let us fight?
5. Veni, Vidi, Vici.
THough Pompey, Mithridates over-threw;
Pharnax his Son, began the Wars anew.
Caesar entreated, by a gremial Friend;
To certify him, when Stern Mars did end:
Returned this Note; I came, viewed, did confound;
After Dispute, as by his Promise bound.
If thy eyes send forth Deadly Rays; sure then,
The Basilisk has left his Trade to Men.
6. The most Cowardly of Caesar's Soldiers, were Courageous, in Defense of his
Honor.
THe trembling Bucks, dread their own shadows; but,
Who such Bravado's, when they go to Rut?
Love scorns, that any Remora should be:
That Is the true Sigil, moving Gallantrie.
7. Upon Caesar's Ambition.
Caesar's aspiring Mind, could not concur;
With the Dictates, of a Superior.
It was more Delight to have sole Command,
In a poor Cottage; and four Acres Land,
Then to have had such a disastrous Fate,
As might have dubbed him second, to the State.
The World feeds many Millions; has four Parts:
Yet cannot Breakfast, two Ambitious Hearts.
8. Non Rex sum, sed Caesar.
ROme as a Camerade to Caesar's Fate;
By name of King, did him Congratulate.
They hit the Grain, for Prides Humor delights;
In nothing more, then crouching Parasites.
One time the Cry, remarkably was small;
Caesar laughed at, the accidental Fall:
And demanded whence might the Error spring;
My Sirname's Caesar; Gentlemen! not King.
9. Julio, and Caesare, Consulibus.
CAesar, and Bibulus, elected were;
Jointly the weight, of Consulship to bear.
Caesar's Activity, brought it to pass;
That nothing, but by him, transacted was.
And the swift Torrent, of a flowing Fame;
Washed clean away, grave Bibulus his Name.
Some Magistrates, void Ciphers we may call:
Useless; but to make others, Decimal.
10. Upon Caesar's Horsmanship.
IF we to Histories submit our Creed;
Caesar with his Hands behind, could Run full speed.
There needs no Dispute, to confirm this true:
That He Rid faster, then Romes Eagle flew.
11. Upon his weeping over Pompey's Head.
WHat did thine eyes embalm Great Pompey's Head?
Could it prove Sorrow, to see a Foe dead?
O admirable Caesar! very fine,
Thy Brain should spend, unnecessary Brine.
Yet the scaled Crocodile, out-weep Thee can:
Nay it is her Practice; But first Kills the Man.
12. Upon his Burning such Letters as were found in Pompey's Trunks.
EQuivocating Fortune gave the Day;
To Caesar; in the large Pharsalia.
Among the Spoils, that beautified the Ground;
Chests packed with Letters, the brave Victor found.
Who lest they should stir Anger, was content,
They should (unseen) feed Vulcan's Element.
'Twas hard to Conquer; But for to deny
Himself; was the Egregious Victory.
13. Mori malo, quam Timere.
CAesar refused a Guard; nor did He care,
To provide Barricado's against Fear.
The Devil, and his Dam, can but cause Death:
Why should Dread gallop, upon humane Breath?
14. Upon his robbing of the Treasury.
CAesar in time of War, did set light by,
The Sacrilege of Saturn's Treasury.
A Heathen would not do it, in times of Peace:
Although some Saints, can swallow it, at Ease.
15. Disficilius est mihi, hoc dicere; quam Facere.
Caesar's necessity made his Hands bold,
To purge the inner Treasury, of Gold.
Metellus resolutely did resist;
Caesar commanded quickly to desist,
Or He should cease to Live. I can thee kill,
with far more Ease, young Man! then say, I will.
Caesar is dead, Two thousand years ago:
We find it easier, for to Say, then Do.
16. Caesar's Wife, should not only be without Fault, but without the least
Suspicion of Fault.
Virtues Law is, Man thy self regulate;
I cannot prevent, being unfortunate.
Let my Wife Answer for her self; shall I;
Bear for her faults, the Brand of Infamy?
Yes that you must; and for your Servants too:
From the old Cock, the Chickens learn to crow.
17. Caesarem vehis, and Fortunam ejus.
IN a black Storm, when Hailstones fell in crowds;
And Hector Boreas, chased the ruffled clouds;
Caesar was in a Pinnace, void of Fear:
Although the Water-man, conceived Death near:
You silly Boat-swain! If Neptune would drown,
The Earth's great Master, he would spare his own.
18. Caesar Sacrificing, One of the Beasts, wanted an Heart.
FOr many Laurel wreaths, the Prince of Rome,
The Gods presented, with an Hecatomb.
The wise Haruspex, searching every Part;
Found out one Beast quite destitute of Heart.
The Sacrifice, was counted Ominous:
No Heart? the Gods will not be served thus.
19 The Ides of March are come, but not past.
LIllies Great Grandfather, would often say,
Caesar outlives not, Marches fifteenth day.
Time being come, to run that Middle Race;
Caesar said, in Astrologies Disgrace;
The Ides of March are come: and so they be,
Replied the Prophet; but you will something see;
Before the Ides be past. His words had grounds:
Before Night, Caesar, received twenty wounds.
Avaunt Security! I am a Mark;
And Providence, can hit Me, in the Dark:
Though Dice be here; who can Predict my Cast?
This Day is come; but this Day, is not past.
20. (...).
CAesar, by taking on him too much State;
And slighting Senators, gave Birth to Hate.
This fatal Serpent, propagated More
Conspirators, then are found, in Threescore.
Caesar was stabbed; and took it silently;
Till Brutus, abhorred damned Impiety;
Wrested out these few words, And Thou my Son*
What have the Traitors, mine own Bowels won?
-- Megaera must Conclude:
No sting but Hers, shall bore, Ingratitude.
21. Upon the Brightness of Augustus Caesar's Countenance.
PHoebus did not so many Rays comprise;
As were resplendent in Augustus Eyes.
No wonder Light, in his Face made abode:
Whose Father by Adoption, was a God.
22. Upon the styling of his Freckles, Stars.
VEnus Cheek has her Mole; so falls it here;
Innumerable Freckles did appear,
Upon Augustus skin: But such as far,
Excelled the Common, Mimicks of a Star.
That flattery which made his Eyes a Sun,
Could make these Stars; by the same Art 'twas done.
23. Upon one of his Edicts.
WHen the Great God, descended from on high;
To take the vesture of Mortality:
When the blessed Jesus, was the Angels Theme;
Whose Carols well-com'd Him, to Bethlehem:
Unto Augustus, it seemed to be known;
For name of Lord, he durst no longer own.
This Demy-God, the Honor did confer,
On the Immortal, and true Jupiter.
Jupiter, quasi juvans Pator.
24. Upon the ceasing of Oracles, at the same Time.
IF the Emperial Head, did chance to Ache;
Forthwith to Delphos, Rome did Journeys take,
To enquire who the Successor should be;
To her redundant Soveraignity.
Augustus did, on the same Message send;
But Hell was cop'd; and could not stand his Friend.
25. Festina lent.
AUgustus pleasing to reprove rash Have,
Used frequently this Proverb; Not too Fast.
Seventy six years, his Lungs were seized of Breath:
Perhaps he read that Lecture unto Death.
26. Upon his Magnificence.
WHen Rome was in her Cradle, Remus Blood,
Washed her Foundation; with a crimson Flood.
Not to be lulled by Peace could she dispense;
As if Bellona's, choicest Residence.
This made the City, far unfit to be,
A Chair of State, to Supreme Majesty.
But in Augustus Reign, fierce Mars did cease:
And from mean Houses he raised Palaces.
That which was lately, Brick, now changed its Pitch:
And Pharian Columns, did the Street enrich.
Rome now, or never, had atchiev' her Prime:
Augustus found Materials, and Peace, Time.
27. Upon his Impartiality.
THe Commendamus, which Augustus gave
His Sons; was only this; Pray let them have
My glorious Crown; Provided that they be,
Worthy the Diadem of Majesty.
The Commonwealth keeps Jubilee; is Blessed:
When great Men chiefly mind, her Interest.
28. Upon the Temple of Janus, being shut.
THe Dove called Concord, had Release a while;
From Melancholy limits, in Exile.
Swords became useless; no sad Clamor fills,
The sublime Unequal, of the Quirine Hills.
Rome locked up Janus Temple: what was He,
The Two-fac'd God, cited in Poetry?
For looking Back, perhaps he deserved Praise:
But looking Forward, Janus was accounted the God of War, as well as Mars.
He could see our days.
And let him exercise, both Eyes, and Mind;
His Temple shut, He Is like no more, to find.
29. Upon his Gaming.
AUgustus was not spotted with much Vice,
Yet He was Proud, and hugely shak'd the Dice.
Antony out-threw all, but him Alone:
Who by a lucky Passage, won the Throne.
30. Upon his Humanity.
THe Eagles Talons did so gripe the Jews,
That to pay Tribute, they durst not refuse.
Augustus wil'd the Publicans to stay,
From grudged Collections, on the Saturday:
Upon Morality, Men may dispense,
With smaller Lapses; done in Conscience.
31. Upon Tiberius Caesar's Speech; Thoughts, and Words, should be Free; in a
free State.
THe smallest Dust, does trouble much the eye;
The lightest Blow, bruises a Monarchy.
How came Tiberius to unbarre the Tongue?
To coin Pretenses, to Hang Old, and young.
Extensive Freedom! Men may Scot-free prate:
Not every Man, but they who want Estate.
32. A good Shepherd only shears his Sheep, etc.
NOne could persuade Tiberius, to play
The Tyrant, for a while; nor would He lay
Taxations on the Provinces. The Wool,
A careful Shepherd clips; Kings must not pull,
Their Subjects skins over their Ears. It Is right;
But, who Complements thus? An Hypocrite.
33. Upon his forbidding Kisses.
TIberias by a promulg'd Edict,
Prohibited Salutes: what, what, so strict?
Yes, yes, for He adored the Stews. Just so,
Mall must not Kiss; although her Madam do.
34. Tiberias was rare Good at Ex Tempore.
PRemeditated Thoughts, quite lost their Edge;
His Nest was Feathered, though his Words not fledge.
Gifted Tiberias! 'twas no Disgrace:
Dear St. revive: thou wilt have an Elders Place.
35. Oderint, dum Probent.
ROme was his Ladder, to the regal Throne:
For to requite her Love, let him alone,
Who likes her Hatred. How? None disapprove,
But thee Biberius! their Subjects Love.
36. Upon his using the Laurel, as a Shield, to protect him against Lightning.
WHen as a fiery exhalation ror'd;
And through the Middle Region, Passage bored:
Tiberias fortified his Kingly Brow;
With the proved Helmet, of a Laurel Bough.
The due Possessor, Laurel frees from Harms:
Not Envy's Thunderbolt, can pierce such Arms.
37. It was a Capital Crime to name a Goat, before Caius Caligula.
A Wanton Hee-Goat, has not moyster Pores;
Then that shag'd Monster, which proud Rome adores.
Hence was it made High Treason for to say,
A Goat; in Presence of Caligula.
A slight reflection, Princes Glory blots:
Before the Moon, forbear to talk of Spots.
38. Upon his wish, that some Eminent Mischief, might befall; during his Reign.
Caius had a misshapen Body; Face,
Exceeding Wan; nor did fair virtue Grace,
His inward Parts: yet the Audacious Clod,
Commanded Worship, to himself; as God.
You needed not to wish Calamity;
What Plague can exceed, such a Prodigy?
39. Upon his Cruelty.
CAligula's Bloodthirsty Soul, did rave,
To send a Man, to an untimely Grave.
Through the mistake of Name, a wrong was slain.
Merciless Caius, did the Fact maintain;
For He deserved it too. An apt Pretense!
He merited the Ax; through Innocence.
40. Upon his Dissimulation.
Caius a mediate Descent could frame,
From him, who yellow Tyber gave a Name.
This cast Foundations; but the regal Chair,
Became his Seat; by leading life so fair.
But when he felt the Gratifying Crown:
Deboshed Clodius, could not put him down.
Whilst Vices Wings are clipped, it cannot soar high:
Honor's the Touchstone, of Morality.
41. (...).
A Grecian Lawyer's Impudence, did quote
Claudius Dotage, and as Fool him note.
Princes should not let loose the Reins. A Frog,
Trampled his King; when Jove threw down, a Log.
42. Upon his ridiculous Resolution.
Claudius was half resolved, by his Edict;
To concede. Leave, Wind might no more afflict,
The Entrails; detained by Civility;
At Feasts, at Banquets, the Guts might let fly.
His Nostrils always wept: you might suppose,
Before I told you this; He wanted Nose.
43. Upon Nero's feigned Clemency.
THe Bloud-Hound Nero, when desired to set
His Hand to fatal Warrants; used Regret.
And to prevent the Incursions of Hate;
In mercy wished himself, Illiterate.
Whence was his Quill, in writing obstructed?
The Ink was Black; and He liked none but Red.
44. Upon his Quinquennium.
TIll Sol had kissed the Equinoctial Line,
Ten times; in Nero, Virtues Rays did shine.
After five years, He did degenerate;
And proved a Vulture, to the Roman State.
Most Kings make Good beginnings; Few endure:
A Murderer, waits till He seems secure.
45. Occidar modo Imperet.
WHen Nero's Embryo, did his Mother fill;
She searched the Bowels of Chaldean skill:
Would know his Fortune? Thy Issue shall be,
A King; thy Life shall feel his Tyranny.
Pride swelled her Joy, that she could not refrain;
Let my Son kill me; so my Son may Reign.
Her wishes took Effect; Nero was kind;
To observe punctualy, his Mothers mind.
46. Upon his inhumane Wish.
NEro hearing one say, that when he died,
He cared not if the Earth in Fire were fried;
Belched forth this wish; O might I live to see,
The World groan under, that Catastrophe!
'Twere frivolous Alecto should so do:
Thy Tyranny, may serve both Her and You.
47. Upon his being deluded by the Oracle.
NEro consulting Delphos Oracle,
How long His Soul might in her Palace dwell;
Received this Answer: Very careful be;
To ten times seven, when there is added Three.
This Age from Nero far remote appears:
His own were counted, and not Galba's years.
When on Destruction, the Gods are intent:
They use Security; as Instrument.
48. Upon his inordinate Delight in Music.
Blessed Agrippina! your Dear Son can tell,
To Tune an Harp; and play a Lesson well.
Why should his Faculty incur dislike?
As great as He, have learned to play Mardike.
49. Upon Sulpitius Galba's Deformity.
GAlba long since, did lose becoming Hair:
Extremely crooked, both Hands, and Feet, were.
It Is strange his Honor, seven Months should stand:
Who was defective in Head, Feet, and Hand.
50. Upon his Studies.
THe Study of the Laws, did Galba please;
Better then other, charming Sciences.
When Princes want the Knowledge of the Law:
It Is Tyranny, not Reason, keeps in Awe.
51. Upon Salvius Otho's Perruck.
DEformed Otho's Hair, was spread so thin;
That to wear False, He accounted no Sin.
What did our Fashions, lie in Otho's Road?
Yes, if his Perruck, were cut A la Mode.
52. Upon his Curiosity.
FIve hundred times a Day, the Looking-glass,
Commended Otho, for a cleanly Face.
This Fool to make it Fair, Sops did apply:
Had He no Wife, to learn him Mercury?
53. Upon the Justice of Aulus Vitellius.
THose, who with Galba's Blood had their Hands stained;
To suffer death, Vitellius constrained.
He, who was thus precise, was no whit Nice;
To plunge Himself, into the Mire of Vice.
One Swallow makes no Summer. Virtuous call
Rulers, when Virtue, is Habitual.
54. Upon his Gluttony.
TWo thousand Fishes, and seven thousand Fowl,
Once Feasted this, Epicurean Soul.
But He was granted, but eight Months command:
A complete year, might have starved half the Land.
55. Upon Flavius Vespasians Virtue.
VEspasian during his Privacie,
Led such a Life, as was Exemplary.
The Soldiers Love, ordained him the Chair:
He grew more High; and his Demeanor Fair.
In the 12 Caesar's, (O how frail are Men!)
Honor made but Two better; Worser, Ten.
56. Upon his Avariciousnesse.
NOne could Vespasians Impositions fly,
But, who were troubled, with the Strangurie.
His manifest Extortions, were so vile;
That Rome was taxed, every Pissing while.
57. Upon Titus Vespasians sweet Disposition.
DEbonaire Titus, rejoiced to confer
Benefits, on the sad Petitioner.
His Love kept Sentinels; lest some by chance,
Might return, with dejected Countenance.
His Subjects were his Sons. They well assigned.
His Epithet; The Darling of Mankind.
58. Upon his Assiduity in Goodness.
THe Days bright Father, had hid profuse Light;
Under the Curtains, of a Pur-blinde Night;
When good Vespasian publicly did say;
Alas my Friends! I did no good this Day.
Fame take a Note; Rome the like never Bred.
Vespasian was a God; and yet not Dead.
59. Upon Flavius Domitians Timerousnesse.
DOmitian the tedious Day did pass,
In Galleries; forging a Looking-glass;
By help of the Phengites Stone. His Mind
Was hugely intent, to observe behind.
His Cruelty, had run much on the Score:
He looked Behind; He should have looked Before.
60. Upon Domitians private Recreation.
CHildish Domitian, no Pastime did prise;
To the Heroic Turnament, at Flies.
Let Hercules Nemaean Lions kill.
Or Julius, with admiration fill,
The Worlds dimensions; who, did disarray,
The Two and fiftieth, hot Battalia.
Fierce Meleager, vapors in a Boar.
Let thy Carpophorus, kill Twenty score;
Of short-Neck'd Bears. What should Domitian try,
Dangers so Evident? A Fly, a Fly.
EPIGRAMS upon Various Subjects.
1. To His Serene Highness, Richard, Lord PROTECTOR, etc.
A Vgustus was most lovely in the Eyes,
Of Romes Grave Senate; who did Eternise
His Fame; and without Arguings agree,
To Honor him; with Pater Patriae.
In a Pacifick, and auspicious Hour,
You made an Ingresse, to the Supreme Power.
Your sweet Demeanor gives, public Content:
Love, Candor, find but few, Malevolent.
Your Father Julius was; Augustus be:
Your Countries Father; Mecoena's to Me.
2. To the Right Honorable, the Lord Chief Justice Glyn.
ONe of your Predecessors, pleased to tell
Posterity, that the Law, is a WELL.
Men are the thirsty Buckets, which receive,
More, or less Water; as, Reason gives Leave.
There Is an Eternal Spring; or else no doubt,
You had long since; drawn all the Water out.
3. To the Right Honorable Oliver. St. John, Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas.
WHere ever Sol emits his innate Light,
On purpose to transport the drowzie Night;
The English valor will endure the Test:
Nor do her Lions fear, the Eagles Nest.
Had Britain many Nestors like to you:
She should be as Renowned, for Wisdom too.
4. To the Right Honorable, the Lord Chief Baron Widdrington: And his Brother,
Mr. Vniversity-Orator.
ANd did the Juncto of the Gods agree,
To make you Sol; your Brother, Mercury?
Nature does seldom so exhaust her Store,
Of Ingenuity; as to makemore
Then one wise, in an House: ye needs must be,
Chronicl'd; for an happy Prodigy.
You Grace the Law; your Brother's words dispense,
To his Admirers; Flowrs of Eloquence.
Learning about to die* these late sad Wars:
Ordained ye, Her Co-executors.
5. To Sir Edmund Prideaux, Attorney General.
IF Law, if Rhetoric, my Muse avow;
In you Enthroned; I sing, what all Men know.
Of your great Virtue, most are Ignorant:
How Charitable unto those that want!
You have found out, the untrack'd path to Bliss:
To sue for Heaven, in Forma Pauperis.
6. To those Excellent Conveyancers, Sir Orlando Bridgman; and the worthy Mr.
Geofry Palmer.
WIse Greece, and Rome, did both in this combine;
To make addresses, to the Delphian Shrine.
And with divine Apollo to advise;
Was the Preludium of an Enterprise.
Few English men, dare purchase an Estate;
Unless your Wisdom's unsophisticate
The Title vouch. Ye can stop Hymen's way;
For Portions, Joyntures, both Sexes must pay,
Due Thanks. Wise Fathers, Ranters keep in awe;
Craving from ye (the Oracles of Law)
Help to entail their Lands: Whilst your selves be,
Tenants of Riches, of Renown, in Fee.
7. To Mr. Recorder, of the celebrious City of London.
YOur Pupil London, did a great while Long;
To have a learned Head, and fluent Tongue.
Now she vaunts happy Fortune, for to you,
All sorts those two, rare Faculties allow:
Pallas, and Suada, Triumphant are seen:
May you for ever flourish; long be Green.
8. To the Learned Lawyer, and Eloquent Pleader, Henneage Finch, Esquire.
THe divine Samian guessed aright, in this;
That Souls affect, a Metempsycosis.
The Penetration of Dimensions be;
Not dissonant, from my Philosophy.
For two great Finches Souls, the Sages know;
(Pardon the Phrase,) concorporate in you.
9. To his Honored Cousin Edward Peck, of the Inner Temple, Esquire.
CErtain set Forms, fixed in the Memory;
Almost accomplish, for the Chancery.
It matters not, in what your Practice lies:
Your Law, your Love, are no Formalities.
10. To a certain old Barrister.
GRave Monsieur Plowden, elected a time,
To tell my Father, Law's not writ in Rythme.
Ergo I must the two-topt Mount defy,
And give my Vale unto Poetry.
Were not thy skin good Buffe; my Muse should send
The Long-nail'd Furies; which thy soul should rend.
I have fierce Satyrs, that can assault Hell:
Dash out Medaeas Brains, in spite of spell.
Reclaim an unback'd Impudence. Make Bleed,
A Rock: And stab the fell Medusa's Head.
And dares thy empty Skull, bandy at Me?
Lord Paramount of gross Stupidity!
11. To his most indulgent Grandmother, Mrs. Anne Talbot.
THey who on Aesculapius Altars tend,
To my slack Memory, this Notion lend;
That Children who are sent abroad to Nurse;
Delight in them; and Love their Mothers worse.
If such Affection, in Cradles appears;
What Love may you expect, from mature years?
Your greatest Study, was my Life to save:
Your self was prompt, to Bail Me from the Grave;
When Tissical distempers, stopped my Breath;
And my clogged Windpipe seemed to whistle death.
I believe Nature, only gives Me Day;
That in some sort, I might strive you to Pay.
12. To his Honorable Father.
I Must acknowledge my Life did commence,
From you; (Dear Father) Thanks to Providence.
Who ordained you Agent, for what was done:
I could not choose a Father; you, a Son.
Reflecting on the Will, we Actions call,
Virtues, or Vices: yours was General.
An Heir was wished; but you could not foresee,
My Sex; my Wit, or my Stupidity.
For Birth, my Muse shall grateful Hymns rehearse;
In praise of him who made the Universe.
My dutiful Devoirs to you are tied:
For my Well-being, 'cause you thus Provide.
13. To his Honorable Mother.
MOther-in-Lawes, Poets much Vilify;
You, did I never; no, not secretly.
When own Mothers prove Sour, Unnatural;
Mother-in-Laws; Sons, may them aptly call.
She that is not by Nature, yet may be
An Own Mother, by sweet Indulgency.
I shall endeavor Duty to improve;
According to the Merits, of your Love.
You shall not lose those Favors, you lend Me:
This is the Time, for my Retaining Fee.
14. To his Highly valued Uncle, Thomas Pecke of Spixworth, Esquire.
When as it was my happy Chance to lie,
Sucking sweet Milk, from the University:
My happy Fortune, prompted you to hold,
Fast my Affection by the Threads of Gold.
But now the Scene is changed. You Will not confer
Your Cash, but on the sprightful Traveller.
What though you cannot push me into France?
Though you cease Piping; still my Love shall Dance.
15. To the worthy Mr. Philips, late Usher of the Free School of Norwich.
WHen Languishings gave leave, I went to School,
To you kind Sir! your Favors made Me whole.
I cannot Chide your Passion, for a Blow:
Not whipping then, makes me obsequious now.
16. To his very loving Schoolmaster, Mr. Tho. Lovering.
MY weak endeavors you were pleased to prise;
As hating, over Lads, to Tyrannize.
Indulgence made my School-boyes Life a Sport;
You did not Lash to Study; but Me Court.
This, this, persuades him, to remain your Friend;
Who may perhaps prove witty, in the End.
17. To his Endeared Tutor, Mr. Will. Naylour, Senior Fellow, of Gone. and Cai.
College in Cambridge.
TO your Protection Sir! my Muse does fly;
As conscious of her Imbecilitie.
It were Impiety, to question now;
The Residence of Candor, on your Brow.
Frequent Experiments made Manifest;
She as Queen Regent, triumphs in your Breast.
I that am Flint, to whatsoever Threat;
And cannot be Anvil'd, to a base Regret:
From things displeasing to you, did refrain:
Nor were your Moral Lectures read in vain.
The Curb of Tutor, did not chafe my will:
This made Me Obey then; and Honor still.
On Pain of Death, I durst not too much Rove:
Lest I should seem a Rebel, against Love.
18. To the highly deserving Dr. Love, Master of Corpus Christi College in
Cambridge.
WHen first I read the Orphean History,
I conceived it a gem of Poetry.
I must recant my error; That is True:
For very Fresh-men, Beadles, adore you.
19. To the learned Doctor Brown.
RAre Oculist! whose Genius did devise,
To cut the Cataracts, from Vulgar Eyes.
The Sunshine of your Learning, brought the day:
And chased the Fogs of Ignorance, away.
Your Universal Judgment, searched about:
And put Gray-bearded Errors, to the rout.
Yet Modesty made you mistake. Most True,
A Phoenix exists. The world, Brown, does owe.
20. To the Celebrated Doctor Scarborowe.
PSyche close veiled, from Galen made escape;
Nor could he view her Entrails, in an Ape.
What dissect Beasts? you are far more precize:
Galen himself, you dare Anatomize.
21. To the Honorable John Lord Herbert.
MAy my Pen venture, to approach a Name;
Long since, Espoused to an Immortal Fame?
Deslowr'd Astraea, in a Sable weed;
For your Grandfather, did not weep, but bleed;
Till she saw you, who are intent to awe;
Audacious Vice, and by your Life, vouch Law.
22. To the Honorable Lord Richardson.
OUr Virgin-Queen, beheld with great content;
Our Sister Suffolk's, happy Government:
But till her Progress; she knew not the Cause;
To be the Gospels Marriage unto Laws.
When to meet her the Justices did Ride;
Not one but had a Chaplain by his side.
To Love the Learned, Pious Clergy; is,
Virtue described, without Periphrasis.
You are the Obadiah, who do feed
The Prophets of the Lord: Relieve their Need.
Whilst you continue, in this devout way:
My Muse shall sing; and let the Clergy Pray.
23. To those Eminent Members of Parliament, Sir Horatio Townshead; and Sir
William Doyle.
OUr Mother Norfolk trusting in your Care,
As to Heroic Spirits, and sincere;
Elected ye as Guardians to us all:
As Good Fathers, let not your Children fall.
Ye who a splendid County represent;
Must strive to Give, the wiser sort content.
A joint consent, made ye our Supreme Parts:
Your virtues, attract to our Heads; our Hearts.
24. To the Noble Sir William Paston.
YOur Recreation, is to feed your Eyes,
With the most select Things, the Globe comprize.
I know the Medium to let you see
A wonder; Englands choicest Rarity.
Advance to the reflecting Looking-glass:
There you may view, the Famed Mecoena's Face.
25. To his highly valued Cousin, Will. Bloys, Esquire; Author of that celebrated
Book, called Modern Policy.
I Am a Servant to Morality;
And (thanks your Worth) Cousin to Policy.
I must be Virtues Page; lest I fall on
The Tortures, of your Colasterion.
26. To the grave and wise Gentleman, Mr. Tuthill.
TO select you from others of your Name;
The Epithet of Lord, the Vulgar frame.
Let them call Lord, I shall style you a King:
Who to subjection all your passions bring.
27 To the Fair Lady, his Daughter.
ACquaintance with your Father, Me commands;
Humbly to Kiss your Ladyships snow-Hands.
I dare not approach nigh; accept my Muse:
As she is a Virgin, you cannot Refuse.
I shall not muster up Hyperboles;
To make you Rival, to the Deities.
Pallas, your Soul; Juno, your Fortune Grace:
Venus sits smiling, on your lovely Face.
You need no Poetry: these great Truths are;
That, Madam! you are Virtuous, Wise; Rich, Fair.
28. To that profound Grecian, Mr. Duport, President of Trinity Coll. in
Cambridge.
THe witty Limner, ancient Poets fed;
With that which admired Homer vomited.
Your curious Palate, hated that crude Meat;
Homer himself, you disjoynted; and Eat.
And lest his Children, should the Fact reveal;
You devoured them too: the succeeding Meal.
29. To his worthy Friends Work, John Sherman, B. D. Author of that Pious Work,
styled White Salt.
RAther then be ungrateful, I express
My high respect, in this so rude a Dress.
What though my Muse is Lame, my Love shall not Halt:
Nor shall she vend, a cornel of Bay Salt.
30. To the Egregious Poet, Sir Will. Davenant.
That Been, whose Head, deserved the Roscian Bays;
Was the first gave the Name of Works, to Plays.
You his Corrival, in this Waspish Age;
Are more then Atlas, to the fainting Stage.
Your Bonus Genius, you this way display:
And to delight us, is your Opera.
31. To his Adopted Uncle, James Howel Esquire.
When first propitious Stars conceded Me,
The sweet enjoyment, of your Company;
I was Adopted: your Pity thought fit,
I at these years should be allied to wit.
Lest I should shame your choice, I will Improve*
And fall to study, in Dodona's Grove.
32. To the lover of Ingenuity, Tho. Stanly Esquire;.
NAture in the unfathomed Stagyrite,
Composed a Body, abject to the sight.
Fortune is more Close-fisted; for we find,
Few Poets Rich; but only in the Mind.
Nature, Fortune, in you Cooperate:
Your Parts are Great; Plentiful, your Estate.
A Poet, Rich, a Mecoenas you be:
Can our Age Parallel in One, these Three?
33. To his Loving Friend, Mr. Pain Fisher.
HOw few are English Poets! but a Brain,
That can reach Ela, in the Latin strain;
Is no small wonder. Rare in both you be:
An Ambodexter in true Poetry.
34. To Mr. John Ogilbie.
YOur sparkling Genius I then did prise;
When you poor Aesop, pleased to Manumise.
I sacrifice these Lines, lest I alone,
Should prove the Cock; and slight a precious Stone.
Were Maro now alive, He must you prise:
And by you, Homer, shall regain his Eyes.
35. To his Loving Friend Edmund Wharton, M. A. and Fellow of Gone. and Cai.
Coll. in Cambridge.
OVer three Lustrums, Time has almost flown;
Since your Acquaintance, I desired to own.
When Age adopted, you were at Expense,
Of Time, and Brains; to purchase Eloquence.
Nor would you let profound Philosophy,
Be exempt from a serious Scrutiny.
Run on the Race; be ever Fortunate:
I wish you egresse, at Honoris Gate.
36. Upon Homespun, One of the Ordinary sort of Preachers.
BUy a Gold Chain, you must entreat true weight:
And it is a Favor, not to meet Deceit.
If sheets of Vulgar Lead, you please to Buy:
Ask a Pound over, Plummers cannot Deny.
Chrysologus will stand, but just his Hour:
Battus cries out, My Lungs will hold for four.
37. An Epigram, that should have been inserted, into a Book of the Authors,
called Advice to Balaams Ass: under the Emblem of a Dog, barking at the Moon.
WHen Phoebe's Glory, the Curre did espy;
He flashed out Lightning from a Threatening Eye.
And what is the Reason? what? you may guess soon:
People kick him, while they admire the Moon.
Just so our Momus, snarls at Osborns Praise:
'Cause his own Merits cannot reach the Bays.
38. There was also intended for that Book, the Picture of an Ass, (in
reference to the Title,) with this Epigram.
WE burden not the dumb Ass, which you see:
Our Pen must scourge, lavish Garrulitie.
No shame to teach a Prating Brute: Alas,
It was an Angels Task; to stop an Ass.
39. Upon the Parliament, that voted down the Universities.
When infant Vipers to the Light do come,
They kill their Dams; by knawing of their Womb.
A Generation, Bald-pate Time never Eyed:
That durst concur, in voting Matricide.
Such Vipers as could not their Stings refrain:
Had not a Pia Matter, to their Brain.
40. Upon Owen.
FErtilis Autumno, pinguescat Vallis opimo:
Aurea saxosis, Mons habet Exta locis.
Anglia Doctrinae, laetis ditescat Aristis:
Jactat Odoenum, Wallia sicca Tagum.
Let crowded Wheat, the humble Valleys line:
The steril Mountains Bowels, with Gold shine.
Let England boast Sagacity: Since Wales,
Can with her Golden Owen turn the Scales.
Verses made Ex tempore, and writ in a Ladies book; occasioned by a Friends
recital, of that well-known Fancy of Doctor Corbets; Little Lute, when I am
gone, etc. And referring to the Covers of a singing Book, Painted with Slips of
Flowers, to several statues, which were there viewed; and bitter Cherries,
tasted of by the Author. The Lady being absent, etc.
1.
WHen my voracious Eyes first lent a Look,
Unto the Florid Covers of thy Book;
I fondly thought this happy Hour,
Might bless Me with my wished Flower.
2.
BUt since my Hopes deluded Me; I went,
And some sad Musings, in the Garden spent.
Where I, 'cause thou were Absent, (Dearest Love)
Became the statue of a mourning Dove.
3.
MY sights swift wheels rapidly roul'd about,
That it some friendly moisture, might find out,
To quench my flaming Breast. Alas,
Thou hid'st thy Rays* and I dim-sighted was.
4.
AT last, a smiling Cherry, did invite
The Embraces of, my gasping Appetite;
My Taste expected Bitterness did meet:
In all the World, for only thou art sweet.
Reverendiss. in Christo Patri, JOHANNI, Exoniae Episcopo; and Celeberrimo
Templorum Magistro, ejusdem Authoris Epistola.
Spectatissime Antistes,
SCythae, (licet Genus Hominum, ab omni Mansuetudine, alienum) piis Affectibus,
sacrificiis, necnon assiduis; Solemn coluerunt. Ego (licet Oratione impolitus,)
saluberrimum tui Adventus Jubar, demisse Congratulor. Non Lydium immensae tuae
Eruditionis Lapidem, incomptus Stylus aggreditur. Non ad Eminentiam vestram,
tenella Musa prorepit. Sed haec Carmina Eucharistica, ^unt veluti mea,
Optimatum Tesseris interposita; ne vocali, and sonoro, communi Gaudio; Ego
solus Edormire viderem. Quae (ut a Discipulo integerrimo Lusa,) Colendissime
Magister! exonorandus es; Aequi, bonique consulere.

Adsis grandisono foecunda Thalia Cothurno!
Adsis! insolito quonam sum persitus Aestro?
Aurea confectum renovarunt Secula cursum.
Nostraque Laetitiae, stagnant Praecordia rivis.
Jupiter iratus, miseros combusserit Anglos.
Fulmine solenni; cum per sua viscera, dudum,
Ardebat Civil nefas; propriasque cruenta
Sanguine Fraterno, terras madidavit Erinnys.
Horresco, referens tabidae fera vulnera dextrae;
Marcida quando suis confossa est Anglia Telis.
Sancitae Populo Leges, tacuere frementi:
Mordax Pierides, Timor and crutiavit inermes.
Sic exporrectas calcat Neptunus arenas,
(Pascua terribili tundens vicina Tridente)
Martem cum Cereri, crudeliter ingerit almae.
Cur Nugas decanto leves? Quid sanguis? and Horror?
Non sacra viscosas vulgi Delubra ruentis,
Evasere Manus. Non inculpata tuetur,
Vita. Fides, Pietas, sunt and Doctrina, peremptae.
Saevas Bellonae lacerata Ecclesia sensit
Plagas: Et Claris flevit viduata Patronis.
Nunc vero expansis, plaudit Concordia Palmis:
Et Pax, pullato detersit Nubila Coelo.
Tu (venerande Pater) redusti tutus in ulnas
Nostras; a brevibus Gyaris: Manicasque fugasti;
Praesulis immerito quas Plebs injecit Honori.
Saepius absentes doluit meditasse Penates:
Sed juvat Antiquae vidisse Crepuscula Formae.
Primaevo retulit fulgori Templa, Tiara,
Nos sub vexillo vestro, pugnamus Ovantes:
Et Themis Exultat, talem sortita Magistrum.
Call. Maii An. (...) 1659. Tui Favoris Cultor Studiosissimus, Tho. Pecke, e
Soc. Interioris Templi.

The Printer to the Reader.
IF you demand what kind of fate there is in it,
That Printers cannot be faultless when they print:
One cause why this misfortune to them comes,
Is by the multitude of Individuums
Used in Composing. What faults are slipped here,
To curious Readers obviously appear.
For which I pardon crave; especially
For one escaped through inadvertencie.
Some Poems said to be Mr. Tho. Pecke's;
Which style, on Him, may cast absurd reflex.
Whose modesty to clear, and Honor quit,
I say, I, not He, was framer of it.
J. C.
A CATALOGUE Of some Books Printed for, and are to be sold by T. Basset, in St.
Dunstans Churchyard, in Fleetstreet.
THe exact Lawgiver, faithfully communicating to the skillful, the firm Basis
and Actioms of their profession; to the ignorant, their ancient and undoubted
Birthrights and Inheritances: being as a light unto all the Professors of the
Law, as well Counselors, as Atturneys, Clerks, Solicitors, Scriveners, etc.

A Survey of the Law, containing directions how to prosecute and defend
personal Actions, usually brought at Common Law; with the Judges opinions in
several Cases. By William Glisson, and Anthony Gulston Esquires, Baristers at
Law.

A short view of the Life and Reign of King CHARLES, the second Monarch of
Great Britain, from his Birth to his Burial, by P. Heylin.

FINIS.

