THE EARL OF PEMBROKE HIS DECLARATION and RESOLUTION, to the High Court of
Parliament, CONCERNING His Election by the Parliament to be General for the
Western Parts of the Kingdom, containing these Counties following: viz.
Wiltshire. Somersetshire. Hampshire. Dorsetshire. Devonshire. Cornwall. The
Isle of Wight.


Wherein is showed his good affection to the King and Parliament, with his
noble and undaunted Resolution for preserving the peace of the Kingdom.

ALSO An Ordinance of Parliament for setting out ten ships for a Winter-guard
for Ireland, with Letters of Surprisall for the taking of the Rebels ships, or
any others that shall offer to assist them.

LONDON, November. 1. Printed for Thomas Holt. 1642.

THE EARL OF PEMBROKE HIS DECLARATION and RESOLUTION concerning his being made
General for the Western parts of the Kingdom.
ALSO An Ordinance of Parliament for the setting forth of ten ships more for a
winter-guard for Ireland, with a Letter of Surprisall for taking of the Rebels
ships, and all others that shall assist them.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration the
great danger and manifold inconveniences which might happ^^ to the whole
Kingdom, if Sir Ral^^ Hopton and the other Malignants th^^ take part with him,
should in that rebellious manner as they have already begun, contin^e ^o raise
more Force in the County, and commit such outrages as they have done, in
plundering and disarming those who stand well-affected to the King and
Parliament in that County, have thought it necessary to nominate the Earl of
Pembroke to be General for the Western parts of the Kingdom, a Person of
honor, power, fidelity and undaunted courage, whose affection to this cause is
such, that he has in a public manner declared his willingness to obey the
commands of both Houses of Parliament, in adventuring his life and fortunes in
this cause, which so much conduces to the honor and good of the King, the
preservation of the Privileges of Parliament, the maintenance of Religion, and
the general peace and safety of the whole Kingdom. His Lordship has
sufficiently declared his resolution and good affection to the public good in
his late Speech at Guild Hall, intimating, that he had ever so good a heart to
this business, that he was resolved to live and die in it.

The Counties of which he is made General are these: viz. Wiltshire,
Somersetshire, Hampshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire, Cornwall, and the Isle of
Wight, and has the like power with the Lord General the Earl of Essex, and
is to disarme the malignants and ill-affected parties of those Counties, and to
quarter on their estates for the service of the Commonwealth.

After the late battle betwixt Banbury, and Stratford upon Avon, between the
Earl of Essex, and the Kings Forces, wherein many were slain on both sides,
and diverse eminent men of the Kings Party taken prisoners, as the Earl of
Lindsey Lord chief General of His Majesty's Forces, the Lord Willoughby of
Eresby his son, Sir Edmund Stradling, Colonel Vavasor, Colonel Lunsford,
and diverse more, his Excellency remaining Master of the field, marched with his
Forces to Warwick, and is come safe thither, and has laid his prisoners in the
Castle, but the Earl of Lindsey, who was sorely wounded when he was taken
prisoner, in the said battle, is since dead.

There was a Priests lately taken at Clarkenwell, who had a Letter found about
him full of treachery against the King and Parliament, wherein are discovered
their policy used for the subversion of the Protestant Religion, the substance
of it was as follows in the vere words of the Letter found about him.

We have now many strings to our bow, and have strongly fortified our faction,
and we have added two bulwarks more. For when K. JAMES was very violent against
Arminianisme, and interrupted with his pestilent wit and deep learning our
strong designs in Holland, and was a great friend to that old rebellious
heretic the Prince of Orange; now we have planted the sovereign drug of
Arminianisme, which we hope will purge the Protestants from their heresy, and
will flourish and bear fruit in due season.

But to return again to our main fabric: In the first place we take into
consideration the Kings honor and present necessity, and we show how the King
may free himself from his wardship as Lewis the 11. did; and for his great
splendour and luster, he may raise vast sums, and not be beholden to his
subjects, which is by way of imposition and Excise: we instance the
Low-Countreyes, and show what a mass of money they raise to pay their armies
both by sea and land merely out of Excise.

Then our Church Catholics proceed to show the means how to settle this Excise
which must be by an Army of horse and foot; for we have made it sure: they
shall be Forraigners, and Germans, who will eat up the Kings revenues, and
spoil the countries wheresoever they come, though they be well paid; what
havoc will they make then when they have no pay. If the country be too hard
for the soldiers, they must consequently outrage, which is equally
advantageous to us.

There are three Troops of horse gone out of Lincolne-shire into Yorkshire for
the aid of the Lord Fairfax and Captain Hotham, against the Earl of
Cumberland and his Cavaliers: Captain Hotham has made good Cawood Castle and
Selby, and is now to join his Forces with the Lord Fairfax, who has raised
great store of men for the defense of the King and Parliament. There is a
Lieutenant Colonel and a Sergeant Major of the Kings Party taken in
Buckinghamshire, and brought up to the Parliament and committed to safe custody.

Both Houses of Parliament have passed an Ordinance for the present setting
forth to sea of ten ships for a winter guard for Iteland, and that for all the
prizes they shall take, a third part be divided amongst the Commanders and
Saylors in the Ship for their better encouragement; besides the Parliament have
also granted Letters of Surprisall to other Merchants, to take the Rebels
ships, or any others that shall offer to assist them.

FINIS.

