Vincit qui patitur OR LIUTENANT COLONEL JOHN LYLBORNE Decyphered, in a short
answer of Captain WENDY OXFORD To a most notoriously false pamphlet of the
said Lylborns entitled John Lylborne Revived printed at Bruges in Flanders.

With a short letter, which was sent to him in July last to give him
satisfaction then, why I printed not what I had then finished for the Press, in
answer to his scandalous pamphlet printed at Viana in May last.

JEREMIE 28. verse. 15.16. Then said the Prophet Jeremiah unto the Prophet
Hananiah, Hear now Hananiah, the Lord had not sent thee, but thou make this
people to trust in a lie.

Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I will cast thee from off the earth:
this year thou shall die, because thou have spoken rebelliously against the
Lord.

With some allegations against the said Mr. Lylborne which the world knows to
be truth, of his writings, actions, plottings, and contryvings, against the
late murdered King, his Royal Queen, Posterity, Nobilitity Spiritual and
Temporal, and all others of the learned Orthodox Divines, quite contrary to the
advice of Solomon Prove. the 29. verse. 18. Amos the 8. Psalm 19. Saint Matthew
the 11. the 10. Corinthians the first, the 6. and the 6. Galath. the 6 and the
6. Acts the 10. Heb. 13. and 17. verse. and in a word contrary to the whole
rules of Scripture, so that feaw or none (saying of His own wicked and
perverse party) will believe his reports.

Printed the first of April in the year of God 1653.

The Present answer of Cap: WENDY OXFORD To a scandalous Paper of Mr. JOHN
LYLBORNE
I Need not to insist much upon my discourse, all people so well knowing the
nature of the object, to answer whom is now my task in this only sheet of
paper: more monyes I have not to spend so much in vain (notwithstanding Mr.
Lilbornes great reports of Salleryes receiving from England) which is well
known to the contrary, neither have I such collections, beggings, and
continual recruits which Mr. Lilborne weekly recives from his Brother hood and
faction in England, by reasson I give not such advise in my letters to those of
England as he does weekly, which He takes the impudency to Justify the same in
part of his pamphlets, by a little you may judge of the rest, He is so much an
Englishman as ever He was, not to have King nor States to do harm to his
Brother rebels and traitors in England, to that end he writs to some in
England his oppinions concerning sea and Land service which may fall out cross
to the designs of the rebels enemies of England. The Proverb often times
prooves truth, That a Standerby sees better then he that plays, to that end he
remains amongst the Parliaments friends to give aim against both our King,
and the States of these united Provinces, being between both. But had I such
sumes of moneys as he reports, he should have heard undoubtedly from me ere
this; having had 24. sheets of Paper ready for the press these 9. months in
two volumes, the one Entitled. The Banished-mans Complaint, the other John
Lylbornes Portaicture with A Hue and Cry after Him.

Nay had I such sumes as he reports, I would not have suffered my book
entitled.

The Prospective Glass for King and subjects to have layn Printed 9. months in
the Printers hands and not sent them into the World imediatly after their
birth, where in Mr. Lylborne is more at larg discovered, his cruelty and
barbarism laid open to all readers.

But why do I hold thee in the porch (Courteious reader) when the house is so
little. Therefore welcome to the rest, and in brief, who so has, or shall
please to read the 8 page of Mr Lilbornes letter directed to Mr D.D. in the
united Provinces, may find the term he gives me. of Spy of Cromwells and
Scotts, and says my book entitled The unexpected Life, (given by Lilborne
and his faction) and the long wished for death of the thing called Parliament
in England, is false and on purposs, to have his throat cut, so that no man
must write or speak what he has done for that cause. But let me tell Mr
Lilborne, that what I write in that book against him, and ten times more then
I shall here insert, that those he terms Cavaliers here, and else where, knows
to be too great a truth, therefore the more he goes about to veil his former,
and still vilany, He will but give him self the lie. For has not many told
him to his face the same; and does not all know that John Lylborne (when he was
but an aprentise boy in London) was one of the very first (if not the first)
that ever endeavored to make a separation between the late murdered King and
his People: The Dutch also can not be ignorant thereof, for, for that very
cause did he fly in to these Lands, and his residence was here in Delph, and my
printer was his in those days, and he made a Burgur here of Delph at the same
time. O yes you (Mr Lylborne) are very well known to be the insurecter in
chief, and him who brought great tumults to white Hall that had not Capt:
Endimion Porter immediately with his trayn band, the Nobility and Stout-hearted
gentery in Court assisted each other, the sense murdered King, his Queen and
Royal progeny had undoubtedly been then murdered, so that you had saved the
murtherurs at Westminster a great deal of Honor, and costly trouble to the 3
Kingdoms: It is likewise known to all at home and a broad of your own nation,
that after that insurrection against the King etc. in the rebellious city of
London and Southwarke you did raise the same rabble, and (had not the train
bands likewise prevented) violently fell on Lambeth House and have killed his
Grace of Canterbury, though sense butchered by your brethren. And does not the
three nations ring of you (Mr Lylborne) for caussing libells to be throun in
his Majestyes coach, as he past the streets of London, and do not all know you
were one of the first Actors in the late bloody war, and death of the late
murdered King, ever posting betwixt the Devils in the Army, and the Turks in
London, but of this more at large else where; And for the pressent I reffer the
reader to your own works (Jack) of 44. books by you printed, or at least
owned (in your Appologie) and sense: in all of which, if there be not Treason,
Conspiricie False Doctrine and Herisy, this is not truth, especialy by reason
my memory is fresh with your pampehlet from Viana in May last, wherein if any
please to view the 12 page they may find your aspertions on the present King,
and your fix Resolutions against the Scotts King (as you term him) to be
irrevocable; and you (Jack) take presumtion upon you there to set down the
reasons, and in the same page say that you will not lose your party, to set his
Interest on foot; in a word all your pamphlets are compossed of naught elce
but seditious names, of Tyranny and oppression in monarchy, and you cloak all
your rebellion under honest magna Charta, which had those valiant old Britanes
thought it should have been so much abused by such evile Spirits as thou art,
they would have made a bone-fire of it, although it cost so dear as it did.
Now let me further tell thee (reader) veiw but that pamphlet, and this last of
his at Bruges, and you shall see, that he labors covertly to distroy this
Kings interest in all States, under covert of the fredome of the people of
England, crying it up, which the world knows cannot be with out their King, as
well as a King consists in the safety of his people, but not a word of a
crown, or King, (except in detraction and derission thereof) in all his
works, O that is contrary to the motions of his Spirit: which now he would
fayn veil over to cheat true hearts out of their understandings, and if you
please impartialy to view Mr Lylborns designs in the last page of his letter
to Mr. D D, wherein he confesses, the Dutch may be angry with him etc: (a
guilty conscience needs no accusser) but says Mr. Lylborne there he is no
hearty enemy of the Dutch, but a true borne Englishman, and truly if all
Englishmen really observe that only page of his, they would have small cause to
think well on Jacke Lylborne, for, he shows what he would be at, neither for
Dutch, King, nor any elce but himself and his crew, for says he therein, that
he desiers with all his heart, an honest peace may be concluded, and soundly
settled between the two States, to the rational securing distinctly, the rights
and Priveledges of each nation with out encroachments of either side by
stripping the great -- on both sides (here in is old Jacke Lylborne revived in
ill Language) and Levelling one with an other, (that being his professed game)
from their arbitrary and Tyranical power says he, (there is an other chipp of the
old block) and so goes on protesting that if his schattered power and
interrest, could contribute any thing to the accomplishing of such a peace and
a greement, he would heartily venture his Life etc: with more large
expressions. Now you may immagine the reasson hereof, and the good which will
arise thereon That if a peace etc. the King may seek his fortune, and
consequently all loyal and true hearted Englishmen of great estates, high birth
(and too good breeding) to be kept from their old and rightful possessions:
but in deed (Jacke) neither English or Dutch must ever look to see peace and
quietness in the 3 Kingdoms of England etc. nor in deed these Netherlands 2
years together with out the Crown be settled on the rightful Heir, for it
will be a pressident and high way to destruction, of all Monarchy in the world,
and set up oppressive Anarchy in steed thereof which the Lord of Hosts but no
doubt will, open the eyes of all Princes (in Christendom especially) for the
prevention thereof, and break the cords of all such unlawful presidents:
besides it will be such a moate, in the eyes of the Netherlands, that it will
not be soon picked out) for all he claws the Dutch in the said Letter, whose
wisdom is too great for his delusive ways. View what he writes to his
Intelligencer Mr. D D. (whom I do avow if so, to be the Son of perdition and
not of an honest woman) for, the time is yet to come, that ever I thought, or
spoke of the Death of John Lylborne, I have other things to talk of on, then
such a perverse disposition; but as I said mark well how he would claw etc:
for says he in the last lines of that letter, what he would do, if the Dutch
would but give Oliver a box on the ear, he would give one on the other in his
way, if not, account him a knave* (many thinks that noe news, any time his 18
or 20 years) but observe the box on the ear, would be both to the English and
Dutch, for should they agree, they ^ust look to be in war with all
neighboring nations, taking part with such a people whose thirst for blood, is
not to be quenched, until they be served as. Alexander was, or the 30 Tyrants
of Athens, for that the Treasury of these lands will not only be exhausted,
but for ever remain empty enough: Now where as Mr. John falsely calumniateth
me again in the 4 and 5 page of his book, by the name Spy of the English and
Dutch, and that He routed me from Amsterdam, many at the Hague, Amsterdam and
elce where knows to the contrary, for the Landlord, Landlady, and other
lodgers in the House wherein our abode was there, and Capt* Rawlins told
Lylborne that to be a cruel Lie to his face (as I am Informed by some of them
selves) for I long before resolved to depart that City, as, (...) being too
dear a place, and not s^ ^lthfull as where I am, which City I designed for my
a boade, at my ve^^ first landing: and where as ^e wickedly and in deed
diabolically ^erses me wi^^ the contriving his murder at Bruges and
Amsterdam, I have more largely cleared that point elce where, only give me
leave, to let you know his bloody conscience is so guilty, that he fears more
then ordinary, for if I had, had such an intent, and was to have, or had a
sallery, for the contriving his murder, I could have dispatched him long sense,
as we traveld together in ships, in our Journey from England, or as we lay
together often times in Amsterdam, in his or my own chamber: and as for
hiering at the first coming over, or sense, any of the Duke of Lorraignes men,
or any elce, I neither could then, or can I well yet, either speak, or
understand the languages of foreign nations, or had I, or have I yet any such
acquaintance in the Lorraignes army, or any such murdering, bloodthirsty, and
bloodminded people, as any those he pretends, and as him self has, and still
is to be feared yet remains, otherwise he could never symphatyze so much with
the disposistion of the Devil, the father of all mischief, wherefore at
present I shall only make this protestation, against all his particulars and
Generals; That I desire all my other sins may be forgiven me at the last
day, saving thoses he charges me with, of murder in a most ample way, of him
in particular, and many in the general of both Nations, as also that detestable
on of Lasciviousness, (no Jacke) I am none of your adimantical romancers
neither am I one of your faction, that hold it noe sin to do with a sister
when the Spirit moves, neither am I so cowerdly as you term it, to plott, or
contrive any man's murder, in a base ignoble way, especialy yours, at that
time, when I had not occassion for it, you never deserving from me any
unkindness (as to my own self) until your pamphlet from Viana came forth,
yet I scorn to think of such heatheniss practices, or Italian lacivious
engagements. Wherefore John Lylborne on what grounds these jealouses arises I
can not conciev of your thus raving, and when you write again, I pray in your
next scurilous paper name them outright in your superscriptious, and also in
your inward parts of your pamphlets nominate your intelligencers, who are not
only the blow coals between you and me but elce where, then I doubt not but
it will appear to the world, thou have been as erroneously perverse to me, as
thou have been generaly against all goodness, honesty and sound judgment from
thy childhood; nay against all people (saving of thy own faction,) again
where as Mr. Lylborne in the 4 and 5th. pages charges me with the name Spy on
Dutch and English I leave all to my former books of satisfaction, Espicialie
my book called The Hue and Cry, after John Lylborne, Or, O Jack art thou found.

Only desiering all Dutch and English, Irish and Scotts, to think of me as
they have hither unto found both my behavior and inquisitions in Company
keepings, and shall beg of them which knows me not (but by the pen of such a
one, who never sense he could first hold it would write any thing elce, but
that which portented to sedition and conspiracy, against public or private
persons) wherefore I desire all to cast their serious eyes, and make deep
inquissitions both of my gestures, actions, and dispossitions past and to come,
and then to a prove ad probatum. Which I doubt not (if I should be questioned
in these lands, by the false suggestions of Lylborne, that there are many
persons of Honor of the Nations of Dutch, English, Scotts, Irish, and French,
who would give a character of me as they have found, having made deep
searches into my ways, for their own satisfactions, which I forbear at
present, or in future to mention, as not being bound there unto by answer to
any Scandalous pen (much less to thine Jacke, who is so well known cannot
touch paper but in letters of blood and maintenance of rebellion, malice, and
extreordinary self conceit; thinking thereby, either to force, or fear those
thou writs against to be of thy in solidity and factiously wicked, and
perversely unparraleld nature.) and where as thou give the term of whore to
one (who were she not of so near a relation unto me as she is) I should then
say more then I shall at present for that the whole world knows thee to have
written against those and called them so in thy pamphletts, whose feet she is
not worthy to wipe, but she is so well known in these parts, of her life and
conversation, of her descent and breeding, that thy pen can not injure her, and
for her journeys making into England it is so well known here to the better
sort, that she goes not about any such matter aledged against her, or me in
that nature, wherefore when thou writest unto me or any body elce, show not the
eye of misunderstanding, and sacrifice not they great man hood so much by thee
blazed Jack, in this pamphlet against an innocent creature and on of the
weaker vessels. A las Jacke, I throught thou had not forgotten the rule of
schooleboys so much: but what shall I say more to all gentlemen, then what I
have already at present, and to the Jacke Lylborne, more then the copy of the
letter under written, which I desire all to read, and judge accordingly. But
Jacke, to witness they falsitie to the King, let all Gentlemen in quier if thou
have not bought his Palace of Thibalds which cost the but six thoussand
pounds, of which thou have already made before thy coming over, seven
thoussand five hundred pounds of only the wanscote, chimney pieces, lead,
Glass and Irone, and converted the rest into above a hundred Tenniments.

A Copy of a Letter sent to Mr. Lylborne etc.
Liut: Col: Lylborne
By your uncivil pen and hair braned folly you have caused me (as much as in
you lies) to stand charged and guilty of many ungentleman like actions, the
burden whereof (was not your pearsson and faction: so well known that they
Honor more then dishonor by railing etc. against those you write) would be too
heavy long to bear, but having the patrocing of John Lylborne, it is not felt
at all, which were an other the author, I might then express a no less eassy,
then I do now a safe issue and good success in the vindication of my own
innocence, which I desire thoses that know us both, and such us know neither of
us, but by our lines, that neither my rashness may plead my innocence, nor
your brasseness my guilt, but that all true hearted gentlemen would conceive of
my defenses as they are of them selves with out reference to either (as I shall
endeavore so to present them,) and I doubt not but when ever I shall resolve to
go out of these countres, I shall go as clearly justified, as I am at present
in the testimony of a good conscience concerning your allegations: and I doubt
not with the blessing of God, but to pull out those poysnous arrows of base and
unworthy actions which you endeavor to feather in the hearts of Gentlemen of
all nations purpossly to make me odious in the nostrils of those heroicke
Spirits who hitherto abhor to hear your name or books spoken of. Sr you
would make hogsheads and whole tunes of some one or two cupps of wine, to the
end, that some petty miss alleged errors of mine may be so intoxicated, that
they are put in the elevation of the highest and damnable crimes of mankind:
but really it has not been in my genius to discern such monsters in my
breast, as you by your sinisterous informations endeavor to stick to heart: but
had I the least suspicion in my self of any thing you charge me withal, I
would spare you further writing, confess all, and through the first stone at my
self, nay pass sentence of condemnation also. Which if you write more, I shall
answer more at large. Then have at you in the name of the Lord, sit as fast as
you can, I will dismount you from your saddles of refuges of Viana etc. out of
these Lands: and when I have hunted you out hence, I shall send further hue and
cries into those Lands where ever you are residing. So resolves

Your forgiving Enemy upon repentance to God, and Wendy Oxford

Gentlemen
This letter made him forsake Viana as you see and go to Brugges, to the
countries of his bretherens friend the Spaniard, which no Prince in
Christendom but refuses to correspond with them and Lylborne, nay the
heathenish Princes, only the Spansh, but it may come in time to his own
palaces the same which has happened by rebellion in my Land, if so noe pity
by my consent on him nor his.

FINIS.

