OF Sudden Diseases.
By Dr. JOHN PECHEY of the College of Physicians, London, at his House in
Robin-Hood's-Court, the Lower End of Bowlane, near Bazing-Lane, Cheapside.
EVERY one that practices in this manner, and would publish Medicines with
Reputation, ought, in the first place, to give an Account of himself: Because
many, nowadays, practice Physic, and publish Medicines, that were never
instructed in the Art of Physic; and so impose on the Public, by professing
an Art they don't understand. I shall therefore preface the following
Undertaking with a Testimonial I received from the College of Physicians many
Years ago.

KNOW all Men, That the President of the College of Physicians, with the
Consent of the Fellows of the same, has, by Authority from King and Parliament,
examined, and Approved of, and Elected into the College, J. PECHEY Master of
Arts in the University of Oxford, a Man of Probity and Skill; and we have
granted him full Power and Authority to exercise the Science and Art of
Physic, according to the Laws published to this Purpose. And moreover, we have
granted him the Use and Benefit of all the Profits, Liberties, and Privileges
which have been already, or may be hereafter granted by Authority aforesaid.

In Witness whereof, we have Sealed these Presents with our Common Seal, at our
College in London, the 22d of December, in the Year 1684. and in the
Thirty-sixth Year of King Charles IId.
Having often considered that there are several Diseases so surprising, and
withal so very violent, that the Patient is often dead, or past all Hopes of
Recovery, before a Physician, in many Places, can be called or advised with:
And that in this Great and Populous City, very few Practitioners are willing to
do any thing for the Sick in the Night; and that no Physician has hitherto
professedly undertaken to dispense Medicines for the Sick in the Night, nor can
without good Help; though acute and violent Diseases happen as well in the Night
as Day, and some of them oftener in the Night than Day. So that many People
seized with sudden and violent Diseases in the Night, are at a loss, and know
not where to apply themselves for Relief: I have employed my self several Years
to find out proper Remedies for sudden and violent Diseases. And after Thirty
Years Practice and Experience, the following Medicines are the best and most
effectual I know, for the Diseases hereafter mentioned.

And that the Sick may have Relief in the Night as well as Day, I have
undertaken to dispense the following Medicines at any time of the Night as well
as Day, for sudden, violent, and dangerous Diseases: And I believe they may be
of General Use, and may suit all Conditions of Men; all, by the Frailty of
Nature, lying open to one or other of these sudden Incursions. And such as live
at a Distance from the City, or in the Country, ought to keep the Medicines by
them that are proper for their Diseases, especially if they have been often
seized with sudden and violent Diseases. For they will find no small Comfort
and Security, in having an Approved Remedy ready at hand in time of need.

The Powder to prevent Miscarriage.
THIS is a noble Remedy; it strengthens and comforts the Stomach, expels Wind,
and comforts the Child very much; and strengthens a weak Womb, and the
Ligaments of it, and prevents the Courses; and is a powerful Remedy for
Diseases of the Womb, coming from extreme Weakness, Cold, and Moisture, and
Laxity or Looseness of the Womb, or from a Defluxion of Humors upon the Womb.
A Paper of it must be taken daily, Morning and Evening, in a Glass of Claret.
Price 6 d. a Paper.

Drops to hasten Delivery.
THESE Drops wonderfully hasten Delivery, when the Pains cease, or are too
weak, and when the Womb does not sufficiently help itself in promoting the
Birth; and in this Case they excel most other Remedies, and are, as it were, a
divine Help: They are also good for Vapors and Mother-Fits. Twenty of these
Drops may be taken at any time, in any Liquor the Woman drinks, and they must
be repeated upon occasion: but you must shake them every time you use them. The
Price of a Viol of these Drops is 1 s. 6 d.

The Childbed Julep.
THIS Julep is an approved and blessed Remedy; and if it be taken presently
after Delivery, it prevents a great many Diseases that afflict Women in
Childbed, and kill many, as Fevers, Convulsions, Inflammations; and cures
Bruises of the Womb, and prevents the Obstruction of the Childbed Cleanfings.
It cures After-pains, and all manner of Pains in the Bowels and Belly; and is
of a Balsamic and Healing Nature, and a divine Help for Women after difficult
and hard Labor, as any one will plainly find, that makes use of it presently
after Delivery. The Viol contains 4 Ounces, which must be taken presently after
Delivery. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Electuary and Hysteric Cordial for a Suppression of the Childbed
Cleansings.
THIS Electuary and Hysteric Cordial, if they are taken soon after the
Suppression of the Childbed Cleansings, generally take it off, and prevent
many ill Accidents: For the Suppression of these, is one of the worst and most
dangerous Symptoms that can befall a Woman after Delivery, especially if they be
wholly and suddenly stopped the first three or four Days.

The Woman must take the Quancity of a large Nutmeg of the Electuary every 3d
Hour, till the Suppression is removed; drinking after every Dose of the
Electuary 4 Spoonfuls of the Hysteric Cordial; and a Galbanum Plaster ought
to be applied to the Navel. The Pot of the Electuary contains 3 Ounces, Price 2
s. the Cordial 13 Ounces, Price 2 s.

The Electuary and Julep for a violent Flux of the Courses.
AN immoderate Flux of the Courses happens to Women either in Childbed, or at
other Times: As to the first, that afflicts Women most on the first Days after
difficult Labor, and is accompanied with a long Train of Hysteric Symptoms;
and as it happens only on the first Days, so usually it does not last long; for
if a thickning Diet be ordered, it soon abates. The following Drink may be also
used:

Take of Plantain-water and Red Wine, each 1 Pint; boil them till a third Part
is consumed; sweeten it with a sufficient Quantity of White Sugar; let the
Woman take half a Pint of it twice or thrice a Day.

But as to the Flux, which happens out of Childbed, though it befalls Women at
any time, yet it most commonly comes a little before the Time it leaves them,
namely, when they are about Forty-five Years of Age, if they have them young;
and about Fifty, if 'twere late before they began to have them; and by reason
of the great Quantity of Blood which is evacuated, they are almost continually
afflicted with Vapors and much weakened.

In order to the Cure, you must bleed in the Arm, and 8 Ounces of Blood must be
taken away; and the next Morning my cooling Purging Potion must be given, which
must be repeated twice, three Days betwixt each Purge; and every Night going to
Bed the Woman must take 5 Spoonfuls of my Cordial for the Bloody Flux, through
the whole Course of the Disease: And after she has been purged thrice, she must
take the Quantity of a large Nutmeg of my Electuary, for the immoderate Flux of
the Courses, in the Morning, and at 5 in the Afternoon daily, drinking
presently after each Dose of the Electuary 6 Spoonfuls of my Julep, for an
immoderate Flux of the Courses. The Pot contains about 3 Ounces of the
Electuary, Price 2 s. 6 d. The Viol of the Julep contains 8 Ounces, Price 1 s.
6 d.

This Method and these Medicines also cure the Whites in Women.

Sometimes the Courses come with violent Pain; sometimes they come before their
due time, and stay longer than they should, and sometimes break out from Places
not natural. For each of these Diseases I have a proper Remedy.

An excellent Cordial Mixture for Weakly Women, near the time of Delivery.
THIS Restorative Cordial Mixture wonderfully strengthens the Mother and Child;
it quickens and revives the Spirits, is very good for the Stomach, and expels
Wind, and cheers the Heart, and comforts the Womb, and makes the Mother and
Child so vigorous and lively, that if a Spoonful of it be taken twice a Day a
Month before lying in, it procures an happy Delivery, and renders the Child
brisk and lusty. The Bottle contains 8 Ounces, Price 3 s.

The Cordial Drops.
THESE Drops are excellent for Mother-Fits, Faintings, Swoonings, and Sinking
of the Spirits, for an Apoplexy, and Trembling and Palpitation of the Heart,
Giddiness, Falling Sickness, Wind, Disorders of the Brain and Womb; they
quicken the Senses, revive the Spirits, and are of great Use to prevent
Infection in sickly Seasons; and they are of such great and wonderful Virtue,
that People subject to these sudden and dangerous Diseases, ought to have them
always by them. The Dose is from 20 to 30 Drops, according to the Age and
Strength, in a Glass of Canary or White Wind, or in a Dish of Tea or the like.
They may be given in the Fit, or in the Morning Fasting, or at Night going to
Bed. Price 1 s. the Ounce.

The Powder for Childrens Convulsions.
COnvulsions in Children are very frequent; and they are chiefly subject to
them in the first Months, and at the Time they breed their Teeth: But they also
happen at other times, and proceed from other Causes, in such as are disposed
to them. This Powder is an approved Remedy for these Convulsions, a Paper of it
being given the Child Morning and Evening, till the Fits go off, especially two
or three Days before every New and Full Moon, in a Spoonful of Black
Cherry-water, or the like; but if the Child be in the first Months, or very
Young, half a Paper is a sufficient Dose. The Price of 12 Papers 3 s.

An Excellent and Approved Oil for Childrens Gripes.
GRipes frequently happen to Children either with a Looseness or without it;
and if they continue long, they weaken Children, and occasion Convulsions.
Anoint the Child's Navel and Pit of the Stomach with this Oil a little warmed;
and you will find it to be an excellent Remedy. Price 1 s. the Dram.

My Excellent Water for the Bloody Flux, Hysteric Colic, Violent Loosenesses,
Griping of the Guts, Stone in the Kidneys, and the Gout when stricken in.
THis Water is an admirable Remedy for the Bloody Flux, the Griping of the
Guts, and Pains of the Stomach, and for sharp and corroding Humors in the
Bowels, for vomiting and spitting of Blood, and for violent Loosenesses, and
for an immoderate Flux of the Courses, and an excellent Remedy to prevent
Miscarriage, when any violent Pain or Perturbation arises in a a Woman with
Child. It chears the Heart, and revives the languishing Spirits, and
strengthens and comforts the Womb. It is good in the Smallpox and Measles,
when the Sick is restless and Lightheaded, and when the Fever is high, or when
the Smallpox don't rise well. When the Gout is stricken in upon the Stomach or
Bowels, and threatens sudden Death, this Water is a sovereign Remedy, and
relieves the Sick to Admiration. For the Stone in the Kidneys, as soon as one
any is seized with a Fit of it, setting aside all other Remedies, let him
presently drink a Gallon of Posset Drink, wherein two Ounces of the Roots of
Marshmallows have been boiled, and let the following Glyster be injected: Take
of the Roots of Marshmallows and Lillies, each one Ounce; of the Leaves of
Mallows, and Pellitory of the Wall, and of the Flowers of Camomil, each one
Handful; of Flax and Fennigreck Seeds, each half an Ounce, boil them in a
sufficient Quantity of Water to a Pint and an half, dissolve in the strained
Liquor brown Sugar and Syrup of Marshmallows, each two Ounces; mingle them and
make a Glyster: As Soon as he had rendered all the Posset Drink by Vomiting, and
rejected the Glyster, let him take half the Bottle of Water, and keep himself
as quiet as possible in Bed. The Water must be taken in the same Quantity, when
the Gout is stricken in upon the Bowels or Stomach, and the Patient must keep
himself Quiet in Bed. For the Gripes, a Man or Woman may take 5 or 6 Spoonfuls;
a Child, according to the Age and Strength, 1, 2, or 3 Spoonfuls; for a violent
Looseness or Bloody Flux, 2 Spoonfuls must be taken after every Stool, and a
Man or Woman must take 6 Spoonfuls going to Bed, every Night as long as the
Flux continues. For an immoderate Flux of the Courses or Whites, 5 Spoonfuls
must be taken every Night, or every other Night, according to the Violence of
the Disease, for a Week. To prevent Miscarriage, the Woman must take 5 or 6
Spoonfuls, and keep her self Quiet in Bed. For the Smallpox and Measles, a
grown Person must take 5 or 6 Spoonfuls, a Child, 1, 2, or 3 Spoonfuls,
according to the Age. The Bottle contains Eight Ounces. Price 2 d. 6 d.

My Water to stop Bleeding at Nose.
THis Water stops Bleeding at Nose, Lint in the form of Tent being dipped in
it, and put up the Nostril from whence the Blood flows. And if you apply a
Linen Rag doubled, being first dipped in this Water. to a Wound, it will
presently stop the Blood; but you must keep your Fingers upon the Rag about
half an Hour. And if an Artery be cut it stops the Blood, being used as above
directed, and kept on awhile with your Hand. This Water having been used with
great Success upon several Occasions, may well deserve a Place here; and
whoever tries it, will find it an Excellent Remedy.

My Julep to stop Violent Vomiting.
THis Julep for Vomiting is the most effectual Remedy that was ever found out,
for it scarce ever fails to stop Vomiting in a short time, when all other
Medicines will not do it. It must be taken all at once, and the Sick must keep
his Bed, or lie down for some Hours. Price I s. 6 d.

My Vomiting Powder.
THis is the best of all Vomits for general Use, for it works with much Safety
and Gentleness; whereas many other Vomits differ very little from Poisons. It
cures the Headache and Giddiness of the Head, it cleanses a foul Stomach, cures
Surfeits, Loathing, and Vomiting, and causes a good Appetite and Digestion; it
is good for the Jaundice, Wind in the Stomach, Bloody Flux, and Looseness; and
powerfully opens Obstructions of the Lungs, and cures Wheesings, Shortness of
Breath, and the Ptisick: And in these Cases this Vomit once taken, will do more
good than ten Purges. A weak Woman may take half a Paper, a strong Man or Woman
may take the whole Paper; Children may take a third part of a Paper, more or
less, according to their Age; a Child of seven Years of Age may take a third
Part. It must be taken in a Spoonful of Posset Drink or Water Gruel; and large
Draughts of Carduus-Tea must be taken after every time you Vomit. The best time
of taking it is about Seven in the Evening, and when it has done working go to
Bed, and take a little Burnt-Claret, or Mace-Ale, or the like: But it may be
taken at any time of the Day or Night, when there is occasion, and, as need
requires, you may repeat the use of it. The Price of this Vomit is I s.

The Royal Antidote.
IT powerfully resists Poison, the Plague, and Smallpox, and cures the Biting
of Serpents and other venomous Beasts, and the Biting of a mad Dog. Is good for
the Stomach, Head, Brain, and Nerves. It chears the Heart; is good for
Melancholy, Sadness, and Dejection of Mind; excellent for Hysteric Women; and
gives a new Ferment to the Blood and Juices, moving them gently and keeping
them in a due Mixture, and frees them from Putrefaction, and so strengthens the
Spirits, that they are able to resist Malignity, and to cast it forth through
the Pores of the Skin; and it is a powerful Remedy for Continual and Malignant
Fevers, when other Medicines are ineffectual. Two Spoonfuls may be taken at a
time; but in Fevers give 3 Spoonfuls every eighth Hour. The Viol contains 4
Ounces. Price 2 s.

My Sweating Bolus.
THere is scarce any Sweating Medicine to be compared with this Bolus: It is
very good against any Malignity, and a powerful Remedy in Continual Fevers, and
such as are of an ill sort; and is also very cordial and good for the Stomach;
and may be used upon all Occasions where Sweating is necessary: Especially when
the Gout is stricken in upon the Bowels, and causes a Looseness and Gripes.
Price I s,

My Family Balsam.
THis Balsam is excellent for Cuts and Wounds; is good for old running Sores,
old Aches and Strains, withered Limbs, Cramps, Convulsions, Tremblings,
Numbness, and Stitches in the Sides; softens the Hardness of the Liver and
Spleen: Being well bathed upon Sinews shrunk, it comforts them, and causes them
to be extended to their due length; and is excellent for the cure of all manner
of outward Swellings: It strengthens weak Limbs, and is good for Lameness and
the Palsy, and comforts the Joints and Nerves; and is of such great Use that it
ought to be kept in all Families. Anoint the Part affected with it Morning and
Evening before a gentle Fire till the Patient is well, and keep the Part
affected warm. Price 6 d. the Ounce.

My Blistering Plaster.
A Among all the Blistering Plasters that have been hitherto invented, this
is certainly the best, for it infallibly raises a Blister in the space of 10 or
12 Hours; and if it be carefully taken off, it brings off the Skin with it, so
that there is no need of cutting the Blister, as is commonly done when other
Blistering Plasters are used. Price 6 d. the Ounce.

I will here also add my Virgins Powder, and 4 or 5 excellent Medicines more
that are often wanted.

My Virgins Powder.
THis Powder opens Women's Obstructions, and cures the Green Sickness, as many
Maids in London know very well, who, after they have labored a long while
under this Disease, and have used many Medicines without Benefit, have been
perfectly cured by this Powder; and it restores to pale Virgins a fresh and
pleasant Countenance. A Paper of it must be taken daily every Night going to
Bed, in a Spoonful of Syrup of Gilliflowers, or the like, till they are quite
well. The Price of 12 Papers' 3 s. But before they begin taking of this Powder,
they must be blooded in the Arm, and purged thrice with my Bitter Tincture.

My Electuary for Agues.
THIS Electuary certainly cures Agues of all sorts, in the space of a few Days,
being taken presently after the Fit is off, namely, take the quantity of a
large Nutmeg every 4 Hours; and 8 Days after taking the last Dose, take another
Pot of the Electuary in the same manner, though the Ague be gone, to prevent the
Return. The Pot contains 3 Ounces, Price 2 s. 6 d.

My Pectoral Syrup for Consumptions.
THIS Syrup is an effectual and excellent Remedy for Consumptive Coughs, Colds,
Wheezings, Ptisick, Shortness of Breath, Stoppages of the Breast and Lungs, and
Soreness of the Breast and Lungs. It Is of a Balsamic and Healing Nature,
discharges the Matter easily from the Lungs, cures Rheums and Soreness of the
Throat: And whereas most other Medicines that are used for Coughs, take away
the Stomach; this, on the contrary, strengthens the Stomach, and creates an
Appetite. Half a Spoonful of it may be taken often in a Day. Price of a Pint of
this Syrup is 5 s.

My Julep for Vapors.
THIS Julep may be well ranked amongst the most excellent Medicines for
Vapors; for it presently suppresses them, by quieting the Spirits, and
reducing them to Order. It has been often tried and well approved of; and may
be truly said to be one of the best Medicines for the Hurry and Confusion of
the Spirits. The Dose is from 4 Spoonfuls to 6, as often as there is Occasion.
The Viol contains a Pint, Price 2 s. 6 d.

Ingredients for Purging-Beer for Chilren.
PUT these Ingredients into a Quart Bottle with Ale and Small Beer, each a
Pint; shake them well together, and let them stand all Night; the next Day let
the Child drink of it for its ordinary Drink; and when half is drank, fill up
the Bottle again, and let the Child drink of it as before, till it has taken
all. It purges gently, and strengthens the Stomach and Bowels; and is good for
the Worms, and is a very proper Purge for Children in most Cases; and certainly
cures Childrens Hectic Fevers. Price 1 s.

My Purging Powder.
THIS Powder is so very safe and easy in its Operation, and of such general
Use, that it is a proper Purge for Men, Women, and Children, and may be used in
all Diseases where Purging is necessary; and is really an exceeding good Purge,
and of a small Price. A strong Man or Woman may take the whole Paper; tender
Women and weakly Men may take 3 Quarters of a Paper; Children betwixt 7 and 14
may take half a Paper; for Children under 7, a Paper may serve for 4 Purges: It
may be taken with Sugar, or in the Pap of a roasted Apple, or with a little
Syrup, or with a little Beer. Price 6 d. the Paper.

And now, that this Undertaking may be more generally useful, I will add, in
the following Index some other choice Medicines that are often wanted.

And moreover, any sick Person that comes to my House, shall have a faithful
Account of his or her Disease, and the best Advice I can give them: But if they
expect to receive any Benefit by Advice or Medicines, they must come in time,
before their Diseases are incurable. And here I must inform the Reader, that I
have learnt, by Time and Experience, certain Rules for Living, and for Diet,
Exercise and Rest, that give greater and more lasting Relief in the Gout and
Stone, and some other Diseases, than any Medicine whatever, (except in violent
Fits of the Stone, and when the Gout is stricken in upon the Bowels or Stomach;)
and are the best means to preserve Nature to extreme old Age, and contribute
much also to the Cure of Consumptions, Convulsions, Colic, Ptisick, King's
Evil, Scurvy, Rheumatism, Weakness in Childrens Limbs, Dropsy, Venereal
Diseases, and Melancholy next to Madness.

And here I will say, by the by, that the Gout and Stone, generally speaking,
are corporal Punishments, inflicted for the Riots, and Intemperance, or Sloth,
of either the Father, Progenitor, or present Possessor, and must be expiated by
hard Fare and Day-Labour, how irksome soever this may seem to the Native Luxury
and Sloth of Gouty Libertines; and if they will not submit to this Discipline,
but tamely yield to the Enchantments of Sloth and ill Customs, they must expect
a long Train of Miseries in a short Life, and will entail their Diseases on
their Progeny; but at length they will make way for an infallible Cure: For
Luxury and Sloth, as they enfeeble the Body, so they waste the Estate too, the
Nurse of these Diseases, and of Hypocondriack Melancholy, their Foster-Brother:
Then humble Fortune enforces Labor, and dispenses only plain wholesome Food;
these purify the Blood, restore and invigorate Nature, and mend the Breed,
and, in process of Time, suceeding Generations are as sound, torose, and
brawny, as the natural Frame of these Gouty Men was at first: And I am inclined
to believe this Revolution is performed in a stated Number of Years. However,
it is as certain as that the Sun and Moon, and some other Heavenly Bodies, will
revolve in their circular Courses, though it is not so much heeded. As to my self,
the Gout and Stone, the best, though cruel Reformers, have tether'd me for many
Years to a severe, solitary, but successful Course of Life. I can now no more
recreate my self with good Company abroad, nor drink so much Wine as is counted
necessary for moderate Refreshment; but beguile the long, tedious, Winter
Evenings, when I have no Business, with Contemplation, and a few good Books.
For though I am now of Thirty Years standing in this School of Affliction,
(having had the Gout ex traduce, and the Stone by drinking Wine and strong
Liquors in the Morning of Life, and by the Proximity of these Diseases) yet,
God be thanked, I have not one Knotted Joint, and but seldom a Bloody Urine.
And here I can affirm upon certain Knowledge, that the less Flesh a Man eats,
and the less he drinks of fermented Liquors, and the more Exercise he uses, if
the Stone be not too big to pass, the seldomer he shall be seized with either
Gout or Stone.

And as for Wine, Beer, and Ale, the more they recede from the Nature of Water,
the worse and more unwholesome they are for ordinary Drink. Water was the common
Drink both for Man and Beast in the first Age of the World, from the Creation
to the Flood, for 1600 Years, when the Lives of Men were prolonged to near 1000
Years; but after the Use of Wine, they were contracted to near a Tenth Part.
The Romans, for the Space of 440 Years, drank nothing but Water, and now the
ordinary People in Italy drink nothing else, and the rich Citizens there are
much delighted with it; and in France it is counted a foul Crime for Virgins to
drink any thing but Water; and it were well if it were more in use in England
among the younger sort. And I must tell Young Men and Women of Gouty Parentage,
how brisk and taper soever they may look in the Bloom of Life, if they don't
bestir themselves daily, and drink some Water every Day, and keep to a low
Diet, they must expect the Gout and Stone too, before they come to be Old; and
will soon, if Care be not taken, become unweildy and unable to stir; for they
have luxuriant Bodies: And if they would lay a good Foundation for Health and
long Life, they should never drink any vinous Liquor, but for real Weakness and
real Sickness, and then only in the manner of Physic. And here I will say,
that if drinking some Water every Day, and living chiefly on Herbs and Roots,
Tea, and Small Beer, would have killed an Old Gouty Man, I had been laid in the
silent Grave some Years ago.

But I would not be so understood, as that I would advise our dear Aethiop ill
Custom should be repudiated all of a sudden, or that I would persuade Old Men
that have weakened their Bodies by drinking much Wine, to leave it off: This
would be a great and dangerous Error on the other Hand; these unhappy Old Men
must use the best Means to keep the Gout from the principal Parts; for if it
strike in, and cannot be soon driven out again, it is as mortal as the Plague:
They must therefore strictly observe the following Rules. 1. The Mind must be
kept as quiet as is possible; for when the Gout has taken deep Root, that is as
much affected as the Body; Cares and Fears dog them continually; and
Melancholy, that naturally attends morose Age, is increased by the Gout; and in
the Fits, and upon a Surprise, their Eye Balls roll, they look wild, and are
subject to violent Passion, which plainly shows, that then the rational
Faculties are crippled too: For we see tender Women, Children, and Men of a
weak Economy Mind, are very passionate, and ready to fire upon slight
Occasions. But if you except this Impetuosity of Mind, few Gouty Men besides my
self are Fools; for they have the greatest Provokements to Thinking of any Men,
and have naturally strong Bodies and sound Minds; Generals, Admirals, great
Statesmen, and Scholars are of their Fraternity; they ought therefore to
maintain the Honor of their Rank by Patience and a manly Sufferance; and though
in the Fits they are full of Fears and Thoughts, and of a preplex'd
Understanding, they should, for their own Comfort, consider, that a Man without
Fear is a Monster, and a Man without Thought is a Fool, and that in a Crowd of
Thoughts they sometimes meet with a very lucky one, which yields great
Satisfaction, and in some sort compensates for the labor of the Brain, and for
their being jostled in a Crowd. II. They must avoid high Feeding and hard
Drinking, and Venery, upon Pain of Death. I treat of Nature, that is my
Province; and it would be as great a Crime in me to conceal any Violence
offered to her, as it would be for a Judge to stifle plain Evidence of a Rape:
But when there is a great Dejection of the Spirits, and a general Languor through
the whole Body, the Conversation of Women, rightly understood, is a greater
Cordial than can be found in the vegetable Kingdom of Herbs, or than the
celebrated Elixirs of Chemists, or their Potable Gold. III. To fortify the
principal Parts, and to prevent the striking in of the Gout, they must take
often of my excellent Electuary for the Gout, especially in Winter. IV. They
must go to Bed early, drink Green Tea in the Morning, eat moderately what they
like at Dinner, except Salted, Smoked, Baked, or Spic'd Meats, and drink a
Glass or two of some strong Wine; the Supper, if any, must be small. V. The
first Days, in the Fits, they must abstain from Flesh, and keep their Beds; and
if the Pain be intolerable, they may take 6 Spoonfuls of my Water for the Gout,
at Bedtime: But they must bear as much Pain as is possible; for the Pain in
the Limbs secures the Life, though it be a bitter Remedy. VI. When the Gout is
fallen in upon the Stomach, and causes racking Pains, they must presently take
my Water for the Gout, to drive it out again, as above directed. VII. When the
Gout is stricken in upon the Bowels, and causes a Looseness and Gripes, they
must take my Sweating Bolus two or three Days, Morning and Evening, to provoke
Sweat for 2 Hours at a time. VIII. When the Gout in stricken in upon the Lungs,
Bleeding must be used and repeated as often as there is Occasion; and my
Cooling Purge must be used, and they must take often of my Syrup for
Consumptions. IX. When they are afflicted with Stomach Sickness, they must be
carried often abroad in the Air in a Coach; for nothing else will save their
Lives. X. When they are seized with a Fit of the Stone, for this is almost an
inseparable Companion from the Gout, they must proceed exactly as above
directed, it being the best Means for Relief in a Fit of the Stone. But when
they have a bloody Urine, they must come or send to my House for Advice and
Medicines; 'twill take up too much Time to give particular Directions in this
Case. XI. Young and Old must use as much Exercise as possible; for they will
not be able to obtain a tolerable State of Health by any other Means; and it is
great pity such brave Constitutions should be worn out, like Iron, by Rust, for
want of Use. Most Things are preserved by Motion; the Sun, by racing round the
World, imparts its vivifying Rays to all Earthly Beings; the Moon, by keeping
the Sea in perpetual Motion, makes clear and wholesome; the Wind, by
providentially stirring and fanning the Air, makes it pure and healthy;
otherwise it would become putrid and pestilential, and would poison Man and
Beast, and the feathered Inhabitants of the Air. Our Lungs and Heart, our Blood
and Spirits are in continual Motion, from the Hour of our Birth, to the Hour of
our Death; the Pores of our Body perform their Offices Night and Day; why then
should not the other Parts cooperate? In a word, moderate Exercise purifies
the Blood, purges away superfluous Humors, makes a good Habit of Body,
enlivens Youth, cheers Old Age, revives the natural Heat, strengthens the
Nerves and Joints, procures an Appetite, make coarse Country Food as pleasant
as the most costly Viands, and makes our Sleep sweet. I have insisted long on
these Things, to rouse Gouty Men from a supine and unactive Course of Life; for
baneful Sloth breeds a Humor in the Blood that is as venomous as Cold Aconite,
and destroys more Men than high Feeding, hard Drinking, and Whoring, though they
are all prime Ministers of Fate: But Exercise is best performed in the open
Air, and in the Sun, better than in the Shade; and Riding on Horseback is the
best Exercise of all.


And now I suppose I may reasonably hope this Undertaking and these Medicines
will meet with a favorable Reception among such as have at any time been
seized with any one of these violent Diseases. If I may judge by my self, and
according to the Benefit I have often received by the Water for the Gout, in
violent Fits of the Stone, having voided a great many Stones, and some very
large, after taking this Water, as above directed, and most commonly in the
Night or the next Morning after taking it: And having experimented the
wonderful Virtue of this Water in my self and others, I must render Thanks to
Almighty God for the miraculous Deliverances I have received from the Use of
it: For besides the present and wonderful Relief I have often had from it in
Fits of the Stone, I was once snatched from the Jaws of Death by the Use of it,
upon the Gout striking in upon my Stomach suddenly on a Journey in Sussex; for
being carried to an House, and laid on a Bed, I took this, which, by good
Providence, I had then by me; and in a short time the Pain ceased, and I
traveled many Miles the next Day; and ever since, when I take a Journey, I
carry this Medicine with me as a blessed Viaticum.

The INDEX of Diseases and Medicines; with the Price of each.
A. s. d. Afterbirth, to bring away, My Oil to bring away the Afterbirth, 10
After-Pains, my Julep for After-Pains 16 Agues, my Electuary for Agues 26
Apoplexy, A Blister 06 my Cordial Drops, Ounce 10 my Tincture of Amber, Oun. 10
my Apoplectick Balsam, the Box 26 Appetite, to promote my Vomiting Powder 10 my
Elixir Proprietatis, Oun. 10 my Stomach Tincture, Oun. 06 Asthma my Syrup for
Consumptions the Pint 50 B. s. d. BAck, weak my Plaster for the Back 16
Barrenness my Purging Elixir 26 Belching my Cordial Drops 10 Bleeding at Nose
my Water for Bleeding at the Nose 16 my Conserve of Sloes, Pot 10 Bruises my
Tincture of Amber 10 Burns my Ointment for Burns 10 C. s. d. CHildrens broken
Bellies my Ointment for Ruptures 10 Childrens Convulsions my Powder for
Childrens Convulsions, 12 Papers 20 Childrens Gripes my Oil for Childrens
Gripes 16 Childrens Coughs my Balsamic Syrup, 2 Oun. 06 my Ointment for
Childrens Breasts 10 Childrens Hectic Fevers my Ingredients for Purging-Beer
10 Childrens Fevers my Cordial Powder for Fevers 10 Childrens Purge my
Ingredients for Purging-Beer 10 Childbed Purgations suppressed my Electuary
for Childbed Purgations suppressed 26 my Hysteric Cordial 26 my Galbanum
Plaster 16 Colic my Purging Elixir 26 my Water for the Gout 26 Colic,
Hysteric my Water for the Gout 26 Consumption my Syrup for Consumptions 50
Convulsions my Cordial Drops 10 my Tincture of Amber 10 Costiveness my Purging
Elixir 26 Coughs my Balsamic Syrup 06 Coughs, tickling my Syrup of White
Poppies 06 Coughs, Consumptive my Electuary for Consumptive Coughs 16 Courses,
immoderate my Electuary for a violent Flux of the Courses 26 my Conserve of
Sloes 06 my Restorative Jelly 20 Courses, stopped my Virgins Powder, 12 Pap. 30
D. s. d. DEafness my Mixture for Deafness 16 Delivery, to hasten my Drops to
hasten Delivevery, the Ounce 26 Diabetes my Purging Elixir 26 Dropsy my Syrup
of Buckthorn, 2 Ounces 06 my Purging Elixir 26 Dropsy of the Womb The same E.
s. d. EYes inflamed my Eyc-Water, the Ounce 06 Eyes, Rheum in them my Eye-Water
06 F. s. d. FAinting my Cordial Drops 10 Fever, malignant the Royal Antidote,
Ounce 06 Fever, continual the same 06 Fever, intermitting my Electuary for
Agues 26 Fever, Hectic the same 06 Flux, Bloody my Water for the Gout 26 my
Conserve of Sloes 10 Flux of Hemorrhoids the same 10 Fundament fallen my
Ointment for Ruptures 10 G. s. d. GIddiness my Vomiting Powder 10 my Cordial
Drops 10 my Tincture of Amber 10 Gout, to prevent its striking in my Electuary
for the Gout 50 Gout, stricken upon the Stomach my Water for the Gout 26 Gout
stricken in upon the Bowels, with a Looseness and Gripes my Sweating Bolus 10
Green Sickness my bitter Tincture 26 my Virgins Powder 30 H. s. d. Headache A
Blister 06 Tincture of Amber 10 Hoarseness my Syrup for Consumptions 50 Hick-up
my Electuary for Agues 26 Hysteric Diseases my Tincture of Assa foetida 10 my
Cordial Drops 10 J. s. d. JAundice my excellent Pills for the Jaundice, the Box
50 Itch my Ointment for the Itch 16 my Water for the Itch 16 K. s. d. KIng's
Evil take my Advice 00 Kidneys, the Stone in them my Gout-Water 26 Kidneys,
Stoppage of Kidneys, foul my Purging Elixir 26 my Purging Elixir 26 L. s. d.
Labor, hard my Drops to hasten Delivery 26 Looseness my Purging Elixir 26 my
Water for the Gout 26 my Conserve of Sloes 10 M. s. d. MEasles my Syrup of
White Poppies, 2 Ounces 06 Miscarriage my Purging Elixir 26 my Powders to
prevent Miscarriage 20 my Water for the Gout 26 Mother, Fits my Tincture of
Assa foetida 10 my Tincture of Amber 10 N. s. d. NAuscousness my Purging Elixir
26 my Elixir Propietatis 10 P. s. d. PAlpitation of the Heart my Cordial Drops
10 my Tincture of Assa foetida 10 Palsy my admirable Mixture for the Palsy.
26 my Tincture of Amber 10 Piles my Remedy for the Piles 10 Pleurisy my
Mixture for the Pleurisy 26 Smallpox my Water for the Gout 26 my Syrup of
White Poppics 06 Venereal Pox take my Advice 00 R. s. d. RHeumatism take my
Advice 00 S. s. d. SCurvy my purging Elixir 2^ my Spirit of Scurvy Grass 1^ my
Conserve of Hips 1^ Spitting of Blood my excellent Mixture for spitting of
Blood 2^ Sores, old my Ointment for old Sores 1^ my Aethiop's Mineral, the
Ounce. 1^ Stomach Pains my purging Elixir 2^ my Water for the Gout 26 V. s. d.
Vapors my excellent Julep for Vapors 16 Vomiting, to stop my Julep to stop
Vomiting 16 Vomiting, to procure my Vomiting Powder 10 Urine, bloody take my
Advice 00 Urine, its Stoppage my Decoction for the Stoppage of Urine 30 Urine,
its Heat the same 30 W. s. d. WHites take my Advice 00 Womb, to cleanse my
Purging Elixir 26 Womb fallen take my Advice 00 Womb, its Ulcer take my Advice
00 Womb, cancerated take my Advice 00

The following Medicines ought to be kept in all Families, and by Masters of
Ships that don't carry a Surgeon with them.
MY Family Balsam, the Pot 10 My Ointment for Burns and Scalds, the Pot 10 My
excellent Ointment for old Sores, the Pot 10 My Spirit of Scurvy Grass, the
Bottle 10 My Cordial-drops, the Ounce 10 My Water for the Gout, the Half-pint
26 My Sweating Bolus, 10 My Tincture of Saffron, the Ounce 10 My Purging
Elixir, the Half-pint 26 My Tincture of Amber, the Ounce 10 My excellent
Mixture for Spitting of Blood and a Pleurisy, 26 My Blistering Plaster, the
Ounce 06 My Water for Bleeding at Nose, 16

All my Medicines are Prepared by my Sons Joseph and Whitlock Pechey, and my
Nephew Francis Pechey, whom I have bred up; and are to be Sold at my House in
Bow-Lane, Cheapside, the Corner of Robin-Hood's-Court; the Lower end of the
Lane.

FINIS.

