TRACTATUS, De facultatibus Simplicium, The Second Part Of the TREATISE Of the
Nature and Quality of such Physical Simples as are most frequently used in
MEDICINES.

Methodically handled for the benefit of those that understand not the Latin
Tongue.

To which is added many Compound Medicines for many diseases incident to
Mankind; as also an Alphabetical Table at the latter end very necessary for the
READER.

By ROBERT PEMELL Practitioner of Physic, at Cranebrooke in Kent.

Qui potest mederi Simplicibus,
frustra quaerit Composita.
LONDON, Printed by J. Legatt, for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in
Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

TO THE READER.
Kind Reader,
I Had not thought to have written any thing more of this Subject, but when I
had finished my first Part, after examination, I found that I had omitted many
useful and necessary Simples; I have therefore now wrote of the Nature of such
only as I omitted before, for the more ready finding out of what is contained
in this Second Part. Here follows a Table of the Simples, and the Chapter
wherein they are handled. Now my hearty desire is, that this and the former
Treatise may be helpful to any that shall make use of them. Desiring thy
prayers for me, I take my leave of thee.

Febr. 24. 1652. Robert Pemell Medicus.

A Table of the Physical Simples handled in this Second Part.
ADders-Tongue, Chapter 1 Allisanders, chap. 2 Avens, chap. 3 BRook-Lime, chap.
4 Bugle, chap. 5 CArawayes, chap. 6 Celandine the greater and lesser, chap. 7
Chervil, chap. 8 Clarie, chap. 9 Clove Gilliflowers, chap. 10 Coltsfoot, chap.
11 Coriander-seed, chap. 12 Cowslips, chap. 13 Cummin-seed, chap. 14
DEvils-bit, chap. 15 Dropwort, chap. 16 Feather-few, chap. 17 Golden rod, chap.
18 Hart's-tongue, chap. 19 White House-leek, chap. 20 Hysop, chap. 21
Knotsgrass, chap. 22 White Lilly, chap. 23 Lilly Coural, chap. 24 Liver wort,
chap. 25 Mouse ear, chap. 26 Nep, chap. 27 Onions, chap. 28 Osmund Royal,
chap. 29 Parsley, Chapter 30 Pellitorie of the wall, chapter 31 Penny royal,
chap. 32 Periwinkle, chap. 33 Poppies garden and wild, chapter, 34 Quincies,
chap. 35 SAge of Jerusalem, chapter 36 Sanicle, or Sanickle, chap. 37 Savine,
chap. 38 Savorie, chap. 39 Saxifrage, English or common, chap. 40 Scabions,
chap. 41 Scurvie grass, chap. 42 Shepherds purse, chap. 43 Smallage, chap. 44
Sorrel, chap. 45 Spinach, chap. 46 Succorie, chap. 47 TAmarisk, chap. 48
Tansie, chap. 49 Thime, chap. 50 VEx vain, chap. 51 Violets, chap. 52
WAtercresses, chap. 53 Wood-sage, chap. 54 Wood sorrel, chap. 55
The second Part, Of the Nature of Physical Simples.
CHAP. I. Of Adders tongue.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Lingua Serpentis, or Serpentina, in English Adders
tongue, or Serpents tongue. It is temperate between heat and cold, and dry in
the second Degree.

The inward Use.
The juice of the Leaves given to drink with the distilled Water of Horse-tail,
is a singular remedy for all manner of wounds in the breast or bowels, or any
other part of the body. It is with no less good success given to those that are
much given to casting or vomiting, and also to those that void blood at the
mouth or nose, or otherwise downwards, the said juice or dried leaves made into
powder, and given in the distilled Water of Oaken buds, is very good for such
women as have their usual Courses, or the Whites come down too abundantly upon
them; the said powder of the Herb taken for some time together does cure
Ruptures. A Decoction of the leaves made with water and taken, is good against
hot Fevers and inward inflammations and heats.

The outward Use.
The green Herb infused or boiled in red or white wine, and waterie eyes washed
therewith, or dropped therein, takes away the watering, and cools any
inflammation that comes thereby. The leaves mixed with Hog's Grease and gently
boiled and strained, is good against burnings, hot tumors and Apostumes,
spreading sores, and wildfire. With the green leaves infused in Oil Olive,
and set in the Sun for certain days, or boiled sufficiently in the same Oil,
is made an excellent green Oil or Balsame singular good for all green and
fresh wounds, as also for old and inveterate Ulcers, quickly to cure them,
especially if a little clear Turpentine be dissolved therein.

The same also stays and represseth all Inflammations that rise upon pains,
by any hurt or wounds.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Oil of Adders tongue. The distilled Water.

CHAP. 2. Of Allisanders.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Hypposelinum, and Petroselinum Alexandrinum; in
English, Alexanders, Alexandre, and Allisanders.

The root and seeds are hot and dry in the third Degree, they cleanse and make
thin.

The inward Use.
Allisanders, are much used to make broth with the upper part of the root and
the leaves being boiled together: some eat them raw with Vinegar, or stew them,
and so eat them, and this chiefly in the time of Lent to help to digest the
Crudities and viscous humors that are gathered in the Stomach by the much use
of Fish at that time; it does also warm any other cold Stomach, and by the
bitterness helps to open stoppings of the Liver, and Spleen, to move Women's
courses, to expel the after Birth, to break wind, to provoke urine and help the
strangury, and these things the Seed will do likewise, if taken in Wine or
boiled in Wine, and so taken, and is effectual against the bitings of Serpents.
The roots preserved in a pickle of Vinegar and Salt, are a very wholesome sauce
with meats, stirring up the Appetite, cleansing and comforting the Stomach and
remove stoppings. They are convenient for every age and constitution,
especially for the Phlegmatic and such as are subject to stoppings.

The Dose.
The Seed is given in powder from a scruple to two scruples; In Decoction from
a dram to two drams.

CHAP. 3. Of Avens.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Caryophillata, and that from the Sent of the Root so
near resembling Cloves; in English Avens and herb Bennet. The roots and leaves
are manifestly dry and something hot, with a clensing quality.

The inward Use.
A Decoction of the root or leaves being taken helps the diseases of the
breast, stitches of the side, and to expel crude or raw humors from the
Stomach and Belly. It also dissolveth congealed blood, happening by falls or
bruises, and the spitting of blood, and helps all inward wounds, comfort
the heart, and strengthens the stomach and a cold brain, and therefore is good
in the Spring time to open stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, helps the wind
Colic, Fluxes of the Belly and Ruptures, and is good against infectious
vapors of the Plague and poison.

The outward Use.
A Decoction of the root made in Wine helps wounds and Ulcers though
Fistulous, if they be washed therewith. If foul spots or marks in the face, or
other parts of the body be washed therewith, it takes them away and leaves
the skin well colored. The powder of the dried roots, or the juice of them
when they are fresh works the same effects, and in callous Ulcers with the
juice of the roots, if a little Verdigrease be added, it works a good effect.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for Choleric persons, and such as have windy bodies, and
their bowels stopped.

The Dose.
The root is given from a scruple to a dram, in powder.

CHAP. 4. Of Brook-lime.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Becabunga, in English Brook-lime. It is hot and dry
like Watercresses yet not so much.

The inward Use.
Brook-lime and Watercresses are generally used together, much in Diet Beeres
and Ales, with other things serving to purge and cleanse the blood from those
ill humors that would overthrow the health thereof; It is very useful in the
Scurvie, breaks the Stone, provokes Urine and Women's Courses, and expels the
dead Birth. It does profit much in the Dropsy.

The outward Use.
Being fried with Butter and Vinegar, and applied warm, it helps all manner
of tumors and swellings, and Saint Anthonies fire also if it be often renewed.
The herb boiled makes a good Fomentation for the smollen Legs and the
Dropsy. The leaves boiled and stamped in a stone mortar with the powder of
Fenegreek, Linseed, the roots of Marish, Mallows, and some Hogs grease, unto
the form of a Pultis, takes away any swelling in leg or arm; wounds also that
are ready to fall into Apostemation it mightily defends that no humor or
accident shall happen thereunto. Farriers do use it about their horses to take
away swellings, to heal the scab, and other like diseases in them.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The juice. The syrup which is thus made; Take of the juice of Brook-lime, and
of the juice of Scurvie-grasse, of each a pound and a half, of Sugar one pound
or one pound and an half; clarify the juice with the white of an Egg, and then
boil it to a syrup; of which take a spoonful morning and Evening. This is
excellent in the Scurvie.

CHAP. 5. Of Bugle.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Bugula Consolida, media; in English, Bugle, or brown
Bugle, and middle Cumfrey or Consound. It is temperate in heat, but drying
moderately, and somewhat astringent.

The inward Use.
It is of excellent use for such as have caught any fall, or are inwardly
bruised, for it dissolveth the congealed blood, and disperseth it by taking the
Decoction of the leaves and flowers made in wine; the same is no less
effectual for any inward wounds, thrusts or stabs into the body or bowels, and
is an especial help in all wound drinks, as also for those that are Liver-grown
as they call it, which arises from the stoppings of the Liver and Gall, and
strengthening the parts afterward. It helps the Jaundise and Ruptures, as
also such as have broken any bone.

The outward Use.
It is wonderful in curing all manner of Ulcers and Sores, whether new or fresh
or old, yea Gangreens and Fistulaes also, either the leaves bruised and
applied, or their juice used to wash and bathe the places; and the same made
into a lotion with some Honey of Roses and Allom cures all sores of the mouth
and gums, be they never so foul or of long continuance: it works no less
effectually for Ulcers and Sores in the secret parts of Men and Women. It
helps broken bones, being thereto applied. An Ointment made with the leaves
of Bugle, Scabious, and Sanicle, bruised and boiled in Hogs grease until the
herbs be dry, and then strained forth and kept in a pot, is found so singular
good for all sorts of hurts in the body, that I would not wish any (that desire
to do good to themselves or others) to be without it.

CHAP. 6. Of Carawayes.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Carum, Careum, but usually Carvum; in English Caraway,
Carawayes, and Caruway. Caraway seeds are hot and dry as Galen says, almost
in the third Degree, and have withal a moderate sharp quality.

The Duration.
The Seeds will keep good a year or two.

The inward Use.
Caraway-seed breaks wind, provokes urine, and is pleasant and comfortable
to the stomach, helping digestion, and also conduces to all cold griefs of the
head and stomach the bowels or mother, as also the wind in them, and helps to
sharpen the eye sight. It is good in the swimming of the head. The seeds are
much used in Bread, Cakes, etc. to give a relish to them. Caraway Comfits are
of the same nature.

The outward Use.
The powder of the seed put into a Poultis, takes away black and blew spots of
blows or bruises. The herb it self or with some of the seed bruised and fried,
laid hot in a double cloth to the lower parts of the belly does ease the pain
of the wind Colic.

The hurtful quality.
They must not be used in very hot and dry bodies.

Of such things, as are made thereof.
The distilled water of the herb. Caraway, Comfits, Chymicall Oil.

CHAP. 7. Of Celandine, the greater and lesser.
The Names and Temperament.
THe greater is called Chelidonium majus, and Hirundinaria major; in English,
great Celandine. It is hot and dry in the third Degree, and of a cleansing
faculty.

The lesser is called in Latin Chelidonium minus, and Hirundinaria minor; in
English, small Celandine and Pilewort. It is not so hot as the greater.

The inward Use.
The greater Celandine opens the stoppings of the Liver and Gall, and thereby
helps the yellow Jaundies, the herb or the roots being boiled in white wine
with a few Anniseeds and drunk; the same helps the Dropsy, Itch and sores in
the legs, or other parts of the body. The juice taken fasting with Sugar or the
distilled water, is commended against the Plague or Pestilence, especially if a
little good Treacle be mixed therewith, and they upon the taking thereof laid
down to sweat a little.

The outward Use.
The juice dropped in the eyes does cleanse them from films and clouds that
darken them, but it is best to mix with it a little breast milk: It is good in
old filthy eating ulcers in any place to stay their fretting and running, and
to cause them to heal the more speedily: the juice often applied to Tetters,
Ringworms, or such like, will quickly kill their sharpness, and heal them
also; and it takes away Warts also being rubbed on them. The herb with the
roots bruised and heated with Oil of Camomil, and applied to the Navil, takes
away the griping pain in the belly, and all pains of the mother, and applied to
Women's breasts that have their Courses too much, stays them; the juice or the
Decoction of the herb gargled between the teeth that ache takes away the pain,
and the powder of the dried root laid upon an aching hollow or loose tooth, will
as they say cause it quickly to fall out: the juice mixed with some powder of
Brimstone cures the itch, and takes away all the discolorings of the skin
whatsoever, be they spots or marks of bruises, stripes or wounds, the Morphew
also, Sun-burning or any the like.

Pilewort does wonderfully help the Piles or Hemorrhoides, as also kernels by
the ears and throat, called the King's Evil, or any other hard wens or tumors,
either the Decoction of the leaves and roots, or an ointment made of them with
Hogs grease, or fresh Butter and used.

A Poultis against Cancrous sores of Women's breasts.
Take of the juice of Celandine, and Goos-dung, of each a like quantity, mix
them together and apply it.

An Injection, good in the cure of hollow wounds.
Take of Celandine, Sage, Saint John's Wort, of each half a hand, full,
Elecampane root four ounces, Vinegar a pint, Water six pints boil them till
near half be consumed, add thereto of Honey a pound, Aloes in fine powder four
ounces; let them boil gently a while, then keep it for your use.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water; Juice, Salt.

CHAP. 8. Of Chervill.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Cerefolium, Cerifolium and Chaerifolium; in English
Chervil, and Chervel. It is of a temperate heat and moderate dryness.

The inward Use.
It does moderately warm the stomach, and it is a certain remedy says Tragus
to dissolve congealed or clotted blood in the body after falls or bruises, if
the juice or the distilled water thereof be drunk: it is taken also by diverse
to be good to provoke urine, and to expel the stone in the kidneyes and Women's
Courses, taken either in meat or drink and moreover to help the Pleurisy and
prickings of the. The round tufts or heads which contain the seeds, do far
excel the leaves, and may be eaten as a sallad by themselves with Oil Olive,
Vinegar and Pepper, for they are very good for a cold and weak stomach. The
roots boiled and eaten as before with Oil, Vinegar and pepper are good for a
weak stomach, for weak and aged persons, and for such as are dull and without
courage; for they delight the stomach, comfort the heart, increase strength,
and stir up Venus or Lust. A Decoction of Chervil taken, provokes sleep
sweetly.

The outward Use.
Being bruised and applied, it dissolveth any tumors or swellings in any part
of the body, as also to take away the spots and marks in the flesh and skin of
congealed blood by bruises or blows in a short space, and also eases the
Colic and pain of the belly.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water; Salt of Chervil.

CHAP. 9. Of Clarie.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Horminum and Orminum; in English, Clary, or Clear
eye. It is hot and dry in the third Degree.

The inward Use.
The Seeds or the Leaves boiled in Wine and taken provokes to Venery. It is
much in use with Men or Women that have weak backs to help to strengthen the
Reins, either used by it self, or with other Herbs that conduce to the same
effect, and in Tansies often, or the fresh Leaves fried in Butter, being first
dipped in a batter of Flower, Eggs, and a little Milk, served as a dish to the
Table, is not unpleasant to any, but exceeding profitable for weak backs. It
provokes Women's Courses, and brings away the after Birth. It is used in
Italy to help Barrenness, when it proceeds from a cold and moist Disposition;
it stays the Whites, and helps also a cold stomach oppressed with cold
Phlegm, purges the Head of Rheum and much corruption.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The Seeds made in fine Powder put into the eye Eye alone, or mixed with Honey
and so used clears the Sight, and takes away white or red spots therein. The
Muscilage of the Seed made with Water and applied to tumors or swellings,
disperseth and takes them away, and also draws forth splinters, thorns or
other things gotten into the flesh; the Leaves used with Vinegar either by it
self, or with a little Honey, does help hot inflammations, if timely applied.
The powder of the dried Leaves put into the Nose provokes sneesing, and
thereby purges the Head and Brain of much Rheum and Corruption.

The hurtful quality.
The frequent use of Clary offends the head, and is hurtful for the brain and
memory.

Clownes Wound-wort or All-heale, See my Help for the Poor, page 10.11, 12, 13,
14.

CHAP. 10. Of Clove gillowflowers.
The Names and Temperament.
THey are called in Latin, Caryophilli; in English Clovegillow-flowers, They
are temperate in heat and dryness.

The Duration.
They will keep good a year being well dried.

The inward Use.
They are very Cordial, and much in use in Fevers both pestilential and
others, in faintness of the heart and spirits.

The syrup is of the same Nature.
The Flowers being pickled with Vinegar and Sugar are a pleasant and dainty
sauce, stir up the Appetite, and are also of a Cordial faculty.

The outward Use.
They are used in wounds of the Head, they draw out pieces of bones the Skul
being broken, ease the Headache and pain of the Teeth, being thereto applied.

The Medicines made thereof.
Syrup, Conserve, Vinegar.

CHAP. 11. Of Coltsfoot.
The Names and Temperaments.
IT is called in Latin, Tussilago, and Tarfara; in English, Coltsfoot,
Hors-foot and Fole-foot. Being fresh it is cooling and drying, but when it is
dry, it is somewhat hot and dry.

The Duration.
The Leaves and Flowers being dry will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
The dry Leaves are best for such as have thin Rheumes and Distillations
upon the Lungs causing the Cough thereby to thicken and dry it. The fresh
Leaves, or Juice, or Syrup made thereof, is fittest for an hot dry Cough, and
for wheesing and shortness of breath; the dried Leaves taken as Tobacco is in
the like manner good for the thin Rheumes, Distillations and Coughs, as also
the Root taken in like sort. The distilled Water hereof simply or with Elder
Flowers and Nightshade is a singular remedy against all hot Agues, to drink
two ounces at a time.

The outward Use.
The distilled Water simply or with Elder Flowers and Nightshade helps the
pains of the head proceeding from heat, if Clothes be wet therein and applied
thereto. The same also applied to any hot swelling or inflammation does much
good, yea it helps Saint Anthonies fire, and burning also, and is singular
good to take away wheales and small pushes, that rise through heat, as also
against the burning heat of the Piles, or of the privy parts, to apply wet
clothes therein to the places. The fume of the dried Leaves or Roots taken
through a Tunnel, burned upon coals effectually, helps those that are
troubled with shortness of breath and fetch their wind thick and often, and
breaks the Apostumes of the breast.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water, Syrup both Simple and Compound, Conserve made of the
Flowers.

CHAP. 12. Of Coriander-seed.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Semen Coriandri; in English, Coriander, and
Coliander-seed. It is hot and dry in the first or second Degree.

The Duration
They will keep good two or three years.

The inward Use.
These Seeds being taken in Wine kills Worms, increases Blood and Sperme:
It is also good against the Serpent called Amphisbaena. It is comfortable to
the Stomach, by heating and drying the cold and moisture thereof, helps the
Digestion, and expresses the Vapors therein that rise upwards, and resists
forcible pains of the VVind Colic and the stopping of Urine: They are very
convenient for cold Phlegmatic and Rheumatick bodies.

Coriander Comfits taken after meat closes up the mouth of the stomach,
stays vomiting, and helps digestion.

These Seeds must be prepared before they are used, which is done by steeping
them all night and a day in wine Vinegar, and then dry them and keep them for
your use.

The hurtful Quality.
They are counted hurtful for such as have the Headache, Falling Sickness,
and swimming of the Head.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Coriander Comfits, Chemical Oil.

CHAP. 13. Of Cowslips.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called, in Latin, Herba Paralysis; in English, Cowslip. They are
moderately dry, and a little hot.

The Duration.
They will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
They are used in the Apoplexy, Palsy, and such like diseases of the head, in
arthritical Pains, Gouts and Convulsions. The roots made into a Decoction and
taken, eases the pains of the back and bladder, opening the passages of Urine
which was the cause thereof. The juice of the leaves is good for such as have
their inward parts hurt, rent or broken. The conserve of Cowslip is profitable
in the Palsy, Apoplexy, weakness of the Joints, etc.

The outward Use.
The juice of the Flowers, or the distilled water is used to cleanse the skin
from spots or discolorings therein, as also to take away the wrinckles
thereof, and cause the skin to become smooth and fair. The Flowers or Leaves
bruised and applied helps the joynt-gout, and swellings that arise from the
stinging of venomous creatures. An Ointment or Oil made with the juice of
Cowslips and Linseed Oil, cures burnings and scaldings.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Conserve of Cowslip, The distilled Water, Syrup, Oil by infusion, Vinegar.

CHAP. 14. Of Cummin-seed.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Caminum, and Cyminum; in English, Cummin-seed. It is
hot and dry in the third Degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good two or three years.

The inward Use.
Cummin-seed dissolveth wind in the body, and eases the pains of the Colic,
being boiled in Wine and drunk, and is used as a correctour of any windy
meats: it helps also those that are bitten by Serpents taken in the same
manner. The same taken in Beer or Posset drink, is good for those that are
short winded, or are otherwise troubled with an old cough, or the disease of
the breast, to boil the same with Figs in Wine. It is very useful in the
Dropsy called Tympanie, and in giddiness of the head.

The outward Use.
Being boiled in Wine, and so made into a Poultis, it takes the swellings of
the Codds by wind or a waterish humor, if it be applied thereto with Barley
meal. It helps also other cold pains and swellings being thus applied. It
stops bleeding of the nose being mixed with Vinegar and smelt to and boiled
in Water and the lower parts bathed therewith, stays the bounding Courses of
Women. Cummin-seed bruised and fried with an hard Egg, and laid to the nod of
the neck, eases an old headache, and stays the rheum that falls into the
eyes, or are blood-shotten, or else the powder mixed with wax into the form of
a Plaster, and applied warm to the eyes will soon help it and take it away.
Being applied to the belly with Wine and Barley meal boiled together to the
form of a Poultis, it eases the gripings and torments of the belly. Being
quilted in a little bag with a small quantity of Bay salt, and made hot upon a
Bed-pan with fire or such like, and sprinkled with good Wine Vinegar, and
applied to the side very hot, it takes away the stitch and pains thereof, and
eases the Pleurisy.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in very hot dry and chollerick bodies. If it be much used
either inwardly or outwardly, it is said to make the party look pale.

Of such medicines as are made thereof.
The Species Diacuminu. Chemical Oil.

CHAP. 15. Of Devils-bit.
The Names and Temperaments.
IT is called in Latin Morsus Diaboli, and Succisa; in English, Devils-bit,
and Forebit. It is hot and dry in the second Degree:

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
It is very profitable against the Plague and all Pestilential diseases, or
poisons, and the bitings of venomous beasts, the herb or root being boiled in
Wine and drunk: the same also helps those that are inwardly bruised by any fall,
or crushed by any casualtie dissolving the clotted or congeald blood, and
voyding it by stool or otherwise. The Decoction of the Herb wherein some Honey
of Roses is put, is very effectual to help inveterate tumors and swellings of
the Almonds and throat, which do hardly come to ripeness, for it digesteth,
cleanses and consumes the phlegm sticking thereto: It helps also to procure
women's Courses, and to ease all pains of the Mother, to break winds therein,
and in the bowels. The powder of the root taken in Beer or Posset drink
drives forth Worms in the body. It is useful in the Falling Sickness, French
Pox, and inward wounds The distilled water is effectual for the aforesaid
diseases.

The manner of administering it.
It is chiefly given in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The Herb or Root bruised and applied takes away the black and blew marks
after bruises and such like. A decoction of the Herb with some Honey of Roses
mixed therein, helps tumor and swellings of the throat and Almonds, if the
mouth and throat be often gargled or washed therewith. The juice or distilled
water of the Herb, is as effectual for green wounds and old sores, as the
Scabiouses be, and cleanses the head from scurffe and sores, and the skin from
itches, pimples, freckles, Morphew, or other deformities thereof, but
especially if a little Vitriol be dissolved therein.

The Dose.
It is given in Powder from half a dram to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water; The Juice.

CHAP. 16. Of Dropwort.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Filipendula and Philipendula; in English, Philipendula
and Dropwort. It is hot and dry in the third Degree, opening and cleansing,
yet a little binding: It is called Dropwort, because it helps such as have
their Urine stopped and piss by drops.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
It is very effectual to provoke Urine, as also to help the Strangurie and all
other pains of the Bladder and Reins, helping mightily to break and expel the
Stone, either in the Kidneyes or Bladder, and also to bring away the gravel,
whether you use the Flowers, Leaves or Seed, but the Roots are most effectual,
either taken in Powder, or in a Decoction with white Wine, whereunto a little
Honey is added. The same helps to expel the Afterbirth, is good in the
Jaundise and Falling Sickness, The Roots made into Powder and mixed with Honey
into the form of an Electuarie, does much help them whose stomachs are swollen,
breaking and dissolving the wind which was the cause thereof, as also is very
effectual for all the diseases of the Lungs, as shortness of Breath,
wheesings, hoarsenesse of the throat, and the Cough, and to bring away cold
Phlegm therefrom, or any other parts there-abouts.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Powder, or Decoction chiefly.

The outward Use.
Being bruised and applied it helps the swelling of the Piles or Hemorrhoides.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from half a dram to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water.

CHAP. 17. Of Featherfew.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Parthemium, matricatia, and Febrifuga; because it
expels Fevers or Agues; in English, Featherfew and Feaverfew. It is hot and
dry in the third Degree, or hot in the third Degree and dry in the second: it
cleanses, purges, or scourceth, opens and fully performs all that bitter
things can do.

The inward Use.
It is chiefly used for the diseases of the mother, whether it be the rising of
the Mother, or the hardness or inflammations of the same, if a Decoction of
the flowers or herbs be made in wine with a little Nutmeg or Mace put therein,
and drunk often in a day: the same brings down the Courses also speedily, and
warmeth those parts oppressed by stoppings or cold, as also helps to expel
the dead Birth and the after Birth. A Decoction thereof taken with Sugar or
Honey helps the cough and stuffing of the chest by cold, as also to cleanse
the reins in them. The powder of the herb (says Dioscorides) taken in wine
with some Oxymel, or Water and Honey, purges like to Epithymum both Choler
and Phlegm, and is available for those that are short winded and are troubled
with melancholy and heaviness, or sadness of the spirits. It is very
effectual for the swimming of the head and wind in the stomach, and is
frequently given before the fits of Agues. It is good in the Dropsey, and
helps such as are impotent in venereous acts, It is a good remedy against
Opium taken too liberally,

The manner of Administering.
It is chiefly given in Decoction.

The outward Use.
Being applied outwardly to the Mother, it helps the rising thereof, the
hardness or inflammation of the same, and brings down Women's Courses, the
Birth and after Birth, if a Woman sit over the hot Fumes of the Decoction of
the herb made in water or wine. It is effectual for all cold pains of the head,
the herb being bruised and applied to che crown of the head. It is a frequent
custom to apply the herb bruised with Glass and Bay Salt to the wrists of the
hands, before the fits of Agues. The same bruised and heated on a tile with a
little wine to moysten it, or fried with a little Oil and wine in a
drying pan, and applied warm to the stomach or belly expels wind and griping
pains. The distilled water is used to take away spots, freckles and other
deformities of the skin.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water.

Filipendula, See Dropwort.

CHAP. 18. Of Golden Rod.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Virga aurea; in English, Golden Rod. It is hot and dry
almost in the second Degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
It is much in use against the stone in the Kidneyes, and to provoke Urine, as
also to bring away gravel. The Decoction of the herb green or dry, or the
distilled water thereof is very effectual for inward bruises, and stays
bleedings in any part of the body, and of wounds also, and Fluxes in women, and
fluxes of the belly, as also the bloody flix in man or woman, avails in
Ruptures, and is a sovereign wound herb.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given chiefly in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The green herb bruised and applied helps bruises, bleeding at the nose or
wounds bleeding, Fluxes of the belly and Ruptures. It heals green wounds
quickly, or old sores and ulcers that are hard to be cured, which often come by
flux of moist humors thereunto, and hinder them from healing: it is likewise
useful in all lotions for sores or ulcers in the mouth or throat, or in the
privy parts of Man or Woman: the Decoction thereof likewise helps to fasten
the teeth that are loose.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 19. Of Hart's-tongue.
The Names and Temperaments.
IT is called in Latin, Lingua Cervina, and Phyllitis, in English,
Hart's-tongue. It is cold and drying.

The inward Use.
It is commended against the hardness and stopping of the Liver and Spleen,
and against the heat of the Liver and Stomach, it is very good also against
lasks and the bloody flux, and spitting of blood. Dioscorides says, it is good
against the biting of Serpents: The leaves are green almost all the year. The
distilled water is commended against the passions of the heart, and to stay the
Hicket.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The distilled water thereof is said to help the falling of the Palate, and to
stay the bleeding of the gums, if the mouth be gargled therewith. The herb or
the juice applied does mundifie or cleanse wounds and ulcers.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water of the leaves.

CHAP. 20. Of White House-leek.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Sempervivum, and sedum majus, in English, Houseleek and
sengreen. It is cold in the third Degree, moderately drying and binding.

The inward Use.
The juice thereof taken with Sugar, or a Posset made with the juice is
singular good in all hot Agues and inflammations, for it cooles and temperateth
the blood and spirits, quenches thirst, helps fluxes of the belly, stays
the Courses in women, kills worms, and is good against the biting of the
Phalangium Spider. The distilled water is profitable for the purposes aforesaid.

The outward Use.
The juice dropped into the eyes, is good to stay all hot defluxions of sharp
and salt rheum into them. It cools inflammations, Saint Anthonies fire, and
all other hot corruption in the flesh, scaldings also and burnings, the
shingles, fretting Ulcers, Cankers, Tetters, Ringworms and the like, eases the
hot gout. The juice takes away warts and Corns being often bathed rherewith,
and the skin of the leaves being laid on afterward: it eases the headache, and
distempered heat of the brain in Frensies, or for want of rest, being applied
to the temples or forehead: the leaves bruised and laid upon the crown or seam
of the head stays bleeding at the nose very quickly. The leaves being gently
rubd on any stung with netles or bees, or any venomous Creature, does presently
take away the pain. The distilled water of the herb is good for the purposes
aforesaid.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. The Juice, Syrup.

CHAP. 21. Of Hysope.
The Names and Temperaments.
IT is called in Latin, Hyssopus and Hyssopum; in English, Hysope, and
Hyssope. It is hot and dry in the third Degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year being dried.

The inward Use.
Hysope boiled with Rue and Honey, and drunk, does help those that are troubled
with Coughs, shortness of breath, wheesing and Rheumatick distillations upon
the Lungs; taken also with Orymel, or water and honey, it purges gross
humors by the stool, and with honey kills worms in the belly. It amendeth
the native color of the body spoiled by the yellow Jaundise, helps the
Dropsy and the Spleen, if it be taken with Figs and Nitar. It is good in the
Falling Sickness, provokes Urine, expels wind, and brings down Women's Courses,
and eases the sharp fits of Agues. The distilled water is good for the same
diseases, but does not work so effectually as the Decoction. The syrup also
has the same virtue.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Pills, Decoction, and in Electuaries.

Pills against the Falling Sickness.
Take of Hysope, Horehound and Castoreum of each half a dram, of the Root of
Male Peony two drams, of Assa-fetida one scruple, with the juice of Hysope make
Pills, and take two or three of them every night so long as they last.

A Decoction, good against the Cough and tough Phlegm.
Take of Hysope one handful, Figs two Ounces, Sugar-candie one Ounce, boil them
in a quart of Muscadine, until half a pint be consumed, strain it, and drink a
small draught thereof morning and evening.

The outward Use.
It takes away black and blew spots and marks that come by strokes, bruises or
falls, being boiled and the places bathed therewith. It is an excellent Medicine
for the Quinsie, to wash and gargle the throat, being boiled with Figs; it
helps the Toothache, being boiled in Vinegar, and gargled therewith; the hot
vapors of the Decoction taken by a Funnel in at the Ears, eases the
inflammations of them; Mesue says, the singing noise of them; being bruised,
and Salt, Honey, and Cummin-seed put to it, helps those that are stung by
Serpents. The green Herbs bruised any a little Sugar put to it, does quickly
heal any green wound or cut in the hand, or else where. The Oil thereof being
anointed, kills Lice, and takes away the itching of the head.

The hurtful Quality.
Hot and dry bodies must be sparing in the use of it. Pliny says, it is an
enemy to the stomach, and provokes casting: it is best in the Spring and
Winter, and that for aged and Phlegmatic persons, and all such as abound with
cold and rheumatick humors.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water, Conserve of the Flowers. Species Diahyssopu, Syrup both
Simple and Compound, Oil.

CHAP. 22. Of Knotgrasse.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Polygonum and Ceutumnodia, from the many joints or
knots that every branch has. It is cold in the second or third Degree, of a
binding Nature.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
The Juice or Decoction thereof is most effectual to stay any bleeding at the
mouth, and to cool and temper the heat of the blood, or of the stomach, and to
stay any flux of the blood or humors, either of the belly or womb, as Courses
in Women, or the running of the Reins also. The juice given before the Tertian
or Quartane Ague comes, is said to drive it away: it is also good to provoke
Urine when it is stopped, as also when it passes away by drops, and with pain,
and when it is hot and sharp also, to take a dram of the Powder of the Herb in
wine for many days together: being boiled in Wine and drunk, it helps those
that are stung or bitten by venomous Creatures, and the same is very effectual
to stay all falling down of humors rheumatick upon the stomach, and kills
Worms in the belly or stomach, and eases all inward pains that arise from
heat, sharpness and corruption of blood and choler, and is good for inward
wounds. The distilled water taken by it self, or with the powder of the herb or
seed is very effectual to all the purposes aforesaid.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly given in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The juice hereof stays the bleeding of the nose being applied to the
forehead and temples, or to be squirted up into the nose: the same cools all
manner of inflammations, even Saint Anthonies fire, or any other breaking forth
of heat, all hot swellings and impostumations, all eating and sweating, or
burning sores and fistulous Cancers, or foul filthy Ulcers being applied or
put into them, but especially for all sorts of Ulcers and sores in the privy
parts of Men or Women, restraining the humors from falling to them, and
cooling and drying up the hot and moist inflammations that are apt to to follow
such sores in such places. It keeps all fresh and green wounds by restraining
the blood, and quickly closes up the lips of them: the juice dropped into the
ears helps them wonderfully, although they are foul, and have running matter
in them. It helps also the inflammation of the eyes being put therein.

The Dose.
The Dose in Powder is from half a dram to a dram.

Of such medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 23. Of White Lilly.
The Names and Temperament.
It is called in Latin Lilium Album, and Rosa Junonis; in English White Lilly.
The Leaves or Flowers are hot and moist, and partly of a subtle substance, the
root is dry in the first Degree, and hot in the second.

The inward Use.
The Roots boiled in honied water and drunk, drives forth by the siege all
corruption of blood, as Pliny says, The seeds are good to be taken against
the biting of Serpents, and expels the poison of the Pestilence, causing it
to break forth in blisters in the outward part of the skin, being taken in
Wine, or the roots stamped and strained with wine, and given to drink for two
or three days together. The juice tempered with Barley meal, and baked in
cakes, and so eaten ordinarily for a month or six weeks together with meat
and no other bread during that time is said to cure the Dropsy. The distilled
water being taken is said to cause easy and speedy deliverance, and to expel
the after Birth. The same water is used in diseases of the Lungs, shortness of
Breath, the Cough, etc.

The outward Use.
The Root roasted and well mixed with Oil of Roses does soften the hardness of
the Matrix, and provokes the Courses in Women, being laid thereupon. The same
stamped with honey gleweth together sinews that be cut in sunder, consumes or
scoureth away the Ulcers of the head called Achores, and likewise all
scurvinesse of the beard and face, and is good to be laid to all dislocations,
or places out of joint. The same stamped with Vinegar, the leaves of Henbane,
or the meal of Barley, cures the Tumors and Apostumes of the privy members:
it brings the hair again upon places that have been burned or scalded, if it
be mingled with oil or grease, and the place anointed therewith: the same
roasted in Embers, and stamped with leaven of Rye bread and Hog's Grease,
breaks pestilential botches, and ripeneth Apostumes in the flanks, coming of
Venery and such like: the same mixed with oil of Roses cures wilde-fire,
burnings and closes up wounds and ulcers, and is good also to be laid upon the
biting of Serpents. The same boiled in Vinegar and applied cures corns.

To break a Felon.
Take of Sorrel, Marsh Marigold, of each half a handful, white Lilie root a
dram bruise them and roast them in Embers in a Dock leaf; bind it on hot to the
places affected. The oil made of the Flowers, is good to supple, mollify and
digest, excellent to soften the sinews, and to cure the hardness of the
Matrix. The distilled water mixed with Camphor and oil of Tarter is used to
beautify the face.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water, Conserve, Oil, both simple and compound

CHAP. 24. Of Lilly Coural.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called Lilium Courallium, in English, Lilly Coural, Lilly of the Valley,
May Lilly, and Liricon fancy. They are hot and dry of complexion.

The inward Use.
The Flowers distilled in wine and drunk the quantity of a spoonful restores
speech to those that have the dumb Palsy, or Apoplexy, and is good against the
gout and comfort the heart; it is very profitable in the swimming of the
head, Palsy and all cold diseases of the head,

The outward Use.
The distilled water thereof helps the inflammation of the eyes, being
dropped therein. The powder thereof being blown up into the nose, is a good
Errhine, and does draw away cold humors from the brain, The flowers put into a
glass, and set in a hill of Ants close stopped for the space of a month and
then taken out, therein you shall find a liquor that eases the pain of the
Gout, and helps the Serpigo, or Titter.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water, both simple and compound Spirit, Conserve, Oil Chemical,
and by infusion.

CHAP. 25. Of Liverwort.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Lichen, Hepatica, and Jecoraria, and that either
because it heals the Lichen Tetters, which deform the skin and make it rough,
or from helping the diseases of the Liver. It is cold and dry, and somewhat
binding.

The inward Use.
It is singular good for all the diseases of the Liver, both to cool and
cleanse it, and helps also inflammations in any part, and the yellow Jaundise
likewise. Liverwort being bruised and boiled in small Beer and drunk cools
the heat of the Liver and Kidneyes, and helps the running of the reins in Men,
and the whites in Women. It is good in the hectic Fever, and all other hot
Fevers, as also in the Scab, Tetter, and all other running sores. If it be
boiled in Posset drink and taken, it helps bleeding at the Nose.

The manner of Administering it:
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
It stops the bleeding of wounds being applied, and is also a singular
remedy to stay the spreading of Tetters or Ringworms, and other fretting sores
and scabs.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 26. Of Mouseare.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Pilosella and Auricula muris; in English Mouseare. It
is hot and dry, and of a cleansing, binding and consolidating quality.

The inward Use.
The Juice hereof taken in Wine, or the Decoction thereof drunk does help the
Jaundies, although of long continuance, to drink thereof morning and Evening,
and abstaining from other drink two or three hours after; it is often used as
a special remedy against the stone and other pains of the bowels. The Decoction
thereof with Succory and Centory, is held very effectual to help the Dropsy,
and them that are inclining thereto, and the diseases of the Spleen: It stays
the Fluxes of blood either at the mouth or nose, and inward bleedings also, for
it is a singular wound herb. It helps the bloody Flix, and stays the
abundance of women's Courses. The Juice or Decoction of the herb taken before
the fit of a Quartane Ague, is said to keep back or much to lessen the fit, and
by the use of it to take it quite away. It is good for Ruptures or burstings.
The distilled water thereof is available in all the diseases aforesaid. The
syrup made thereof is useful for such as are troubled with the Cough and
Consumption, as also for inward bleedings and Ruptures.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Juice, Decoction or Powder.

The outward Use.
The green herb bruised, and presently bound to any fresh cut or wound, does
quickly sodder the lips thereof; and the Juice, Decoction or Powder of the
dried herb is most singular to stay the malignitie of spreading or fretting
Cankers or Ulcers. Wheresoever, as well those in the mouth, as secret parts of
Men and Women. The distilled water is good to wash wounds and sores, and to
apply Tents or clothes wet therein. The Powder of the dry herb, stays
bleeding at the nose, being put therein. It is said to be so powerful to harden
iron or steel, that if any edged or pointed tool shall be often quenched in
the juice thereof, it will cut all other iron, or steel, or stone very easily,
without turning edge or point.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from half a dram to a dram, in juice from one spoonful
to two.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water. The Syrup.

CHAP. 27. Of Nep.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called Nepeta, Herba Cattania, and Herba Catti, and that because Cats
delight both to smell and eat thereof and gladly rub themselves against it. It
is hot and dry in the third Degree, and of thin parts.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
It is used to procure Women's Courses, it warmeth and comfort the coldness,
and dries the overmuch moisture of the mother, which may be the cause of
barrenness, and by the frequent use of it may cause women to be more fruitful.
It is also good for the wind, and pains of the mother or rising of it. It is
used in pains of the head that come from any cold cause, as Catarrhes and
thin Rheumes, and for giddiness thereof, and for winds in the stomach and
belly; also for cramps or cold aches to dissolve the cold and wind that
affects the place, and to bring warmth and comfort thereunto afterward. It
is used for colds and coughs, and shortness of breath. The juice thereof drunk
in Wine is profitable for those that are bruised.

The manner of Administering.
It is chiefly given in Decoction.

The outward Use.
A bath made thereof and used, or to sit over the hot Fumes, does help to bring
down women's Courses, help barrenness, and warm those parts. The green herb
bruised and applied to the Fundament there abiding for two or three hours,
eases the sharp pains of the piles, the juice also is effectual for the same
purpose, being made up into an Ointment and applied. A Decoction thereof is
commended to wash the head, to take away the scabs thereof, and may be
effectual for other parts of the body also.

CHAP. 28. Of Onions.
The Names and Temperaments.
IT is called in Latin, Cepa; in English, Onions. They are hot and dry in the
fourth Degree.

The inward Use.
Onions provoke the appetite, ease the pains of the belly, provoke urine and
women's Courses, help the biting of a mad Dog, and of other venomous creatures,
to be used with a little Honey and Rue, and increase Sperme, especially the
seed. They also kill the worms in children if they drink the water fasting
wherein they have been steeped all night: being roasted under the Embers, and
eaten with Honey and Sugar, and Oil, they help an old Cough, by cutting the
tough Phlegm and causing it to be easily spit forth. It is counted by many a
good preservative against infection, to eat Onions fasting with bread and salt.
Onions sliced and dipped in the juice of Sorrel, and given to one sick of a
Tertian Ague, to eat, takes away the fit in once or twice so taking them.

The manner of Administering them.
The best way to use them is to boil them, and so to eat them with Butter,
Vinegar and Pepper, or to lay them a steep some time in water, and so to eat
them.

The outward Use.
The juice snuffed up into the nostrils, purges the head, and helps the
Lethargy, and is good also for scalding or burning by fire, water or
gunpowder, and used with Vinegar takes away all blemishes, spots and marks in
the skin, and dropped into the ears, eases the pains and noise in them:
applied also with Figs beaten together helps to ripen and break Impostumes
and other sores, especially being first roasted in Embers, stamped with Salt,
Rue, and Honey, and so applied, they are good against the biting of a mad Dog.
The juice of Onions mixed with the Decoction of Pennirial, and a cloth wet
therein and applied, eases the Gout. Some take a great Onion, and being made
hollow, they fill the place with good Treacle, and then roast it well under
Embers, after which let the outermost skins be taken away, and being well
beaten and applied to any Plague sore, or putrid ulcer, they say it is a
sovereign Medicine. The juice mixed with Honey, and a bald head anointed
therewith causes the hair to grow again. They provoke the Hemorrhoides being
laid unto them, either by themselves or stamped with Vinegar. They help Kibes
being roasted and applied with butter or hog's grease.

The hurtful quality.
Being too often or immoderately eaten raw, they breed ill and corrupt humors
in the stomach, inflame the blood, increase thirst, cause drowsinesse and the
headache, hurt the sight, dull and disturb the memory and understanding. They
are hurtful to young men and chollerick persons. They are flatulent or windy.

CHAP. 29. Of Osmund royal.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Osmunda regalis, of the singular properties therein,
also Filix aquatica; in English, Osmund royal, Osmund the waterman, water Fern
and Zut. Christophers herb. The root is hot and dry.

The Duration.
The root will keep good two or three years,

The inward Use.
The Decoction of the leaves or roots drunk, is useful for Ruptures or
burstings, as also for such as have falled or bruised themselves, or have any
inward wound, and gives ease to the Colic and splenetick diseases. The
powder has the sams virtue, and is excellent for such as cannot hold their
water.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction or powder.

The outward Use.
It is singular in wounds, bruises, broken bones, Ruptures or burstings, boiled
into an Ointment or Oil as a Balsame or Balm, or boiled in astringent wine,
and so applied in manner of a Poultis.

The Dose.
The Dose of the root in powder, is from half a scruple to two scruples.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water of the leaves, Syrup.

CHAP. 30. Of Parsley.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Petroselinum; in English, Parsley, or garden Parsley.
It is hot and dry in the second Degree, the seed hot in the second Degree, and
dry almost in the third: the root is also of a moderate heat.

The inward Use.
It is much used in meats and brothes in all Countries, and does help to
provoke Urine, and Women's Courses, and to break wind both in the stomach and
bowels, and does a little open the body, but the root much more, and opens
the stoppings of both Liver and Spleen, and is profitable for the yellow
Jaundise, and Dropsy, Galen commends it against the Falling Sickness, and
to provoke Urine mightily, especially if the roots be boiled and eaten with
Parsneps. The seed is held by most to be most effectual, yet some do think the
root to be strongest: but the seed is effectual to provok Urine and Women's
Courses, to expel winds, to break the stone, and to ease the pains and
torments thereof, or of any other part in the stomach and body procured by
wind, and also is effectual against venom, and is put therefore into
counterpoysons for that purpose as also against the danger that comes to them
that have taken Litharge; it is also used among other things, that serve for
the Cough. The seeds boiled in white wine and taken help to bring away the
Birth and after Birth. The distilled water of the herb is much used by Nurses
for Children against wind and gripings in the belly or stomach.

The manner of administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

A Decoction against the Jaundise, Dropsy, Falling Sickness, Stone in the
Reins.
Take of Parsley seeds, Fennel, Aniseed and Carrawayes of each an Ounce of the
roots of Parsley, Burnet, Saxi frage and Carrawayes, of each one Ounce and a
half: let the seeds be bruised and the roots washed and cut small, let them all
be steeped in a pottle of white wine one night, and in the morning boiled in a
close earthen vessel until a third part or more be wasted, which being strained
and cleared, take four Ounces thereof at a time, morning and evening first and
last abstaining from drink for three hours after.

The outward Use.
The leaves of Parsley laid to the eyes that are inflamed with heat or are
swollen does much help them, if it be used with bread or meal: and being laid
to women's hard breasts that come by the curding of their milk, does abate the
hardness quickly, if it be fried with butter and applied, and does also take
away black and blew spats or marks by bruises, falls, etc, The juice thereof
dropped into the ears with a little wine eases the pains thereof.

The hurtful quality.
Parsley eaten raw and too frequently, hurts the head, breeds choleric blood,
and is hardly digested. Women with child must not be too bold with it least it
prove dangerous to them.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 31. Of Pellitorie of the wall.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Helxine and Perdicium, because Partridges sometimes
feed thereon; also Parietaria and herba Muralis, or Muralium, because it
grows near to walls. It is counted by most to be cold and moist, but surely
it is hot, otherwise it cannot be so effectual against wind and the stone.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
The dried herb in powder made up with Honey into an Electuarie, or the juice of
the herb, or the Decoction thereof taken with Sugar or Honey, is a singular
remedy for any old continual, or dry cough, shortness of breath, and wheesing
in the throat: the juice thereof taken to the quantity of three ounces at a
time does wonderfully ease those that are troubled with the suppression of
their Urine, and to expel both the gravel and stone. The Decoction also of the
herb being drunk, eases the pains of the mother, and provokes the Courses;
the same also eases those griefs that arise from the stoppings of the Liver,
Spleen and Reins. The distilled water drunken with Sugar works the same
effects.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
It is much used in Glysters to ease pains in the back, sides or bowels
proceeding from wind, or the like stoppings of Urine, or the gravel and stone:
it works the like effect also, if the bruised herb sprinkled with some
Muskadine be warmed upon a tile, or in a dish upon a few quick coals in a
chaffing-dish, and applied to the belly. The decoction thereof may serve as a
bath for women to sit in to bring down their Courses, to ease gripings, etc.
The same Decoction also with a little Honey added thereto will serve to good
purpose to gargle the throat when it is swollen or pained. The juice held a
while in the mouth eases the toothache, and dropped into the ears, eases the
noise and hummings in them, and takes away the pricking and shooting pains in
them. The juice, or herb bruised and applied with a little salt is very
effectual to cleanse Fistulaes and to heal them. It is likewise very effectual
for any green wound that if it be bruised and bound thereto for three days you
need no other medicine or salve to heal it. A Pultis made hereof with Mallows,
and boiled in Wine with Wheat bran and Bean flower, and some Oil put thereto,
and applied warm to any bruised Sinew, Tendon, or Muscle, does in a very short
time restore them to their strength, and takes away the pains of bruises, and
dissolveth the congealed blood of any beatings, or falls from high places. The
juice or the distilled water cleanses the skin from Spots, Freckles,
Purples, Wheals, Sunburn, Morphew, etc. and leaves the skin smooth and
delicate. The said Water or Juice, does assuage hot Impostumes, burnings or
scaldings, as also all other hot tumors or inflammations, be it Saint
Anthonies fire, or any other eruptions of heat, being bathed often with wet
clothes dipped therein; or the said juice made into an Ointment with Cerusse
and Oil of Roses, and anointed therewith, which does also cleanse foul
rotten Ulcers, and stays creeping Ulcers, and running Scabs in Childrens
heads, and helps also to stay the falling off the hair of the head, etc. The
leaves mixed with Oil of sweet Almonds in manner of a Pultis, and laid to the
pained parts, is a good help for them that are troubled with the Stone, or are
troubled with Wind and gripings.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water.

CHAP. 32. Of Pennyroyal.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Pulegium, because it kills fleas being burned; In
English, Pennyroyal, and Pudding-grasse. It is hot and dry in the third
Degree, and of subtle parts.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
It makes thick phlegm thinn, warmeth a cold stomach, and digesteth raw matter,
being boiled and drunk; it provokes women's Courses, expels the dead child and
after Birth, and allayeth the gnawing of the stomach. Being mixed with Honey
and salt and drunk, it is a good Medicine for the Lungs, and helps cramps.
The Decoction thereof is good in the Falling Sickness, Dropsy, Jaundise,
stopping of the Urine, and in the Leprosy. Drunk with wine, it helps such as
are stung with venomous beasts.

The manner of administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
Applied to the nostrils with Vinegar, it reviveth those that are fainting or
sounding: being dried and burnt it strengthens the gums. It is helpful to
those that are troubled with the gout applied to the place till it wax red:
applied in a cerot or plaster, it takes away spots or marks in the face; it
much profits those that are splenetick or liver grown being applied with
salt. The Decoction helps those that have the itch, being bathed therewith:
being put into baths for women to sit therein, it helps the swelling and
hardness of the mother, and when it is out of its place. Being bruised and put
into Vinegar it cleanses foul Ulcers, and causes the matter to digest; it
helps black and blew eyes and all discolorings of the face by the fire.
Being boiled in wine with Honey and Salt, it helps the toothache. It helps
the cold griefs of the joints, taking away the pains and warming the cold
parts, being fast bound to the place after a bathing, or having been in a hot
house.

A lotion to refresh wearied limbs.
Take of Pennyroyal and Origanum of each a handful and a half, of Sage a
handful. Boil them in water, and wash therewith or bath therein at night.

The hurtful quality.
Very hot and dry bodies must not be too busy with it:

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water, Conserve, Oil Chemical.

CHAP. 33. Of Periwinkle.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Vinca Pervinca, and Pervinca, also Clematis Pervinca;
in English, Periwinkle, and Pervinkle, It is hot about the second Degree,
something dry and astringent.

The inward Use.
The leaves boiled in wine and drunk, stops the lask and bloody flix. An
handful of the leaves stamped, and the juice thereof given to drink in red wine
stops the lask and bloody flix, spitting of blood, the bleeding of the
Hemorrhoides, and the overflowing of women's Courses, which seldom fails in
any. It is also excellent in inward wounds.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in juice, or in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The juice or the herb bruised, and put into the nose, stops the bleeding
thereof. The same chewed helps the toothache, and all stinging of venomous
beasts being thereto applied. The same mingled with milk and oil of Roses and
put into the Matrix in a Pessary or in other Suppository, takes away the pains
thereof.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water.

Pilewort, See Celandine.

CHAP. 34. Of garden and wild Poppies.
The Names and Temperament.
THe white Poppy is called in Latin, Papaver album sativum, the black, Papaver
nigrum sativum; the red, Papaver rubrum sativum; the red wild Poppie is called
Papaver Rhaeas, Papaver erraticum, and Sylvestre, in English, Red Poppy and
Corn-Rose. They are all cold and moist, some in the third, some in the fourth
Degree.

The inward Use.
They are chiefly in use to cause sleep, to cool the body, and also in diseases
of the breast and lungs, especially in the Cough, Hoarsnesse and Consumptions
of the Lungs. The Garden Poppy heads with seeds made into a syrup, is
frequently used to procure rest and sleep, in the sick and weak, and to stay
hot Rheumes that fall from the head into the stomach, and upon the lungs,
causing a continual Cough, the forerunner of a Consumption: the same also
helps the hoarsnesse of the throat, and when one has lost their voice, which
the oil of the seed does likewise. The black seed boiled in wine and drunk is
said to stay the flux of the belly, and the immoderate Courses of women. The
empty shells, or husks of the Poppy heads, are usualy boiled in water, and given
to procure sleep; so do the leaves in the same manner, A caudle made of the
seeds of white Poppy or made into Almond milk, and so given causes sleep. The
wild or red Poppy that grows in the Corn, while it is young, is a sallet herb
in Italy in many places, and is used to prevent the Falling Sickness. The
Syrup made with the Flowers is given to those that have a Pleurisy, and the
dried flowers also, either boiled in water, or made into Powder, and drunk
either in the distilled water of them, or in some other drink, works the like
effects, and is good also in all other diseases of the head and breast. The
distilled water thereof is used against surfets, to drink it evening and
morning. It is more cooling then other Poppies, and therefore cannot but be as
effectual in hot Agues, Frensies and other inflammations, the Syrup or water
to be used. Concerning Opium which is the juice of Poppie thickened; see my
first part of the nature of Simple Medicines, Chap. 49.

The manner of Administering it.
It is used in Decoction, Syrup, etc.

The inward Use.
A Decoction of the leaves provokes rest, if the temples and head or feet be
bathed therewith, and the Oil does the like. The green heads or leaves bruised
and applied with a little Vinegar or made into a Pultis with Barley meal and
Hogs grease, cools all inflammations, as also that disease called Saint
Anthonies fire.

The hurtful Quality.
It must not be used in cold and moist bodies, nor to such as have the Palsy,
Cramp, Lethargy, etc.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water, Syrup, both simple and compound of many kinds. Ex tract.
Lohoch Oil.

CHAP. 35. Of Quinces.
The Names and Temperament.
TThe Quince is called in Latin, malus Cydonia, and Cotonea; bccause they were
first brought out of Candy, says Pliny in his Natural History, Book 15.
Chap. 11. page 436. Malum Cotoneum, Pomum Cydonium, and many times Cydonium
without any addition, are other names given to it. They are cold in the first,
and dry in the second Degree, and very binding. The sweet are not so cold nor
binding as the sour.

The inward Use.
They are good to stay all manner of fluxes in man or woman, and chollerick
lasks, castings, and whatsoever needs binding, and that more when they are
green, then any way prepared by fire. The Syrup made of the juice is very
profitable for the same also, so is the Conserve: If a little Vinegar be added,
it stirs up the weak appetite, and the stomach given to casting, and if some
spices be added, it comfort and strengthens the decaying and fainting
spirits, and helps the Liver oppressed, that it cannot perfect the digestion,
and corrects choler and phlegm. To take of the raw juice of Quinces, is held
a preservative against the force of deadly poison. They are good for those that
spit up blood, or vomit blood, or for the Hicket. The Mussilage of the seed
taken with a little Sugar is good for the harshnesse and hoarsnesse of the
throat, and roughness of the tongue. Quinces used before meals bind the belly,
but eaten after meals they loose the belly.

The manner of Administering them.
They must not be eaten raw, but either roasted, baked, etc.

The outward Use.
The smell of Quince takes away the strength of the poison of white Hellebore,
which Hunters make to kill wild beasts by dipping their Arrow heads therein: It
has also been found certain, that if Quinces be brought into a house where
Grapes are hung up to be kept dry all the year, they will assuredly rot with
the very smell of them. If there be need of any outward binding and cooling of
any hot fluxes, the Oil of Quinces, or the other Medicines that may be made
thereof, are very available to anoint the belly or other parts therewith, it
likewise strengthens the stomach and belly, and the sinews that are loosened
by sharp humors falling on them, and restrains immoderate sweatings. The
mussilage of the seeds made in water is very good to cool the heat, heal the
sore breasts of women. The Cotton or Down of Quinces boiled in wine and
applied to plague sores, heals them up, and laid as a plaster made up with
wax, it brings hair to them that are bald, and keeps it from falling, if
it be ready to shed. The seeds are very useful in Glisters against fluxes of
the belly.

The hurtful quality.
Quinces are not convenient for such as are much troubled with costivenesse, or
much bound in their bodies.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Syrup of diverse kinds both simple and compound, Marmalade, Preserved Quinces,
Rob Cydoniorum, Essence or Spirit, Oil. etc.

CHAP. 36. Of Sage of Jerusalem.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Pulmonaria, and Pulmonaria maculosa to distinguish it
from the other Lungwort; also Symphitum maculosum; in English, Sage of
Jerusalem, Couslip of Jerusalem, Sage of Bethlehem, Lungwort and spotted
Comfrey. It is judged by some to be cold and dry, by others to be hot and dry.

The inward Use.
It is chiefly commended in the Cough, shortness of breath, in ulcers of the
Lungs, and for such as are full of rotten matter, and also for such as spit
blood, being boiled in water and drunk. It is a very good Pot-herb, and much in
use for that purpose.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
It is used to heal old or new wounds, being thereto applied, or boiled in
Hog's Grease, strained, and being cold laid thereto.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 37. Of Sanicle, or Sanickle.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Sanicula, from its excellency in healing wounds, also
Diapensia; in English Sanicle, and Sanickle. It is hot and dry in the second
Degree, and bitter and astringent, or binding.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
It helps Wounds, Ulcers, Impostumes, or any inward bleedings, and does
wonderfully help those that have any tumor in their bodies in any part, if the
Decoction or juice thereof be taken, or the powder in drink; for there is not
found any herb that can give such present help, either to man or beast, when
the disease falls upon the lungs or throat. It stays all women's Courses,
and all other fluxes of blood, either by the mouth, urine or stool, and lasks
of the belly, the ulceration of the kidneyes also, and the pains in the bowels,
and the running of the reins, being boiled in water and drunk: the same helps
ruptures or burstings, and is as effectual in binding, restraining,
consolidating, heating, drying and healing, as Comfrey, Bugle. Self heal, or
any other woundherb whatsoever. A spoonful or two of the juice taken three or
four mornings together with a little Sugar helps such as have any vein
broken in the lungs, or spetting of blood.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
It cures all green Wounds and Ulcers speedily if they be washed with the
Decoction thereof, or the juice. It heals also all malign, putrid, or
stinking ulcers of the mouth, throat and privities, by gargling or washing with
the Decoction of the leaves and roots made in water, and a little Honey put
thereto. The herb boiled in water and applied in manner of a Pultis, does
dissolve and wast away cold swellings,

The hurtful quality.
Such as are much bound in their bodies are not to use it too frequently.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water of the green herb, The juice.

CHAP. 38. Of Savine.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Sabina, and Savina; in English Savine, or garden
Savine. It is hot and dry in the third Degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year, but you may have it green all the year. It is hot
and dry in the third Degree.

The inward Use.
Matthiolus says, that a dram of Savine in powder mixed with 3 ounces of Niter,
and 2 of Honey does wonderfully help such as are short winded. The Decoction
thereof drunk, does provoke the courses, and draws forth the Birth and after
Birth, expels blood by urine, and is profitable for the Kings Evil. It
kills worms in children, and the Bots in Horses or Cattle, to give it in
their drink, or with their Oats. The distilled water thereof is effectual
against worms, and helps those that have a giddiness in their brain. Savine
does powerfully resist putrifactions.

The manner of Administering.
It is given in Decoction, or in Powder.

The outward Use.
The perfume of the Decoction taken underneath, provokes the Courses, brings
away the Birth and after Birth. Being mixed with Honey and used; it cures
Ulcers, stays spreading and creeping Ulcers, takes away their blackness, as
also all spots and freckles from the face or body. It breaks or dissolveth
Carbuncles and Plague sores. It killed worms being boiled and applied to the
belly, or the Oil made thereof and used does the like. The powder of the
leaves mixed with cream, or the green leaves boiled in cream, and anointed on
running sores, or dry sores, cleanses them thoroughly, and heals them, as
also Saint Anthonies fire. The fresh leaves bruised and laid upon running and
fretting Cankers and the like, kills and destroys them. The powder of the
leaves used with some other things, or strewed upon does help those blisters
that rise on the yard by inordinate luxury, after they have been bathed with
the Decoction of the leaves. The distilled water does cleanse the skin from
spots of marks therein, and other deformities. The smoke thereof cures Hens
that have gotten the pipp.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given to women with child but with good advise, least it
destroy the Birth.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water. The Oil of Savine.

CHAP. 39. Of Savorie.
The Kinds, Names and Temperament.
THere are two sorts of Savory chiefly in use; the Winter and the Summer
Savory: The Winter Savory is called Satureia hortensis, or vulgaris, the Summer
Savory is called Satureia hortensis activa. Both sorts are hot and dry in the
third Degree, especially the Summer kind, which is both sharp and quick in
taste:

The inward Use.
Savory expels wind in the stomach and bowels, and is a present help for the
rising of the mother procured by wind, provokes Urine and women's Courses, and
is much commended for women with child to take often of it, It procures a good
appetite to meat and takes away all manner of loathing to the same. It cutteth
tough phlegm in the chest and lungs, and helps to bring it away more easily.
It quickneth the sight, and some write that it provokes venery.

The outward Use.
It is much commended for women with child to smell often to it. It helps to
quicken the dull spirits of the Lethargy, the juice being snuffed up into the
nostrils: the juice also is of good use to be dropped into the eyes to clear
the dull sight, if it proceed of raw thinn cold humors distilling from the
brain. The same also heated with a little Oil of Roses, and dropped into the
ears, takes away the noise and singing in them, and deafness also. Being
applied with wheat flower in manner of a Poultis, gives ease to the Sciatica,
or members that have the Palsy by heating and warming them, and takes away
the pain. It takes away the stinging of Bees, Wasps, etc. and being laid in
Chambers it kills Fleas.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water, Chemical Oil.

CHAP. 40. Of English or common Saxifrage.
The Names and Temperaments.
IT is called in Latin Saxifraga, and Saxifraga Anglicana, in English,
Stone-break and English Saxifrage. It is hot and dry in the third Degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
A Decoction made with the seeds and roots being taken, breaks the stone in
the bladder and kidneyes, helps the strangury, and causes one to piss
freely. The roots boiled in Wine, and taken, brings down women's Courses,
expels the after Birth and dead Child. The root dried and made into powder,
and taken with Sugar, comfort and warmeth the stomach, cures the gnawings
and griping pains of the belly, eases the Colic also, and expels wind.

The Cheshire-women put it in their running or rennet for cheese. The distilled
water is much in use to give children against the stopping of their Urine, and
to ease griping pains in their belly.

The manner of Administering it.
It is used chiefly in Decoction.

The outward Use.
It is used outwardly in Bathes and Fomentations to provoke Urine and to ease
pains of the belly etc. proceeding from wind.

The Dose.
It is given from half a dram to a dram, both the root, herb and seeds.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 41. Of Scabious.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Scabiosa; in English Scabious. It is hot and dry in
the second Degree, opening, cleansing, digesting, and making thin.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
It is effectual for all sorts of Coughs, shortness of breath, and all other
the diseases of the breast and lungs, ripening and digesting cold phlegm, and
other tough humors, voyding them forth by coughing and spitting. It ripeneth
also all sort of inward Ulcers and Apostumes, yea the Pleurisy also, if the
Decoction of the dry or green herb being made with wine be drunk some time
together, thereby voiding it forth by Urine, as well as other ways. Four
ounces of the clarified juice of Scabious taken in the morning fasting, with a
dram of Mithridate or Venice Treacle, does free the heart from any infection of
the Plague or Pestilence, so as upon the taking thereof they sweat two hours
in their beds at the first, yet after the first time taking, let them that are
infected take the same proportion again, and again if need be, for fear of
further danger. The same is good against the stinging of any venomous beast.
The Decoction drunk helps the pains and stitches of the sides, The Decoction
of the roots taken for forty days together, or the powder of them to the
quantity of a dram at a time, taken in Whey, does as Matthiolus says,
wonderfully help those that are troubled with dangerous running or spreading
Scabs, Tetters, or Ringworms, yea although they proceed from the French pox.
The juice or the Decoction drunk does very much help those that are broken out
into scabs and itches. The same also wonderfully helps all inward wounds, be
they made by thrust or stroke, by the drying, cleansing, and healing quality
therein. A Syrup made of the juice and Sugar, is very effectual to all the
purposes aforesaid, and so is the distilled water of the herb and flowers made
in due time.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction chiefly.

A Decoction, good against the Cough and shorenesse of breath, etc.
Take of dried Scabious a handful, Licoris bruised, Anniseed and Fennelseed
bruised, of each one Ounce, white Orris root cut in thin slices half an Ounce
Figs cut into pieces a dozen: Let all be steeped for a night, in a quart of
fair water (or rather in so much wine) boiling them the next day, until a third
part be consumed at the least, whereof take a draught every morning and evening
warm, with Honey or Sugar.

The outward Use.
The green herb bruised and applied to any Carbuncle or Plague sore is found by
good experience to dissolve or break it within the space of three hours; the
same applied helps the stinging of any venomous beast. The juice made up into
an ointment with Hog's Grease helps the itch and scab, being thereto applied.
The Decoction of the herb and roots applied, does help all sorts of hard or
cold tumors, or swellings in any part of the body; and is also as effectual
for any shrunk sinew or vein in any place. The juice made up with the powder
of Borax and Camphor, does cleanse the skin of the face, or any other part of
the body, as Freckles, Pimples, Morphew and Leprie. The same Decoction helps
the redness and spots in the white of the eyes, used either by it self, or
with the juice of Fennel. The head washed with the same Decoction, cleanses it
from dandraffe, scurff, scabs, sores, itches and the like, being used warm;
Tents also dipped in the juice or water thereof, does heal all green wounds,
old sores and ulcers. The herb bruised and applied, does loosen splinter,
broken bone, arrow head, or other such like thing lying in the flesh, and
causes it to be easily drawn forth.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Syrup both simple and compound. Conserve of the flowers.
Salt.

CHAP. 42. Of Scurvy-grasse.
The Names and Temperament.
THe common Scurvy-grasse is called Cochlearia, and Cochlearia vulgaris; the
other sort with round leaves is called in Latin, Cochlearia rotundifolia, and
Cochlearia Batava; in English, Scurvigrasse, or Spoonwort, that with round
leaves is called Dutch-Scutvy-grasse. Its hot and dry in the second or third
Degree, especially the garden Scurvy-grasse.

The inward Use.
The English Scurvy-grasse is more used for the salt taste it bears, which
does somewhat open and cleanse, but the Dutch or garden Scurvy-grasse is of
better effect, and chiefly used (if it may be had) by those that have the
Scurvy, especially also to purge and cleanse the Blood, the Liver and Spleen;
for all which diseases it is of singular good effect, by taking the juice in
the Spring every morning fasting in a cup of drink. The Decoction is good for
the same purpose, and the herb tunned up in new drink either by it self or with
other things, for it opens obstructions or stoppings and evacuateth cold
clammy and phlegmatic humors both from the Liver and Spleen, wasting and
consuming the swelling and hardness thereof, and thereby bringing to the body
a more lively color. The Conserve made of the leaves is a fine delicate
Medicine for weak and tender stomachs, and works the same effect, although a
little slowly; the like does the Syrup.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in juice, Decoction, etc.

The outward Use.
The Juice helps all foul Ulcers and sores in the mouth, if it be often
gargled therewith, and used to the skin does cleanse the same from spots, marks
or skars that happens therein.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water; Syrup, Conserve, Salt, and Spirit of Scurvy-grasse.

Sengreen, See House-leek.

CHAP. 43. Of Shepherds purse.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Bursa pastoris, or Pera pastoris; in English,
shepherds purse or pouch, and in the North, Pick-purse and Case-weed. It is
counted by most to be cold and dry, and much binding.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
It stays all fluxes of blood, as also the fluxes of the belly, the bloody
flux and the abundance of women's Courses, or the pissing of blood, the juice or
the Decoction of the herb with some Plantane being drunk, or any other way
taken.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly given in Decoction.

The outward Use.
In a Glister it cures the bloody flix, and bruised and applied it helps
inflammations, and Saint Anthonies fire, cures green wounds, and is of great
effect being made into a Salve for wounds in the head. It stays the bleeding
of the nose, or any wound bleeding, being thereto applied. Some hold that the
green herb bruised and bound to the wrests of the hands, and soles of the feet,
will help the yellow Jaundise, and mitigate the fits of Agues.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 44. Of Smallage.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Apium, Apium palustre and Paludapium; in English,
Smallage and water Parsley. It is hot and dry near in the third Degree.

The inward Use.
It opens the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, makes thin thick fiegme,
and cleanses it and the blood withal. It provokes Urine and Women's Courses,
and is good for the yellow Jaundise, and for the tertian and quartain Agues, if
the juice thereof be taken, but especially made into a Syrup. The seed is used
to break and expel wind, to kill worms, and to help a stinking breath. The root
is effectual for all the purposes aforesaid, and is stronger in operation then
the herb, but especially to open stoppings, and to rid away an Ague, if the
juice thereof be taken in wine, or the Decoction thereof in wine be taken.
Pliny says, it has an especial property against the poison of Spiders.

The outward Use.
The juice put to honey of Roses and some Barley water, is very good to gargle
the mouth and throat of those that have sores and ulcers in them, and will
quickly heal them: the same lotion also does cleanse and heal all other foul
ulcers and cankers else where, if they be washed therewith. The leaves bruised
and boiled with Hogs grease and made into a Poultis, cures Felons and white
flawes in the fingers, being thereto applied.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Syrup.

CHAP. 45. Of Sorrel.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Oxlis of the sharp taste, and Acetosa, in English,
Sorrel, and Garden Sorrel. It is cooling and drying in the second Degree.

The inward Use.
It is prevalent in all hot diseases to cool any inflammations, heat of the
blood in Agues Pestilential or Choleric, or other sicknesses and faintings
rising from heat, and to refresh the overspent spirits with the violence of
furious fits of Agues, etc. to quench thirst, and to procure an Appetite in
fainting and decayed stomachs; for it resists the putrefaction of the blood,
kills worms, and is as a Cordial to the heart, which the seed does more
effectually, being more drying and binding, and thereby also stays the hot
fluxes of women's Courses, or of humors in the bloody flix or flux of the
stomach. The roots also in Decoction or in powder is effectual for the said
purposes: both roots and seeds, as well as the herb is held powerful to resist
the poison of the Scorpion, so that he that shall eat thereof, shall feel no
pain being stung. The Decoction of the roots is taken to help the Iaundise, and
to expel gravel and the stone in the Kidneyes. The Decoction of the Flowers
made with wine, and drunk helps the black Jaundise, as also the inward ulcers
of the body or bowels. A Syrup made with the Juice of Sorrel and Fumitorie is
a sovereign help to kill the force of those sharp humors that cause the itch.
The distilled water of the herb is used for the aforesaid purposes.

The outward Use.
The juice with a little vinegar is useful for frettings and gallings of the
skin in any part, and for Tetters, etc. It helps also to dissolve or disperse
kernels in the throat, and the juice gargled in the mouth helps the sores
therein, and dropped into the ears helps deafness. The leaves wrapped up in
a Colewort leaf, or a wet paper, and roasted under the Embers, and applied to
an hard impostume, botch, bile or plague sore, both ripeneth and breaks it.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful to melancholy persons.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Conserve. Syrup.

CHAP. 46. Of Spinach.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Spinachia and Spinacheum olus in English, Spinach and
Spinach. It is cold and moist in the first or second Degree.

The inward Use.
Being young and tender it is used in Sallads, and loses the belly,
moderately cools the Lungs, represseth Choler, lenifieth the roughness of
the throat and windpipe, and is good for those that have hot and chollerick
stomachs. In France this herb shred and made up in bals, fried with Oil and
Vinegar, in the time of Lent, fills up the room of an ordinary dish.

The outward Use.
It is outwardly used to cool inflammations, to cool the heat of the stomach
and Liver, and laid upon hot swellings, it takes away the heat thereof, and
dissolveth the swelling.

The hurtful quality.
It weakneth the stomach, increases wind and waterish humors, and yields
little or no nourishment at all, hurts the phlegmatic, and being often used
breeds melancholy blood.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled Water.

CHAP. 47. Of Succory.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Cichorium and Cichorea, in English Succory. It is cold
and dry in the second Degree, others will have it to be hot, because it is
bitter.

The inward Use.
A handful of the leaves or roots boiled in wine or water, and a draught
thereof drunk fasting drives forth chollerick and phlegmatic humors, opens
the stoppings of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen, helps the yellow Jaundise, the
heat of the reins and of the urine, the Dropsy also, and those that have the
green sickness. A Decoction thereof made with wine and drunk is very effectual
against long lingering Agues; and a dram of the seed in powder drunk in wine
before the fit of an Ague does help to drive it away. The distilled water of
the herb and flowers performs the same before said, and is special good for
hot stomachs, and in Agues either pestilential, or of long continuance, and for
swoundings and passions of the heart, for the heat and headache in Children,
and to temper the distemperature of the blood and liver.

The manner of Administering it.
It is used chiefly in Decoction, juice, and Syrup.

The outward Use.
The distilled water, or the juice, or the herb bruised and applied, allayeth
tumors, inflammations, Saint Anthonies fire, pushes, wheales and pimples,
especially used with a little Vinegar, as also to wash pestiferous sores: the
said water is effectual for sore eyes, that are inflamed or are red; as also
for Nurses sore breasts that are pained by abundance of milk.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Conserve. The root candied. Syrup simple and compound.

CHAP. 48. Of Tamarisk.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Myrica Tamarix, and Tamariscus; in English, Tamarisk.
It is of a cleansing and cutting quality, without manifest drying, that it has
a little therein, but the fruit and bark are much more drying.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year, the bark longer.

The inward Use.
It is very powerful against the stopping and hardness of the Spleen, if the
root or leaves, or young branches be boiled in wine or vinegar and drunk. The
leaves boiled in wine and drunk is good to stay the bleeding of the
Hemorrhoidal veins, the spitting of blood, and women's Courses that flow too
much, and helps the Jaundise, the Colic, and the bitings of the Spider
Plalangium, the Viper, and all other venomous Serpents, except the Aspe. The
bark is as effectual or rather more to all the purposes aforesaid. It is
reported that the Egyptians use the wood hereof to cure the French disease with
as good success as others do with Lignum vitae, and give it always to such
as have the Lepry, scab, pushes, ulcers or the like, and helps the Dropsy
arising from the hardness and stopping of the Spleen, as also melancholy and
the black Jaundise that arises thereof. Cups or Cans made thereof, and drunk
in, is good for Splenitick persons.

The manner of Administering it.
It is used chiefly in Decoctions and diet drinks.

The outward Use.
It is good for the hardness of the Spleen, if the root or leaves, or young
branches be boiled in Wine or Vinegar and applied. The bark and leaves boiled
in Wine, and the mouth and teeth often washed therewith, helps the
toothache, being dropped into the ears eases the pain thereof, and is good
for the redness and watering of the eyes. The said Decoction with some Honey
put thereto is good to stay gangreens, and fretting ulcers; the said decoction
is also good to wash those that are subject to lice and nits. The ashes of the
wood are used for all the aforesaid effects, and besides does quicly help the
blisters raised by burnings or scaldings by fire or water.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The extract. Salt.

CHAP. 49. Of Tansie.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Tanacetum, because the yellow Flowers gathered in due
time, do not dye or wither speedily; in English, Tansie. It is hot and dry in
the second or third Degree.

The inward Use.
The Decoction of Garden. or common Tansie, or the juice drunk in Wine is a
singular remedy for all the griefs of the Urine to provoke it being stopped, to
help those that have the strangury, and have weak reins and kidneyes, and that
cannot make their water but by drops. It expels wind, in the stomach or
belly, procures women's Courses, and expels windiness in the mother. It is
much used in Lent and in the beginning of the Spring (while the herb is young
and tender) to make Tansies, and are very profitable for those stomachs that
are troubled with bad humors cleaving thereunto, both to help to digest them,
and by clearing the stomach of them, to carry them away downward. The seed is
given to children to kill worms; and the juice given in drink is as effectual
for the same. The root preserved in Sugar, is a remedy for them that have the
cold Gout, if they take thereof fasting for cerrain days together.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction, or in juice.

The outward Use.
Being boiled in Oil, it is very profitably applied to comfort the Sinews
that are shrunk by cramps, or are in pain through cold. If it be bruised and
smelled unto often, as also applied to the lower parts of the belly, it is
found to be profitable for such women as are given to miscarry in
childbearing, to cause them to go out their full time without danger or loss.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful to young persons and chollerick bodies.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 50. Of Thyme.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Thymus and Thymum; in English, Thyme. It is hot and
dry in the third Degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
Thyme does help somewhat to purge phlegm, if it be taken with Honey, Salt, and
Vinegar. The Decoction thereof is good for those that are troubled with
shortness of breath, kills worms in the belly, procures the monthly
courses of women, expels the after Birth or Secundine after it has helped
the delivery of the child and causes tough phlegm to be easily brought away,
being taken with Honey in an Electuary, and helps also those that are dull
sighted. It is of good use in meats and broths, to warm and comfort the
stomach, and to help to break wind as well for the sick as the sound. It is
very profitable in the Colic, and Iliack and Nephritick passions, and most
excellent against Melancholy, and stoppings of the Matrix, and dissolveth
clotted or congealed blood in the body, Aetius says, that four drams of dried
Thyme in powder being given (in Oxymel fasting) to them that have the Gout, it
helps them, for it purges Choler and other sharp humors, and that if one
dram thereof be given fasting with meade, it dissolveth the hard swellings of
the belly. It is profitable for those that have swellings in their sides, and
pains in their loins and hips: it is likewise given fasting to those that have
great pains in their eyes and are blear-eyed.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly given in Powder, or in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The Decoction thereof dissolveth tumors or swellings when they are fresh,
being bathed therewith. The juice thereof being anointed or bathed on the place
with some Vinegar, takes away loose or hanging warts. It helps those that
have the Sciatica applied with wine and meal, and helps the swollen cods
being laid thereto. It is used in bathes to expel wind and to ease the
joynt-gout.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from a dram to two or three drams.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Spirit. Chemical Oil. Syrup.

CHAP. 51. Of Vex vain.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Verbena, and Verbenaca; in English. Vex vain, and
Pigeons grass, because Pigeons delight to be amongst it. It is hot and dry,
bitter and binding, cleansing and healing.

The inward Use.
It is an opener of obstructions, helps the yellow Jaundise, the Dropsy and
the Gout, as also the defect of the Reins and Lungs, and generally all inward
pains and torments of the body, the leaves being boiled and drunk. The same is
held to be good against the biting of Serpents and venomous beasts, and the
Plague or Pestilence, against both Tertian and Quartane Agues, kills and
expels Worms, and causes a good color in the face and body, strengthens
as well as corrects the diseases of the Liver and spleen, is very effectual
in all diseases of the stomach and lungs, as Coughs, shortness of Breath, and
wheesing, and expels the stone in the Reins. It heals all inward wounds,
stays bleedings and flues of the belly. It is very profitable in cold
diseases of the head and eyes restrains lust, nd does facilitate or hasten
the birth in hand labors of women. The distilled Water is useful for the
aforesaid diseases.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
It heals all wounds, and stays bleedings, and used with some honey,
heals all old Ulcers and Fistulaes in the legs or other parts of the body,
and also Ulcers of the mouth; or used with Hogs grease, it helps the
swellings and pains of the secret parts of Man or Woman, as also the Piles or
Hemorrhoids. Applied with some Oil of Roses and Vinegar unto the forehead and
Temples, it helps to ease the old pains of the head, and is good for those
that are fallen into a Frensy. The leaves bruised or the juice of them mixed
with some Vinegar, does cleanse the skin, and takes away all Morphew,
Freckles, pustulaes, or the like inflammations and deformities of the skin in
any part of the body. The leaves bruised with Oil of Roses and Vinegar, or the
Decoction of it made in Oil of Roses keeps the hairs from falling, being
bathed or anointed therewith. The Decoction of the leaves and roots helps the
toothache. The leaves bruised and boiled in Hogs grease, helps the Quinsie,
swelling of the throat and the Gout being applied warm. The distilled water of
the herb when it is in his full strength, dropped into the eyes, cleanses them
from films, clouds or mist that darkens the sight, and comfort the Optic
nerves, and it good also to heal old sores or green wounds.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water, Ointment.

CHAP. 53. Of Violets.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Viola, and Viola martia; in English Violet. The garden
and field Violets are cold and moist.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
Violets are used to cool any heat or distemperature of the body, inflammations
in the eyes, in the mother, or in the Fundament when they are fallen down and
are full of pain, Impostumes also and hot swellings, to drink the Decoction of
the leaves or flowers made with wine or water: it likewise eases pains in the
head caused through want of rest. A dram of the dried leaves of the flowers of
Violets does purge the body of Chollerick humors, and asswageth the heat,
being taken in a draught of wine, or other drink, The powder of the purple
leaves of the flowers only picked and dried, and drunk in powder with water, is
said to help the Quinsie, and the Falling Sickness in children, especially in
the beginning of the disease. The seed being taken resists the force of the
Scorpion. The herb or flowers while they are fresh, or the flowers when they
are dry are effectual in the Pleurisy and all other diseases of the Lungs, to
lenifie the sharpness of hot Rheumes, and the hoarsnesse of the throat, the
heat also of the Urine, and the sharpness thereof, and all pains of the back
or reins or bladder. It is good also for the Liver and the Jaundise, and in all
hot Agues, helping to cool the heat, and quench thirst: but the Syrup of
Violets is of most use and of better effect being taken in some convenient
liquor, and if a little of the juice or Syrup of Lemons be put to it, or a few
drops of the oil of Vitriol, it is made thereby the more powerful to cool the
heat and to quench the thirst, and besides the effect, gives to the drink a
Claretwine color, and a fine tart relish pleasing to the taste. Violets taken
or made up with Honey does more cleanse then cool, and with Sugar
contrariwise. The dried flowers of Violets are accounted among the Cordial
flowers, and are used in Cordials, drinks, Powders and other medicines,
especially where cooling Cordials, as Roses and Sanders are used.

The manner of Administering it.
It is used in Decoction, Syrup, Powder, etc.

The outward Use.
Being outwardly applied, they mitigate all kind of hot inflammations in the
eyes, in the mother, or in the Fundament when they are fallen down and full of
pain, Impostumes also and hot swellings mixed with Oil of Roses and applied,
it eases pains in the head, which are caused through want of sleep, or in any
other place arising of heat. The green leaves are always used with other herbs
to make Poultisses for inflammations or swellings, and to ease pains
wheresoever arising of heat, and for the Piles also being fried with yolks of
Eggs and applied thereto. The oil of Violets is good for the foresaid purposes.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water. Syrup both simple and compound. Julep of Violets.
Trochisces, Conserve, Tincture, Vinegar of Violets. Extract. Oil.

CHAP. 53. Of Water Cresses.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Nasturtium aquaticum; in English Water Cresses. They
are hot and dry in the second Degree.

The inward Use.
Water Cresses are good against the Scurvie, and to cleanse the blood and
humors, and for all the other uses whereunto Brooklime is before said to be
available, as to break the stone, provoke urine and Women's Courses, and is very
useful in the Green sickness. It is very usual in the Spring to make Pottage
thereof, which is very wholesome, and cleanses the blood, and gross humors.
It is profitable in stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and in the Dropsy.

The outward Use.
The Decoction thereof is said to be good to wash foul and filthy ulcers,
thereby to cleanse them, and make them the fitter to heal. The leaves or the
juice is good to be applied to the face or other parts troubled with freckles,
pimples, spots or the like at night, and taken away, or washed away in the
morning. The juice mixed with Vinegar, and the fore part of the head bathed
therewith, is very good for those that are dull and drowsy, or have the
Lethargy.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. The Spirit.

CHAP. 54. Of Wood Sage.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Salvia agrestis; in English, Wood Sage, Wild Sage, and
Garlic Sage. It is hot and dry in the second Degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
The Decoction thereof is good to be given to those whose urine is stayed, for
it provokes it and Women's Courses also. It is thought to be good against the
French pox, because the Decoction thereof drunk does provoke sweat, digesteth
humors, and dissolveth swellings and nodes in the flesh. The Decoction of the
herb rather green then day made with wine, and taken is accounted a safe and
sure remedy for those who by falls, bruises or beatings doubt some vein to be
inwardly broken, to disperse and avoid the congealed blood, and to close up the
Vein, and is also good for such as are inwardly bursten; the same also is good
for the Palsy.

The outward Use.
Being bruised and applied in manner of a Poultis it helps burstings. The
juice of the herb, or the powder thereof dried is good for moist ulcers and
sores in the legs or other parts to dry them, and thereby to cause them to heal
the more speedily: It is no less effectual also in green wounds, to be used
upon any occasion.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 55. Of Wood Sorell.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Lujula and Alleluja, because about that time it is in
flower; Alleluja was wont to be sung in the Churches in English, Wood Sorrel,
Wood Sower, Stubwort, and Sorrel Dubois. It is cold and dry in the second
Degree.

The Duration.
It will keep long dry, but we may find it almost all the year.

The inward Use.
It is more effectual then other Sorels are, especially in hindering the
putrefaction of blood and ulcers in the mouth and body, and in cooling heats,
and inflammations, to quench thirst, to strengthen a weak stomach, to procure
an appetite, to stay vomiting, and most excellent in any contagious sickness
or pestilential Fever. The Syrup made of the juice is effectual in all the
causes aforesaid, and so is the distilled water also.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction, or in juice:

The outward Use.
Spunges or Linen clothes wet in the juice, and applied to any hot tumors and
inflammations does exceedingly cool and heal them; the same juice taken into
the mouth and there gargled for some time, and after spit forth and fresh
taken, will wonderfully help a stinking foul Canker or Ulcer therein, and
helps well also to stay any hot defluxions or Catarrhes upon the throat and
lungs: It is also singular good in wounds, punctures, thrusts, and stabs into
the body to stay bleeding, and to cleanse and heal the wounds speedily.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water; Conserve, Syrup.

FINIS.
The Alphebetical Table of such diseases as are mentioned in this Second Part.
A ABortion, See Miscarrying Aches cold, Chap. 27 Afterbirth, chap. 2. 9. 16.
17. 30. 32. 38. 40. 50 Agues, to cure, chap. 17. 21. 43, 44. 45. 47 Agues of
long continuance, chap. 7 Ague tertian, chap. 22. 28, 44. 51 Ague quartane,
chap. 22. 26. 44. 51 Agues hot; chap. 11. 20. 34. 52 Almonds swollen, chap. 15
Appetite to provoke, chap. 2. 10. 28. 35. 39. 45. 55 Apoplexy, chap. 13. 24
Apostumes, chap. 1, 21. 22. 28. 41. 45. 52 Apostume hot, chap. 31 Arthritical
pains, chap. 13
B BAck pained, chapter, 13. 31 52 Back weak chap. 9 Barrenness, chap. 9. 27
Beard, scurvinesse thereof, chap. 23 Belly pained, chap. 7. 8. Bees stinging,
chap. 20. 39 Bile or Botch, chap. 45 Belly to loose, chap. 35 Belly pained,
chapter 14. 26 28 Birth to bring away, chap. 2. 4. 17. 30. 38. 50. 51
Blackness and spots; see Spots and Bruises. Bladder to cleanse, chap. 17
Bladder pained, chapter 13. 16. 52. Bleeding inward, chap. 18. 26. 37. 51. 55
Blood spitting, chap. 19. 33. 35, 36, 37, 48 Blood pissing, chap. 43 Blood
vomiting, chap. 1. 35. Blood congealed, chap. 3. 5. 8. 15. 31. 50. 54 Blood to
cleanse, chap. 4. 23. 42. 44. 45. 53 Blood to increase, chap. 12 Blood hot,
Chap. 20. 22. 45. 47 Bones broken, chap. 5 Bones broken to draw out. chap. 10.
41 Botches, chap. 23. 45 Bots in horses, chap. 38 Bowels pained, chap. 37 Brain
cold, chap. 3 Breasts of Women pained, chapter, 47 Breasts sore, chap. 35
Breasts swollen, chap. 30 Breasts cancerous, chap. 7 Breath short, chap. 11.
14. 16. 17. 21. 23. 27. 31. 36. 38. 41. 50. 51 Breath stinking, chap. 44
Bruises and falls, chapter, 3. 5. 6. 7. 8. 15. 18. 21. 27. 29. 30. 31. 54
Burning and scalding, chap. 1. 13. 20. 23. 28. 31. 48 Burstings, see Ruptures.
C CAncers chapter, 20. 26. 44. 55 Cancer fistulous, chap. 22 Cankers in the
mouth, chap. 26. 55 Cancers fretting, chap. 38 Carbuncles chap. 23. 38. 41
Catarrhe, see Rheum. Child dead to bring away, chap. 4. 17. 32. 40. Choler to
purge, chapter, 17. 47. 50. 52 Choler to repress, chapter. 46 Chollericke
stomachs. chapter, 46 Cod swollen, chap. 14. 15 Colic, chap. 3. 6. 8. 12.
13. 29. 40. 48. 50 Consumption, chap. 26. 34 Contagious diseases, chap. 55
Contusion, see Bruises. Convulsions and Cramps, chap. 13. 27. 32 Corns, chap.
20. 23 Cough, chap. 11. 14. 16 17. 21. 23. 26. 27, 28, 30. 31, 34. 41. 51.
Courses to provoke, chapter, 2. 4. 8. 9. 15. 17. 21. 23. 27. 28. 30. 31. 32.
38. 39. 40: 44 48. 50. 53. 54. Courses to stay, chap. 1. 7. 14. 18. 20. 22. 26.
33. 34. 35. 37. 43. 45 Cramp, see Convulsion. Crude and raw humors to expel
chap. 3
D Dandraffe, chapter. 41 Deafness, chap. 39. 45 Digestion to help, chapter.
6. 12 Dislocations, chapter 23 Dog mad, biting thereof, chapter, 28 Dropsy.
chap. 4. 7. 14. 17. 21. 23. 26. 30. 32. 47. 48. 51: 53 Dysentery flux. chap. 37
E Ears pained. chap. 28. 30. 31. 48 Ears inflamed. chap. 21 Ears running.
Chap. 22 Ears, noise therein, chap. 21 31. 39 Eruptions of the skin, chap. 20.
31 Erysipelas; See wildfire. Eyes red. chap. 1. 22. 24. 30. 41. 47. 48. 52 Eyes
blood shotten. chap. 14 Eyes watery, chap. 1 Eyes to cleanse. chap. 51 Eyes,
spots therein. chap. 7. 9: 41. 51 Eyes swollen. chap. 30 Eyes pained. chap. 50
Eyes blear. chap. 50 Eyes films therein, chap. 7 Eyes black and blew. chapter.
32
F FAce pale. chap. 21. 42. 51 Face. spots thereof. chapter 3. 38. 41 Face to
make fair. chap. 23. 32 Falling sickness. chapter 15. 16. 21. 30. 32. 34. 52
Falls. See Bruises. Fever burning. chap. 1. 10. 25. 45 Fever pestilential.
chap. 10. 45. 47. 55 Fever hecticke. chap. 25 Felon. chap. 23. 41 Fistulaes,
chap. 5. 3 Fistula of the Leg. chapter 51 Fleas to kill. chap. 39 Phlegm to
purge. chap. 17. 51 Phlegm tough. chap. 21. 28. 39. 44. 50 Flux of the belly.
chap. 3. 19. 20. 22. 34. 35. 45. 51 Flux bloody. chap. 22. 26. 33. 35. 37. 43.
45 Fluxes in women. Chapter 18. Freckles chap. 15. 17. 31. 38 41. 53 Frenzy.
chap. 20. 34. 51 French Pox: chapter 15. 41. 48. 54 Fundament inflamed. chapter
52
G Gall stopped. chap. 7. 47 Galling of the skin. chap. 45 Gangreen. chap. 5. 48
Gonorrhaea; See running of the Reins. Gout, chapter. 13. 24. 28. 32. 50. 51
Gout cold, chap. 49. 51 Gravel, chap. 16: 18. 31. 45 Green sickness, chap. 47.
53 Gripings of the belly, chap. 31 Gross humors to purge, chapter. 21 Gums
bleeding, chap. 19 Gums sore, chap. 5 Gums to strengthen, chap. 32
H HAir falling, chapter 23. 28. 31. 35. 51 Headache, chap. 10. 11. 14
Headache of cold, chap. 17. 27. 51 Headache of heat, chapter 20 52 Headache
in Children, chapter 47 Head itching, chap. 21 Head scabbed, chap. 27 Head to
purge, chap. 28 Head cold, chap. 6. 51 Heart to comfort, chap. 3. 10. 17. 19,
24. 45. 47 Heat to assuage, chap. 52. 55 Hemorrhoides to help, chap. 7. 11. 51.
52 Hemorrhoides to provoke, chapter 28 Hemorrhoides bleeding, chapter. 33. 48
Hemorrhoides painful, chapter 27 Hicket, Chap. 19. 35 Hips pained, chap. 50 Hip
gout; see Sciatica. Hoarsnesse, chap. 16. 34. 35. 52 Hot eruptions, chap. 20.
22 Humors to digest, chap. 54 Hysterical fits; see Mother fits.
I JAundise, chap. 5. 7. 16. 21. 25. 26. 30. 32. 43. 44. 45. 47. 48. 51. 52
Jaundise black, chap. 48 Iliacke passion, chap. 50 Impostume; see Apostume:
Inflammations, chap. 1. 9. 11. 20. 22. 25. 34. 45. 46. 47. 51. 52. 55 Inward
parts hurt, chap. 13 Joynt-gout, chap. 50 Joynt-cold. chap. 32 Itch, chap. 7.
32. 41. 45
K KErnels, to dissolve, chap. 7. 45 Kibes, chapter 28 Kidneyes ulcerated,
chap. 37 King's Evil, chap. 7. 38. 45
L LEg sore, chapter. 7 Leg swollen, chap. 4 Legs fistula thereof, chap. 51
Leprosy, chap. 32. 48 Lethargy chap. 28. 39. 53 Lice to kill. chap. 21. 48
Limbs weary. chap. 32 Litharge taken. chap. 30 Liver stopped. chap. 2. 3. 5. 7.
19. 30. 31. 42. 44. 47. 53. Liver hot. chap. 19. 25. 47. Liver to strengthen,
chap. 51 Liver oppressed. chap. 35 Liver-grown. chap. 5. 32 Loathing of meat.
chapter. 39 Loins pained. chap. 50 Lungs stopped. chapter 32. 41. 52 Lungs
inflamed, chapter 46. 52 Lungs ulcerated. chapter 36 37 Lungs, Consumption
thereof. chap. 34 Lust to provoke. chap. 8 Lust to abate. chap. 51
M MAtrix pained. chap. 33 Matrix stopped. chap. 50 Matrix hard. Chap. 23
Melancholy. chapter 17. 50 Milk curled. chap. 30 Miscarrying. chap. 49
Morphew. chap. 7. 15. 31. 41. 51 Mother fits, chapter 17. 27. 39. Mother
pained, chap. 7. 15 27, 31. 33 Mother inflamed. chapter 17 52 Mother hard.
chapter, 17. 23. 32 Mother windiness thereof, chapter 49 Mother, cold diseases
thereof. chap. 6. 27 Mouth sore. chap. 5. 31. 42. 44. 45. 55 Mouth bleeding.
chap. 22. 37
N NEesing to provoke, Chapter 9 Nephritick passion, chap. 50 Nits to kill,
chap. 48 Nodes in the flesh, chap. 54 Nose bleeding, chap. 14. 18. 20. 22. 26.
33. 43
O Opium too much taken. Chapter. 17 Optic nerves to strengthen. chap. 51
P PAllat of the mouth fallen. Chapter 19 Palsy, chapter 13. 24 Pestilential
botch. chapter 23 Pestilence. chapter 7. 15. 23. 28. 41. 51 Pestilential Fever,
See Fever. Piles; See Hemorrhoides. Pip in Poultrie. chap. 38 Pimples. chap.
15. 41. 53 Plague. chap. 3. 7. 15. 41 51 Plague Sore. chap. 28. 35. 38. 41. 45
Pleurifie. chap. 8. 34. 41. 52 Poison. chap. 3. 15. 35 Punctures, or thrusts.
chap. 55 Pustules. chap. 47. 48. 51 Putrefaction to hinder. Chapter 55
Q QVartane Ague; See Ague. Quinsie. Chap. 21. 51. 52
R Reins to strengthen. chap. 9. 49 Reins pained. chap. 16. 52 Reins hot.
chap. 47 Reins to cleanse. chap. 17. 31. 50 Reins running thereof. chap. 22.
25. 37 Rheumes. chap. 11. 27 Rheum cold. chap. 9. 27 Rheum hot. chap. 20. 34.
52. 55 Ringworm; See Tetter. Ruptures. chapter 1. 3. 5. 18. 26. 29. 37. 54
S Sadness. chap. 17 Scab. chap. 25. 31. 38. 41. 48 Scab running. chap. 41
Scalds; See Burnings. Sciatica. chap. 39. 50 Scurfe. chap. 15. 41 Scurvie.
chapter 4. 42. 53 Scorpion stinging thereof. chap. 45. 52 Secundine; See
Afterbirth. Secret parts swollen. Chapter 51 Serpents biting thereof. chap. 2.
12. 13. 19. 21. 23. 51 Sharp humors to purge. chapter 50 Shingles. chap. 20
Side pained. chap. 8. 14 Side swollen. chap. 50 Sight weak. chapter 6. 39 50
Sight to cleanse. chap. 9 Sinews te soften. chap. 25 Sinews shrunk. chapter.
41. 49 Sinews to strengthen. chapter 35. 49 Sinews cut. chapter 23 Sinew bruised.
chap. 31 Skin to cleanse. chap. 7. 13. 31 51 Skin galling thereof. Chapter 45
Sleep to procure. chap. 8. 34. 52 Sneesing to provoke. chap. 9 Saint Anthonies
fire. See Wild fire. Sores ald and running. chap. 5. 25. 38 Sores of the head.
chap. 38 Sores spreading. chap. 1. 22. 25 Sores to cure. chap. 5. 7. 18. 22. 41
Speech lost. chap. 23 Sperm to increase, chap. 12. 28. Spirits faint. chap. 10.
32 35. 45 Spider against the venom thereof. chap. 20. 44. 48 Spleen stopped.
chap. 2. 3. 19. 21. 26. 29. 30. 31. 42. 44. 47. 53 Spleen hard. chap. 48 Spleen
to strengthen. chapter 51 Spots to take away. chapter 3. 6. 8. 13. 15. 17. 21.
28. 30. 31. 32. 38. 42. 53 Steel to harden. Chap. 26 Stiches in the fide. chap.
3 14. 41 Stomach to comfort. chap. 2. 6. 8. 12. 40. 50 Stomach crude or raw.
chap. 2. 8. 9. 32. 40, 49 Stomach to strengthen. chap. 3. 35. 55 Stomach hot,
chapter, 19. 22. 46. 47 Stomach windy. chap. 17. 27 39 Stomach swollen. chap.
16 Stomach gnawing. chapter, 32 Stone to bring away. chap. 4. 8. 16. 17. 18.
26. 30. 31. 40. 45. 51. 53 Strangury. chap. 2. 16. 40. 49 Sun burning. chap. 7.
31 Sweat to restrain. Chap. 35 Sweat to provoke. chap. 54 Swellings to abate.
chap. 9. 37. 47 Swellings hard to dissolve. chapter 50. 54 Swellings hot.
chapter 22. 46. 52 Swimming of the head. chap. 6. 14. 17. 24. 27. 38 Swoonings.
chap. 32. 47
T TEndon bruised. Chap. 31 Terms; See Courses Tetters. chap. 7. 20. 24. 25. 41
Teeth loose. chap. 7. 18 Teeth loose, to make them fall out. chap. 7 Thirst to
quench. chap. 20. 45. 52. 55 Throat hoarse, chap. 52 Throat sore, chap. 18. 31
Throat swollen, chapter 51 Throat rough, chapter 35. 46 Thorns and Splinters to
draw out. chapter 9. 41. Thrusts or stabs, chapter 5 55 Toothe-ache. chap. 10. 21.
31. 48. 51 Tumors hard to dissolve. chapter 7. 8. 41. 50 Tumors hot. chap. 1.
55. Tumors to help. chap. 4. 7. 9. 15. 23 Tympany. chap. 14
V VEins broken. chapter 37. 54 Vein shrunk. chapter 41 Venery to provoke, chapter 9.
17 39 Venom to expel. chapter. 30. 41 Venomous Creatures stinging thereof. chapter
13. 15. 20. 22. 28. 32. 33. 41. 48, 51 Viper stinging thereof. chapter 48
Viscous humors to digest. chapter 2 Ulcers to cure. chapter 5. 18. 23. 37. 38. 41.
48. 51. 55 Ulcers malign. chapter 37 Ulcers moist, ch 54 Ulcers of the leg. chap.
51 54 Ulcers fretting* chap. 26. 48 Ulcers of the mouth. chapter 18. 37. 42. 44.
51. 55 Ulcers in ward. chap. 41. 45 Ulcers old. chap. Ulcers creeping. chapter 38
Ulcers of the bowels. chapter. 45 Ulcers of the head. chapter 23. 31 Ulcers
eating. chapter 7. 26 Ulcers running. chap. 31 Ulcers of the secret parts. chapter
5. 18. 22 Ulcers of the Lungs; see Lungs. Ulcers to cleanse. chap. 19. 32
Ulcers putrified and rotten. chap. 28. 31. 32. 37. 42. 44. 53 Ulcers fistulous.
chapter 3 Ulcers callous, or hard, chapter. 3 Vomiting to stay, chap. 1. 12. 35. 55
Vomit to provoke, cha. 2. 4. 6. 8. 16. 21 Urine stopped. Chapter 2. 12. 18. 21.
22. 28. 30. 31. 32. 39. 44. 47. 49. 53. 54 Urine flowing to stop. Chapter 24
Urine hot and sharp. Chapter 52 Urine bloody. chap. 37 Uvula fallen; see
Palate of the mouth.
W WArts to take away. Chapter 7. 50 Wasps stinging thereof; Chapter 39
Weariness of the limbs. chapter 32 Wens to take away. chap. 7 Wheels and
blanes. chap. 47 Wheesing. chap. 11. 20. 30. 51 Whites in women, chap. 1. 25
Wildfire. chap. 4. 11. 20. 22. 23. 31. 34. 38. 42. 47 Wind to expel chap. 2. 6.
14. 16. 21. 30. 39. 44. 49. 50. 51 Wind in the belly. chap. 27. 39. 40. 49
Womb, cold diseases thereof chapter 6 Womb windy. chap. 6 Worms to kill. chap.
12. 15. 21. 22. 28. 38. 44. 45. 49. 50. 51 Wounds to cure. chap. 5. 23. 26. 29.
36: 37. 51. 55 Wounds bleeding. chap. 18: 25. 43 Wounds inflamed. chap. 1
Wounds hollow. chapter 7 Wounds green. chap. 1. 15. 18. 21. 22. 26. 31. 36. 41. 42.
54 Wounds inward. chap. 3. 5. 22. 29. 33. 41. 51. 55 Wounds of the head. chap.
11. 43 Wounds to cleanse. chap. 19. 26 Wounds in the breast. chap. 1 Wounds in
the bowels. chap. 1 Wounds fistulous. chap. 3.
Y Yard blistered, chap. 38.

FINIS.
The Books following are to be sold by Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion
in Paul's Churchyard.
SIx Books written by the learned Knight Sir Henry Spelman:

1. De non temerandis Ecclesiis; or, of the Right and Respects due unto
Churches which are not to be violated.

2. Tithes too hot to be touched, showing that Tithes are due by the Law of
Nature, Scripture, and Nations; and therefore neither Jewish, Popish nor
Inconvenient. Whereunto are annexed certain Treatises of that Argument by other
Authors with a perfect Table of their Contents.

3. Concilia, Decreta, Leges, Constitutiones de Re Ecclesiarum Orbis
Brittannici, ab initio Christianae ibidem Religionis; cum Annotationibus non
minus piis quam doctis: Opus Antiquitatis studiosis apprime gratum and utile.

4. Glossarium eruditissimum: in quo prisci Ritus quamplurimi, Magistratus,
Dignitates, Munera, Officia, Mores, Leges, and Consuetudines enarrantur.

5. Psalterium Davidis Latino-Saxonicum, a Jo. Spelmanno, Henrici F. e Patris
Bibliotheca in lucem editum: ubi ad fienm uniuscujusque Psalmi preces optimae
in animum Psalmi reperiuntur.

6. De Sepultura.

The Civil Magistrates Power in matters of Religion modestly debated, and
impartially stated according to the bounds and grounds of Scripture, and answer
returned to the Objections against the same of any seeming weight. Written by
Thomas Cobbet, Pastor of the Church at Lyn in New England.

Thomas Gataker, B. D. his Vindication of the Annotations by him published on
Jer. 10.2. Against the scurrilous Aspersions of Mr. William Lilly, wherein the
pretended grounds of Judicarie Astrology, and the Scripture proofs produced
for it, are discussed and refuted.

Thomae Gatakeri de Nomine Tetragrammato Dissertatio; Qua vocis Jehova, apud
nostros receptae usus defenditur, and a quorundam cavillationibus iniqis
pariter atque inanibus vindicatur.


