AN EPISTLE To all such as observe the Seventh-day of the Week for A SABBATH TO
THE LORD.
FRIENDS,
IN true love to your souls, and in the fear of the Lord I have a few things to
lay before you, that the simplicity in you may not be deceived, and ye err
from the way of life, while ye may be eagerly seeking and pressing toward it:
For notwithstanding that, if with the wrong eye ye be searching into
Scripture, ye must needs mis-read, mis-understand, and mispractice; and so
thereby will still be running further and further from God, even while ye
think ye are drawing nigher toward him. Be persuaded therefore seriously to
consider (out of the wisdom from which God hides, in the Babish simplicity of
his begetting, where the true life springs) these few things following.

1. That the whole Law of Moses (the ten words, as well as the institutions
about sacrifices and worship) was added because of transgression, Gal. 3. 19.

2. That the whole Law (the ten words, as well as the sacrifices) were
representations, figures or shadows of somewhat relating to Christ the seed,
subservient to the promise not making perfect, but pointing to, and making way
for the bringing in of the better hope, Gal. 3. 21. Heb. 7. 19. The Law of
Commandments, or the ten words did no more make perfect, than the other
shadows or sacrifices did, but with them made way for the better hope, toward
which they were to lead their Scholar or Disciple as a Schoolmaster.

3. That the whole dispensation of the Law was given to the Jews, and not to
the Gentiles, Romans 9. 4. and so not any thing there written binds the
Gentiles (as there written) but only the Jews. God had another way of making
his mind known to the Gentiles, Romans 1. 19. and 2. 15. according to which he
would judge them, ver. 12. and not by the Law written, which was given to the
Jews, which spoke not to the Gentiles, but to the Jews who were under it, Romans
3. 19.

4. That the duration of this dispensation of Moses Law in the Letter, was till
Christ, the seed should come and fulfill it, Gal. 3. 19. and ver. 24, 25. Moses
his family with all the Laws thereof, were to prepare for Christ the seed, and
to give way to him when he came: For when that dispensation which was figured
out, is come; then that dispensation which did figure it out, is at an end,
Heb. 3. 5, 6. Christ came to do the will, to keep and fulfill the whole Law,
and so to put an end to that dispensation of it, Psalm. 40. Romans 10. 4. And so
he takes away the first Administration of the Law, which was in the letter,
that he might establish the second, which is in the Spirit, Heb. 10. 9. 2 Cor.
3. 7, 11.

This then is the truth, as it is in Jesus concerning this thing, That Christ
coming in the flesh, and fulfilling all the righteousness (as well of the ten
Commandments, as of the sacrifices) puts an end to that dispensation wholly:
So that henceforth both Jews and Gentiles are to come to him, to hear his
voice, this is my beloved Son, hear him. And Moses foretold, that when that
Prophet came, he was to be heard in all things; whose whole Ministration was
but to figure out what the Son was afterward to fulfill in spirit, Heb. 3. 5.
Who would be faithful to give forth the entire law and substance of life to
his house or family of believers, as Moses was faithful to give the entire
shadow to his House or Family of that Nation of the Jews, ver. 6. So that here,
in the Gospel, Christ being come, the new Covenant and Law in the Spirit takes
place, and not the old Covenant or Law in the letter. And this Law is more
inward, more full, more close, more spiritual, and more lasting, then the
ministration of Moses Law to them of old time was, Gal. 3. 25. etc. And it is
the ministration of this Law of the Spirit which is not to pass away from the
Disciples of Christ, until all be fulfilled; but is to remain a Sword against
every lust and desire of the flesh in them, until they all with the very root
of them be thereby cut down, Mat. 3. 12. Heb. 4. 12. Mat. 5. 17, 18.

Quest. But what were the ten Commandments a figure or shadow of?

Answ. The Tables of stone were a representation or figure of the fleshly
Tables of the heart, wherein the new Law of the Covenant of life is written.

The writing of the Law of Commandments in the Tables of stone, was a figure
of the writing of this new Law by the finger of Gods Spirit in the heart. The
outward writing in the outward Tables, was a figure of the inward writing in
the inward Tables.

The Law it self of Commandments, which was written in those Tables, was a
figure of the Law of life which is to be written in these Tables.

And this Law thus received, thus written, is easily fulfilled, whereas the Law
in the letter, because of the weakness of the flesh was very hard to be
fulfilled, and generally proved an handwriting of Ordinances against the Jews:
For he that was guilty of one, was guilty of all, and so upon every
transgression had the force and strength of the whole Law against him. And
whosoever now runs back to the Law in the letter, to take up any command as
held forth in it, and so making himself a debtor thereto, will be found a
breaker thereof in Spirit, even one that has more Gods then the Lord, a maker
of Images or liknesses of things in heaven, or things in earth, if not of both,
a taker of the Name in vain, a prophaner of the Sabbath, etc. For he that has
not received the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, knows not the
Lord of life to be the only true God, but makes Images in his mind, and
takes his Name in vain, not feeling the living power thereof, nor can keep his
Sabbath (ceasing from sin, forbearing his own works, his own willing and
running, and entering into the rest of the Gospel) for there is but one day of
rest holy to the Lord; all the Sabbaths of the Law were but signs of it,
having but a significative or representative holiness; but the day of
redemption which the Lord has made, Psalm. 118. 24. (in which his redeemed
rejoice, and rest to him) that has the true holiness. This was it which came
by Christ, the other came by Moses, Joh. 1. 17. Moses his family or children
were to keep that day (that was the day for the servants, who were to be
exercised under the shadows) but the believers are to keep this day in the
Spirit, to enter into this rest by the faith, Heb. 4. And to worship the Father
in it, in the Spirit, and in the truth, on the Mountain of his holiness, Joh.
4. 23. Whereof the other Mountain, Temple, Worship, and day was but a shadow.

Now the sum or substance of this Law of the Spirit, may outwardly be signified
in diverse short words, as Love, that comprehends the whole of it, so does fear;
there is the whole wisdom and course of the life comprehended also: or thus,
Thou shall not lust, (thus it was administered to Paul, Romans 7.) or thou shall
keep the Sabbath, or believe in the light, follow the light. The observing of
any one of these in the Spirit, is the keeping of the Law; for every breach of
the Law is out of the love* out of the fear, a lust of the fleshly Spirit, a
transgression of the Sabbath, or spiritual rest to God, out of the light, and
out of the faith. But if ye will read this in the Spirit, and come to the true
righteousness of the faith, which is received in the obedience of faith, to
the Law of the Spirit, ye must come to the word of faith, to which Paul
directs, Romans 10. 6. by the hearing whereof is the justification, and not by a
bare believing that Christ's blood was shed: for it is the virtue of the blood
which saves, which virtue is in the living word, and is felt and received in
hearing, believing, and obeying that word, thereby bringing into unity and
conformity with him both in his death, and in his resurrection and life. This
is the only way to life, be not deceived: there is not, nor ever was any
other. O wait on the Lord in his fear, that it may be opened to you, and that
slain in you which cannot bear the straitness thereof, and with which there is
no entering.

From a Friend to your eternal peace, Isaac Pennington the younger.


