THE FALACIE Of the great WATER-DRINKER DISCOVERED.

Fully representing what are the Ingredients that provoke him to so wonderful
a Vomit, and by what Art one Glass seems to be of one color, and another of
another; and what he does when he takes the Rose Water and the Angelica-water.

By Mr Thomas Peedle and Mr Thomas Cozbie, who brought him over into England
from Tours in France: and after Wednesday next being the 26 of this present
June, will be constantly ready every Afternoon, if desired, in their own
persons to make an experimental proof of what is here declared.

Published for the satisfaction of many of the Nobility and Ladies of this
Nation, and many eminent Gentlemen who have offered great sums of money to have
the mystery discovered. As also to undeceive many thousands, who having seen
the manner of it, have been amazed at the wonder but could not discover the
secret.

Licenced and entered into the Register-book of the Company of Stationers,
according to Order.

Printed by B. Alsop for T. Dunster, and are to be sold at the Red Lion in
Grubstreet. Anno Domini 1650.

depiction of Floram Marchand Floram Marchand, Le grand Boyeur de Tours.
See here the pourtract of this man of Tours,
Who from him wine in such abundance powers,
His Art and Reasons here are published
What makes this Glass look white and that so red;
And all the progress of the work's displaid,
The whole Deceit is here now open laid.


Floram Marchand Le grand Boyeur de Tours, Or The Fallacy of the great
Water-Drinker discovered.
THe mystery of this so famous Water-Drinker who at his pleasure (as the
Spectatours have believed) can turn water into Wine, and at his vomit render
not only the tincture but the strength and smell of several wines, and
several waters is the subject of this discourse: which being to satisfy the
people (so often in this Nation and in foreign Kingdoms astonished at the
wonder, I shall here study to declare unto you in as plain words as I can, and
to contrive it in as few.

Howsoever I shall be most careful to represent it to you in that manner, that
the curtain being drawn open and the vizzard taken off, you shall see the whole
progress and the face of the Imposture.

But before I come to close upon it, it will be no ways impertinent, to relate
that the Master of this Mastery Bloise an Italian by name, from whom our
imposture now in England received his Rudiments, and full Knowledge, was not
long since questioned in Francis by the Cardinal Mazarine, who threatened him
with all the miseries that a tedious imprisonment could bring upon him, which
he would see most severel inflicted, unless he would discover to him by which
Art he did it, Bloise startled at the sentence, and fearing the event made a
provident discovery, for it was on these terms, that he would communicate it to
no man else, by which means having made an experimental proof of what so
powerfully was expected, he not only gained his liberty but the connivance of
the Cardinal.

From this Bloise, the imposture in England, Floram Marchand by name, received
al his instructions, and finding that Bloise was the more famous in the
Artifice, by the advice of two English friends Mr. Tho. Peedle, and Mr. Tho.
Cozbie, who brought him over, he abandoned Tours to come into England, where
his moist cheat before was never heard off, and where the cause of the wonder
being utterly unknown, he promised himself to advance the wonder into all
Advantages.

I shall trouble you with no further circumstance, the manner of the imposture
is this,

To prepare his body for so hardy a task, before he makes his appearance on the
Stage, does take a Pill about the quantity of a hazle nut, confected with the
Gall of an Heifer and wheat flower baked. After which he drinks privately in
his Chamber, four or five pints of luke-warm-water, to take all the foulness,
and slime from his stomach, and to avoid that loath some spectacle which
otherwise would make thick the water, and offend the eye of the observer.

In the first place he presents you with a payl of lukewarm water, and sixteen
glasses in a Basket, but you are to understand that every morning he boileth 2
ounces of Brazile thin sliced in 3 pints of running water, so long till the
whole strength and color of the Brazile is exhausted: of this he drinks half
a pint in his private chamber before he comes on the Stage: you are also to
understand that he neither eats nor drinks in the morning on those days
wherein he comes on the Stage, the cleansing Pill and water only excepted;
but in the evening will make a very good supper, and eat as much as two or
three other men who have not their stomachs so thoroughly purged.

Before he presents himself to the Spectators, he washes all his glasses in
the best white wind vinegar he can procure. Coming on the Stage, he always
washes his first glass, and rinseth it two or three times, to take away the
strength of the Vinegar, that it might in no wise discolor the complexion of
what is represented to be Wine.

In his first entrance, he drinks four and twenty glasses of luke-warm-water;
the first vomit he makes the water seems to be a full deep Claret: you are
to observe that his Gall-pill in the morning, and so many glasses of
luke-warm-water afterward, will force him into a sudden capacity to vomit,
which vomit upon so much warm water, is for the most part so violent on him,
that he cannot forbear if he would.

You are again to understand, that all that comes from him is red of it self,
or has a tincture of it from the first Brazil water; but by degrees, the more
water he drinks, as on every new trial he drinks so many glasses of water
as his Stomach will contain, the water that comes from him will grow paler and
paler: having then, as I said before, made his essay on Claret, and proved it
to be of the same complexion, he drinks again four or five glasses of the
luke-warm-water, and brings forth Claret and Beer at once into two several
glasses; now you are to observe, that the glass which appears to be Claret,
is rinsed as before, but the Beer glass not rinsed at all, but is still moist
water from him in three pipes, the distance of four or five yeards. This is all
clear water, which he does with so much port, and such a flowing grace as if it
were his Masterpiece.

He has been invited by diverse Gent. and personages of Honor to make the like
evacuation in milk, as he made a semblance in wine, you are to understand that
then he goes into another room, and drinks two or three pints of milk, on
his return (which is always speedy) he goes first to his pail and afterward
to his Vomit. The milk which comes from him looks curdled, and shows like
curdled milk and drink. If there be no milk ready to be had he will excuse
himself to his Spectators; and make a large promise of what he will perform the
next day. At which time being sure to have milk enough to serve his turn he will
perform his promise.

His milk he always drinks in a withdrawing room, that it may not be
discovered, for that will be too apparent, nor has he any other shift to evade
the discerning eye of the observers.

It is also to be considered, that he never comes on the Stage as he does
sometimes three or four times in a day, but he first drinks the Brazile water,
without which he can do nothing at all, for all that comes from him has a
tincture of the red, and it only varieth and alters according to the
abundance of water which he takes, and the strength of the White-wine-vinegar,
in which all the glasses are washed.

To prove the truth of what here is delivered unto you, you shall have the two
Gent. that brought him over with them from Tours viz. Tho. Peedle, and Tho.
Cozby, by name, constantly resident at their lodging at the widow Gilmans
house in Golden-lane, the next door to the sign of the Peel, where every day
after wednesday being the 26 of this instant June, from 12 of the clock until 6
in the evening, they will be present to justify what is here discovered; and
with glasses, and other accommodations in this business to show actually in
their own persons, what is here declared, and to convince any that shall
contradict it.

FINIS.

