(...).

THE GOOD FIGHT OF FAITH. BEING The Substance of a Sermon Preached to the
Congregation assembled at the interring of the body of Master William Hill
lately one of the Magistrates of Guildford in Surrey.

By his Son in law Francis Peck, Master of Arts, sometimes Preacher there,
and now Minister of God's Word in Hereford.

London, Printed for Samuel Enderby, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Star in Pope's Head Alley, 1645.

To the virtuous Widow, and hopeful Offspring of that eminent Servant of
Jesus Christ, Mr. William Hill, one of the Magistrates of the ancient Borough
of Guildsord in Surrey.
Precious and Beloved:
THere be but two irresistible arguments (...) any ingenuous nature to resign
ones self to the desire of another, viz. That of duty, and that of affection;
both which (you know) has strongly engaged me both to preach and print this
Sermon, upon this sad and sudden occasion; the former task required by the
deceased himself, whose very relation (being a Father so full of care and
affection to us all) hears the nature of an injunction, not to be disobeyed:
the latter importuned by the concurrent request of you all surviving so nearly
related; that except I could put off duty and humanity at once, without all
dispute, you must be also gratified: which undertaken, I presume to make mine
earnest request to you all in some few particulars; which I hope the Lord Jesus
will both move and enable you readily to condescend to me in, viz.

1. That so precious a pattern and president of virtue and piety be really
imitated of you all.

2. That you be practical, and turn the words you desired of me, into the
works which God requires of you.

3. That by the savory Unction of brotherly concord amongst our selves, you
will endeavor with me to be so consolatory to our dear surviving Parent, that
albeit we cannot supply her invaluable loss, yet we may argue our grateful
acknowledgment of her right commendable behavior to, and pains with him who
is now with the Lord.

4. Lastly, that you will excuse me, and make mine apology for speaking so
little in the praise of him that deserved so much; mine affection and
experience indeed instigates: but counsel to one so aproximate must be
observed, viz. Let another praise thee and not thine own Prove. 27. 2.
mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips. So I commend you to the provident
care of him who is faithful, and bath promised so much to the widow and
fatherless; and in him, according to my several relations, to each of you,
rest,

Yours, F. P.

THE GOOD FIGHT OF Faith.
1 TIMOTHY 6. 12. Fight the good Fight of Faith: Lay hold on Eternal Life.
IN these fighting times, whereunto by the provident hand and just vengeance of
God, we are fallen: In which sad wars, many poor ignorant souls, and many
profane, atheistical blasphemous, idolatrons wretches are engaged, utterly
unfit to live, and as utterly unprepared to dye; when such on both sides has
fought this fight, and death seizes on them, they lay hold on eternal death,
and everlasting torments, in the burning lake is the portion of their cup. I
would now gladly improve the opportunity on this occasion to immind you of the
good fight indeed, which if you fight not, you live and dye but the miserable
bond slaves of sin and satan, and so continue as miserable as the other to
all eternity: But if the Lord Jesus Christ, the captain of our salvation,
enable you to fight this fight (as this deceased servant of the Lord has done)
and if in him you be more then conquerours, then when death seizes upon you,
you will lay hold on eternal life as your Crown; and as sure as the Lord
lives, the eternal joys of heaven will be the portion of your cup.

But to omit farther circumlocation, take notice that this Text contains
Paul's charge to Timothy, to fight the good fight of faith and to lay hold on
eternal life.

Object. But what is that to us (may some say) Timothy was a Minister, and the
charge is given to him to behave himself as a valiant Soldier in his
ministerial calling, against all oppositions which he was likely to meet with.

Answ. Sometimes the Apostle speaks to him as a Minister, sometimes as a
professor and private Christian; intimating unto us hereby, that this charge
belongs both to Ministers and people.

All Christians, both Pasters and people, are Soldiers, often exposed to great
streights and difficulties; yet the spirit of God in this chapter directs them
to help themselves three ways;

by 1 Flight. 2 Pursuit. 3 Fight.

First, by Flight: There are four particulars in the preceding verses which
Christians must fly from as from Serpents and devils else they are likely to
be overcome.

1 Not consenting to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the doctrine which is according unto godliness, ver. 3.

2 Proud doting about questions and strises of words.

3 The evil effects and consequences of these, which are five:

1 Envy. 2 Strife. 3 Raylings. 4 Evil surmizings. 5 Perverse disputings of men
of corrupt minds, ver. 4 5. And a motive hereunto in verse 7, 8.
4 Cursed covetousness, manifested by an inordinate desire to be rich; the
love of money being the root of all evil, which makes men fall into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which pierces them through with many sorrows;
nay, which drown them in destruction and perdition. Oh man of God (whether
Ministers or private Christian) help thy self, secure thy soul, by flying
from these, verse 9, 10. and part of the 11.

Secondly, by Pursuit of six friends (expressed in the 11. ver.) which if we gain
not on our side, there is little hope for our souls to escape a cruel
overthrow and eternal rain: therefore O man of God (...) follow after (or
eagerly pursue) these (as hounds do the Hare) which are 1 Rightcousnesse. 2
Godliness. 3 Faith. 4 Love. 5 Patience. 6 Meekness.

Thirdly, by Fight; in the words of the Text: in which you

have two things. 1 An Injunction: Timothy must fight the good fight of faith.
2 A provocation hereunto: Then Timothy may be assured that he shall be crowned
with eternal life. I shall only pitch upon the Injunction, and bring in the
Provocation in the Application.

In the Injunction you have three things.

1 The fight that must be sought, viz. The fight of faith. 2 The description of
this fight: It is a good fight. 3 The combatants or soldiers that must fight
it, viz. Ministers and all other christians; from whence there arise three
points of doctrine to be prosecuted.
Doctr. 1 That there is a fight in faith. 2 This fight is a good fight. 3
Timothy and all of his spirit must fight it. To begin with the first.

First, there is a fight in faith, it is a combating and conflicting grace: I
do not say that no other grace is militant but this, but what grace soever
has flesh and blood, and devil, strong lusts, and corruptions to fight
against, this has much more. There is indeed a fight in humility, combating
against horrid pride and cursed vainglory; there is a fight in love,
combating against malice, envy and hatred (those cruel enemies to the soul) a
fight in patience against murmuring, repining impatient discontentednesse; a
fight in chastity against scorching and broyling lusts; in liberality against
covetonsnesse; in temporance against drunkenness: but faith is the Captain
grace, and the maine in a christian combat against these and many such
spiritual enemies.

None that know any thing in Christianity, but knows this, that there is a fig
it in faith, no sooner is a man a believer but he is a warrior: But for the
prosecution of this point, I shall show you three things.

1 The parallel between corporal and spiritual war. 2 The maine particulats
wherein faith is engaged in this combat. 3 By what strength this fight is
managed.
To show you wherein the resemblance holds in every thing would be too tedious:
the parallel holds chiefly in these five particulars.

I. Soldiers are gathered together, and battles brought on by the sound of a
Trumpet, so are true believers and worshippers in the Lord's mountain to be
brought on to his spiritual warfare by the sound of the Lord's Trumpet, viz.
the powerful preaching of the Gospel, Isa. 27. 2. which as a shrill sound of
a Trumpet summons them hereunto.

The service of the Tabernacle (which must be managed by faith in the Messiah,
or else abominable) is twice said in the original to be the warfare of the
Tabernacle, and this is brought on by the sound of the Trumpet, Numb. 8. 24. 25.

Again, 1 Cor. 14. 8. for if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepare to the battle? and what is this Trumpet but the plain preaching of
the Word in such a manner as it may be easily understood else none will be
excited to this warfare: for as the sound of the Trumpet, so the Word serves
not only to teach what is to be done, but to excite with courage to Pareus in
^oc.
perform the duty.

II. In fighting there are encounterers and strong opposites; so in this fight
of faith it meets with strong opposites, world, flesh and devil, and all that
they can muster up and bandy together: Faith is like Thmael in this case; the
hands of all these are against faith, and the hand of faith is against them all.

1 Satan hates faith and all the faithful, and would not leave any alive in
the world; as the King of Syria said to his 32 Capraines concerning the King of
Israel, so says satan concerning 1 King. 22. 31
faith and the faithful; fight neither against small nor great but against
these only. 2 The world is a deadly enemy: witness 1 In preaching of it; the
world hates it. 2 In professing of it; the world scorns it. 3 In practizing of
it; what a world of malice is continually manifested against it?
3 The flesh and carnail reason cry it down, as the most absurd thing in the
world.
III. In fighting there is much difficulty so in believing; the hardest thing
in the world to believe; It Is durum certamen, a hard combat; a wrestling with
principalities and powers, which Ephesians. 6. 12.
are not overcome but with much difficulty; as when a poor Christian gotten
from under the slavery of a Turk, or a Prorestant from the cruelty of a
barbarous Cavaleir, he is pursued by his potent and cruel enemy, who again
lays hold on him, to reduce him to his former thraldom. Imagine with what
vigor he wrastles with his enemy, and with what difficulty he escapes his fury.
Or as a poor man thrown overboard; and ready to sink under water, his friend
reaches him out a pole, at which he catches, and no sooner got hold on it, but
his enemy strives (by rapping, knocking and cutting his fingers) to make him
let go his hold; yet he cries and holds and holds and cries, but with much
difficulty: So it is often with a poor believer, got from under the tyranoy of
Satan: His arch enemy would feign reduce him to his former condition and by
temptation lays hold on him yet the poor believing soul escapes through much
difficulty: Christ tenders and offers himself to him, to free him from that
gulf of woeful misery whereinto he is so deeply plunged; with difficulty faith
lays hold on this Object; no sooner does it so, but Saran is ready to beat him
off from his hold; yet faith (like a brave spirited child) fights and cries,
and cries and fights weeps and prays and prays and weeps, and still keeps his
hold.

IV. In fighting there is a Victory aimed at, and whosoever goes a warfare,
has an eye and aim at this; so there is in the fight of faith an eye and aim
at victory: It Is this which makes the believer triumph in the midst of misery;
when wealth is gone, faith tells him of a treasure in Heaven; when husband,
father or friend is gone, faith tells us of a better husband, and better father
and friends in Heaven, when life comes to a period faith tells of an eternal
life of glory, of which he can never be bereaved.

V. There is violence used in other fights to get the victory, so there is in
the fight of faith. Mat. 11. 12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by sorce.

Qu. 2. What are the main particulars wherein faith is engaged, or the
business of faith, in which (if it be at all) it cannot but combat, fight, and
contend?

A. In twelve particulars faith is engaged, as a combating and conflicting
grace, at which I must but hint without illustrations.

First, to maintain all divine revelations; to set to the seal that God is
true, that he must have the honor of all divine truths revealed in his holy
word, though they seem to be nothing Romans 4. 17.
but Mysteries, Riddles and Paradoxes; and in believing these, and closing with
them to become a fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3. 18. As for example:

1 To believe the doctrine of the glorious Trinity in Unity, that three should
be one, and one three, that the Son should be as old as his Father, and the
holy Ghost proceeding from them both, equal with them both. 2 The doctrine of
the creation: that God made all things of nothing, which worldly reason
contradicts, saying, ex nihilo, nihil fit: out of nothing, nothing can be made:
and so we might run over all till we come to the doctrine of resurrection and
last judgment. 3 To believe that bodies so long dead shall rise again; nay,
bodies buried in the sea, and devoured by fishes, and several fishes
swallowing several parts, and though cut into a thousand pieces and given to
the fowls of the air, yet to believe that these bodies shall rise again. 4
To believe that soul and body, so long separated shall at the last day be
reunited to receive either the fullness of blessedness, or the fullness of
cursednesse: these and many such seem to be doctrines full of absurdity, and
therefore cannot be believed without a combat.
Secondly, to keep the soul from sinking into desperation at the sight of
sin and sinfulness, when sin in the nature, acts, aggravations and effects
are clearly discovered, and set home to the conscience; it is then in the nature
of every heart to play the part of Judas, and the desperate Jailer, to lay
violent hands on themselves and with the poor fish to leap out of the
drying pan into the fire; now the business of faith is to hold a man up by the
coin that he sink not in these waters, and so be irrecoverably drowned in
desparation: but all this is not done without a combat.

Thirdly, to bring a man from self-sufficiency and self dependency, to rest
upon Christ alone: Herein there is a twofold self that faith fights with
and overcommeth.

1 Selfe-opposition to Christ. 2 Selfe-mixture with Christ.
1 The first tendereth a sufficiency of her own to the soul without Christ;
hence closes not with Christ, but rests on self and its own doings.

2 The second seems to abhor such profaneness as to depend Phil. 3 verse.
4, etc.
on self without Christ for life and for salvation; therefore places only
sufficiency in Christ alone to make the soul blessed, but in point of applying
and receiving this blessedness to it self, mixeth her own parts, duties or
something of self with Christ; and so serves her self and her own ways in
the sufficiency of Christ: But the Lord enables a believer by faith to come
from self in both these particulars, and rest wholly on Christ alone, but not
without a combat and conflict: Nay, the business of faith is to bring a man
from self in other particulars; as (contrary to that in Job) to Job 36. 21.
Heb. 11. 25. Acts 7. 60.
choose the greatest affliction rather then the least sin: 2. To recompense
the greatest evil with the greatest good: 3. To rely on a word without sense
rather then to rest on sense without a word: 4. To take as much pains in the
duties of piety for Heaven, as if there were no Christ to bring him thither;
and when he has done all to account himself an unprofitable servant and so
attribute all to Christ, as if he had not been endued with any parts, nor
performed any duties at all etc. but Phil. 4. 13.
all this is not without a combat.

Fourthly, to bring Christ and the soul together, and to give them possession
of each other, whereby Christ comes to dwell in the heart, and the soul in
Christ; this cannot be without a Ephesians 3. 17.
combat, because satan puts sorth all his power and policy to hinder this.

Fifthly, to purify the heart and to make riddance of a man's Acts 15. 9.
prevailing corruptions, so as (though they remain) yet they reign not in the
soul: But this cannot be without a combat, because sin and lust are such
enemies as have no ingenuity nor good manners and therefore will not be gotten
out by fair means, by entreaties and the like. Mat. 5. 29, 30. Rom 4. 18, 19,
20.


Sixthly, to give the soul possession of the promises, and to enable it to
rest on them; which is not done without a combat.

Seventhly, to make the soul facile and tractable to God's mind, and pliable
to yield obedience to all God's Commandments; it is faith that makes a man see
that it is God that commands Psalm. 119.
to run the ways of his Commandments; it is faith again that is as the oil
to the wheels, to enable a man with alacrity to run: But oh the combat of flesh
against faith herein, what believer feels it not?

Eighthly, to unglevv, unscrew and loosen a man from the world, by presenting
better objects unto him: this is done by faith, but not without a combat. Heb.
11 24.


Ninthly, to bring a man's neck under the cross and to enable him to bear the
greatest indignities, losses, crosses, with invincible patience; see what faith
enabled the Patriarchs to undergo, Heb. 11. 36, 37. but this is not done
without a combat: flesh and blood puts in here again, like Peter to Christ,
Pity thy self Master, etc.

Tenthly, To give a man a holy rest in God, a holy peace comfort and confidence
in God; the one maine and principal rest that Saints aim at is God in Christ,
and this makes any particular rests truly reposes to them indeed: Now faith
engages it self to bring the soul to such a rest in God through Christ, Heb.
4. 11. this cannot bewithout a combat, to bring a man into such a condition, as
to make every day a feast day, a day of rest, sweetly reposing himself in the
bosom of God in Christ with confidence: Oh there are many enemies, labor to
interrupt
this sweet rest, with whom faith combats, both to bring the soul to and to
keep it as by a garrison in this rest, till it arive at eternal rest, Phil. 4.
6, 7. (...).

Eleventhly, to make a man willing to dye, by presenting happiness to come,
and the vanity and sinfulness of this life; yet Phil. 1. 23.
this is not done without a combat; as we see by the example of the Saints:
Believers only are willing to dye, and faith makes them so, after the combat
with, and conquest over those enemies to this sweet frame of willingness, to
be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Twelfthly, to make Christians say in all these, we are more then Conquerours
(that is) most glorious and eminent Conquerours Romans 1. 37. (...). 1 John 5. 4.
and this by faith: There can be no such conquest without faith, and you never
heard of a conquest without a combat. Thus you see there is a fight in
believing, a real, yet spiritual fight, closely and inwardly managed.

Qu. 3. How, or by what strength is this fight of faith managed?

Answ. I answer in general; not by any strength of its own, as it is a grace,
but in way and strength of dependency upon God and his grace; though faith be
the chief rooting, Captain Grace; and all other graces are (as it were) to
bind the towell about them, and wash the feet of this grace, yet take faith
from dependancy, and it will be as another grace; as Sampson said of his hair,
cut off this and I shall be like another man: It Is not any power of faith that
gets the victory, but the sword of the Lord and Gideon, it is the power of the
Lord joining with his own work of faith in the heart, that gets the victory.
Thus much of the Doctrinall part of this point: the Application will be
coincident with the Application of the two doctrines remaining, which for
brevity sake shall be united into one; which being unfolded, application shall
be made of them altogether: the point is this, viz.

That it is the duty of all Pastors and people to fight the good Doctr. 2 and 3
united.
fight of faith. For the explication and confirmation hereof, consider.

Qu. 1. That this fight of faith is two-sold,

1 Internal. 2 External.
1 Internal, when a believer fights against his lusts and corruptions, and
satan's wiles; as appears by these Scriptures, 2 Cor. 10. 3. Ephesians. 6. 11. 1 Pet.
2. 11. 2 External, when a man courageously stands up in the Cause of Christ
and suffers afflictions and persecutions for Christ, and is not overcome by
them; as these Scriptures demonstrate, 2 Cor. 15. 31, 32. 2 Cor. 11. 23, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 18. 19. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
Qu. 2. Why this fight, is it called a good fight?

Answ. 1 Because a good God is the Author of it; we need not fear, it is a good
fight, when God appoints the field. 2 In regard of the General, or Leader of
this Army, which is Christ: He never sinned, yet in some respect it may be
said, that he fought the good fight of faith; therefore it must needs be good.
Revel. 17. 14.
3 The good Spirit of God is the guide and conductor in this combat; therefore
it must needs be good. 4 The weapons with which we must fight, are appointed
and prepared by God, Ephesians. 6. Therefore a good fight. 5 Because it is for a good
Cause, and it appears to be a good Cause: 1 Because it is to preserve God's
glory against all oppesers of it, and such persons and things as would eclipse
and darken it. 2 Beause it is for truth and righteousness sake, Jud. 3. As one
said, it must needs be a good Religion that such a wretch as Nero persecuted;
so that must needs be a good fight that opposes and weakneth the power of such
enemies as Devil World and Flesh. 3 Because it is to preserve a precious soul,
better worth then the whole world, Mat. 16. 26.
6 In regard it has a good issue and event. viz. eternal life: though a
believer meet with many a knock and much hardship and difficulties in the
combat, yet he shall certainly be crowned with victory: In all these respects
it is said to be a good fight.
Qu. 3 But why must all of Timothie's spirit fight this fight of faith, which
so clearly appears to be a good fight?

Answ. 1. Because God will have all the seed of the woman tried; all such must
look to have their heel bruised by the old Genesis 3d 1^
Serpent; therefore all must war.

2 Because Satan bears a like hatred against all; he seeks whom he may devour,
1 Pet. 5. 8. as the Wolf will spare none in the flock neither Ram nor Sheep
nor Lamb that he can come by; so Satan-world and flesh will neither spare
Minister nor Magistrate, nor common sort of people: therefore all believers of
what rank and quality soever, must (in opposition to this common foe) fight the
good fight of faith.

Qu. 4. Why does the Lord suffer this spiritual warfare, whereby the souls of
believers are so annoyed with such enemies? could not the Lord have brought
believers souls to eternal life without this?

Answ. Though God at the first work of faith in the soul could have utterly
abolished all such spiritual adversaries, yet he lets them remain even after
effectual calling, while we are here militant in this world; for these
respects:

1 To show his power that he can keep believers, notwithstanding the continual
danger they are in: God can carry one of his soldiers quite through all the
quarters and armies of the black Prince of darkness without any hurt; he can
make his Sheep feed fat in the midst of Wolves, and his Lillies grow and
flourish in the midst of Thorns, and believers upright in the midst of
strong enemies, till they become triumphant in glory.

2 Hereby the graces of God's Spirit are raised and exercised to the glory of
God who wrought them, which (if they met with no opposition) would not so
gloriously appear; as in the time of peace many choice spirits lie
undiscovered, etc.

3 It is equal we should war before we triumph, that we fight this good
fight on earth before we reign in heavenly glory.

4 It makes grace here and glory hereafter more sweet and precious; hence the
Lord often brings a soul to Heaven by the gates of hell, and to a triumphant
condition in glory, by a militant condition on earth, which is sweetened by this
means; for how pleasant is peace after war you may imagine?

The first Use of what truths have been explicated and confirmed Use 1.
unto you, is of trial, whether you be Soldiers of Christ in a militant way
against Christ's and your soul's spiritual enemies or whether yet you be
vassals of the devil. Here are no newters: He that is not with me is against
me (says Christ) Matthew. 12. 30.
you are certainly every one of you militant either under Christ's or Satan's
banner: Now the same question in the ministry of the Word is propounded by
Christ, which was once by Jehu, Who is on my side, who? 2 King. 9. 32. If you
be on Christ's side, then are you believers in a militant way.

Qu. How shall we know whether we be so or not?

Answ. 1. If you be gathered and brought on by the sound of the Trumpet, viz.
the powerful preaching of the Word, the ordinary way which the Lord takes to
prepare a people for this spiritual battle, by enlightening their eyes to see
their danger, to see their enemies of whom they are in danger, the multitude,
Isa. 27. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 8. Heb. 10. 32.
subtilty and strength of these adversaries, and the souls weakness in it
self to vanquish them; but with all its strength; by faith in her Captain the
Lord Jesus, when once savingly wrought on: Then here are according to the
parallel before, five sorts to be set by, who may have the name and profession
of a Soldier, for the credit on it, or for some base sinister respect, or
other, yet utter strangers to this spiritual warfare: As many amongst us have
the name of a soldier and martial men flanting it in their Buffe and great
Scarfes; but yet others, and their own consciences know they are no Soldiers,
and have neither will nor skill to fight, but basely thrust themselves into
that noble and honorable profession of a soldier for some sordid and sinister
respect.

Qu. But who are these?

1 All such as hate the sound of the Drum and Trumpet have no disposition of a
soldier; so all these haters of the Lords Trumpet. the shrill clear and sharp
preaching of the Gospel by such and such Ministers (who dare not let it give
an uncertain sound) are yet none of these that are fighting the good fight of
faith.

2 Such as are not sensible of any enemies to their souls spiritual good
here, and eternal good hereafter.

3 Such as aim at no victory, or think to attain it without a fight.

4 That fight, but use no violence; all newters and lukewarm persons are here
excluded.

5 But chiefly these that please themselves with a strong conceit that they are
as good soldiers as the best, and doubt not but they are fighting the good
fight of faith, and shall certainly lay hold on eternal life; yet think their
multitude of strong and subtle enemies are easily overcome; they think it is an
easy matter to believe, and to be a Christian soldier indeed, and so find no
difficulty in this fight, which is a clear demonstration that they never were
in combat and conflict, and so are no soldiers of Jesus Christ: others
indeed, like some soldiers in show and external profession, are in some light
skirmishes of which they will exceedingly brag, and make this an argument,
that they are approved soldiers; so many will conclude themselves to be
undoubtedly soldiers of the Lord Jesus, because they have been now and then
exercised with some combats and conflicts, and these they will often talk of
and boast of, and from hence gather arguments of their spiritual good
souldery, and fighting the good fight, when there is no such matter.

Object. But what then is the difference?

Answ. The difference lies in

three things: 1 The manner 2 The aim and end 3 The event or success
of the Fight.

Sometimes there appears a mere delusion; when two lusts are together by the
ears, as Covetousness and Prodigality are striving which shall prevail, in
the mean time the poor unskilful soldier thinks he is combating against an
enemy: But admit a combat, yet there is much difference between the combatings
of regenerate and unregenerate.

1. In the manner, in four particulars. 1. A natural man though he fight
against spiritual enemies, yet it is coldly and listlesly: Like Ephraim,
turns his back in the day of battle, Psalm. 77. 9.
and having got advantages, will not follow them, (Eg.) Saul had some fits of
sorrow for sin, and some purposes to leave it; but how cold was this? as
appears by his present hot pursuit of David 1 Samuel 26. 20, 21, 22.
again. Light sometimes shines in dark st prisons and hard Marbles sometimes
stand a drops, and rocky hearts sometimes relent; but contrary, where the
Spirit of God is in the heart of a believer, it makes him a man of power and
might powerfully and mightily to resist sin, to follow his advantages and
pursue Col. 1. last.
his victories, and still to fight with a kill or be killed; whereas the cold
fighting against an enemy, and flow pursuit of him when they have him at an
advantage is a clear discovery of such to have only the name and profession of
soldiers.

2. A natural man fights against some of the enemies of his Lord and of his
poor soul, but not against them all; he only strives against some gross
sins, such as the world cries shame of, the laws of the land take hold of,
or such as are too costly to maintain, or such as fill the conscience with
horror; it is contrary with a gracious heart like David, hates every false
Psalm. 119 128. Psalm. 18. 33.
way, and strives against his peculiar sin, the sin of his complexion or
constitution, etc.

3. A natural man in his striving and fighting against some sins only, does
but lop the branches; a true spiritual soldier of Christ strikes at the very
root of corruption, and is not quiet till Romans 7. 24. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
he find his sinful disposition changed, and himself made partaker of the
divine nature.

4. The one fights and strives hard against sin by fits and starts, when he
is Sermon-sick, or after some heavy loss or cross, then he is persuaded sin
is the cause of all this misery, and now he begins to strive against it, and
pray for power and strength against it; but the other holds on constantly
fighting the good fight, and gives not over till he has finished his 2 Timothy 4.
7.
course.

The second difference lies in both their aims and which II. In the end.
they have in this their combating and conflicting with sin, which appears
in three respects:

1. The regenerate, or the true Christian soldier fights against sin as Gods
enemy; hence he gets up to help the Lord against the mighty, that Gods enemies
may be weakened, that God may have the sole dominion, that his laws may be kept
unviolated, that his promises and threars may be believed, etc. Contrary, a
mere natural man has some strife against sin, not as sin, but in regard
of some ill consequences of it; as to prevent shame, horror here, and hell
hereafter: he loves the forbidden fruit (as the dog his hot broth) but dares
not meddle with it for fear of scalding his lips: But the true soldier of
Christ corflicts by virtue of that antipathy which is between his renewed
nature and sin: As it is with a man (by reason of the antipathy between him
and a Serpent) he cannot think of a Serpent, but his spirit rises against it
but much more when this Serpent comes near him, most of all, when environed
with a multitude of them, ready to leap upon him and sting him; so it is with a
believer; he cannot think of sin as sin against God, but his spirits rise
with indignation of it, much more when it nearly approaches to his soul; but
when he is beset with sin, and endangered to be stung and poisoned with it,
and so Gods Name dishonored, then all that is within him is mustered up
against it, and if he had a thousand times more spirit and strength, all should
be employed against it in this combat, as it is Gods enemy, as well as the
enemy of his own soul.

2. A natural man's end in striving against sin is, that he may have some
temporal advantages thereby; as ease, and peace, and wealth, and credit, and
friends; the contrary, if he have any aim at all at gain, it is to his soul
here and glory hereafter, which he knows cannot be had without a victorious
fighting the good fight of faith.

3. The natural man combats only to subdue sin (which is well) but if this
be all, he is but like Ephraim, half-baked; if only sins be subdued, he will
be dis-appointed of his aim and end herein too; for if he have no other aim,
his sins will never be conquered.

The spiritual man has a further aim and end in his combat then only to
subdue sin, viz. to get corruption subdued, that Christ may reign, that
sin may be pulled up, that Christ may be planted in the room; he takes revenge
on disobedience, that he may be more obedient; he puts off rioting and
drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, strife and envying, that he may Romans
13, 13, 14.
further put on the Lord Jesus, and walk honestly as in the day; he forbeares
the superstitious observation of days; that he may observe the Lords day the
better; he forbeares to profane the Lords day, that he may sanctify it
aright: But it is contrary with the natural man in his strife and fighting; if
he can suppress sin he thinks it enough; he has none of these aims and
ends in his fight, he never labors for a part in Christ, and his grace and
growth therein.

The third difference is in the issue and success. A natural III. In the
success.
man fights and strives against corruptions, but is usually foiled and
overcome; the spiritual man gets the victory; and if he be foiled at any time,
he gathers strength hereby, and sets upon his spiritual enemies with greater
violence and better success.

The second Use is of Information. Use 2.


1. That it is not so easy a matter to be a Christian; is it an easy matter to
fight courageously, skilfully, watchfully and constantly with a multitude of
strong, subtle enemies, and vanquish them? Is It an easy matter to chop off
the right hand and pull out the right eye? No, no: The Christians that lead
such easy and pleasant lives, and never find any such combating, are but
Christians in profession only; though this fight be not managed by any
strength of a man's own, but the Lord Jesus himself enables the soul by faith
to, run and win; yet it is not without difficulty, and to fight and be
victorious, yet with difficulty.

2. That it is not safe to conclude of the happy condition of all that dye
quietly, nor of the bad condition of those that dye in conflict. etc.

3. Those that enter into the profession of Christianity, into this spiritual
warfare, and never reckon aforehand what it will Luk: 14, 31.
cost them are never likely to hold out, but have a brand of folly upon them.

4. This also discovers the folly of such as think to get the Crown without a
fight, or begin to fight when good soldiers finish it; namely in their old
age, when the time of their departure draws nigh; when Paul finisheth his
course, many think it is 2 Timothy 4, 6, 7,
then time enough to begin theirs: this is all one as if one should say, I will
fight under the banner of the utter enemy of my Prince, till my old, lame,
decreped age, and then I will offer my service to him, which (says the
Prophet) is a cursed and a deceitful Mal. 3, 8.
thing: this is all one, as if one should let his enemy get him down and
weaken him, and then think it is time enough to recover; as England deals with
their corporal so many now adays deal with their spiritual adversaries: Do
they not let their enemies increase, Irish Rebels invade the Land, possess
Forts, Castles, Countries, and have the better end of the staff, then think
it is time enough to arise as one man, and make opposition? so foolish are most
of us in our spiritual fight, we let lust take possession of the heart, and
fortify, and make it self very strong, and then we are ready to think it is
time enough to set upon this duty of fighting the good fight of faith: the
serious consideration of this Scripture, Rev. 2. 7. may prevent this Revel. 2.
7.
folly; the Spirit of God in this place holds out

three things unto us: 1 There is no communion with Christ where there is no
opposition against corruption. 2 Where there is no fighting there is no
conquest. 3 And where there is no overcomming there is no eating of the Tree of
Life, (that is) no salvation.

The holy Ghost does not say, he that fights a little (for credit, honor, or
such sinister respects, and then gives over and runs out of the Field and
lays down his Commission, and will fight no more) shall eat of the tree of
life, but he that so fights and overcomes shall eat of the Tree of life that is
in the midst of the Garden. Oh then be ashamed of such thoughts to attain
Heaven Non est eter^is mollis ad astra via.
with so much ease; the way thither is not in a fether-bed, nor strewed with
rushes: Be ashamed also of such a sordid disposition, either to begin in the
spirit, and then (basely apostatizing) end in the flesh, or to defer the
fight so long, till it be time to finish the course.

Then be ye all in the name of Christ exhorted to go on in a Use 3. of
exhortation.
military way here, that ye may be triumphant hereafter.

Qu. But how shall we fight against these spiritual enemies especially our
sinful corruptions, so as to overcome them?

Answ. Time permits not to instruct and direct fully in this; I must therefore
send you to that whole armor of God, mentioned in Ephesians. 6. 11. to 13. and do
beseech you to study that; (...).
where you are directed what spiritual weapons you must get to fight with; as
also, how wisely, and with what spiritual skill these ought to be used in this
warfare; and for the presert do but observe these general directions,
imitating a good soldier of Jesus Christ; make such a one your pattern in
these four 2 Timothy 2. 3.
particulars.

First, Begin this spiritual warfare betime, and procrastinate not. etc.
Secondly, have sincere references as the preservation of souls, the ruinating
of Christ's and the soul's enemies, and in all, the advancement of Christ's
glory. Thirdly, endure hardness; use moderation; you know a little sleep and
food serves a good soldier, and he often lodges hard, and watches much etc.
Imitate him herein, and beware either of unlawful liberties, or the inordinate
use of lawful which do exceedingly hinder us in this warfare, nay they do
entangle us hand and foot, and so unfit us for the battle; but in using
hardship (as a good soldier) let it be with this threefold caution. 1 All this
must be for righteousness sake, then ye are blessed. Matthew: 6. 10.
2 In thy place and calling as a good soldier and not as a medler; you know if
a soldier suffer or be slaint 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16
out of his rank, and from under his Commander, gets no honor. 3 All this must
be for thy Captain, who will certainly recompense it: Satan's soldiers suffer
much, but 2 Timothy 4. 8.
what get they from their captain?
Fourthly, hold on constantly; all promises are made to this, Rev. 2. 7. 10.
Take heed of apostatizing spirits, but stand to your colors, and follow the
Lord Jesus your Captain, as well by the Cross as the Garden to the Crown.
For your better encouragement herein, consider three things: First, Christ
himself is your Captain Isa. 63. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 3. Secondly, Christ your
General is present, and his powerful presence may encourage you against all
fears; a generous Mastiffe dog will venture upon a Lion in the presence of his
master, and what true hearted soldier will not fight valiantly in the eye and
presence of his General? and shall not a believer do as much in the presence
of Christ?

Thirdly, The enemy has received his deaths-wound by our Captain, and now
fights like a drone without a sting.

The last Use is a great ground of consolation to all those that Use of
consolation.
are enabled by the Lord Jesus to fight this good fight of faith, especially
it is very comfortable on the deathbed: When the time of Paul's departure drew
near, what comforted him but this? 2 Timothy 4. 7. though death be called the King
of fears and said to be (...) the most terrible of al terrible things in the
world; yet such as have fought this good fight of faith, may with much comfort
look death in the face.

1. Because by Christ the sting of Death is taken away; death 1 Cor. 15. 55,
56, 57.
to such is but a stinglesse serpent, and a toothlesse dog, which may afright
but cannot hurt them.

2. In regard of other terrors and fears when death approaches as when such
a blessed believer is ready to say, farewell all my temporal good things, I
shall never rejoice in you more: His conscience sweetly answers, No matter, I
shall have a better Husband and a better Father, I shall go to better friends
and comforts, and rejoice in these to all eternity.

Nay, when he has such a thought on his death bed; What will become of my soul
for ever? Now there are but two for evers, either for ever in weal, or for
ever in woe: When a man thinks of that sentence in Mat. 25. 4^. he looks wan;
but the consideration of this text, and the Spirit of God witnessing to his
spirit, that Christ has enabled him to fulfill this charge, he sweetly breaths
out his last with these thoughts, I have fought the good fight of faith and
shall be free from eternal death, and lay hold on 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
eternal life.

FINIS.
May 14. 1645. Imprimatur

JOSEPH CARYL.


