Some few QUERIES AND CONSIDERATIONS Proposed to the CAVALIERS, Being of
weighty Importance to Them.
May 2 1660
Query I. Whether all those Sufferings, which have befallen that Party for
these many years, were just as relating to God or no? that is, whether they so
sinned against him, forgetting his Name and fear, dealing hardly with such as
truly desired to fear him, (and who in his true fear did differ from their way
of worship) exalting man in an hard and arbitrary Government both over the
Consciences of the upright-hearted toward God, and over the rights, liberties
and persons of the Nation, which with many other things, as the vanity and
excess of the Court, the looseness and profaneness of the Gentry, swearing,
drinking of healths, and following the vain pomps and vanities of the world,
(which by their very Baptism they stand engaged to deny) might fill up their
Ephah, sway down their balance, and sink their prosperity: I say, whether
these and such like things, might not justly provoke the Lord to turn his hand
upon them, to overturn their Church Government, smite their King who was their
strength, and bring them under the feet of those, whom before they had trampled
upon and oppressed? Now though they may cry out against men, and in the day of
their power fly out upon the rod wherewith the Lord chastised them, yet this is
more proper and safe for them now, to consider what hand the Lord had in all
these things, and whether he was just therein or no.

Quer. II. Whether in these their sufferings they have humbled themselves
before the Lord, submitting to his hand, mourning over their sins and
transgressions against him, and have more desired his gracious mercy and power,
to pardon and deliver them from their sins, than to be freed of their
sufferings; so that if ever it should please him to take his hand from off
them, and bring them again into place and power, they might not so provoke him
any more, either against themselves or their King, but in true humility and in
his fear (and in love to his name, truths and people, and the people of this
Nation) might walk righteously, meekly, and faithfully in the exercising of
authority for the good and peace of all, and not for the hurt of any?

Quer. III. Whether the cause (which they now may easily trample upon and
despise) in those people who were engaged against them, was not just on their
behalf also in its first rise, and at the beginning of the controversy; and
whether their spirits might not be stirred up by God thereunto? wherein if they
had continued faithful, going on singly in the work of the Lord, and not
seeking themselves, nor the hurt of any, but the just rights, liberties, and
good of all according to their engagements, this overturn might never have
befallen them. But they letting Gods Cause fall day after day, time after time,
one opportunity after another, no marvel though the Lord has suffered them to
fall also: for it was not the intent of the Lord to set up their persons (as
was often testified to them while they stood) but to set up truth and
righteousness in these Nations, and to give his people full liberty of fearing
and obeying him without fear of men. This the Lord began to effect by them,
wherein their service was very precious and acceptable to him, which if they
had gone on faithfully in, they had never seen this day.

Quer. IV. Whether they consider the hand of the Lord in turning things thus
about, or whether their eye be on instruments: on such as were against them on
the one hand, and on such as were for them on the other hand? for is it not
very wonderful to consider, how many plots and contrivances they have had one
after another to bring this about (some whereof were very likely to take, and
hard to be disappointed) and yet all have still failed: and now at length
unlooked for, it has as it were dropped into their mouths in such a way, and
after such a manner, and in so full a measure, as they could hardly have
expected. O that they could eye the Lord herein, and fear before him, earnestly
desiring and waiting for his grace to guide them, that at length one generation
on whom he shows mercy, might show themselves worthy of his mercy, and not
provoke him against them by abusing it, and so on a sudden forfeit and hazard
the loss again, of what they have been so long desiring and aiming at!

Quer. V. Whether they consider how easy it is for the Lord to turn things
about again, in as unexpected a way to them, as this was to those who are now
overturned. Indeed they are settled as to the eye of man: what can withstand
them? what can rise up against them? but alas what is the strength of a Nation
to the Lord? The whole Nation are men, and not God; and their whole strength
flesh, and not Spirit: and if the Lord rise up against them, what are they
before him? O that they could fear the Lord for his goodness, and that those
that are fallen under them might fear him for his severity, and that we might
all give over upbraiding and fighting against one another, and every man fight
against the lusts of his own heart: against pride, passion, envy, covetousness,
heard-heartedness, oppression of men's consciences, doing to others what we
would not receive from others, etc. for the hand of God is swift against the
unrighteous Spirit, and he overturns apace. And if this present settlement do
not please him, but if this generation after all their afflictions prove
unworthy of this mercy, not letting fall what the hand of the Lord has gone
forth against, but thinking again to settle upon firmer foundations what God
has all this while been shaking, the Lord will laugh at their counsels and at
all their strength, and overturn them in a moment. This has been it has
undone the foregoing Powers, they have been eyeing men, and strengthening
themselves against men, and if they could but be strong against the visible
powers, they thought they were safe and secure enough, and so have overlooked
the invisible hand, which was the strength that went forth against them.
Therefore O Cavaliers consider in this your day, how strong are ye against the
invisible arm of the Lord? If ye are not able to deal therewith, fear before
it, and make peace with it, least it prove that the Lord has raised you up to
make his power known upon you, and to get himself a name by your overthrow.
This is a warning of love to you, even from that which saw this your day before
it came.

Quer. VI. Whether an evil Spirit, a loose Spirit, a Spirit which is out of
the fear of God (and against them that fear God) has not risen up in the
Nation, and been too much encouraged since your coming into power? The end of
government is to bring men into, and encourage and preserve them in the fear of
God, which is the spring of all goodness, righteousness and equity (not to
bring men into a formal way of worship, that the Lord always loathed; but to
encourage in the true fear, which teaches that worship of him in heart and
Spirit which his soul ever loved.) Now consider seriously, is not iniquity
broke loose? is not the chain as it were taking off from the wicked, and
preparing to be laid on the righteous? What vanity, what excess, abuse of the
creatures, Swearing, Drinking, Scoffing, etc. is already broke forth? yea and
how are those that in truth of heart fear the Lord, and apply themselves to
meet in his fear to worship him, already derided, disturbed, and threatened, as
if this should not be lawful for them much longer? Alas, alas; If ye do not
take heed, your ruin will be writ on the very entrance into your prosperity! O
Nation of England, why do ye thus provoke the Lord against your selves, against
your King, against your Parliament, against that part of the Nation who have
been so long sufferers? will ye throw away the Lords mercy as soon as it is
bestowed on you? will ye hasten to stir up his anger and jealousy against you?
O how short will your day be, if ye proceed after this manner! O remember God,
and be troubled and deeply humbled for these things; and rejoice with
trembling, and do not show vain expressions of joy out of his fear, but let
your joy be in his fear, and then we also shall rejoice with you, and hope that
the wrath of the Lord may be diverted from this Nation, which these things help
to kindle and increase.

Quer. VII. Have ye considered, or do ye yet seriously apply your selves duly
to consider, what the Lords controversy with this Nation and the powers
thereof all this while has been, and how it may be ended, that there may be no
more striving against him, neither by the powers nor people of the Nation? for
what are men, that they should contend with God? how can they prosper therein?
had they never so great advantage of gaining or carrying a cause against him,
yet how certainly would they fall before him! Now look back honestly, singly,
faithfully, in the simplicity of your hearts, search and consider, what God
has contended with the powers of the Nation for, these many years: and if the
Lord please (to such as thus search after it) to discover what it has been
for, let the Lord have his pleasure; for assuredly he will not fail of
recovering and advancing his cause, how much fallen soever it seems to men,
and how impossible soever it seem to be recovered. Let me in the uprightness of
my heart propose some few things to you.

First, is not this a likely thing, that the Lord would have the reformation
from Popery perfected? If the Protestants did well to leave Popery, then surely
the more they leave it and come out of it, cannot but be acceptable to God: and
the same Spirit which drew out of Popery, will be drawing out of all the
relics of it, and still bringing into a purer and more inward and spiritual
worship? Now consider seriously of this matter, will ye give God leave to draw
his people out of what ever is left of Popery in this Nation? Will ye forbear
forcing of them to such things as they verily believe in their hearts to be a
denial of Christ their Lord and Master? If ye suppose such, or such a Ministry
and way of worship to be good, can ye not enjoy it your selves without forcing
others (who cannot but from their hearts disown it in the sight of God) to
submit to it, and to help to maintain it? how can they do this thing, and sin
against the Lord? O do not strive, like Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, to make Gods
Israel to sin! The Lord God considers the sufferings of his people for his
names-sake. O England take heed of this thing, and do not hinder any in
reforming either their lives or their worships, but at length amend this thing,
which has been so long amiss in the government of this Nation. The government
of this Nation has been gentle to the loose Spirit, to the profane Spirit;
but hard to the strict Spirit, even to that which fears to offend the Lord, let
it now at length, after thus much desolation and distress, become gentle to
that which fears the Lord, and more severe to that which is loose and profane.
Surely he that governs under God, it becomes him to cherish that which is
tender to God. And let the laws in this kind be considered of, and set strait
for the encouragement of the good, and for the curbing of the unrighteous loose
and profane spirit, that it may no longer thus swim on top, and abound in the
Nation, but be brought under.

2. Is not this also likely and a fitting thing, that the Lord God should have
the leading and guidance of those whom he beget by his spirit, and who are born
thereof? Shall not the everlasting father have the ordering and dispose of his
own children, to whom he gives his spirit to that very end, that they may be
led by it, Romans 8.14. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is
every one that is born of the spirit, John 3.8. Now he that is begotten and
brought forth by a free breath of the spirit, shall not the same Spirit guide
and lead him out of the world to the Father, out of the love of it, out of the
customs, fashion, worships, and whole course of it? They are not of the world
says Christ, even as I am not of the world, John 17.16 They walk not as men,
or according to men, 1 Cor. 3.3. Indeed he that is Christ's is crucified with
him, the man's part is slain, and he can walk no more as a man, but as one
redeemed out of the earthly nature and Spirit: therefore the world hates him,
John 17.14. and is ready to crush and oppress him, Gal. 4.29. but this is not
righteous before God, that his children and people should be hated, hunted and
persecuted, because of their likeness to God by partaking of his image, and
because of their obedience to his Spirit, which draws them out of all the
unrighteousness of the world, yea and out of its righteousness too, that they
may be found in the righteousness, faith, and obedience of Gods Spirit in every
thing.

3. Is it not fitting that the Lord should have and enjoy the worship of such,
as he teaches and seeks to worship him in Spirit and in truth? The worship in
spirit and in truth is the Fathers worship, that is the worship which he has
appointed and chosen, and which he teaches his Children, and such worshippers
the Father seeks to worship him, John 4.23. men seek such worshippers, as will
own their form and way of worship: but God seeks such as are born of his
spirit, and are willing to learn of him to worship him in Spirit and in truth.
God is a spirit, and such as worship him, must worship in his spirit, John
4.24. and such as live to him, must live in his spirit and such as walk with
him must walk in his spirit, Gal. 5.25. this is the true Gospel religion, first
to wait for the promise of the Spirit, and then to Worship and walk with God in
the Spirit. Now will ye not suffer God to enjoy the worship of his own People,
into whose spirits he breaths life, and whom he forms and begets into his own
likeness? Consider how provoking this must needs be to God, of what dangerous
consequence this has been to the foregoing Powers, and how dangerous it may
prove to you.

4. Consider whether it be in your hearts to bring us back to Egypt, and
whether ye be able indeed so to do. It was an heavy yoke which we lay under by
the government of Episcopacy, and our spirits cried and groaned to the Lord,
and he did deliver us, and has brought us from under it. Now a power is risen
up which has not felt nor known the burden of our spirits, nor been
acquainted with our secret breathings and mournings to the Lord; nor seen his
mighty hand in what he has done for us, and so ye may easily be tempted to
attempt either to bring us back into our old bondage, or to fall upon us and
crush us. But if this be your aim and intent, it will soon prove your ruin: for
the Lord God who has given you a day (and in whose hand your breath is, and
before whom all your power is nothing) if he see you thus make use of it can
soon put an end to it. What is all your visible strength before the invisible
arm and power? Therefore be not high minded because ye are outwardly so strong
and invincible, but fear before him who is stronger, whose eyes run to and fro
through the earth to behold the carriage of things, that he may be ready to
stretch forth his arm for the saving of his people, when there is none left to
help them.

5. Consider seriously and pray earnestly, that ye may know what God has put
this opportunity into your hands for; and do not seek the regaining of the
earthly glory and greatness (which we know to be falling, that the Lord alone
may be exalted, as the Scripture also has testified, Isa. 2.17.) but be sober
and moderate as to that, and seek the glory of the immortal God, who is to rise
in the Kingdoms of the earth over all ( Rev. 11.15.) and seek righteousness,
meekness, the peace, good and welfare of all, neither doing nor suffering to be
done to any sort of persons, what ye would not be willing to have done to you
by them, if ye were in their case, state and condition: and in any thing
wherein ye have been injured in the time of your sufferings and sore visitation
by Gods hand, though ye may now blame, and seek to right your selves on the
instruments which God pleased to make use of to afflict you, yet it will be
safer and better for you, if ye can forgive.

These things belong to your peace, and by this means the Lord's favor may
turn toward you, who cannot but dislike your beginnings: but if in a fleshly
confidence because of your outward strength, ye shall set your selves against
the work of the Lord, his cause and people, we can say to you in the dread of
our God, Who art thou O great Mountain? We do not doubt but before the Fanner
of Babel to see thee made a plain, and are prepared in our Spirits to stand
still to see the Salvation of our God, whose arm is not shortened that it cannot
save, even when the enemies strength, resolution and advantage is greatest.

This is from one who has mourned for the oppressed, and because of the
oppressions which have long abounded, praying to and waiting on the Lord for
the good and prosperity of the Nation in general, and for the bringing forth of
that righteousness, fear of the Lord and true peace, which alone can make it
happy.

Isaac Penington, the Younger.


