THE RVMPS Last Will and Testament WHICH THE EXECUTORS Herein Named (being out
of hopes of the MONSTER'S Recovery) have thought good to publish and exhibit.

LONDON, ^rinted by John Tailor, 1660.

THE RUMPS Last Will and Testament,
Which the Executors herein named, being out of hopes of the MONSTERS
recovery, have thought good to publish and exhibit,

IN the NAME of OLD NICK and Sir Arthur, So be it: The day of our declining
Condition, and (to our grief be it spoken) we fear in that Platonical Year,
wherein all Things are like to come Round: We the wretched RVMP of a Long
Parliament, at first Legally Elected, but since miserably Degenerated, having
scarce ever a good quality, and finding a daily decay in our selves, both of
Wit an^ Honesty, having a long time stunk above ground, do call to remembrance
the uncertain estate of our Noysom Continuance, and that the RVMP must yield to
dissolution, when it shall please we to our sorrow know whom to call; and being
desirous (according to our old wont) to put things in disorder, do make,
constitute, ordain and declare this our last wickedness, in manner and form
following.

And first, being penitent and sorry from the very bottom of our Fundament,
that we were not ten times worse then we are most humbly defiring forgiveness
for the same, we permit our stinking RVMP to the Close-Stool, where we desire
(but are so much like Infidels that we cannot believe) to be preserved till
that joyful day of our third Resurrection, with our RVMP upward in token of
good Luck, and through the Industry and power of some seditious Sectaries, and
Jesuitical Impostors possess and Inherit the Kingdom of England, prepared we
fear for a better purpose. And now for the settling of our real exacted Estates,
and ill gotten goods, which the Devil (who usually to his power helps his
servants) has pretended to bestow upon us; we do Order give and dispose of
them in manner and form following (that is to say) we Will that all those
Debts and Duties, either upon the Public Faith, or otherwise, which we owe in
Right or Conscience to any manner of person or persons whatsoever, shall never
by our Consent be truly contented or Paid, or Ordained to be paid at any time
or times after Our Decease by our Executors hereafter named.

ITEM. We give and bequeath all those Lands now in our Possession, commonly
called, or known by the name of Good Conscience, which we enjoyed before the
late times of Temptation, to be equally divided amongst such as intend to turn
Knaves with the first opportunity.

ITEM. We give and bequeath all other our Lands, being ten times the value of
the former, which we raised out of the ruins of our Country, to be shared
amongst our Instruments of oppression, to the intent that they may pray
heartily for our next Resurrection, and not to cease unless the Lands aforesaid
revert to the Right Owners.

ITEM. We give and bequeath all our broken Ware, as Oaths, Protestations,
Solemn Leagues and Covenants, to whomsoever will take them, being like to prove
troublesome stuff in another World.

ITEM. (Because we know not how to avoid it) we give and bequeath to General
MONK the Keys of our Shop of Iniquity (as we have made is) at Westminster, in
Order to the Letting in of the secluded Members; and with them all the Curses
we are able to pronounce for his presumption in being more honest then our
selves.

ITEM. To all his honest Officers and Soldiers we give and bequeath for the
finding some few Trifles which we lately utterly lost (to wit) the Love, Good
will, and Wellwishes of the people.

ITEM, We give and bequeath our late Knack of Extortion in Folio (being for
six months Assessment, not like to be paid by our Order) to be foulded in
Quarto, and employed only to backside service, in remembrance of the RVMP:

ITEM. Our WILL further is, that Haberdashers Hall be hanged round with
mourning, in order to the celebration of our Obsequies, and that our two late
Knacks of Sequestration (more dear to us then the Bible) be cut into
Escutcheons and hanged about about Our Hearse, and that every O^fi-cer there,
lately gaping for Preferment, have a lighted Torch put in his mouth, ready to
dance attendance upon our RVMP-SHIPS to Charon's Boat; and that Jack Lambert,
late Master of mis-rule, and Ringleader of the Phanatiques, be during this
Solemnization Master of the Ceremonies.

ITEM. Our WILL further is, that all Buttons made by the RVMP in their
extremity, be valued at a High Rate, and that none be sold under the Rate of a
Six Months Assessment the Gross. And we do hereby give unto our Executors
hereafter named all benefit, profit, and advantage thereby accruing, that they
may have cause to remember us by a good Token.

ITEM. We give and bequeath what we cannot keep, to be employed toward the
repairing of those breaches we have made both in Church and State, and in
particular toward the mending of the City Gates and Port-Cullises, which as we
have had the shame of throwing down, so our Will is, that we may have the
Credit (seeing we deserve to be at the Cost) of the setting up, and to have
this MOTTO engraven. These gates they fell with many a thump
And were set up at the charge of the Rump


And Lastly, we do by this our WILL nominate, constitute, and appoint our
loving Friends Praise God Barebone, together with his late Rabble of Fellow
Petitioners to be Executioners of this our Last Will and Testament, giving unto
them the thank of the House for their good infections; and our Will is, that
as our Rising again, they be put into all places of Profit and Trust throughout
our Dominions: and in the interim we give them a Copy of our Countenance, as a
Commission to carry on their Damnable, Cursed; and Cutthroat Designs.

In Witness whereof to this our LAST WILL and TESTAMENT, we have subscribed
Our NAME, RVMP

Postscript.
Reader,
I Shall desire thee to take notice that this Rump-Will, though it be published
in the Executors names, yet the promulgation thereof I must needs take upon my
self, and then if thou say I might have been better employed, I shall say so
too, but (mistake me not) not because thou say it, but because I think it:
And yet let me tell thee, I think I have done well, though I might have done
better, and thou that find fault may do worse; but however if thou do
not like, thou had best look off, which is the best Counsel I can at this
time give thee, only thus much I Will promise thee, that when I have any other
Varieties to treat the withal besides RVMPS, thou shall find me more solid.

S. P.

FINIS.

