TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT, The humble PETITION OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, In behalf of EPISCOPACY AND CATHEDRALS.

Printed in the year, 1641.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT, The humble Petition of the
University of OXFORD
SHOWS,
THAT whereas the Universitie has bin informed of several Petitions
concerning the present Government of this Church, and maintenance of the
Clergy, which have of late been exhibited to this Honorable Assembly; We
could not but think our Selves bound in duty to God, and this whole Nation, in
charity to our Selves and Successors, who have and are like to have more then
ordinary interest in any resolution that shall be taken concerning
Church-affaires, in all humility, to desire the continuance of that form of
Government, which is now established here, and has bin preserved in some of
the Eastern and Western Churches, in a continued Succession of Bishops, down
from the very Apostles to this present time; the like whereof cannot be
affirmed of any other form of Government in any Church. Upon which
consideration, and such other motives as have been already represented to this
Honorable Parliament from other Persons and places (with whom We concur) in
behalf of Episcopacy, We earnestly desire, that you would protect that
ancient and Apostolical Order from ruin or diminution.

And become farther Suitors for the continuance of those pious Foundations of
Cathedral Churches, with their Lands and Revenues,

As dedicate to the service and honor of God, soon after the plantation of
Christianity in the English Nation:

As thought fit and useful to be preserved for that end, when the Nurseries of
superstition were demolished, and so continued in the last and best times since
the blessed Reformation, under King Edw. 6. Q. Elizab. and K. James. Princes
renowned through the would for their piety and wisdom:

As approved and confirmed by the Laws of this Land, ancient and modern:

As the principal outward motive and encouragement of all Students, especially
in Divinity, and the fittest reward of some deep and eminent Scholars:

As producing or nourishing in all Ages many godly and Learned men, who have
most strongly asserted the truth of that Religion We profess, against the
many fierce oppositions of our Adversaries of Rome:

As affording a competent portion in an ingenuous way to many younger Brothers
of good Parentage, who devote themselves to the Ministry of the Gospel:

As the only means of subsistence to a multitude of Officers and other
Ministers, who with their Families depend upon them and are wholly maintained
by them:

As the main Authors or upholders of diverse Schools, Hospitalls, highways,
bridges, and other public and pious works:

As special causes of much profit and advantage to those Cities where they are
situate, not only by relieving their poor and keeping convenient hospitality,
but by occasioning a frequent resort of Strangers from other parts, to the
great benefit of all Tradesmen, and most Inhabitants in those places:

As the goodly Monuments of our Predecessors Peity, and present Honor of this
Kingdom in the eye of foreign Nations:

As the chief support of many thousand Families of the Laity, who enjoy fair
estates from them in a free way:

As yielding a constant and ample revenue to the Crown:

And as by which many of the learned Professors in our University are
maintained.

The subversion or alienation whereof must (as we conceive) not only be
attended with such consequences as will redound to the scandal of many well
affected to our Religion, but open the mouths of our Adversaries, and of
Posterity against us, and is likely in time to draw after it harder conditions
upon a considerable part of the Laity, an universal cheapnesse and contempt
upon the Clergy, a lamentable drooping and defection of industry and knowledge
in the Universities; which is easy to foresee, but will be hard to remedy.

May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly, upon these and such other
Considerations as your great Wisdoms shall suggest, to take such pious care
for the continuance of these Religious Houses, and their Revenews, according to
the best intentions of their Founders, as may be to the most furtherance of
Gods glory and service, the Honor of this Church and Nation, the advancement
of Religion and Learning, the encouragement of the modest hopes and honest
endeavors of many hundred Students in the Universities

Who do and shall ever pray etc.
Dat XXIV. Apr. An. Dom. M.DC.XLI. e Domo Convocationis, in celebri Conventu
Doctorum ac Magistrorum, omnibus and singulis assentientibus.

