PEMBROKES Enaration, a little before his Death, or, his Remonstrance to all
his fellow Rebels, with his Caution to the City of LONDON.
DAm me what shall I do? me thinks I find,
The Pangs of Hell, all in a troubled mind;
Blood cries for Blood; nay, it is the K. blood too,
That gripes my Soul, and speaks my fatal woe:
Zounds, I did Covenant, to maintain his Right,
And to defend him, with my utmost might,
Plague take the Fool, 'twas I, with many more,
Like Lordly Fools, that did his Death implore,
Cause was (Gods Blood) because he was too wise,
Too good for's all, and would not Sympathise;
Or to speak home, God dam me give consent.
For to subscribe our Acts of PARLIAMENT.
When We a headless Number, often did meet,
For to subject the Head, unto the Feet;
Under pretense, that We, were jointly bent,
To give to him, and all; all just content.
Confusion take me, I was fooled to this,
Under the motion that We all were his;
But now unto my hearts great grief I find,
That I was led, just like a man was blind.
With thousands more, who all did then combine,
To shorten him, who to us gave the Line;
Showed us the way how we might prevent,
Ensuing Evils, and speak full content,
God dam me, to us all: cursed be the hour,
That I did ere rebel, (against his Power)
A Catalogue I could name of those,
God dam my Soul, that were this mortal Foes;
Some Brewers, Tinkers, and some other were
Broome-men and Cobblers, and I dare to swear,
Some of unknown Birth; the best but base,
And yet we all shook hands, to run one Race.
I like a Lordly Fool, had no more wit,
But as the Commons bid me, stand or sit;
And now (Gods Blood) I know not what to do,
Death swears he will have me, and some others too:
Though made of Steel, or Iron, it is all one,
The State must fall too, when he cries come, come,
Zounds, whether shall we go, Dam me old Nick.
I fear will show us all, a plaguey Trick.
Gods Blood in Heaven, there cannot be a place,
For any of us Roundheads, the Royal Race,
Such as for God, and King, did manly fight,
Will keep us out, protesting it is their Right.
Why, whether then (Gods Zounds) must Pembroke go,
With all the rest, Pluto does only know.
Ah, how Death haules me to some fatal Place,
Where I obscured must be for want of grace;
Sink me, my Council, to the next shall be,
By flying somewhere, to gain Liberty;
For when young Charles (Gods Blood) shall hither come,
Dam me, I fear they will be all undone,
Gods Plague hangs over them, and the Cities curse,
Attends them all; who at the first did Nurse
This Brat, Rebellion; but now they see,
They were but bull'd, to fight for Liberty,
For all the Liberty to them that is left,
Is, that they are, of all their Wealth bereft:
When that the Commons please to vote it so,
These silly Cowards dare not to say no;
Pride does attend them menacing their fall.
If they withstand, when he for ought should call.
God dam me (if they will be advised by me)
I Will tell them how to gain their Liberty:
Aud's blood (in some time) how they may obtain,
The Honor once they had, unto their fame.
Submit to Caesar, give King Charles his Due,
Next under God, his Right must come from you.
But if you do withstand, and bow to the State,
God dam me (you will all repent too late
For why Gods Zounds) his Fathers blood does call,
For speedy Vengeance to light on you all,
All I do mean, who durst to enterprise,
Against their Sovereign (the least Arms to raise)
The blood of Nobles, Gentry, and all those,
Who in mad fury you did once oppose,
Zounds, cries for Vengeance, and svre you must,
If not repent in time, prove all accursed;
Gods blood (I Have said enough) be wise in time,
Least you the Triple-Tree (Gods Zounds) do clime.
FINIS.
Printed at LONDON, 1650.


