OBSEQUIES: ON That Vnexemplar Champion of Chivalrie and perfect Pattern of true
Prowess, ARTHUR, Lord Capell.
-- In Trepidus mea Fata ^^quor
louell fecit


IT IS false Astronomy: we are not yet
In utter-darknesse, though the Sun be set;
Since thy star-beaming-influence proves all
Those Rules Excentrique, and Apocryphal.
Thou 'rt heighthn'd by thy Fall; and do now shine
With doubled luster, since thy last Decline.
Bright mirror of our Sphere! who were no less
Then Valors wonder: Virtues Masterpiece;
Filling whole Volumes with thy Fame; to tell
The World Thy Worth was Her own Chronicle.
To tell the World, those Praises in the Wars
Thou'ast purchased, might be numbered with the Stars;
And had thy well-proportion'd-Dayes been Spunne
Out by thy Deeds, thou had outlived the Sun;
Forcing the Worlds great Luminary to have
His Chaos climacterick with thy Grave.
Thus thy renowned Meeds like Incense hurled
On flaming Altars have Perfumed the World,
With such rich Odours, that scarce envy knew
Whether thou were to King, or Realm most true;
Let State-Chronographers admire, and plead
Those Rites they owe to Honor; when they read
Thy rare Achievements; studying to refine
The truth of Modern History by Thine.
Carthage be dumb! our Colchester stands now
Corrivall with thee, and dares more then Thou;
And all those Punick wars thy walls could boast,
Have over and over been traversed on Her coast.
Romes three Horatij are Posed; our Isle
Has bred a Capell, Lucas, and a Lisle:
Whose matchless Deeds have Dubd them with that late
And glorious title of Triumvirate;
Whiles their transcendent merit struts, and strives
To stand on tip-toe in Superlatives.
And still there is something more; for, what was mixed
Promiscuously in these, in Thee was fixed.
In Thee that Pythagorean Maxime's true;
And what was State Philosophy, proves new
Divinity, since the Souls of all those Nine
Renowned Ones Transmigrated to Thine.
But why do we Adore thee, made immense
And far sublimed above our Sphere of sense?
Scorning bright Obelisques of Brass, or Stone
Should raise thy Monument, who ar't thine own.
Yet should thou expect a shrine on Earth, we must
Make Colchester the Exchequer of thy dust.
Nor is it more then Reason, since 'twere pity
To give thee a less Churchyard then that City
TO Interre thee in her Breaches, and o'returne
Her stately Bulwarks, and support thine Urne;
Whilst the thronged streets would justle to make room
And spread their Towers, as Trophies, over thy Tomb.
But this grand task I recommend to those
Who can limme Fancies in more lively Prose;
Whose Rhetorique may richly guild this Pile
And raise Invention to a lofty style;
Such as may Conjure Horror, and obliege
Belief (from our nice Zelots) of that Siege,
That fatal Siege, whose tre^ches were o'respread
With mangled truncks, and Bodies of the Dead,
Till the discolored Earth, thus died in Grain,
Blush't to behold such Shambles of the Slain:
And the pale Furies stood, like heartlesse Elves,
Trembling; to see Men do more then Themselves.
The Center-shaking-Brasse grew hot, and spoke
In Flames of Lightning, and in clouds of smoke;
And Charon fainted, Ferrying Souls to Hell,
When Hecatombs of the Besiegers fell.
Amidst these Tragic triumphs did thou rear
Thy brave Top-gallant 'bove the reach of Fear,
Undauntedly exposing thy bold Head
To shock of Thunder, and thick showers of Lead.
Those Bullets were then Tame; and we may tax
The partial Sword that spared thee for the Axe.
The Field (the Asylum of great Spirits) clean
Is now transferred; the City is the Scaene;
The Cannon showed faire-play; But thou were packt
Away, not by an Ordnance but an Act.
The Scaffold turned a Stage: Where, it is confessed,
The last Act (though most Bloody) proved Thy Best:
It proved Thy solemn Coronation, since
The Yard's thy Palace; and a glorious Prince
Thy President: Who after Him art hurled
To meet thy Sovereign in another World.
Where Thou art Fixed a glorious Star, to gain
Nearer access, and wait on CHARLES his Wayne.

