THE Inseparable Union Between CHRIST AND A BELIEVER, Which Death it Self
cannot Sever.

OR The Bond that can never be broken.

Opened in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Dorothy Freeborne, who was Interred
at Prittlewell in Essex on 24. of August, 1658.

By Thomas Peck, M. A. And Preacher of Gods Word at Prittlewell.

Ioh. 13. 1. Having loved this own, which were in the world, he loved them to
the end.

(...).

2 Timothy 2. 19. London, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers Chapel, and at
the Bible on London Bridge 1671.

To the truly Pious, and his much Honored Friend Mr. Samuel Freeborne, S. P.
wishes increase of Grace and fruition of Glory.
Honored Sir,
WHen you first view this Paper, I know you will be stricken with wonder what I
aim at, or intend by it; but when you understand both the occasion and end of
this undertaking, you will (I doubt not) accept it with mildness and candor,
and forgive my boldness in presuming upon your Patronage, seeing I know not
any, who has a juster right to it, than yourself. The occasion of making this
Sermon (delivered by my Father at the funeral of your late religious Mrs.
Dorothy Freeborne.
Consort) public was the desire and solicitation of her two Captain Richard
and Captain William Goodlad.
Sons, to whom I bare so singular a respect, and am so much engaged, that I
could not deny this their first, and so reasonable request; nor shall deny any
other, which is in my power to grant: this was the occasion. The end of it is
twofold, private and public, and I hope both good. Private for the benefit of
you and them, of your Family and theirs; by receiving the memory of so choice a
Saint, who was a pattern of Piety in all her relations, more especially in
those two, of a Wife and a Mother; whose example if her Children follow, they
will manifest themselves born again, and so to have a right to that Glory,
which she now possesses.

The public end I aim at, is the Spiritual good of all those, that shall read
the Sermon with diligence, and Prayer to profit by it. This (the good of Souls)
was, I am sure, my Fathers chiefest end in Preaching it, and is mine also in
Publishing it. His great care and design in his work (when ever God gave him
opportunity) was to win Souls, and God was pleased to let him see of the travel
of his Soul, the fruits of his labors, long before he took him to himself;
which was great comfort and satisfaction to him, upon his dying Bed. You know
Sir, it was never his custom or ambition, to interline his Sermons (especially
upon such solemn occasions as this) with much reading, nor yet to glaze them
with much Rhetoric, well understanding, that the leaves of Antiquity would
make but a weak Shield against the stroke of Death, and that the fine flowers
of Rhetoric would not be Armor of proof against the conquering fears of the
King of terrors. His manner was to Preach a crucified Christ in a cracified
style, to hold fast the form of sound words, delivering the mind of God, in
Scripture language, not in the enticing words of man's wisdom; to see that his
Doctrine was sound, wholesome, savoury, and edifying, not merely notional,
suited to men's corrupt humors; but well grounded on holy writ, and suited to
the Souls of his hearers; which savours of a more divine-like spirit, than the
light jingling of some, and spiritual bombest of other Preachers and Writers in
our dairs.

Such as it was in the Pulpit, such you have it from the Press, there is
nothing added to adorn it, nor yet to enlarge it; something more there is, than
was delivered, (time preventing him) yet nothing more, than what I find in his
own Notes. As to the dead, if any thing be added, it is but what he could have
spoken of her, if occasion had permitted; and but what all persons who had the
happiness to know her, and be acquainted with her, will witness to be true; yea
and say, that all that is written does not set forth half of her Glory, the
half of her excellency. The Charracter, which the Holy Ghost has given of
Abigall, 1 Samuel 25. 3. May be 1 Samuel 25. 3.
given of her; she was a woman of good understanding, and of a beautiful
countenance. She was eminent for her Piety, Modesty, Humility, Charity, and
(which made her amiable in the eyes both of God and men) she was adorned with
the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit. So richly decked with all Christian
excellencies, that as Solomon speaks of the Virtuous Pro. 31. 10.
Woman, Prove. 31. 10. Her price was far above Rubies; for what does the wise
man mention Commendable in Women, that was not found in her? She stretched out
her Verse 20.
hand to the Poor, yea she reached forth her hand to the Needy. She opened her
mouth with wisdom, in Verse 26.
her tongue was the Law of kindness. She looked well to the ways of her Verse
27.
Household, and eat not the bread of Idleness. Her Children rise up, and Verse
28.
call her blessed, her Husband also, and he praises her. Many Daughters have
done Virtuously; but she Verse 29.
excels them all, and her own works praise her in the gates. But lest, Verse
31.
while I mention her (though God has been pleased to Compensate your loss in
another Pious Consort) I should renew your grief, I forbear, and only add my
prayer to the God of all grace, to perfect his own work, begun in you, and to
increase your graces, till you shall attain the measure of assurance, which she
enjoyed; till you shall certainly know there is such an Union betwixt Christ
and your Soul, as death it self shall never be able to loose; that so when your
work is finished, and your graces perfected, according to the measure of that
stature, which God has appointed you in Christ Jesus, here on Earth, You may
go triumphantly to Heaven, which is, and shall be the fervent desire of

Sir, Your truly Respectful, and Loving friend. Samuel Peck.
August 18. 1671.
To his highly Respected Friends Captain Richard and Captain William Goodlad,
S. P. wishes all increase of Spiritual and Temporal riches.
Worthy Friends,
WHen I understood the desire you had, that I would Publish, and let pass into
the eye of this Censorious age, this Sermon, Preached at the Funeral of your
honored Mother (whose departure was much lamented, and whose memory shall ever
be blessed, so long as any survive, who knew her worth) I did set my self to
Transcribe it for the Press. And the rather, because this might give me
opportunity to make a thankful acknowledgement of your respectful, and more
than ordinary favors to me. All that I can do, besides, in requital, is to
Counsel and entreat you to be followers of her, as she was a follower of
Christ, to endeavor after a further and greater knowledge of God and of his
Son, whom to know is Life Eternal. All knowledge and all Sciences invented and
revealed by the wise men of the world without the knowledge of Jesus Christ, by
whom remission of Sins, and Eternal happiness is obtained, are vain and
unprofitable. What does it avail a man to know the height of the Heavens, the
breadth of the Earth, the depth of the Sea, and the course and influence of the
Stars, if in the mean time he is ignorant of God, and the weighty concernments
of Eternity, and his Conscience tells him he is unworthy of the Earth, and
without a right to Heaven? Suppose a man could Compose and take a view, and
have perfect knowledge of this Terrestial Globe, and all things in it, and
after that (as the Devil proffered our Savior) enjoy it and all the Kingdoms
and Glory of it, for the time of his Life; if yet he were ignorant of heavenly
things, and had not, by Christ, a title to a more enduring substance, he were
of all men most miserable; and in truth, knew Si Christum nescis, nihil est si
caetera ai ces; Si Christum disces nihil est si caetera nescis.
nothing, enjoyed nothing. The knowledge of Christ therefore is to be prized
and preferred, which only can make the souls of men truly happy; for the
excellency of this knowledge, St. Paul counted all things but loss and dung.
The like esteem (I hope) Phil. 3 7, 8.
you have of all things here below, in comparison of this divine and saving
knowledge. You go down into the Sea in Ships, and see the wonders of the Lord
in the deep; O! Let the wonderful Visions which you behold, and the wonderful
deliverances, which you often receive, augment your awe of his dreadful
Majesty, and cause you to walk humbly and thankfully before him, undertake all
in his name and for his glory, jo may you be assured of success and enriching
returns. Forget not, when you are in the depth of the Sea, with Jonah, to make
your prayers to him; accomplish and fulfill all your Vows and Promises made to
the Almighty in times of danger and extremity; that so he may be your deliverer
again in time of need. And when by his providence he Calls you Swit. Christ.
man's Call. 2. p. 477.
forth, to your Lawful employments, then do you (and all that Embark with you)
take faith for your guide, Scripture for your Compass, an holy fear for your
sounding line, the Son of Righteousness for your Loadstar; Hope for your
Anchor, the white linen of the Saints imputed Righteousness with a Red Cross
in it, of precious blood, for your Flagg, with this Motto, Save us Master or we
Perish.
And I beseech the God of the Sea and Dry Land, to be your continual Convoy,
his Spirit to be your Pilate in all your Courses; that so at last, after all
your tumblings and tossings, hazzards and hardshaps in the toublesome Sea of
this world, You may arrive with top and top gallant, richly laden with
Spiritual good things, at the blessed harbor of everlasting rest, Heaven, and
receive for your reward Love, Honor, and Glory for ever, and ever. Amen. So
prays

Your obliged, Loving Friend, Samuel Peck.
August 18. 1671.
The Inseparable Union between Christ and a Believer, etc. Opened from that Text
ROMANS 8. 38, 39. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from
the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
AS among Pearls, which are all excellent, some excel others: So in Books of
Holy Scripture; as in the Old Testament, the Book of the Psalms, containing an
Anotamy of the Soul: in the New Testament, after the divine History of our
Savior, the Epistles, among the Epistles, St. Paul's, among St. Paul's, this, to
the Romans is most excellent, which contains a methodical Catechize, wherein
the grounds of Theology are laid down in most excellent order, As

1. The misery of man by nature.

2. The means of delivery, by Christ.

3. How man comes to be partaker of Christ, viz by faith, whereby he is
justified in the sight of God.

4. He shows that this man, that is thus justified, is also sanctified. Chap. 6.

5. That his Sanctification, though it be throughout; yet it is not so perfect,
but there is a remain of Corruption in him, which does much perplex and
disquiet a Child of God, as the Apostle shows in his own person. Chap. 7.

6. Here in this Chapter he makes an end of the point of Justification, and
shows that though there remain Corruption in Gods Children, yet seeing they
walk not after it, but after the Spirit, it shall not prejudice their
salvation, verse 1. there is therefore now no Condemnation to those that are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not aftr the flesh, but after the Spirit.

This eighth Chapter placed in the midst of the Epistle, is called by some
Divines a pleasant knot of the Garden, or Paradise of God, for the faithful to
delight themselves in; a breast full of the milk of Consolation, for such as
are born again to suck and be satisfied with: It consists of three parts.

1. The First part contains matter of Consolation, against the remainders of
Sin and Corruption in us from 1. to 17. verse.

2. The Second affords true Consolation against the manifold afflictions to be
endured in this Life, to the 29. and 30. verse.

3. The Third part is a Conclusion full of all Comfort, drawn from the
immutable love of God in Christ to all the faithful, causing them to triumph
like conquerours in the midst of their trials, ver. 28, 29. I am persuaded
that neither death -- shall separate us from the love of God, in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

He whom God loves is happy, though he knows it not, he that knows God loves
him, knows himself to be happy; this happy knowledge our blessed Apostle had,
which made him in his own name, and in the name of all the beloved of God, to
make this glorious insultation over all the enemies of his and their happiness,
that they could not separate him or them from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus.

In the Words you have 1. His and their Assurance. 2. The ground of it.


1. The assurance is of the immutability of Gods love to the faithful, from
whose affection, nothing can make separation; I am persuaded that neither
Death, nor Life, etc.

2. The ground of this assurance, because the free love of God to the faithful
is founded upon Christ Jesus, whose merits are infinite, and whose efficacy is
omnipotent, therefore Gods love is immutable and can never fail.

In the first you have
1. An enumeration of some particulars (nine in number) which if any thing
could separate us from Gods love, it were likely to be some of these, which he
names, either Death, or Life, or Principallities, etc. 2. Because the Apostle
could not insist in the induction, or bringing in of all particulars; he uses
a general comprehensive expression of all things, that nothing might be
excepted -- Nor any other Creature. 3. The certainty or fullness of St. Paul's
persuasion, or assurance of faith concerning all these, that not any one of
them can, nor all of them together shall be able to separate us from the love
of God: I am persswaded, i. e. I am fully persuaded of it, certainly certain of
it and insallibly sure of it; and I here make it known to all the world; O Paul
(says one) great is thy faith.
In the second you have
1. The persons that are said to be in Gods love, St. Paul, and all believers.
2. The ground and foundation of all Gods love, which he bears and manifests to
believers, Christ Jesus. 3. The special interest that the faithful have in
Christ Jesus, set forth by a note of relation betwixt Christ and them -- Our
Lord.


I am persuaded, i. e. I am fully The meaning of the words.
certain, by what I have heard out of Gods Word; I do not go by (...). S il. ex
verbi predicatione effecaci ut indicat tacit hos Verbo. Beza. --
thinkings and guessings, I am upon a sure ground; it is not a morral
Conjecture; but my faith and confidence, yea my full assurance of faith. --
That 1. Neither Death nor Life,] i. e. of the body; also all extremes of
prosperity and adversity, whereby we may be either allured or terrified. 2. Nor
Angels] good and bad spirits, if it were possible they should concur to
separate us from Christ Jesus. 3. Nor Principallities nor Powers] the power of
Kings, Emperors, Popes, Tyrants throughout the whole world. 4. Nor things
present, nor things to Come,] all events good or bad, which now or hereafter
may befall us. 5. Nor any other Creature] not any other thing Created, of what
sort soever, how great soever, or how terrible soever it may seem to us. 6.
Shall be able to separate us from the love of God,) the love of God is to be
taken here, as before, passively, for the love wherewith he Verse 35.
loves us. 7. Which is in Christ Jesus our Lord,) which God the father bears
to us, and which comes to us in and through Christ Jesus. -- Thus you have the
meaning of the words.


Now I come to the particular points in the Text, which are too many to be
taken notice of at present, it would be too much work for the short time
alloted for this Exercise: I shall therefore select from the words two or three
observations, which may best suit with the sad occasion of our present meeting,
and speak to them as time shall give leave; and they are these. -- Prop. 1.
That a Christian in this life may be persuaded or assured that he shall be
saved: -- I am persuaded, etc. Prop. 2. That there is nothing in Heaven, Earth,
or Hell, nothing that is now or shall be hereafter, can possibly separate the
faithful from the love and favor of God, which he bears to them in Christ
Jesus their Lord. -- Prop. 3. That Death it self, shall not be able to separate
a Believer from Gods love in Christ Jesus.


I begin with the first of these, viz. That a Christian in this life may be
persuaded, or assured that he shall be saved.

And here I must speak somewhat for 1. Explication. 2. Probation.

1. For Explication.
This assurance has several denominations in Scripture;

I. It is called knowledge, very often, 1 John, 3. 2. We know that (...)
Scientia. 1 John 3. 2. 14, 19, 24
when he shall appear we shall be like him: So we know, that we are translated
from Death to Life, ver. 14. We know we are of the Truth, ver. 19. And we know
that we are of God, ver. 24. So 1 John 5. 19. and so 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know that
if our Earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
God, etc.

Now this knowledge is not a speculative knowledge, but an experimental
knowledge. A man cannot know he shall be saved, as he knows what Faith is, and
what Repentance is; but it is obtained by long experience, by reflection of
Conscience and Faith upon our selves, whereby we evidently see that we are in a
good and gracious estate, experimentally descerning what God has done for us;
and that upon such grounds as these; Being new creatures, walking in the light,
walking after the Spirit, not after the Flesh; loving the Brethren, and the
like. --

II. It is called a perspicuous (...).
manifestation, when Christ manifests himself to the soul, that loves him, as
not unto the world, Joh, 14. 21, 22, 23. He that loves me shall be loved of my
Father, and I will Joh. 14. 21, 22, 23. --
manifest my self unto him: and 22. ver. Lord how is it that thou will manifest
thy self unto us and not unto the world? Now this manifestation is Christ's act,
who being a free Agent may suspend his own act, and withdraw himself; therefore
this assurance may be interrupted, may be overclouded, and a child of God, of
Light, may walk in darkness and see no light, Esa. 5. 10. --

III. It is called boldness, so it is usually translated, Heb. 4. 16. Let us come
boldly to the Throne of grace, (...). Fiducia. Heb. 4. 16. Ephesians. 3. 12.
and Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness and access with Confidence. Now
this boldness, is the boldness of faith, not of presumption, it is an holy
boldness, not an impudent boldness, it is a child-like boldness an undaunted,
yet an humble dutyful looking God in the face: there was this boldness of faith
in the Woman in the Gospel, in touching Christ, though She did not
presumptuously crowd upon him, as others did in the throng.

IV. It is called full assurance, noting to us that it is gradual, not (...).
Prena certioratio Heb. 10. 22.
given all at once, but there is a growth in it, or a growing to it, by
degrees. There may be assurance and a good measure of assurance, though there
be not full assurance. All assurance is not of the highest degree, neither does
assurance in the highest degree exclude all doubting. Most think, as long as
they have doubts, they have so assurance; but they must know, that while they
are here they shall know but in part; they shall be imperfect in the knowledge
of Scripture, which is their rule of trying, imperfect in the knowledge of
their own obscure and deceitful hearts, some strangeness to God and themselves
there will still remain, some darkness will overspread the face of their souls.
Obj. But why does St. Paul call it a fullness of faith or a full assurance?
Answ. St. Paul calls it so ^n comparison of lower degrees, and not because it
is perfect, for if assurance were perfect, then also is our knowledge perfect,
and our ^aith and some other graces perfect, and if some, why not all? Perhaps
^n some their certainty may be so ^reat, as to overcome all sensible ^oubtings,
all sensible stirrings of ^nbelief, by reason of the sweet and powerful acts,
and effects of that certainty, and yet it does not overcome all unbelief, or
uncertainty so as to expel or nullify them, but a certain measure of them
remains still: thus you see in what sense it is called full assurance. It is
called also sometimes the full assurance of understanding, 2 Col. 2. 2 Col. 2.
Heb. 6. 11. Heb. 10. 22.
Sometimes the full assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11. Sometimes the full assurance
of faith, Heb. 10. 22. It Is not these graces, but the fruit of them, for
knowledge, Faith and Hope do all contribute their influence, to the making up
of this full assurance.

V. It is called the hid Manna, the white stone with the new name, (...), etc.
Rev. 2. 17.
that no man knows, but he that has it, Revel. 2. 17. First all believers
have it not, for some are weak believers, weak in faith: smoking Flax, babes
in Christ: this is the fruit of a strong faith, a weak believer is not fit for
it, now can he make a good use of it, it is like a great Sail to a small Vessel.
Secondly, it is the Crown after Conquest, to him that overcomes I will give,
etc. A man that has fought and overcome shall have it; not as soon as he
begins to fight, or at the second Combat, but when he has fought the battle
and has got the Victory, has got the day of his Corruptions, and soundly
mortified, then is the time, when God gives it. And thirdly, it is a secret
sweet, known only to him that has it.

VI. Lastly it is called a persuasion, (...). Perswasio.
so in the Text: I am persuaded: and it is the persuasion of Faith: hence (...),
Faith has its name, from persuading, because thereby the heart is persuaded:
First God gives faith, persuading the heart to believe, and then faith
reflecting upon its own acts, and seeing it self believing, does persuade the
heart of Gods Love, and Union with Christ, so consequently of its own salvation.

Having thus opened the nature of this assurance, I come to the second thing,
the Confirmation of the point; to show you that this certainty, this infallible
persuasion or assurance may be attained to: and that I prove thus.

1. Because St. Paul and other Believers, the Saints before us, have been
assured of this, by ordinary Faith, this is clear, 2 Cor. 5. 1. To go no
farther than this eighth to the Romans 15. 16. v. and the words of 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Romans 8. 15, 16.
my Text, I am persuaded, a place for the proof of this point beyond all
exception. Indeed the Papists say, this was a special revelation, St. Paul had
of his own salvation, which is most injurious to the whole Text: for though he
says I am persuaded, as speaking of himself, yet in the matter of persuasion
he joyneth all the faithful, as that nothing can separate (us) v. 39. and so
v. 35.
v. 39. speaking generally of all, which is proved by many speeches v. 23. v.
35.
before. We groan for the redemption of our body: did St. Paul only groan? and
who shall separate us from the love of God, was St. Paul only beloved? And we
are killed all the 36.
day long, and we are more than Conquerors, including all the faithful.
Therefore it is a poor shift of the Papists; to say, St. Paul had this Certain
persuasion of Gods love to him in Christ, by special revelation; for such
things as he had by revelation 2 Cor. 12. 4. They were (...), things not to be
spoaken, but this persuasion of his he utters, and therefore it was none of
those secrets, which he had by special revelation. They say again the word
(...), signifies only a Conjectural persuasion, but this is contrary to
themselves, for they say he was certainly persuaded of Gods love by revelation:
again the word indeed sometimes signifies, a persuasion of Charity touching
other particular persons, and then it is not so certain; but when it is used of
a man's self according to the word of God, it is then a persuasion of faith and
most certain, and so it is here used by the Apostle.

2. This assurance may be attained to, because a Christian may be certain of
the promises, therefore of the undeniable Conclusion from them; a Christian may
be certain of both promises. First he may be certain that whom God loves with a
special and an everlasting love shall be saved. That whoever is in Christ shall
be saved, for he is the Savior of his body; that whoever believes shall not
perish, but have everlasting life; that whoever loves Christ in sincerity shall
be glorified. For eyes has not seen, what God has prepared for them that love
him: this is the voice of the Gospel, therefore this we may be sure of.
Secondly as a Christian may know, that whosoever is in Gods love, is in Christ,
is a believer, shall be saved; so he may know, that he loves God, is in the
love of God, that he is in Christ, is a believer, and consequently be assured
that he shall be saved. That a Christian may know he is beloved of God, is in
Christ, etc. is evident from Scripture. We know and believe, says St. John,
the love that God has to us. 1 John 4. 16. Romans 5. 5.
1 John 4. 16. So Romans 5. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts; he
may know that he is in Christ and Christ in him, we know that we dwell in him
and he in us. 1 John 1 John 3. 24.
3. 24. That he does believe. Mark 9. 24. I believe. 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know Mark.
9. 24. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
whom I have believed. He may know that he loves Christ Jesus in sincerity Joh.
21. 15, 16, 17.
Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17. If God has given a man the good things that accompany
salvation, he may know it. 1 Cor. 2. 12. and consequently be 1 Cor. 2. 12.
assured of his salvation.

3. The Commands of believing and repenting, were in vain, especially as the
condition of the covenant, if we could not know whether we performed them or
not; to these, I might add many arguments more, As, that the Scriptures would
never make such a wide difference between the godly and the wicked, the
Children of God and the Children of the Devil, and set forth the happiness of
the one, and the misery of the other so largely, and make this difference to
run through all the veins of its doctrine, if a man cannot know which of these
two Estates he is in; Much less would the Holy Ghost urge us to give all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure 2 Pet. 1. 10. if it 2 Pet. 1.
10.
could not be done; by making of which sure, we make our salvation sure.

And to what purpose should we be so earnestly provoked and excited to examine,
prove, and try our selves whether we be in the faith or 1 Cor. 11. 28. 2 Cor.
13. 5.
no, whether Christ be in us or no, or whether we be reprobates or no? if it
cannot be known, why should we search for that, which cannot be found? How can
we obey those precepts, which require us to rejoice always in the Lord. Phil.
Phil. 4. 4.
4. 4. To call God Father. Luke 11. 2. Luke 11. 2. Psalm. 149. 1. 2, 3, 4.
to live in his praises Psalm. 149. 1. 2, 3, 4. to long for Christ's coming Rev.
22. Rev. 22. 20.
20. to comfort our selves with the mention of it. 1 Thessalonians. 4. last. which 1 Thessalonians. 4. last.
are all consequents of assurance, who can obey these precepts, perform these
duties heartily, that is not in some measure assured that he is the Child of
God? Again there are some duties which either the Saints only, or chiefly are
commanded to do: as sing unto the Lord all the Saints of his, and give thanks
at the remembrance of his holiness, Psalm. 30. 4. O love the Lord all ye Psalm.
30. 4. Psalm. 33. 1, 2, 3. Ps. 132. 9.
his Saints, and let the Saints shoot for joy. Psalm. 132. 9. and how shall this
be done if we cannot know that we are Saints?

Thus I have proved a certainty may be obtained, an infallible, though not a
perfect certainty; such as excludes all deceit, though not all degrees of
doubting. -- I proceed now to the Application; and first I infer
Use. 1. That if such an assurance may be obtained, then that is a Popish
Error, which (according to the Cannons of the Council of Trent) is that no man
can have any assurance of his salvation in this life, otherwise then
conjectural, unless it be made known to him by special revelation; nay they
hold him accursed that teaches a man may be thus assured. He that is a Papist
indeed, is bound by the principles of his own Religion to be in suspense of
that to his dying day, without the knowledge of which a Christian can never
have any sollid comfort. We say a Christian may doubt, and a true believer is
often troubled with doubtings, they say he must doubt, and it is a cursed Heresy
for a man to think he may have certainty: but we renounce this doctrine, as an
enemy to faith and salvation, and to a Christians comfort and consolation.
Miserable comforters are they all, as Job said of his friends. Job 16. 2. for
as in Job 16. 2.
most of their doctrines they rob God of his glory, which is his choicest
Jewel, so in this, they deprive a Christian of his assurance, which is his
chiefest comfort. In which respect the teachers of this doctrine may be fitly
resembled to those Locusts mentioned Rev. 9. Rev. 9 7, 8, 9.
7, 8, 9. they had faces like men; their doctrine in show had no harm or danger
in it; wolves in sheeps clothing, of whom our Savior bid you beware Mat. 10.
17. Mat. 24. 4, 5. Mat. 10. 17. Mat. 24. 4, 5.


2. They have the hair of women; their doctrines are insinuative, and
inductive to sin, have many inticements to allure men to the liking of them,
and to provoke to spiritual lust and fornication.

3. They have Crowns of gold upon their heads; triple Crowns and Myters, they
pervaile much, and have great reverence and authority where they come. But

4. They have tails like Scorpions, stings in their tails, their doctrine is
such, that in the end it will wound the Soul and conscience of him that
receives it intollerably, they can never have found peace and comfort in their
consciences that receive it, and believe it.

I might farther enlarge this use to the confutation, or rather reprehension,
of some amongst us, who renounce Popery and yet think this impossible and too
high a point; such as are no Papists; yet in this little better, condemning
this doctrine as presumption; for men to take upon them to know so much of Gods
secrets, as to be assured they shall go to Heaven when they dye, why this is
an high presumption. To whom I answer.

1. Because it is presumption in you, is it so therefore in Gods Children? It Is
presumption indeed for men to say they shall be saved when they dye, and yet
lie and live in their sins. Jer. 3. 4. will thou cry Jer. 3. 4, 5.
thou art my Father and yet do evil as thou could? so if we say we have
fellowship with him, and yet walk in darkness we lie. 1 John 1. 6. 1 John 1. 6.
such may be sure of their damnation, but not of their salvation in the case
they are in; for the Scripture says expressly salvation is far from them, and
they shall not inherit Gods Kingdom 1 Cor. 6. 9. and these 1 Cor. 6 9.
evidences will come in strongly against them at death and Judgment to their
confutation and confusion.

2. To press to know that, which God has secreted, and locked up in the
insearchable Cabinet of his own breast, this were presumption: but to refuse, or
not to endeavor to know that, which God has commanded us to search and find
out, this is disobedience, unthankfulness and contempt. True it is, no man can
of himself find out this secret, for the things of God knows no man, but the
spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2. 11. but says he Verse. 12. 1 Cor. 2. 11* v. 12.
we have received the spirit, that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God; and if any man have not the spirit of God, he is none of
Christ's. Thus much for this first use.

Use. 2. It reproves those, that acknowledge the truth in word, but deny it in
deed, in practice; for they look not, seek not for it, as if it were not to be
had; or at least not worth having.

The Apostle Peter commands to give all diligence to make our calling and
Election sure 2 Pet. 1. 10. but 2 Pet. 1. 10.
they give no diligence this way, but are careless and negligent about it: and
so much the more to be condemned is their supine carelessness to ensure their
everlasting Estates, because of their anxious carefulness to make sure the
things of this life, which are but for a moment. If men buy houses or lands or
take leases, or put out money, what a do to make these things sure? How many
draughts of paper must there be? what scanning of words, and weighing of every
clause as it were in a balance, what consulting of Lawyers, and boxing up
writings? But come to the point of their chief Inheritance, ask what evidence
they have for Heaven, what assurance of their salvation; and alas what wo^ul
uncertainties are men content to be at here? I hope well says one, I trust
says another, God is merciful says a third, and I shall do as well as others
says a fourth. Surely he that is no better ensured in worldly matters then
thus, I hope, and I trust, is but a weak man and in a very poor case we think.
Alas! that we should be so Politic for our bodies, and so silly and simple for
our Souls; that men should seek so much to make that sure, which they are sure
to forgo, and seek after no assurance of their Eternal condition; unless it be
to make their damnation sure: as many wicked men, are as diligent about this,
as the children of God are to make their salvation sure; doing quite contrary
to these commands and councels in 2 Pet. 1. 5. 2 Phil. 12. Heb. 2 Pet. 1. 5. 2
Phil. 12. Heb. 3. 15.
3. 15. these men are as far from faith and grace, as they are from the
assurance of faith and grace; as far from salvation it self as from the
assurance of it: salvation is far from the wicked, for they seek not thy
statutes.

2. Branch of this use is to reprove those, who, because assurance may be had,
and many of Gods children have it, think they have it too: Yea they that have
none at all, pretend to it most of all, carnal men and hypocrites, who never
rightly sought it, nor are subjects rightly qualified for it, being unhumbled,
unbroken, impenitent, unbelieving, sensual not having the Spirit. All graces,
and so assurance, how their counterfeits. Solomon speaks of some boasting of a
false gift. Pro. 14. 25. so many boast Pro. 14. 25. 2 Romans 71. 23.
of assurance and have it not 2 Romans 17. 23. thou make thy boast of God and
art confident, so many boast that God is their God, Christ their Savior, and
that God loves them with his special love, but their confidence is groundless,
like that of Solomon's fool Pro. 14. 16. and Pro. 14. 16. Rev. 3. 17.
the Laodicean Angel Rev. 3. 17. and of these there are diverse sorts.

1. Such as say they are persuaded God loves them, and it shall go well with
them, and take it for granted it is so, because their own hearts tell them so,
and can give no other reason of their hope and persuasion, but this, my mind
gives me so, etc. But this persuasion is a delusion of Satan and thy own
deceitful heart, this persuasion comes not from the spirit of God, for then it
would be grounded upon the word of God; but arising merely from thine own
spirit without the word, it is a delusion and a presumption, no true persuasion
or assurance. Prove. 28. 26. he that Pro. 28. 26.
trusts his own heart is a fool, for that is deceitful above all things, and
is always a false Prophet, speaking peace, when no peace is, and the false
spirit works effectually in the hearts of such, this false assurance Luke 11.
21. Luke 11. 21.


2. Such as say they are assured because they never doubted; they have always
believed God loves them, and that they shall be saved, they never doubted of
going to Heaven when they dye; they have ever taken it for an axiom never to
be called in question, or denied that they shall be saved. Friends, this is a
false assurance; for take this for an infallible truth, he that never doubted,
never believed, and he that never believed, never had a sound assurance of his
salvation: true faith is accompanied with doubts, why art thou disquieted and
cast down oh my Soul? Psalm. 42. 5. and Psa 42. 5.
O thou of little faith wherefore do thou doubt. Mat. 14. 31. Assurance is
never Mat. 14. 31.
so perfect, as to exclude all doubting, at all times; St. Paul says of
himself, who had this assurance, without were doubtings, within were fears 2
Cor. 7. 5. that is, doubtings 2 Cor. 7. 5.
and infidelity; yea God who brings good out of evil, and light out of
darkness, brings assurance out of doubtings and fears; for, first these
doubtings and fears stir up a Christian to be diligent in the use of means,
whereby he may come to be assured. Yea secondly these doubts and fears do use
to end in true peace and sound assurance as David's did Psalm. 42. 5. and the
last Psalm. 42. 5. and last.
Verse. whereas they that never had them and are thereupon confident of their
good Estates, this false assurance of theirs will end in great fear^ and
desperate terrors Job. 18. Job 14. 18.
14. His confidence, says Bildod, shall be rooted out of his Tabernacle, and
shall bring him to the King of terrors. If then thou think thou art assured
because thou never doubtest, wondering at others full of doubts and fears in
this respect, then know thy persuasion is a false persuasion, a false
assurance; no assurance of Gods people, no assurance of faith, which does not
exclude all doubting.

It is a bastard assurance, it was born and bred with thee, it is a Counterfeit,
a very delusion of the Devil. And I may apply to thee, that saying of Eliphaz.
Job 15. 31. let not Job 15. 31.
him that is deceived trust in vanity, for vanity shall be his recompense: Your
assurance thus built is but vanity, and it shall have no other recompense but
frustration and disapointment.

3. A third sort are persuaded God loves them, and so consequently that they
shall be saved, because God blesses them with common mercies, and it goes well
with them in this life: they receive many testimonies of Gods love and favor
toward them, as health, wealth, prosperity and a good name, like those the
Prophet Micah mentions. Micah. 3. 11. Or as Ephraim Hos. Micah. 3. 11. Hos. 12.
8.
12. 8. I am become rich, I have found me out substance, in all my labors they
shall find no iniquity in me. But this is a false persuasion, or assurance,
which is grounded only upon the fruits of Gods common bounty, not of his
special love and mercy; things that God gives to his very enemies, crumbs that
are often cast to dogs; and no man can know love or hatred by these things here
below.

4. A fourth sort are persuaded well of themselves, and of their everlasting
Estates, because their Neighbors, yea Ministers and good people think well of
them. Thus the Church of Laodicea, because well thought of by other Churches,
thought well of her self; and Judas (very like) thought his condition good,
because the rest of the disciples did so. But that assurance only is good, that
is built upon the word of God, not the word of man, they that rest upon every
bodies good word can assure themselves of nothing but that heavy woe in Luk 6.
26. woe unto you, Luk 6. 26.
when all men speak well of you: and therefore says the Apostle. Gal. 6. 4.
Gal. 6. 4.
let every man prove his own work, so shall he have rejoicing in himself and
not in an other.

5. Another sort that boast of false assurance, are false believers,
temporaries, who having, by some common work of the spirit, some common gifts
and graces wrought in them, some illumination, convictions, joy in the word and
some partial reformation, are presently so full of assurance, that they have
not any doubts; and imagine they are able to judge and determine concerning
others, whether they have grace or no. But it is a sign of a bad building, that
has a weak, or no foundation; and it was a sign Jacobs venison was not right,
because it was so quickly catched: so this assurance is too quickly gotten to
be good, and for the most part comes to nothing; like Jonahs Gouard sprung up
in one night, and withered in another; or like the stony ground hearers, that
received the word suddenly with joy, and for want of a depth of Earth, in time
of temptation fell away. All these assurances which men boast of are false, and
it apears by the fruits of them. By their fruits ye shall know them, says our
Savior, of the false Prophets. Mat. 7. 20. So Mat 7 20.
by their fruits ye shall know these false assurances, or persuasions, which
make men never the better, work no change in their lives; no care to please
God, no fear to offend God; nay they work contrary effects; they harden men's
hearts, and keep them from sorrowing for sin, Isa. 57. 10. thou said not,
there Isa. 57. 10.
is no hope, therefore thou were not grieved; nay they can commit very heinous
sins and never be troubled at them Psalm. 64. 4. they shoot in secret Psalm. 64 4.
at the perfect, yea suddenly do they shoot at him and fear not, they
encourage themselves in an evil way. Farther this assurance they talk of does
inbolden them to commit sin. Jer. 3. 4. did thou not cry, thou art Jer. 3. 4.
my Father? but they do evil more and more: And in Hos. 8. my God, we Hos 8.
know thee; yet they have rejected the thing that is good. Now how many are
there, whom Satan has over thrown with this false persuasion, yet men and
women will go away with it, dreaming their case is good: let such know, as
true assurance of salvation is a great mercy, so false assurance is one of the
most grievous judgments, that can befall a man; in Isa. 29. 9. when Isa. 29. 9.
the Lord had said stay your selves and wonder, in v. 10. he adds v. 10.
this to be the judgment they should wonder at, the Lord has covered you with
a spirit of slumber, or has powered upon you the spirit of a deep sleep, he
has closed your eyes, Of the two it is far better to be vexed with continual
fears, than to be lulled asleep with a false assurance, for besides that it
keeps a man from seeking to God, it will not hold; but certainly fail a man
when he has most need of it, as Zophar says in Job 11. 20. The eyes Job 11.
20.
of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not Escape, and their hope shall be
as the giving up of the Ghost: that is, as the Soul and body part with great
pain and horror, so shall he and his hope; as the Soul departs suddenly, so
shall his hope leave him in a moment; and as the Soul returns not into the body
any more in this life; so he and his hope take an everlasting farewell each of
other; his Soul and his hope depart together, never to meet more; therefore let
me invert the words of the Apostle concerning true confidence Heb. 10. 35. and
say concerning this, Heb. 10. 35.
cast it away, cast away your confidence, for it shall have no recompense of
reward. Thus much for this second use, by way of reprehension.

III. Use. Let it serve in the last place for Exhortation. Is it so that a
Christian in this life may be persuaded and assured he shall be saved, then let
this persuade and stir up us, to labor for this assurance: let us not run
blundering on in an uncertain opinion, or a wavering hope; but strive after
this sound persuasion, you have heard it is attainable, others have actually
enjoyed it, and we are enjoined to seek it, and if the fault be not our own,
may obtain it, and to make you the more earnest and diligent in the persuit of
it, consider these motives briefly.

1. Mot. Nothing else can be assured, are not riches, honors, possessions,
relations, and all worldly enjoyments uncertain? is there not vanity written
upon them all, and are they not all subject to variation and loss? such
uncertain beings they are, that the wise man says they are not, Pro. 23. 5.
they are but Pro. 23. 5.
like a flock of birds in a man's yard, which he cannot call his own, for they
soon take to themselves wings and flee away; but whosoever is sure of his
salvation, sure of the love of God and his interest in Christ, is sure of that
which he can never loose; this is an abiding substance, an enduring
inheritance, which the iron teeth of time can never destroy, nor eternity it
self wear out.

2. Mot. It Is your indispensable duty to labor to be assured of Gods love and
your own salvation. God has often charged his people to contend for the
security and assurance of their spiritual Estates. 2. Pet. 1. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
and in Heb. 2 Pet. 1. 10. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Heb. 6. 11.
6. 11. we desire that every one of you do show the some diligence, to the
full assurance of hope unto the end. And this commandment is for our good.

3. Mot. This knowledge and certainty is naturally desirable. Every man would
feign know things to come, ^especially concerning themselves. If there were a
book written, that would tell men what should certainly befall them in this
world to their last breath, O how desirous would people be to procure and read
it? now is it so desirable to know our destiny, to hear and know prophecies,
what shall hapen to us in this life? and is it not as desirable to know and be
assured what shall be our portion to all eternity, what we must trust to and
look for, what state and place we must be in for ever? why there is a book will
tell you this, the written word of God, and this you may know if you will
labor for it.

4. Mot. This certainty of our salvation, as it is very desirable, so beyond
expression comfortable. Though not the being, yet the well being, the comfort
of a Christian depends upon it: and if ever God bestow this blessing of
assurance upon thee (whatever thy condition be in the world) thou will account
thy self the happiest man upon earth, therefore this full assurance is called
riches. Col. 2. 2. Riches serve to Col. 2. 2.
make the life of man Comfortable, and put a great deal of joy into men's
hearts: So this riches of assurance makes the life of a Christian comfortable,
put that joy into the heart, that all the riches of the world cannot. Psalm. 4.
6. Now to Psalm 4. 6.
show you how sweet and comfortable this assurance will be, I might be very
large; but may not, the time preventing me; taste it a little briefly; what
sweet thoughts might thou have of God when thou art assured of his love and
thine own salvation? All that greatness, jealousy and Justice in God, which is
the terror of others, will be matter of incouragment and joy to thee; as the
Son of a King does rejoice in his fathers magnificence and power, which is the
awe of subjects and terror of rebels. When the thunder roars, the lightning
flashes, the Earth quakes, and the signs of Gods dreadful omnipotency appear;
then thou can say, all this is the effect of my Fathers power. So how sweet
may every thought of Christ be, of the blood that he has shed, and the
benefits he has procured, be to thee, who have got this assurance? when thou
can put thy finger into his side and say with Thomas, my Lord and my God, or
as St. Paul, who loved me and gave himself for me; now the name of a Savior
will be a sweet name indeed. Yea every passage of the word will now afford the
comfort; how sweet will the promises be to thee when thou art assured they are
thine own? the Gospel will now be glad tidings indeed; the very threatenings
will occasion thy comfort, to remember thou have escaped them; thou will now
cry with David, O how I love thy Law; it is sweeter then the honey and the
honey comb; it is better to me then thousands of Silver and Gold; and wilt say
with Luther, that thou will not take all the world for one leaf in the Bible;
and for the ministry of the word, thou will account their feet beautiful that
bring the glad tidings of good things Romans Romans 10. 15.
10. 15. O, what sweetness does this assurance put into the ordinanes of God?
Into prayer, when thou can say our Father, with full assurance, and know
thou art welcome and accepted in Christ, and have a promise to be heard. Into
the Sacrament? gives it a sweet relish, makes it a feast of fat things, a
refreshing banquet indeed. This assurance will sweteen every mercy to thee, yea
multiply the sweetness of every mercy, when thou art sure they all proceed from
love, and are the beginings and earnest of everlasting mercies: thou may now
take comfort in them, and with David style them loving kindnesses and tender
mercies, that come from the very bowels of a loving and tender Father; thou will now take more comfort in a morsel of bread, then the worldling has in the
greatest abundance of all things. Yea this assurance will make bitter things
sweet; afflictions, when thou know they are for thy profit, that God means
thee no hurt by them, and will bring good to the out of them. Romans 8. 28. It
will make death Romans 8. 28.
it self sweet, which is called a bitter thing, a sweet sleep, the grave a
sweet bed, when thou art assured it shall not separate thee from, but bring
thee to the full enjoyment of him who has loved thee and dyed for thee; sweet
when you know the day of your desolution, shall be the day of sins destruction,
the Souls absolution, coronation and glorification: Oh labor for this
assurance which is so comfortable and will sweeten to thee all things, and all
conditions, mercies, promises, thretnings, duty, ordinances, afflictions,
losses, death it self.

5. Mot. This assurance as it is comfortable, so very profitable. It will put
life into all thy affections and graces: it will help thee to repent and melt
over thy sins, when thou know how dearly God loved thee, even then, when
thou did abuse his mercy. It will inflame thy heart with love to God, when
thou know thy near relation to him, and how tenderly affected he is to thee.
Psalm. 18. 1, 2. Psalm. 18. 1, 2. Psalm. 116. 1.
Psalm. 116. 1. It will quicken thy, desires after him, it will confirm and
strengthen thy trust in him Psalm. Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3.
46. 1, 2, 3.

It will fill thy heart with thankfulness, and heavenly mindedness, and
exceedingly tend to thy perseverance. It will put courage into thee in all thy
works and duties, and make thee rejoice to work righteousness. It will be Oil
to the wheels and wind to the Sails. With what courage will thou run, when
thou know thou shall have the prize? and fight when thou know thou shall
conquer? and work, when thou know thy labor is not in vain? and endure all
things, when thou art assured of the recompense of reward. Thus having heard
thus much of assurance, me thinks every one of you should desire it; and
inquire after the means to attain it; which are briefly these; I shall but
name them.

1. Labor to be humbled, to see your sin, and to sorrow for it. 2. Seek after
faith in Christ, and the Spirit to renew and sanctify thee. 3. Be much in self
examination, self probation; to know thy self, this assurance is called
knowledge of our selves. 2 Cor. 13. 5. and that thou may not be deceived in
proving thy self, let thy examination be; 1. Frequent, and often, 2. Regular,
by the word. 3. Painful and diligent. 4. Constant and continued.
4. Means is serious meditation, on the offers of the Gospel, the promises of
the Gospel and performances of the Gospel: meditation, on thee freeness of Gods
mercy; the fullness of Christ's merits, and the firmness of the covenant of
grace. 5. Diligently and skilfully improve those notable assuring ordinances;
the word, the Lords supper and prayer. 6. Endeavor to keep a good conscience
and conversation toward God and men; this is an excellent means to obtain this
assurance. For 1. This has the promise of assurance Psalm. 50. 24. last Verse.
Psalm. 50. 24.
2. This produces assurance, as the cause, the effect Isa. 32. 17. Isa. 32. 17.
3. St. Paul found this fruit of a good conscience Act. 24. 15, 10. 2 Cor. 1.
12. Act. 24. 15, 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Romans 5. 4.


6. Make use of experiences, for experience breeds hope and hope assurance Romans
5. 4. The experience you have of Gods goodness all your days, experience of
Gods goodness to you in spirituals. The experience of the fruits of Gods grace
in you, take notice of all these, register them, recall them, read them over and
repeat them to thy Soul, and that for this very cause, because experience
breeds hope, and that upon this ground, because though we be variable, yet Gods
love is unchangable; whom he once loves, he ever loves. Jam. 1. 17. Oh
Christians labor by these and all other means to attain this assurance, of
Gods love and your own salvation, if you once have it, it will repay you for
all your pains; and if once thou art assured of Gods love, thou art assured to
be saved, for nothing can separate thee from this love, nor deprive thee of
this salvation. And so I pass to the second doctrine, where I must be more
brief. The doctrine is this. --

Doct. 2. There is nothing in Heaven, Earth or Hell; nothing that now is, or
shall be hereafter can possibly separate the faithful from the love and favor
of God, which he bears to them in Christ Jesus, their Lord. --
Having loved his own he loves them to the end. Joh. 13. 1. but with Joh. 13. 1.
what love? with an everlasting love. Jer. 31. 3. with a love of antiquity Jer.
31 3.
and perpetuity; to eternity my love is the same. And it must needs be, that
nothing can devide betwixt God and the faithful, or separate them from his
love; because he has made a covenat with them to be their God Jer. 31. 33.
Jer. 31. 33.
which he has promised shall not fail: He has betrothed and married them to
himself, as his spouse; and that not for a day, or for years and Ages, but for
ever. Hos. 2. 19. Hos. 2. 19.
now God is not a man, that he should lie; he is not subject to change, no
change in the world can make a change in him, Mal. 3. 6. I am Mal. 3. 6.
the Lord I change not, He cannot be unfaithful in his promise, now he has
promised love to his Children, he will never take it from them: the mountains
shall depart and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from
thee; neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that
has mercy on thee Isa. 54. 10. Nor is there any imbecility Isa. 54. 10.
or weakness in God, his power is infinite, therefore no creature in Heaven,
Earth or Hell can pluck us from the love of God. Joh. 10. 29. Joh. 10. 29.
The freeness of Gods love speaks the perpetuity of it; he loves not upon
external motives, not for any thing in the creature, but freely, and as nothing
could move him to love, so nothing in the creature can move him to break off
his love. His love is free, when we were enemies, he loved us; and it is
fervent, a vehement flame; love as strong as death, many waters cannot quench
it, nor floods of water drown it; invincible love Cant. 8 Cant. 8. 6, 7.
6, 7. Se what our Savior says of the fervency of Gods love to the faithful.
Joh. 17. 23. and have loved Joh. 17. 23.
them, as thou have loved me: God loves the faithful, his Children by adoption;
as he loves Christ, his Son by Eternal generation; with the same love, though
not with the same degrees of love: now nothing can hinder or break of Gods love
from Christ his Son; he and his Father being one. Joh. 10. 30. and Joh. 10. 30.
if not from Him, then not from them, for they also are one in him Joh. 17. 21.
and thou have loved them Joh. 17. 21.
as thou have loved me says our Savior. This may serve for the proof of the
point; now let me improve it briefly. --

Use. 1. If there be nothing in Heaven, Earth or Hell that can possibly
separate the faithful, etc. then this Doctrine affords matter of consutation of
those, who hold that a Child of God may utterly fall away from Gods love; may
to day be loved of God, and to morrow out of his love and favor; a most
uncomfortable Doctrine, directly opposite to Gods word, and the truth now
delivered. It is granted, that true believers may fall from, or loose the sense
of Gods love, as the spouse did Cant. 5. and Cant. 5.
David often complains of Gods hideing his face, and the Church of Gods forsaking
her Psalm. 77. 9. Psalm. Psalm. 77. 9. Psalm. 88. 14. Psalm. 60. 1.
88. 14. and Psalm. 60. 1. but they were not separated from the love of God:
though the sense and feeling of Gods love was separated from them. Gods love is
an everlasting, unchangable, invincible love; it is founded upon Christ; in
Christ you are Elected; in Christ you are beloved, and in Christ all Gods
promises are yea and amen, and it is Christ that makes intercession for you
continually. Can any thing separate Christ from his Fathers love? then
something may separate Gods Children from the love of their Father: no, God
must cease to be himself, if he cease to love his Children.

Object. 1. Though persons cannot, though things cannot, though creatures
cannot separate, etc. yet Sin may and does, Isa. 59. 2. Your iniquities Isa.
59. 2.
have separated between you and your God.
Answ. What separation is there meant, the following words declare, your sins
have hid his face from you, that he will not hear: this (as I said before) is
only a separation from the sense of Gods love, not from his love it self. If
reigning sins could not hinder Gods love at first, Ezekiel 16. 8. when thou Ezekiel.
16. 8.
layest in thy blood I looked upon thee and said behold, thy time is a time of
love; then the sins and failings and infirmities of Gods Children, when they
are in the Estate of Gods love and favor, cannot break of Gods love and favor
from them, as we may see in the spouse, David, St. Peter. so Romans 5. 10. Romans
5. 10.


Object. 2. This doctrine breeds presumption, leaves no place for fear, for
this doctrine being true, there is no cause of fear at all.
Answ. 1. whom God loves thus with an immutable love, them he makes fearful to
offend him, and this fear is a principal means to preserve them from falling
into sin, Jer. 32. 40.
Jer. 32. 40. I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not
turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts,
that they shall not depart from me.

2. The belief and assurance of this, that nothing can separate us from Gods
love, breeds in a Child of God, love to God again (we love him for loving us
first) and an high esteem of his love, that is so sure and certain, and this
causes fear in the heart, a filial fear to offend so loving and so everloving
a Father, which fear in Scripture is opposed to Carnal security and presumption.

3. It is false that such as are beloved of God, and know it, have no cause of
fear; for though those whom God loves, he loves to the end and will never
disinherit them or utterly cast them of; yet if they be not fearful to offend
him, though he love them, yet because he loves them, he will chasten them, as
the Apostle speaks Heb. 12. 6. and in Heb. 12. 6.
what kind he will scourge them, and how long his rod shall lie upon them, and
how deeply he will wound them with lashes, that the Lord only knows: therefore
one beloved of God, and assured of his love has somewhat to fear besides
eternal damnation, he has cause to fear with an Holy fear, lest by sin he
displease God his loving Father, and so provoke him to scourge him, not only in
his body, but in his Soul and conscience, as he did David, whose sin put him to
more grief and anguish in his Soul, than ever man felt that was wracked in his
body to the breaking of his bones: it put him to such a torture, terror and
anguish that he would have given his Kingdom to have been eased of it. Psalm.
51. 8. Psalm. 51. 8.


Object. 3. But does not the Scripture say Prove. 8. 17. I love them Prove. 8. 17.
that love me? God continues his love to us, if we continue our love to him:
but if we cease to love him, he may cease to love us.
Answ. 1. For answer to this place, the meaning is this, It is Gods love to us
that makes us love him, and doubtless he that loves us so, as to make us love
him, cannot but love us when we do love him.

2. It is denied that a Child of God can cease to love God, he may fall from
some degrees of this love, he may loose his first love, and loose the exercise
of this grace of love, but he cannot fall totally or finally from his love to
God, much water cannot quench his love to God, nor can floods drown it:
therefore some Interpreters make the words of my text to bear this sense,
nothing shall separate us from the love we bear to God in Christ Jesus; as
well, as the former.

3. It is an idle dream that Gods love to us does depend upon our love to him,
and the continuance of it upon the constancy of our love to him, for so the
love of God should be variable and changable, according to the change and
alteration that is in us, which is contrary to the Scripture. 1 Jam. 17. 1 Jam.
17.
and to the text, when the Apostle speaks not conditionally, but possitively
and Absolutely, that nothing shall separate us from the love of God in Christ
Jesus.

4. Such is the nature of Gods love, that as it is constant to his Children, so
it is effectual in them to keep them continually in their love to him, so as it
cannot be quite extinct, shaken out of their hearts, or quenched in them. Cant.
8. 6, 7. Cant. 8. 6, 7.


Object. 4. But why are the faithful exhorted to continue in the love of God
Joh. 15. 9. Joh. 15. 9. Jude 21.
so Jude 21. keep your selves in the love of God, if there were no possibility
of falling from the love of God?
Answ. Some understand these places of Scripture, to speak of the love of God
and Christ to us; then they are exhortations to us, to take heed of doing any
thing, whereby we provoke God to hide his face, to withold the sense of his
love from, and to frown upon us, for if we fall into sin, as negligence and
security, it is the high way to loose the sense and fealing of the love of God,
and to feel his anger and displeasure against us, in so much that we may be
brought to question his love toward us: Or if you understand them of our love
to God and Christ, then they are only incitations to quicken us to a growth and
perseverance in that grace of love.

Thus much for this first use.
Use. 2. Is it so that nothing can separate the faithful from the love, which
God bears to them in Christ Jesus their Lord; this then is ground of abundant
comfort, of firm, lasting and everlasting consolation to all the faithful, who
are interested in the special love of God in Christ Jesus: that are in the
Estate of Gods love, in the state of grace (as divines call it) I call it the
Estates of Gods love, in opposition to the Estate of Gods wrath, wherein we are
all by nature, I say, this is matter of unspeakable comfort to all such and
that first.

1. Against the fear of all enemies and evils whatever, none of them can
separate from Gods love. Poverty may take away thy wealth, sickness thy health,
disgrace thy good name, death thy life, but none of these can take away Gods
love from thee, that is unchangable, inseparable love.

2. It affords you comfort against the mutability of men's love, the love of
great men, of Princes is mutable, Joseph and Haman are east out of the Kings
favor. The love of friends is changable, they may love to day and hate to
morrow, yea more friends and familiars, who were wont to show much love, may
show much hatred, of which David complains, Psalm. 38. 11. and Psalm. 38. 11.
Psalm. 55. 12, 13.
Psalm. 55. 12, 13. that his equal, his Guide, and acquaintance, with whom he
took sweet council, he did reproach him and magnify himself against him. And
Job says that his former friends did abhor him, and did not spare to spit in
his face Job 30. 10. And Job 30. 10.
have not we seen this in our days, friends not only ceasing to be friends, but
turning mortal, killing enemies; now that which has befallen others, may befall
us, and if it does; if thou art a Child of God, one whom God loves, thou have
this to comfort thee, Gods love is not mutable as man's is. Though thou may be
cast out of the love and favor of men, yet thou can not be cast out of the
love and favor of God; though they separate their love from thee and hate
thee, yet they cannot separate the love of God from thee, nor cause him to hate
thee; his love to thee, as it was from everlasting, so it is to everlasting.
Psalm 103. 17. So that it is better to love Psalm. 103 17.
the love of God, than the love of all the world; for the worlds love is
mutable, but Gods love is Eternal.

3. It affords you comfort against the separability of all beloved and desired
comforts here below.

1. Happily thou have a pleasant habitation, and with it many desirable
accommodations, this is a comfort: but thou may be separated from it, thou
may be driven from house and home, as those worthys were in Heb. 11. who were
driven in Heb. 11.
to dens and deserts and caves of the Earth. But yet you cannot be separated
from the love of God in Christ Jesus: when thou have not an house to put thy
head in, thou have this love of God to warm thy heart in; thou can not be put
out of Gods love, wherein thou dwell. Psalm. 90. 1. Lord (says Psalm 90. 1.
the Church) thou have been our dwelling place in all generations; that is, in
all our sojournings, and wanderings, thy love and favor has been our Harbor,
shelter and protection. 1 John 4. 16. We have 1 John 4, 16.
known and believed the love that God has to us, God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God and God in him. No matter where our dwelling
be, in a Wood, in a Wilderness, in a Cave, in a Cottage, in a strange Country,
so long as we dwell in the love of God; nay though our dwelling be in a Prison,
a dungeon, yet we still dwell in the love of God there, and that will make a
Prison, a Palace, a Paradise, a Garden of Joy.

2. Probably thou have a loving wife, Husband, beloved children and other dear
friends and relations, these are comforts, choice comforts; but uncertain; thou
may be put to forsake Father, and Mother, Wife and Children, to keep a good
conscience: But thou can not be separated from Gods love. A Prison, and
Wilderness, a foreign Land may separate, and sever thee from all these, but
all these cannot separate from the love of God in Christ Jesus, thy Lord;
wherever thou art and whitherever thou go, God will be with thee, and will
be better and sweeter to thee, than Wife or Children, or any relations, yea
then all relations: I will be with thee says the Lord and will not leave thee
nor forsake thee. Isa. 43. 2, 4. Isa* 43. 2, 4.


3. Thou have now sweet society with Gods people in his ordinances, both
public and private communion with them, this is a great comfort; but thou
may be separated from these too, where thou shall scarce hear a Sermon, enjoy
a Sabbath, have liberty to read a Chapter, or converse with any of Gods
Children; this is a sad separation indeed; woe is me says David because of
this: and yet this cannot separate thee from the love of God in Christ Jesus.
His love like wine will cheer thee, when thou want the waterbrooks of Gods
Ordinances to refresh thee: as it did John Baptist in the Isle of Patmos, Paul
and Syl^s in Prison: Daniel when Dan. 10. 11.
he was in Babylon, the Angel tells him he was a man greatly beloved. Thus when
thou art in a dry and desert Wilderness, ready to dye for thirst after the
waters of the sanctuary, Gods love in Christ will then be a dew to thee, and as
Rivers of waters in a dry place; it will be hid Manna to thee and bread to eat,
which the world knows not of.

4. Possibly thou have a fair estate in Land, in money and movables, this is a
comsort: but thou may be separated and sequestered from that too, and made as
poor as Job was by the plundring Caldeans and Sabeans. But still these cannot
separate thee from Gods love, which is better than riches, than Silver and
Gold, than stock and Lands, better then all this worlds goods, and will put
that joy into thy heart, when thou art without them, that they never could
yield to any man, enjoying them in the greatest fullness. Psalm. 4. 6. Hab. 3.
17, 18. Psalm. 4. 6. Hab. 3. 17, 18.


5. Thou have a precious life, that men will give all they have for; but bloody
persecutors may take this away also: principalitys and powers, may separate
Soul and body, but neither Soul nor body from the love and favor of God, which
is better than life Psalm 63. 3. Psalm. 63. 3.


4. This doctrine affords the comfort against the loss of the sense and feeling
of Gods love. A child of God may loose the comfortable aprehension of his
fathers affection, as David did Psalm. 51. 11, 12. and as Psalm. 51. 11, 12.
Cant. 5.
the spouse did. Cant. 5. for her remisness and carelessness her beloved
departed from her, and her bowels were troubled for him; and hence a child of
God is apt to conclude (though by no good Logic) that God loves him not. But
know for thy comfort, that thy want of feeling, and exercise of faith cannot
separate thee from Gods love; and though thy comfort be in the feeling, yet thy
happiness is in thy being in Gods love; and thou always have Gods love, though
not always the sense of it. Yea God loves the as truly when he hides away his
face from thee, as when he kisseth thee with the kisses of his mouth. Joh. 17.
23. thou have loved them, as Joh. 17. 23.
thou have loved me; now God loved Christ as dearly and truly when he hung
upon the Cross, tormented in Soul and body, crying out, my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me; as he did when he said in a voice from Heaven, this is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well Mat. 3. 17.
pleased. The Sun shines as clearly in the darkest, as in the brightest day,
the difference is not in the Sun, but in some clouds that interposing hinder
the manifestations thereof. So Gods love is as hot and fervent to us when he
clouds his face toward us, as when he shines in the brightness of his
countenance upon us. And those cloudings, Christians, are but for a time, not
for ever, nay but for a moment, a little moment. Isa. 54. 7. for a small moment
Isa. 54. 7.
have I hid my face from thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee.
Though thou sit in darkness, yet the Lord will be a light to thee; yea
though thou fittest in darkness, dyest under a cloud, yet thou shall be saved,
and received to glory (because God loves thee, not because thou perceivest he
loves thee) where thou shall behold the beauty of his Holiness without clouds
or darkness to all eternity.

5. This doctrine yields thee great comfort against the world of divisions,
that in these days are amongst Christians.

Christians are divided and separated one from another both in judgment and
affection, and therefore in affection, because in judgment: not only their
heads but their hearts are divided. Well, this may comfort us against this
evil; For all that fear God and are called according to his purpose, though
they may be divided and separated one from another for a time, as Paul and
Barnabas were, and many among the Corinthians were, one saying I am of Paul,
another I am of Appollo, and a third I am of Cephas, yet they can never be
separated nor divided from the love of God. Devils and Tyrants and Romish
Achitophels, bad events, and their own pride and passions may separate them one
from another, but none of these can separate them from the love of God. And God
continuing to love his people, will in time heal these divisions and make all
those that are his to be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind. His love to them will set his wisdom on work to find out a
way to do this; As his love set him on work to find out a way to reconcile the
world of his Elect to himself by Jesus Christ; so also to reconcile them one to
another; and he has many ways to do this; and if nothing else will do it,
his rod shall, for whom he loves he corrects, and his rod shall scourge them
into union; as it did some of the martyrs in Q. Mary's days, as Riddly and
Hooper, though they could not agree in Edward 6. days, yet in Q. Mary's time
they agreed very well, says Mr. Fox, they agree in black, in the Prison; in
red, in the fire; in white, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus you see what comfort
this doctrine affords to the faithful in all conditions and Estates. Oh how
should this make you prize and esteem the love of God above all things in the
world; above riches, friends, favor of men, life it self, which are all
uncertain; Oh how should this unchangable and eternal love of God in Christ
Jesus our Lord, make us grow out of love, yea into a loathing of all other
things in comparison of it, as St. Paul did. Phil. 3. 8.
Phil. 3. 8. Oh prize this love of God above ten thousand worlds; Take heed
that you do not abuse it, by carnal security and wantonness; but let it make
you more diligent in your work and more studious of his glory; more careful to
please him, more fearful to offend him, and let the frequent thoughts of it
augment and increase your love to him; whom you can never love enough, nor fear
enough, nor serve nor honor enough, for this great love of his to you, which
made him send his own Son to dye in thy stead, to reconcile thee and bring thee
into favor with himself, and so into a better and surer Estate of happiness,
than Adam had in innocence; from which wonderful, invincible and eternal love
nothing shall be able to separate thee, no not death it self, I am persuaded
that neither death -- shall separate us; so I pass to the third and last point,
which is this,

Doct. 3. The death of the body cannot separate believers from the love of God
in Christ Jesus.
In the handling of this I shall be short also. I say death it self cannot
separate; by death here understand not only death it self; but also all those
sicknesses and deseases that go before it; all the pains, terrors and tortures
that accompany it, or what ever may befall Gods Children at their death, cannot
separate them from the love of God in Christ Jesus. 1. Nothing that goes before
death 2. Nothing that accompanys death.


1. Nothing that goes before death can separate them from Gods love.

1. Sickness cannot, those whom God loves, have sickness, yea mortal sickness
as well as others, but this does not separate them from Gods love. Joh. 11. 3.
He whom thou Joh. 11. 3.
love is sick. Not their Souls, for he knows their Soul in adversity Psalm.
31. 7. not their bodies. Psalm Psalm. 31. 7. Psalm. 41. 3.
41. 3. for God will strengthen them upon their bed of languishing, and make
their bed in their sickness.

2. Nothing that accompanies death can separate them from his love.
1. The terrors and horrors of death cannot. Psalm. 23. 4. thou art Psalm. 23 4.
with me and thy rod and thy staff comfort me: so when David walked in the
Valley of the shadow of death, he would not fear; when he was upon the borders
of death, and walked side by side with this King of terrors, yet David would
not be daunted, but be confident, because thou Lord art with me. Then terrors
of death which are able to distract a man and separate him from himself, could
not separate David from his God, thou art with me.

2. The pains of death cannot, the faithful, who not only dyed, but suffered
painful deaths. Heb. 11. were stoned to death, sawn assunder, were yet the
Lords worthys, dear and precious in his sight. Yea precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of all his Saints, whether it be a natural or violent death,
an easy or a painful death.

3. Death it self cannot, which is a separation of the Soul and body, yet
neither of Soul or body from the Lords love; as living, so dying they are the
Lords, both in their Souls and bodies. Romans 14. 8. Romans 14. 8.
that death it self cannot separate the faithful from Gods love is evident.

*1 For first, the death of the body cannot break Gods covenant with his
people, which is that he will not take away his love from them. Isa. Isa. 54.
10. Psalm. 89. 33.
54. 10. Psalm. 89. 33. the reason is because the covenant is made with their
whole persons, God is in covenant with Soul and body too; therefore when death
severs these, it separates neither the one nor the other from Gods love. God is
the God of Abraham of Abraham's dust, of a believers dust, God loves the very
dust of his Saints. By this argument Christ proves the resurrection of the body
Mat. 22. 32. that God was the Mat. 22. 32.
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the ground of the argument is, that God made
his covenant not only with the Souls of the Partriarcks, but with their whole
persons.

2. Death cannot separate the faithful from Gods love, because they are in
Christ Jesus, loved in Christ, knit unto Christ, as members to the head, and
this union is an inseparable union, it remains for ever, nothing can violate
it, no not death, therefore when they dye, they are said to dye in the Lord.
Rev. 14. 13. and when they are in their Rev. 14. 13.
graves, they are said to be dead in Christ, and to rest and sleep in him.

3. Death cannot do this, for death is ours, our friend, on our side, at our
service, for us, not against us: all the passages of it are ours. 1 Cor. 1. 22.
Nay death in so 1 Cor. 1. 22.
far from separating the faithful from the Lord and his love, that it brings
them home to the Lord, and to your full fruition of him and his love in Heaven:
it brings them to the enjoyment of him, who is love it self, not only to kiss
him through the lattice, but to lie in the bosom of his love, to be infolded in
the everlasting arms of his love, to be pertakers of all his love; and to be
filled will all the fullness of God. Ephesians. 3. 19. Ephesians. 3. 19.
Death is so far from casting a believing Soul out of Gods love, that it
lancheth him into the bottomless Sea of Gods love, the breadth and depth whereof
passes knowledge, and one drop whereof is more worth then all the Gold of
Ophir, yea surpasses all the glory of the world.

4. Death cannot separate the faithful from the sense and feeling of Gods love,
therefore much less from his love it self; but usually they have then the
greatest manifestations of his love to their Souls, it is then most stird abroad
in their hearts by the Holy Ghost. When they are to drink this bitter Cup, God
sweetens it with the Wine of his love, which is better and sweeter then life.
Thus St. Stephen when he was dying saw Heaven open, beheld the glory of God and
Christ standing at Gods right hand. Act. 7. 55, 56. How fully Act. 7. 55, 56.
has God manifested his love to some of his servants, at their death? of which
I could give many instances. Mr. John Holland a memorable Saint, and a godly
man, an eminent Minister of Christ, the day before he dyed, did earnestly call
for a Bible, with these words come, come death approaches, let us gather some
flowers to comfort this heart, in this hour, and turning with his own hand to
the 8. Chapt. to the Romans, he gave it to a Minister present, and bad him
read, and at the end of every Verse, Mr. Holland made a Pause, gave the sense
of it, and so continued his meditation and exposition for two hours. On the
sudden he said to the Minister that was reading to him; O stay your reading,
what brightness is that I see? have you lighted any Candles? to whom was
answered, no it is the Sun shine; Sun shine, says he! nay my Saviors shine,
now farewell world, welcome Heaven, the Day Star from on high has visited my
heart. O speak it when I am gone, and Preach it at my funeral; God deals
familiarly with men, I see his mercy, I see his Majesty, whether in the body or
out of the body, I cannot tell, but God knows, I see things unutterable. And a
little before he dyed, ravished in Spirit, he raised himself up and shut up his
blessed life with these blessed words; Oh what an happy change shall I make
from darkness to light, from night to day, from death to life, from sorrow to
sollace, from a sinful world to an heavenly Being. O my dear Brethren, Sisters
and Friends, i^ pittys me to leave you behind; yet remember my death when I am
gone, and what I now feel, I hope you shall feel ere you dye, that God does and
will deal familiarly with men. And now ye blessed Angels bear me, O bear me
into the bosom of my best beloved, Amen, Amen come Lord Jesus come quickly,
and so fell asleep in the Lord. -- So Mr. Bolton boasted at his death to a
friend what he felt in his Soul; I am (said he) by the wonderful mercies of
God, as full of comfort as my heart can hold, and feel nothing in my Soul but
Christ, with whom I heartily desire to be. So Mrs. Catherine Britterge, a Holly
woman, said at her death, O my sweet Savior, do thou so love me, who am but
dust and ashes? O how wonderful, how wonderful is thy love; O thee joys, the
joys that I feel in my Soul! they be wonderful, they be wonderful. Many like
examples might be given of Saints dying as full of the sense of Gods love, as
heart could hold, and more then their tongues could express; I shall instance
but in one more; and it is in this precious servant of Jesus Christ, whose
funerals we solemnize this day; her death did not separate her from the sense
and feeling of Gods love, how sweetly did she apply the promises for her
comfort; and in her greatest weakness, by the shength of her faith drow those
breasts of consolation? which are then sweetest when death is nearest. How
comfortably did she speak to her Relations and friends weeping about her?
desiring them not to mourn for her, but to rejoice rather, because the time of
her redemption was at hand; redemption from sin, from sorrow, from sickness and
pain which she had long suffered. What a plerophory and full persuasion she had
of her salvation and future happiness, appears by her words to my self, which
were these, I know in whom I have believed, and will not cast away my
confidence; And also by her last, and remarkable words to her dear and
disconsolate Husband, which she uttered a little before she breathed out her
Soul into the bosom of her best beloved (alluding to the words of her Savior)
she said I go to my Father and thy Father to my God and thy God. By all these
instances you may see, death cannot separate a believer from the sense of Gods
love, much less from his love. Thus you have the doctrinal part: a few words by
way of Application.

Use. 1. If death cannot separate the faithful from the love of God, th^s then
is a sweet comfort to Gods Children against the fear of death; of what sort
soever, in what manner soever. Though there be many separa^^ons in death
terrible to flesh and blood, dreadful to nature, as

1. It is a separation from our dear friends and relations, from husband, wife
and children, from Father and Mother, death plucks us from all these at once,
this is dreadful to nature; but yet no separation from Gods love: It only takes
us from friends on Earth to friends in Heaven, it brings us to the general
assembly of the first born, to Jesus the media^our, to Angels and the Spirits
of just men made perfect; So that by this separation we do but change our
place, not our company, and our faithful friends, which we leave behind us,
shall shortly follow after us, co(...) to us and we and them shall ever be with
the Lord.

2. The death of the body is a separation from all our Earthly comforts, from
all our worldly enjoyments, and accommodations, and this is uncomfortable to
nature too: He that has House and Land, Money and Stock, flocks and herds,
riches and honors, high dignities and great preferments in the world, must
take a final farewell of all these when death comes. The Fool and his full
Barns, rich stores and goods for many years, must suddenly and ever lastingly
part when death aproacheth; and this is sad to him that has nothing in store
in another world. But such a separation is not terrible or uncomfortable to a
Child of God, because he is assured, though these things leave him, yet God
loves him, which is better to him then all the comforts of life, and will bring
him, ever by death, to better comforts, to a building, an house in Heaven, to
inherit all things, to a rich and glorious purchase, to an everlasting Kingdom,
to joys unspeakable, felicity inconcevable and to Rivers of pleasures at Gods
right hand for evermore.

3. The death of the body is the separation of the Soul from thee body; which
is most terrible to nature: that the body and Soul, these old friends must now
part, the body to return to the dust as it was, and the Soul to God that gave
it, and Oh with what bitterness, with what throbs and groans with what sighs
and tears, with what pangs and pains do these long and intimate acquaintance
usually part? But though death part Soul and body, yet neither the Soul nor the
body of a Saint from the love of God Psalm. 116. 15. Precious Psalm. 116. 15.
in the sight of the Lord is the death of all his Saints. A poor Child of God
lying upon his death bed bemoans himself, his friends also grieve and mourn for
him, and in the sight of the world he is in a grievous and miserable Estate;
but in the sight and estimation of God his death is very precious and dear, the
Lord loves him, loves his Soul in its separation from the body, and receives it
as a precious Jewel into the very besome of his love; He loves his dead body,
yea his very dust and will raise it again out of the dust to glory at the last
day. And as the death of a Saint is precious to God, so it is very gainful and
advantageous to the Saint himself for

1. It separates him from all his sins, corruptions, impurities, imperfections,
from his body of death.

2. From this vile and wicked world, as the Angels separated Lot from Sodom.

3. From all failings and weakness, from all afflictions and temptations, from
all Crosses and grief whatever,

This is a precious separation; but it never separates him from the love of God
in Christ Jesus; so far is it from this, that it brings him to the immediate
and full fruition of God and his love, to see him face to face, and so to be
satisfied with his love and likeness. Why then should a believer fear death let
death be their fear and dread, who are out of Gods favor, and have no interest
in the love of God in Christ Jesus; but let not the beloved of the Lord fear
it, which is so much their friend (because God loves them) as to bring them
into the bosom of his love and to a present and perfect Union with himself,
which was the reason why Job so little feared it, and St. Paul so Job 3 14, 15.
Phil. 1. 23.
much d^^ired it, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is
far better yea best of all.

Use 2. This doctrine speaks terror to the wicked. You may think it strange
that I should draw terror, out of so comfortable a truth: but consider this
comfort belongs only to those that are in Christ Jesus; as for those that are
out of Christ, they are out of the love and favor of God, both in life and in
death. For the present the case of a wicked man is sad, in death it will be
worse.

1. It Is sad in this life, because they live without God, out of the love and
favor of God, in a state of enmity and wrath, and all outward blessings they
enjoy are no signs of Gods special love. --

2. In death it is worse, it is bad and sad enough to live out of Gods favor,
but worse and more sad to dye out of it, for then they dye eternally, and death
to them will be a sad separation, for it separates them

1. From their presumptuous conceit, hopes and belief of their interest in the
love and favor of God. What is the hope of the Hypocrite, when God takes away
his Soul. Now he hopes he is in the love of God, but when God by death
separates his Soul from his body, he separates him also from all his hopes,
these dye with him, and he and his hopes of being in the love of God perish
together Prove. 11. 7. Prove. 11. 7.


2. Death separates the wicked from that common and general love of God,
wherewith he loves all his creatures, especially mankind; manifested by his
patience and long sufferings by many blessings and comforts of life, by his
ordinances and many Church privileges, yea and common gifts and graces; now
death separates them from this common and general love of God, and all the
forenamed fruits of it. Death puts an end to Gods patience, separates them from
Gods protection, from all things that were good and comfortable to them here in
this life, from all Gods ordinances, and from those common graces they have,
the oil which they had in their Lamps goes out when death comes.

3. It separates them not only from this general love of God, and all that good
that is in it; but it separates them to everlasting punishment from the
presence of the Lord; God will say to them then, depart from me I never knew
you, I never loved you: Go ye cursed, that never had any interest in my
everlasting love, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and for his
Angels. --

Use 3. If death it self cannot separate the faithful from the love of God in
Christ Jesus, then as you desire comfort at death, labor to get an interest in
and an assurance of this love. If the arms of Gods love, have once embraced
thee, neither death nor Hell can get the thence for ever: the Sanctuary to
which thou art fled is inviolate, the rock impregnable, the City invincible,
and thou art safe laid up to all eternity. This assurance will make thee
triumph over death, as an enemy that cannot hurt thee, a Serpent that cannot
sting thee, a privation that cannot deprive thee of Gods love. O death (thou
may say) where is thy sting, O Grave where is thy Victory? for neither the
one nor the other can separate thee from Gods love. O this will sweeten death,
which is a bitter thing, make death a sweet sleep, and the Grave an easy Bed to
rest in, when we know that it shall not feparate us from, but bring us to the
full enjoyment of him, who has loved us, and whom we have loved and longed
for. O then strive after this assurance in the diligent use of all means,
search for it, seek for it, hear it, pray for it, and wait for it; its worth
seeking, for if once attained, you will be so far from fearing death, that you
will say with old Simeon, Lord, mine eyes have seen thy Luke 2. 29, 30.
salvation, my Soul is assured of thy love, therefore now let thy Servant
depart in peace.

And here I may set before you, as an example to follow, this precious Saint,
whose sad funerals we now celebrate, who by the use of means, servent prayer,
self examination, search of the Scriptures, meditation on the promises, and
long patience had attained this assurance, this full and certain persuasion of
Gods love; for when death approached she could say, I know in whom I have
believed, and I go to my God and Father; that the time of her redemption was at
hand, redemption from pain and sickness, from sorrow and fin. It is not
(indeed) my manner often in this place to make Encomiums of the dead; and the
Jews have a saying, that non facienda sunt monumenta justis, monuments are not
to be made for the righteous, whose words and works are their best monuments,
and which praise (as the righteous man) so the virtuous woman in the Gates.
Prove. 31. 31. In this respect our deceased Pro. 31. 31.
friend needs no monument to perpetuate the memory of her worth; Her own works
will Publish her praise to posterity: Yet that I may not seem, by silence, to
bury her virtues with her Ashes, give me leave for a few words, and that for
these two reasons,

1. That God may have the glory, whilst we show forth the praises of this
Saint, whom he long since called from darkness to light in his Kingdom of
grace, and has now translated into his Kingdom of Glory.

2. That the world may have the benefit of so worthy a pattern and example. And
though I might enlarge much on this subject, yet take what I shall say of her
in a few words.

1. More generally.

She was richly adorned with those graces, wherewith the holy women of old were
adorned, of which St. Peter speaks in 1 Pet. 3. from the v. 1. 1 Pet. 3. 1. ad
7.
to 7. Recount those worthy women, recorded in sacred story, Obedient Sara,
modest Rebecca, Devout Hanna, lovely Elizabeth, and Dorcas full of good works,
and she was all these; she was excellent in all those virtues and graces,
commendable in them, what Saint do you read of in all the book of God, which in
some grace or other she did not resemble? she lived and dyed a daughter of
Abraham, and is now (no doubt) at rest in Abraham's bosom.

2. But more particularly. Consider her both in her relative and personal
capacity.

1. In her relative capacity, and here you might behold her (1) a most Chaste,
Loyal, loving, and (according to her matrimonial engagement and duty) an
obedient wife, as her loving husband survives to testify. (2) Consider her as
a Mother and a Mistress, and she was exemplary in these relations. Her
government was made up of sweetness and gravity; sweetness without levity or
remisness; and gravity without bitterness or severity. There was no severity in
her disciplines, save what was in the pattern she Proposed to them in her
conversation, and indeed she was severely good. Her care was that her family
might know God and Jesus Christ, whom to know Joh. 17. 3d
is life eternal: She was of a Joshuah like resolution, as for me and my house
we will serve the Lord. She thought it not enough to go to Heaven alone, but
labored to carry as many as she could with her, especially those of her own
house. By Catechizing and instructing them, she endeavored their conversion,
and to bring them to a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ; as well knowing that
her Childrens, and Servants Souls were as precious to God as her own, and cost
Jesus Christ as much blood to redeem. You that are Governors of families,
labor to imitate her in this. 3. As a friend and neighbor; she was of a most
sweet obliging Converse, beloved of all that knew her; her large bounty and
charity, and offices of love in that kind, made her highly esteemed of all the
poor in the place where she lived, which they testified by their bitter
lamentation for her, when she dyed; what company soever she was in, she
retained her Christian modesty and gravity, and would never talk vainly or
frothily; nor show her self sometimes holly and sometimes profane, to please
the company, but her words were (as those present were fit to receive them)
savoury and tending to edification. I might enlarge in these her relative
excellencys: but a word or two of her.

2. In her personal capacity, because I hasten; and her, all that knew her
might observe her holiness, meekness, love, faith and patience were eminent.
She made Religion her business: the common Sanctity of the world would not
serve her turn, which is only Civility and Morality; She out went the Scribes
and Phariseessin righteousness, and walked according to the pattern, her
Savior had set before her. She wore the comely garment of an holy profession,
without any visible spot, forgetting the things that were behind and pressing
toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. In
her meekness she resembled Moses; this ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit
rendered her amiable in the eyes of God and man. Her love was transcendent; to
God whom she loved suparlatively, to Christ whom she loved for his Person, as
well, as portion, for what he was, as well, as for what he had, she beheld him
with the spouses eye, fairer then the Children of men, the chiefest of ten
thousand, altogether lovely and precious to her Soul. Her love was great to the
public Ordinances, to all Gods Ministers, and to all others in whom she
beheld any thing of Christ, she dare not but love them for his sake.

Her faith and patience were always visible in their fruits, but more
especially in the time of her last sickness; keeping her Spirit quiet and
steady, amidst all those billows that beat upon her in her passage from Earth
to Heaven; so that all her afflictions were but the trials and triumph of her
patience and faith, by the exercise of which graces she at last came off a
conqueror, through Christ that loved her, and has her faith and patience
rewarded with a full and joyful fruition of her beloved in his Kingdom and
Glory. I might enlarge farther, but I forbear; this is she, whom we have lost,
and Oh what a loss, do we all sustain! One has lost a loving comfort, others a
tender Mother, and all of us a choice and faithful friend and Neighbor: and
what shall we do? shall we now give up our selves to sorrow? No, or shall we
make it our work to forget her, whom we cannot recall? No neither, but let us
remember her, so as to imitate her, and be followers of her. O that all that
hear of her would imitate her, that all you, that knew her, would follow her in
that pattern she has given you: Especially you that are her near and dear
relations, do you remember her so, as to be followers of her, wherein she was a
follower of Christ. Methinks I hear her calling to you out of Heaven (where her
triumphant Soul is placed, amongst the Spirits of just men made perfect) as
sometimes her Lord, and ours, bespake his Desciples, saying I have given you an
example, that you should do as I have done. Now the Lord grant that you and
all of us, may be followers of her, and all other the Saints of God, who were
followers of Christ; that we at last with them and her may also inherit the
promises.

FINIS.

