De Morbis Querorum, OR, A TREATISE OF The Diseases of Children; WITH Their
Causes, Signs, Prognostics, and Cures, for the benefit of such as do not
understand the Latin Tongue, and very useful for all such as are
Housekeepers, and have Children. With the Contents of the several Chapters, as
also an Alphabetical Table of all the Diseases mentioned herein.

By ROBERT PEMELL Practitioner in Physic, at Cranebrooke in Kent. May the 29.
1653.

LONDON, Printed by J. Legatt, for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in
Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

The Author to the Reader.
Kind Reader,
PRomise is a debt; In my Book of the nature of Simples I did promise to do
something more that might be helpful to young Practitioners, as also to the
Vulgar; I have therefore taken some pains to write, concerning the diseases of
Children, and have handled them methodically, that so it might be more useful
and profitable to such as shall Read the same. And because I see my glass runs
apace, and I know not how short my time is, therefore I have made the more
have, and taken the present advantage: yet have I not made it my hoc age, my
only business, but have done it at rapt hours. Whatever I have done I now offer
it to thy view, and submit to thy Charitable censure, desiring my good will and
affection may be accepted.

December. 1. 1652. Thine to serve in what I may. Robert Pemel Medicus.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
OF Ulcers and sores in childrens heads. Chapter 1. Of Lice, Chap. 2. Of the
Scab and Itch. Chap. 3. Of the Falling sickness and Convulsion, Chap. 4. Of
pain in the ears, with inflammation, Chap. 5. Of breeding and coming of Teeth.
Chap. 6. Of inflammation of the mouth and throat, with ulcers and sores
thereof, Chap. 7. Of Fevers, Chap. 8. Of the small Pox and Measels, Chap. 9.
Of watching out of measure and want of rest, Chap. 10. Of fear, starting and
terrible Dreams, Chap. 11. Of Rheum, the Cough, and shortness of breath,
Chap. 12. Of Vomiting, and weakness of the stomach, Chap. 13. Of the
Consumption, or leanness, and of the Rickets, Chap. 14. Of the Hicket, Chap.
15. Of Gripings and fretings in the belly, Chap. 16. Of looseness and flux of
the belly, Chap. 17. Of Costivenesse and stopping of the belly, Chap. 18. Of
Worms, Chap. 19. Of Ruptures and Burstings, Chap. 20. Of swelling, or coming
forth of the Navel, Chap. 21. Of inflammation of the Navel, Chap. 22. Of the
swelling of the Cods. Chap. 23. Of falling of the Fundament, Chap. 24. Of the
Stone, and difficulty of making water, Chap. 25. Of Pissing in bed, Chap. 26.
Of the disease called Saint Anthonies fire, or wild fire, as also of burning
and scalding, Chap. 27. Of fretting, chafing, or galling of the skin in the
groines, Chap. 28.
Of the diseases of Children.
CHA.P. I. Of Ulcers and sores in Childrens heads.
CHildren are many times troubled with running sores and ulcers in their head,
both when they suck, and when they be weaned.

The cause.
The cause hereof are excrementitious humors thin and sharp, or they proceed
from a mixed humor, partly thin and sharp, and partly thick and melancholy and
altogether salt and nitrous; from whence these ulcers and sores look sometimes
white, sometimes red, sometimes yellow, and sometimes black, always salt and
fretting whereby they cause itching, and from thence they are forced often to
scratch. Now these humors are gathered together, or produced partly in the
womb from the impurity of the mothers blood, whereby the infant is nourished;
partly from the vitiousnesse or corruption of the milk, whereby the infants are
nourished either from the mother or nurse.

The signs are Manifest.
These sores and ulcers if they be but gentle and easy are judged to be very
healthful for children, because nature expels ill and noxious humors from
the inward parts to the outward, and if they dry up, many times children fall
into fears and other diseases: Hippocrates De morb. sac. fol. 139.
says, that if ulcers or sores arise in the heads of children, or in their
ears, or face, or in any other part of their body, they are freed from the
falling sickness. These ulcers are many times cured without means, as strength
and age increases. If they continue long and run much, it is to be feared
least these exulcerations pierce to the skul and brain. If these ulcers
continue long and grow crusty and black, they are hard to cure.

The cure.
Concerning the Cure care must be taken that such things as are cooling and
binding be not used. Let the Nurse use a good Diet, and abstain from all sharp
and salt meats, and such as breed vicious or bad juyces; as Onions, Garlic,
Leeks, Peese, Beans, Raddish, salt Beef, Porke, etc: If the Nurse have need of
purging, give her a purge, of the Electuary called Confectio Hamech, or
Diacatholicon; and let her use Burrage, Buglosse, Fumitory, Sorrel, Succo^y,
etc. Or sirup of any of these. The child if of any bigness may take the sirups
likewise, or half an ounce of Manna, or more according to its age.

A Bath.
First, let the child's head be bathed with a decoction of Mallows, and Barley,
or with a decoction of Dock roots, mallows, Celendine the greater, Wormwood,
Fenegreek, Cicers, Lupines, Beans, etc. If there be need of greater cleansing,
you may boil the foregoing herbs in wine; or make a Lotion with decoction of
Marshmallow roots, made with Urine of the infant alone, or mixed wih Barley
water. Then anoint the head with oil of Roses and oil of bitter Almonds mixed
with a little litharge of gold or silver in fine powder; or take of the juice
of Beets and Celendine the greater of each one ounce, Hogs grease two ounces;
boil them together a while, then being almost cold put in of Brimstone in
powder a drachme, make an ointment, with which anoint the parts affected
morning and evening. Or wash the head with Sope-suds made strong. If these
ulcers eat to the skul, then use honey of Roses mixed with a little spirit of
Wine, and afterward the powder Birthwort and natural Balsam.

CHAP. 2. Of Lice breeding in Children.
IF persons of years do live nastily and not change often, they soon become
lousey. But it is very familiar for Children to breed Lice.

The cause.
They arise from a hot and moist matter which putrifieth in the skin, or pores
of the body. Sometimes they are bred by eating of Figs, in grown persons
because they engender bad juice.

The signs.
The signs are apparent, for the lice are bred both nhead and body.

The Prognostics.
This disease is a foul and filthy disease, and very troublesome, because it
causes a constant scratching, but especially if they breed in the whole body
as many times it happneth. Lice are wont to leave those that are ready to die,
and to creep away in heaps, which surely comes to pass because that hot moist
nourishment (which bred them) is wanting, and noisome vapors arise from the
party ready to die. If lice be only in the head, in many it preserves their
health, because they consume much excrementitious humors. Lice are engendered in
the beginning of the Leprosy, and in the second and third kinds of hectic
Fevers. If they breed much and that all over the body, they are not only very
irksome, but sometimes bring death.

The cure.
First, for the prevention of lice, and to hinder the breeding of them, it will
be very necessary to keep the child often changed, and to comb often the head,
and to avoid all meats of ill juice. If the child be of any bigness the body
may be purged in this manner.

Take of Seen and Polipodium of each two drachmes. Fumitory one drachme and a
half, Cream of Tartar a drach. Licorice and Anniseed, of each a drachme; bruise
the Polipodium and Licorice, then infuse or steep them all in half a pint of
water on hot embers, and afterward gently boil them; strain it, and to the
clear add of sirup of Roses one ounce: let the child take every morning two or
three spo^nfuls fasting, and fast one hour after it, then to take some warm
posset drink or broth. Make a bath as follows.

A Bath.
Take of Elecampane root bruised two ounces, white Briony root bruised half an
ounce, Beets, Mercury, Sopewort, Centory the lesser, of each a handful,
Lupines bruised one ounce, Nitre half an ounce; boil these in water and make a
bath for the head, with which let the head be bathed morning and evening warm.
After bathing anoint the head once or twice a day (if a strong child twice, if
a weak child but once,) with this ointment following.

An ointment.
Take of Stavesacre one ounce, Wormwood, Rue, of each half an ounce, Brimstone,
and Nitre, of each two drachmes, make all into powder, and with two or three
ounces of oil of Bays, and one ounce of oil of Wormwood make an ointment.

Or take of Brimstone in powder half an ounce, of Stavesacre in powder one
ounce, oil of Wormwood two ounces and a half, vinegar one ounce; make all into
an ointment, and use it as before is showed.

Or take seawater, or else Brine and strong lee of Ashes, of each a quart,
Wormwood a good handful or two; boil it a while therein, and afterward wash
the body or head therewith. Many use stronger ointments made with Arsenick, or
Quicksilver, and white Hellebor, but for young children it is not safe to use
them.

This powder following is very good and safe.

A powder good and safe for Lice in the head.
Take of Coculus Indy a quarter of an ounce, white Pepper a drachme; beat them
into a gross powder, and strew it into the heads of children, for it will soon
destroy the lice. Or you may dip a comb in strong Mercury water, or water made
with Arsenick, and so comb the child's head therewith.

CHAP. 3. Of the Scab and Itch.
THe Scab and Itch is an infection of the skin, sometimes with crusts or scabs,
sometimes dry, sometimes only in the head, and sometimes in the whole body,
and does much provoke to scratching.

The cause.
These come from the sharpness of the milk, or from some salt humor abounding
in the body, and sometimes they bring this infection into the world with them.

The signs.
The signs are manifest.

Prognostics.
If the Scab or Itch be small and do not hinder sleep, it is the easier cured,
but if it do much molest and disquiet the child in the night, it is the more
difficult to cure. If they be of long continuance and have got a habit in the
body, they are not easily cured.

The cure.
For the cure of the Itch and Scab, many use to give common Treacle, which I do
not approve of, but rather advise to use flower of Brimstone morning and
evening in milk or Posset drink. Also sirup of Fumitory is good to give often
half a spoonful thereof to children of growth.

If the head be scabby, it is usual to anoint with burnt butter, but this many
times strikes into the body and makes the child sick. You may anoint with this
ointment following.

An Ointment.
Take oil of Roses four ounces, quick Brimstone in powder one ounce, juice of
Lemmons two ounces, Rosin three ounces, make all into an ointment, and anoint
the head, face, or body with it; but observe this, that you do not anoint all
over where the itch or scab is, but anoint first at one place, and when that is
killed, then use it to another place, and so the rest one after another. You
may also anoint with the white Camphire ointment, or with Tarr and Hogs grease
boiled together; or you may use a decoction of Tobacco stalks boiled in water
and vinegar.

If the Itch or Scab be hot and burning, then use this ointment following.

Take white lead and Lytharge of gold in fine powder, of each five drachmes,
lee made of the ashes of a vine three drachmes, oil of Roses an ounce, wax as
much; melt the wax and oil first, then put in the rest keeping it stirring, and
last of all add two yolks of eggs, or rather the whites, make an ointment, and
use it.

See more in my book called Help for the Poor, in Itch and Scab, page 21, 22.
Cap. 23.

CHAP. 4. Of the Falling sickness and convulsion.
THhese are diseases very incident to children newly born; and because they are
so near of affinity I shall join them together.

The cause.
The falling sickness comes sometimes by consent of the inferior, or lower
parts especially of the stomach and bowels, when milk is corrupted in the
stomach, or has an ill quality, which does often happen when the nurse is of
an ill complexion, or from the nurses ill diet, and to frequent drinking of
wine, and so ill vapors arise from the stomach too the brain, and affect the
membranes thereof, or worms, the Small Pox and Measels, or Fevers may cause
these fits, or primarily it may come from the brain being ill affected*
Sometimes it may be Hereditary and come from the Parents;* Also vehement pains
of the teeth (whereby the brain is drawn into consent) may cause convulsions in
children. Moreover sudden fears or beating the child may occasion these fits.
Some will have phlegm to be the cause of the Falling sickness; but if it were
so, then why might not old men (whose brains are phlegmatic) have the Falling
sickness, and Infants as well as old men, be taken with the Apoplexy, which
notwithstanding we see by experience does not happen: Therefore the falling
sickness does not proceed from phlegm, but rather from an occult and sharp
quality, which does oppress the membranes of the brain. For although children
do abound with phlegm, (from whence suffocating rheumes and other diseases be
bred, yet does not the Falling sickness follow except there be some venomous
and corrupt vapor joined therewith.

The signs.
The signs are manifest. But whether it proceed from vicious or corrupt milk,
or from worms, the small Pox, or Measels, breeding of teeth, or from fears, the
signs of those diseases will manifest. If fear be the cause, the standers by or
tenders can evidence the same: Now if none of these be the cause, then it is
probable it may arise primarily from the brain.

The Prognostics.
The Falling sickness and convulsion are diseases very horrible to behold, and
dangerous in all persons and ages, and does kill many children that are taken
therewith so soon as they be born.

Where these fits happen to young children, it is more dangerous then in grown
persons, because they can bear and endure the fits better.

The cure.
For the cure of these diseases, something must be done in the fit, and
something when the fit is over.

What is to be done in the fit.
First, in the fit give three or four drops of spirit of Castor in beer or
milk, also black Cherry water with a little sirup of Pyony, or give a small
spoonful of this following Julep.

A Julep.
Take of Piony water, and linden water, of each one ounce, sirupe of Piony
compound half an ounce, spirit of black Cherries two drachmes, magister of
Coral a scruple, mix them together, and give it as before is showed. Put to the
nostrils Rue bruised, or oil of Amber, or Balsam of Amber. Apply to the Region
of the heart, and to the Temples Mithridate, or London Treacle, with the juice
of Rue and a little wine, or water Epileptick of Langius. Let the nape of the
neck, and the ridge of the back be anointed with this following.

Take oil of Castor, or oil of Euphorbium half an ounce, the juice of Rue one
ounce; boil them together to the consumption of the juice, and use it. Hang
about the neck of the child a thin slice of Piony, or white Briony roots as
green as you can.

What must be done when the fit is over.
Secondly, something must be done out of the fit. If the child be five or six
years old, you may give it this potion.

A purging potion.
Take of Agarick trochiscated four scruples, infuse it five or six hours in
Oxymel of Squils; strain it hard, and add thereto of Castor in powder three
greins, sirupe of Roses solutive with Agarick one ounce, Balm water one ounce,
make a potion, and give it in a morning fasting. Let the child constantly take
of the Julep before mentioned, and be kept anointed with the oil of Castor and
juice of Rue; also let it wear about it is neck constantly a root of male Peony,
or white Briony.

In Italy, and other places where this disease is very frequent, (...) soon as
children be born, they cauterize or burn them in the neck with a hot iron, or
else drop a burning wax candle upon the place, where they desire to make an
Issue, and that to prevent the falling sickness, for hereby they think the
brain is dried, and by pain the humor which does flow, or may flow, is drawn
and derived ^o the hinder part of the head, especially if the Issue be made by
burning, for thereby whatsoever is gathered together in the brain that is
offensive is evacuated. Cornelius Celsus was of the same mind, Lib. 3. Cap.
28. fol. 40. for he advises to have an Issue made there in two places, and he
says, it is the last refuge or remedy for to cure the Falling sickness. But I
conceive that it is not safe to use such a remedy in young and tender bodies;
for if the bodies of such young and tender children will not suffer purging or
bleeding, how shall they endure burning, when as this must needs bring
continual pain and watchings, whereby the strength must also decay.

Again, although an Issue may be profitable where the falling sickness arises
primarily and chiefly from the brain, yet when the Falling sickness arises
from the lower parts, (which does often happen to children) it does not profit,
when as the matter, or ill vapor that comes from the lower parts cannot be
turned from the brain.

If the Falling sickness arise from worms, then use means against worms, as
you may see in the Chapter of worms, to which means may be added the root of
Piony, red Coral, etc.

Let the Mother, or Nurse keep a good diet, and neither eat nor drink any thing
that may offend the child, or occasion these fits.

See more in my book of the chief diseases of the head, in the 6. and 7.
Chapters.

CHAP. 5. Of the pain in the ears, with inflammation, moistures, ulcers, and
worms thereof.
AMong the diseases of children Hippocrat. Appli. sect. 3. 24.
Hippocrates in his Aphorisms does nominate the moisture or running of the
ears; For when the brain of infants is very moist, great part of that
superfluous moisture is evacuated, or purged by the ears, yet this does not
often happen without inflammation. Therefore when abundance of moist humors do
flow plentifully to the ears, they cause inflammation, also grievous pain is
joined therewith, which in moist bodies of children cannot be dispersed or
dissolved, but is turned into matter, so that blood and matter does flow out of
the ears.

The cause.
The cause is abundance of moist humors and excrements of the brain, which
nature cannot expel by the nose and Palate.

The signs.
The moisture of the ears is easily known by it is running, but pain and
inflammation thereof is not so easily discerned, because infants cannot declare
the same; but it may be known by their crying out and unquietness, especially
being touched near their ears, also redness and heat is perceived about the
ear or ears.

The Prognostics.
These diseases are not to be slighted for such pains (in grown persons) have
proved dangerous, much more therefore in children if it continue long.

Inflammation of the ears is many times dangerous, and brings a delirium or
dotage and indangers life.

In ulcers of the ears if the matter be white, not too thick nor too thin,
neither bloody nor much stinking, it is the better.

Inveterate and long continued Ulcers of the ears are dangerous, because they
soon turn to a Fistula.

The cure.
For pain of the ears, use oil of Roses, or oil of Violets warm, or milk warm
dropped into the ears, and afterward stopped with wool* or drop therein the
juice of Origanum and milk mixed together: Or drop in a little Linseed oil
warm, or use a decoction of the heads of white Poppy, or the white of an Egg
beaten and mixed with a little milk: or put a little Saffron into the ears.

Against moistness of the ears and ulcers thereof, use honey of Roses, and
water of honey; dip a clout or tent therein and put it warm into the ears; or
put in oil of bitter Almonds warm.

For worms in the ears, use oil of bitter Almonds and Myrrh in powder, as in
two drachmes of oil put of Myrrh in powder a scruple or thirty grains: or put
the juice of Wormwood warm into the ears.

Or take of Aloes, Myrrh, and the seeds of Coloquintida, of each a drachme;
boil them in two ounces of oil of Roses, strain ^t and drop of the strained
liquor into the ears.

CHAP. 6. Of breeding and coming of teeth.
Among all diseases that children are subject to, there is none more grievous
or troublesome to them then the pain in breeding of their teeth. For says Hip.
Aph. sect. 3. 25.
Hippocrates, The time of teeth breeding coming there happens itching of the
gums, fears, Convulsions, Fluxes of the belly, especially when they bring
forth their teeth, and most principally to those children which are most fat
and gross and have their belly hard and bound.

Sometimes children are born into the world with teeth, as experience
witnesses. Pliny Not. Hist. the 7. Book and 16. Chaper.
Pliny says M. Curjus was so born, who thereupon was surnamed Dentatus; and C^.
Papyrius Carbo, both of them very great men and right honorable Personages.
And Bald-Rousaeus de vitae hom. primord. cap de dent. In the year 1564. Says
he saw a girl born with two teeth in her lower gums called cutters.

The time of breeding teeth.
The time of breeding teeth is about the seventh month, and first those teeth
are bred that are called Incisorii, cutters or shearers, in Greek (...),
because they show themselves when we laugh: then within a little space of time
come forth the Canini or Dogteeth, from their length above the rest: They are
called Oculares or eye teeth, not that they reach to the orbit of the eye; for
they mount not higher then the Nostrils; but because sprigs of the nerves,
which move the eyes are carried to them. Last of all are bred the Molares or
Grinders, because like Millers they grind the meat. Of these the hindermost are
called Genuini and dentes sapientiae, the teeth of wisdom, because they show
not themselves until men come to the years of discretion, to wit, the 28. 30.
yea even to old age it self. In some they never appear.

And first of all at their coming forth Children have a great itching of their
gums, afterward there following a pricking of their gums at the roots as it
were with needles, from whence follows vehement pain, watchfulness,
inflammation of the gums, fears, fluxes of the belly, and convulsions; And this
does chiefly happen when they breed their Dog teeth, or Eye teeth as the vulgar
call them: from whence we have a Proverb, that Parents cannot rejoice in their
children till their eye teeth be come.

Sometimes about the seventh year children sheed their teeth, or their teeth
fall out, and new come in their room, but this is without any pain, although
children cannot speak of their pain in breeding their teeth, yet it may be
known by these signs.

Signs of teeth breeding.
First from the time of breeding, viz. about the seventh month. Secondly,
because they often put their fingers in their mouth, thereby to ease the pain.
Thirdly, because the Nipples of the mother or nurse are more wrinkled then
before. Fourthly, in those places where the teeth are breeding the gums are
white and swollen. Lastly, diverse accidents happen, as pain, watchfulness,
fluxes of the belly, fevers, convulsions: Now these fears which follow upon the
teeth breeding, the inflammations of the gums, and watchfulness, they all come
from pain, and then humors are stirred up and choler abounding which brings
fluxes of the belly.

The Prognostics.
The breeding of teeth in Children is very grievous and troublesome, by reason
those diseases and symptoms that accompany the same, in so much that many die
thereof: when convulsions and fevers are joined therewith. Hip. de dentione
fol. 59.

The longer the teeth are a coming forth, the greater is the danger. Such
children as have a loosnesse when they breed teeth, are less subject to
Convulsions then those that are bound. If an acute or sharp Fever happen to
children breeding their teeth, they are seldom taken with the Convulsion;
because by the Fever the matter that might bring a convulsion is taken away.

Such as are in good health when they breed their teeth, if they be very
drowsy and sleepy, there is danger least they fall into convulsions.

Such as breed teeth in winter are less troubled then those in summer: and if
they be a little helped they will endure it the ea^er.

Not all that breed teeth (being taken with convulsions) do die, but many
escape.

Their teeth come forth hardest, or with most pain, that have a little Cough
withal; and if they be troubled with pricking and shooting of the gums, they
become very lean. While children breed their Dog teeth, or Eye teeth, they are
worst, and more troublesome, because they bring more sharp and grievous pain to
them.

The cure.
Let the gums be often rubbed with the finger wet with Honey, or with Honey and
Butter mixed together, or with the brains of a Hare; or the brains of a Hare
mixed with Capons grease and Honey. If you cannot get a Hares brains, take
Conies brains.

Rub the gums often with red Coral. It is good also to wash the outside of the
cheek with a decoction of Mallows and Camomil flowers; or to anoint the same
with the juice of Mallows and Butter mixed together.

If there be an inflammation of the gum^, and the pain be very extreme, use oil
of Roses with the juice of Nightshade.

If these medicines prevail not, as many times comes to pass, then the best
way is to cut the gums; for this is very safe, and were it more used, fewer
Children would die: for I am confident the want hereof does occasion the death
of many a child.

Diet.
The Nurse must observe a good Diet, and be very temperat therein, and rather
incline to cooling then heating. She may use Barley water made with Avens,
Lettice and Endive, abstaining from all salt and sharp meats, especially about
the time of breeding their teeth.

CHAP. 7. Of the inflammation of the mouth and throat, with ulcers and sores
thereof.
OFtentimes there arise certain ulcers and sores in the mouths of children
called Aphthae, which do not only possess the sides of the mouth, the tongue
and gums, but sometimes the very Almonds and Pallat of the mouth.

Among the diseases of children, Hippocrates Hip. Aph. 3. 26.
makes mention of the inflammations of the Almonds of the mouth.

The cause.
They proceed from vicious and corrupt milk, for seeing the inward parts of the
mouths in children are soft and tender, and have not been used to any meat in
the mothers womb, if the milk be not very sweet and pleasant, but sharp and
corrupt, these ulcers, sores, and inflammations are soon bred. The same does
happen if the milk be corrupt in the stomach, for from thence arise hot and
sharp vapors, especially considering the tenderness of those parts about the
mouth and throat.

The Prognostics.
These inflammations and sores being not of any long continuance, (especially
in tender and young infants) are easily cured, because they arise from a light
cause and matter: But such as are of long continuance are more hardly cured,
and have putrefaction joined therewith.

Those sores and ulcers of the mouth in children that are black and with crusts
or scales, are worst of all, and many times prove mortal.

The cure.
In the beginning we must use astringent, or binding and repelling, or
medicines to drive back; afterward medicines binding but withal discussing.

If there be only heat and inflammation, then we must use cooling means and a
little binding. If these sores come from the fault of the milk, then the Nurse
must keep a good Diet, and avoid all hot, sharp and salt meats.

Give the child often sirup of Mulberries with honey of Roses, and if need be
with Oxymel. If they be red, then use medicines moderatly binding, as sirup of
dry Roses, sirup of Purslain, sirup of Grapes, Sorrel, Citrons, and Mulberries
with the powder of Lentils, Sumach and red Roses.

If they be yellow use cooling means, as sirup of Violets, sirup ^f Purslain,
etc.

Or take the juice of Lettice, Purslain, Nightshade, of each half an ounce; mix
them together and use it with a feather.

Or take of red Roses and Violets in powder of each a drachme, Honey one ounce
and a half, or as much sirup of Mulberries, mix them together and use it.

Or take of Plantain water half an ounce, honey of Roses, and sirup of
Mulberries, of each half an ounce, mix them together, and wash the child's mouth
often with it.

Or take of French Barley half an ounce, Agrimony, Plaintain, red Roses, of each
a handful: boil these in water, strain it, and in six ounces thereof mix of
sirup of Mulberries half an ounce, honey of Roses one ounce, and a half, and if
there be need, you may add half a drachme of Allom, which will make it more
cleansing.

Or take of Rosewater, or Plantain water one ounce, honey of Roses, half an
ounce, oil of Vitriol so many drops as may make it sharp; mix them together,
and wash the mouth therewith.

CHAP. 8. Of fevers in Children.
CHildren are many times taken with burning fevers, as well as with Quotidian,
Tertian, and quartain Agues.

The cause.
The cause of fevers in children may arise from corrupt milk, for when the milk
does putrify choler is stirred up, and also the rest of the humors are
inflamed, from whence comes fevers. Sometimes fevers may proceed from the
breeding of teeth, sometimes from pains, inflammation and overmuch watching, as
Hippocrates witnesses. Hip. Aph. 3. 25.


The Signs.
The signs of a Fever in children are these; Great heat and drynes, rednes of
the tongue and throat, want of rest, urine red, sometimes thick and sometimes
thin, quickness of the pulse, much inquietnesse, and many times raving and
idle talk if they be of any bigness. If fevers come from the breeding of teeth,
then you have the signs in the Chapter of breeding of teeth.

The Prognostics:
These fears being but gentle, are not dangerous, for the cause being taken
away, they soon cease; but if the milk continue long corrupt and vicious, then
children are much endangered by these fevers. If sharp fevers come upon
children while they breed their teeth, they are seldom taken with convulsions;
sometimes fluxes, of the belly and great watchings accompany these fevers,
whereby children are soon suffocated.

The cure.
If the fever proceed from corrupt milk, then choler does abound; the mother
or nurse therefore must use cooling and moistening means, as broth or
posset drink made with Lettice, Endive, Sorrel, Violet leaves, straberry
leaves, etc.

Also Almond milk made with the four cooling seeds, and Barley water are very
useful. The mother or nurse must abstain from Wine, hot water and all hot
spices; and may use some purging means, as Manna, two ounces thereof may be
taken in broth or clear posset drink, or three ounces of sirup of Roses
solutive, or one ounce, or one ounce and a half of Cassia, in the same you may
give the child often sirup of Violets, sirup of the juice of Citrons, half a
spoonful at a time; or Take one ounce of sirup of Violets, and add to it as
much Endive water, and give the child a spoonful at any time.

A Julep.
Or take of Borrage water four ounces, sirup of Violets, or sirup of Citrons
one ounce and a half, spirit of Vitriol five or six drops, mix them together,
and let the child take often two or three spoonfuls at a time.

If the body of the child be bound, you may put up a Violet comfit or two,
first anointed with a little oil; or give one ounce of sirup of Roses solutive
(more or less according to the age of the child) in posset drink in a morning.
Or give half an ounce of Manna dissolved in posset drink. Anoint the back and
ridge of the child with oil of Violets mixed with a little wax. And anoint the
stomach with some of this ointment following.

An ointment.
Take oil of Roses, and Mastick in powde of each half an ounce. red and white
Saunders in powder, red Coral in powder of each x scruple, wax two drachmes;
make an ointmen, and use it as before mentioned.

A Pultis.
Or take of red Roses in powder two drachmes, the juice of plantain, Housleek,
and Endive of each half an ounce; with the white of an egg and some Barley
flower make a pultis, and apply it to the stomach. Anoint the temples and
wrests with oil of Roses and oil of Populcon of each a little quantity mixed
together.

If the fever proceed from breeding of teeth, use means to help nature herein,
as in the first Chapter.

CHAP. 9. Of the small Pox and measels.
Of small Pox and Measels are diseases that most children are troubled with
first or last.

They are both of one nature and proceed from one cause, saving that the
measels are engendered of the inflammation of blood, and the small Pox of the
inflammation of blood mingled with Choler.

What the small Pox are.
The small Pox are spots, red pustules appearing in the skin, with a continual
fever stirred up or excited from the strength of the expulsive faculty and
ebullition or boiling of the blood.

What the Measels are.
The Measels are spots or risings upon the outside of the skin, in some parts,
more or less with a Fever, by reason of the strength of of the expulsive
faculty, and heat or boiling of the blood.

The difference between the small Pox and the Measels.
At the first appearing they are so like one another, that you can hardly
discern the difference; The Measels (most times) come more suddenly, and the
face and the skin of the whole body looks redder, and the rednes continues
longer without rising, there being joined therewith most commonly a greater
itching and pricking. But the small Pox come not forth so suddenly, neither is
the skin so red, nor does the color stay so long, and the pimples rise higher,
neither is the itching and pricking so much, and at length grow white.

The cause.
There are two chief causes thereof. First, the relics and impurity of the
mothers blood, with which the child was nourished in the womb, and receiving
the same into the pores of the body, the which at that time for debility of
nature could not be expelled, but the child increasing afterward in strength is
driven out of the veins into the upper skin.

Secondly, it may come by way of contagion, from a peculiar malignity of the
air when any place is infected, so that one person infecteth another.

Now the fuller the body is of this menstrual blood, the deeper impression does
the outward air make in it; which is the reason that some have them in greater
quantity, and are fuller of them then others: And so according to the malignity
of the humor, it is more or less dangerous to some then to others. Sometimes
the ill diet of the nurse, or feeding upon meats that increase rotten humors,
may cause this disease.

The signs.
The signs of them are these. Pain of the head, eyes and throat, with a
beating of the head and temples, itching of the nose, neesing, fear, and
starting in sleep, like fits of the convulsion, or Falling sickness, and
sometimes Convulsions with ravings; all which happen from hot vapors, and that
from the boiling of the blood, and so ascend up to the head. Also there is a
pain and beating of the back, heaviness of the whole body, a pricking pain in
all parts, as if stung with nettles, difficulty of breath, a trembling of the
feet, yawning or gaping, and a stretching of the body, trembling of the heart,
and sometimes swoning, redness of the eyes, great drought, hoarsness, and a
dry cough. The urine is sometimes red and thick, which shows great heat and
boiling of humors, and sometimes not much differing from the water of one in
health. The nose does many times bleed, and that from the heat of the blood,
and by it is sharpness does open the orifices, or mouths of the veins; which
if it happen to be much in the beginning, then the disease is not so violent.
Sometimes the eyes water and are moist: And last of all the spots appear, and
that most times within three or four days.

The small Pox or Measels happen chiefly in the Spring and Autumn, especially
if the Summer before were wet, and the wind in the South; or if the winter
foregoing be warm, and the wind Southern.

The Prognostics.
It is better to have the small Pox or Measels come forth speedily then to be
long in coming forth; for this shows strength of nature.

If after they be come forth, the fever and other symptoms do decrease, it is a
good sign.

If the spots be white, or red, and full, coming to maturity or ripeness, it is
good; but if they be blew or black, livid and fall flat, whether few or many,
it is a bad sign.

If fainting of the spirits, or swoonings, fluxes of the belly, shortness of
breath, black urine, or Convulsions happen, it is worst of all.

If the fever increase after they be come forth, and they flash abroad not
ripening speedily, and if hoarsenesse follow, these are very bad signs.

The cure.
The safest way is not to meddle much with children that have these diseases,
but to let nature alone herein; yet where nature is weak it will be very
necessary to use means to expel out the disease: As Saffron in milk, London
Treacle, and Diascordium, if there be a looseness is very good, given in
Carduus or Angelica water. Barley water made with Figs, Dates, Licorice and
Annis seed is very good; or

Take of French Barley a handful, shavings of Ivory and Hearts horn, of each two
drachmes, Licorice bruised one ounce, Citron pills dry and cut in thin slices
three drachmes; boil them in a pint and a half of Posset drink to a pint,
strain it, and let the child drink often of it, especially morning and evening.

Or,

Take three or four Figs cut, Hearts horn two drachmes, Marigold-flowers a
drachme, Carduus half a drachme; Boil them in a pint of Posset-ale, strain it
and add thereto of Saffron in powder two scruples. Give three or four spoonfuls
of it morning and evening warm.

A Cordial Julep.
Take of Carduus, or Angelica water three ounces, syrup of Baume one ounce two
drachmes, Treacle water a spoonful or two, mix them together, and give often of
it a spoonful at a time.

If the child be bound, you may put up a violent comfit anointed with oil, or
if the Pox be well come forth, and the child be bound, you may administer a
Clister made with milk and brown Sugar; or, take of milk a quarter of a pint,
and two ounces of Sugar, mix them together, and administer it warm.

After the Pox are come forth, and do begin to dye, you may anoint with this
following.

An Ointment.
Take of chalk in fine powder, and often washed in Plantane water two drachmes,
of Cream two ounces; mix them well together, and anoint the face with a
feather. Or, use the oil of sweet Almonds mixed with Parmacitty.

You must not keep the child too hot nor too cold, for being kept too hot it
may cause faintings and swoonings, and being kept too cold, it may drive them
in again, and so check and hinder nature from expelling them out to the skin.

See more in my book called Help for the Poor, Page 56, 57, 58, and 59.

CHAP. 10. Of watchings out of measure, and want of rest.
THe child while it is in the mothers womb is detained or kept in a perpetual
sleep, and after it is born, if it be well, it does sleep much at the first,
because it has a very moist brain, and does abound with humidity or moisture,

The cause.
The cause of watchings, is the corruption of the milk, or too much milk, which
putrifieth in the stomach, from whence sharp vapors arise continually to the
brain, and stir up the animal spirits not letting them be at quiet. Sometimes
breeding of teeth may be the cause thereof.

The signs.
The signs are manifest, for the child cannot sleep, but is constantly out of
quiet.

Prognostics.
This is dangerous in children, not only because in general sleep and
watchfulness if they exceed measure, are ill; but chiefly because this is
contrary to the nature of children, which are wont to sleep much.

By too much watching humors are stirred up, and become dry, from whence
Convulsions, fears, Catarrhes or Rheums, and other diseases are bred in
children.

The cure.
The means to bring rest are inward or outward. Inward means are these
following.

Inward means.
If the child be bound give it syrup of Roses, or put up a violet comfit into
the body of it, and give every night the bigness of a Pease of Diascordium, in
a little Posset drink, more or less, as the child is in bigness. This you
may use four or five nights together if need be, but where the body is bound be
sparing in the use of it. Barley water (made with white Poppy seeds) may be
given to the child at night, or half a spoonful of syrup of violets, or syrup
of white Poppy heads, half so much, where the child is subject to watchings,
else use not the last.

Outward means.
Outward means, are these following, make a Bath (if it be Summer) of the tops
of Dill, Cammomil flowers, Mallows Willow leaves, Vine leaves, and the heads
of Poppy, white or red; and wash the feet therewith. You may anoint the temples
with oil of Roses, or oil of Violets, or water Lillies, or with Populeon
ointment; or you may use oil of Nutmegs (made by expression) to the temples
warm, or you may make a Pulcis of white Poppy seed, woman's milk, or Rose water,
or Nightshade water, and the white of an egg with a little Saffron. Anoint the
nostrils with oil of Violets mixed with the juice of Nightshade. If it proceed
from breeding of teeth, then use those means set down in the Chapter of
breeding teeth. Let the Nurse use a good diet, and means that may cause sleep,
as Almond milk, made with a decoction of Lettice and white Poppy seeds: Or, she
may take a spoonful of sirup of white Poppy for three or four nights together
in Posset drink.

CHAP. 11. Of Fear, Starting, and terrible dreams.
AMong the diseases that are incident to children, Hippocrates mentions great
fears, and startings which is nothing else but troublesome sleep, accompanied
with terrible dreams.

The cause.
The causes hereof are impure and filthy vapors which mingle themselves with
the animal spirits, and trouble the same, representing terrible fancies to the
imagination; now these vapors arise from the bad concoction of the stomach.
Therefore this disease is very subject to children, who suck the milk very
greedily, or eat abundantly, and so receiving more nourishment then the stomach
can digest, it is corrupt, and so these vapors arise to the brain, and trouble
he animal spirits. Neither is it absurd to say that these vapors do not only
ascend by the Oesophagus is that part, by which meat and drink are turned down
into the stomach.
Oesophagus or gullet, but that by the veins they ascend up to the head. Elder
children are subject to this disease as well as younger.

Galen says, these fears, are caused when there is a natural imbecibillity or
weakness of the child's stomach, and the meat received is corrupted in it,
which cause vapors to arise up to the head, and bring these startings.
Sometimes they come from worms, and when they breed their teeth.

The signs.
The signs are manifest, for they often start in their sleep, screech and cry
out suddenly, and many times they shake and are all in a water, and most times
a hot and stinking vapor proceeds out of the child's mouth.

The Prognostics.
This disease must not be slighted, because many times it is the forerunner of
the Falling sickness.

The cure.
For the cure hereof, means must be used to take away the corrupt humors in
the stomach.

Let the Nurse keep to a moderate diet, and use meats that hinder corruption,
and abstain from all vicious and corrupt food; as Pease, Beans, Leeks, Onions,
Colewort, etc. that so the milk may be good which the child sucketh.

Let the child suck but sparingly and moderately least by too often sucking
the stomach be oppressed; neither let the child after sucking or feeding be
laid to sleep, but kept watching a while, that so the nourishment may descend
to the bottom of the stomach, and the concoction be the better. When it is
laid to sleep, let it not be much rocked, for overmuch shaking of the child
hinders digestion, and causes the child many times to vomit.

To remove the corrupt food in the stomach, let the child take oil of sweet
Almonds, or sirup of Succory, or Manna, or a little honey of Roses solutive; you
may give a spoonful or two of either, for these will cleanse the corrupt
humors and provoke to stool. Give the child half a scruple or more of Pyony
seeds in a little milk morning and evening; or give it a little Magister of
Coral.

Or,

Take Magister of Coral a drachme, species Pleres Archonticon a scruple, Sugar
dissolved in Rosewater one ounce; make rouls or cakes, and give of them to the
child, or dissolve them in beer and so give them.

Let the stomach be anointed morning and evening with oil of wormwood, Mints,
Nardus, Mastick, or oil of Nutmegs.

Or,

Take oil of Wormwood and Mastick of each a drachme, Cloves in powder ten
grains, wax half a drachme, make a Liniment, and anoint the stomach therewith.

If starting come of worms, or from a fever, then use those means set down in
the several Chapters. Great care must be taken against all occasions of fear
and frighting be taken away.

CHAP. 12. Of Rheum, the Cough, and shortness of breath.
THe Cough, Rheum, and shortness of breath does oftentimes much molest and
disquiet children.

The cause.
The cause of rheum in children is from their natural constitution, or moist
temper of brain, from which many excrements are easily heaped together. And
this happens from abundance of milk oppressing the stomach, from whence many
vapors arise up to the brain and fill the same. For if the brain be filled
with excrementitious humors, or molested with the cold air, (which the child
was not used to in the mothers womb, or with too much heat, or being kept too
hot (either the head or body*) the matter gathered together in the brain does
plentifully fall down to the nostrils, mouth, or lungs. Now if these
excrementitious humors cannot be purged by the nostrils, they slide down into
the rough artery and cause a cough. If they fall down to the lungs they cause
shortness of breath.

The Signs.
Whether the humor be hot or cold is easily known, for if it be hot the humor
is more thin, and the child does often sneese, the face and cheeks are hot, and
the mouth of the child is hot, which may be perceived by the nipples of the
nurse, as also in sucking. If the humor be cold, then the contrary is found.
Now whether the shortness of breath proceed of matter descending from the
head, or from a phlegmatic blood, ascending from the veins to the lungs, may
be thus known; if it come from the head there is a cough, and rheum does
follow, and sometimes as they breath they snort, and make a noise, because the
air is stopped coming from the lungs. But if it come from a phlegmatic humor
arising from the hypochonders, then there is neither cough nor rheum, and the
hypochonders are puffed up and swollen.

The Prognostics.
Rheumes, and also the cough following, and shortness of breath in infants and
children are not to be neglected, because strong Coughing does not only cause
watchings and vomiting but Ruptures, and Rheumes also bring suffocations and
death many times. These Rheumes and Coughs in children are not so easily cured,
because those medicines cannot be used which bring expectoration or spitting,
and to cause the matter to be easily spit out.

The cure.
Let the nurse keep a temperate diet, avoiding all sharp and salt meats, as
also all things that cause vapors to ascend up to the brain.

Let the nurse take often of this pectoral decoction.

Take of Figs and Jujubes of each twenty in number, Sebestens thirty in number,
Raisons of the sun stoned ten drach. Licorice 2. drachmes, Maidenhair, Hyssop,
and Violets of each an ounce; boil them in three pints of water to the
consumption of the third part, then being strained give it as before.

If the child be bound you may give it sirup of Roses, Manna or Cassia. And
give the child oil of sweet Almonds with white Sugar candy, which will not
only loose the belly but ease the Cough. If shortness of breath proceed from
fullness of the stomach and hypochonders, then give the child some Honey mixed
with a little Fenegreek seed and Comin seed in powder. Afterward give the
juice of Fennel in milk, or sirup of Jujubes, or sirup of Maidenhair: or make
Almond milk with some Pine kernels in Colts foot water, or Scabious water, and
sweeten it with sugar Candy.

Or,

Take one ounce of sugar Pellets, and being dissolved in two ounces of Hyssop
water, warm them on the fire, and give a spoonful often of it. Or you may give
sugar Candy and Hyssop water in the same manner. If the child be of any bigness,
you may give it often pectoral Roules, or Trosses to eat, or sugar Pellets.

Let the breast be anointed morning and evening warm with oil of sweet Almonds
mixed with Capons grease or sweet Butter; or with the ointment called Pectorale.

Or,

Take of the ointment called Resumptivum, oil of sweet Almonds of each one
ounce, Capons grease and Goose grease, of each two drachmes, mix them together
and use it,

To dry up the Rheum lest the child's headclothes be perfumed with the powder
of red Roses and Frankincense at night. And you may bath the child's feet with a
decoction made with Rosemary, Sage, Marjoram, etc. And afterward anoint the
feet with oil of Bays, or oil of Costus warm.

And because the Rheum sometimes falls down by the rough artery, so that the
nostrils of the child are dry, and much stopped, therefore you must anoint the
same with fresh Butter, or put up some therein, or with oil of sweet Almonds,
or with this following.

Take of the juice Beets of and Marjoram, of each two drachmes, of the juice of
Chickweed half an ounce, oil of sweet Almonds one ounce mix them together, and
anoint the nostrils therewith; or put up Basil, Cloves, or Marjoram in powder
into the nostrils to provoke sneesing, that thereby the matter which flows
down by the rough Artery may flow out of the nose.

If the Cough hinder the child from sleeping, give it at night of sirup of
Jujubes, sirup of Violets, and sirup of white Poppy, of each a like quantity
mixed together, or give Conserve of red Roses if the child be of any bigness.

CHAP. 13. Of vomiting and weakness of the stomach.
MAny times the child's stomach is so weak that it cannot retain any sustenance
taken.

The cause.
The cause hereof is either abundance of milk which the child greedily sucketh;
or the ill quality of the milk, or worms; from whence ill humors are stirred
up and so cause vomiting. It may also proceed from phlegm falling down upon the
stomach, but this is more rare in children and does not often happen.

The signs.
If it come from abundance of milk sucked the Nurse may soon know it; besides
the child after vomitting is better.

If it proceed from the corruption of the milk, it is known by the quality
thereof, for the milk is yellow, green, or of some other bad color which is
vomited up, and has an ill savor or smell; also the milk of the Nurse is not
good.

If worms be the cause, then you have the signs in the Chapter of worms.

The Prognostics.
Vomiting in children is most times little dangerous, for it is a common saying
among women, that those children are most lively and vivacious that being young
do vomit; and there wants not reason to second this opinion; for the child
being newly born has some vicious humors in the stomach, which was collected
in it is mothers womb, and then receiving fresh nourishment from the Nurse which
it was not accustomed to; moreover the stomach being lax or loose, moist and
weak, it soon happens that the milk is corrupted: Therefore if these vicious
humors be cast out by vomit, it is far better then if they were retained in
the stomach.

If vomiting proceed from abundance of milk, there is less danger, and most
times after vomiting the child is better. If from the corruption of the milk
it is worse, because thereby may follow other dangerous symptoms.

If vomiting continue long, it is dangerous, because it may bring an Atrophy,
or leanness of the whole body, and so death at length.

If that which is vomited be white and phlegmatic, it is better then if it be
yellow, green, or blackish.

The cure.
If vomiting proceed from too great plenty of milk sucked, then let not the
child suck so often, nor so long.

If it come from corruption of the milk, then the fault of the milk must be
mended, as is before declared, and that which is corrupt must be cleansed by
the use of syrup of Roses solutive, or honey of Roses solutive.

Now that the stomach of the child (which is weak and loose) may be
strengthened, you may use syrup of Mints, syrup of Q^inces, etc. Or,

A powder or lohoch.
Take of wood Aloes, red Coral, Mastick, of each half a drach, Galangal half a
scruple, make them into powder, and give of it to the child in milk, as much as
will lie upon two pence, or three pence at a time; or make a lohoch, or licking
medicine thereof with syrup of Quinces, and give it often to the child.
Marmalade of Quinces also is very good for the child, or a Quince roasted tender
and given with Sugar and Cloves in powder: Apply outwardly to the stomach the
plaster of a crust of bread, the Cerot called distomachale, or a crust of
bread, wet in Muscadel.

Or,

Take oil of Mastick, oil of Quinces, oil of Mints, oil of Wormwood, of each
half an ounce, oil of Nutmegs by expression half a drachme, Cloves in powder a
scruple, mix them together, and anoint the stomach therewith morning and
evening warm.

Or,

Take of red Roses half a handful, Mints a drachme, Cyperus roots and Myrtle
berries, of each two drachmes; Boil them in red wine, and bathe the childs
stomach therewith warm.

Or,

Wet a sponge, or woollen cloth therein, and lay it warm to the stomach.

Or,

Take Mastick, Frankincense, red Roses, of each two drachmes, Cloves a scruple;
make them into powder, and with the juice of Mints, or the distilled water
thereof make a Pultis, and lay it to the stomach.

Or,

Take of oil of Mastick, or oil of Wormwood two ounces, wax one ounce and a
half, Cloves, Mace and Cynamom in powder, of each two drachmes; make all into
an ointment, adding thereto a little Vinegar: Anoint the stomach with it
morning and evening warm. You may anoint the stomach morning and evening with
oil of Mace made by expression.

If the milk be very hot, then anoint the stomach with oil of Quinces, or oil
of Myrtles, or oil of Roses.

Or,

Take oil of Roses, and oil Myrtles, of each one ounce, Vinegar two drachmes,
red Coral and the three Saunders in powder, of each half an ounce, mix them
together, and use it to the stomach. Coral does much prevail herein by an
occult, or hidden property, and therefore it is hung about the neck of children
to stay vomiting.

CHAP. 14. Of the Consumption, or Leanness of the Rickets.
CHildren do many times wax lean without any manifest cause, and although they
suck much, or feed well, yet they are not therewith nourished.

The cause.
Now the causes are many; as the corruption of the milk, for being either too
hot or too cold, it turns into ill humors, and so hinders the breeding of good
blood; or it may come for want of suck, from whence we see many times that when
a child consumes and pines away with sucking one Nurse, if it suck an other,
it soon thrives and grows.

Again, worms may be the cause, both such as are bred in the belly, as also in
other parts; or it may come by reason of a Fever, or from a flux of the belly.

The signs.
The signs are manifest.

The Prognostics.
If the child consume for want of milk, or a good Nurse, this may soon be cured
by getting a better Nurse.

If it come from worms in the belly or other parts, it is not easily cured. The
Consumption in most children is dangerours if it be not taken in time, and
kills many.

The cure.
If the fault be in the milk, that must be rectified by good diet of the Nurse,
or if that do not help, then the Nurse is to be changed.

If worms be the cause, then means must be used to kill worms, as you may see
in the Chapter of worms.

If leanness come from a Fever, or without any manifest cause, make this
following Bath.

A Bath.
Take the head and feet of a Wether; boil them till the bones fall asunder;
then bath the child with this liquor twice a day, and after bathing anoint
with this following oynment.

Take of fresh Butter, oil of Roses and of Violets, of each one ounce,
Hog's Grease, or the fat of raw Pork half an ounce, wax a quarter of an ounce;
make an ointment, and anoint the body with it warm twice a day.

Or,

Anoint the body with oil of sweet Almonds and fresh butter mixed together; or
else anoint the body with the ointment called Resumptivum, or Resumptive
ointment.

Or,

If it come from great dryness of the stomach, bathe the stomach with milk
warm, and use this following.

Take of fresh Butter, Hens grease, of each half an ounce, Saffron in powder
five or six grains, oil of Violets, or Wormwood three ounces, mix them
together, and anoint the stomach morning and evening warm.

If it come from a flux of the belly, then use the means to stay the looseness
as in the Chapter of the flux of the belly.

Concerning the Rickets, there is a learned Treatise set forth lately by three
or four Doctors, and since translated into English, where you have that disease
accurately and exactly handled, unto which I refer the Reader.

CHAP. 15. Of the Hicket.
The cause.
THe Hicket in children is caused from the corrupt nourishment in the stomach,
or from abundance of milk in the stomach, or from the coldness of the stomach
by the outward air.

The Prognostics.
The Hicket in children most times is void of danger, and the cause being taken
away, it does soon cease. But if it happen to continue long, or be complicated
with some other disease, as the Falling sickness, or Convulsions, many times
it proves deadly.

The cure.
If the Hicket come from corrupt nourishment, or fullness of the stomach, it is
good to make the child vomit either by putting your finger in the throat of it,
or by putting down a feather anointed with oil, or by some other light and
easy means, that hereby the offensive matter may be taken away; then use means
to heat and strengthen the stomach as in the 13. Chapter, and let the child be
sparing in sucking and eating.

If it proceed from corruption and fault of the milk, then means must be used
to amend the same by good diet of the Nurse as before, and the corrupt milk to
be purged away by syrup of Roses, or honey of Roses solutive, then to use
Conserve of red Roses with red Coral in powder, or Bole-armoniack.

If it come from cold, then let the stomach be warmed both with inward and
outward means. Give the child sirup of Mints, or sirup of Betony, and let the
stomach be bathed with a decoction made of Mints, Organy Wormwood and Cyperus
roots; afterward anoint the stomach with oil of Dil, oil of Mastick, or oil of
Mints; or apply a Pultis made with Mints and Dill seed bruised, and oil of
Mastick.

Or,

Apply Mastick and Frankincense in powder (mixed with the white of an egg) to
the hole of the stomach.

Or,

Take of Mastick one ounce, Frankincense, Dill seed, ana.. 2. make them into
powder, and mix them with the juice of Mints, then wet Hempen clouts therein,
and apply it to the stomach warm.

CHAP. 16. Of Gripings and Frettings in the belly.
CHildren are very often troubled with gripings in their belly, which sometimes
comes alone and sometimes with fluxes of the belly.

The cause.
These gripings come chiefly from the milk, either being too windy or too
sharp; for if abundance of milk oppress the childs stomach crudities and
wind are soon bred; which also does the sooner happen if the Nurse have used
windy meat, or if the belly of the child be tender and cannot endure the cold
air. But if the milk be corrupted in the stomach, when it descends to the
bowels it does gnaw and pinch them, so that it causes great pains and
gripings. Sometimes worms are the cause thereof.

The signs.
These gripings are easily known, for the child is very unquiet, and cries
frequently, neither will it suck, and many times cannot make water because of
the wind that oppresses the neck of the bladder and stops the urine.

If these gripings come of wind, sometimes the pain remitteth or cease, and
sometimes increases, and the belly is puffed up and makes a noise.

If they proceed from a humor, the pain is almost continually; and if from a
tough and phlegmatic humor, the belly is most times bound, and the excrements
are like snot or snivel.

If they proceed from corrupt milk, or choler and sharp humors, then the belly
is most times loose, and that which is voided is yellow or green.

If worms be the cause, then the signs of worms are manifest.

The Prognostics.
These pains if they continue long, they weaken the spirits, and many times
bring Convulsions and the Falling sickness. Those pains are worst, or most
dangerous that proceed from corrupt milk and sharp humors. They are dangerous
also that arise from worms.

The cure.
If these gripings come of wind and crude, or raw humors, and the body be
bound it will be necessary to give the child this or the like Clister.

A Clyster.
Take Pellitory of the wall and Camomil flowers of each half a handful; boil
them in broth made of meat; strain it, and take two, three, or four ounces of
this liquor, and add to it honey of Roses solutive one ounce, half the white of
an Egg, and make a Clister, which may be given to a child of a month, or two
months old. Or give it some oil of sweet Almonds new with a little Sugar one
hour before it sucks, for this will loosen the belly and ease the pains.

Or,

You may give a scruple of Anniseed grossly beaten in Pap, Milk, or such like
sweetened with Sugar. To a child newly born it does help herein, and profitably
purges away, or expels from the bowels green choler and filthy phlegm. This
does Heurnius Heurn. meth. ad prax. lib. 2. cap. 26. fol. 293.
commend by his own experience.

You may also give the child Penniroyal water with Sugar, or Diascordium at
night.

Outward means also (which do moderately warm, make thin, and expel wind) must
be used, as the oil of Dill, or oil of Camomil, with which anoint the belly
warm morning and evening.

Or,

Bruise Pellitory of the wall and boil it in oil of Camomil, or Sallad oil, and
apply it warm to the belly.

Or,

Take Camomil flowers, the tops of Dill, of each a handful, Fenegreek and
Linseed bruised of each half an ounce; boil them in Wine, and twice a day
(before feeding or sucking) let the child's belly be bathed therewith.

If they come from corrupt milk and sharp humors, then cleansing means are to
be used; as sirup of Roses, honey of Roses solutive or sirup of Succory with
Rubarb: or give a Clyster made of the decoction of Bran, and Pellitory of the
wall, adding one ounce, or one ounce and a half of sirup of Roses solutive.

Or,

Take of the decoction of Barley 3. or 4. ounces, oil of Dill one ounce, or one
ounce and a half, the white of one Egg, make a Clister, and give it.

Anoint the belly with oil of Roses, or oil of Dill, and oil of Camomil mixed
together.

The nurse must avoid all windy meats, as Pease, Beans, Beets hard Eggs, etc.

CHAP. 17. Of looseness and flux of the belly.
FLuxes of the belly and looseness does often happen to children, and that
many times about the time of breeding their teeth, as Hippocrates witnesses.
Hip. Aph. 3. 25.


The cause.
The cause hereof is bad concoction, or corruption of the milk, or nourishment:
For a Fever does commonly follow the breeding of teeth, so that by the
unnatural heat the digestion is hurt; then by much watching pain is increased
and the concoction hindered. Also by pain the necessary heat (which brings good
digestion) is drawn from the stomach, and so concoction is disturbed. Moreover
the heat of the fever does stir up many humors which flowing to the belly
cause these fluxes Again by reason of the Fever which happens to children
about the time of breeding their teeth, they suck, or drink more then is meet;
and also the Nurse most times (that she may content the child) does often
offer it the breast, and so dispose it to sleep more then is necessary, by
which means both food and drink not being well concocted, are avoided by stool
both crude and corrupt. Mer. de morb. pueror. lib. 2. chapter 25. fol 147.
Mercurialis adds an other cause of this flux while children breed their
teeth, viz. from the pain that is stirred up by unnatural heat, from whence the
humors are drawn to those parts, they become putrid salt and sharp, and so
falling down to the stomach, and from thence to the bowels, stir up exceedingly
the expulsive faculty, from whence follow these fluxes. But some do not
concieve this to be probable.

First, because those humors thus attracted, or gathered together, do not stay
or abide in the mouth or gums, but fall down to the stomach.

Secondly, because the teeth and gums by the continual use of the milk, or
sucking, are made more soft and temperate.

Thirdly, because in moist children there cannot be so great a heat, which can
produce so much acrimonie and saltness.

Fourthly, because if these humors were so salt and sharp, they would soon
breed ulcers of the mouth. Sometimes when children do not breed teeth, the
cause may be from the outward air, whereby the stomach and belly of the child
are too much cooled, and thereby concoction is hindered: or when the stomach is
oppressed with too much food or nourishment whereby crudities and corruption of
the food does follow, so that if the same be not rejected or cast up by
vomiting, it is carried down to the belly and causes these fluxes: or it may
arise from bad nourishment, or from the badnes of the milk, from whence corrupt
juice is bred in the stomach which nature expels by stool. Sometimes it may
proceed from the moistnes and loosenes of ^he bowels, which moisture has its
original from some sharp humors in the stomach, and from thence falls down in
to the bowels.

The signs.
If the flux come from the breeding of teeth, it may be known from the signs of
breeding of teeth; as in the sixth Chapter. If it come from crude humors, then
the food is voided not concocted, and the child is troubled with belching, also
the excrements are white and frothy. If it come from hot humors, and corrupt
nourishment, then the excrements are yellow, or green, also stinking, and the
pains of the belly are greater.

The Prognostics.
If the flux in children be not violent, the danger is not great, neither must
it be suddenly stopped, because the corrupt humors in the stomach hereby are
evacuated or purged, which if they were stopped would prove dangerous. From hence
says Hippocrates, Hip. de dentione fol. 59.
except blood come forth, stop it not till the seventh day be passed.

Such children as have loosnesse when they breed teeth, are less subject to
convulsions then those that are bound.

If children do not easily endure the flux, but have weak stomachs, and the
spirits are low, also the flux continuing long, and they grow lean, then must
the loosenes be stayed. That flux is dangerous in children, if it come by
reason of acute or sharp fevers, and especially if the excrements be black.

The cure.
In the cure of looseness of the belly, we must consider whether the child
suck or not, then whether the teeth break forth or not: For if the child suck,
then the nurses milk must be looked on whether it be good or bad; If bad then
it must be mended, or the Nurse changed. The Nurse must use a binding diet, and
abstain from fruits and raw nourishment, as also from those things that are of
hard digestion. If the Infant suck or not, and the flux be of some continuance,
means must be used to stay it, and such means as first cleanse and then bind
the body, as sirup of Roses solutive, or honey of Roses solutive. Clysters may
be used.

A Clyster.
Take of Barley water (made with steel) four ounces, red Sugar one ounce, mix
them together and make a Clyster. Where the humors are cleansed, and the flux
does proceed from a hot cause, give sirup of dry Roses, sirup of Quinces, sirup
of Mirtles, sirup of red Coral, etc. Or give the powder of Mirtles with a
little Dragons blood, or give Sorrel seed, Plantain seed, or red Roses in
powder with the yolk of an Egg roasted at the fire.

Or,

Take of Mullein flowers red Roses of each half a small handful, of Comfry
roots the greater, and Tormentil roots, of each a drach. bruise the roots, and
boil them all in water, strain it, and to three ounces of the clearest add one
ounce of sirup of Quinces, and give the child often of it: or take Nutmeg and
Mastick in powder of each a scruple; give it at twice with the juice, or a
scruple of Quinces.

Or,

Take Acorn cups, Sorrel seed, and the kernels of Raisons dried, of each a
drachme, white Poppy seed half a drachme, make them into powder, and give ten
grains or twenty grains of it morning and evening in sirup of Quinces, or sirup
of red Coral.

Outward means must be used also.

Take oil of Mirtles, oil of Roses, oil of Mastick, of each one ounce, with
half an ounce of wax, make an ointment, and anoint the belly therewith morning
and evening warm.

Or,

Bath the belly with a decoction made of red Roses, Mullein, Plantain, in red
Wine.

Or,

Take red Rose leaves, Mullein, of each a handful, Cipres roots two drachmes,
Mastick half an ounce; make them into gross powder, and make a quilt or bag,
which being boiled in red Wine, apply it warm to the belly.

Or,

Take of the pulpe of Quince boiled in red Wine 4. ounces, of tosted bread (wet
in Vinegar) one ounce and a half; with a little oil of Mastick, make a Pultis
and apply it to the belly and stomach warm. Or lay to the belly a plaster of a
crust of bread, or the Cerot called Stomachale. If it come from a cold cause,
and that the excrements be white, give sirup of Quinces with Mint water. Some
commend the maw of a Kid, or Hare, if ten grains thereof be given, and the
child to take no milk that day, least it curdle in the stomach; but give it
bread boiled in water with Rosewater and Sugar.

Apply outwardly Mints, Wormwood, Mastick and Comin seed.

Or,

Take of Rose seeds one ounce, Comin seed and Annised of each two drachmes,
make them into powder, and with oil of Mastick, oil of Wormwood and a little
wax make an ointment, and use it warm to the belly.

Or,

Apply Mints (boiled in red Wine) to the stomach, or a crust of bread wet in
Mint water: or make a quilt or bag of Mints, Wormwood, red Roses, Mastick,
Nutmegs and Cloves, and apply it to the belly.

CHA.P. 18. Of Costivenes, or stopping of the belly.
AS Children are often troubled with fluxes of the belly, so are they many
times troubled with stopping thereof.

The cause.
It may proceed from extreme cold and dryness of the belly, which happens to
some children, from their birth; or from tough and phlegmatic humors, which
are as it were rolled up with the excrements, and cleave so fast to the bowels,
that they are hardly voided, or from corrupt milk (with which the child is
nourished) from whence tough and phlegmatic humors are bred in the stomach;
which comes to pass by reason of the weakness thereof, as also when the
mother or nurse feed upon tough meats, and drink but little; for it seldom
happens that children are fed with such diet, except grown children; or it
may come from the intemperate heat of the Liver, spleen, or reins of the
child, whereby the excrements become dry, or it may happen, when Choler that
comes from the gall, (and should be carried down to the bowels) is turned some
other way.

The Signs.
The signs are manifest. If it be from a natural dryness, then the child is
constantly bound and stopped.

If tough and thick phlegm be the cause, the excrements that are voided, are
mixed with the same.

If there be any error in the Mother or Nurse by ill diet, that is easily known.

If it be from the heat and dryness of the Liver and Spleen, or Kidneys, it is
known by those signs that show the heat of those par^s.

If Choler be turned an other way, and that be the cause, then the excrements
are white, and not dyed at all with Choler, and the skin of the child looks
yellow.

The Prognostics:
Children that are much bound in their bodies have seldom their health well;
and it is far better for youth to have their bellies loose then bound, ill
vapors arise from the excrements to the whole body, and cause gripings of the
belly, pain of the head, and many other distempers.

The cure.
First let the Mother or Nurse use a loosening diet, and such things as are
mollifying. And let them take also Manna, Cassia, or sirup of Roses, or a
little Honey in the morning.

If the child be of some reasonable growth, then you may give it Manna, or
Cassia, as from two drachmes to one ounce; or if it be young, you may give it
half an ounce, or one ounce of sirup of Roses. Suppositories also made of Honey
and Salt (and put up into the body) are good and safe, or Violet comfits
anointed with oil and so used, or Clisters may be given; as take common oil
two, three, or four ounces, of brown Sugar, two or three drach. the yolk of an
egg, Salt three or four corns, make a Clyster and administer it.

Or,

Take of Marsh-mallowes half an ounce, common Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall,
of each half a handful, Cammomil flowers, Linseed and Fenigreek bruised, of
each a drachme; boil them in sufficient water, and take of the strained liquor
three, four, or six ounces (according to the age of the child, in which
dissolve of Cassia two, three, or four drachmes, common oil one ounce, or one
ounce and a half; with the yolk of an egg, make a Clyster. You may anoint the
Navil of the child with Butter, or oil of sweet Almonds, either alone, or
mixed with a grain or two of Scammony or Coloquintida. The Gall of an Ox or Cow
laid upon a clout, and so laid on the Navel causes looseness, or a plaster
made with the gall of an Ox, a roasted Onyon and Butter mixed together, and
applied warm to the belly does the same.

If you desire stronger means, then take the juice of Walwort and Mildust, boil
them together, and apply them warm to the Navel.

CHAP. 19. Of Worms.
AMong all the diseases that are incident to children, this of Worms is not the
least. There are three sorts of worms, round flat, and small worms called
Ascharides, and are bred in the fundament.

The cause.
Worms are caused of a crude and putrified phlegm and other ill humors, but
never of Choler nor Melancholy; For all bitter things kill worms. All manner
of fruits also breed worms, especially in children and moist bodies.

signs of long and round worms.
The signs of long and round worms are these; The mouth abounds with
moisture, the breath stinketh: terrible and fearful dreams follow, and they
gnash and grind their teeth in their sleep, and start suddenly in their sleep,
their tongues are hot and dry, and they often rub their noses; they have a dry
cough, and sometimes vomiting and the Hicket follows: they feed much
sometimes, and sometimes little; great drought does most times accompany
worms, the belly is hard and swollen, and sometimes bound, but most times
loose. The urine is most times white and thick, and great gripings of the belly
does follow, especially when the belly is empty. The body waxes lean for want
of that nourishment which the worms consume. Oftimes they have cold sweats, the
face is sometimes red, and sometimes pale, and many times they are taken with
Convulsions, and fevers happen. The pulse is very uncertain. But the most
certain sign of all is, when they void worms in their excrements.

Signs of long and flat worms.
If the worms be long, and flat, they have a great appetite to feed, and except
they do eat, they have a great pain and grawing in their belly, and many times
they faint; the body waxes lean and grows weak; but the most certain sign is,
if with their excrements they void flat substances like Gourd seeds.

Signs of the least sort of worms.
Signs of the least sort of Worms (which are engendered in the great Gut) are
these. A great itching in the fundament, and an often desire to go to stool;
the excrements are like beasts excrements and very stinking, and these worms
come oftentimes forth in the excrement, which is the most certain sign.

The Prognostiks.
Although sometimes children have worms, and that without any great hurt or
danger, yet many times they produce dangerous symptoms.

The small worms are less dangerous then the others, because they are small
and cleave to the right gut, and so are far distant from the noble parts: yet
sometimes they cause ulcers in the right gut.

Broad Worms are hardly cured, and produce bad symptoms, yea and many times
death.

Long and round Worms are most hurtful and bring most dangerous symptoms, and
do many times pierce through the bowels. It is better that Worms be thin and
small then full, or great and filled with blood. It is better if a few worms be
voided, then if many be voided. If the Worms be white, it is far better then to
have them yellow, livid, red or black.

It is more dangerous to have worms voided by the mouth, then by stools. Worms
are more dangerous with a Fever then without a Fever.

If a Convulsion, with gnashing of teeth and loss of appetite happen to such
as void Worms, it is dangerous.

Of the place where the Worms breed.
For the place where Worms breed, it is the bowels chiefly, and that for these
reasons.

First, because the matter or substance of which they are bred being a crude
and raw humor) is so plentifully found in the bowels, that there is sufficient
to breed and nourish them. Indeed crudities or raw humors are found in other
parts of the body, but not sufficient to breed Worms. Secondly, because there
is room enough for them to breed, the bowels being very large. And the veins
they are too narrow to breed them there.

Thirdly, because nature showing her care of life, has so appointed it, that
although worms many times kill, yet that they should be bred in such places
where they may do least hurt, and be with more facility and ease cast out of
the body. Now although Worms be chiefly engendered in the bowels, yet Authors
mention many other places where they are found.

Sometimes Worms have been brought forth out of the nose. Benivenius de abdit.
Morb. Cause. cap. 100. fol. 19. Schenchius observat. lib. fol. 179.

Sometimes Worms have been found in the corner of the eyes, and have come
forth. Amat. Cent. 7. cur. 63. Schench. observat. lib. 1. fol. 179.

Sometimes they have come forth out of the ears, Schenchius, observat. lib. 1.
fol. 191. Sometimes they have been found in the teeth. Schench. obser. lib. 1.
fol. 218. Antonius Benivenius relates of one that was troubled with a Cough,
and had used many means but all in vain, at length counsel was given him to
take the juice of Horehound with honey for many days, with which he fell a
Coughing and brought up a worm, and was thereby cured. Beniven. de abd. morb.
cause. cap. 77. fol. 16.

Sometimes worms have been found in the blood. Schench, obser. lib. 3. fol.
457. Sometimes in the heart; and memorable is that of late years, of a Serpent,
or Serpentine worm that was found in the left ventricle of the heart, in John
Pennant of the age of one and twenty years. You may see the full relation
thereof put out by Dr. May, Printed 1639.

Sometimes they have been found in the liver. Schench. obser. lib. 3. fol. 452.
and sometimes in the Kidneys. Schench. obser. lib. 4. fol. 509. Sometimes they
have been found coming out of the groyn.

Tulpius observe. lib. 3. cap. 12. Sometimes they have been voided by urine.
Roussens Epistol. 10. fol. 39. Sometimes Worms and other living creatures have
been bred in the womb. Schench. observe. lib. 4. fol. 718. Sometimes worms have
been found in women's breasts. Schench. observe. lib 2. fol. 338. And sometimes
they have eat their way through the stomach, bowels, Navel, Hypochonders and
groyns. Schench observe. lib. 3. fol. 409.

I could weary the Reader with many more observations of the like nature, but
it is time to come to the cure of worms.

The cure.
First to preserve children from worms, let their diet be such as may not
engender worms. Let them avoid all sweet, fatty and tough meats, as also milk,
Fish, Figs and all fruits.

They may take the shavings of Hartshorn or Hartshorn burnt in powder in Beer
or in their Broth. If children be of any reasonable growth, you may give them
Aloes, Hiera picra, or Rubarb in powder made up in pills with London Treacle, or
sirup of Roses. Or give them in the pap of an Apple: or give them Trosses made
of Diaturbith with Rubarb. Many herbs also that dry and resist the breeding of
worms, are profitable, as wormwood, Centory water, Germander, etc.

But because these are so bitter, children will hardly take them; you may give
them a decoction of the roots of grass and mouse-ear with the juice of Lemons
or Citrons. And sometimes you give them a drop or two of the spirit of Vitriol
in Beer, or posset drink.

The cure.
Secondly, for the cure of Worms; There are many common medicines in use as
Aloes, Sea-mosse, Wormseed, etc.

The manner of giving them you may see in my Book of the nature of Simples.
Wormseed and Figs, Wormseed and honey, or wormseed and muscadine, is a very good
medicine for children that are of some bigness, if you give it in the morning
fasting and let them fast one hour after it

Give this powder following.

Take of Wormseed and moss, of each a drachme and a half, white Dittany roots
and Tormentil roots of each half a drachme; make all into powder, and give it
from ten grains to a scruple or more, in any convenient liquor.

Or,

Take of Wormseed two drachmes, Seamosse, Hearts horn burnt, of each a drachme,
Piony root, white Dittany, magister of Coral, of each a scruple; make all into
powder, and take it as before. If a Fever be joined therewith, then use
medicines more cooling, and such as resist malignity as the juice of Lemons,
and Oranges, Vinegar, Hearts horn, Bezar, etc. Or make this Potion.

Take of the distilled water of Grass four ounces, sirup of Citrons one ounce,
sirup of Violets half an ounce, spirit of Vitriol two or 3. drops, mix them
together for a Julep, and give a spoonful or two thereof at any time.

Also note, that in killing worms bitter things be given at the mouth, and
sweet things administered by Clysters for by the bitter things they descend
lower, and feeding on the sweet they are soon brought away; after the giving of
any medicine to kill worms, you may give a Clyster of milk and Sugar, or this
following.

Take of Raisons in number ten, Figs in number seven; boil them in water,
strain it, and in 4. or 6. ounces of the decoction, dissolve of Sugar one or
two ounces.

Note also if one medicine do not bring away Worms, that you must use variety
of medicines; or continue one medicine for some time, as about the full of the
Moon give your medicine at the least two or three days together. Give a
spoonful of sirup of Succory with Rubarb for diverse mornings together. Before
you give medicines to children for the Worms, it is convenient to give sweet
and fatty things, as milk, Honey, Sugar, etc. And it is very profitable to mix
sweet things with such medicine as we give for the Worms.

Outward means to kill worms.
Outward means are to be used also; as you may boil Wormwood and Centory, Peach
leaves and Lupins in water, and apply them warm to the belly, or apply Cumin
seed with Ox Gall, or Bulls gall, or anoint the belly with the oil of Savin, or
oil of Rue, morning and evening warm.

Or,

Take of London Treacle, or Mithridate half an ounce, mix it with the juice of
Wormwood, spread it on leather, and lay it to the belly,

Or,

Take of Pills called sine quibus, half a drachme, Wormwood in powder a
drachme, Myrrh and Aloes in powder of each two scruples, Lupins in powder a
drachme and a half, with Ox gall make a plaster and lay it to the belly.

CHAP. 20. Of Ruptures, or Burstings.
The cause.
CHildren are often troubled with this disease, and that chiefly male children,
and the cause may be from too much crying, coughing, and too frequent going to
stool. In elder children it may come by too much motion of the body; as
running, or leaping, by a fall, or riding astride; for the Rim or film of the
belly in children is but weak and does soon break, or grow loose, and so the
guts fall into the cods.

The signs.
The signs are manifest.

The Prognostics.
The Rupture in children is more easy to cure then in Elder persons, and that
because the Rim of the belly is as yet more soft, and so is sooner joined
together.

Some hold that all watery Ruptures are worse to cure then the Rupture wherein
the guts fall into the cods; but in infants it is not so, for experience does
witness, that the watery Rupture is cured soon with fit means, as they grow up
to any bigness.

The cure.
In Ruptures of the bowels, care must be had that the child be loose bellyed,
and that it take not too great plenty of nourishment whereby the belly may be
distended, or swollen, also the child must be kept from crying, and from all
vehement motion. For the cure hereof lay the child upon his back, that his
head may be lower then his feet, and gently reduce the bowels with your hand
into their due place (but first let the place be anointed with oil of water
Lillies, or oil of Cammomil) then apply this Pultis following.

A Pultis.
Take of Plantain leaves and Sanicle, of each half an ounce, meal of Lentils
and Lupins, red Roses, of each three drachmes, Olibanum a drachme, Allom half a
drachme; make them into powder, and take part of it, and with the white of an
egg beaten, make a Pultis and apply it warm, or make this Plaster.

A Plaster.
Take of the ointment called Desiccativum, two ounces, Mastick, Olibanum,
Sarcocol, Cypress nuts in powder, of each a drachme, with a little wax and oil
of Mastick, make a loft plaster, apply it to the place, and bind it on, or
get a Trussand put on.

Or, you may apply a Plaster of the plaster called Emplastrum ad Herniam. Or,
take the leaves of thorough wax, and the root of great Comfrey, bruise them,
and apply it warm on a linen cloth, after twelve hours put on fresh, and so
apply four or five, one after another. Or, take great Comfrey root bruised and
cleansed, apply it as the former.

Inward means.
Inward means are also very necessary, as give the child five or ten grains of
Osmund oyal, or water Fern (more or less, as the child is in bigness) in
milk or pap, morning and evening, or give as much of the herb called
Rupturewort.

Or,

Take Sanicle, Plantain, of each half an handful, Egrimony a handful, Comfrey
root the greater, half an ounce; boil them in about a pint of water; strain it,
and being sweetened with Sugar, give the child often to drink of it.

Or,

Take Comfrey the greater and Knotgrasse, of each a handful; Boil them in milk,
and give the child often of it. Mous-ear in powder is very profitable, being
given in milk, or pap. So is small Moonwort boiled in red wine alone, or boiled
with Comfrey, and so taken. Thorough wax also taken in powder, or decoction,
helps Ruptures. Be sure the bowels be well put up before inward or outward
means be used.

If the Cod be swollen of reason of water, use oil of Elder, oil of Rue, or oil
of Bay, or make Pultis of Bean flower, Linseed, Fenegreek, Camomil flowers,
Elder flowers, and Cumin seed in powder, and with a sufficient quantity of oil
of Elders make it up. Let the child be kept in bed, and as quiet as may be,
and to avoid all windy and watery meats.

CHAP. 21. Of swelling, or coming forth of the Navel.
The cause.
THis may happen when the Navel is not well bound, and when it is cut too long,
or when the Rim of the belly is loosened, and from thence watery and windy
humors get in and causes the Navel to swell; which is caused from too much
crying of the child, or coughing: or it may come to pass when the Rim of the
belly is broken, or when the Navel is ulcerated, and the guts fall down to the
Navel, which disease is called properly Exomphalon, and Omphalocele.

The signs.
The signs are manifest.

The Prognostics.
If the Midwife do not rightly cut the Navel of the child, but leave it longer
then is meet, this is not to be helped, but yet it is more troublesome then
dangerous. This disease being not of long continuance is easily cured, but
continuing long it is hardly cured and many times remains uncurable. If it be
not cured in Infants, it may in grown years (especially if the bowels being
fallen down be inflamed) bring the Iliack passion, and so death.

A History.
And now while I am writing this I have a Patient about fifty years of age, who
for many years had a Rupture of her Navel, and and on the 26. of this August.
1652. she was taken with the Iliack passion, who vomited very much, and on the
27. day, she vomited up her excrements, near a basin full at a time, and though
Clysters were administered to her, yet all in vain, for they come still away
without any thing else, and whatsoever she took at the mouth came up again, so
on the 30. day she dyed.

The cure.
If therim of the belly be only relaxed, or loosened, binding and
strengthening means are to be used; but if broken, then vomiting and
consolidating means are to be used. Let the child be kept from crying, and use
all means to quiet it, and to bring it to rest. If there be a Cough, use means
to mitigate the same, and let the child avoid all vehement motion. Bathing is
not convenient, for hereby the Navel is made more loose. Both Nurse and
Children must avoid all windy and flatulent meats. Let the belly be kept so
loose, that there may not be too much straining of the body in going to stool.
Then if the rim of the belly be loosened, and wind extend the Navel; Take of
Comin seed, Bayberries, Lupines in powder, of each half an ounce, with red Wine
make a Pultis, and apply i^ warm. Or take Cow dung in powder, Barley flower, and
Bean flower, of each one ounce, Comin seed in powder half an ounce, with the
juice of Knotgrasse make a Pultis, and apply it to the navel.

Or,

Take Cow dung and boil it in milk, and lay it to the navel. Or make a bag with
Comin seed and Spikenard, then boil them in red Wine, and apply it to the navel
laying a bolster thereon, binding it hard with a swade band. If the rim of the
belly be broke, then use those means set down in the Chapter foregoing.

CHAP. 22. Of inflammation of the Navel.
The cause.
SOmetime the Navel of the child is inflamed, which happens after the cutting
of the Navel, and especialy being exposed to the cold air.

The Signs.
This is known by swelling and hardness of the Navel, by rednes, heat and
beating thereof.

The Prognostics.
If this disease be taken in time, it is easily cured: But if it be not soon
cured a Fever will follow. If the inflammation turn to an impostume and break,
and the bowels falling down many times it brings death to the child.

The cure.
Let the Navel be anointed with oil of Roses, or with ointment of Roses mixed
with Populeon ointment.

Or,

Take of Mallows boiled and bruised one ounce; Barley meal half an ounce,
Lupines and Fenegreek in powder of each two drach. with a little oil of Roses
make a Pultis and apply it.

Or,

Take Spikenard half an ounce, being in powder, Turpentine 3. ounces, with oil
of sweet Almonds one ounce, make an ointment and use it.

If it come to suppuration or matter, Take of Turpentine half an ounce, the
yolk of one Egg, oil of Roses two ounces; mix them together and use it morning
and evening.

Or,

Apply a Plaster of the ointment called Diapompholigos, or of the same
ointment, and the ointment called Desicativum Rubrum mixed together.

CHAP. 23. Of the swelling of the Cods.
The cause.
Many times the Cods of children are swollen, which may happen by reason of
water or wind, and by too much motion of the child.

The signs are manifest.

The Prognostics.
This disease although it be easily cured in children, yet if it be inveterate,
many times it proves dangerous, and hinders generation.

The cure.
Let the cods be anointed with oil of Lillies, oil of Camomil, or oil of Dill.
Or apply this following.

Take Cow Dung, boil it in milk, and apply it warm.

Or,

Take a quart of Ale-wort, boil it with crumbs of bread leavened, and one ounce
of Comin seed bruised or in powder; with a sufficient quantity of Bean flower,
make a Pultis and apply it warm.

Or,

Take Linseed and Fenegreek bruised, or in powder, of each one ounce, Camomil
and Hollihock bruised, or cut small, of each a handful; boil them in water,
then with a sufficient quantity of Bean flower make a Pultis, and lay it on
warm.

If there be any inflammation, and it be at the beginning, you may take a
handful of Plantain leaves, bruise it, and with the white and yolk of an Egg,
and a little oil of Roses make a Pultis, and apply it twice in a day.

If the pain be very extreme, and the child be strong and of a reasonable
growth, take of Henbane leaves bruised one handful, Mallows as much; boil them
in water till they be tender, then with Bean flower, Barley flower, oil of
Roses, and oil of Camomil, make a Pultis, and apply it warm: otherwise if the
pain be not very great, use no repercussives, or such medicines as strike in
the humor, or drive the matter back, for that will be dangerous.

CHAP. 24. Of falling of the fundament.
The cause.
THis disease happens when there is a relaxation, or resolution of the
muscles which closes the fundament: Now the cause hereof is too much moistnes
and softnes, which does frequently follow a flux of the belly: or it may come
from a sudden cold, or by too much straining when children go to stool,
especially when the body is bound whereby the fundament comes forth and cannot
return into his place again; which does easily happen in children, because
their bodies are moist and soft, and the muscles as yet but loose and languid,
or weak.

The signs are manifest.

The Prognostics.
If the fundament fall, or go out by too much straining in going to the stool
it is more easily cured, if means, be used in time: But the longer the
fundament has been out, the more harder it will be to reduce it in again.

If it proceed from too much moisture it is more difficult to cure, especially
if the flux of the belly be joined therewith; for the disease can hardly be
cured till the flux be stayed: moreover those necessary medicines that are
used, are not easily detained or kept, but are hindered by the excrements
coming forth so frequently.

The cure.
The whole cure of this disease does consist in reducing the same into it is
proper place, and so keeping it. Therefore presently let the fundament be
reduced into his place thus. Take a warm soft cloth, and with your hands gently
return it into his due place, and then let the child sit upon a hot Oaken
board; or hold a hot napkin doubled to his fundament, and an other to his belly.

But if there be any tumor or swelling about the same, make a decoction of
Mallows, Marshmallowes, and Linseed, with which bath the fundament warm, and
afterward anoint it with oil of Lillies warm; or anoint the fundament with oil
of Linseed warm morning and evening, and strew upon the same the powder of
white Dogs turd. The powder of burnt bones, and Bean flowr also is much
commended for the same.

Or,

Take red Roses, Pomegranat flowers, Cypress nuts, Pomegranet pills, of each
half an ounce, Sumach, Olibanum, Mastick, of each two drachmes, boil them in
red wine, and bathe the fundament with some of it warm; then use this following
powder. Take red Roses and Pomgranat flowers, of each half a drachme, Olibanum,
Mastick, and Myrrh, of each two scruples; make all into powder, and being
strowed upon Cotton wool, apply it to the fundament; or let the powder be
strowed upon hot coals, and let the child sit over the same to receive the fume
thereof. Or, take only Olibanum in powder, and strew it upon hot coals, and
let the child sit over the fume thereof. The powder following is commended.

Take Galls, Pomegranat rind, Goats claws burnt, red Roses, Acorn cups dried,
Hearts horn burnt; make them into powder; strew some upon the fundament, and
being reduced in it is place, bind on hot Linen clothes. Give the child often
to eat Marmalade of Quinces, or roasted Quince, or warden with Cinamom and
Sugar. Let the childs legs and thighs be kept close together for fear of
coming forth again.

If the child be often provoked to go to stool, and can expel, or void little
or nothing, then that disease is called Tenasmus, and may be thus cured.

Take a handful of Garden Cresses, and half an ounce of Cumin seed, bruise them
and fry them in Butter, then lay it hot to the belly, and make a fume below
with Turpentine and Pitch, and let the child sit long upon a board of Cedar or
Juniper, as hot as may be.

CHAP. 25. Of the Stone, and difficulty of making water.
AMong all those diseases that happen to children, these two are not the least
dangerous. The stone in the bladder is most frequent in children, for with the
stone in the Kidneyes they are seldom troubled; as on the contrary old men are
most frequently troubled with the stone in the kidneyes.

The cause.
The stone in children is engendered, or bred from the milk they suck, which if
it be impure and corrupt, does not only cause the stone, but many other
diseases: or it may come from a gross diet whereby tough humors are bred,
especially in such as have weak stomachs and hot Kidneyes.

The urine in children may be stopped from some stone bred, or breeding, or from
some thick and flimy humors stopping those parts, (or children that eat much
have much crudities, and are subject to the stone,) or from wind: or it may
proceed from the ill quality of the urine, as when it it is too hot, sharp, or
pricking, so that the child is afraid to piss, because of the pain it feels
when the water comes away: or the abundance of urine in the bladder may stop
the urine, for thereby the bladder is overcharged, so that the Fibers thereof
being over stretched, cannot draw themselves together to expel the urine, as it
happens to those that have kept their water too long.

The signs.
The stone in the bladder in children is thus known. They make water with pain,
and sometimes by drops, yea many times the urine is altogether suppressed. When
they do void urine, it is sometimes clear as water, sometimes white as milk, or
whey, sometimes bloody, and sometimes gravelly, or sand appears therein:
more-sometimes they feel an itching in their yard, from whence they often put
their hands to scratch it.

The Prognostics.
The stone in the bladders of Children is not to be slighted; for although it
does not suddenly kill them, yet if it be not in some time cured, it proves
dangerous, and cannot be cured but by cutting. And truly there is much danger
in cutting them, for if the stones be great, not only children but also persons
of years die therewith. Suppression of urine in children is dangerous,
especially if it proceed from the stone in the bladder.

The cure.
For the cure all good means are to be used to prevent the breeding of the
stone. Therefore let not the stomach be filled too much with food, and let both
nurse and child avoid all gross thick, and tough meats. Let the belly be
always kept loose with sirup of Roses solutive, Cassia, etc. Make a bath of
the decoction of Mallows, Marshmallowes, Pellitory of the wall, Parsley, Dill,
Linsed and Fenegreek; bath the child therewith: and after bathing let the
places about the bladder be anointed with ointment of Marshmallowes, oil of
white Lillies and oil of Scorpions, of each a like quantity mixed together. And
afterward apply a pultis made with green Pellitory of the wall, boiled in oil
of white Lillies, or oil of Camomil. Give the child a scruple or two of the
powder of magister of crabs eyes, or of Amber, or Goats blood prepared with
Parsley water: or two or three drops of the spirit of Vitriol, or 4. or 5. drops
of oil of Crabs eyes in the same water: or give morning and evening a spoonful
or two of Saxifrage, of Sampier water: or you may give half a spoonful of sirup
of Marshmallowes morning and evening to the child in posset drink.

It will also be profitable to give a scruple or more of Cipresse Turpentine.

If the child be of any bigness give it this following.

Take oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn one ounce and a half, Pellitory, or
Saxifrage water one ounce, juice of Lemons a drach. make a potion, and give in
a morning fasting.

It is necessary that children be caused often to piss, especially when they
awake, as also when they are change. And being of any bigness let them make
water before and after they have eat. If it come from sharpness of the urine,
or heat thereof, then let the Nurse use a good diet, and cool broths, or cool
possets for to temper the heat of her blood. And if need reqiure let her be let
blood, and purged with 3. or 4. ounces of sirup of Roses, or with two ounces of
Manna taken in posset drink.

CHAP. 26. Of pissing in bed.
The cause.
THis disease is frequent with young children, and that because of weakness of
the retentive faculty of the reins and bladder, or from debility, weakness of
the Sphincter muscle of the bladder, and also because they abound with much
moisture. Sometimes the stone in the bladder does hurt the Sphincter muscle,
that the bladder cannot shut, nor well contiane the urine.

The signs.
The signs are manifest, for the child cannot hold it is water night nor day,
but especially it comes from them in their sleep.

The Prognostics.
This disease although it be not mortal yet it is very troublesome, and if not
cured in time, it continues (in many) till death. If it proceed from the stone,
it cannot be cured till the stone be taken away. This disease is cured in many
when they come to grown years without any means.

The cure.
Let the Nurses diet be hot and dry. The child must drink but little, and let
the belly of it be kept loose, for hereby they piss less.

The Wesand of a Cock in powder, is commended, also the stone of a Hedghog in
powder; if a scruple or more of either be taken morning and evening in Plantain
water. The bladder of a Bull, or Goat dried, and in powder, is good to be used
as before: or give the powder of Goats claws in Pap, or milk. This following
powder is commended.

Take a Hogs bladder, or Botes, or sheeps bladder dried, the stones of a Hare,
and the Wesand of a Cock dried, of each half a drachme. Acorn cups two
scruples, Nep and Mace, of each a scruple; make all into powder, and give
hereof a scruple, or half a drachme in the distilled water of Oaken leaves: or
give ten grains, or a scruple of Acorn cups in powder, morning and evening in
Plantain, or Oaken leaf water.

Or,

Take of the distilled water of Mirtles three ounces. Conserve of Roses half an
ounce, sirup of dry Roses, one ounce, mix them together, and give the child
often of it being first shaken together.

Let the place about the bladder be anointed with oil of Costus, oil of Orris,
or such like: or make a Bath of Brimstone, Nitre, and the leaves of Oak, and
use it to the back and place about the bladder warm.

If the child be of some reasonable growth, make a plate of lead with holes
therein, and lay it to his back; let it lie on for a month or two.

CHAP. 27. Of the disease called St. Anthonies fire, or wild fire, as also of
Burning and scalding.
THis disease is a great heat and redness that disperseth it self over the
uppermost part of the body; and it is twofold, either only with heat and
redness; or with inflammation, heat and small pimples, and very painful. This
the Vulgar call the Shingles.

Others are troubled with this disease as well as children.

The cause.
It is caused of thin and hot blood, or of blood mingled with Choler.

The signs.
The signs are manifest; for there is a redness upon the outward skin, very
hot and angry, and many times does flash abroad, if it be not prevented by the
use of means.

The Prognostics.
Although many have this disease without danger, yet the cure hereof must not
be neglected, least a worse disease follow: For as Hip. Aph. sect. 6. 25.
Hippocrates says, if an Erisipelas being outward, be returned inwards, it is
evil; but if on the contrary, if being inward it be turned outward it is a
good sign.

If strong repercussive, or repelling means be used in the beginning of the
disease, it is dangerous least the humor strike inward, and so endanger the
life of the party.

If this disease appear in the head, it is more dangerous then in other parts;
because if the matter pass to the membranes of the brain, it cause a Frenzy,
if to the muscles of the neck, the Quinzie.

The cure.
First of all great care must be had to use such inward means as may expel the
matter outward: as give the child a scruple of London Treacle, or five grains
of the powder of Crabs claws in Carduus water. Then use outward means, as,
take of Plantain water, Rosewater, Lettice and Housleek water, of each one
ounce, Vinegar half an ounce, mix them together, and wet Linen clouts therein,
and apply it a little warm, so often as it dries up let it be wet again in the
same, and applied.

Or

Take of Galens cooling ointment one ounce and a half, oil of Roses two ounces,
of the ointment called Populeon one ounce, the juice of Plantain and
Nightshade, of each half an ounce, the white of two or three eggs beaten; mix
them altogether, and anoint with it. See more in my book called Help for the
Poor, Page, 14. and 15.

Against Burning or Scalding.
See my Help for the Poor, page 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. where you have many easy
and safe medicines.

CHAP. 28. Of Fretting, Chafing, or Galling of the Skin in the Groyns.
The cause.
CHildren are much troubled with the skin going off in their groins and thighs;
which is caused by reason of the sharpness of their urine, especially if they
be not often changed with fresh linen.

The signs.
The signs are apparent, for the skin is raw, and the child very unquiet
therewith.

The Prognostiks.
This disease is not hard to cure, yet because it causes pain, and brings
watchings to the child, if it be not taken in time it causes ulceration in
those parts.

The cure.
The Linen of the child must be often changed, lest by the wetnesse thereof
the disease be made worse. Wash the thighs and buttocks with Plantain water,
with Rose, or Nightshade water, or make a decoction with Plantain,
Shepheards-purse, Horsetail, and Knotgrasse, and bathe the place therewith. Or,
anoint it with a little Capons grease, and lay a Linen cloth to it: or anoint
it with Pomatum, or strew on it the powder of a post, or any old wood that is
wormeaten, or meal dust, or Bean flower; or else,

A powder.
Take red Roses and Orris root, of each a quarter of an ounce; beat them into
powder, and use it as before, by strowing it upon the raw places.

FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table of all the Diseases in this Treatise.
B
Belly, fretting and griping thereof Page. 31. Belly loose p. 34. Belly stopped
p. 38. Bed-pissing therein p. 55. Boeeding of Teeth p. 10, Burning and scalding
p. 7. Bursting, or Ruptures p. 45,
C
CHafing and fretting of the groynes p. 58. Cods swollen p. 50. Coming forth of
the Navel p. 47. Consumption and leanness p. 29. Convulsion and falling
sickness p. 6. Costivenesse, or stopping of the belly p. 38.
D
DIfficult making of water p. 53. Dreams and starting. p. 22.
E
EArs pained and inflamed p. 9. Ears, worms thereof ibid. Ears moist ibid.
F
FAlling of the fundament p. 51. Falling sickness p. 16. Fear, starting, and
terrible dreams p. 22. Fevers p. 15. Flux of the belly p. 34. Fretting in the
belly p. 31. Fretting and chafing of the groyns p. 58. Fundament fallen p. 51.
G
GAlling of the skin in the groynes p. 78. Gripings and frettings of the belly
p. 31. Groynes chafed, or galled p. 58.
H
HEads of children sore p. 1. Hicket p. 30.
I
INflammation of the ears p. 9. Inflammation of the mouth and throat p. 12.
Inflammation of the Navel p. 49. Itch and Scab p. 5.
L
Leanness p. 29. Lice breeding p. 3. Looseness of the belly p. 34.
M
MEasels and small Pox p. 17. Mouth inflamed p. 13.
N
NAvel swollen, or coming forth p. 47. Navel inflamed p. 49.
O
Often going to stool p. 52.
P
Pissing in bed p. 55 Pox and Measels p. 17
R
REst wanting p. 20. Rickets p. 30. Rupture, or Bursting p. 45.
S
SCab and Itch p. 5. Scalding and burning p. 57. Sores in the head p. 1.
Starting and terrible dreams p. 22. Stomach weak p. 26. Stopping of the belly
p. 38. Stone p. 53. Swelling of the Navel p. 47. Swelling of the Cods p. 50.
T
TEnesmus, or often provoking to stool p. 52. Teeth breeding p. 10. Throat sore
and inflamed p. 13.
V
ULcers and sores in the head p. 1. Ulcers of the ears p. 9. Ulcers of the
mouth and throat p. 13. Vomiting and weakness of the stomach p. 26.
VV
Water difficult making thereof p. 53. Watching out of measure, and want of
rest p. 20. Weakness of the stomach p. 26. Wild fire p. 56. Worms p. 40.
Worms in the ears p. 9. Worms of the heart, liver, etc. p. 42.
FINIS.

