AN ECHO FROM The Great Deep: CONTAINING Further Inward Openings, Concerning
diverse other things, upon some whereof the Principles and Practices of the Mad
Folks do much depend.

As also the Life, Hope, Safety and Happiness of the Seed of God, is pointed
at; which through many dark, dismal, untrodden paths and passages (as
particularly through an unthought of death and captivity) they shall at length
be led unto.

Through ISAAC PENINGTON (junior) Esquire.

PSALM. 14.2, 3. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men; to
see if there were any that did understand and seek God.

They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy: there is none that
does good, no not one.

PSALM. 82.5. They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in
darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert near the
West end of Paul's. MDCL.

To the Mad Folks.
Poor shattered Souls,
YE little think how dear ye are unto me because of your breakings (such of you
as have been broken by power and not by notion.) That which I have felt in the
same kind (for I have been broken all in pieces once and again, yea and yet
again; My life and my strength has been led, nay driven into captivity, yea I
have been made to taste the death of the whole lump, and the death of every
parcel over and over, and the bitter relish of it is yet very strong upon my
palate) That, I say, which I have felt in this kind, has made me beyond
measure tender toward you, and I cannot but own you before all the world as
the greatest objects both of my delight and expectation: I am most pleased in
beholding you; your sickness is more lovely in my eye then that health which
others enjoy and please themselves in; My expectations, of the next discovery
of Light, Life and Glory, are fastened upon you, as the most proper materials
which wisdom has fitted to disclose it self in most unexpectedly to the world.
My heart tells me that ye are not thus shattered, broken, and made so odious
for nothing: yet let me withal tell you, that my spirit thinks you never the
nearer either for your principles or practices, which carry more unloveliness
to me then any principles or practices of any sort of men upon the face of the
earth. It is not your new Fabric but your old desolations that kindle in me
any desire toward you or hopes concerning you. They are not your new notions
of God, Christ, the death of Christ, the life of Christ, the coming of Christ,
the Judgment, hell, heaven, the equality of things, the community of things,
etc. that represent you any thing lovely to me; No really, My palate does in no
wise relish this new wine, but rather says the old is better. But it is your
broken state, your desolate condition, your being stripped and made naked of
all your garments, ornaments, beauty, glory: this is it takes with me; and if I
could see you yet more sick, yet more stripped, stripped of these new
fig leaves also wherewith you cover your old nakedness, mine eye would more
pity you and my heart more love and embrace you. As ye live, I loath you; nay I
loath your life more then the life of any else: So far as ye are dead I cannot
but hug you.

And for such of you who break forth through Visions and Revelations into new
apprehensions, I profess I know you not, this is not the way of the breaking
forth of my life, which must not be steered by these, but be able to judge
these, which when once I feel with cleerness, Majesty and power, I may then be
drawn to believe that I begin to taste life.

But oh how I long to see your new life, with all the motions of it swallowed
up by death! There is a cup prepared for you, a baptism ye are to be baptized
with, which shall wash you clean within, and make you vomit lustily, even till
ye are quite emptied of all that froth and scum of vanity, which now swims up
and down in your stomachs, and fumes up into your brains.

This is not HE, whom ye now hold forth. This is not God, nor any thing, which
ye now take to be all things. The child is not yet born in you that knows how
to choose the good or refuse the evil. This is not the Land of promise wherein
ye now set up your rest, but a strange land, a land of dearth and barrenness, a
land of darkness and of the shadow of death. This is not light, not true light;
it is but a painted light wherein ye now walk: not the light of the Lord, but
the light of the vain imagination of the creature. O quit your station, your
present habitation, the wilderness is better, though not as an abode, yet as a
passage. Depart ye, depart ye; this is not your rest: for it is polluted. Life
lives not here. This is not the chamber of the Bridegroom for him to embrace
and enjoy his Bride in. This is poor gain, This falls short of what ye have
lost. The meanest enjoyment of a living God in the lowest dispensation, is
better then the highest transportations from airy notions.

O my Beloved, where dwell thou! where is thy Temple, where is thy Turtle!
where dwell thou, where dwells thy love! Where shall God and his people meet
to know and enjoy one another! When shall the Son put off his servile Form, and
be admitted into his inheritance! When shall the creature be made free, which
has so long groaned under the bondage of its corruption! Awake, arise, save
with thy right hand, that thy Beloved may be delivered. Gather into thy self
that which cannot be happy out of thee. Put an end to death to destruction, by
thy life, by thy Salvation. Bind up enmity in the bosom of thine own love. O
let us at length see the conquest of love. Overcome all by thine own goodness.
Swallow up all in thine own perfection, and nothing shall remain weak or
imperfect any longer. Visit thy fainting Spouse; for behold the very strength
of her heart fails, which she desires only to preserve to entertain and
embrace thee with: Her spirit is quite spent, therefore contend no longer, but
yield up thy self at length to the desire, which thou thy self have kindled in
the bosom of thy Beloved. Revive that precious life by thy presence which is
expiring for want of thee, and can no longer live but in thee and with thee.
Thou who have prepared food for every thing thou haste made, satisfy that
hunger, that thirst which is immeasurable after, and can only be allayed with
the presence and possession of a living God. Thou who invitest him that is a
thirst, give to him whose very tongue fails for thirst, that he may drink of
the water of life freely and fully. What shall every desire be satisfied, but
that which is kindled after God? Is this the true way, the only way to
restlesness and misery, to be touched and inflamed with love toward God? Is
there no cure for this love, no rasing it out of the heart, nor no attracting
its object into the heart? O God why art thou so coy? why do thou so disdain
the low estate of thy Spouse? What credit will it be unto thee to have it said
and seen, when all things shall be opened to all eyes and spoken in all ears,
Behold a Soul burnt up into perfect misery by the flames of its own love!

Of the Difference between God and the Creature.
THE Difference between God and the Creature, can only be seen by that eye,
which thoroughly discerns, and is able to measure both throughout: yet
according to that measure we have to discern somewhat of both, we may also in
part discern that vast difference that is between them.

God is the Original Being, the Creature but a derived Being, and has only so
much of and from God, as he is pleased to impart unto it, who may do what he
will with his own, dispensing it as he pleases. As every thing is a shadow of
him; so every thing has some stamp of his Image upon it; one sort of creatures
more then another, Man more then other sorts, some sorts of men more then
others. Man is a God in respect of the creatures, yet still he is but man, the
Egyptians are men, and not God; Some men are Gods in respect of others, in
reference to that majesty, wisdom, justice, mercy, kindness, love, holiness,
etc. wherewith some are endued beyond others.

Man in his best estate is vanity; weak, fading, changeable; his very soul and
spirit subject to faint, and unable to stand before the hand of God, when it
goes forth against him: Who knows the Power of thine anger! I will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, lest the spirit should fail
before me, and the Souls which I have made.

Man came from God, his spirit was made, so was not Gods. God is able to bear
his own weight in every kind, Man is not able to bear his weight in any kind.
God can so wound the strongest man as quickly to make him sink; A wounded
spirit who can bear? But God can not only bear up himself, but man also under
the greatest pressure.

Man is a poor, narrow, confined, limited spirit: God is a large, universal,
unlimited Spirit; He sits upon the Circle of the Earth. God is Substance,
Truth: Man is vanity (in his best estate altogether vanity) a shadow in
himself, in all his motions, (man walks in a vain shade) a lie, a liar, (let
God be true, and every man a liar.) All men, put them in the balance, they are
nothing before God, but as the dust of the balance, as grasshoppers, as
nothing, less then nothing, and vanity. All that all the men in the Earth have
derivatively from him, is nothing to that which is originally in him; Whereunto
will ye liken me, says the most High? There is nothing throughout the whole
Creation, nothing that man can see, nothing that can enter into his heart or
thoughts, that can bear any true or substantial resemblance of God. Alas, poor
man, what can thou think aright concerning God! Will thou be measuring God,
what he is, or what his Thoughts, or what his Ways in any kind, are? Who
knows the Spirit of the Lord? O Man, thou have ever been befooled in all thy
thoughts of God; and as thou risest higher in thy apprehensions, and bolder in
thy determinations, the more shall thou certainly be befooled. When God opens
himself, to thy cost shall thou see, how far thou wast from knowing him, or
speaking aright concerning him.

Of Good and Evil.
GOOD is that which tends to the welfare of the creature: Evil is that which
tends to its hurt and damage. They have also some reference to God, though not
as he is in himself, yet as he discovers himself, appears, and acts in
such or such a line: So in the several lines, wherein he acts, there is a Good
and an Evil, the one tending toward his honor in that line, the other toward
his dishonor.

God as he is in himself cannot be touched, yet as he appears, acts, and
holds forth his Name, it may receive honor or disparagement; Him that
honors me, I will honor. The Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Love, Grace, Mercy of
God, etc. may be neglected, slighted, undervalued by the creature: He may
discover these in his motions, and the creature not take notice of them, not
acknowledge them, not acknowledge him in them; and this is a dishonor cast upon
him. Again; They may be taken notice of, and he exalted in the thoughts and
heart of the creature thereby; and this he pleases to accept of and esteem as
an honor done unto him.

Now there is a double kind of good. The creature's keeping in its line,
walking to its rule, moving orderly in its station; and the enjoying of life,
sweetness and content therein. The living to God, and the enjoying of God, in
its course, in its Orb, in its sphere, this is good, and herein lies the
happiness of the creature.

There is answerably a double Evil. The creature's deviating from its line,
walking out of its way, swerving from the rule of its Creation; and its meeting
with that misery which attends this, losing its life, sweetness, content,
happiness. And let men think what they will by the change of their
apprehensions, yet Good and Evil will evidence their difference to the sense
and experience of the creature: that they are different in their own nature,
are sown in different grounds, grow from different roots, and tend to different
ends. And the creature, while it is a creature, cannot be happy in the way of
Evil (either in his present state, or in his end) but only in the way of Good.
Mark the perfect man, behold the upright; the end of that man is peace. Say ye
to the righteous, it shall go well with him; Say to the wicked, it shall not go
well with him. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, etc. he shall be like a tree planted, etc. The ungodly are not so,
they shall not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the
Righteous. Christ himself, the beloved Son, comes to his Exaltation by
Righteousness; Because thou love Righteousness, and hate iniquity,
therefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows.

Let the righteousness of the creature fall, lay it as flat as ye will, make
unrighteousness equal with it, as well ye may, because it is but
unrighteousness, and somewhat more unlovely, because of its paint. But is there
no other Righteousness? Is there no true Righteousness? Or must that fare the
worse, because there is so much painted righteousness? Consider this well. All
Gods work, from the very beginning, has been about Righteousness and
Unrighteousness, holding forth the evil nature of the one, the excellent nature
of the other; expressing his esteem of the one, his hatred of the other,
showing the different ends of each, etc. Now how will he come off at last, if
all this should prove nothing but a flam, and one should be as good as the
other, and both tend but to one and the same end? If it should be granted, that
both shall be swallowed up at last, yet doubtless there must be subordinate
ends, (which must have their time and course, and may contain in them a larger
everlasting or for ever, then yet we are acquainted with,) wherein their
difference shall appear, and wherein those things spoken concerning them in the
Scripture must be fulfilled.

Of the Devil.
THe Devil is that created Spirit, which God has fitted with enmity, subtilty,
and strength, for the distraction and destruction of his Works. God, to show
his own Wisdom, Strength, and Love, has prepared opposition against himself;
and that they might appear the more clearly, he has so fitted the Opposer, as
may best try and draw out his own to the utmost.

The Devil is not an Original Spirit, no more then the rest of the creatures;
but a created, a derived Spirit. It is the breath of the Lord in his nostrils
that gives him life: all that he has, and is, came from the Lord, and remains
still in the Lord; in whom he lives, and moves, and acts; and who lives, and
moves, and acts in him. There is but one, originally; This one is all, and in
all: all in every being, all in every motion; all in Heaven, Earth, Hell; all
in herbs, plants, beasts, birds, fishes, men, devils; all in every of their
motions.

Now the work of this Spirit is to destroy; to oppose God: or if you will, that
which God intended to work in, by, and through this created Spirit, was to
oppose himself; to destroy his own Works, so far as he saw good. God made all
good; but he did not intend this goodness should stand, therefore he provides
this Spirit to let loose upon the Creation, to eat out the sweetness, the
beauty, the virtue, the excellency of it.

Now that this Spirit might the better accomplish his work, he is fitted for it
with Enmity, Subtilty, and Strength.

1. With Enmity. Hence he has his name, Satan, an Enemy. An enemy to God, to
the creature, to the life and happiness of both, to all that is good and truly
excellent: And where he thoroughly prevails, he sows all this enmity, and begets
a child like himself; O full of all subtilty, and all mischief, thou child of
the Devil, thou enemy of all Righteousness. We see enmity in the creatures one
against another, this is his work, from the beginning it was not so, all was in
peace and love before the evil one sowed the tares of division. As all shall be
in peace at last (the Lion and the Lamb shall lie down together:) so all was in
peace at first. This was one part of the goodness that God saw in his works,
namely, the harmony, the sweetness, the natural unity and subserviency, which
he beheld in the whole, when it came newly out of his fingers.

2. He is fitted with Subtilty; not with Wisdom, that is peculiar to Christ, he
is the Wisdom of God. (As God only is Love; so God alone is Wisdom. There is a
vein of subtilty runs through the Devil, and through wicked men, but it is not
wisdom.) That the Devil might the better do his work, he has abundance of
subtilty as well as enmity (yea all subtilty) bestowed upon him; O full of all
subtilty, said Paul to one who had it but at the second hand, from him, for he
was but the child of the Devil. And he is very subtle; for though he cannot
reach the original Wisdom of God, nor can he touch any of his Plot, any of his
Design, which is wrapped up safe in it, (but he himself is but an engine
there:) yet in his several goings forth, in his footsteps and tracks that
appear, he can there undermine him, and dash his enterprises in pieces.

Thus did he break the whole fabric of the Creation, which God made an
excellent, sweet, beautiful Piece, what an heap of confusion, misery and vanity
is it now become? The whole world lies in him, and the whole world is poisoned
by him, and is become a kind of Devil with him, a piece of enmity, a tormentor
of it self: There is nothing in it lives in true love, in true wisdom, in true
peace; but in a devilish love and policy. There is such a love and wisdom in
the world, as is in the Devil; such peace and good will among men, as is in
Hell among devils.

Thus did he break the spiritual Fabric of the New Creation, the evil one
sowed tares in this field also. The Husbandry, the building of God was no
sooner erected by God, but it was presently defaced by him. He has taken
possession of this inward world, and has emptied all sorts of Religions of
true love, and filled them only with enmity; and the wisdom that is among them
is neither pure nor peaceable but sensual and devilish. He appears like an
Angel of light, that he may vent his own wares, and his great traffic is in
Religion; but for all the paint wherewith he colors them, he that can look
into them may see them to be his wares. The Devil has his faith, his love, his
holiness, his ways of ravishing and transporting the heart in prayer, in
meditation, in conference, etc. It is not the sweetness of these, it is not the
pleasingness of these, it is not the warming and drawing forth of the heart in
these, that can distinguish them. There is abundance of this counterfeit stuff
abroad in the world, (the Devil is making use of his time, he may be somewhat
near playing his masterpiece, though as yet he needs not to do it) little of
truth, because now is the time of destruction; God gives the Devil string, and
he will make use of it to the utmost.

3. He is fitted with Strength. He is the strong man armed. He is strong in
himself, the world is but a weak thing to him; Man is very weak before him, yea
the renewed man has nothing of strength comparable to him. He is a fountain, a
Wellhead, a kind of original; so vast, that he contains all wicked persons,
all wicked actions, all wicked things, all wicked motions, within him. He has
a Kingdom, and is a mighty King; and not a King in title, but he has the head
and heart of a King; he is as fit to be the Head of his Body in his kind, as
Christ is to be the Head of his Body in his kind. He has so much strength in
him that no place can be at quiet, can be free from enmity, while he is there,
unless it will admit of his peace. There will be trouble in Heaven, in Earth,
in each, in both, till he be cast out of both into the pit, and bound up in the
pit. There is no chaining of him, but by eternal, by everlasting Strength. He
dares venture upon any thing even upon Christ himself; and if God, with his
infinite Power and Wisdom, had not stood by him, and stuck close to him, he had
without doubt vanquished him.

And he is not only strong, but armed; He has his fortresses, his bulwarks,
his ammunion, both of offense and defense, in every kind, whereby he can set
upon his enemy, or strengthen and defend his own, as occasion serves.

Lo, this is the great Destroyer, he that dwells in death, he that leads unto
death; and what can be proper for him, but death, but destruction? He that has
slain the creature, is it not fit he himself should dye? He that has shed the
blood of man, is it not just and equal, that by man his blood should be shed?
He that has marred and destroyed the whole Creation, does he not deserve his
wages? and is it not fit he should be paid in his own coin, even with death and
destruction? And as for such as are led captive by him, whither can they be
led, but into death and destruction with him? Surely there are none can escape
from him, or from suffering that torment that is cut out for him and his, but
the redeemed of the Lord, those who by his Power, his Love, his Purchase, are
fetched out of the claws of this cruel one.

Obj. But how can God be just in punishing the Devil, if he appointed him to
his work, and fitted him for his work? How can the Devil be blameable for
acting as he was made, for fulfilling the will of him who made him?

Answ. Has not God power to make what he pleases? May he not make use of his
Power, to show his skill in making several kinds of things, of several natures,
and appoint them distinct courses and ends according to their natures? May he
not make Hell as well as Heaven, darkness as well as light, evil as well as
good? (I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I
the Lord do all these things. The Lord made all things for himself, even the
wicked for the day of wrath.) If he has a black seed of death and destruction,
which he sows in ground suitable to it, and causes to grow up unto death,
unto destruction, what have thou to say to him?

O shallow man, when will thou cease measuring God by the eye of thy Reason!
Will thou say it must be thus and thus, it cannot be otherwise, because thou
can not see how it can be otherwise? Thou know not any one creature
throughout the whole Creation, and yet thou will be taking upon thee to know
God. Thou know not the heart of any man, and yet thou will be determining
what is in the heart of God. Thou know not what any man can do, what any man
will do; and yet thou will be chaining up the infinite One, and be telling how
far he shall or can go, and that he can go no further. If thou had far more
knowledge, far more wisdom, far more considerateness, a far deeper insight into
things; yet God would be still beyond thee, and able to out-reach thee in any
thing, and could show thee, when he pleased, himself to be somewhat else then
thou did conceive of him, and at liberty to act other-ghess things in an
other-ghess manner then thou could possibly apprehend.

Of Righteousness, Holiness, and Happiness.
RIghteousness is the conformity of persons, things, or actions, to a straight
Rule. To make persons, things, or actions righteous, there must be a Rule, that
Rule just, and the person, thing, or action, conformed to it.

Holiness is the purity of any nature. Gods Holiness is the purity of his
Divine Nature, man's holiness is the purity of the humane nature, its
constitution and current in its own immixed channel. In every thing there is an
uncleanness, an impurity, and a purity. We see this in the nature of bodies,
and also in the nature of spirits, in the constitution and actions of both.

Happiness flows from Righteousness and Holiness. God cannot but be happy,
because he is both righteous and holy: Not as many understand, that whatsoever
he should do he could not be unrighteous or unholy, but because he cannot but
keep within the limits of his own holy and righteous Nature in his motions and
actions. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? It is not right because
he does it; but because he is what he is, he cannot but do what is right. And
he in whom the seed of God is cannot sin, because he cannot but do so likewise;
he is free only to that to which his own nature inclines him, which is an holy
and righteous nature, and can run but in its own channel.

The Devil is the unclean, the unrighteous one, therefore also the miserable
one. He is the fountain of impurity, poison in himself, and poisoning every
thing he comes near: and so long as any thing is within his verge, within his
kingdom, it can be neither righteous, holy, nor happy. The subjection of the
creature at present to him, is its vanity, its bondage, its death, its misery;
and it can never enjoy it self, until it be delivered from his dominion, and be
purged of that tincture of uncleanness which he has breathed and infused into
it. It requires no small skill, power and love, to redeem the creature, and
when the misery of our present state appears in its own colors, we shall see
the need of, and know how to prize Redemption. Miserable is that man whose God
is the Devil, but happy is he under whose feet he is trodden, who is passed
through the kingdom of Satan into the Kingdom of God.

Of Redemption.
REdemption is the buying of the creature out of its captivity, the bringing of
it back into its former state, into its conformity unto God, into its union and
communion with God. The creature slipped from God, the creature was gained by
the Devils wiles into his possession: Redemption is the recovery of the
creature by that price which Wisdom, Power and Love weighed out, and laid down
for the rescue of it.

He who redeemeth us is God, he pays the price for us. He who made us, paying
the price of our Creation, redeems us too, paying the price of our Redemption.
He who laid out so much Wisdom, Power and Love in forming us, is also at the
cost of all the Wisdom, Power and Love that is requisite to redeem and renew us.

He, whom he redeemeth us by, is his Son; he does it by the blood of his Son.
Wisdom and Love has prepared in and by him a Ransom, not to bribe, but justly
to stop the mouth of Justice, by paying it its full price.

He, to whom he pays the price, is himself. He pays it himself, and he
pays it to himself. His Love pays the price to his Justice. His Justice is
himself, it will not be bribed, but will stand upon its right while it has a
Being: his Love does not go about to undermine it, but to satisfy it, by
paying the whole price that it requires; and hereby it makes Justice its
friend, and as ready to seal the discharge of the prisoner, as Love can be to
desire it. To illustrate this a little, because it seems to some so
impossible. Suppose a King making a Law of Death, after the manner of the Medes
and Persians, irreversible: One, whom he exceedingly loves, transgresses this
Law: Suppose this King could, by his great understanding and skill, fairly
according to exact Rules of Justice, transfer this fault upon his son, and
should, out of love to the offender, so do, giving up his own son to death for
him. Here is the King himself, paying the price to himself, of the
transgression of his own Law. And yet God is more exact in the case in hand,
for with him the same person, or that which offended in the person, dies. It
was not simply a man, but the manhood that sinned; and he sent his Son not
barely to offer up himself, but the Manhood. He slew and offered up the man in
himself, the nature that offended: He gave up that principle of life in himself
that had gone astray in man, not to have it spared in the rest, but to have it
offered up in them also, so that there is no more living henceforth by it, but
the life now to be had is a new life after the death of this, (I mean not, the
body, but the spirit,) which must as certainly dye in us, before we live, as
Christ's did. And surely this death must needs be acceptable to God, and of true
worth and value in his eye, seeing by it all dies that he would not have live.
He offers up his own unspotted Life, and puts to death all that is polluted;
and all that he desires is, that he and his may live, after this death, a life
that cannot dye, nor be defiled. He would have that Principle of Life live only
where it was, and as it was, before it miscarried in their hand. The great Work
of Christ is, first to bring all forth from God by a weak fading Life, and then
to bring all back again to God by a strong violent Death: And as he receives
life first, and so communicates it unto them; so he enters into death first,
he begins the cup of death and destruction to them also: And as they could not
but live, when he let out life upon them; so they cannot but dye, when he
administers death unto them. He did not dye that any might escape death, but
that they might pass through it to life; that they might be redeemed from
death, that they might live again; that was it he gave his life for, and that
is the fruit of his death. And it is another-ghess death we have by Christ, and
suffer with Christ, then that which fell upon us from sin and the Law. By the
Law we dye in sin, we enter into and lie under condemnation: By Christ that
principle of life dies in us that sinned; so that we can sin no more, nor be
no more obnoxious unto death, after once we come to live in him. O sweet Price!
O excellent Purchase! The Life, which Christ has bought for us, was worth the
buying, it is Life indeed: and the Price he gave was of value also, both in it
self, and in the eyes of him, who could not but accept it.

He out of whose hands he redeemeth us, is the Devil, who is the great Lord and
Tyrant over us until then, until Redemption be perfected. He does not pay to
him the Price, but to his own Justice, and then takes us from him by force;
for there is no dealing with him by Justice, but only by Power, yet God will
show himself just in putting forth his Power to recover any thing from him,
therefore first he clears his right to us, and then tugs with him for us, who
unjustly detaineth us from him.

That which he redeemeth us from, is that slavery, misery and vanity, which we
are in subjection unto by lying under the Devil, by being in the hands of the
Devil.

That which he redeemeth us unto, is the enjoyment of himself, of life and
blessedness in himself; and the end, the intent he has in redeeming us is,
that he might enjoy us, and that we might be happy in him and with him.

O God, How excellent are thy Works! How excellent art thou in Creation, in
Desolation, in Redemption and Salvation, and in the Circle and Circumference of
them all!

Of Faith.
FAith is the divine Instinct of the new Nature in the new Creature, whereby it
naturally knows, and goes forth toward God as its Center.

Faith is not an acquired thing, but sown in nature; humane Faith in the nature
of man, spiritual Faith in the nature of the spiritual man. Indeed outward
occurrences and experiences may occasion its growing and thriving, but they
cannot sow the seed of it. Things from without may draw it out, and strengthen
it, but not beget it. And yet, to speak properly, they cannot increase it
neither, but rather the same life flowing from the Fountain through them into
it: And so life can at any time reach it, either immediately from it self, or
through any other conveyance it shall please to choose.

In Faith there are two things.

1. The knowledge of God. Faith, it is the eye wherewith we see God and
spiritual things. We see nothing that is spiritual by our nature, by our
reason, but only by Faith. We see indeed with those eyes that which we think to
be and call the same thing, but not that which is the same thing. We have a
kind of sight, a natural sight, a rational sight, yea a believing sight of
these things without this Faith, (for there is Faith in nature, and this Faith
will act toward every thing that nature, or any revelation or discovery to the
eye of Nature, can point out as a proper object for it,) but this sight is not
the spiritual sight. This light is but darkness, not light; and that sight,
which is in and by this light, is but blindness, not sight. This light cannot
comprehend any thing that is spiritual, nor can this eye see any thing that is
spiritual. The light is too thick, and the eye is too weak.

Man has ever been searching after God, making no question but if he were
discovered once, he could see him, not perceiving in himself the want of that
eye which alone can see him, which is this eye of Faith, which alone is sown
and grows up in the new nature. And where this Faith is sown, though there were
never any outward means, the knowledge of God could not but spring up, for it is
sown in Faith, in the very nature of Faith, and does as naturally spring up and
grow, as any thing in the ordinary course of common nature does. The knowledge
this child has of his Parent is by its nature, by feeling the nature of his
Parent in him, by the instinct of the divine nature in himself, which points
out God to him as his Original.

2. There is in Faith a going forth toward God in desire, in delight, in
confidence: it naturally desires God, delights in God, and relieth upon him.
This Nature teaches him more freely and fully to trust God, then the nature in
common children does them to trust their parents. It is not by outward
promises, and falling in with a visible Covenant, that things are transacted
between God and them; but God begets them by his nature, and they turn again
toward God by the same nature, so soon as it springs up and acts in them. Of
his own will he begets them, and by the same will begotten in them, they run
into his lap, and give themselves up unto him. The little, weak, imperfect,
childish Will of eternity in us, naturally rouls it self upon the perfect,
complete, fatherly Will of Eternity in God.

Now Faith is the substance of a Christian, of this new child. All that the
Soul is, it is by Faith: All that the Soul enjoys, it enjoys by Faith: All that
the Soul acts, it acts by Faith: All that the Soul receives, it receives by
Faith. By Faith it walks with God; by Faith it pleases God; by Faith it goes
forth toward God; by Faith it receives God into it self: or in plain terms,
It is by the several windings and turnings of this divine Instinct, that it
lives, moves, acts, enjoys any thing. And as this Instinct or nature is nipped,
so it withers and dies, for it has its storms, and sharp Winter blasts and
frosts, and so also it has its seasons of retiring its life, as things in this
outward world have.

By Faith this weak vessel, whereinto this new Nature is put, comes to be
saved; for the new man himself needs not Salvation for himself, having never
sinned: but the vessel, whereinto it is put, is unclean, and fit only to be
cast away, unless it were purified and saved by Faith.

Of Love.
LOve is the spiritual affection between God and this new child. As they know
one another, so they love one another: and as their knowledge is the straitest
knowledge, so is their love likewise the closest love. There is no such union
besides as is between them, nor are there any such streams of love any where
else to carry hearts up and down to one another, or to center them in one
another.

This Love is sown in their nature; there is no attaining it, but where this
nature is sown. Man may reason himself into love of God (a kind of love,) and
it is natural to him so to do, but he cannot thus love him; he has not the
root of this love in him, he has not the nature whence it flows.

O how excellent is this Love! O how strong is this Love! Cast this child into
what state you will, you cannot turn the heart of God one hairs breadth from
him. Let God appear in what posture he will, act how he will toward this
Child, it cannot think hardly of him. The streams of this Love run (though
sometimes insensibly) forward and backward from each toward each in the midst
of all the varieties, changes, and strange unlovely disguises that both are
clothed with. And O what torment is it to have this Love chained up! How does
it consume and burn up the poor spirit within, when it cannot find its God to
go forth upon, for it cannot move toward any thing else!

It were a very pretty thing to observe the workings of this Love on both hands
between God and them, in the several dispensations he carries them through.
How gentle it makes them both, how kind to one another! They can withhold
nothing from one another, They dare trust one another with all they have. The
child dares put himself into the hands of the Father, it is the pleasure of the
child to be subject to the will of the Father: The Father dares trust his
whole Estate, his Name (then which nothing is dearer to him) every thing, in
the hands of the child. How patient toward one another! God will bear any
thing from them, they will bear any thing from God. How naturally do they
interpret every thing well concerning one another, notwithstanding all the
contradictions and contrary apparitions of sense! Surely, says God, they are
children that will not lie, I will trust them with Salvation: Surely, say they,
God will not fail me, nor forsake me, I will follow him into the jaws of death
and destruction. And if things appear never so contrary to what is expected or
hoped, though it be quite swallowed up in misery, (contrary to all Promises and
Assurances, as it cannot but apprehend,) yet it will not believe what it feels,
because of the strength of its Love: And though with its mouth it cannot but at
sometimes complain, because of the bitterness of its anguish; yet in heart it
cannot think amiss: Nay those very complaints, be they never so bitter against
God, yet they flow from Love, and he who had but a skilful eye to read them,
might read Love in them. God never deals so sharply with his People, but still
it is from Love and in Love, and they never speak so hardly against God, but
it is from Love and in Love too. Love is at bottom, and it is Love moves, it is
Love complains; Love thus vents it self, to ease it self, that it might
strengthen it self at the root.

There is a twofold Love between God and his People: A Love of Good Will, and
a Love of Righteousness and Justice. They love one another from their nature,
from that natural tie that is between them; and they love one another according
to that worth and excellency they see in one another. A shadow of this we see
in man: We love our kindred from and according to the bond of nature, and also
from and according to that worth that appears in them.

The former of these remains constant, is still the same in both; The latter
varies, according to the various appearances of worth and loveliness in each.

It was the latter of these from which we fell. We fell from the Love of God
according to our excellency, when we lost our excellency: God could not then
love us as excellent, when we were no longer excellent. And this Christ
restores us unto in restoring us to our former beauty and excellency.

So in this Love we vary toward God too. Though we always love him with the
love of good will, yet his Excellency is so hid from us that we cannot always
love it, because it is often (and cannot but be) otherwise represented to us in
this frail state. His Ways, his Dispensations, his various Appearances are not
thoroughly seen into by us, and so we cannot thoroughly love them, or him in
them: but this Christ will also restore us to in opening that loveliness in
them all, which is yet hid from us. And when this is completely done, our
hearts will perfectly flow forth in all manner of love one toward another;
when we are made in every respect what God loves and esteems, and when God is
made to appear what he is, even every way pure, excellent and lovely in all his
Ways and Motions.

This Love both in God and in his (for it is one and the same) has these six
Properties in it. 1. It is Spiritual. 2. Pure. 3. Universal. 4. Gradual. 5.
Dispersive. 6. Conquering or Subduing.

1. It is Spiritual, of a divine Nature, of the Nature of God: Not of an
earthly nature, not of the nature of any thing here below, but of an heavenly
Nature, of the Nature of God. No man, no creature can thus love, but God alone:
it dwells in him, it goes along with him; where he sows his own Life, there he
sows this Love, and it is no where else to be found.

2. It is Pure, it is not mixed, it will not mix with any thing: it will not go
forth for any by ends, but from it self, of its own Nature; it is of pure
good will, of exact Righteousness. Where there is the nature it seeks, where
there is the worth it seeks, it will, it cannot but love it.

3. It is Universal, it goes forth toward all things. God loves himself, his
Son, his Creatures, his Enemies; Heaven and Hell, Light and Darkness, Saints
and Devils, Holiness and Sin: It is a comprehensive Love, takes in all things
into its bosom. God is Love: as every thing has its place in God, so every
thing has its proper place in his Love. God has prescribed us nothing but
what is in himself, and he calls for it from us, because he would have us like
himself: He bids us love our enemies, because he himself does so; he has no
enemy but what he loves. O how vast are his Motions! He can hate with a perfect
hatred, and yet love with a more perfect Love. And he, in whom this Love is
grown up in strength and power, finds it also spreading in him in this
universality: There is nothing he can so hate, but he also loves it; He
knows Hell, Devil, Sin so well, that he can tell both how and wherein to hate
and love them.

4. It is Gradual: God loves not all things alike, but every thing in its
order, place and station. He loves himself first and chiefly, he loves his
Son as himself, he loves his Creatures according to their several ranks, Hell,
Devil and Sin, in theirs; and that both with the love of good will and of
Righteousness; all which are lovely in their several respects, though some of
them are very unlovely both in themselves and in their motions, yet all of them
are very lovely in their subserviency; and none of them can be spared. Yea the
very nature of the very worst of them (which is the worst thing in them, far
worse then any of their motions and actions) has its proper luster and
loveliness to that eye which thoroughly discerns it: The loveliness of
darkness lies in its black dark nature, in its contrariety to and opposition
against light; and he who made it so, saw it lovely, and cannot but love it in
its being so; and he, who is taken up into him, cannot but see its loveliness
also, and love it with him.

Yet there is an order and degree, as in things themselves, so in Love's going
forth toward them.

A Master of a family loves his whole family, every thing in it; his wife, his
children, his servants, his vassals, his horses, his oxen, his sheep, his
asses, his whole household stuff, all his furniture, and several sorts of
jewels, vessels of gold, silver, wood, stone, brass, tin, etc. yet not all
alike: These have not all the same nearness to him, (though they have all some
relation, and may challenge some love and respect:) These are not all of the
same nature, have not all the same make, are not all for the same use; They are
not of the same worth in themselves, they yield not the same delight unto him;
but there is a vast difference in them, and cannot but be likewise in his love
toward them.

An excellent Workman may like all his pieces of work, because several veins
of his skill appear in them all, yet still with a difference. He has his rude
inferior draughts of things, which he cares not much for, which any almost may
beg from him: but he has some pieces he sets so high a price upon, that he
will by no means be drawn to part with them.

God is THE GREAT OPERATOR, he has THE SKILL, (He is wonderful in Counsel,
excellent in working:) but yet he works variously. He has his slight pieces,
as he reckons this Creation, which he made but for a Say, and regards not
what becomes of it, but makes havoc of it, and suffers havoc to be made of
it continually. Such are all his outward Works, in his outward People, by his
outward visible Covenant: He never set much by the one, he never did any great
thing by the other; he brought it forth to show its weakness, its insufficiency
for the bringing about of what he meant to do: And the love he bears to it is
for its weakness, for its fitness to set off the strength of his other Covenant
when it should be brought forth. But God has his pieces of Skill, he has his
accurate pieces of Work which he has brought forth all his Wisdom in, wherein
there are the very depths of God running in their several secret lines; these
he is very dainty of. He loves every thing; but yet wisely, in its order and
place, according to its nature, end and use. His Love is not such a confused
love, as must go forth with its whole strength, or not at all; but he has
Wisdom and Judgment to guide it by, to let it out as may yield him most
pleasure, and may most commend and set it off in its going forth; which
consists in the perfect variety of objects, and in the perfect variety of acts
and ways of motion. The having and enjoying of the whole strength of his heart
would not be so choice, rare and excellent, if it were over-common. But when
none has it but his Spouse, his Children, his Jewels, it will appear what it
is to be his Spouse, to be his Child, to be his Jewel. And when he has none
else to love, enjoy and delight in, as them; his delight in them will be more
precious and pleasing to himself. God will have, can have but one Spouse; and
his Spouse will not, cannot endure the least jot of his husbandly affection to
run aside from her, no more then he can suffer the least Spouse-like affection
of hers to run aside from him. They shall each love every thing else, but
nothing so as they love one another.

5. It is Dispersive: This Love sows and scatters it self every where. There is
not any thing any where, but God is there; it is in God, and God is in it. God
has excluded himself from many things, yea from most things in some
considerations, but yet he is still there in other considerations; and where he
is, his Love is: And how remote soever things appear at present from him, yet
he will have a time to discover himself, and consequently his Love, in them.

6. It is Conquering, it is Subduing, it subjects all things to it self. Love
is stronger then death: The Love that is in every thing will one day, when it
discovers its strength, conquer the Death that is in every thing: (and the
Conquest must be where the Combat is, even in the heart of every thing.)
Nothing is able to stand before Love: If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst, give him drink; hereby thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, and
he shall not be able to hold out against the engines and art of Love. If we had
but Love enough, we might conquer our greatest enemies; God has Love enough,
and therefore can conquer his greatest enemies: He can chain them up by Power,
but that is nothing so noble a Conquest as to change them by Love. The letting
loose of pure and perfect Love will charm all the enmity and opposition in the
bitterest and fiercest adversary.

Now do not say, O Man, these things cannot be. There is certainly such a Love
in God, who cannot but delight to give it full vent; And when Wrath has had
its full scope, why should not Love (which cannot be always bound) have its
turn? Wrath comes from Love, and in its greatest heat is subject unto Love, and
why should it not at length be swallowed up in Love? Love cannot be perfect in
its work, while it suffers an enemy to remain: and its Conquest being so sweet,
excellent and universally good, how can it but desire and delight to conquer?
If Love be the best thing, the most universally pleasing and profitable, why
should it not delight to diffuse it self? how can it rest until it has
diffused it self? Was there any thing but Love, before things were brought
forth in such a way, as they might be exposed to hatred? When there was nothing
but God, was there any hatred in him? Does any man hate his own flesh, himself?
And how can Love be quiet, until it has reduced all into Love and loveliness
again? Surely, says my Soul, Love must want strength, or it cannot suffer
misery always to remain. If I had power in me answerable to the love I find
sown and springing up in me, I could not endure the misery of any thing. Whence
comes this? what is this, being interpreted? Is not this from, and a shadow of
that Love, which wants not this power, nor this good will, nor skill to do it
in a way of Righteousness? (Is it not just for Love to recover all it once had
and possessed, if it can?) And this may God do, to my understanding, (which
since he has broken it, gives him his scope in doing what he pleases, in
speaking what he pleases, in interpreting his own words as he pleases,) and not
contradict any thing he has said, but only our weak creaturely apprehension of
things, who have measured his declaration of his Intentions, not in his light,
but in our own.

Of Self-denial.
Self-denial is the first step in Christianity, that which Christ first teaches
and requires to have learnt of any, before he will admit of them into his
School, before he will undertake to train them up as his Disciples. It is that
which makes way for all the Lessons which he teaches afterward, without which
none of them can be learnt, and by which they are all made easy: He who has
learned to deny himself, will quickly learn to bear his Cross, to dye with
Christ daily, yea to live and move toward God in and through Christ.

Self is the natural man, the earthly principle, (Adam in his own nature,)
which is of the earth, and tends to the earth, which is ever sinking into that
corruption which makes way for death. This Self, where ever it is, where ever
it has a Being, it cannot but seek to preserve and make use of its Being in
motion and activity, which as it comes from it self, so it centers in it self:
it may move toward God, toward any spiritual thing, yet it is from Self, and
for Self that it so moves.

This Self, being corrupted, has most of its principles, motions and ends in
and from corruption; yet it will not rest there, but wanders up and down every
where for security; and there is nothing within its reach but it will lay hold
on, if it may hope for preservation from it or through it: There is nothing can
be propounded for it to believe, but it will believe; nothing can be propounded
for it to practice, but it will practice; yea it will not fall short in the
very accurateness of Self-denial it self.

There was never yet any Fabric that God reared for himself, for his own
Spirit to make use of, or to dwell in; but our spirits, our Self has entered
in after him, hoping to live there with him, and to be safe there through him,
through his presence and help. When the Lord built a material Temple which he
appeared in, how did the spirits of fleshly Israel cling unto it, how did
Flesh, Self, corrupt all those Ordinances and ways of Worship which were once
pleasing, but by it made abominable in the eyes of God.

There is no Form (take the expression as largely as ye can) either of outward
or inward worship, but flesh, self, will intrude thither, will be making use of
it, will be corrupt there and corrupting it. It will enter into all Duties,
Ordinances, into all Spiritual Motions of every kind, into Faith, into Love,
into Humility, Patience, Meekness, heavenly mindedness, there Self will be, in
these postures will Self act and move. There is not any strain of Religion so
pure, not a notion or apprehension so spiritual, not a vision or revelation so
sublime, and seemingly remote from Self, but Self will be climbing up, and
getting into it, putrefying and preparing it for Eternal fire, which will not
be quenched (when once it is kindled) until it has burnt up flesh, burnt up
Self where ever it finds it. And though these now seem very glorious, smell
very sweet, (O how Flesh is pleased and ravished here!) yet when the Eternal
fire is let loose upon them they will stink extremely (nothing scents worse
then burnt flesh) and then in stead of a sweet savor there will be a stink. Ye
begin to smell the flesh in your Ordinances, in your Duties; ye shall smell it
in your Graces too, yea in the purest intirest motions that ever your spirits
went out in.

This sickness is so deep, this leprosy so spread, that it will be very costly
to have it purged out, and the person cured. The whole house must be pulled
down, the whole building, the spiritual Temple as well as the material, and
every stone burnt in the fire. Every Ordinance, all spiritual Knowledge, every
spiritual Motion must be rent, confounded, torn in pieces, so that there will
be no sight or acknowledgment of them left. We shall be perfectly lost in the
life of our spirits, before the life of the flesh come to be lost in us. And
the corruption of the flesh will so stink, in every thing that is spiritual,
when it comes to be burnt, that we shall think there was nothing else, nothing
but corruption in them; because at present (in the time of its burning) we can
see nothing else, and see and smell that so strong.

Ye have heard a noise of persons crying out against all Righteousness, all
Religion, all Excellency, laying the highest, the eminentest acts in that kind
even with the vilest, grossest acts of evil to common sense and understanding.
Ye can judge these clearly, and well ye may, for in some respect some of them
lie open to your judgment: But when the flames come to find thee out, and seize
upon these in thee, thou also wilt be confounded, and become not so able to
distinguish and retain that difference which is now so palpable between them.
Nay Flesh, Self, that is got into these motions, will smell more abominably
(when it is cast into the fire) then that which concents it self to dwell and
act in the grossest: And the day may come that thou may prefer the swaring,
drinking, cursing, blaspheming, uncleanness of those that are now loathsome unto
thee in this respect, before thine own praying, believing, loving of God, etc.
The inward intense, spiritual wickedness that lies hid in these, is of a
thousand-fold deeper nature then that grossness which appears in the other. As
the Spirit of Life is most excellent in these, beyond what he is in outward
appearances, (The Spirit of Life triumphs in the new Creature, in the new
Creation, in the motions of this Life:) So the spirit of man, Self, Flesh is
most abominable here, far surpassing the common curruption of mankind, both in
the nature and degree of wickedness.

Man can never learn to deny himself. He can indeed both learn and practice
this Lesson after his manner, as he does other Lessons of the same nature, viz.
truly and substantially to his own judgment, but not to Gods. As he can
believe, and that upon Scripture-Grounds, love God upon spiritual
Considerations: So he can deny himself, he can move not for his own ends, but
from the Excellency in God and spiritual things. Man can make every action and
motion of his weighty in his own balance, but for all that they are light in
Gods: Thy Faith is not Faith (though bottomed on Scripture-Grounds and
Promises) thy Love is not Love, thy Self-denial is not Self-denial, thou do
not throw down, but set up thy self in thy purest motions, ends, desires. To
avoid misery (eternal misery) to obtain glory (an eternal weight of glory) what
would not poor Self do! How hard will it run the race for this prize, and strip
it self as naked of Self, as may be, that it may so run as to obtain! and yet
it is not stripped, it does not run, it cannot obtain. Ah poor man, what will
become of thee! Of what nature, think thou, are all thy signs, and all thy
Evidences, by which thou weighest things concerning thy self in the balance of
the Sanctuary, as thou imaginest; but in truth do but turn them up and down
in the scale of thine own uncertain reason and understanding, which by a false
finger thou still make speak well for thy self! Thou art undone, all thy
treasure is dross, it cannot abide the coming of the Lord, nor the day of his
strict Trial; all thy precious things will be consumed and perish in the fierce
fire of his Jealousy.

But there is New-Man, who cannot but learn to deny himself, for it is written
in his nature, so that it is as hard for him to seek himself, as it is for the
other to deny himself. Let him be beset with never so many motives, snares,
advantages to seek and set up himself, he cannot do it. It is as impossible for
him to be drawn to himself, as it is for the other to be drawn from himself.

Of CHRIST, FROM JOH. 1. Verse. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.


IN the beginning. In the Circle of Eternity there is neither beginning nor
ending, and yet in it and from it is both the beginning and the end. When
Eternal Life clothed it self with weakness and mortality, then there was a
beginning; when it shall put off all these garments, swallowing up the vanity
and emptiness of the Creature in its own immortal Substance and Fullness, then
there shall be an end. Before those things were, that were brought forth in
time, there was no beginning; but when those things began to be framed, which
could not so be but in time, then there was a beginning both of time and them.

Was the Word. A word with us, is that which we speak: a Word with God, is that
which he speaks, who has the complete Substance in himself of every thing which
is (but weakly) shadowed out in us. God speaks often, has many words, and yet
but one: His several Words express parts (as I may say) parcels of him; his one
Word this one Word expresses him all, expresses him wholly, expresses him
fully. This is the Original Word whereof all other Words are but Copies: This
is the perfect Word, wherein God spoke out himself perfectly; wherein he spoke
the whole Godhead as fully as it could be spoken, in whom he brought forth his
own invisibility into view, he is the express Image of the invisible God, his
likeness is just as may be, his own Word that came out of his own Mouth from
his very Heart, and has all his Heart engraven upon it, so that he who can
read this Word, may read the whole Godhead.

In the beginning was the Word. When other things did but begin to be, then the
Word was: He had his full, his perfect Being before any thing else: He was
before all things, and by him do all things subsist. The Word was not only when
other things were, but before other things were. He was in the beginning, nay
indeed he was the Beginning: I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last. He
was the first that came from God, and the last that returns into God. He was
that Point in the Circle out of which every thing was let, and into which every
thing runs back, and returns with him into the Circle again.

And the Word was with God. Would you know where the Word was in the beginning?
it was with God. This was an inward Word: This Word did not so go forth from
God, but that it still remained in and with God. This Word God brought forth
both within himself, to live and remain in him, and without himself, for him to
live and dwell in: And whoever are made one with this Word, must become the
same; They must be Gods House. Gods Temple, and God must be their House, their
Temple; they must dwell in God, and God in them. The Creature, the Creation,
when it was brought forth, it was to be removed at a distance from God: God
would have communion with the Creature but when and as he pleased, after what
manner, and by what rule he pleased. He would not dwell in the same house with
him, he would not keep continual company with him, but he would come, and walk,
and converse with him at what seasons he saw good: He puts Adam into the
Garden, but there he leaves him, and what befell him, while he left him, we all
too well know. But the Son abides in the house for ever; the Father ever
abides with the Son; the Blood, the Life, the Spirit of the Father continually
runs in the veins of the Son. The Word was ever with God, and God was ever
with the Word; the Son lay ever in his bosom, and he lay ever in his Sons
bosom. The Word was made (for he was the beginning of the Creation of God) for
his own immediate and everlasting Possession. When he keeps him within himself,
he possesses him there; when he sends him forth, he goes forth with him, and
possesses him there also; I am not alone, but the Father is with me: They never
are alone, they never act alone; but where the Father is, the Son is; and where
the Son is, the Father is; what the Father does, the Son does; and what the Son
does, the Father does in him: He is not, he acts not, he speaks not, but the
Father in him; the Father is not, acts not, speaks not, but in him. Here him
expounding this himself, how he was with God in the beginning.

Prove. 8.22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his Way, before his
Works of old. The Lord had a Way to go, a great Circuit to fetch, to make
Eternity, Life, Perfection run through all the paths of mortality: He had Works
of old, the things he made a great while ago, the whole Weeks Creation that ye
read of. Why in the very beginning of his Way, when he set the first step in
it, yea even before any of these his Works of old, he possessed me.

Verse. 23. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth
was. The Fabric of Christ was reared from everlasting, or if you will, from
the beginning: I was the first he began with, and he began with me from
everlasting; yea then was I perfected, I was his Tabernacle pitched, I was set
up from everlasting. Ye cannot conceive how any thing can be brought forth from
everlasting, neither can ye conceive how any thing can be from everlasting: but
ye may believe the one as well as the other. I was set up from everlasting,
from the beginning, or ever the Earth was. I am not of the stamp of this
Creation, not such a thing as is brought forth in time; but I am that Word
wherein God brought forth his own Eternal Being, his own Eternal Life and
Substance: and as he reared up his own Eternity in me, so he set me up from
Eternity. I was not the first in this Creation, but from the beginning, before
ever the Earth was. Not from the beginning of this Creation, that is but a
shadow of the beginning, as well as all the things created are but shadows of
somewhat else, but from the beginning indeed, from that beginning which was a
beginning from everlasting, where all things do begin and end in another-ghess
manner then can be shadowed out by draughts of Creation to a created eye: and
from then was I set up.

Verse. 24. When there were no depths, I was brought forth: when no fountains
abounding with water. He instances in the first things, and in the greatest
things. The first thing we read of was the great deep, and the deeps they are
the wonders of God, and where he does wonders, These see the Works of the Lord,
and his Wonders in the deep. And the Fountains of Waters are one of his
Master-peeces in this Creation, Worship him who made the Heaven, the Earth, the
Seas, and the Fountains of Waters. Yea but there was a more wonderful thing
brought forth then these, before any of these; When there were no dephs, I was
brought forth: when no Fountains abounding with water.

Verse. 25. Before the Mountains were settled, before the Hills was I brought
forth. The depths and fountains, they are the eminent things in the Waters: The
mountains and hills, they are as eminent in the Land, or dry part of the
Creation. What mighty mountains are there up and down throughout the whole
Earth? and what a piece of work was it, think you, to settle and fix these in
their places; or to bring forth all the hills throughout the whole world? and
yet I was before them, I was brought forth before them. Before the mountains
were settled, before the hills was I brought forth.

Verse. 26. While as yet he had not made the Earth, nor the open places, nor the
chief part of the dust of the World. He speaks very accurately, as one who was
very well acquainted with the work of Creation. He divides the Earth into three
parts, or represents it under three Considerations. There is the bulk of it,
which is generally hid; Then there is the surface or open part of it, which
lies open to the eye of the creature for it to view and behold; and then there
is the spirituous part of it, wherein is as it were the life and excellency of
the Earth.

Nor the chief part of the dust of the World. There is a choyceness in Earth as
well as in other things, and God has a special eye to the chief part. The dust
is the lightest part, the most minute and spirituous, the fittest to be formed
into any thing, (God formed man of the dust of the Earth:) and he has a
choyceness in dust too. But before he made either the bulk of the Earth, or the
open part of it, or the chief part of the dust of the World, I was brought
forth, and stood by him.

Verse. 27. When he prepared the Heavens, I was there: when he set a Compass (or
Circle) upon the face of the depth. Here are two wonderful things more: his
preparing Heaven and Earth. He had Works to form and fashion above, as well as
beneath; he had Heavens to make, as well as Earth. He takes the matter he would
make the Heavens of, the Sun, Moon, Stars, and all that Host, the several
Regions and Orbs there, and prepares it for it, makes it ready for himself to
work upon, to cast into what form he pleased. And he takes the depth out of
which, and within which he would make the dry Land and the Sea (which were
jumbled together in one Mass) and draws a line about it, within this Compass,
says he, will I do it. When he did this, says Wisdom (Wisdom brought forth,
which was the Word) I was there, I saw him do it, I knew his meaning in it, I
perceived the very skill whereby he wrought it.

Verse. 28. When he established the Clouds above: when he strengthened the
Fountains of the deep: The Clouds had need be well fastened, or they would soon
drop down. They are such great Curtains, they had not need only be fastened at
the ends, but up and down every where: God perceived this well enough in his
making and stretching them out, and therefore when he had made them, and set
them in their places, he established them. And the Fountains, that continually
yield so much water, the Fountains of the deep (that must yield waters to
maintain all Seas and Rivers, and supply the continual expense of waters from
each, whereof the Earth sucks in much, and from whence the multitude of
creatures, both on the Earth and in the Air, draw much) had need of good store,
it requites a great stock to nourish these: therefore the Lord, when he had
made them, he strengthened them, that they might have fullness in themselves,
and be able to fill all their vessels.

Verse. 29. When he gave to the Sea his Decree, that the Waters should not pass
his Commandment: when he appointed the Foundations of the Earth. The Sea is
very violent and unruly, not to be tamed by mankind as other creatures are.
The Foundations of the Earth are very vast things, as hard to be mastered as
tha Sea. But God who made both knows how to rule both; and when he divided them
he gave each their bounds. He gave the Sea his Decree; hither may it go, but
here must it stop, the pride of its waves must not swell further: Neither may
the Foundations of the Earth thrust the Sea out of its place, but keep their
own station and limits, which he likewise appointed them.

Verse. 30. Then I was by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his
delight, rejoicing always before him. I then stood by him and saw him do all
these things, and understood his meaning and intent, comprehending him fully in
every one of them: I was then as one that stood by him, having the view and
comprehension of his whole operation in this Fabric from first to last. Nor
was I by him as one then newly brought forth, as the first piece of the
Creation; but as one brought up with him, as one who had always been with him;
as one in whom he always delighted, whom he could never tell how to pass a day
pleasantly without, I was daily his delight. Christ is the delight of God, he
whom God evermore delighted in, he who was still so like himself, so perfect
and unchangeable in the Image of himself, that God could not but take continual
pleasure in beholding himself in this glass: yea he was so taken with this
representation of himself that he could never leave off looking on it. He could
never forbear looking on him, and every look was pleasant to him, (it is
impossible for God to be cloyed with Christ*) I was daily his delight. Man is
not so pleased to behold himself, as to behold his Image in his Son, that is
his pleasure, his content, the delight of his heart: And it is the delight and
pleasure of God, not simply to see himself in himself, but to see himself
brought forth in Christ, to behold this Image, this draught of himself
perfectly brought forth, eternally durable; to behold every thing of himself
brought forth in him, living in him acting in him; This is his delight, the
very joy of his heart.

Rejoicing always before him. Christ is not only delightful to God, but
delightful in himself before God, rejoicing before him. Gods heart is full of
joy and delight in Christ and because of Christ, and Christ's heart is full of
joy before God, he is ever rejoicing. Where God and Christ are together there
is nothing but delight and joy, delight in God, joy in Christ; God delighting
in Christ, and Christ rejoicing before God. Rejoicing always before him. The
mirth and rejoicing of the Child is exceedingly pleasing to the Father,
specially when it is in his presence, and when it flows from the delight and
pleasure he has in the Father. The Father is pleased with all his excellencies
and perfections as they are brought forth in Christ: Christ he is pleased with
them as they dwell originally in the Father. The Father pours out his own
Spirit of Joy into the Son, anointing him abundantly with the oil of gladness;
and the Son pours forth that joy abundantly and continually in the presence of
the Father, he is ever rejoicing before him, rejoicing in the Person of the
Father, delighting in the Works of the Father, leaping to see how every thing
comes from him, how every thing returns to him, how every thing makes for him,
how every thing is full of him, how every thing is fully in him. Oh how
ravishing would it be to any eye, to any heart, to behold things in Christ as
God beholds them there, or to behold things in God as Christ beholds them
there! He who once is led to this, will meet with true joy with Christ, with
true delight with God; he cannot forbear delighting himself in Christ with God,
nor from rejoicing continually with Christ before God.

Verse. 31. Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were
with the sons of men. Christ does only rejoice in God; but in every thing that
comes from God; as God does not only rejoice in Christ, but in every thing
that he brings forth through Christ. There is nothing displeases Christ in any
thing but its distance from God; There is nothing displeases God in any thing,
but its distance from Christ: They so entirely love one another that they care
not for beholding any thing, desire not to enjoy any thing, but in one another.

Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth. Heaven and Earth and all things
in both had a Being in God, a more complete substantial Being then this shadowy
Being wherein they are brought forth and outwardly appear: There Christ knew
them, there Christ rejoiced in them, from thence Christ brought them forth into
this state and kind of being wherein they are; thither will Christ bring them
back again, and rejoice in them again; alas, this present state is not a state
to be rejoiced in.

His Earth. The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; It is his own, it
came from him, it was framed by him, he made the matter of it, he formed and
shaped it, it was what it was by him, it is what it is according to his
pleasure and for him, it is subjected to weakness and vanity for his sake, and
he knows and owns it, in a way unknown to it, in the midst of all its weakness
and vanity. Man, if he be a little exalted, does presently despise that which
appears weak and beneath him: but God, who is mighty in strength and wisdom,
despises not: Job 36.5.

The habitable part of his Earth. In the Earth, in his Earth there are
habitable and inhabitable parts (this outward Fabric is a true draught of the
inward, though a dark and defaced one;) He changes it as he pleases, makes
it habitable or inhabitable as he pleases: but his work lies most still at
present in the habitable part; there he is most active, his glory is most sown
there, and most seen from thence, there Christ is at work with him, and
rejoicing in his work.

And my delights were with the sons of men. The sons of men are the chief part
in Gods Earth, even in the habitable part of it, according as they were brought
forth the chief part of this shadowy Earth, they have the special stamp and
Image of God upon them, the excellency and quintessence of the whole Creation
is contracted into them, the life and glory of God is sown in them, this the
soil for it to spring up in, grow in, discover it self in, this is his
Tabernacle, this is his holy Land, etc. and accordingly Christ's delights were
chiefly here, and my delights were with the sons of men.

Lo this is the Word, thus he was with God, and this was his employment in part.

And the Word was God. He was with God, and he was God. He was not with God as
a stranger, as a mere beholder of him and his works, as one at a great distance
from him, but as one with him. As God brought him forth out of himself, so he
brought him forth as himself, he brought forth himself in him; he brought forth
his own life, his own Wisdom, his own Power, his own Eternity, his own
Immortality, which remains the same now as it was before; it was God before,
and it is God still, it was God in it self, and it is God in him. Christ is but
God breathed out, and God is but Christ drawn in. He is the Image of the
invisible God, yet not a bare Image, but a living Image, an Image wherein the
whole portraiture and lineaments, yea the very life and substance of the
Godhead is engraven. Where ever God forms Christ he forms himself, for he is
but himself a little diversified, and that with the least distinction that may
be; it is himself in the first step of descent, it is himself in his first and
most immediate going forth, it is the primary and most perfect forming of God
(it is a Scripture Phrase, before me was no God formed.) God is formed in the
Creature, but it is very difficult to read him there, the likeness is so small,
the unlikeness so great: but it is easy to read him in Christ. He that beholds
Christ, cannot but behold God; He that understands and knows Christ, cannot but
know God: for there is nothing but God in him. He is the true draught of the
Godhead, he in whom God came forth, in whom God is, in whom God dwells, who
has filled every part of him with himself, who shines through him, and cannot
but be seen where he is seen. Christ is every thing that God is, is every where
where God is, does every thing that God does, All things were made by him; and
without him was not any thing made that was made: All things are ordered and
governed by him, he upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power: Hebr. 1.

The Word was God. Not his flesh, that is but his garment, it is no part of him
no more then our clothes are of us, only indeed in this respect it is somewhat
nearer, because he took it up as an everlasting garment. Our flesh is no part
of us, no part of the new-man, no part of Christ in us, it is but our garment;
and his flesh is but his garment, which he took up not for any need he had of
it, or from any love to it, but because he would be like us, and because he
found it somewhat advantageous to him to express his love to us, to perform
some offices of love for us in; because the children were partakers of flesh
and blood, he himself also took part of the same: Hebr. 2. The Word was made
flesh; He was made or became, he put himself into that appearance, he partook
of it with his Brethren, but it was no part of him, nor had no relation to him,
otherwise then as it was assumed by him. It is an imaginary description which
many give of Christ, that he is God in flesh, God in weakness: No, he is God in
strength, God in perfection; The Wisdom of God, the Power of God, the Arm of
the Lord wherein all his strength lies; the skill of God whereby he does every
thing (by him he made the Worlds;) the storehouse, the treasury wherein the
whole fullness of the Godhead is locked up and dwells in its own perfection. It
is true he was made flesh, he entered into a state of weakness, but what was he
who became flesh, who entered into this state of weakness? It was the Word, and
that Word was God.

O Man, Behold thy Savior, know thy life; do not despise Eternity because of
its appearing in and acting through mortality. This is he who came to redeem
thee, to be a propitiatory sacrifice for thee, and a pattern to thee. Art thou
able to measure God in any work of his through the Creature? Thou know thou
art nor; why then do thou measure him so confidently in his greatest work
through his Christ, even the work of Redemption, and so apparently contradict
him in it? He lays the stress on that Death of his Son which he underwent, when
he offered up himself in his Body on the Cross through the Eternal Spirit: Thou
slightest that, look upon it as nothing but a type, making the substance to
be the death of Christ in thee. Indeed it is a type, and the death of Christ in
thee is the substance of it, so far as it is a type of it: but is it no more
then a type? Was there nothing done but only a representation of what was to
be done in thee and in others? Search, read, see, consider what is spoken
concerning that once dying of his, by that one offering has he for ever
perfected them that are sanctified. Poor shallow Man cannot comprehend God or
any thing of God, he can see but one piece but one side or any of his works at
once, and in beholding and acknowledging that, he is still ready to contradict
the other which at that time he sees not. He who looks on Christ without, and
is taken up with beholding that death, little thinks he that he must feel the
same within, that he must be baptiz d with the same Baptism, that he must drink
of the same Cup. He who sees and feels that death within, finding the power,
efficacy and virtue of it there, presently inclines to slight the other, to
look upon it as a mere shadow; yet not as comprehending it, not as truly and
thoroughly knowing it, but as having lost the sight of it, by being taken up
with the sight and sense of what is wrought within: and so he passes
unrighteous judgment, undervaluing that which is the foundation of this, and
has the main influence into this, by virtue whereof this is wrought.

O vain Man, thou would fain be wise, though thou beeft born a wild Asses
Colt! Thou art still searching after knowledge, and erecting a fabric of
wisdom, though thou have no capacity in thee of receiving or entertaining
either. If God throw down the edifice of thy Religion about thine ears, thou
presently with thy wisdom wilt rear up another: When thou see thy self
impoverished by those ruins which he brings upon thee, thou immediately
returnest to build the desolate places. But what come all thy buildings to?
They are only permitted to be raised for greater throwings down: This wisdom
must not stand, nor any thing that it brings forth. O that thou could be
still, and that this might be thy wisdom! Cease measuring God and spiritual
things, till he give thee a measure wherewith to do it. When thou know
Christ the Wisdom of God, then shall thou know God; and when thou know God,
the Original of Christ, then shall thou know Christ, what God is in Christ,
what God has done by Christ: But if thou will be measuring the things or
actions of God by what thou feel in thy self, thou can not choose but miss,
and wilt be as much befooled herein, as thou see others to be in what they
have uncertainly received and held forth from an outward sight and knowledge.

Of the two Principles, Seeds or Creations, their different Natures, Motions,
and Ends.
THere are two Creations, made by one and the same workman, which have both of
them their several distinct Natures, Motions and Ends, according to their frame
and constitution, and are both excellent in their kind, and for that use to
which they were intended.

The one is weak, frail, perishing, made and appointed as a foyl to set off the
beauty, excellency and perfection of the other; (which if it were of the nature
of the other, it could not do, and so should lose its own proper excellency,
virtue and use: for the excellency of every thing lies in its own nature, and
in its suitableness by its nature to its end and use. If sin were not black in
its nature, vile in every motion, did not tend both in its nature and motions
to death and destruction, it were not excellent, it would be a dull tool
without an edg, which is no way lovely or commendable.)

The one has all manner of excellency in it, but appears weak, poor, low: The
other makes a great show of much worth, beauty, excellency, but is nothing but
emptiness and vanity at the bottom. The one spreads little, but has abundance
of life and strength at root: The other spreads abundantly, its branches,
leaves, fruit are very fair and flourishing, but it is putrified at the root.

These two have their distinct Natures, and accordingly their distinct motions
and ends, which they still retain in all the varieties and changes which they
are made to undergo.

Clothe the first Creation how you will, it is but still Earth; carry it
whither you will, mount it up to Heaven, it remains Earth there; let in what
glory can be let in upon it, it is still but Earth. The other, the second
Creation, lay it as low as you will, bring it down into the Earth, clothe it
with Earth, bury it in the very bowels of the Earth, it still retains its own
heavenly life and nature.

So for their Motions: They still move according to their Natures. Let Earth be
tried to the utmost, thoroughly frighted into Spirituality, driven to seek
shelter in the life and power of God to preserve it self from perishing, be put
upon moving toward God, toward Heaven; or it sees it is undone for ever; it
cannot for all this move spiritually, but will be like it self (though moving
to the utmost, yet) earthly in all these motions. On the other hand, Let the
spiritual Principle be thrust out of Heaven into the Earth, be shut up from all
spiritual life and motion there, have no happiness, peace, rest, content day
nor night, but what it can suck in from and through the Earth: alas! for all
this it cannot move earthlily, it cannot rest or take in delight from the
Earth; if it cannot find its own life it will refuse to live, it will choose
death rather then the life of the Earth.

And for their Ends, they are according to their Natures and Motions. The one
tends to Condemnation, to Death; the other to Justification, to Life. Involve
Earth, as much as may be, in Heaven, in Life; it will be sinking into Death and
Hell again: Bind Heaven, as much as may be, in the Grave, in Hell, its life
will be breaking all bonds, and mounting upwards, when its strength is grown it
will not be held back, but will return into its own Country and Inheritance.

These two, they differ in their seed or root, in their bulk or body, in their
branches, leaves, fruit; in their substance, virtue, quality, from their very
rise unto their very end in every thing.

The Scripture holds out this abundantly every where, testifying concerning two
distinct trees, trees of righteousness, trees of Gods planting, trees that grow
in his Garden, in his Vineyard, and trees of wickedness, wild Olives, wild
Vines, their Vine is the Vine of Sodom.

These Trees have distinct roots, of distinct natures, the one whereof is
earthly, of this Creation, and so weak and corrupt; the other is heavenly, of
the other Creation, of a nature more inward, strong and pure.

They have likewise distinct branches, leaves and fruit, which as each grow
from their own root, so they have their distinct virtue, keeping that nature
which they have from the root: The one is still sowing and bearing fruit to the
flesh, the other to the Spirit.

They have also (both the tree, leaf and fruit) their distinct shape and Image;
the one the Image of the earthly, the other the Image of the heavenly. There is
the Image of God, of Christ every where throughout the New Creation, in every
piece and parcel of it, in every motion of any part of it: The Faith, Love,
Hope, Joy, Peace, Humility, Patience, Praying, Waiting, etc. of the new man
have the Image of the Father and of Christ in them, whereas the best of these
in man and from man are but earthly.

And they have their distinct ends. The one, with all that comes from them,
with all that belongs to them, shall be cast into and perish in the fire, shall
be like chaff before the wind, tossed up and down by it, shall return from
whence they came, shall receive their death where they had their life: The
other shall only be purified in the fire from that which encumbereth it, and is
death unto it, and its end shall be rest and peace, Justification in it self
with all its ways and motions, and perfect union and communion with God, which
the other shall never be admitted unto. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the Spirit,
shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

They differ also in their circuit and course. The one begins in life, and ends
in death, begins in strength, and ends in weakness, begins in glory, and ends
in shame, begins in order, but ends in confusion: The other begins with death,
weakness, shame, confusion, but ends in perfect life, strength, glory, and
order. This Creation was brought forth in its perfection, it began gloriously,
but it withers and dies daily; its life, its glory is like a wind that passes
away and comes to nothing, for it returns not again: The other Creation is
but as seed sown in this Creation, which hardly appears to have any life or
excellency in it, and its growth is very weak and gradual, but withal it does
spring up, and will grow, until it arrive at Life and Perfection.

These two Principles, Seeds, Creations, the fleshly, the earthly, and the
spiritual and heavenly, are together, live together, move together in the
renewed man, and cannot perfectly be distinguished either in themselves or
motions. The spiritual Principle goes up and down through the Earth with the
earthly, extracting God out of every thing, and feeding upon God in every
thing, turning every thing into heavenliness, into spirituality, into life,
that it meets with. The earthly Principle goes up and down also into Heaven,
and among heavenly things, with the spiritual, with the heavenly, making them
earthly to it self, and feeding its earthliness with them, extracting Earth out
of Heaven, blowing upon, and tainting every spiritual excellency that it has
to do with. And these can neither of them have ease, rest or content, the one
being still disturbed by the other: Neither of them can move freely, nor enjoy
it self fully, because the other is still striving to move and enjoy it self
(as its nature still guides it) in that which is quite contrary. O how welcome
will a separation be to both! The one would leap into the fire to get rid of
the other, nay either would choose to live rather in the fire then with the
other.

The condemnation, which is to issue out upon the first Creation, is double,
(which may easily be discerned every where, in every thing, by him that can
read, it is so plainly written upon every thing.) One is, because of their
deviating from their state and kind, for falling short of that excellency which
is proper to them, and which they might attain in a far greater degree then
they do, for not being what they should and might be: Every seed has
degenerated from its kind, all flesh has corrupted its way before the Lord,
and so lies open to condemnation for its degeneration, for its corruption. The
other is in respect of their kind, which shall be made appear to be weak,
shallow, imperfect, and so not fit to be suffered to remain, but fit only to
make fuel for the fire against that great time of burning which is designed
concerning the Earth, and all the works therein, which must then be burnt up.
Such is all the righteousness and excellency of the Creature, and therefore
though it were as complete in any as it was in Adam, yet it must come under
condemnation: And though it should be justified in and according to its nature,
for being what, and acting according to what it was made; yet it should be
condemned for the weakness of its nature, as being but a shadow and Image
suited only to represent somewhat at present, but in no wise fit to abide.

There is answerably a double Justification of the second Creation: One in
respect of the excellency of its kind, the other is in its keeping to its kind,
it remaining still the same in all its motions, conditions, changes. As it came
forth pure from God, so it remains pure in it self, acts purely, and is
stripping it self daily of that filthy garment wherewith it is here clothed, as
fast as may be. He who has this seed in him (which seed has Faith and Hope,
and every spiritual thing in it) purifieth himself as he is pure from whom it
came. As he is pure who begat, so it is pure which is begotten by him, and
cannot but be contracting inwards, and purging it self from that impurity which
cleaves unto it by reason of its present affinity with flesh.

Of the New Birth, whence Faith and Love flows, and to which Redemption with
all the Privileges of it appertain: FROM JOH. 1. Verse. 13. Which were born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.


HEre is the New Birth distinguished from all other Births which bear any
resemblance to it, and by their similitude may happen to be taken for it.

There are three sorts of generations or ways of begetting men in Religion,
none of which are this Birth, nor can entitle to that Sonship, or those
Privileges which flow from this Birth, and belong to the Child thus born.

1. The first way of generation in Religion, is by Blood: So the blood of
Abraham running along in that line did convey Religion, or at least the
Privileges of that outward Religion which was established among the Jews: They
were free born, they were born under the Promises and Privileges belonging to
that Nation. They were not of the common sort of the world; but an holy, a
peculiar people, who were nigh unto God, to whom God was nigh; whereas the rest
of the world were aliens and strangers to him. He was their God so as he was
not to any else, and they were his people so as none else were: God was to take
care of them, their Posterity, their Land, every thing that belonged to them in
an especial manner; They were to serve and honor God in a peculiar way, so as
none else were appointed to do, and they might expect that acceptance with God
which none else could, though doing the same things.

2. A second way of generation in Religion, is by the fleshly will of man, by
the corrupted, depraved will of man, by the selfish desire of man, which
naturally enclines to propagate its own Principles, Party, and Interest. Thus
the Pharisees did beget or make Proselites, yea they compassed Sea and Land to
do it, as also the Sadduces; and so all sorts of Sects have ever been very
industrious to strengthen and increase their Party.

3. There is a third way of generation, and that is by the honest, plain,
simple, downright, ingenuous will of man, which for no by-ends, but merely in
reference to the good of man, desires and endeavors to change him from those
corrupt principles, which come into the world with all, and grow up in all,
into principles and practices of justice and order, of righteousness and love
both toward God and man. This is the will of man, of man so far as he is
undepraved, which naturally he enclines to, cannot but strive after, and be
very earnest to bring others unto also, as being very sensible that it tends
both to his and their happiness, whereas all other things tend apparently to
the misery and destruction of the creature. And herein lies the excellency of
man, this is the best he can desire or hope to attain, and a Birth to or in
this, is the best Birth that can be produced by him.

But this is not the new birth, this is not that which God calls Regeneration;
this is not the heir, but the son of the bondwoman, which shall never inherit;
this is but the fruit, but the offspring of the first Adam, which is of the
earth, earthly, not of the second Adam, which is the Lord from Heaven, heavenly
in himself, and begetting an heavenly nature.

All these come from man, the nature of man, the blood of man, the desire and
skill of man, the corruption of man, or at best the excellency of man: But the
Child here spoken of, the Child God delights in, the Child he will own as his
Son, is of his own Seed, is begotten by himself, is born of him. He is of the
Seed of Eternity, of Immortality, and therefore Eternity of right belongs to
him. He is the Child of God by a new Nature, by a new Life, he is the immediate
offspring of his own Son, formed by his own Spirit. But of God. This whole
Birth belongs to God.

1. It is he that sows this Seed in the heart, the seed of this Life, his own
Seed, the Seed wherein the very Godhead is contained, and which cannot but grow
up into God. God has his Power to generate, as well as man and the other
creatures, he has his Seed to sow as well as they, and his Seed does a truly
and fully contain his Nature, as their seed does theirs. He is the great Sower
that sows his own grain in his own Vineyard: He is the great Builder that lays
the foundation of his own House; He has begotten us again, etc.

2. It is he that quickens the Seed, and causes it to grow; And you has he
quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. He casts a vail of
death upon Eternity, upon Immortality for a season, he makes it, as it were,
to rot in the heart, that he may quicken it again, that he may cause it to grow
up in its own shape and fullness: And when it shoots forth, it is he that
causes it to thrive and flourish; Paul may plant, and Apollos water, but God
gives the increase; This Life flows only from God, and grows up only by
the breath of God.

3. He does this by his own Power, by his mighty Arm; He puts his whole
strength to it. It does not cost him nothing to sow this Seed, to beget this
Son, but it costs him the very Power and strength of the Godhead, even an
exceeding greatness of Power; he works with the very might of his Power when he
begets this Child, when he brings forth Faith in this Child, even with the very
same strain of strength that he exercised upon Christ, when he raised him from
the dead, and exalted him above all other power, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.

4. He does this also by his own Will. The other births are by the power of
man, by the will of man; this is as by the Power of God, so by the Will of God.
He is not at all moved to this by any thing in the creature, by any thing from
the creature, but merely by his own Will, of his own Will begat he us. He
sows his Seed according to his Nature, as other things do theirs according to
their nature.

Lo this is the New Birth. The Spirit breaths where he lists; No man knows
whence this breath comes, no man knows whither this breath goes, but it keeps
within its own Circuit, which is only known to it self: Thus is every one that
is born of God.

Of the Excellent Nature of this Birth, or of the Child thus begotten, thus
born: FROM JOH. 3. Verse. 6. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.


SPirit denotes excellency, purity, strength, durableness of nature; its
constitution is more excellent, more clear, more strong, more lasting, then
that of flesh. Flesh is weak, corrupt, fading, has little loveliness it, and
that loveliness quickly perishing, (the Egyptians are men, and not God, and
their horses flesh, and not Spirit:) Spirit is a sublime, an excellent kind of
nature, both in its inwardness, and in its outwardness; its way of Being, of
motion (either within or without) of generation, far exceeds that of flesh, and
so does the Child begotten this way; it is of the same nature with that which
begets it, That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. That which is begotten
by the Spirit is of a spiritual nature, of the same nature with himself, of the
very divine nature, who has made us partakers of the divine nature. He
observes the Law of Generation, which is to beget and increase his own nature
and kind, to multiply himself. So that this Child is divine, what ever is in
this Child, what ever flows from this Child cannot but be divine: its Faith,
its Love, its Hope, its Joy, its Meekness, Sweetness, Holiness, Righteousness,
are not such as grow in Natures garden, but in the Paradise of God, and from a
more inward and spiritual seed then is sown in nature. That which is born of
the flesh is flesh: All the excellency that man can attain to, all the Faith,
Hope, Love, Joy, etc. that man can have from any of the Births forementioned,
is but fleshly, but weak, corrupt, fading; but that which is born of the
Spirit, that which flows from this Life, that which grows out of this Seed, is
spiritual, and has the Spirit of Life, Eternity and Immortality in it.

The flesh profits nothing; Christ speaks that to persons who were bending
their whole strength to understand him, all this avails nothing: The greatest
fleshly desire moves not God, the greatest fleshly industry and endeavor
furthers not the creature. What ever is thus received, what ever is thus
understood, what ever is thus obtained, is but fleshly, and will not avail. All
the faith in God, all the love toward God, all the desire after God, or
delight in him, all the obedience unto God thus gained, thus put forth, has no
true life in it, and must needs wither, and come to nothing. The fleshly
understanding of any thing revealed by Christ is of no value; It is the Spirit
that quickens: It is the spiritual part in the Word, the spiritual part of
the Word engrafted by the Spirit in the heart, that quickens it at first, or
causes it afterward to thrive and grow.

This Child has a generosity, a nobility, an height, an aspiringness in him.
He can never rest out of his own Country, nor out of his own place of
habitation in his Country: He cannot endure to live beneath himself. He must
possess and enjoy God to the full, or he is not satisfied. He must live at the
full height of Majesty, Power, Greatness and Glory, or his Life does not please
him; he will hardly own it as Life till it arrive at that. It is the seed of
the Kingdom, and it will never leave shooting up till it grow into the Kingdom;
till all the Light, till all the Life, till all the Power, Glory, Greatness and
Majesty of God that was sown in it, spring up in it, flourish, and expatiate it
self to the full. And then when this Spirit comes to its full stature, when it
is so united to the Lord as to become perfectly one with that which begat it,
it will come to it self, be it self, and enjoy it self: Having attained to that
whereunto it was appointed, and to which its nature did aspire, and continually
reach toward, it will enter into perfect rest, into that rest which is
prepared for it only, and which it alone is capable of comprehending.

Of the Excellent Food, prepared for this New-born-Child, to nourish him, and
cause him to grow; FROM JOH. 6. Verse. 63. The Words that I speak unto you, they
are Spirit, and they are Life.


EVery thing that has life given it, has food likewise prepared for it to
nourish it, and cause it to grow. Man lives by bread, though not by bread only.
The New-Man has his bread also whereupon he lives. It is Christ in him that is
born who is the New-Man, and it is Christ that Christ feeds upon. Christ is the
Bread of Life, by eating and digesting whereof the New-Man increases his life.
He hangs upon the mouth of Christ (from whence he came) for the continuation
and growth of his life, it is his Word he feeds upon and lives by, it is the
nourishment by which he is sustained, and by which he grows in life, as
new-born-babes desire the sincere milk of the Word that ye may grow thereby. As
it was the Word, whereby he was begotten, of his own Will begat he us by the
Word of Truth: So it is the Word, whereby he lives. As he is born of water, so
he has water administered unto him to nourish him up to eternal life. As he is
formed of the flesh and blood of Christ, so he eats and drinks the flesh and
blood of Christ; and he that desires not this food, he that knows not how to
eat and digest this food, has no life (none of this life) in him. As it is by
sowing and quickening the seed of light, of life in us, that we come to live:
So it is by adding of the same light, of the same life unto us, that we come to
live more abundantly. The principle of this life is within, but the food it
gathers it receives from without, as every life else also does: Its Being, its
subsistence is from what God has formed in it, its life and growth is from
what God pleases to add unto it of the same nature and kind with it self;
from his food, which food is the Word of Christ.

Man has the Principle of Knowledge in him, but he is trained up by
Instruction, and learns no more but as he is taught, either by the dilating of
that Principle in himself, or from men: So is it with this new Nature; The
new-man learneth what it teaches him within, or what Christ teaches him from
without, from without in this sense; though his Teachings are inward. Christ
speaks within, but he speaks from without. He does not only draw forth that
life within, but from without he adds more life. As he does give out of himself
the seed and principle of life whereby he comes to be sown and grow up in
another, so he gives out of himself likewise that food, that virtue, that
nourishment whereby that life lives, thrives, flourishes. The Word of Christ
upon which the new-man feeds is without, is distinct from him (as our food is
from us) until it be eaten, concocted, distributed, and so made perfectly one
with him.

Christ is the Word of God, and Christ has his Word too. God teaches Christ,
Christ teaches us. God teaches Christ by writing his Nature in him; Christ
teaches us by writing his Nature in us. As there is the Nature of God in his
Word, so there is the Nature of Christ in his Word. As God teaches Christ by
opening his Life and Spirit in him: So Christ teaches us by opening his Life
and Spirit in us. God taught him by anointing him, and he teaches us by
anointing us; Ye have an anointing which teaches you all things. As Christ is
Life and Spirit, so he speaks nothing but what is living and spiritual, The
Words which I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life; and where
ever they enter they convey spirit and life. Indeed every one cannot receive
them, as these here could not, they thought to comprehend them by their natural
fleshly understanding, which is a principle beneath them, and cannot reach up
unto them. As well may a brute understand the wisdom the reason of the words of
a man, as a man understand the spiritual wisdom of the words of Christ. But
man's words may have reason in them, though the brute understand them not; and
Christ's words have spirit and life in them, though man perceive it not. Christ's
words are like unto him, truly spiritual and living, what ever they appear to
man. If he prescribe a way to man, it is a spiritual a living way; If he open
any thing of God, it is a true a spiritual opening; If he speak peace, it is
peace indeed: But there must be a principle within to receive this, or else it
falls to the ground.

There is a twofold Word of Christ; a generating, a creating Word, and a
fructifying Word. The former there needs no principle to receive, but there he
speaks life where there was no life; he only sends forth his voice, saying,
Let there be light, and there is light; Let there be life, and there is life.
But the fructifying the thriving Word only takes place where a principle of
life is first sown: That cannot be blessed with increase and multiplication,
which is not, which has not a Being. Quarrel not therefore, O Man, against the
Scriptures in this respect, because they speak not life to thee, that may be
because there is not life in thee, or at least that life at present may be so
nipped, that it may be altogether unable to go forth for or receive in its
sustenance.

The Words which I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life.

This food is spiritual food, living food, pure food, perfect food, eternal
food, food that never wastes, never corrupts, but abides the same for ever.
This seed, this child is spiritual, eternally living, and such is his food; it
grows up with him and in him to eternity; the water that I shall give him,
shall be in him a Well of water springing up to Eternal Life. It is food of a
quickening nature, comes from a quick and living Spirit, enters into a quick
and living spirit, is spiritual and living of its own nature. O how richly has
God prepared for thee, O Child of Eternity! He has sown his own life and
perfection in thee, he has reserved his own life and perfection for thee, and
he feeds thee with no less then life and perfection at present, only a little
prepared, a little qualified and corrected for the queasiness of thy stomach in
the state of thy weakness.

Some Properties which attend this New-born-Childe in his nonage, while he is
growing up to his inheritance; FROM MATTHEW. 5. Verse. 3, etc.
1. HE is poor in spirit, stripped of all his life, of all his beauty, of all his
excellency, of all his wisdom, of all his strength, of all his righteousness,
of all his holiness, of all his happiness; a piece of perfect weakness,
emptiness, vanity and misery. He is nothing, he can do nothing: He cannot pray,
he cannot believe, he cannot wait, he cannot hope, he cannot love, he cannot so
much as desire. Indeed when God breathes any of these into him, then he has
them; when God draws forth any of these in him, then he acts them; when God
lives in him, then he lives: but of himself he is nothing, knows nothing, can
do nothing. Other men can resist temptations, but he lies open to all evils:
Other men can conquer corruptions, but every thing is too strong for him: Other
men have a stock of duties, of mortification, of holiness; but he is poor:
Other men are strong, but he is weak: Other men cannot but trust God, love God,
live in and upon God; but he sees, he knows, he feels he can do none of them:
He has nothing of his own, nothing in his power, but is shut out of all the
possession and possibility of life in himself.

Behold a poor one indeed! There are none else so poor but they are rich in
themselves, rich in the esteem, thoughts and conceits of themselves: But this
Soul is emptyed within, as well as without; is stripped of his inside, as well as
of his outside; is made naked to purpose, his very spirit is unclothed, he has
nothing to cover, support or refresh himself even there.

2. He is of a mournful spirit, cannot but grieve at the sight and sense of
this poverty. As he is the truly poor one, so he is the truly afflicted one. As
this is the greatest, the deepest poverty; So it pincheth hardest, it causes
the greatest, the sharpest smart. It overwhelms his heart to see, how he is
fallen short of the glory of God; to find himself destitute of the life and
presence of God: He cannot rejoice while he wants him, who is the light of his
countenance. The Primitive Christians indeed had a taste of joy, but that was
from the riches which were then dispensed unto them, which did not long last;
They were poor outwardly, but rich toward God; as having nothing, but yet
possessing all in him: but this was no abiding state, the Bridegroom was soon
taken away, and ever since has been a time of mourning.

3. He is of a meek spirit: by being continually emptyed, broken and stripped, he
is made very meek. His haughtiness and roughness is tamed and subdued by his
constant sense of misery. He knows what it is to be miserable, to be subject to
vanity, to be destitute of the life and power of God. He has nothing in him to
lift up it self against any, to accuse any of. He can neither act roughly
toward others, nor oppose any rough actings toward him. He knows the meaning
of nothing, and so is silent and meek toward all and concerning all. He is not
a fretful outrageous mourner, but he bewails himself, and the sad condition of
all things with a meek broken spirit.

4. He is hungry and thirsty after Righteousness. He is very poor, altogether
stripped of them, yet not contented so to remain, but there is a great hunger and
thirst kindled in him after them. He feels the vanity and misery of
unrighteousness, and would fain be rid of it; he tastes the sweetness and
excellency of righteousness, and is very eager to be filled with it, to be
possessed of it, to have it brought forth in him. It is his own natural temper,
and he cannot rest until he return into the freedom and fullness of it; until he
find nothing but righteousness within, nothing but righteousness flowing
forth; perfect righteousness within, perfect righteousness flowing forth, even
the Righteousness of God himself communicated to him, living in him, and
displaying it self through him. When he is perfect as his heavenly Father is
perfect, then and not till then will he have enough.

5. He is very merciful, full of compassion, of bowels. Merciful to every
creature, merciful to all men, to their Bodies, Souls, to every thing that is
liable to suffer. He loves no cruelty, no oppression, but would fain have all
tendered, all pityed, all relieved. He is touched with every ones want, and
would fain have them supplied: He would not have the Bodies of men want food or
raiment; He would not have the Souls of men want God, the life of God,
satisfaction in and from God.

6. He is pure in heart. Though he is overspred and covered with abundance of
filth and impurity, yet the principle of life in him is pure, and incapable of
being tainted.

7. He is a peacemaker, does not love quarrels and contentions, but meekness
and quietness. There should be no fallings out, no jarrings between Creature
and Creature, or between God and Creature, if he could help it: and he is still
making peace so far as lies in his reach. He loves peace exceedingly, and
because of his abundant delight to reap it, he is ever sowing and cherishing
it. He is the very Image of his Father still moving and working toward
Reconciliation.

8. He is persecuted for righteousness sake, for that righteousness, sweetness,
meekness, etc. that God brings forth in him. There is no cause why he should
be persecuted, but yet he is persecuted, and this kind of temper lays him
open to persecution (the Dove-like Lamb-like spirit is a temptation to the
Hawk, to the Wolf.) Christ was persecuted for this very cause, and the same
spirit in the world that persecuted Christ will also be still persecuting such
as these upon the same ground, and speaking all manner of evil against them
falsely, for Christ's sake, because of their reference and likeness to Christ,
whom by a secret antipathy the spirit of the world (when most refined and
spiritualized) cannot but oppose. They cannot for shame (before men, and in
their own spirits) speak against these things in them, therefore they invent
lies and falsehoods, that they may represent them odious to men and their own
spirits thereby, and so more freely, without check of Conscience, persecute
them under color thereof.

But these, notwithstanding all their present miseries and hardships, though
they be looked upon as the scum and offscouring of the world, and so used by
the world, yet they are the blessed of God, of whom the world is not worthy. A
dram of their life is worth a thousand worlds. They are blessed in their
likeness unto Christ, blessed in their present communion with Christ, in their
fellowship in his death and sufferings, and shall appear to be blessed when
they are taken up into his glory, and come to inherit both God, Heaven and
Earth, in and with him; which he, who cannot lie, has promised them, and has
reserved for them, and which none shall ever come to partake of with them but
this way.

Of the Fathers care over this Child, and his readiness to provide for him
every thing he needs, FROM LUKE 11. Verse. 13. If ye then, being evil, know how
to give good gifts unto your Children: how much more shall your heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?


NAture, among other of her lessons, teaches Parents to be tender over their
Children, to give them what is for their good and not for their hurt. While
they are babes, unable to choose for themselves, they provide for them what they
know needful: when they grow up, and begin to feel what they want, they are
still ready to furnish them with those necessaries which Nature directs them
to seek to them for.

God has his Children, his Children need provision, and his Nature teaches
him to take care of them, to be tender toward them, as well as the nature of
man teaches him.

That which these children chiefly want is the Spirit of the Father, to live in
them, to dwell with them, to guide them, to enlighten them, to quicken them, to
comfort and refresh them. They came from this Spirit, and all their content
lies in union and communion with this Spirit, in the presence and power ot this
Spirit in them: He is their meat, their drink, their light, their life, their
strength, their clothes, their house, their inheritance, their way, their end,
their all. They are as it were at present severed from him, as the seed is from
the body; but they cannot be well till they return into him, and that which
they want in the mean time is him to enter into and dwell in them: And as they
grow up, to any distinct understanding of themselves and their state, they feel
this want, and are led by their nature to ask accordingly of their Father.

That which this Child begs is the Spirit, he cares not for any thing else. It
is that which his Soul, which every part of him wants; it is that which he
needs in every motion, in every condition: He cannot tell how to shift any
where, how to do any thing without this Spirit of life. There is no life more
vigorous then this when it lives in this Spirit, nor no life more flags without
it.

To them that ask him. This Child asks; it is natural to him to be asking what
he wants of the Father; He is taught to ask, and according to the nature and
degree of his want. And Oh how he begs for this Spirit, for this Holy Spirit.
He loathes the unclean spirit of the world, but he loves and longs for the pure
Spirit of the Father. His Nature is pure, and he loves purity: His Nature is
spirit, and he loves spirit; but not every spirit, but that spirit which is
suitable to his Nature, the Spirit which he himself came from, and for this he
cries and groans unto the Father night and day.

Now there seems to be a great hardness in God to part with this Spirit unto
them, which may be gathered out of this question here, and may be further
confirmed by their experience: for though they cry hard for him, they obtain
little of him; little of his presence, little of his power, little of his
comfort. They are ever and anon complaining that they have not sufficient of
him to rub on with. They do not only want the delight of his presence, but
they have hardly enough to keep life and soul together, hardly enough of Gods
Spirit to keep life in their spirits.

But for all this, there is a great propensity in God to furnish them with his
Spirit, with so much as their present state needs; though not with so much to
their sense, yet with so much to his knowledge: How much more shall your
heavenly Father, etc. He is not an heavenly Father for nothing, but is as ready
to give heavenly good things, as earthly Parents are to give earthly good
things. How much more? If your Nature, which is weak, derived, which came from
him, teach you to carry your selves thus toward your children; how much more
shall his Nature, which is strong, which is the Fountain of Strength and
Perfection, teach him to empty his Goodness into his Children according to
their need? If ye being evil know how to give good gifts, etc. If your nature
thus prevail to instruct you who are corrupted, and in whom it is corrupted;
how much more shall his pure, his heavenly, his incorruptible Nature teach him
tender-heartedness toward his Children? How much more shall it incline him to
give, not outward things, earthly things, but heavenly things, and that
heavenly thing which they all want, which is his own Spirit. Be silent, O
Sense, Be confounded, O Experience, who art still witnessing the contrary in
our spirits: We see not, we feel not, we taste not, we apprehend not God or any
of his Ways aright through thee.

A strange Occurrence, which may befall this Darling of God and of Christ, in
his pilgrimage and travel toward his native Country, hidden in a Parable, JOHN
Chap. 11.
IN which Parable there are several strange things, covertly held forth or
represented to that eye, which is taught and enabled to pierce into them under
a vail.

1. There is the sickness and death of one dearly beloved of Christ, he whom he
loved was sick: His love was so great to him, that he was known to be an
especial object of it. Christ, who cured others, had power enough to have
preserved him in health if he had pleased, or to have recovered him at a
distance; but for all Christ's Love and Power Lazarus falls sick, and his
sickness tends unto that which we count and call death.

2. The true causes of his death, which were, Christ's neglect, and an hidden
design of glory to God, and love to him. (I reckon not his sickness as any,
that was but an instrument, an engine, so inferior a cause as it deserves not
to come in number with these.)

First, Christ's neglect, and that was very great, Verse. 6. When he had heard
therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he
was. Though he had notice of it, and that in the most pathetical manner that
could be, the news was directed to his heart, and so directed as it might best
touch and wound his heart, Behold, he whom thou love is sick: There is one
whom thou have professed and born much love to, he now stands in need of thy
love, of the putting forth of thy love for his relief, he wants thy help,
behold he is sick. When he hears this, he stirs not one step, but stays still
where he was two days together, as if he would be sure to give him time enough
to dye.

Secondly, Another cause of his death was an hidden design of glory to God.
This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God: that the Son of God
might be glorified thereby, Verse. 4. I know the meaning of this sickness, it
shall not end in death, but that death it must lead to shall be as it were no
death, it shall be so soon and so powerfully swallowed up in life; But for the
glory of God, for the advancing of the glory of that Power and Love of his
which this shall occasion the putting forth and discovery of in his Son; that
the Son of God may be glorified thereby.

There was also a design of love to Lazarus; that he might gain a further
testimony, a further sight, a further experiment of the Love and Power of
Christ, that he might receive and enjoy a further degree of life from Christ.
God does not merely use us as Instruments for his own Glory, but he loves that
we should have a taste of that Glory he raises to himself out of us: He brings
us to sickness, to death, to destruction, not only to exercise his skill and
power in healing, in raising, in restoring us; but that he might also cause a
more sweet fresh health, a more precious flourishing life, a more pure perfect
Salvation to spring up out of that sickness, out of that death, out of the
ashes of that destruction.

There was another design yet in it, which had also an influence upon it, and
that was the confirmation of the Faith of the Disciples. So Verse. 14.15.
Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the
intent ye may believe. God had an intent, besides the glory of the Work, to
confirm the Faith of the Disciples. Miracles can neither work nor confirm
Faith, they cannot reach that Principle whence Faith springs and grows; but God
can either work or confirm faith by them. All the Miracles that ever Christ
wrought could not bring any one to believe, but they still ask for a sign,
these were not evidencing and convincing enough; but yet God made use of every
one of them when, and to whom, and as he pleased. He who has an eye may see
the Power of God in every thing, and may observe the several eminent putings
forth of it, and so be strengthened in his Faith toward him; but he who has
not this eye can only toss it up and down in his own uncertain reasonings, but
not spiritually discern it.

And I am glad for your sakes. He was not glad of Lazarus's sickness, of
Lazarus's misery, of Lazarus's death; but he was glad of the advantage it
yielded him to set forth God, the Glory of God, to make Lazarus taste of his
Love and his Power, to strengthen the Faith of his weak staggering Disciples,
in this respect he was glad of it. God delights not simply in misery, in death,
in destruction; but in that which he works by them, and out of them, which
could not so advantagiously any other way be brought forth and discovered as
through them.

3. There is the sad lamentation over dead Lazarus: The lamentation of the
Jews, of his kindred, of the Disciples; but especially the lamentation of
Martha and Mary is very observable, Verse. 21, and 32. Lord, if thou had been
here, my brother had not dyed. Wherein they secretly tax him for his neglect,
for his delay; as if they had said; Lord, we sent to thee soon enough, and if
thou had come, we had not now been thus mourning and weeping over our dead
brother, thou might easily have prevented all this if thou had pleased;
Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed. And this is the
language of the poor desolate Soul, of the poor dead spirit; Lord, if thou
had been here, my life had not gone out; If thou had stood by me, and stuck
to me, and put forth thy skill and power for me (as I thought thy love to me
would have enforced thee to do) I had never tasted this cup of desolation, this
cup of death. O it is the absence of Christ that kills the Soul, whose Life is
in his presence!

4. The unexpectedness of any restoration of him to life. The Disciples, it
never enters into their thoughts, but let us go and dye with him, V. 16. The
Jews wonder that Christ (loving him so well) did not preserve him from dying,
but never once thought of raising of restoring him to life, Verse. 37. Martha,
who seemed to be full of Faith in this very respect, Verse. 22. was so far from
it, that she even mocks at Christ that he should make any offer to go about it:
Verse. 39 Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he has been dead four days. If
thou had come sooner thou might have preserved him from death, but now it
is too late to think of any thing, he is not in a case now to be visited or
recovered, by this time he stinketh, what do thou mean to speak of taking
away the stone? Resurrection from death is very unexpected: He that is shut up
in the grave seems quite out of the capacity of life. In misery, in
affliction there may be hope of relief, but who can look for Redemption from
death, to be raised out of the grave? Alas, we little think ever to meet with
any such grave, much less to be redeemed from it! Christ was thy Type herein
(though somewhat more also:) Thou must taste of his Death, thou must into his
Grave, and lie there thy season, though the holy One in thee shall not see
corruption. Thy life shall not dye, shall not not there, it shall but sleep;
and when thou awakest, thou shall awake in his likeness, and live for ever. As
Christ was raised from the dead to dye no more, for death to have no more
dominion over him, so shall thou: Thou shall sit on the Throne with him; and
that life, which has been hitherto in weakness, in bonds, in slavery, in
misery, passing through and bearing the weight of death and destruction, shall
then reign, shall then enjoy it self in the Fountain from whence it did flow,
and where alone it can sweetly and perfectly live.

5. The great Love and Power Christ showed in recovering him to life. There was
great Love, which he variously expressed, both in disregarding himself and his
own safety in going thither, which his Disciples put him in mind of, verse. 8.
and in his behavior when he came there. His affection vented it self
exceedingly, so that the Jews could not but take notice of his great Love to
him, verse. 36. He groaned and troubled himself, verse. 33. He wept, verse. 35. It
went to his Heart, it melted his very Soul to see the condition of his beloved
one. O the various workings in the Heart of Christ! He can weep and rejoice
over the same thing: how sorrowful does he here express himself at that which
he told the Disciples he was glad of: It afflicts him to see his people in
misery, in perplexity, in the hands of death, and yet he rejoices to behold
what he means to work for his Father, himself and them out of it. He groans
again very deeply in himself, verse. 38. (He did not make a show of sorrow and
groaning, but it was inward, in his heart,) and he prays for him, and sets his
strength to deliver him; he both calls upon God for his strength, and puts
forth that strength of God that was in himself; He cried with a loud voice,
Lazarus, come forth, Verse. 43. He spoke with Life and Power mightily; He who
was the Resurrection and the Life, gave an evidence of it, for he spoke
Resurrection and Life with his lips; he sent forth his raising and living
Power, and it did raise and beget life.

This is the only way to cure such as enter into this state of death, into the
grave of Christ; they must be raised by the very same Power wherewith Christ
was raised; Nothing beneath that will avail to effect it; the death that binds
them, the grave that holds them under, will easily master any thing else. It is
not using of means that can relieve them, they are dead, they are beneath the
use of means, they have lost all life and knowledge in the grave, they know no
means, they can use no means, they can stir no way, they can move no more then
a dead man. Nor indeed are there any means appointed for them, or to be used by
them, Spiritual means are as improper, and will prove as ineffectual in this
state of spiritual death, as natural means would used toward a man naturally
dead. That Light, that Life, whereby they knew, whereby they acted, being dead
and buried, they cannot stir nor move, they are in no capacity either of
knowing, using, or receiving benefit from any means. That Eternal Life, Love,
Power that at first quickened them, that at first brought them forth, by whose
withdrawing from them, and leaving them for a season (as he had done Christ
before, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?) they were brought to this
state, must come again himself to the grave, and raise them up by the very same
Power of Life, if ever they live more.

Of the Relation between Christ and his, and the Hold they have of each other;
FROM JOH. 10. Verse. 14. I am the good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known
of mine.


HE is the Shepherd, they the Sheep; He the Father, they the Children; He the
King, they his Subjects; He the Head, they his Members; He and they together
make up one Church, one Body, one Christ. They have all the same Life in them,
he the same with them, they the same with him, and the same with one another;
but yet every member its different portion according to what it is, needs, and
is appointed to. (There is unity and variety every where, in every thing, in
every life, which true Light comprehends, but darkness confounds, and makes the
one swallow up the other.) Though they all make up one Christ, yet not one
Head, but he is the Savior of his Spouse, of his Body; he lays down his Life
for his Sheep; he begets them, renews them, washes them, sanctifies them. It is
true, they both came from one, and they are one, both he that sanctifies, and
they who are sanctified, are all of one: They came from the same Original, they
are of the same Nature, they have the same stamp upon them, there is the most
perfect Oneness between them that can be, (the very same that is between God
and Christ,) and yet there is also a difference. The whole body of man, or any
other creature, has the same flesh and blood, the same life, it is wholly of
the same substance and make, and yet there is a difference between one member
and another. The head is not the whole body, nor is it the hand, or foot, or
any other member of the body; nor is any other member, or part of the body, or
the body it self the head, nor ever can be according to the present
constitution of nature.

I am the good Shepherd. Christ had been speaking of three things in the
beginning of the Chapter: Of the door of the sheepfold, the Doorkeeper, and
the Shepherd. The first and the last he challenges to himself, I am the Door,
says he, verse. 9. I am the good Shepherd, says he here; and the second
belongs to him also, he is the Doorkeeper who opens and shuts the door.

1. Christ is the Door. There is a door at which Christ enters into us, and
that we are to open to Christ, Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any
man open to me, etc. and there is a Door at which we enter into the Father,
which Door is Christ. We are the Seed of the Father sown in a strange Land, and
we return by Christ unto our own home. There is no other Door but this to enter
into the Kingdom and Bosom of the Father by.

2. Christ is the Doorkeeper, he it is that opens this Door, and lets in the
Sheep at this Door; he has the Key of David, who opens, and none shuts, and
shuts, and none opens. He set the Door open to that Church, Rev. 3.8. He turns
the Key, and lets in the Soul into spiritual Light, Life and Truth: and he who
gets in by any other means, he who gets spiritual Mysteries opened to him
before Christ opens them, he comes not into them aright, nor will he be
advantaged in the life of his spirit thereby. That Truth alone will do us good,
which Christ by his Spirit opens to us, and leads us into.

3. He is the Shepherd, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, the Master-Shepherd.
He is the only Shepherd to the Universal Flock, that never had any Shepherd but
him: The Kings, the Priests, the Prophets of old, they were only typical
Shepherds to that typical Kingdom and People of Israel: The Officers of
Churches were only Shepherds to a few particular Congregations, some to one,
some to another: The Apostles rose a step higher, they were Shepherds over all
the Churches at that time in the World, though some of them had a more peculiar
charge over the Jews, as Peter; some a more peculiar charge over the Gentiles,
as Paul. But none of these were Master-Shepherds, but all under Christ as his
Servants. He is the only Shepherd of the Universal Flock, and the Head-Shepherd
of every little Flock; in whom all the Light and Life does dwell, and from whom
it does spring forth to them, who speaks in all other Shepherds, and to whom
the greatest Shepherds are but Sheep.

I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, (says Christ:) No man comes unto the
Father but by me. I am the spiritual Way, wherein I my self, and wherein all
spirits walk toward God: I am the Truth, the Light that leads all in this Way:
I am the Life that quickens and enables all to follow this Light in this Way.

I am the Way. It is by entering into me that a man enters into the Way, and by
walking in me a man walks in the Way. Out of Christ, and quite out of the way
to the Father: ever in Christ, and ever in the Way. Every branch that abides
in him is in the way of growing in the Light and Life of God, and of bringing
forth fruit unto God.

I am the Truth. It is in Christ we have the true Light, the Lord shall be a
Light unto thee: They are the spiritual Beams of Truth that flow from Christ
which only guide us to God. All the light of this world, all the light of
reason is but darkness, and leads a man further and further from the Father;
Christ is our Light when ever we are led to the Father.

I am the Life. All the quickenings and warmings we have any where but from
Christ, never lead us to God: it is only the Life of him in us that moves us
and guides us truly and aright to him. Every motion, but what we have from
Christ, is a dead motion, there is no true life in it: in him we live, and
move, and have our spiritual Being. We are out of the way, dark and dead
naturally, and all the helps of nature and art help but to lead us more out of
the way, to increase our wanderings, darkness and death upon us: God has made
Christ unto us our Way, and our Light, and our Life; when ever we come to the
Father we come in him as our Path, lighted by him who is that Truth that never
deceives, quickened and animated with him who is that Life that never fails.

I am the good Shepherd. He is not only a Shepherd, but the Shepherd, not only
the Shepherd, but the good Shepherd. He takes care of the Sheep, he makes a
Fold to keep the Sheep safe in, he looks to every one of the Sheep, ( he
calls his own Sheep by name, verse. 3.) he leads them out, he goes out
before them, chooses their pasture for them, has skill (and makes use of it)
to feed them, to water them, to preserve them, to cure them; he ventures his
Life for them, yea yields it up to rescue them, (Whom seek ye? I am he: if
therefore ye seek me, let these go their way:) A kind Shepherd, a loving
Shepherd, a faithful Shepherd, a tender Shepherd, the good Shepherd, I am the
good Shepherd.

And know my sheep. I know who they are, I know what they are; I know their
nature, I know their names, I know whence they came, I know their very
original, I know their present state, their present strength, their present
weakness; I can tell every one of them, both who they are, and where they are,
and what they are, and what they need; there is nothing can befall them, no
condition they can be led or driven into, but I understand it, and them in it.
It notes Christ's full understanding the state of his sheep, and his owning and
taking care of them in their several states; I know mine: yea the performing
every office of service and care that belongs to him concerning them in that
state, as if they be sick or weak or wandering, the Shepherd is then to express
special love and care toward them: The Shepherd is not to neglect or cast off
his sheep for any such thing, as one who knows not their weakness, their
foolishness, their proneness to run astray, their liableness to diseases, etc.
but to be the more tender over them, to take the more pains about them, to
watch them so much the more narrowly, to guard them so much the more safely.
Christ will not suffer any of his sheep to miscarry, of those which thou have
given me, I have lost none. And know my sheep: Christ knows his sheep as part
of himself (as of the same nature and life with himself) knows how to love and
cherish them as himself, yea can neglect himself, his own ease and liberty, yea
his very life for their sakes.

And am known of mine. As Christ knows his sheep, so his sheep know him: He
knows them as his sheep, and they know him as their Shepherd: The derived light
and life in them knows that original light in him from whence it came. Hence it
is that they cannot but own and submit to him. They hear his voice, they
folfollow him, they will not so much as harken to the voice of strangers: Let
another come with never so much learning, with never so much skill, with never
so much light, with never so high and mysterious openings of spiritual things,
they know him not, they cannot receive any thing from him. It is the goat the
stranger in us that hears the voice of a stranger, but the sheep never hears
any voice but the voice of Christ. It knows none but him, and it knows him very
well, and will hear him in every thing he speaks, will follow him any
whither, will take any food any Physique from him, will yield it self up to him
to deal as he will with it in any distemper which it is obnoxious to. These
sheep are ever satisfied while they are under the eye and in the hands of this
Shepherd: They like every thing he makes use of toward them; They like his
crook whereby he gathers them in when he sees good unto himself, they like the
very rod wherewith he smites them, they know him so well; the sight the
thoughts of them, his use of them is a refreshment to them, thy rod and thy
staff comfort me: Psalm. 23.4.

This knowledge between Christ and them is just such a knowledge as is between
the Father and him, as it is illustrated in the next verse of this Chapter. It
arises from such an union, it is heightened by such a communion, nay it is such
a kind of knowledge for nature: We know Christ by proceeding from him, and by
lying in his bosom, and by his opening his secrets to us; Thus Christ comes to
know the Father, and thus we come to know Christ. There is the most intimate,
the most clear, the most full acquaintance between the Father and Christ that
can be: Christ knows the Father as one with him, as he in whom the Father is
written and brought forth. Christ speaks much of his knowing the Father, what
is it? It is a knowledge that arises from the same nature: by the communication
of the same nature unto him, he has his capacity and comprehension of it: by
the full revelation of the Father in him he has his light, and by lying in the
bosom of the Father he has the full use of his light to see with. There is a
kind of knowledge between Creatures of the same nature, and the nearer they are
in the line of blood, the better they know one another: There is none comes
between the Father and the Son, they know one another indeed. The first act of
the Fathers knowledge passed upon the Son, and the first act of the Sons
knowledge passed upon the Father, and there it is fullest and strongest. God
knew the Son first, and all for his sake; Christ knew the Father first, and all
for his sake: Their knowledge is concentred in each other, there they fix it,
there they make use of it, there they delight in it.

Just such a knowledge, as this, is there between Christ and his sheep. Christ
knows them as those he himself has begotten, as those whom he has breathed
the Image of the Father into, as those that were taken out of him, as his wife
formed out of his own side (as Eve was out of Adams:) They know Christ as the
everlasting Father, as the Fountain of their life, as their only Lord and
Shepherd. And therefore it is the first and most natural act of the Soul, so
soon as it is begotten and born, to believe on Christ, to love Christ, to hope
in Christ: So soon as ever it opens its eyes and sees, it sees Christ the
original of its own life; and it clings unto him; all its motions are goings
forth of it self toward him, and receiving and letting him into it self: It
cannot live further then it enters into Christ, or then Christ enters into it;
this is its proper element where it only can rest and delight it self. As
Christ did hang on the Father from that knowledge he had of him, and the Father
did continually communicate himself to Christ by that knowledge he had of him:
So Christ's sheep presently hang on him as their Shepherd so soon as they are
made sheep, and he naturally takes care of them as the Father does of him.
Look after what manner, and upon what grounds the Father and Christ know one
another, and what the effects of this knowledge are; just such a knowledge, and
such effects of knowledge shall you find between Christ and his sheep.

Knowledge is the acquaintance persons have one with another, their
comprehending of one another in the same light wherein they are and live;
wherein they understand the dispositions, the ways, the counsels of one
another: God is said not to know wicked men, because he holds no acquaintance
no correspondence with them; but he knows Christ, he holds intimate
acquaintance and correspondence with him, he lets him see what ever is in him,
and what ever he intends to do: and so Christ also advises with his Father
about every thing, desires to hide nothing from the Father, desires to know
nothing but from, in and with the Father. Such an acquaintance is there between
Christ and his: Christ opens his excellencies and the mysteries of his ways to
them, and they open their hearts and thoughts and burdens and every thing to
Christ; it is a knowledge accompanied with and begetting the most intimate
familiarity, the most mutual communion, delight and confidence.

And this knowledge only is certain; all other knowledge, all from without, all
from within that is any other ways received then from the lips of Christ, is
but a lie, and cannot but deceive. We know Truth by knowing Christ, and it is
in and from Christ that we know it. Christ's sheep cannot take up truth at any
time when it is held out, nor from any hand, but only when they see Christ
going before them: Though they see Truth to be their food, yet they desire it
not, they meddle not with it, but when their Shepherd picks it out for them and
as he distributes it to them. It is the subtilty of the Devil to be beforehand
with Truth, to hold it out first on his false grounds and principles, that
afterward by felling them he may supplant the Truth it self, when Christ comes
to hold it forth: And though other persons may take up Truth thus held forth
(by drinking in the outward notion) yet they cannot. They do not know this
kind of voice, they are not used to receive things thus from principles, or
from the light of Reason, after the manner of men; but when Christ leads them
by his Spirit, when he thus speaks to them, they know his voice and follow him.
They regard not what Creatures speak in or through the Creation; They regard
not what spiritual men speak of God or Christ, or any other spiritual thing;
They regard not what is spoken within them (they know the root of vanity and
deceit is deep within:) But what Christ speaks either from within or from
without is exceeding welcome to them, when he opens that ear and that heart
that can hear and know his voice. And this is their kind of knowledge, which
having once tasted of they are not able to relish any other: Christ relisheth
no other knowledge in them, nor do they relish any other knowledge in themselves.
When this is at any time darkened, hid or buried from them or within them,
though they have never so much left of that which men call knowledge, yet they
cannot look upon it or own it as knowledge. Such kind of knowledge is not
knowledge with them, is not their knowledge, they have neither interest nor
delight in it. As Christ knows them by his own light, by his own knowledge, by
the knowledge of his own divine spiritual Nature, so they know Christ and
spiritual things by the same light, by the same nature, with the same knowledge:
He has the peculiar knowledge of such a Shepherd as he is, and they have the
peculiar knowledge of such sheep as they are. Their relation is distinct,
different from any relation in this world, of another nature and kind, their
union is such an union as is not to be found here below, and such is their
knowledge and communion; I am the good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known
of mine.

Of the New Covenant: FROM HEBR. 8.10, 11, 12. For this is the Covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord: I will put
my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them
a God, and they shall be to me a People.

And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord: For all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.

For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their
iniquities will I remember no more.


A Covenant with us is that agreement which is concluded of between man and
man, between two several parties: It contains in it the agreement between them,
and the terms of the agreement. This is sown every where in every thing
throughout the whole Creation, and in all affairs and transactions there may be
seen and read the force and virtue of a Covenant, written either in open
letters or secret characters. Every union every relation contains a Covenant in
it, the bounds whereof makes the union and relation sweet, but beyond those
limits it is very bitter. And O how sweetly things go between God and his
people within the bounds of his Covenant, but he who passes those limits shall
find it an evil and a very bitter thing.

God has two seeds to sow and cause to grow up, two earths or wives to
conceive and bring forth children to him from the seeds sown in their wombs;
and he has two Covenants, wherein are his terms of agreement (and theirs too,
for each sort readily by their very nature desire, and cannot but assent to the
terms of each Covenant) how far, in what respect and upon what ground he will
own them as his, be with them, be what they desire unto them.

Now as these seeds were in several seasons to be brought forth and appear; So
were these wives to be taken and owned, and accordingly were the Covenants to
appear, in which respect the one is said to be old the other new, verse. 13.
When God speaks to us, he speaks in a language suitable to us, and suitable to
so much of his mind as he intends to express, whereas those very things he
speaks to us he can represent, open and call otherwise. He can call that old
which he tells us is new, and that new which he tells us is old, yea and he can
confound this language also and bring them both to an equality in this respect.

There never was any deep, any wise understanding of God, nor ever can be, till
the great depths of the Godhead are broken up; till then God can and may hide
himself in his whole Being, in every motion, in every thought of his heart, in
every word of his mouth. He may speak what he pleases; He may speak one thing
now, and in the very next breath speak clean contrary to what he spoke before,
and make both good, and yet make him a liar that spoke either from him, or
pretended to understand him in either. He can call the same thing old that he
calls new, and the same thing new that he calls old. He can call this a new
Covenant, and if thou think to understand him and speak the same thing with
him, he can tell thee thou art a liar, and call it an old Covenant: If thou will fall in with him here and say with him it is old, he can confound thee here
also and say it is both new and old: If thou think thou can comprehend him
in this, he can confound thee yet again and say it is neither new nor old: If
thou will yet be wise and understand both how it is new and how it is old, and
how neither new nor old, he can and will confound thee again and show thee that
thou art now the greatest fool of all. That very understanding which was made
by the Lord, enlightened by him, made wise to know him, must be darkened and
confounded again. A deep wise man can order his words so as others shall think
they know him by them, yet shall not, but he alone understand and comprehend
himself: When he will he can open himself to the understanding of the meanest,
and when he will he can hide himself from the understanding of the deepest: He
can open himself in his deepest mysteries, and he can hide himself in his
plainest conceptions of things; and this is an excellent piece of skill to be
able to open and hide as one pleases. Will thou deny to God this skill, O Man?
Or if he have it, will thou deny him liberty to make use of it? Will thou say,
that if he speak to thee, he must speak to thee so as thou may understand
him? Or if he speak that which seems plain to thy Reason, will thou presently
conclude that thou do see and understand him? O the boldness of man who will
be measuring the mind of God in his words, and say thus far must his meaning
go and no further! To what an height does every sort of men raise their own
Babylon (some out of the Scriptures, some out of inward Revelations)
comprehending God, Christ, Life, Blessedness within their line! But the
building does no where come to perfection, nor ever shall; for before it does
or can, confusion shall overtake it, and the City alone shall stand whose
builder and maker is God. That which God speaks shall stand for Truth only as
he opens, and only so far as he opens it: and man shall one day see (let him
be as confident now as he will) that he never understood one jot or tittle of
God in the plainest thing that ever he did or spoke.

Verse. 10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,
after those days, says the Lord:

There is a Covenant to be made, to be established between God and his People,
which has not been as yet. I will make, but I have not yet made. The seed are
to be brought forth, but they have not as yet been brought forth; and the
Covenant is to be made and set up, but has not as yet been made and set up.
There is a Covenant that has been already made, an old Covenant, a Covenant of
works, of labor and toil, of bondage, slavery, misery, wrath, death: And there
is a Covenant to be made, a new Covenant, a Covenant of Rest, of Liberty, of
Love, of Life and Peace evermore; (God has his several sorts of things to
bring forth and set in an excellent order one by another.) And this is it, it
contains this in it, this is the description of it which here follows, this is
the Covenant that I will make.

With the house of Israel. What is here meant by the house of Israel, whether
the natural seed of Abraham, (which were so in one sense) or the spiritual seed
of Christ, (which were so in another sense) or both, (for though they have
hitherto been separated, yet the shadow and the substance may one day be
gathered into one) I shall not now declare.

After those days says the Lord. After the days of their visitation
destruction and desolation shall be ended, after he has plucked up both the
natural seed and the spiritual seed, and has done breaking down destroying and
afflicting them, after that then will he begin to raise them up, to build and
to plant them, Jer. 31.28. And when the time of restitution, when the time of
refreshing, when the time of this seeds springing up anew (with its
new-purified life) comes, then shall this new Covenant appear, then will I make
this Covenant with them, says the Lord.

I will put my Laws into their mind. Their mind.

The mind is the inward part of the man, the understanding part wherein the
light of the man lies: it is that wherein the principles of light or darkness,
of life or death are sown. The constitution of man, the state of man is
according to his mind, the changes wrought in man one way or other is by an
efficacy upon his mind; the mind being changed the man is changed, otherwise
not; Man would in all changes remain the same, if his mind were not changed.

My Laws. Laws are Rules of Government. In every Kingdom, City, Society there
are or at least should be Laws for the ordering and governing of them: God has
his Laws, which are his Rules, whereby he would have both the mind and the
body, the inward and outward man guided in every thing. A Law is a Rule for
such or such an action: God has his rules for every action; for every action
of worship, of obedience, for the whole course and conversation, and those that
do not obey him are called unruly men, sons of Belial, that come not under his
yoke. He has his Laws for us in every condition, for every motion in every
condition, what we should turn from, what we should turn toward, how, in what
degree, by what light, by what power, etc.

I will put my Laws into their minds. I will put, or I will give; I will bestow
them upon the mind for a gift. I will dip their minds into my Laws, or I will
put my Laws within their minds: My Laws shall be the quality or qualification
of their minds, I will make their minds savor and relish of all my Laws; it
shall be the Ark to keep them in, that they shall not be to seek when they
should come to obey them, and guide their actions by them, for they shall lie
within their understanding; They shall not need to say, Who shall go up to
Heaven to bring the Will of God down to us? but they shall find his Will (their
Rule) in their own minds. I will put my Laws into their minds.

And write them in their hearts. The heart is the seat, the fountain of life
and motion; the inward principle of life is there: It is the place where life
dwells, and whence life goes forth into the whole man, and every motion and
action of the man. Writing notes a solemn putting in, a clear putting in, a
durable putting in; it expresses somewhat more to us then the former phrase:
The other was given as it were by word of mouth, this by writing, which remains
in the heart, that the heart may have recourse to it continually, nay it is
written in and upon the heart, that the heart cannot choose but know it, that if
the light of the understanding should at any time fail, yet the holy
inclination of the will should preserve it pure. And write them in their
hearts: He will not only put them into their mind, that they may have a force
upon their reason and understanding, but he will make them take a deep
impression upon their hearts too, he will write them there.

There are two things make men miscarry; the darkness of their understandings,
and the perverseness of their wills. God undertakes to heal both in this New
Covenant: He will put his Laws into their mind to be a Light there, and he will
write them in their hearts to be a Guide there, to have the first motion in,
and upon, and from the principle of life, so that the heart shall never move,
but it shall have the tincture and force of the Law going forth in it. Though a
man should have the Law put into his mind, and know clearly what the will of
God is; yet his heart may stand at a distance from it. (It is one thing to make
a man know the will of God, and another thing to incline his will to it.) The
heart will not always follow the law of the understanding, but sometimes
observes the rule of its own crookedness; therefore God will rectify that too,
that it shall not have a crooked Law within in it self, but a right Rule to
guide it by; that whatsoever the will and affections incline to shall be
suitable to the Law: that as now the heart closes with nothing but what is
suitable to its own perverseness, because the Law of Sin is written there; so
then the heart shall incline to nothing but what is suitable to Gods Holiness,
because the Law of his Life is written there.

Christ still complains of the heart, and tells us that out of the heart
proceeds all evil, there lies the root and strength of our disease: Our
understandings indeed are bad, but our hearts are worse. Now God, intending to
cure us by this New Covenant, does not only take order about the understanding,
but especially about the heart; I will put my Laws into their mind, and in
their hearts will I write them, as the words may somewhat more forcibly and
significantly be rendered.

And I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.

This phrase is very full, denoting not only the Relation, but also the filling
up of the Relation between God and his People on both sides. He does not say, I
will be their God, and they shall be my People, for so God always was, even in
the time of his greatest estrangedness from them; and so they always were, even
in their greatest bondage and captivity: but I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a People. I will become a God to them, and they shall become a
people to me: I will act toward them as their God, and they shall act toward
me as my people: I and they will both walk answerably to the relation that is
between us: I will walk toward them just as a God should toward his people,
and they shall walk toward me just as a people should toward their God: When
this Covenant comes to take place, their own hearts shall feel, and all that
look upon our mutual walking shall know, that I am their God, and they my
people. There shall no fault be to be found in either of our carriages toward
the other, but in every thing I will (as becomes me) be to them a God, and they
shall in every thing (as it behooves them also) be to me a people.

I will be to them a God. To be a God implies two things.

1. To be full of all things, to be the Fountain of Fullness, to be and enjoy
every thing (the Perfection of every thing) in himself. They are degrees of
wisdom, power, holiness, goodness, etc. that are communicated to creatures, but
the Fullness of these is proper to God: He is the Fountain whence all these
issue; he is the great Sea out of which all waters flow, into which they
return, and in which they live their own life: It Is a weak, a creaturely life
they enjoy in their going forth, it is a true, a full, a perfect Life they
enjoy in their return.

2. To take care of all things. God is the great Owner of all, to him it
properly belongs to take care of all. The Heathen, when they make gods, they
attribute and commit to them the care of themselves, and of every thing. Care,
it belongs to the Master of the Family, to the Head, to the Governor. The care
of all things lies upon God, it belongs to his place, it is proper to him, it
is his due, yea (let me speak a little freely) it is his duty, it is that which
he owes to every thing that came from him.

Now God will be a God to them, that is. First, He will be Fullness to them, he
will be the Fountain of all Perfection in them, he will lay out all his Wisdom,
Goodness, Power and Love for them. He will not only be their God, in giving
them a right to these, an interest in these; but he will be a God to them in
employing and improving these for them, that they shall have as great a share
in them, and as great a freedom in the use of them, as any man can have in that
that is his most proper possession: that as God is a God to himself, still
laying out his Wisdom, Power, etc. for himself; so he will be a God to them, he
will never spare any of them when they have occasion to use them; they shall
have as free and as full use of every thing he has, as he himself has: The same
Fullness that dwells in himself, and is enjoyed by himself, shall dwell in them,
and be enjoyed by them: What he is in himself, he will be in them and to them.
I will be to them a God.

And then secondly, God will be a God to them in his care over them. He will
take as exact care of them as a Master does of his family, as a King does of
his people, yea as he does of himself, and what belongs to himself. As he
takes care of himself, of his own Glory, that it be preserved and flourish, so
will he take care of them in every respect; of their standing, growing,
thriving, etc. that nothing hurt them, that every thing advance their
happiness: And well he may, for they are himself, the children that came out of
his own loins, the Wife that came out of his own side; they were one at first
in the straitest union and conjunction, they are one still even as much as ever
they were, (their present separation does but hide, not destroy their union,)
and they must appear to be one again. Indeed he is a God to them at present, he
takes care of them at present, his eye is continually upon them, and his heart
with them in all their bondage and captivities; but he is not so a God to them
as he will be when he brings them forth as his people under this Covenant. And
well may he forbear appearing thus a God to them, for he does not yet so appear
a God to himself, but his own Name, Glory and Excellencies go to wrack and
ruin.

And they shall be to me a people. Not only Gods people, (so they are where
ever they are, and in what state and condition soever,) but a people to him, a
people that walks every way like his people, children that will not lie and
deceive in that relation which they pretend to stand and act in.

There are two things which a people stand indebted to God in, Love and
Obedience, in neither of which shall they fall short.

God loves his people entirely, and he cannot be satisfied unless they love him
again: ye know, it goes to our hearts to have no returns of love from them on
whom we bestow all our affection. It is Gods great desire, to have a people
that may love him, that may receive and answer all his Love: When he chose the
Jews, this was the main thing he looked for from them, viz. Love in that way
wherein he loved them, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart. As
it is Gods Love makes him choose a people, so it is their love he does it for,
that the same Love may have free scope between them. The end of this Covenant
being to engage hearts together, Love is a necessary fruit on both sides. It is
the root, the main ingredient and the fruit on both sides. That from or out of
which the Covenant grows is Love, that which makes up the Covenant is Love,
that which sprouts out of the Covenant is Love. Because God loves his people,
therefore he makes this Covenant with them, that which he makes this Covenant
up of is his own Love, and as it contains his Love, so it is continually
emptying it into them: and they fall in with this Covenant from the same Love,
that they might have the same way, and the same advantage of emptying their
Love into him. And Obedience is necessary to testify the truth of Love: If ye
love me, keep my Commandments: Thou shall love the Lord, and keep all his
Statutes, he prescribes the Law of Obedience immediately after the Command of
loving him. As God must perfectly write his Law in their hearts, or he cannot
fully testify his Love: So they must perfectly obey every tittle, or they
cannot fully testify their love. Now the people of God shall fail neither in
Love nor Obedience to him when he comes to set up this Covenant among them; but
they shall love him as much as he desires to be loved, and obey him as much as
he desires to be obeyed; they shall be to him a people, he shall have every
thing fully from them that he can expect from a people.

And so by this means, by this Covenant will he amend both those faults which
he excepted against in the former Covenant, verse. 9. God disliked that
Covenant, but why? There are two Reasons rendered in that 9. verse. The one was,
because they continued not in it; The other was, because God was not
sufficiently engaged by it to respect them. Neither God nor they were bound
close enough to one another in that Covenant, the bonds were not strait enough
for either, but they were able to start from God notwithstanding the Covenant;
and God was left at liberty too, he could slip loose from them for all this
Covenant: Notwithstanding the bond of this Covenant, he regarded them not, he
did not look upon them as his people, and so on himself as their God, to take
care of them as of his people, but let enemies loose upon them, scattered them
up and down, become of them what would he cared not, I regarded them not, says
the Lord. But now in this Covenant God undertakes, and has so framed it, that
he will be sure to mend both those faults; it shall so bind him and his people
together, that neither shall be able to start one hairs breadth from the other,
but when they once meet they shall ever remain together in perfect Life and
Love; He will be to them a God, and they shall be to him a people.

Verse. 11. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the
greatest.

The happiness, the perfection of the creature consists in the knowledge of God.
A man might be any thing, do any thing, have any thing, enjoy any thing, if he
knew but God: If he had but the Light of God, he could not but have the Life of
God also, for the Life lies in it; This is life Eternal, to know thee the only
true God. If a man were in the light, as he is in the light, he could not but
walk in the light with him. This is the great misery of the Creation, God is
shut up from it, and it is shut out from God; and there is nothing but
emptiness, vanity and misery to be met with, while God remains unknown.

Man's excellency lies in knowledge. Wherein does man excel the other creatures,
but in his knowledge? The light of this world the creatures have in common with
him, but not the light of his mind. Wherein does one man excel another, but in
knowledge? He that knows much in any kind, excels others in that kind who fall
short of him in that knowledge. He that knows most (most certainly, most
clearly, most fully) in the deepest kind of knowledge, excels all others.

The proper object of knowledge is God; there is nothing else worth knowing; the
knowledge of any thing else begets and increases misery. And there is but one
kind of knowledge of God neither that tends toward happiness, and that is that
knowledge of himself which he gives out to his people in his own Light: all
other knowledge is death, and carries destruction in the bowels of it. The
knowledge of God as it springs up in the creature destroys the creature, that
life it seems to feed and nourish it does but fatten for destruction, and so
moves toward destruction even therein; that knowledge alone preserves the
creature, which comes immediately from God into the creature, and carries the
creature out of it self into God, where it lodges and lives save.

The knowledge of God (since the broken, dark state of man) comes by teaching,
by such a Ministry and Ministration as God pleases to set up among his people,
who are the persons he alone picks out to know, and to make himself known unto.
The Law was given to the Jews by Moses, and he and Aaron (the Priests and the
Prophets) were still to open the Law unto them, and to teach them to know God
by it; The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law
at his mouth. Men were also to teach one another according to the light they
had, according to the relation they stood in, according to the conveniences
and opportunities that were cut out unto them for the instruction and
exhortation of one another: Thus every man was to teach his neighbor, and every
man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; This is your life, this is your
happiness, this is that ye were chosen by him for, to be his people, to be
acquainted with him, to understand his mind, therefore what ever ye do look to
it, make it your main business to know the Lord. So in the times of the
Apostles there was the same way of teaching, we shall find men there likewise
communicating the knowledge of God to one another, and pressing them earnestly
to receive and retain this knowledge, (there was a tang of somewhat further, but
it was neither universal, full, nor lasting.)

But now when this Covenant comes to be set up there shall need no more of this
teaching, this teaching shall continue no longer: God will so himself diffuse
the knowledge of himself into every one, according to what they need, and can
hold, that none shall need to look abroad for it. Every one shall drink water
out of their own Cistern, or rather out of their own Fountain, for all shall
know me. There shall not remain one, among the whole people of God, ignorant of
God; there shall not any one need any other teaching, or be taught any other
ways then as the anointing teaches him.

From the least to the greatest. God produces every thing in great variety.
There are smaller and greater in every sort of creatures: Though they are much
one, yet they differ much also. They differ in their shape, in their dimension,
in beauty, virtue, strength and spirit; some are of mean low spirits, others of
high, noble, excellent spirits. So is it in his Seed. In the natural seed, the
Jews, there was a difference, both in the Tribes, and in the Families, and in
the particular persons in each Tribe and Family: And as there were many other
differences, so there was particularly this in respect of the knowledge of God,
some having much knowledge of the Law, others little, some none at all. So in
the spiritual Seed, there are little ones (babes in Christ) young men, old men,
experienced men, strong men, men strong in Faith, in Love, in the Life and
Power of God, etc.

But this was the common way of all their learning, viz. by teaching one
another. Indeed the Apostles were not taught by men, but immediately by God,
but that was not usual, it was in reference to their particular work, but the
Churches were taught by one another, by the Officers, and by the Brethren in
them: So that this has been the common way hitherto. But, when this Covenant
is set up in full force, every one shall be taught by the Lord, all thy
children shall be taught of God, and so taught, that every one shall know God.
Man can but lay, what he teaches, before the understanding; but God can infuse
it into the heart, he can presently leaven the heart with it; when he teaches
there is none shall avoid learning, but they shall all know the Lord, from the
least to the greatest: They shall all learn of him, and they shall all learn
him, from the very least to the greatest. The hardest lesson that is (for there
is nothing harder then to know God) God will teach his meanest scholar. God
will not have any blockhead or dullard in his School, but the least there shall
be able to comprehend himself. From the least to the greatest: He that is
least, he that has least, yet he shall not receive it from others, but from
God: He that has least light, least life, shall have that he has pure from the
Fountain. The least of his he will teach, and the very least thing that is to
be taught them, he himself will teach them. He will suffer none to teach his
but himself; indeed the least thing that can be known cannot thus be taught by
any but himself. And he that is greatest, fullest, who had need have much to
fill him, yet shall not draw one jot of it from any Cistern, but all from the
living God. The greatest in the Life, Liberty and Power of God, he will teach
yet further; the least he will teach sufficiently; he will teach every one from
the very beginning to the end of all his School; and he will teach every one
effectually, so as they shall need no other Teacher, so as they shall need no
otherwise to be taught, so as they shall not choose but learn that lesson every
one of them, wherein lies their whole life and happiness, they shall all know
me, from the least to the greatest. God will make his people vomit up all the
knowledge of himself that ever they have received, he will break the old
bottles, and spill all the wine they held, and this will he do from the least
to the greatest: The highest in the knowledge of God, who have the purest, the
clearest light, shall not be able to preserve one scrap of their knowledge from
destruction. And then will he make new bottles, and fill them with new wine:
Every bottle must be new-made that is filled with this wine, and every bottle
that is new-made shall be filled with this wine from the least to the greatest.

Verse. 12. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
their iniquities will I remember no more.

Here is the ground of all, here is the first beginning of all, here is the
establishment of all this good will, love and sweetness between God and his
people: He will certainly do it, for he will take away that which hinders, that
which any way stops or diverts the current of their affection and intimacy on
either hand. That which had the great force in the other Covenant to estrange
God and his people, was sin; Your iniquities have separated between you and
your God, and your sins have hid his face from you: Sin made God turn from
them, and sin made them turn from God; for, feeling the guilt of sin in his own
spirit, man runs as far and as fast from him as he can. Adam had great delight
in the presence of God, and God in Adams till he had sinned, then the
appearance of God is terrible to him, and he seeks to hide himself from his
presence: and since that time guilty man could never endure to come near God.
To quiet himself he is fain to frame a God suitable to himself, and this he can
come near and delight himself with; but the true, the living God, who can
pierce into him and will not be bribed to spare him, the heart of man cannot
endure to come near: Every man is apt to think that of all things he desires
God, communion with God, but the appearance of God will one day give him the
lie. And this arises from the secret guilt of sin, which however it be dawbed
up at present, yet the purity of Gods presence cannot but search and discern
it: The sight of sin is drowned and lost at present, every man almost has an
art to hide, silence, cover and bury sin; but the approach of God will put life
into it again, the effects whereof will be such as will make his coming very
unwelcom even to such as now seem to themselves much to desire it.

The Majesty and Terror of God, whom would it not affright! how can sinful
flesh stand before him! There is no hiding any sin from him, for the light in
him discovers it: There is no undergoing his wrath, it is too weighty for any
creature. While any sin remains upon the conscience of the creature, it cannot
but startle at God and shrink from him; while any sin remains upon the score of
the creature God cannot but be dreadful to it: O what a distance and shyness is
there between him and his dearest ones while any reckoning remains between them!

O how little true intercourse and communion is there between God and any man
at this day! There is a great deal of seeming boldness in drawing nigh to him
and claiming acquaintance with him, arising from ignorance and from an
imagination of the pardon of sin; but alas how will this vanish, when he comes
to make himself known and to lay men's sins to their charge, which are not yet
so blotted out as they think they are. I will do it, says he, at such a time,
but the time is not yet come: The blotting out of sin is reserved for the times
of refreshing, for the days wherein this Covenant shall be set up; Then God
will indeed do great things for his people, and nothing shall fall short of all
that sweetness and perfect communion that he has spoken of between him and
them, for all that might interpose shall be taken away by him; for I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I
remember no more.

For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness.

Unrighteousness holds forth the nature of sin in general, for sin is nothing
but unrighteousness. Take what sin you will into consideration, this is the
nature of it, this is the chief property of it, this is that which makes it to
be sin, which brings the person into danger from whom it flows, which any way
diverse God from or incites God against the creature, namely its
unrighteousness. The influence which sin has upon the Justice of God (which is
an utter enemy to it) is by its unrighteousness: The harm it does to the
creature, both by deforming it, defiling it, and laying it open to wrath and
misery, is by its unrighteousness: That which makes it to be sin, that whereby
it produces all its effects, is its unrighteousness.

Their unrighteousness. The People of God, who are dear unto him, whom his
heart is upon, whom he intends to do all the good he can to, whom he means to
bring into perfect union and communion with himself, yet have their
unrighteousness belonging to them, cleaving to them, they are not yet freed
from sin, but lie with the rest of the world overwhelmed and buried under the
heap and rubbish of it. Indeed there is that life and hope in them that will
one day spring out of the grave and throw off all the fetters and boods of sin,
but at present there is little difference between them and others, saving that
they are somewhat more sensible of their burden, which makes their yoke smart
the more: Sin clings yet to their consciences, they are yet slaves under it,
they are yet in captivity and misery because of it. If mercy had took its
swinge upon them, sin could not so remain and dwell in them, nor the effects of
sin so follow them as they continually do.

I will be merciful to their unrighteousness. As Justice has hitherto had and
must still have its scope to prosecute sin, to be severe against sin where ever
it finds it: So then mercy shall have its scope, and shall be able to answer
justice in all its pleas against the sinner; and the poor creature (that is now
worn out by the prosecuting avenger of blood) shall be refreshed, shall never
hear more concerning sin but what mercy speaks. And mercy shall have full vent,
God will set himself to be merciful. When Justice has had its full time, its
full hearing; then Mercy shall have its turn, and be fairly heard to what it
can say for the rescue and Salvation of the sinner. God will give himself up to
mercy, set himself to be merciful, I will be merciful to their unrighteousness;
Where ever I espy unrighteousness in them I will show forth mercy; I will hear
no voice of sin but what calls for mercy; There Is not one of their sins shall
stand before me, if I have mercy enough to blot it out; If ever sin prejudice
them any more, let the blame lie upon my mercy; I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness.

And their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. There are two
sorts of sin (two ways of sinning) one of commission the other of omission.
There is a direct spurning against the Law, and a falling short of the Law.
There is a doing things contrary to the Will of God, and a neglecting to do the
Will of God: There is (...) and (...), as they are here expressed. This is the
great charge God has against all men, under all his several Dispensations, the
not doing what he in righteousness requires of them, and the doing otherwise or
contrary thereunto; the slipping aside from his Rule, or the clashing against
his Rule by motions contrary to it.

I will remember no more. They shall be so far from feeling any prejudice by
reason of sin any more, that I will not so much as remember that they have
sinned. Not any Transgression against the Law, not any falling short of the Law
will I ever remember again; I will think never the worse of them for it, I will
carry my self not one whit the more unkindly to them because of it, there shall
be no strangeness between me and them in any such respect. I will not only
pity them and be merciful to them, but my mercy shall carry me to do the utmost
act against sin, that can be done, to keep it from prejudicing them: I will not
only pity them in their sins and under their miseries showing mercy to them in
respect of both, but I will heal them perfectly, I will cure them for ever, I
will take away the root of their sickness and all the sap that can feed that
root. I will not only forgive sin, but I will forget it too: I will blot it
out of mine own mind that it may never be by me to stir up the least jealousy
or harsh thoughts in me concerning them. Their sins shall be so far from ever
working upon my heart that I will not keep them in my mind; I will not think
of them again, I will set my self to forget them, I will not suffer the
remembrance of them to enter into me or come any more before me: I will never
henceforth look upon them as persons that ever did any such thing, but what
they have offended in I will so discharge them of that the offense shall for
ever be forgotten even by my self. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness,
and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.

O sweet Covenant! O certain way of emptying God into his people, and of
letting in his people into his fullness! Surely they can never miss of any thing
they desire who lie under the direct influence of this Covenant.

But when shall these things be! when shall this Covenant be set up! There was
a sweet taste of it, once given out, in the Primitive Times, (The Spirit was
then given out, there was then enjoying of God, living in and toward God,
rejoicing in tribulation, triumphing over sin, Law, Death, Hell, etc. the yoke
of the Cross was then easy, sweet, delightful, etc.) but it was but a taste,
but a shadow of the thing it self: it was weak while it was in Being, it was
quickly swallowed up: The sweetness of the intercourse and communion between
God and his people was low and liable to frequent interruptions in the midst of
its enjoyment: Sin was not conquered (though sorely struck at and wounded) but
in conflict, and after a while gathered up its strength and overcame that
appearance of God in the world. Since which time there has been much
quietness, much rest, much peace in the world, in the Kingdom of the Devil, all
being at his dispose, he reigning and commanding in open wickedness, in moral
righteousness, in the several ways and paths of Religion; and the holy seed
being in such bondage and captivity under him, so shut up in his dark prison
that they see not where they are, nor what they are, nor have either heart or
strength to oppose him: Things being thus, the Devil lies still, Sin is quiet,
the Law is silent, they are where they would be, they have what they would,
they do what they would; God and Christ overlook this time of ignorance, take
as it were no notice what the Devil does, do not so much as offer to disturb
him. But when God shall once stir to set up his Kingdom, when Christ arises to
recover his own out of the Devils hands, then it will be a quick sharp time,
then Satan Sin and the Law will put forth their strength, and will not let
Israel go while they have any power to detain them; and O how dreadful will the
breaking of their power be, and how fierce their tyranny over Israel while it
is in breaking! Then shall Israel feel the bitterness of bondage and of
captivity; then shall Israel know what Sin is, what the Law is, and what the
Devil is. O how terrible will their death-pangs be! O how will they rent and
teer at their casting out! when they fall ( Sampson-like) they will make the
very house fall with them: And indeed the leprosy of Sin has so overspred and
is so interwoven that there is no purging of it out without breaking the vessel
all in pieces and melting those broken pieces over and over again and again;
Corruption will never be purged out of this old man, but this old man must be
destroyed and a new one made. God also will be very sharp, very severe against
all manner of sin and unrighteousness according to the Law, while the Law
remains in force to exact it from him: yea Christ himself will be a sore
Minister of Justice, (until his own righteousness come to conquer and take
place) He will not pardon your iniquities, for my name is in him. Alas, what a
dream are we in! We have a kind of sense of sin, and a kind of sight of
Christ and Salvation, and a kind of going forth (by that which we call Faith)
for Salvation from him, and thus we think to pass over unto rest: No, no, we
must feel our captivity, we must come under and feel the force of the
Ministration of Condemnation, we must taste the death-pangs of Sin and the Law,
and we must fetch every step of our journey or travel through the wilderness to
the promised Land, as in the type there was not one of the Israel of God
exempted from so doing. And when this is in agitation, then ye shall know the
meaning of so many carcasses of the Israelites falling in the wilderness, and
how those to whom a promise is made of entering into Rest, may fall short by
unbelief; and then ye shall find the whole mystery of Salvation (both in the
type and in the substance) to be another-ghess manner of thing then man (by his
understanding and reason, or by that which he calls the assistance of the
Spirit of God) has interpreted it to be.

Hasten thy work O God; Let thy counsel stand: Fulfill all thy pleasure; and do
it as speedily as thou will. Let forth that destruction, that desolation which
must necessarily precede and make way for Salvation: Let the old Covenant
devour and bury in her own bowels the fruit of her own womb, that the new seed
may be conceived, formed, quickened, brought forth, and hang upon the breasts of
the new Covenant, whence nothing but the sweetness, purity and power of Life
can be sucked. Live O God, live in thy seed; quicken thy seed, let them (cause
them) to live in thee according to the law and by the virtue of thine own life.
Finish imperfection, weakness, sin, vanity, death; dash it out, and write thine
own perfection and life in the stead and room of it: Blot out the name of the
foolish, vain, empty creature, and write thine own name every where; then shall
those that desire and love thee be satisfied with thee, when they shall meet
none but thee, and meet thee every where.

The way to Life, which is through the death of that which we account and press
after as life, and through the captivity of the Life it self; FROM 2 COR. 12.7,
8, 9, 10. And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of
the revelations, there was given to me a thorn to the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.

And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made
perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.

Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I
strong.


IN these words there are diverse remarkable passages, which he is very likely
to meet with, who pursues the purity and height of the life of his spirit.

1. There is the excellency of a Christians life, the top of it; which lies in
Visions and Revelations, in Gods opening of himself and spiritual things to the
eye of his spirit, letting him in to the other world to behold God, himself,
and the state of things there: Ye are come to mount Sion, to the City of the
living God the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to
the general Assembly and Church of the first born, to God the Judge of all, and
to the spirits of just men made perfect, etc. Here is life indeed, here is true
sight, true enjoyment; here is the possession of strength; he feels nothing,
fears nothing that may affright or trouble him, who is here, being wrapped up
safe in the bosom of Eternity, where mortality cannot seize upon him: And the
greater, the fuller, the deeper, the more frequent and abundant these Visions
are, the quicker and stronger is the life by them, the more is the spirit
elevated through them.

2. The danger of this life, the danger of these enjoyments; they tend to
over-exalt him, his flesh cannot bear them, he is puffed up by them and forgets
himself because of them: Lest I should be exalted above measure through the
abundance of revelations: Paul was in great danger of being lift up beyond all
bounds by reason of these; his strength, though it was great and much more then
ordinary, yet it was no way proportionable to his Revelations. God can bear the
weight of all his glory, he is not at all lifted up with the sight and
possession of his own strength and fullness: but flesh cannot do so, it is
lifted up with any thing, with every thing that is a little more then ordinary,
a little above it self; and if its life and enjoyments be over-vigorous (be
much more then ordinary) they over-exalt it. This is the foolishness of the
creature, it desires the highest life, the best, the purest, the strongest
food; but is not able to bear any thing beyond it self, nothing but what is
suitable to its proportion of life: and it only enjoys it self while, by
eternal Wisdom and Power, it is guided and kept within its own bounds: The
Plants cannot live the life of Sensitives, Sensitives cannot live the life of
Man, Man cannot live the life of God; he cannot know as he knows, he cannot
comprehend as he comprehends, he cannot live as he lives: We think, if we had
abundance of sights and enjoyments of God, we should live abundantly; Alas,
poor fools! Behold the experiment, it almost overturned Paul, lifted up his
flesh so high that it cost him very dear to have it brought down again.

Exaltation is the worst posture of spirit, (of the worst nature, the most
prejudicial to the Creature) that can be. It is the most unbeseeming posture,
the most dishonorable to God, and that which sets the Creature at the greatest
distance from him.

It is the most unbeseeming posture: for what is the Creature? Nothing,
emptiness, vanity, a lie, that which appears, but is not; a puff of wind that
makes a noise, but passes away, and comes not again. Now for this to be
lifted up, as if it were somewhat, as if it were substance, nay as if it were
all, as if it knew all, as if it alone were, and none besides it, what more
uncomely thing? And yet such is the foolishness of the creature, that let God
but open himself a little to it, it presently conceits it self to be as
himself; let him but open himself in it, it in himself, and it presently is God
as truly, as fully as himself; let him but open a little of his bosom, a little
beyond what it has formerly seen, and it presently sees as himself, and so
certainly that things cannot possibly be otherwise then as it now sees. O
uncomely Spectacle! O how my Soul loathes the creature lifted up! O how sordid
is the creature aspiring to, assuming and clothing himself with that greatness,
state and majesty, which belongs not to him, and which he can in no wise
manage! O God, thou must needs destroy, and prepare a grave to bury this
uncomeliness in.

It is the most dishonorable to God, intrenching most upon his Glory who is
all, who fills all, who can endure nothing to be or appear where he is in his
own Life and Fullness. The creature never lifts up it self, but it throws down
God (as much as in it lies,) it robs him, and prides it self with what it has
stolen, as if it were its own; it defloureth his Beauties, his Excellencies,
by making them appear unlike his, and as if they were not his; it raseth his
Name out of that wherein he has written in, writing its own in stead thereof.

It sets the creature at the greatest distance from God; it turns the heart of
God most from the creature. God can only have communion with the creature in
its low estate; it must be nothing, when he (who is all) fills it, and dwells
fully in it. So much as the creature strives to be, desires to be, it turns
from God. God is all, where he is himself; and appears as all, where he appears
as himself; and he cannot fully be, not fully appear in that creature that is,
or that appears any thing. The proud he beholds afar off, but he makes his
habitation with the humble; he lives there, he dwells there: and the humble may
walk, converse, have full and free communion with him; humble thy self to walk
with thy God. It were better for the creature never to see or enjoy any thing
of God, then to be lifted up by it: and, if I might have mine own choice, I
would never have any discovery of God, further then I were first enabled by him
to bear it.

3. The Remedy of this danger, which has a very proper appellation here, it is
called a thorn to the flesh, somewhat to prick and make the flesh sensible of
its weakness, and so to abate and assuage its swelling. Flesh is the weak part,
a thorn is that which is very painful and irksom to the flesh. Visions and
Revelations, they lift up the flesh, cause it to forget it self, raise it up in
its own eyes and thoughts, as if it were no longer flesh but spirit, no longer
weakness but strength, surrounded with the Life, Glory and Perfection of God,
which these give some taste and sense of; so that the poor creature begins now
to perk up above all other things, beholding them far beneath it self, they
lying in a dungeon of darkness, horror, weakness, filthiness, corruption,
death, whereas it is situated in the light of the Lord, dwelling with him in
the Land of the living: But now, when a thorn is thrust into the flesh, making
it ache and smart, (and all its Visions and Revelations can neither help to
pluck out this thorn, nor take away the smart of it,) it begins to feel and
know it self again, it finds it self not to be what it took it self to be, not
to be where it was, not so full, not so glorious, not so safe: It thought it
self above all these things, above the reach, above the sense of these things;
but now by this it sensibly perceives, that it is still a weak frail creature
in a weak frail state: This lets the wind out of the bladder, and so its
swelling falls by degrees. There is no better physic in such a state, and it
is the skill and kindness of the Physician, to administer it to the Patient,
though against his mind: Paul here calls it a gift, there was given me a thorn
to the flesh; indeed it was a gift, a kind gift, a needful gift, a seasonable g
ft. Paul, if he might have had his own choice, would have had more Revelations
still: but he, who knew the present state of Paul, knew what to give him; and
however he looked upon it at present, yet afterward (when he came to
understand himself) he could not but see and acknowledge it to be a gift. The
captivity of our life, that pain, bondage, heaviness of spirit, death (which we
are so apt to complain of) is a gift, which our life, in this state wherein it
is, needs, ( if need be ye suffer heaviness through manifold temptations, 1
Pet. 1.6.) it cannot otherwise enjoy it self, it cannot otherwise be rid of
that enemy which is still surprising it in its enjoyments.

The particular thorn to the flesh here bestowed on Paul, was a messenger of
Satan to buffet him. To bring him down Satan is let loose upon him, (who, when
he has his Commission, will quickly make the flesh feel it self what it is:)
To bring him down yet more Satan deals with him by a messenger, as if
(notwithstanding all his height) he scorned to deal with him himself; and this
messenger handles him in a most disgraceful way, buffets him; and Paul lies
open to him, not knowing which way to help himself, but is fain to receive blow
after blow from him, as he gives them him: This was a thorn to the flesh
indeed, a very sharp thorn.

He who knows what it is, to be wrapped up into the might and power of the
Lord, cannot at that time fear the powers of darkness, dares challenge the very
Prince of darkness, with all his force and stratagems, to do his worst, and
cannot suspect the least prejudice from him. Now for this person, who knows
the sweetness of this strength, to be wholly stripped of it, have his enemy let
loose upon him, be left to the weakness of his own flesh, be laid open to
receive and feel the smart of every blow that Satan pleases to give him, and
that not by himself, but by a messenger, (as if he scorned to put his own
strength to it,) this is a grievous thorn to the flesh, this pricketh very
sharply the weak, the fleshly part, and by its continuance allayeth and lets
out that swelling and puffing wherewith it was lifted up by those Revelations
and Inlets of the Life, Glory and Power of God, which were bestowed not on it,
but on the spiritual part. It is the flesh that is lifted up; and were it not
for the fleshly part, the spirit would as willingly lie low as be exalted, yea
in some respect rather, for it desires not to be exalted, but to lie low; it
desires to have the Lord alone exalted; it would not be any thing, it would
not appear any thing, it would not own any thing, but have the Lord alone be,
appear, be known; So far would it live as the Lord lives in it, so far would
it shine as the Lord pleases to shine in it, and no further: And the
sufferings of the spirit are with and because of the flesh, and to this intent,
to free and deliver it from the infirmity, bondage and corruption which
cleaves close to the flesh, and is ready still to annoy it by reason of its
present conjunction with the flesh.

The spirit and the flesh are so incorporated one within the other (yet
unmixed) that whatsoever is done to the one, the other also partakes of, (as
suppose, like two trees, whose root, body, boughs, branches, leaves and fruit
were entwisted within one another, yet still retaining their own property and
distinction.) You cannot feed the spirit, but the flesh also will suck in and
partake of the sweetness thereof, and be nourished and grow thereby: you cannot
feed the flesh, but the spirit tastes and is made sick by the poison; for such
is the food of the flesh unto the spirit, no other then poison. You cannot
smite the flesh, but you also wound the spirit; and if you go about to heal the
spirit, the flesh will also partake of it, and gather strength and freshness by
it: If the flesh be thrown into the furnace, the spirit goes with it, and is
burnt and melted in the fire as well as it. Therefore all the life the spirit
gains, possesses, pleases it self with, it must part with again, and must dye a
bitter death with the flesh, that it may be quite rid of the flesh: all its
life must sink back into its principle, and lie there as if it were dead, while
the flesh is truly mortified and slain for ever: And if it were not of an
excellent nature, if it could not bear the force of that fire which kills and
burns up the flesh, it would also be slain and consumed with the flesh; if it
were not pure gold, it could not but waste and perish in the heat of that
furnace, which is still consuming, and at last (when it is heated hot enough)
will quite devour all fleshly dross whatsoever, that is cast into it.

4. The restlesness of the spirit under this Remedy: For this thing I be sought
the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me: He uses the best means with the
utmost vigor to get rid of it. Nothing more effectual then prayer, then
fervent prayer, then constant prayer. We have no strength of our own, our
strength lies in God; faith and prayer (or faith in prayer) is our readiest and
surest way of recourse to him for it. Paul prays once, yea again, and again,
and fain he would be heard: and mark the earnestness of his spirit, that it
might depart from me. He does not pray for strength to bear it, for submission
to the Will of God, for spiritual benefit and advantage by it; No, nothing will
serve his turn but to have it taken away, to have it removed, to have it
depart; the pain, the shame is so great, that he can by no means be content to
lie under it. This is such physic as we would never take, if we might choose;
it makes us so sick, that we would rather be without health then come by it
this way: If this remedy were not forced upon us, this sickness would always
remain with us.

5. The support of the Soul under this restlessness, the Cordial that is of
most force to refresh the spirits, under the violent workings of this physic,
which make the spirits very faint, and bring the Soul very low; My Grace is
sufficient for thee. The Grace of God, the good will of God revealed to, tasted
by the Soul, is able to refresh and support it under sense of the greatest
misery. There are two things of very great efficacy in it.

1. There is a taste of sweetness at present, which does secretly relieve,
refresh, revive the spirit. He who ever knew God, let him at any time taste the
favor and love of God, though in the lowest, darkest, deadest, most oppressed
state he can be in, he cannot but find a secret touch of life in it, in thy
favor is life, yea thy loving kindness is better then life; it is better to
taste the sweetness, the kindness, the love of God in the most bitter pangs of
death, then to enjoy the sweetest touches and motions of life in ones own
spirit.

2. There is an assurance of a good issue, and of all this tending that way. He
who sees the Grace of God (the virtue of its nature, its skill and efficacy in
operation) will see his physic administered to him from that Grace, and working
by that Grace. He sees no more the temptations of the Devil in the Devils hand,
or his own sins in his own hand, doing him mischief; but in Gods hand doing him
good: He sees his own weakness, not any longer his snare, but his advantage,
making way to rid him of his weakness, and to give him full possession of the
strength of God, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. The strength of
God is not made perfect in the discovery of it self to the creature, in the
creature, for the creature, till the creature be made perfectly weak. While
there is any strength left in the creature, there is some room left there which
the strength of God does not fill: the strength of God may be there, but not
all his strength; the strength of God may act there, but not perfectly. The
strength of God can never do, that it has to do for the Soul to perfect it,
before the Soul be first made perfectly weak; and then the strength of God will
soon be perfected, when the Soul is brought to perfect weakness. When we are
brought into perfect captivity, and perfectly weakened in captivity, so that
there is nothing left, nothing remaining, nothing visible to be delivered, but
the whole life of the spirit is perfectly dried up and lost even for ever, then
is there nothing to hinder the breaking forth of perfect deliverance.

6. The exultation of the spirit, from the sense and experience of the good
that the Grace of God works for it by these: it can hereafter sport with
misery, play with death, laugh while it is in the very jaws of destruction;
Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities. I will not be so
ashamed of my weakness now I know what it is, and whither it tends, but I will
glory in it; I will rejoice in mine own inability to withstand temptations, to
keep back the breaking forth of any corruption in me, to secure my self from
the meanest messenger of Satan; and I will not do it as a forced thing, but
most gladly; it shall be a free motion of my spirit, that which it shall most
freely give it self up to, namely to rejoice in and because of its weakness,
most gladly therefore, etc. Yea I will rather do it; I will choose to rejoice
and glory in them before I would do it in Revelations: I like them better, they
tend to bring me nearer to that which my spirit longs after, whereas
Revelations tend to set me further from it.

That the Power of Christ may rest upon me. My life, my happiness lies in
enjoying the Power of Christ, Revelations tend to strip me of it, but
weaknesses tend to possess me of it, yea to cause it to rest upon me, not only
to seize upon me, but to abide with me: Our weaknesses are not only to fit us
for some more vigorous aid and assistance from God, but for the inhabitation of
God, there will he dwell, thither shall the Power of Christ resort, and there
shall it rest.

Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities. I will never be so unwilling to be
weakened again: Since I knew the meaning of it, I cannot but take pleasure in
it. It is my delight to be made weak, to be thrown down, to be reproached, to
be bemired in my own filth, (I could not endure shame immediately after my
Revelations, but now I can please my self to behold mine own shame.) Yea I love
to be brought to necessities, to distresses, that I know not which way to turn
my self: for all this is for Christ's sake, to give him more hold of me, to give
him more advantage to work himself into me; this weakening of me, by all these
sharp corrasives to the flesh, is but the pulling down of my strength that he
may set up his, and I sensibly feel it in constant experience; for when I am
weak then am I strong.

I am never strong but when I am weak, nor never weak but when I am strong. A
strange Paradox, that a man's strength should lie in his weakness, that the time
of his weakness should be the season of his strength, that the way to make him
strong should be by making him weak: yet Paul felt, and therefore ye may give
him leave to speak; he spoke feelingly, experimentally in saying, when I am
weak, then am I strong. Strength is both sown in weakness, grows up in
weakness, and is perfected in weakness.

1. Strength is sown in weakness: In our weakness God sows his strength: The
time of weakening us, of pulling down our strength is the time of sowing Gods
strength in us. When God plows us up, makes long furrows in us, rents and tears
up all that lives in us, then is his time of sowing the seed of his own Life
and Strength in us. Light is sown in darkness, (the Light of Eternity is
covered in the dark bowels of the Earth;) Life is sown in death, Salvation is
sown in destruction, and strength is sown in weakness.

2. Strength grows in weakness: By growing weak a man grows strong. A Christian
the more he is stripped of his own riches, the richer he grows; the more he is
stripped of his own life, the more he grows in life; and the more he is
stripped of his own strength, the more he grows in strength. There is nothing
makes us weak but our own strength, (the strength of our enemies can only try,
not any way impair our strength;) therefore the taking of our strength from us
is the taking away of our weakness, it is the delivering of us from that which
hindered the increasing and thriving of true strength in us.

3. Strength is perfected in weakness: When weakness is perfected, strength is
perfected. As the shadow declines, and is made to give way, so the substance
comes in and fills up its place; and when the shadow is quite gone, the
substance comes wholly in, and then there is nothing to be found there but
substance. Our strength is a shadow, a counterfeit of strength, but not
strength indeed; it is the strength of man, who is but weak himself in his
whole frame and constitution, and what can his strength be? Now as the strength
of the man, the shadowy strength decays; so the strength of God, true,
substantial strength grows up in him in the stead of it: And when all his
strength is quite spent, quite gone, utterly vanished; there will be no
weakness left, nothing but perfect strength (everlasting strength) remaining.
The strength of God has nothing to hinder it self in us, but our strength: He
has nothing to hinder him, but the creature; (it is, as it was made, both a
glass and a vail, to represent or hide him, as he himself pleases to make use
of it:) Nothing to hinder his Being, but the being of the creature; Nothing to
hinder his Life, but the life of the creature; Nothing to hinder his Wisdom,
but the wisdom of the creature; Nothing to hinder his Strength, but the
strength of the creature: Where ever he destroys these (as he will do
perfectly one day, in the great day, at the great battle of the Lord God
Almighty) he himself fills up their room.

O happy is he who has drunk his full draught of death and misery; for full
Life, perfect Life and Happiness cannot choose but spring up in him! Does the
plowman plow all day to sow? Does God rent and teer in pieces for nothing? Do
you think he cannot give an account of all the misery and desolation that
lights upon his Creation? It is his more then its own, it ever was his, it
ever will be his; it is but its own for a moment, yea it is his while it is its
own, nay it is his in being its own: He has made it, for a season, to know and
feel what it is to be its own; shall it never know and feel what it is to be
his? It has been long disowned and cast off by him, as if it were of no value,
as if it had no relation to him, but shall this distance and strangeness last
for ever? It is true, he does rent, teer, and make havoc of it, and speaks
terribly concerning future desolations and miseries which he will unavoydably
bring upon it, and it does not please him to give an account of his Ways, but
tells proud man he does it for his pleasure; but he does not tell him why it is
his pleasure, nor how long it shall be his pleasure. Be silent then, and rest
here, Do not say that he has no other pleasure, thou know not the thoughts
of his heart, thou know not what relation any thing has unto him, nor how
he will dispose of it. He is what he is, He does what he does, He will be what
he will be, He will do what he will do, and he scorneth to let proud man know
him in any thing. The light which he gives him (without which he cannot so
much as see after that poor, weak, silly manner that he does) is but to befool,
to bewilder him, not to lead him to him. Man thinks to be wise by his light,
God by that very light makes him a fool. It is light to him, but darkness in
it self: and what a fool is he whose light is darkness, whose wisdom is folly,
whose life is death, whose Heaven is Hell, whose God is the Devil, only
transformed at present into an Angel of light to please the fool with appearing
light, with his counterfeit light, which is but darkness, not light. O poor,
shallow, deceived man, what a dismal time is coming upon thee! a time of
darkness, of darkness that may be felt, nay of darkness that cannot but be
felt: Thou will not, thou can not now see and acknowledge thy darkness; No, it
is light; but the time shall come that thou shall not be able to avoid seeing,
and feeling and acknowledging it. The Sun that shines upon thee, by the light
whereof thou yet see, must be turned into darkness; and if thou will think to
get a little light in that night by the Moon (if when the Sun is put out thou
would be content to descend and make shift with the light of the Moon) thou
shall not neither, for that shall be turned into blood: That which was set up
by God, under God, to give light unto man either in his day or in his night,
shall go out; and there shall a day or night come upon him, wherein he shall be
perfectly lost, wherein he shall see and feel and know that he is a fool and
cannot reach to the true understanding either of God, of himself, or of any
thing else. Man thinks now he can attain any thing, there is nothing either in
Heaven above or Earth beneath but he can understand in his proportion,
according to what of it is represented to him, and according as he bends and
applies himself to take in the knowledge of it, but the briars and the thorns of
the wilderness will teach him otherwise: When he is thoroughly brayed in the
mortar, though his folly will not depart from him, yet his conceit of his
wisdom will fall. And what will then become of the life in him? (What would
become of the life of the Creature if there were no Sun?) Where will be his
knowledge of good and evil, wherewith he does now so lift up himself, judging,
justifying or condemning as he pleases? How will he resist his enemies or turn
toward his friends, when he cannot see or distinguish either? Ah poor man,
poor Christian; How does my spirit bewail that dreadful captivity, which thou
do not so much as dream of, yet must drink deep of! There is no avoiding it:
it is the Lords interest to put out thy light, to put out thy life, and it must
not be spared.

There is a double Captivity hastening, hastening, coming on apace, very
swiftly, (though man may account the Lords haste slackness:) A captivity of the
whole Creation, a captivity of all Creation; a captivity of the old Creature, a
captivity of the new Creature; a captivity of the seed of man; a captivity of
the seed of God; a captivity of the flesh, a captivity of the spirit; a
captivity of the old creaturely life, (of the reason, wisdom, understanding of
the creature) a captivity of the new regenerate life (of the life of God sown
in the creature.) I shall only give a glance at the latter of these, because
it is here pointed at, and is first to take place: for God will begin with his
people, God shall judge his people, Judgment must begin at the house of God; and
the other captivity (the captivity of the Creature) may go hand in hand with
this in them, so that their whole captivity perhaps may be wholly ended before
God begins with the world: They shall lift up their heads, because their
redemption draws nigh, when destruction is but coming upon others: God will
say to them; Arise, shine, thy light is come, the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee, when he is but raising the cloud of darkness, yea of gross darkness
to cover the earth and the people of the earth with. But as they must rise
before the world, so they must dye before the world; they must dye while man
remains alive, that they may live when death issues forth to seize upon man:
And as their Life and Resurrection is far more excellent then ever man can
attain to, so is their Death and Captivity far more bitter. To touch a little
at it.

There is a captivity, a great captivity which the spiritual life is subject
unto before it enters into perfect rest.

Whether this shall befall any in the body or out of the body, I know not, (God
knows:) for I know not the way of the spirit in the body, nor the way of the
spirit out of the body. Yet Paul seems expressly to affirm concerning some,
that they should be saved in the Day of the Lord (which is the proper time of
Salvation) yet so as by fire: Their works should not be able to endure the fire
(many of them) but should be burnt up; yet they themselves (notwithstanding
their loss by the burning up of their works) should be saved, yet not perhaps
as they think, but so as by fire. The Soul must be purified, thoroughly
purified, perfectly purified, before it enjoy God: it must pass through the
fire, and if it be not able to endure the fire, it cannot but suffer by it both
pain and loss. Sin may be taken away by imputation, but the work of renovation
is not so either begun or perfected, but by often casting into the fire, and by
often molding in the fire, where the very powers of life are melted and
transformed, by several steps and degrees, into perfection; and the process and
growth into life is still according to the force and degree of death. I have
nothing to say concerning a place of Purgatory, (which the Papists speak of)
but in this I know not how to be otherwise minded, but that the Soul must be
thoroughly purged of all its dross before it enter into perfect union and
communion with God; and the Apostle seems to intimate that some shall not be
so purged until the Day of the Lord, which is the proper time for the letting
out of that fire for the trial of all things: And when the Trial is, then must
needs the suffering be of that which is not able to bear the Trial, although in
the result it should be saved; he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire, 1
Cor. 3.15. If we observe men's departure out of the body, there are few seem so
purged but that they have still need of the fire: How far that Thief was
changed upon the Cross, or what is wrought in men at the point of death, or
what becomes of them immediately after, I have nothing to say concerning; yet
the general apprehension, of such an immediate entering into perfect rest,
would not to me carry sufficient clearness if I should go about to scan things
as a man: But to let that pass.

There is, I say, a great captivity for the spiritual life to be tried in and
by to the purpose, before it be entrusted with Rest, before it be admitted into
the possession of perfect and unchangeable Rest. There may be an entering into
the Land of Canaan, yea a settling in and an enjoying of it, and yet after that
a going into captivity. We, who believe, have entered into Rest, Paul deeply
entered, and yet here is a kind of captivity afterward; he was buffeted by a
messenger from Satan, and his spirit very restless under it: And though his be
but a type or taste of the captivity, not the captivity it self, yet it may
serve to point at it. The Jews were Types of the true Israel, Canaan a Type of
their Rest, and the captivities of the Jews Types of the captivities of their
spirits: To have a spirit wounded is very bitter, what is it to have a spirit
in captivity, where it is continually wounding (nothing but wounded) at the
pleasure of its greatest enemy?

There are two things in this Captivity pointed at here, as in a figure. The
nature of it, and the helplessness of the spirit under it.

1. The nature of it, which consists in a subjection to the Devil. The person,
who was delivered from him, snatched out of his Kingdom, set free from his yoke
of Tyranny, seated in its own land; is thrust out of its own land and put into
the hands of the Devil again: he is brought back to Egypt, concerning which it
was said unto him that he should return no more thither: He is bound and
carried into Babylon, yea beyond Babylon (there is a Captivity beyond Babylon)
I will carry you beyond Babylon.

In this Subjection there are diverse things considerable, which discover it to
be very hard and bitter. 1. There is the weakening of this life, the drying up
of the life of the spirit. When we lie under the influences of God, this life
is quickened, revived and cherished; but when we are in the Devils prison,
(laid in bonds by him) he nips this life, blows upon it, does as much as he can
to extinguish it: And how bitter, how painful is it to a spiritual man, to
find his spiritual life dying and decaying!

2. The stopping the course of it: And this were death it self (if there were
no more added) to have the activity of this life choked, it being so full of
motion, and so active in every motion. The whole current of this life is
stopped: it can do nothing that it would; it wants its light, it wants its
strength, it wants that which was wont to set it agoing, it wants oil. In this
Captivity, the night is come, wherein none can work. Spiritual actions and
motions are of a curious nature, requiring much skill, care, accurateness;
requiring a great deal of pure, clear light; how can they be wrought in the
night! They require strength, how can the Soul effect them in so great weakness
as its Captivity exposes it unto? They require liberty, how can the Soul set
about them in bonds? Nor will the Devil suffer any such works (of Light, Life,
and Liberty) to be wrought in his Kingdom: If we would sing the Lords Song in a
strange Land, he would not permit it. He is Master over us in our Captivity, he
has our spirit so bound with his chain, that we can stir no whither, do
nothing without his leave. I tell you Sirs, it is as impossible to believe, to
hope, to wait, to rejoice in God, nay to submit to God in this Captivity, as it
is for the man who was never yet brought out of his Kingdom: Life wholly shut
up cannot at all stir abroad, Life wholly bound up can no more act then Death
it self, then that which never was nor ever knew life. It Is true, there are
Captivities wherein these things may be done; but I speak now of the great
Captivity, and of the depth of that Captivity too; for both at the going in and
upon the coming out some of these things may perhaps be possible.

3. There is the drawing forth of the person into contrary ways and acts of
death. He is not only hindered from doing what he would, but he is made to do
what he would not. He is not only forcibly kept from serving his own Liege
Lord, but he is made to serve the Devil, who delights to put him upon such
motions as are most contrary to his former life, and to his present most inward
spiritual nature: He is a perfect Tyrant, will still be putting his slave to
that which may be most irksom to him, and which may most manifest his own
dominion over him. And here I could relate some strange things, which I have
heard of one that has felt, how (in the time of his Captivity) he never
resolved against any thing, nor strongly desired to avoid any thing, but he was
sure to be forced into it; and found this his greatest relief and safety to lie
perfectly open to all manner of weakness.

4. There is hard usage under all this, buffetings, blows, sharp strokes upon
the spirit; (He deals like the Turks with their Gallyslaves, beats them whether
they work or no;) He uses all manner of Tyranny toward them, is not pleased
with any thing they can do, but hates them perfectly, and does them all the
mischief he can, because of that life in them which still lives in the root,
and shall break forth again in branches, leaves and fruit for all this. Indeed
he who was never out of his clutches may have some fair quarter from his hands,
but he who is brought back again (with the life in him) must expect to feel the
utmost that his malice is suffered to do, unless he will yield (as many shall,
and extremity will much urge all, and over-bear the strongest resolutions of
standing out) and come under his banner, and then he shall have light enough,
and strength enough and pleasure enough in his service: but this they cannot
do, because their nature steereth them otherwise, and therefore must undergo
the brunt.

II. The spirits helplessness under it, or the ineffectualness of all means
that can be used toward Redemption or toward mitigation of the rigor of this
Captivity; there is a taste of that here too, for this I prayed thrice; Paul
used all his strength in prayer, all his interest in God, but it would not
avail, he must bear these buffetings. So is it in this Captivity, it must have
its course; pray never so hard, the cup will neither pass from you nor so much
as one drop be abated: It is not possible for this cup or the least portion of
it to pass from the dearest ones of God. This is Christ's cup, he drank all his
share, and every one must drink all theirs. And the physic, as it is very
strong, so it will make them very sick, perfectly restless and helpless. Christ
was so, he knew not which way to turn him: He knew none but God could help him,
and he could not reach him nor make any prayer come near him; O my God, says
he, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not; and in the night season, and
there is no silence to me: And it will make every one (though the life of
Christ be in them) sick, restless, helpless, as it did Christ. The Soul cannot
tell which way to turn, in any one motion, for the least ease, all the time of
its Captivity: Run to the Scriptures, run to Experiences, think of the Nature
of God, its Interest in God, etc. all is dead, all is dark, all is confounded;
there is nothing now can be looked upon but as it is represented in the Kingdom
of Darkness, as it is poisoned by the Devil, and so tends but further to poison
and torment the Soul: And the more it thinks on these, the more it feeds on
these, the more it seeks relief from these; the more it sucks in that which
still administers fresh anguish and death unto it. If it be never so hungry, it
can come at no food; if it be never so thirsty, it can come at no drink, except
vinegar and gall, not one crumb of the bread of life, not one drop of the water
of life is to be heard of here. This is not the place for life either to live
or act in; nay there is nothing is an occasion of greater Torment to the Soul
in the time of this Captivity, then its striving to live and move spiritually;
as to believe, love, pray, hope, wait, or the like: For hereby,

1. It occasions a calling to mind the former sweetness of these, its former
activity in these (which are now become so difficult, so impossible to it:) and
a lively remembrance of the sweetness of what was formerly enjoyed, does much
increase the trouble of the present want of it.

2. It increases the sense of the present bitterness, by making it more
lively. It does not only increase the sense of the want of these, but
increases also the sense of that which lies upon the spirit. The remembrance
of former life and liberty, makes the present bonds and pangs of death a great
deal more sharp and weighty.

3. It increases the Devils rage, that he now lays load upon the Soul. To
find that life yet striving to stir which he has bound so fast, this makes
him seek for new cords to bind it yet faster, for stronger poison to strike it
yet more dead. Now if I should tell you of a strange Mystery, viz. of embracing
this subjection, of putting your necks under Nebuchadnezzars girdle, of
receiving quietly all the buffetings of Satan; (not only of entering again
willingly into your Captivity, but of bearing your whole burden in your
Captivity) of letting your life, hope, strength and all suffer death and be
laid in the grave; if I should speak after this manner to you, ye would say
this were a very hard doctrine: yet this is certain, that the Bird in the Cage
does but tire (yea perhaps bruise and hurt) it self by fluttering to get out,
or the Bird in the net or snare does but entangle it self more by straining to
get loose and fly abroad. There is no way like to lying still, and yielding up
even the spiritual life as a sacrifice, following Christ as a Lamb or Sheep to
the slaughter without the least resistance, gainsaying, or reluctation.

O sad, sad, sad will this Captivity be! Never was there destruction,
desolation and anguish like unto it! Then shall every member feel the pains of
the head, and then shall every member (so afflicted) complain with the head,
and say; Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see, if there be
any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger. From above has he sent fire into
my bones, and it prevails against them: he has spread a net for my feet, he
has turned me back: he has made me desolate, and faint all the day.

But when this Captivity is ended, when life shall again come forth from under
this bondage; O how sweet, how fresh, how pure will it be! how pleasant to look
back upon the several yokes, bonds, snares, deaths in the Land of our
Captivity! Then we shall glory more in those multiplied deaths, then in our
former life. Our former life and enjoyments tended but to lead us to Captivity;
but this Captivity tends to lead us to that Life which cannot enter into
Captivity, which cannot feel Captivity, but will be master of it where ere it
meets it. Our life led us into that Captivity where we felt unutterable
anguish, death, misery; but our Captivity leads us to that Life which is so
strong and vigorous, that it is able to lead Captivity captive even in its own
Land.

The Way to true Knowledge. FROM 2 COR. 5.16. Wherefore henceforth know we no
man after the flesh: yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more.


THat which God created, was flesh: He brought forth every thing, in this
Creation, in a state of weakness: All the Images and representations of himself
here are fleshly; The eye he made to behold them, was a fleshly eye; The
content, the happiness that comes by this sight, is a fleshly happiness; The
enjoyment of God in this way, is a fleshly enjoyment. There was emptiness,
weakness, vanity written in the very state yea in the very make of the
Creation: Indeed it might have enjoyed a kind of happiness, if it had remained
as it was made, but it would not have been true happiness, nor could it have
lasted: It was as impossible for Adam to have stood, as it is for God to fall;
for there was mortality, mutability written in his state, in his nature, as
there is Eternity, Immutability written in Gods. Adams nature disposed him to
what befell him, it was flesh, walked in the path of flesh, hastening toward
the end designed unto flesh.

Henceforth know we no man after the flesh.

The eye, the created eye, the eye of this Creation in its best, in its purest,
in its perfectest state, is no better then fleshly.

This eye, as it is fleshly, so that which this eye sees, is flesh; it can see
nothing which is spiritual. The eye of sense cannot see the reason of man, nor
can the reason of man see the Nature of God. Man may see God, as the creatures
see man, (not comprehending, not understanding him:) He may see the fleshly
part of God, the fleshly appearance, but not the spiritual Substance; He may
see outward visible Demonstrations of God, but not his Nature, not his Spirit,
which alone is God.

The manner after which this eye sees, is fleshly; after a weak, shallow,
fleshly manner, not comprehending, not piercing into things, not gathering
things into it self, but by gathering deductions and conclusions from
principles and experiences; this is man's way.

Henceforth know we: We.

There is a parcel of this Creation, in whom Eternity, in whom the seed of
another-ghess life (then this Creation is acquainted with, or can comprehend)
is sown; in whom this Creation is in part pulled down, and the Foundations of
Eternity laid in the ruins of it. All things are not one, all things are not
alike, do not your senses perceive a vast difference in things? There is an
inward world, and there are inward senses, which have felt, and can tell you
that the difference there is more vast, and more substantial. In this world ye
see that excellent things are rare: there is abundance of dross, but little
pure metal in comparison; abundance of stones, but pearls are not so common;
abundance of chaff and off all, but not so much pure seed: So is it in the
inward world; The jewels of God, the grain of God, the seed of his own Spirit
is very scarce and precious.

We know. As there is such a seed, so they have a life and knowledge suitable to
them: and indeed their knowledge is the only knowledge, before which all the
knowledge of man vanishes and shrinketh away like a shadow. It is true, man
has knowledge, man has life, if ye speak in one kind of language; but if ye
speak in a pure language he has not: He does know God, he does live in God, he
does live to God in a sense, in a shadowy life and knowledge (and so do other
creatures in a sense too, in a more dark and more shadowy life and knowledge,)
but in truth he does not. But we know, this seed, this man (the new man) does
know; his is knowledge, and shall appear knowledge when it comes to be tried:
when the day comes, and the shadows fly away, this shall stand and remain; we
know. He that is born of God, he that feeds upon and grows up in the Life of
God, he does indeed know: He that sees with his eye, in his light, sees truth,
sees himself, and that not any way painted, but in his own native nakedness,
beauty and excellency. But all other eyes, all other lights, all other sights
of things with these eyes in or through these lights, are but shadows, tend but
to hide and deceive, and after their appointed season is over, must pass away.
Man must dye, his eye be closed at the time of his death, after which it can
see no more, and then must he into the grave, and all his light and knowledge be
buried with him.

Go on, O Man; study the creatures, study the Scriptures, gather a stock of
knowledge and experience from these; Admire God, love God, live in God, live to
God, be perfect, walk exactly with God. This is knowledge, this is life, this is
excellency, (I cannot but give it its due*) as I am a man, I love it; and O how
is my heart taken with the person in whom I find this vigorous! But again, This
is not knowledge, this is not life, this must perish, and thou with it; This
will not save thee, but kindle the flames upon thee, and help the more to
scortch thee: And if I do not know this more certainly then thou know any
thing, let me be proved a Liar, and shamed before the whole bulk of mankind,
for so unjustly arraigning, accusing and condeming man so long and so deeply in
mine own spirit, and now at length so publicly in open view.

We know no man after the flesh.

This Seed of God, who are begotten and born of God, who live in the Life of
God, who walk in the Light of God, they see nothing after the manner of men,
they know nothing as man knows. It is not by reason or experience, by the sight
of the eye, or hearing of the ear, that they come to understand, but by the
springing up of their own life in them. Indeed while the man remains in them,
he will be knowing (even spiritual things) as other men know them, and making
use of them as other men make use of them; but this is not the life in them
that does thus. The Life only knows it self, and it only knows by it self, by
its own living it comes to know. There is light sown every where in this life;
and as the light grows, the life springs up in it. They need nothing to make
them perfect but the perfect growth of their own life; they need nothing else
to teach them, to guide them, to refresh them; all that they can desire, dwells
in that life which they already have. They are like God (his Seed cannot but
have his likeness) their happiness, their perfection lies in themselves, in
their own life. They walk in the light as he is in the light, the knowledge, the
fellowship they have with things is by feeling them in their own spirits: They
know God by feeling him there, and they know other things by comprehending them
there in God, in whom they are originally, and most fully.

Yea though we have known Christ after the flesh.

The Word became flesh, The Word appeared in flesh, the Word tabernacled in
flesh, dwelt in flesh, discovered himself in flesh, and the Word may be known
after the flesh. Those spiritual Excellencies and Glories of God which he in
his fleshly Appearance held forth, may be seen by the fleshly eye, and after a
fleshly manner. All his Preachings, all his Miracles, all his outward
Manifestations of the Power, Goodness and Love of God in these, were but
fleshly Manifestations; and he who thus knew him, knew him but by these, knew
him but after the flesh. Christ, as he was here in a fleshly state, so he had a
fleshly knowledge of God, and held forth a fleshly knowledge of God, which was
useful to him, and might be also to others in the season of it; but it passed
away with him (he dyed to it, and is to live no more to it) and with his
Apostles after him in part, and must pass away in all, in whom the other seed
is sown, according as that comes to live in them.

Yet now henceforth know we him no more.

We have been weak, we have been babes in Christ, and then the man did much
live in us, and we knew by outward receptions of Light, and by visible
demonstrations of Power. While the seed is young and tender, the weeds are
suffered to grow up with it, that it might also grow: If you should at first
pluck up all the knowledge of the man, ye could not but pluck up the knowledge of
God too, which is weak, and as it were hangs upon it; but let them both alone,
let them both grow till it has taken through rooting, and then it will keep its
ground, and be able to bear the violence of the separation. Let but the New-Man
grow strong and hearty enough he will spue up the other of himself; henceforth
know we no man after the flesh; yea though we have known Christ after the
flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more: Not as if Paul or any else then
had perfectly attained unto this, but life in him and in others was working
apace toward this, and had in part also attained.

And now let me tell thee, O Man, if thou can bear to hear it, that though
thou have a great deal of knowledge in thy kind; yet not one dram of true
knowledge, not one grain of knowledge in the right kind. Thou can not read
aright one line throughout the whole Creation, nor one tittle of the Book of
God. Thou do not know God, or the creatures, or (that which thou think
cannot but be known) that God made the creatures. Thou do not know sin, or
the Law whereby sin is sin, or Christ who is the Redeemer from sin. That which
thou call the knowledge of these things, (which indeed thou have) is not
knowledge; and when they come to be opened in the light of the Lord (which shall
put out thy light, and discover thy darkness, which is now painted as if it
were light) thou shall find thou do not know them. Thou art so far from
Redemption, that thou never knew what sin was, even thou who can talk of
sin, and seem to thy self to be able to open it in the several kinds,
natures and degrees of it. Ah poor perishing man, how will thou be deluded in
thy hopes of Salvation! Thy ways are the ways of death, all thy motions toward
God, toward Life, toward Happiness (as thou think) are but so many steps
from it: Thou do but dream of things in the night, (and it is not much
material whether thy dreams please or disturb thy fancy, for whichsoever it be
it is but imaginary, thy very certainty is imaginary,) but fetchest not one
step in the light, and when thou awakest, and come to behold the vanity of
thy dreams, O how sick will thou be of them! Thou walk toward happiness, O
Man? thou can not so much as desire happiness: (Thou can not but desire
happiness, and yet thou can not for thy heart desire happiness:) As thou
come from the flesh, so thou centerest in the flesh, and fain would come to
rest in a fleshly happiness from God, but thou would choose to go to Hell
rather then come near true Life, which will, one day, be more tormenting to
thee then all the Hells thou can imagine. O how tormenting is the Life and
Love of God to every thing but it self! tormenting in its nature, tormenting in
every motion of it. Every creature can imagine an excellency in his life, in
his love; but none can groundedly acknowledge it, nay none can bear it: They
call that so (and can very well bear that) which they fancy in him, (if God
were that which man imagines him to be, he could not but love him and honor
him exceedingly, and desire the greatest intimacy and communion with him,) but
they cannot call that so which is so in him, for when they come near it their
very sense and experience will undenyably evidence it to be otherwise to them.
Wisdom cries aloud to thee, O Man, she has long uttered her voice in thy
streets; but thou can not hear nor understand her language, the way of life
thou can not know: The light shines in thy darkness, but thy darkness cannot
comprehend it; therefore must thou dye in thy blindness and folly, while WISDOM
laughs at thy destruction, and mocks when thy fear comes. This is thy Judgment
written, which will at length overtake thee, how skilful soever thou art at
present to put it far from thee.

Of the Seasons, varieties and changes in the inward World, which answer to the
seasons, varieties and changes in the outward World (which is a map or picture
of them) according to the description given by that wise Observer of the Course
of Nature. ECCLES. 3. Verse. 1, etc. To every thing there is a season, and a
time to every purpose under the Heaven.

A time to be born, and a time to dye: a time to plant, and a time to pluck up
that which is planted.

A time to kill, and a time to heal: a time to break down, and a time to build
up.

A time to weep, and a time to laugh: a time to mourn, and a time to dance.

A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together: a time to
embrace, and a time to be far from embracing.

A time to get, and a time lose: a time to keep, and a time to cast away.

A time to rent, and a time to sow: a time to keep silence, and a time to speak.

A time to love, and a time to hate: a time of war, and a time of peace.

What profit has he that works, in that wherein he laboreth?

I have seen the travel which God has given to the sons of men to be exercised
therein.

He has made every thing beautiful in his time; also he has set the World in
their heart, so that no man can find out the Work that God makes from the
beginning to the end.


THis is the whole course of things here below: In living and dying, (coming
into the world, and going out of the world,) planting and plucking up, killing
and healing, breaking down and building, weeping and laughing, mourning and
dancing, etc. the world passes away. Some come in, some go out; Some plant,
some pluck up; Some kill, some heal; Some break down, some build; Some weep,
some laugh; Some mourn, some dance, etc. Yea the very same persons have their
several seasons, to go forth in these several motions so contrary one to
another. Man is ordained to walk retrograde to himself, to go quite contrary
ways, to fetch contrary steps, to throw down all that he builds, to build all
that he throws down, to go so many degrees of death as he has gone degrees of
life, to run through so many passages in the dark world as he has gone through
in the light World, one while to make himself an universal transgressor, and
anon to justify himself in all his transgressions, (and he is but a vain fool
in all; a fool living a fool dying; a fool planting, a fool plucking up; a fool
killing, a fool healing; a fool weeping, a fool laughing; a fool making himself
a sinner, a fool making himself a Saint.) There is no man has so much life and
so much pleasure allotted to him, but he must taste death answerable: and there
is no man undergoeth and runs through so much misery, anguish, grief,
trouble, but he shall have happiness, joy, rest, peace, content answerable when
his season comes, when those superior Orbs which carry these influences in them
are circumvolved by that power which moves them, and produces these effects
by them.

There is an inward World much like this outward, (it is the Copy after which
this was drawn;) There are such Elements in it as in this, after the same
manner compounded, by the same art and skill; There are creatures there of the
same manner of make as these here: There is an inward man to govern this inward
world: There are the same seasons of night and day, Winter and Summer (with the
several concomitants of each, and with the several alterations in each) which
have their force and influences upon the inward man and the inward world, as
these here have upon the outward, (but none of all the Beings in this inward
world has any sight or understanding of the state of things here but the
inward man, as none of all the creatures have any understanding of the state of
this outward world but the outward man, though every outward thing has its
place and state in it, yet unknown to it self, none here knows either where
it is, or what it is, but man, or rather in that manner that man does, for man
does it not truly neither.) There are here also winds, some nipping, some
cherishing; and rains, some refreshing, some overflowing and drowning. There is
likewise here a Sun to rule and give light by day, and a Moon and Stars to give
light by night. And this world has its course just like the outward; it begins
with Life, first traversing the several paths of it, and then runs backward
retiring into the chambers and degrees of death. And herein will God deceive
the thoughts and expectations of all men, both the inward man and the outward
man: for the inward world shall dye and pass away so as the inward man could
never imagine it possible, and the outward world shall live and remain so as
the outward man could never imagine it possible: The one shall meet with such a
death as it never dreamed of, and the other with such a life as it never
dreamed of: The one (for all the vigor of its life) shall not find it self
able to live out of God, when the time of its remove and separation comes; and
the other (for all its weakness) shall find it self able to live in God, when
it is taken into him. There is nothing so weak, so imperfect; but God can make
it taste of strength, of perfection: There is nothing so strong, so perfect;
but God can make it taste of weakness and imperfection. There was nothing ever
born, planted, built up, etc. but may have a time to dye, to be plucked up, to
be thrown down, etc. There was nothing ever deaded, plucked up, rased out; but
may have a time to be quickened, to be planted, to be written in again.

All things are brought forth in weakness, the inward world as well as the
outward: All things under the Sun there are vanity, are to have but a vain
course, and to end in vexation of spirit. God indeed is perfect in every motion
of his both in the inward and in the outward world, ( I know that whatsoever he
does, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from
it, Verse. 14.) But man is weak, man is vain, the outward man vain, the inward
man vain; every motion of his comes to nothing: He seems to be wondrous
wise, to have motions of great weight (even of Eternity) upon him, but alas he
cannot reach Eternity, he is but a vain empty cipher which stands for nothing:
He has purposes in him: but his purposes are poor shallow things, and there is
a season for them, wherein he takes his swinge in them, but these seasons must
blow over too, and the time must come wherein man must be ripped up with all
his hurdle of vanity from the very beginning to the end, and then both he and it
blown away with the wind; an eternal puff will quickly set them all packing.

What profit has he that works, in that wherein he laboreth?

O God, Let others treasure up, but I abhor, I throw away every inward motion
that ever has sprung up from me! I will have nothing to delight in, nothing to
glory in, nothing to hope from before thee. Do thou gather them up and save
them as they are thine (as thou have been and appeared in them) but as mine let
them pass away for evermore. Let there be no profit of all my labor and
travel. Do thou reap the travel of thy Soul and be satisfied; but for my part I
have long turned, and still do, and cannot but turn from all the works of my
hands, all the delights of my spirit, even in the inward world, and with as
perfect irksomness and tiredness of spirit, as ever Solomon did from his in the
outward.

He has made every thing beautiful in his time.

Every thing is beautiful in its season, and nothing is lovely out of its
season. There Is a beauty in life, O how lovely is the spring both in the inward
and outward world! The life of the flesh, the life of the spirit, each shoots
forth with a grace. And there is a beauty in death, it is comely to see things
dye when the season of death comes. There is nothing so black but there is
beauty written in it, nothing so evil but it has goodness engraven on it;
Nothing so bad but it is good in its own place, order, season, course; nothing
so good but it is bad out of its place: There Is a beauty in killing, and a
beauty in healing; a beauty in weeping, and a beauty in laughing, etc. in their
seasons, but of their seasons they are very deformed.

All the motions of God, both in the inward and in the outward world, are very
exact; They have all reference one to another, the outward to the inward, the
inward to the outward, every motion in each has an universal aspect and
referrence, there is a strain of Eternity in every motion: There is the very
Nature and Excellency of God in every thing that God does, every thing as it
comes from him savours and tastes of his own Perfection. Man has but a poor
sight of things, either the outward or inward man, and after that manner that
he sees he does not see either from the beginning or to the end of any thing:
The outward man sees not any outward thing so, nor does the inward man see any
inward thing so. And indeed God has so set the world in man's heart, that man
cannot be left free and unbyassed in observation and judgment: There is such a
desire, planted in man, to grasp and enjoy what ever is discovered (every thing
in the outward world there is a desire in the outward man to possess, every
thing in the inward world there is a desire in the inward man to possess) that
man cannot addict and apply himself to understand things, to observe the motion
and operation of God in things from the beginning to the end. There is nothing
seen in the root, either as it lies in the root, or as it springs out of the
root, or as it returns into the root: Man has only a brutish knowledge of
things, or of the motions and actions of God in and about things, seeing only a
present appearance of this or that, but not knowing what it is, whence it came,
what it means, or whither it tends. And this also is beautiful in its season;
Darkness becomes the night, (spiritual darkness the spiritual night) as light
becomes the day: and shadows and lies are as proper for the night, as Truth and
substance is for the day. While the night remains it is as suitable that the
shadows should remain also, as that when the day dawns the shadows should fly
away.

Now here is the Excellency of Christ, of Sion, of the holy Seed, They are not
exempted from any varieties or changes either in the inward or outward world,
but in their running through them they still remain the same. They are like
God; Every where, in every thing, what ever their clothes, what ever their
appearances be, yet their Substance, their Life is still the same. The inward
man shall be befooled (all his light be put out, and he made to see and confess
that he knows nothing) as well as the outward, it is the spiritual man only
(whether in the seed or grown up) that shall live and flourish: And for the
coming of this day my Soul, after its own hidden way and manner, waits and
longs, the breaking forth whereof is alone able to afford my spirit rest and
satisfaction.

The secret, hidden, most inward Voice and Demeanor of Sion, in the time of her
Captivity; FROM LAMENT. 3. Verse. 24, etc. The Lord is my Portion, says my
Soul, therefore will I hope in him.

The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the Soul that seeks him.

It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of
the Lord.

It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.

He sits alone and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him.

He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.

He gives his cheek to him that smites him, he is filled full with reproach.

For the Lord will not cast off for ever.

But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies.


Verse. 24. The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul.
A Portion is the child's share in his fathers estate, containing in it present
provision for him, education according to his quality and degree, and a
proportion of substance for him afterward to enjoy and inherit as his fathers
estate will bear, and as his fathers good will stands toward him.

The Lord has his children, and he (according to the bond of the relation)
provides portions for them, shares out his own estate among them, takes care
of them, both to furnish them with necessaries, and to bring them up (by
education suitable to their rank) in the time of their nonage, and has cut out
an inheritance for them, which he will freely bestow upon them when they come
to age, which he has divided and disposed of partly according to the greatness
of his own estate, partly according to the disposition and inclination of his
own Will.

Now this Portion is the Lord himself. As he has cut out his people for
himself, (the Lords Portion is his People, Jacob is the lot of his
Inheritance:) So he has cut out himself for his Peoples Portion, the Lord is
my Portion, says my Soul. For every thing that is made he has made provision,
but his own Seed has he reserved for himself, and himself for his Seed. They
come from nothing but God, they live upon nothing but God, they can expect
nothing but God: He is all their share, all that ever was intended or appointed
for them, all they have, all they can enjoy, all they are to look for.

And as God knows this, so his Seed have a knowledge of this likewise: When they
are grown up to understanding they come to see whose they are, from whence they
came, to whom they belong, what their life and hope is. Their relation, and all
that belongs to them, is written in their very nature, which when they come to
be so skilful as to read, they cannot but take notice of.

But in their Captivity their light and their life is buried, their relation to
God veiled, they removed at a distance from him: He severs them from him as if
they belonged not to him, he acts toward them as if he knew them not, he
lets all kind of misery and distress befall them as if he took no care of
them at all; so that the poor Soul loses all sight of him, all viable virtue
from him, yea and interest in him, cannot tell how to lay any hold of him: Yet
for all this there remains a deep inward sense of this thing, and the heart
secretly, inwardly (in such a manner as perhaps the person himself cannot
distinguish the sound) says, the Lord is my Portion. I have no share in any
thing but God; nothing can help me, nothing can relieve me, nothing can refresh
me but God: And I have a share in him, he will yet look after me, (I shall yet
see him, who is the health of my countenance and my God,) he will yet be Life
unto me, and Spirit in me; The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul.

Therefore will I hope in him.

In extremity, the poor creature looks up and down every where is everywhere
kindling desire after relief, and everywhere fastening hope for relief: But the
heart of the Spouse, the heart of the child looks for no relief any where else
but only from her Husband, from its Father, nor will fasten hope any where
else. If it can but look at any time into its own heart, it shall hear this
kind of language; Nothing can relieve me but God, Nothing can mitigate my
misery but God, Nothing can satisfy my tormenting love, my scortching desire,
but the full enjoyment of God; therefore there is all the hope I have: I may be
made to search up and down by the force of extremity; I may be persuaded to try
this way and that way, and the other way, but I have no manner of expectation
from them, I cannot hope in them, I will not hope in them, I will hope in him.
He is all my share, my only share; my help, my relief lies there or no where,
from thence must I have it, or no where at all, and thither alone will I have
recourse, upon him will I hang for it.

Verse. 25. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the Soul that
seeks him.

There are two son-like tempers or kinds of motion in the spirit of this child
toward his Father, in his Fathers withdrawing and absence for him; which are
to wait for him, and to seek after him. He waits and he seeks, he seeks and he
waits. Fain would he find him, and therefore he seeks; and yet he would not
have him come before his own time, and therefore he waits for his appointed
season: He waits for a full enjoyment of him, he seeks for present food and
support. Those that know not God can neither wait nor seek: but those that have
this life in them can forbear neither, for their nature is pointed toward it,
their nature puts them into, and keeps them in that posture, it is the proper
course and current of their nature, which cannot be stopped while their nature
remains: If it were possible, by the thickness of darkness, and extremity of
misery, to drive them into the greatest hatred of these, and strongest
resolution against these, yet their spirits would return again to their course,
yea in the very midst hereof have their secret current through secret channels
(though perhaps untaken notice of by themselves) in these. To what parpose is
it to wait, to what purpose is it to seek, says the flesh and the fleshly
birth? Yes it is to purpose, says the Spirit and the spiritual Child, for the
Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the Soul that seeks him. It is
not in vain to wait for God, for the goodness and kindness of God, to seek him,
or what our spirits want from him; The Lord is good to such. You cannot
persuade the child, that it is in vain for him to ask what he wants of his
father, or to wait the pleasure of his father for it, he knows it is not. He
who is led to seek God, to wait for God; to seek what his spirit wants of God,
to wait for it from God, shall find that the Lord, who put him into this
posture, who keeps and sustains him in this posture, will be good unto him: And
what ever jealousies to the contrary may be whispered into his ears, yet they
cannot enter into the inmost of his heart, but there is still this secret
language there, The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the Soul that
seeks him.

Verse. 26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
Salvation of the Lord.

That which the poor creature in thraldom, in bonds, in captivity, in misery
needs is Salvation: That which the Lords Captives (those that are captived at
his appointment, and for his sake) that which they need is his Salvation, even
the Salvation of the Lord. There is no hastening of this Salvation, nor no
attaining any other Salvation, ( They that seek after lying vanities, forsake
their own mercies: They that turn aside from him, after any thing but him,
follow after vain things which cannot profit, for they are vain;) the best way
is to hope and wait for it with all the quietness that may be. This does best
compose and temper the spirit in its present misery, to hope that deliverance
will come, and to wait, with all possible quietness, until it come. Well, I
will be content to bear the buffetings of Satan, to lie open to all manner of
enemies, to all manner of evils; to every vanity, to every temptation, to every
corruption; to have no light to walk by, no life to move in me, no strength for
or against any thing: How can it be otherwise? I am in a strange Land, in mine
enemies hands, cast off by my God for a season; but there will come a time when
he will again visit me, when he will visit me with Salvation. Then shall I have
all these burdens and oppressions removed from me: Till then, I must lie under
them, and I will give up my neck to the yoke, and my shoulders to the load,
till be vouchsafe to ease me. The easiest posture in misery is the spirits
suiting and complying with it.

Verse. 27. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.

Every one must bear the yoke. The son of Belial, the untamed flesh must be
tamed in every one by the yoke. Every one (how unruly soever at present) shall
one day be made subject to the Will, Power and Law of him who has prepared and
fitted a yoke for that end. And the sooner this subjection is begun, the
easilier will it be wrought. A tender twig will be more easily bent. Captivity
is not so bitter to a child, as to him who has long tasted the sweetness of
his own Country, and of liberty in his Country. It is good to begin betimes to
drink ones draught of misery: It will be the sooner over, the more easily
swallowed, and work the more kindly. It will require a great deal of pains to
bring them to the yoke, and to break them in the yoke, who were never
acquainted with it (whose necks were never used to it) till their old age.

Verse. 28. He sits alone and keeps silence, because he has born it upon
him.

Here is the posture of the man in misery, he sits alone and keeps
silence. Grief chooses solitariness and silence: I am like a Pelican in the
wilderness, like an Owl in the desert. The behavior of the child of God, in
every condition, is from his nature, which guides him in this season to
lonesomeness and silence. He who can hear nothing, know nothing, act nothing;
can neither give nor receive, what should he do in company? He wants him with
whom alone he knows how to converse, and therefore what should he do but sit
alone mourning for him? There is none can know or taste his condition, or apply
themselves in any wise suitable to it, what should he do among them? The Turtle
cannot but choose solitariness to mourn and bewail the loss of her mate.

And keeps silence. All he does alone is to give scope to grief. He says
nothing, but throbs and mourns in his heart. He will not, he cannot allay his
grief by speaking it out, but keeps silence. He has nothing to say
concerning any thing, or to any save to him whom he cannot come to speak with,
and therefore is enforced to keep silence. His weight, his burden takes up
all his thoughts, (taking forcible possession of them by reason of that
advantage it has from sense,) and yet he has nothing to say concerning that
neither; neither concerning the burden it self, nor concerning the meaning of
him who laid it upon him.

Because he has born it upon him. It is a mighty burden, such an one as put
God as it were to bearing or lifting of it. And because God did it (whom he
understands not in any of his ways or motions) he is silent; I held my peace,
because thou did it. He takes no notice either of men or means whereby he is
afflicted, he knows they are but mere instruments: but the captivity, the
misery he feels, he knows to be from the Lord (who ever had the dispose of him)
and that makes him silent.

Verse. 29. He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be their may be hope.

The mouth of the people of God is their glory before men, as their heart is
their glory before God. With their mouth they confess and honor him. That
which men hear of the renown of God is from the mouths of his people, whose
heart alone knows him, and whose tongue alone can declare him. But this he
puts in the dust, covering his glory with shame: He knows nothing now of
God, and can speak nothing now of God. He abaseth the instrument of his praise
(hangs his harp upon the willows,) those lips that were wont to lift up the
great Name of God in the world, are now laid in the dust: He puts his mouth
in the dust.

If so be there may be hope. Good God! How low is the Seed of God brought in
their Captivity! If so be there may be hope! He who was wont to glory in God;
who feared no difficulty, no danger, no enemy, who was sure he could never fall
so low but he should be raised up again, who could rejoice in all manner of
tribulations, by this Captivity is brought to that stress, that his hopes
faint, and he is fain to feed them with peradventures, with an if it may be. It
may be, for all this, God will look toward me: Though I am even swallowed up,
nay though the pit has shut her mouth upon me, it may be there may come
Redemption from the grave; it may be the great Whale in the great Sea may be
forced by Eternal Power to spue up its prisoner. And this is the furthest they
can go, and it is a great degree of life and refreshment too: for when all
light is shut out, that there is no sight of Redemption or a Redeemer, and the
spirit within flags, and is so continually overwhelmed with waves and billows,
that it has not a moments respite to lift up its head, how can it go further?
it is well it can go so far as an if. Read but a little backward, and you shall
hear another language far different from this, My hope and my strength is
perished from the Lord: I may now even go shift for my self as well as I can,
but that hope, that strength which I fastened upon God for, and which I was
wont to have from God, is quite lost, the very bottom of it is failed.

Verse. 30. He gives his cheek to him that smites him.

He resists not evil: All his strength is broken, and now he knows how to
resist no longer. He lies open to all manner of injuries from all manner of
enemies; he yields up his face to men, to Satan to buffet. Now his wisdom is
taken from him, his spirit is not so averse from bearing oppression. He wants
his true fence, his proper fortress, which he knows is alone able to secure
him, and so he seeks no shelter from any indignity, from any stroke of malice
or cruelty, but yields himself (like Christ) to be led about like a fool, spit
upon, buffeted, any thing.

He is filled full with reproach.

There is no such object of shame and obloquy, as the people of God in their
Captivity. Their former height, their nearness to God, their interest in God,
their boasts about their expectations from God, all tend to fit them for and
lay them open to the greater scorn: And the more livelily God did appear and
act in them before, the greater is their present shame. All that pass by clap
their hands at thee, they hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem.
What is this the City that men call the perfection of beauty, the joy of the
whole Earth? Is this the people that were so glorious, so eminent in piety, in
purity, in self-denial, in mortification, in faith, in love, in all manner of
righteousness and holiness? And his spirit is sensible of the just ground of
this reproach that is cast upon him; for there is not that loveliness that was,
nay there is all manner of unloveliness appearing in him, now God has left
him. He is besmeared all over with lying among the pots, and though he be
comely in this his blackness, yet not to any outward eye, no not to his own
eye; he sees not his own comeliness, and therefore cannot cast off any of that
reproach that is thrown upon him, not so much as from his own spirit, but is
filled with it; he is filled full with reproach.

Verse. 31. For the Lord will not cast off for ever.

Here is the ground, of all this his misery, hinted at: God has cast him off
at present. When he had nothing he was made rich by Gods entertaining him, and
taking care of him, who when he saw him in his blood pitied him, and bid him
live: But now, he who clothed him, strips him again naked, (naked as in the day
that he was born;) he, who took him in, thrusts him out of doors; he, who gave
him light, takes away his light; he, who breathed life into him, dries up his
life; he, who redeemed him out of his enemies hand, delivers him back into
his enemies hand again: And now he is worse then he was before, both worse used
by his enemies, and more sensible of his sufferings and misery in his own
spirit. Thus it was with Christ; He was the Son of his Love, he in and with
whom he delighted to live and converse, his only one, in whom the pleasure of
his Soul was seated, whom he was continually nigh unto, whom he delighted to
satisfy, fill and please with himself, with the inhabitation, presence and
enjoyment of himself: But at last, when Christ had most need of him, then he
left him; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And thus may every one
also partake of, feel and complain of it, when the time of their Captivity,
when the season, of the hour and power of darkness's seizing upon them, comes.

But the Lord will not cast off for ever: Though he does thus cast off, and
make miserable for a season, yet it shall be but for a season, it shall not
always last: And it is a secret sense of this that makes him thus quietly give
up himself unto his present most miserable condition. Thou will not leave my
Soul in Hell, I shall not always lie in the grave, says Christ; and while I
lie there, that life which I would have preserved shall not corrupt there: I
shall lose nothing by my death, by my misery, but that which I my self am
willing to part with. I shall not lose my God, for he will be still with me in
the grave (though not to my sense) and will raise me out of the grave, and
manifest himself again unto me. He will so appear in me, that I shall fear
grave, death, hell, sin, devil no more. Why then art thou so sad O my Soul, and
why art thou so disquieted within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet see him, and
satisfy the desire of my heart with the sight of him. The Lord will not cast
off for ever, nay does not cast off at present any further then I desire to be
cast off by him. Though there is that weakness and tenderness in me (which is
much increased by duration of misery) which turns from the cup, and desires if
it were possible to avoid it, yet there is that also in me which takes it
willingly, and drinks it down heartily, and stands ready to embrace both that
sickness and that death (with all its sick fits, and sharp pangs) which it
hastens upon them who drink deeply of it.

Verse. 32. But though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to
the multitude of his mercies.

It is God that causes grief: He measures out our sorrow to us, as well as
the misery that causes it. He drowneth the Soul in anguish, who thought it had
been impossible for him to have been driven from rejoicing and delighting in
himself. And our state requires it: We have as much need of the pain, of the
smart, of the grief, as of the affliction that occasioneth it, ( if need be,
yea if need be, only if need be, ye suffer heaviness through many temptations,
for he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men from his
heart; it is his strange work, not his natural delight.) He sends into
captivity, and he makes that captivity doleful; and though we cry and roar,
yet will he not hear, but shut up his bowels against us: But he will have a
time again to have compassion, he will have a time to heal and take away grief,
as well as to wound and cause it. He has multitude of mercies within him to
heal and make up every condition of misery with, and he will one day open the
sluices wide, and let forth all his bowels, he will have compassion according to
the multitude of his mercies: And then he that keeps not alive his Soul shall
know and praise him.

God will build up Sion, and when he builds up Sion he will appear in his
Glory: He will repair the old waste places, and shine himself in those desolate
ruins: He will make the Wilderness a pleasant Land, even his own garden of
delight. Wise man could never know God, could never learn the way to God, could
never be acquainted with the Life of God, that which he calls so is vanity: But
Gods fools shall know him; Those that are indeed stripped and made naked by him
shall indeed be clothed with him; Those whose old life, old eye, old heart is
slain, dead and buried, shall be raised with a new life, a new eye, a new
heart, and that life shall live in God, that eye see God, and that heart
embrace God. This feed, which has so long layn dead in the grave, when it is
raised by that Almighty Power which slew it, shall love the Lord its God with
all its heart, and live.

Therefore, Say not, O Jacob, nor complain not, O Israel, saying, My way is hid
from the Lord, (God takes no notice of what befalls me,) My Judgment (that
Salvation which God himself has judged suitable to my condition) is passed
over by my God: for he will show himself as skilful to vent his mercies and
compassions (which all miseries tend to stir) as he has been to cause grief.
As he has been exceeding skilful in making such a wound in thee as none can
administer any thing to heal or mitigate the smart of, so he will likewise
approve his skill in providing balm himself, and in applying it to effect a
perfect cure. None could grieve thee but he, none could touch thy life but he;
he has touched thy life to purpose, so as thou never suspectedst: None can
refresh thee, none can restore thee but he; stay, wait, see what he will do,
and if he do not satisfy thee with life and Salvation, spare not to blame him.

The Ruin, Destruction, and utter Desolation of Babylon, FROM REVEL. 18. Verse.
21. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into
the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown
down, and shall be found no more at all.


BAbylon is the chief fabric, the great masterpiece of the spirit of man, the
City that man builds to dwell with God in, to enjoy God in, yea the great
City, which all the will, wisdom and power of man have contributed toward to
the utmost, to make it glorious and sumptuous, to make it pleasing to, and
taking with the spirit of man. The City that God builds is Sion, the City that
man builds is Babylon. The City that God erecteth is spiritual, he does it by
his own Spirit, with his own spiritual Wisdom: The City that man erecteth is
carnal, from and according to the measure of his own carnal mind; That which he
sets up for the Will of God, for the Worship of God, is but according to his
own carnal apprehension and imagination; That which he worships for God is not
God, but Bell or Merodach his own Idol, an Idea which his own wisdom has
framed, which he sees and apprehends to be God with the eye of his
understanding, but will prove but emptiness and vanity in the presence and
light of the true and living Substance.

In this Babylon, in this great City there are many streets, and in them many
houses, and in them many rooms of several heights or stories: There is much
beauty, much riches, much sweetness, much pleasure: Their worship of their Idol
is glorious; their enjoyments high, their pleasure great, their raptures sweet:
There is somewhat in one street or other, in one room or other, to allure and
entangle the spirit of man in what dress soever it be; (she has wares suitable
to the spirit of man, be it in what state or posture it will,) and hereby she
prevails to draw the whole Earth after her. In Sion there is a God, a Will, a
Worship, a Light, a Purity that will not bend one jot to humor the will or
wisdom of man in the least, and therefore the ways of Sion mourn, poor Sion is
desolate: But Babylon is suited to the wisdom and will of man, there is
somewhat in her to take every one with, and therefore all the trade and
traffic runs that way.

O the beauty of Babylon! O the excellent order in Babylon to the eye of man!
(the unity, the uniformity, the harmony, the decency!) Sion is a poor mean
thing, not worthy to be compared with Babylon, nay hardly worthy, to be the
footstool of Babylon. But O the filthiness of Babylon, O the confusion of
Babylon to the eye and in the light of God! and O how beautiful is Sion there!

In Babylon there are two eminent things to be taken notice of.

There Is their own Image, their own way, their own worship, their own knowledge,
their own light adorned, beautified, presented as very taking, and enforced
upon all; all must acknowledge and do reverence to this Image some way or other:
They must worship in some street, in some house, in some room, though not all
in one and the same.

And then there is the holy Seed, and the vessels of the House of the Lord in
Captivity; the true Life, the true Power is hampered and kept under there: The
people of God lie there among the pots, defiled, besmeared, made slaves, and
put to nothing but drudgery in the Land of their enemies. No loveliness appears
in them, but all the glory shines in and about Babylons brood: They appear poor
and wretched; the rich ones, the great ones are the children of Babylon. Sion
mourns, pants, fetches breath for life, is destitute, afflicted, tormented:
Babylon has pleasure, lives deliciously; lightsomness is in her countenance,
and sorrow far from her heart, I fit as a Queen, says she, and shall never see
widowhood. The Babylonians, they have a glorious God and a glorious Worship,
all things magnificent: But Gods people they are like lost sheep, like sheep
turned away upon the mountains, like sheep running astray, having none to take
care of them; God does not look after them now so as he did while they were in
their own Land, nor do they know how to find out their God, but wander up and
down from mountain to hill, having forgotten their resting place.

In the destruction of Babylon, there will be the Redemption, the rescue, the
delivery of this Seed; the defacing of all her glory, the discovery of her
paint, and the lothsomness of that underneath, which she thus painted, and the
clothing of Sion with Life and Salvation, with true Beauty and Glory. She
(Babylon) shall have torment in stead of pleasure, (How much she has glorified
her self and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. The voice
of the Bridegroom and of the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee.)
Darkness in stead of light, (The light of a candle shall shine no more at all
in thee.) Howling in stead of music, (The voice of Harpers, Musicians, etc.
shall be heard no more at all in thee.) Desolation in stead of such abundant
traffic, (No Crafts-man, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more
in thee: and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee.)
Filthy nakedness in stead of precious garments and ornaments, for she was
clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet; and decked with gold, and
precious stones, and pearls.

The plagues and downfall of Babylon (they may be put together, for her plagues
shall quickly make an end of her) shall be sudden, violent, and utterly
destructive.

Sudden, like the taking up of a stone, and throwing it into the Sea; her
plagues come in one day, Verse. 8. ( death, mourning, famine, yea utter
burning,) nay in one hour, Verse. 17.

Violent, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down;
besides its own weight, which will make it descend downward amain, there is the
strength of him that casts it added to it, and it is a mighty Angel, who is
chosen out to that purpose.

And utterly destructive, she shall be so sunk that she shall be found no more.
Sion, though long drowned and lost in Babylon, shall be fought out and found
again, her Land shall be married; though she fall, she shall rise again; though
her light be put out, and she sit long in the dark sighing and mourning over
her widowhood and desolation, yet her Sun shall rise again, light shall spring
unto her out of obscurity: But Babylon shall be utterly destroyed, eternally
destroyed, shall be put to such a death as it shall never recover from, shall
be buried in that Sea where nothing can never be found more that is cast into
it; and shall be found no more.

After this manner shall Babylon be destroyed. It shall not only be rased to
the ground, but it shall be plucked up by the very roots: God will not only cut
off some branches of Babylon, and cast them into the fire, but he will lay the
Ax to the root of the tree, and cast the whole tree with all its branches,
leaves, fruit, trunk, root and all into that fire which shall prevail over it
utterly to consume it. Sion shall be purified with Judgment, but Babylon shall
be destroyed with Judgment: Sion shall be purged by the fire, but Babylon shall
be burnt to nothing in the fire; This dross the fire will lick up for ever, and
suffer to be or appear no more.

An Exhortation to such in whom the seed of life is sown, to wait for the
growth and happy success of it; FROM JAMES 5. Verse. 7, 8. Be patient therefore,
Brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: behold, the husbandman waits for the
precious fruit of the Earth, and has long patience for it, until he receive
the early and latter rain.

Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draws
nigh.


BRethren. They in whom the Seed of God is sown are brethren: They are begotten
by the same Father in the same nature and life; They are members of the very
same Body whereof Christ is the Head: They have such a relation one to another,
such a knowledge of one another, such love toward one another, such delight in
one another, as that which is in the world among natural brethren (even where
it is highest and purest) is but a dark shadow of. Christ is the Head of this
relation, (the Foundation, the top stone, the corner stone in this new
building,) he is the firstborn, the eldest Son, the elder Brother; but all the
rest have a share in it, they are also the children of God, and having the same
sonship from God, they must needs become brethren with him, and among one
another, I will declare thy name among the brethren.

Be patient. Every thing is exposed to suffering; the first Creation, the
second Creation: Man, Christ, God, every thing. That which sweetens sufferings,
and makes the sufferer hold out, is patience. If man were not endued with
patience, he could never go through those hardships which he ordinarily meets
with: If Christ had not been furnished with patience, he could never have born
the contradiction of sinners, the weight of sin, and the absence of his Father:
If God himself had not patience, he could never suffer his Name and Glory to be
so trampled upon in the world. There is a patience formed in every thing
proportionable to its nature and kind of sufferings. God and Christ, as their
sufferings are great, so their patience is of a very deep intense nature, they
are not capable of being provoked further then they themselves please to give
way to it: And the new-man, as he must drink of the same cup of sufferings with
them, so he has the same patience given him. There is none knows the nature
of his sufferings, nor does any know the nature of his patience.

Be patient. Give your selves up to patience, settle your spirits to wait
quietly; be content to meet with storms, with blasts, with troubles, and to
stay your time for the enjoyment of your life and happiness. Every thing must
be encouraged and cherished according to its nature and kind, or it will not
grow nor move freely and kindly. The natural man, who has natural patience,
must apply himself unto it, or his passions will over-master him, and make his
troubles very grievous and burdensome to him. Man has knowledge, faith, love,
joy, patience, meekness (for these are not spiritual, but where they grow in a
spiritual seed, from a spiritual stock) yea all natural excellencies sown in
him; but if he has not wisdom to draw them forth and manage them aright, he
cannot use them, he cannot enjoy them, he cannot reap that sweet benefit which
he might from them: The New-man has faith, love, patience, yea all spiritual
excellencies in him, but for want of spiritual skill these are not always drawn
forth into act according to the strength of them within; but many times, in
many cases the use of them, and that comfort and refreshment that might be had
by them is lost. There are oppositions to every kind of motion; to faith, to
love, to hope, to joy, and so to patience: now if there be not strength within
to graple with, and overcome the opposition met with, these motions must needs
flag. I know this life is of such a nature as that it cannot be put out, This
faith, this love, this patience, every thing of this impression, must live for
ever: yet its life may be driven back exceedingly inward, and it deprived of
all the sense and sweetness of life or refreshment by life.

Unto the Coming of the Lord. Here he tells them how long their patience should
last, namely until the Lord come; then they shall wait no longer, then they
shall hope no longer, then they shall desire no longer, but enjoy what they
have waited for, hoped after and desired.

The Lord. Christ is the Head of both Creations, he is the Lord of Life; he
gave life unto both, he has appointed every thing its course in life and
motion, and he will call all to an account concerning every Talent that they
have been entrusted with by him.

The Coming of the Lord. Christ was once here in this World in a fleshly body
like ours, causing the glory of the Godhead (which dwelt in his Spirit) to
shine in it and through it as he pleased, conversing with men, but more
especially with his own, going in and out before them as the shepherd does
before his sheep: He came unto the world, and he came unto his own: He made an
offer of himself to the world, he enforced himself upon his own, or which is
all one, made them willing to receive him in the day of his power. Now after he
had thus lived a while he went away again, appeared thus no more, was to be
seen or known thus no longer: The Comforter was to come to sustain their hearts
until the coming of Christ again, but Christ himself was to be seen no more,
until his return from that far Country into which he then went, when he took
his leave of his dearest ones. The Seed of God they are the Spouse of Christ,
and their life consists in the presence of their Husband: If they might have
the Spirit of God dwelling in them never so fully, it will not serve their
turn, they must have Christ's company. There is that foundation laid in the
spiritual Nature between Christ and them, that neither could enjoy God with
content without the other, neither can they enjoy themselves any where without
one another: They cannot enjoy themselves in the earth till they enjoy Christ
there, nor can Christ enjoy himself in Heaven till he enjoys them there. Their
content, their life, their happiness is bound up in one another, and there
alone can they reap and possess it.

The Coming of the Lord. Christ is gone, removed out of the world from the eye
of flesh, a cloud has taken him out of our sight: He is hid in God even where
he was hid before he was manifested in the flesh, and thither is he retired
again, whither no eye can follow him; whither I go ye cannot come: and there
must he stay the appointed season. But he is to come again, he will come again,
he shall come again, He that shall come will come: If I go and prepare a place,
I will come again and receive you unto my self.

There are two things comprised in the Coming of Christ, two great effects of
his coming, which make it on the one hand so terible to some, and on the other
hand so desirable to others. There is the death of the world in it, and the
life of his people. He will come to Judgment, to reveal, declare and execute
Judgment: And this is the Judgment, which he has already pronounced (though
not in the same way as then he will, he has but talked of it yet, but then he
will make good what he has hitherto held out but in words) viz. Death to the
old earthly man, he will strike him at the very root, and in all his branches
and fruit, woe to every thing that has sprung from him, woe to him in every
thing wherein he has appeared and acted, Life to the new spiritual man;
Destruction to Babylon, everlasting destruction; Salvation to Sion, everlasting
Salvation: Your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompense, he
will come and save you. He will come with gloominess with darkness
over-spreading all the light of the Creature, but he will come with the light
of life to you: Because he lives, ye shall live also. He will cover all the
glory of the Creature with shame, but he will cloth you with glory. It does
not yet appear what we shall be, but when he appears we shall appear with him
in the same glory wherein he himself appears. His absence is your death, your
misery, your torment; but it is the joy, happiness and life of the world; they
cannot live nor enjoy any thing, nor rejoice in any thing in his presence. Ye
shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: why? what is the matter? O!
very great cause for both. Christ has left the Earth, and now the men of the
Earth can enjoy their life very quietly; that which disturbed, that which
interrupted their joy, their life, their peace, is removed: But it was that
which fed the life of his people, therefore they weep and mourn. But says
Christ, cheer up your spirits poor hearts, your grief and sadness shall have a
better issue then their mirth and jollity; your seed-time (though it be very
troublesome and boisterous, though ye sow in tears and deep anguish of spirit)
is better then their harvest: your sorrow shall be turned into joy, when their
joy shall be turned into sorrow: I will turn the scales one of these days, I
will see you again and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy none takes from
you. O how will the heart of the People of Christ leap at the sight of Christ
who is their full and only joy! And if he remain always with them, as he then
will, their joy can never be taken from them more. Be quiet therefore, be
patient; wait but till this time, till the Lord come, and you will find amends
made for all your misery. Then ye are to have your happiness, then ye are to
reap and enjoy, and ye shall reap and enjoy that which will give you full
content, if ye can but stay your time. But before the coming of the Lord expect
it not; If in the mean time ye may have but so much of the Spirit allowed you,
as may help you to rub on, as may keep you from sinking under your burdens and
miseries, it is well: but as for any enjoying of life or sweetness it is not
till then to be had.

Be patient therefore. Therefore. Because your happiness, your life, your
content will be so complete, so full and satisfactory then; because ye shall be
so full of joy, so abound with true riches, when they who have hitherto been
rich shall mourn over the loss of all: when the world shall lose all their life,
all their substance, all their hope, all their joy; then shall ye enter into
the possession of yours, which shall be as full and as lasting as your hearts
can desire. Be patient therefore; Be content to be without it a while and to
feel misery and anguish under the sense of the want of it: ye now therefore
have sorrow, ye must sow in tears before ye reap in joy; and be content to do
so, to go forth weeping to sow your precious seed, and stay for your crop till
the harvest, it will be worth your staying for: Be patient therefore.

Behold the Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the Earth, and has
long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. Ye see it
ordinary in the course of Nature; Precious things take time to grow, and the
Husbandman does not expect to reap so soon as he has sowed, but waits the
season, waits for the former rain, and after that waits again for the latter.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like seed sown, which must have seasons pass over it
before it spring up, must rot and dye before it live (though in its rotting it
does not rot, and in its dying it does not dye) and when it does spring up,
must grow gradually and undergo many changes before it comes to maturity.

There is a double sowing, one of Christ's, another of ours: Christ sows, and
we sow. Christ sows in us, and we sow unto him: He sows the seed of life in
us, and this life in us sows the seed of living motions toward him, and of
living operations in him; it moves spiritually toward Christ, it works
spiritually in Christ. Every motion of life, put forth toward Christ, is a
sowing; Every act of faith, of love, of joy, of expectation, of contentedness
and submission of spirit under his dispose, is a sowing; He that sows unto
the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he that sows unto the
spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting: To be spiritual, to move
spiritually, to live spiritually, is to sow unto the spirit; as to be carnal,
to move carnally, to live carnally, according to the will and desire of the
flesh, is to sow unto the flesh. Now all these, all these motions, all these
operations, this life with all the buddings forth of it must be thrown into the
Earth, dye there, be gone and lost a long season before they come to any thing,
so that the flesh which had great hopes because of them, great delight in them,
and great desire after them, will lose all its expectation, be weary of its
delight, and let fall its desire, and will be vehemently persuading the spirit
to do so also. To what purpose is it to believe? to what purpose is it to pray?
to what purpose is it to deny ones self, and to suffer in so many kinds? All
comes to nothing, he whose spirit multiplyeth in these, multiplyeth sorrow unto
himself, etc. True, all these are thrown into the Earth, lost and gone for ever
to all sight and appearance, they come to nothing, a great deal of pains and
trouble there is, but to no purpose: And how can it be otherwise, seeing the
time of reaping, nay perhaps of growth, is not yet come? But wait, run the
venture, as you see the husbandman is fain to do who expects a crop.

Be ye also patient. Follow their example, wait and wait long as ye see they do.

Stablish your hearts. Do not give way to frights, to discouragements from
present pressures, which may dishearten you and make your waiting irksom; but
stablish your hearts to wait. It will come, it will be worth all your waiting
for it when it comes, and the longer it stays the more weighty will it be in it
self and the sweeter to you: Be content then to stay for it, and to expect
nothing but trouble and misery until you meet with it.

For the Coming of the Lord draws nigh.

It is a great encouragement to wait, if one be near the attaining of what one
waits for: And this great advantage Faith has always had to represent things
very near, as near as they can be desired to be. The Coming of the Lord is a
great way off to the eye of man (so far off that he can hardly forbear scoffing
at the spiritual man for speaking of it as nigh at hand) but close by to the
eye of Faith, even as near as Faith would have it. Faith would have nothing
wrought otherwise then it is (he that sees every thing with a spiritual eye can
dislike nothing) it would not have any thing come sooner then it is appointed
to come. It is the flesh, which shall never be saved, that is so hasty after
Salvation, but he that believes does not make haste, but stays willingly
till Salvation be ripe, and till he be ripened for Salvation. It is the foolish
flesh that thinks it self wise enough to cut out its own season and proportion
of deliverance, but the truly and spiritually-wise-childe knows his degree of
wisdom (the degree of wisdom allotted him) does not amount high enough for this
undertaking, and therefore yields it up to the dispose of the wisdom of the
Father. The flesh is much troubled that it cannot have things, times and
seasons at its own dispose: the spirit (or spiritual child) would not have
them at its own dispose if it might. The spirit, in the spirit of the child,
teaches it contentedly (from choice and with delight) to give up it self to
the dispose of the spirit in the spirit of the Father. Surely it cannot but
seem strange to the eye of man that the Apostles should then, in their times,
so many ages ago, speak of the coming of Christ as so nigh, and that it should
yet be so far off; but Faith can digest very well. Faith sees the certainty of
it, the suddenness of it, yea that it is already in motion; Behold he that
comes, will come, and will not tarry. He is certainly a coming, and he will
come on, he will not stay. He comes, he comes; he will not step back again, he
will come on forward, nay he will not stand still, he will not tarry. Behold he
comes leaping over the mountains, skipping over the hills: Arise, shine, thy
light is come: Lift up your heads, your Redemption draws nigh. Howl ye who
have thriven and grown rich in his absence; your delight, your content, your
life, your peace, your happiness is ended, your Sun is set: Spring forth with
joy and singing ye weak, ye sick, ye poor, faint, distressed spirits; the Sun
of righteousness is risen with healing in his wings, he is coming to anoint you
with the oil of salvation and gladness, to wipe away all tears from your eyes,
and so to fill you with joy as ye shall be able to grieve or weep no more. He
will appear the second time without sin to Salvation: ye have been long talking
of Salvation, when he comes again ye shall know what it means, ye shall feel
what it is; and it will not be long ere he come, he is upon his march already,
hastening toward you, coming on apace, the appointed time of his absence is
wearing out amain, and the time of his return approaching, The day is at hand,
the Coming of the Lord draws nigh. Even so Amen; Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly, redeem the time of thy long delay, and come quickly, yea very quickly.
The Spirit of the Bride says Come, and he that is athirst says Come; Come O
Water of Life or I perish, come O Bread of Life or I famish. Come, Come.

ERRATA'S.
Page 24. l. 6. r. a new-man. P. 30. l. 27. r. does not only. P. 31. l. 28. r.
this is the. P. 74. l. 28. r. lives safe. P. 78. l. 23. r. diverts. P. 79. l.
1. r. and bonds. P. 109. l. 28. r. out of.

The Contents.
1. OF the difference between God and the Creature. Page 1 2. Of Good and Evil.
Page 3 3. Of the Devil. Page 5 4. Of Righteousness, Holiness and Happiness.
Page 9 5. Of Redemption. Page 10 6. Of Faith. Page 12 7. Of Love. Page 14 8. Of
Self-denial. Page 21 9. Of Christ, from John 1.1. Page 24 10. Of the two
Principles, Seeds or Creations; their different Natures, Motions and Ends. Page
35 11. Of the New Birth, whence Faith and Love flows, and to which Redemption
with all the privileges of it appertain, from Joh. 1.12. Page 39 12. Of the
excellent Nature of this Birth, or of the Child thus begotten, thus born; from
Joh. 3.6. Page 42 13. Of the excellent Food prepared for this New-born-child,
to nourish him, and cause him to grow, from Joh. 6.63. Page 44 14. Some
Properties which attend this New-born-child in his nonage, while he is growing
up to his inheritance, from Matthew. 5.3, etc. Page 47 15. Of the Fathers care
over this Child, and his readiness to provide for him every thing he needs;
from Luke 11.13. Page 51 16. A strange Occurrence, which may befall this
Darling of God and of Christ, in his pilgrimage and travel toward his native
Country, hidden in a Parable John 11. Page 53 17. Of the Relation between
Christ and his, and the Hold they have of each other, from Joh. 10.14. Page 58
18. Of the New Covenant, from Hebr. 8.10, 11, 12. Page 65 19. The way to Life,
which is through the death of that which we account and press after as life,
and particularly through the Captivity of the Life it self; from 2 Cor. 12.7,
8, 9, 10. Page 83 20. The Way to true Knowledge, from 2 Cor. 5.16. Page 100 21.
Of the Seasons, varieties and changes in the inward World, which answer to the
seasons, varieties and changes in the outward World (which is a map or picture
of them) according to that description given by that wise Observer of the
course of Nature, Eccles. 3.1, etc. Page 106 22. The secret, hidden, most
inward voice and demeanor of Sion in the time of her Captivity, from Lament.
3.24, etc. Page 111 23. The Ruin, Destruction, and utter Desolation of
Babylon, from Revel. 18.21. Page 121 24. An Exhortation to such in whom the
seed of Life is sown, to wait for the growth and happy success of it; from
James 5.7, 8. Page 125
FINIS.

