PELAGOS. NEC Inter vivos, NEC Inter Mortuos, Neither Amongst the living, nor
amongst the Dead.

OR, AN IMPROVEMENT of the SEA, Upon the Nine Nautical Verses in the 107.
PSALM; Wherein is handled I. The several, great, and many hazzards, that
Mariners do meet withal, in Stormy and Tempestuous Seas. II. Their many,
several, miraculous, and stupendous deliverances out of all their helpless,
and shiftless distresses. III. A very full, and delightful description of all
those many various, and multitudinous objects, which they behold in their
travels (through the Lords Creation) both on Sea, in Sea, and on Land, viz. All
sorts and kinds of Fish, Foul, and Beasts, whether wild, or tame; all sorts of
Trees, and Fruits; all sorts of People, Cities, Towns, and Countries;


With many profitable, and useful rules, and Instructions for them that use the
Seas.

By DANIEL PELL, Preacher of the Word.

London, printed for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at the Crown in
Pope's Head Alley. 1659.

Pells Improvement of the Seas.

To the Right Honorable John Lord Desborough, One of his Highnesses most
Honorable Privy Council. George Lord Munk Governor of Scotland, and sole
Commander of all the Forces in it. George Lord Mountague, General for the
Narrow-Seas: And George Ask^e Knight, and General for the Northern-Seas. To the
Right Honorable Commissioners for the Navy, and Admiralty of ENGLAND, Colonel
Edward Salmon, Col. John Clerk, Col. Robert Beak, Esquires, etc. Daniel Pell
Wishes all increase of saving Graces, with true honor, and prosperity in this
life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
My Lords, and Gentlemen,
LUke Dedicated his Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles, to that Honorable
and Noble person Theophilus, Luke 1.1. Act. 1.1. John dedicated (as I find in
Scripture-Record) his 2 Epist. to the Elect Lady, and his 3 Epist. to his
friend Gaius, 2 John 1, 2. Alexander on his deathbed left his Kingdom, (...),
Optimatum Optimo, to him that was the best of the best. To your Honors I
dedicate this worthless, yet painful piece, and I pray God it may prove
profitable. I hope you will like it the better, because there is none of this
subject extant that I do know of, or ever heard of in the world. The Age we
live in is all for novelties, This I can say for my comfort, that I could not
be at rest, nor at quiet, and at peace in my own heart and conscience, till I
undertook the writing of this piece, both to reprove such as go in the Seas, to
do them good (when I shall be gone) and to stir up your Honors to appear for
the Lord, against that profaneness that is in the Sea, and also to let my own
dear Relations, and the world to know, That I^ made some use of my time, whilst
amongst the Lords wonders in the Deeps.
and high-strained Jigs of Music (God in his good time alter it) and the
newest songs are now adays commonly best liked of for once, because they were
never heard of before; but however I hope you will accept of it; and if that
these Lines which were writ in a restless and turbulent Sea, may but obtain
your much-desired countenance and comprobation, I will courageously speak it
with the Orator, (...), I fear not any manscensure. Nec frons Catonis movebit
me, nec Timonis lingua. Perhaps some simple (...), will speak against it, or
some low-bred Pedantick Ex aula Telemachi, or e Patrocli domo. But no more
shall it, nor the Author regard them, than the Moon does the clamouring and
snarling Cur, in the Heavens, of whom the Poet sings, En peragit cursus surda
Diana suos.

Some of David's Psalms, Insignis Ode Davidis, Tremel. (...) prae corona
aestimatur hie Psalmus
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful, are called Michtam, which in the
Hebrew tongue signifies a precious Jewel, or a Psalm of gold, Propter mirificam
ejus excellentiam, which is of far better worth than its weight in gold, both
for the matter thereof, and the manner. And I hope that you will say the like
of this: Aureum flumen orationis, said Cicero concerning Aristotle's Politics,
there is in that book a golden flood of discourse. Liber iste auro contra non
carus, said another concerning the lives of the Philosophers written by
Diogenes Laertius, no gold is comparable to that gallant peace, how much more
then may it be said of this notable and precious Psalm that is here handled?

Ad votivas Insulas humanitatis vostra fortunatas navigo, and if I may but have
Apparente Horizonte Phaebo scintillantis adinstar met^eri, that is all that I
desire, and look for from you. The Sea is neither (scribendi, studendi, neque
commorandi, praeter pugnandi, and navigandi locus) a place to study in, nor to
write in, it is no place (believe it) to tarry any long time in, it is only a
place for transportation, or navigation, and digladiation: Therefore I hope
that your Honors will expect no Tullianum scribendi fluxum and amaenum from
me (that would better become a Coriphaeus, or an Eloquii sol, a bonarum
literarum Phoenix, a musarum decus, and a Leporum and delicium gratiarum
unicum) neither words that are picked, phrase choice, composition smooth,
sentences fluent, cadencies sweet, language polite, style flourishing; look not
for Tropes of Rhetoric, or Syllogismes of Logic, or Axioms of Philosophy, nor
words set in checker work, the Sea is no place to do it in (and indeed non been
Cymbalissant, quum nihil prater inconceptis verbis, those words are not very
savoury that are delivered (rudi Minerva) raw, crude, and unpremeditated) for a
ship is but a confused place to undertake the writing of any thing in, where
Drums, and Trumpets, Pikes, and Muskets, great Guns, and Harquebusses, ranting
Roysters, and Ear-deafing sails, and cordage, are evermore roaring about one,
which make a far greater noise than the Cataracts of Egypt, by which, and
through which, the Inhabitants that live near unto them are extraordinarily
deafned. This Hulk, and poor Pinnace was builded, and meanly rigged a good
while ago at Sea, and being ready to put forth, one storm or other arose, which
caused it to lie by the Lee. But the weather now clearing up, and promising a
calm, I have adventured and exposed it to wind and weather, and the censuring
world, hoping that those that will come on board of it, and truck with it, will
find some commodity in it, worth as much as the Merchant Venturer, (the
Stationer) will ask them for it The Reasons why I shroud this. Book under your
Honors, be these, Right Honorable.





comb of that, which this Book so sharply slashes, and reproves in the Sea.

Honors in the first place, than unto any other in the Land, in respect you
sit at the Helm of Sea-affairs. But give me leave a little.

There be three things that I would commend to your Honors, and they are very
much in my eye.

1. That you would keep up, It is well if there be not as great a necessity
for our ships to be round about this land of ours to guard it, as there was
for Solomon's bed, Cant. 3.7. They all hold swords, being expert in war; every
man has his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.
and maintain your shipping for the Sea.

2. That you would arise to beat us down that swearing that is in the Sea.

3. That you would have an eye over the factious and Anti-evangelical spirits
that go in your service.

1. That you would keep up, and maintain your shipping for the Sea. ( Bonum
exercitus, said Tho. Aquinas, ad bonum Civitatis ordinatur, an Army is not
raised for any other end, but to maintain the peace, of the City and
Commonweath.) If you do not this, then will your foreign enemies vaunt it, and
lord it over you. If Holland follow but the humors of her first founders, she
will then love war better than peace, and happily be enticed thereto by the old
Prophecy that runs of her, Mart triumphabis, Batavia, pace peribis.
Holland, by war thou shall increase,
Thou will destroy thy self by peace.


What is said of Venice, I may say of England hitherto (thanks be to our God
for it.)

-- Reipublica nescia sordidae,
Intaminatis fulget honoribus.
Thou have tugged thy part poor England with thine enemies both by Sea and
Land, and yet thou prospers, I wish the plague of Division ruin thee not.
Venice to this day, though all her neighbors round about her far and near
have tugged with her both by Land and Sea, yet like the Constellation Virgo
amongst the Celestial bodies, she shines still amongst the Kingdoms of the
world. Her Proverb is, (I wish the same to thee poor England.)

Venetiae non nisi cum rerum natura
Et mundi machina periturae.
Till nature and the universe decline,
Venice within her watery Orb shall shine.
2. That you would arise to beat us down that swearing that is in the Sea. My
Lords and Gentlemen, You are looked upon to be either the supreme or
subordinate Commanders, and Lord Controulers of the Seas, and Sea-affairs, not
wanting in the least for valor, courage, and undaunted prowess, I may say it,
if visible powers were not more feared (at Sea --) than the invisible God, the
Halter more than Hell, White hall more than the Devil, natural men (I speak of
rude and ill mannered --) being like to wild beasts that are more sensible of
the flesh, than of the bullet, the States ships would be overrun with the
surging waves of irreconcilable Discord. I am confident of it, that if a
mortal man might but have the privilege (might it be so spoken) to fit in the
Throne of God one hour to behold the swearing, and abominable wickedness that
is in some ships at Sea, he would in the very near let them all on a burning
fire, Yet is the Lord merciful.
which so much sparkled in that much talked-of Alexander, one of the worlds
stout-sword-handling Lads and Conquerours. You have the power to say, either in
the head of an out-braving Army, or unruly Navy, as once a great Warrior said
when vexed at his Soldiers for their mutining and tumultuating, whom he
Thunderstruck with these words, Facessite hinc ocyus, neminem teneo; liberate
oculos meos ingratissimi milites. Get you quickly out of my presence, and be
packing hence you unthankful Soldiers, I cannot abide you.

Severus the Emperor dealt thus with his unruly Army, Discedite Quirites, said
he, Et incertum est an Quirites. Another said, that he could with one stamp
of his foot, with one frown of his face, and with one word of his tongue, quell
the highest rage, and madness that is at any time in an Army. Seeing God has
put power into your hands, I hope he both has, and also will put a further
degree of tenderness of his name, and of his honor into your hearts, you
cannot believe the one half of that dishonor God has by those that use the
Seas, my heart even aches to speak of it, One would think that there were in
ships, Nymphales Dryades, and infinita pene monstra qua vulgo decantantur.
and it is a very sword in the heart of me when I think of it. Captains are
loose and negligent in the punishing of this needless and soul-damning sin, and
also in their reprovings of Seamen for it. I profess, were I a Commander, if
fair means, and sweet persuasions would not prevail, I would hang them up at
the Main-yard. There is such swearing in the Sea, as if both hell, the damned,
and all the Devils in it were let loose, and set at liberty. God be merciful
to them! There is swearing in the Main-top, cursing in the Fore-top, lying in
the Mizzon-top, idle, profane, and sinful language upon all the shrouds about
their ships, filthiness in every part, and corner of their ships, Roysters
betwixt Decks, Rioters, and Roaring boys in the Steeridge, Mad-caps, and
unsavory wretches upon the Boltsprit, damming, and ramming in the Cook-room,
fighting and scratching in the Forecastle, one Devil at the Helm, I am
confident of it, that after the rate some Sailors swear in the Seas, should
they but be strictly looked after, and fined according to that act and penalty
that is established in the Land against it, viz. 12 for every oath, they would
in one Voyage both swear themselves out of their wages, and also the value and
worth of the ships they sail in, and if thus much in one Voyage, what would
they not do in a great many? But, I have no mind to dishonor them, for
compassion on their souls commands me to complain, and to direct them, in
order to reform them.
and another upon the Boltsprit amongst them, looking out for a sand-bank, or
rock to cast them away upon, Job 24.25. And if it be not so now (I have gone
to Sea long enough to see it) who will make me a liar, and make my speech
nothing worth? Ah Sirs, Lets down with swearing, if ever we mean to prosper at
Sea.

3. That you would have an eye over the factious, and
Anti-evangelical-ministerian spirits that go in the Seas, either to curb,
suppress, or to keep them out of your employments, for they do more mischief in
them, than a thousand other persons do, though profane. I dare maintain it,
that one godly, holy, and powerful conscientious Minister does more good in an
hour (mistake me not, I countenance no profane men in the Ministry) than such
do, Travelers write that in Padus Justice is described in a public place
betwixt a pair of Souls, and a Sword, with those two verses in her mouth,
Reddo cuique suum, sanctis and legibus omne Consilio mort de genus ne crimine
vivat. These Verses have little handsom^ess or ^^oothness in th^^^ to come from
such a famous University, as it is renowned to be yet it the sense extreme
good. And I hope that you th^^ are in Power, will will by this soul toward
them (...) the Sea^.
or can do, by their whole years service. Many quarrel with the Ministry, and
alas the fault it not in the Sun, but in the Owl, Non crimen Phoebus, noctua
crimen habet. Better might the Sun be spared (said a people, of Chrysostom)
than a preaching faithful Ministry. The Ministry is compared in Scripture to
the most needful things, Bread, Salt, Water, Physic, Armor, and who can spare
any of these? What are Ships or Countries without the Word, but Fabrics, and
Nests of Drunkards, Adulterers, and piping Tiplers, yea far worse than Newgate?
But I question not, but that your Honors are great favorers, and prizers of
learning, and I pray God make them all so, that are in power, and authority
over us (I hope you see enough of the folly, the hair-braindness, and giddiness
of the illiterate, in this age, which swarms amongst us both at Sea and Land,
and who so forward, rash, bold, and precipitant as the ignorant, even upon
every design that the Ignis fatuus of their stupid brain leads them to?
Lapidandi sunt Haeretici non tantum sacrarum literarum argumentis, as --
Let this age be a president for future ages to have a care of themselves.)
The University of Cambridge (I have observed) has for her Arms a book clasped
betwixt four Lions, and Oxford, a book open betwixt three Crowns, hereby
signifying, that English men may not only study the liberal Arts closely, and
quietly, but also profess them publicly, and openly, being guarded with the
Lion, and the Crown, protected thereby, and encouraged thereunto by Royal
charters, The Lord knows I took little contentment in the Sea amongst that pack
of rude, and disorderly swearing and profane wretches that go in it. Our
Savior Christ hyed him to the wilderness amongst the beasts, and carried his
Disciples with him, holding their fellowship to be less hurtful, and
dangerous. Frater fui Draconum, says Job 30. Inter Scorpiones habitavi, said
Ezekiel. chap. 2. Better live amongst Beasts, than beastly minded men.
and Princely privileges. The University of Heidelbergh has for her Arms, a
Lion holding a book in his paw, intimating, that persons of honor, quality and
authority, ought to be both favorers, countenancers, and also upholders of
all good literature. But to come to a period.

My Lords and Gentlemen, I do acknowledge my self to be much engaged unto some
of you, for which I am very thankful, and to come out of your debt, I knew no
better way than the presentation of this small Treatise, which I hope will
prove both savoury, and also delightful in the reading. Your names are famous
in this our Land, both for unknown valor, and unparalleld piety, the smell
whereof, like the sweetness of the Panther, goes far and near, and travels both
Sea and Land over. God make you still instruments of his gory, and more and
more multiply his graces in you, that you may be pillars in our Church,
adorning your Religion, which as your best ornament adorneth you, and gracing
that truth by your holy profession, and practice, which above all other titles
will most inoble you, and make you truly noble in this world, both in the sight
of God, and all good men, and eternize you in the life to come.

The which shall be the hearty prayer of me, who present you with this piece
of my hard pains, and of my experiences whilst in the Sea; And so shall ever
remain much devoted to

Your Lordships and Honors, in all Christian duty and service, DANIEL PELL.
From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords in Hungarford house upon the Strand,
London, May 4. 1659.
To the Right Worshipful Mr. MATTHEW GILEY Esquire; Daniel Pell Wishes all
happiness, and comfort, both in this life and in the life to come.
Reverend and Noble Sir;
IF Anatomists tell true, that there is a certain concave in the heart, in
which little cell lies all the best affections, then shall I not only promise
you, but assure you that you have them all. I do affectionately speak it, Si de
capite tuo (sicuti Minervam ferunt ex Jove) natus essem, non major afflueret
amor, quam tibi manat. I am constrained to tell your Worship, that I am acted
like the Sea by the Moon, whose operation (if Philosophers tell true) sets the
Sea, the worlds great wonder, on an ebbing, and reflowing. The like power, and
influence, has your transcendent worth, and goodness, over me, besides the
many, and unexpected kindnesses, and Christian favors that I have now received
from you, and your religious, and virtuous family, and am still likely to have
conferred upon me, that I cannot but break out into a torrent of admiration,
and of thankfulness, unto you; and could I write those respects which I bear to
you again for them, Thankfulness in men, was a thing that Helidor, much prised,
and looked for, when he said, (...).

Gratitudo viro sapienti, pulcherrimum munus.

Sir, They are but my Iuvenilia's, yet I hope that you will esteem of them, and
bid them welcome.


with a Ray of the Sun, as once Aurelius the Roman Emperor wished to do, I
would. Certainly, Ego sim plane perditus, and inhumanus, si egregiam tuam, mihi
tam perspectam in me pietatem, benevolentiam, and fidem, ex animo deinceps
affluere aut elabi patiar. Nay should I not be an Adinstar Mecaenatis annuli,
in quo, Rana fuit ex Insula quapiam, ubi ranae perpetuo silent, If I should not
acknowledge my many engagements unto your worthiness? It was a notable saying
of Seneca, says he, ( si ingratum dixeris, etc.) let me but hear of a man
that is unthankful, and you need to say no more of him to me, I know then well
enough what he is. Worthy Sir, I would not for a world lie under such a
censure to your merit. De tuis innumerabilibus in me amoribus, nullum nec
finem, nec modum facio cogitandi. To put you out of all questioning of that, I
here present you with the best praelibamen, or principium of that great, and
high respect that I do bear you, and can for the present procure you (from
which you may expect, and shall assuredly find hereafter far greater
acknowledgments) and it is, namely, My Nec inter vivos, nec inter mortuos,
which was writ upon the cradel-rocking waves, and surges of Neptune's restless,
and turbulent Ocean, which was (and is) a place, that is not for study, or any
other weighty undertaking of this nature. I hope you will look for no
extraordinary strains of wit, and fancy from it, because it is an impossible
thing, that the head should bring forth any extraordinary conceptions, in such
a confused, and head-disturbing, and brain-perplexing employment, where the
winds roar it over head, Sailors rant it within board, and guns roar it, and
thunder it without board, and the Seas run on hills and mountains before the
winds, where there is nothing but reeling, and staggering, and staggering and
reeling every day one uprises. If there had not been an unwithstanding
providence leading me, and stirring of me up daily to the work, Many are the
Symbols and Emblems of true thankfulness and grateful acknowledgment. In the
Sun-dyal with all the hours thereon by distinct figures, the motto is, in umbra
desino, to the Sun only I owe my motion, and being. The shel full of Pearl
lying open to the Sun, and the dew of Heaven, with this word, Rore divine. The
Olive growing amidst the craggy clifts without rooting or moisture, with this
motto, or wreath coming out of it, A Coelo. All these examples prompt me to
express my thankfulness to you, whom I shall live and dye admiring.
to that end I might do that generation of people some good that go in the
Seas, whom I find to have nothing writ too, in any Subject I ever saw extant, I
should never a gone about such a work, in such a plac^, which is only for
transportation, and not for commoration, and body-tyring lucubrations.

Worthy Sir, I freely bestow upon you this my Nec inter vivos, nec inter
mortuos, and withal, I give you the highest interest in it, that is possible
for a man in the Dedication of a Book to bestow upon a person that it is
dedicated to; I humbly beg your acceptance of it, and I will not doubt but that
you will find some thing in it, that will be worth your perusal; there is a
great part (I will assure you) though not all, of the sweet experiences that my
soul has tasted of, when in the Seas. Such was the excellent condescending
frame of Artaxerxes's spirit, King of Persia; that he thought it as well
becoming a Royal mind, to accept of small things from others, as to give great
things unto them. Worthy Sir, your name is sweet, fragrant, savory, and famous
in our Israel, and with, and amongst the people of God, and the Lord has
bestowed a public frame of heart, and spirit upon you, to do all the good you
can in your generation, both to Church, and Commonwealth, which is a thing I
much bless God for in my spirit, and admire. My prayers shall be for you and
yours, that God would bless both you and them with the dews of heaven in this
life, and crown you, and yours, in the life to come. In the interim my prayer
shall be, that you may live and dye, Adinstar Isabellae Arragoniae Reginae,
quae habuit duos flosculos, unus vocabatur Scelenitropos (i.e. Flos Lunae,)
Alter Heliotropos, (i. e. Flos Solis) cum lemmate: sequor and aeternum specto.
So prays he, who rests,

Sir, Your worships devoted to serve you in the service of Christ, DANIEL PELL.
From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords, in Hungarford House upon the Strand,
London, May 4. 1659.
To the much Honored, Virtuous, and most worthy Lady, the Lady MARGARET
HUNGARFORD, Wife to the Right Worshipful, Sr. EDWARD HUNGARFORD, Now deceased.
Daniel Pell wishes increase of all true Honor, and Happiness.
Madam,
I Take the boldness to present you with this small Treatise of my experience,
travel, and hard pains (I took) during the time I was at Sea (which is the very
first printed fruits of my weak endeavors) as induced to think that the
goodness, candor, and dulce of your nature is such, that you will be pleased
to accept of so small a present, as a little monument of that great respect I
oblidgedly, and deservedly bear you. Artaxerxes, a Persian Prince, was so
humbly minded, that he thought it as well becoming a Royal mind, to accept of
small things from others, as to give great things unto them. I hope that your
Ladyship will be so minded too. I wish this piece may prove as delightful to
you in the reading, and perusing, as Orpheus's Music was to the stones, and
beasts of the field, to their hearing, of whom History says, that they were not
able to stay in their center, nor continue in their stations, but start up and
dance after it. Historians relate, how stones followed Amphion to the Theban
walls. That lofty Ossa, and high Panchaia danced when they overheard the
Odrissian Lyre, and Dolphins grew tame at the melody of Arions Harp, couching
their scaly backs to bear him out of Neptunes foaming surges. Madam, if I tell
your Ladyship, that I see these good things in you, since I came into your
family (to whom I am much obliged, and shall ever acknowledge you as an
instrument of much good to me, God reward you) let it not be thought by you,
nor by the world, that I am of that temper, either to give you, or the world,
flattering, and daubing titles for that is very much inconsistent with my
constitution, Your motto may be that of Solomon's, Prove. 31.26. She opens
her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of kindness.
and my Principle.

1. I have observed that you are a very great follower, countenancer, and
encourager of a holy, good, powerful, and godly Ministry, which these sad, and
black-nighted times of the world do so much undervalue. Me thinks I wonder why
people are so sotitsh now a days. I hear neither any in the City, nor the
Country say, that they are weary of the Sun for its shining, of the air in
which they breath, of their food from whence they have their nourishment, nor
of their raiment, and apparel, which keeps off the cold from them, why then of
the Word? What wrong has the Gospel done them? or the painful, and Godly
Ministry in this Land, who preach themselves to their graves for the good of
souls? certainly, were the Gospel down (as our English Atheists could wish it)
we should long for it as much again, as those people do for the Sun, of whom
Procopius reports, that near to the Pole where the night continues many months
together, the Inhabitants in the end of such a long night, when the Sun draws
near to make its appearance to them, will get up into the tops of all high
trees, and Mountains, striving who should have the first sight of that glorious
lamp, and caelestial luminary, that is set in the Heavens, for the comfort of
the world, and no sooner do they see it, but they dress themselves in their
best apparel, as rejoicing at its appearance, filling the air with many loud
acclamations.

2. That there is a tenderness of heart, and spirit in you, mourning for and
under sin, which renders you Elect, holy, and beloved amongst the Saints that
know you. I would all the new upstarts in England were of this good old
sin-mourning temper. Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who -- Acts 24.16.
Herein do I exercise my self --


3. That you make it your constant care, and business, to look to your life,
and conversation; and I do know it, that it is the desire of you soul, that it
should be such, and in such a way of holiness, as does become the Gospel of
Christ, Philip. 1.21.

4. That it is the great care, and desire of your soul, that all under you
should be engaged in the daily worship and service of God. Joshua 24.15. But
as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.

5. That you are a discourager of what you apprehend to be evil, in your
family. Psalm. 101.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. He that tells lies shall not tarry in my
sight. Were all Families so ordered, it would be better both in the City,
Country, and the whole Land, than it is at this day. Prove. 14.1. Every wise
woman builds her house.

6. That you are exemplary in your Family; and truly it is good so to be; if
the Mountains overflow with waters, the Valleys are the better for it, and if
the head be full of ill humors, the whole body fares the worse for it. Give
me leave now, my much Honored Lady, to present a few things to you, which may
tarry with you when Providence may call me from you.

1. Think of your dying day; It is said, that there stands a Globe of the world
at the one end of the Library in Dublin, and a Skeleton of a man at the other,
it seems they that go into that Library need not stand long to study out a good
lesson. What if a man were Lord, or Lady, King or Queen, of all the known parts
of the world, yet must he dye.
I like not the Proverb, I no more thought of it, than I did of my dying day.
It is written of the Philosophers, called Brachmani, that they were so much
given to think of their latter end, that they had their graves always open
before their gates, that both going out, and coming in, they might be mindful
of their death.

There was once a discourse betwixt a Citizen and a Mariner, my Ancestors said
the Mariner, were all Seamen, and all of them died at Sea, my Father, my grand
Father, and my great grand Father, were all buried in the Sea; then says the
Citizen, what great cause have you when you set out to Sea, to remember your
death? I but says the Mariner to the Citizen, where I pray did your Father, and
your grand Father die? why says he, they died all of them in their beds;
truly then says the Mariner to the Citizen, what a care had you need to have
every night, when you go to bed, to think of your bed as a grave, and the
clothes that cover you as the earth that must one day be thrown upon you? You
are wise, and know how to apply it.

2. Lay up treasure in Heaven; God has done much for you, in the bestowing the
riches, honors, dignities, and great things of this life upon you, by making
you taller by the head and shoulders than thousands, both in City, and Country
are. Matthew. 6.19, 20. Is a Scripture I would commend to your leasurable
considerations.

3. Take heed of the bewitching honors, entertainments, and the deluding and
heart-insinuating great things of this world. It was a good saying of Luther (I
hope your Ladyship will make it yours) when offered great things, that he
protested to the Lord he would not be put off with the things of this life
for his portion. Psalm. 17.14. Men of the world have their portion in this life;
That is all it seems, that ever they are like to have. The Rubenites (Numb.
23.) having taken a liking of the Country which was first conquered, because it
was commodious for the feeding of their Cattle, though it was far from the
Temple where they might have fed their souls, to enjoy it, they renounced all
interests in the Land of Promise. It is said of the Locusts, that came out of
the bottomless pit, that they were like unto Horses, and on their heads were as
it were Crowns of gold, and their faces were as the faces of men, their hairs,
as the hair of women, their teeth, as it were the teeth of Lions, etc. (Rev.
9.7, 8.) in which Scripture we have quasi Horses, quasi Crowns, quasi faces,
quasi teeth and quasi hairs of men. In part, such are all the honors, and
comforts of this life.

4. Be much in prayer, hard, and private wrestling with God in your closer for
Heaven, and Salavation. If a man were assured that there were a great purchase
in Spain, Turkey, Italy, etc. or some other remote parts, would he not run,
ride, sail, and adventure the dangers, and hazzards of the Sea, and of his
enemies also, if need were, that he might come to the enjoyment and possession
thereof? Heaven is better than Earth, and a life in glory, than a life in this
sinful World; and that you may prefer that above this, in this lower world, and
may also live, and be with the Father and the Lamb in the highest glory (when
this life is ended) for ever more, shall be the hearty prayer of him

Madam, Who is your Ladyships most humbly devoted, DANIEL PELL.
From my Study in your own most Honorable House, and Family, London, May 6.
1659.
To the Right Worshipful Mr. HENRY HUNGARFORD Esquire, And one of the Members
of the Honorable House of Parliament. D. P. Wishes the grace, mercy, peace,
and love of God the Father, in this life, and eternal bliss and glory in the
life to come.
Reverend, and Right Honorable Sir;
Uno non possum quantum te diligo versu
Dicere, si satis est distichon, ecce duos.
If I cannot in one verse my mind declare,
If two will serve the turn, lo here they are.
SO great an honourer, and admirer am I of you, and the House and Family that
you are descended of, and belong unto, that I cannot praetermit you, without
the presenting of this small Tract, and Treatise, which is of no great worth,
or value, but only an act, or an expression of that superlative respect and
service I bear you. Certainly if I should, I should then be an Adinstar Niciae
cujusdam Pictoris, (of whom it was said tantam in pingendo diligentiam
adhibuit, ut saepe numero intentus arti cibum sumere oblivisceretur: and e
famulo quaereret, LAVINE, pransus ne sum?) a very forgetful person. I question
not, but that you will find some thing in it worth your reading; although you
have traveled all, or the greatest part of all the known parts of the world,
in Books, and Study. Ennius could find, and pick out gold out of a Dunghill. The
laborious Be will fetch honey out of a flower before she leaves it, And, I
hope that you will see some thing in this piece worth the relishing. I will
assure you, it was never writ, studied, nor composed on Land, but in a
turbulent Sea, where there is nothing but a Chaos of hurry, and confusion, and
so I hope you will pardon the weakness of the work, for had I been on Land, or
had I had the time when on Land, I would have sent it out into the world more
accurrately furnished, and accomplished. But, Quid moror istis? I cannot but
speak of it to your praise, and worth, that I am very much affected, and taken
with that good life and conversation, that you live and lead in my Ladies
family, and bless God in my soul many times, for that gracious, and pious voice
of Prayer that I hear daily out of your Chamber into my Study that is adjacent,
I pray God bless you, and bestow the riches of his grace, and sweet comfortable
Spirit upon you, for that is the thing you daily press for. Quo pede caepisti,
progrediare precor.
This I shall say, the more you pray, and the more holily, and spiritually you
live, and walk, the more serviceable will you be both to your good God,
Nation, and Country. God has many times called you out of the world into a
Parliamentary way, and that undoubtedly to do your Country all the good you
can; your Motto, and the Motto of the whole House now assembled, may, and
should be, Adinstar Alphonsi Regis Arragonum qui in Symbolo habuit lumen
ardens, cum lemmate: Aliis servio, mihi consumor. Or if you will, Ludovicus's
the King of France, Qui in Symbolo habuit Pelicanum revocantem ad vitam
sanguine proprio pullos emortuos: God grant that the affairs of this Land may
be carried on for the peoples good, and may resemble Virgils Echo, where all
things went well, Omnia sonant Hyla, Hyla.
lemma: Sanguis meus estis, vivite. Thus should the whole House be, and do for
the Land and Country that has chosen them. I would have our Parliament House to
resemble that good Bishop, Socrates tells of, who did (when a terrible fire was
in Constantinople, fastening on a great part of the City, and Churches in it) go
to the Atar, and falling down upon his knees, would not rise from thence till
the fire-blazing in the windows, and flashing in every door was vanquished, and
extinguished. Do what in you lies to put out the fire of the sword, and the
fire of Division, that is gone forth, and broke out upon us in this Nation. (I
have met with this passage, Non sit jam quod clamant. (...). i. e. O Jupiter
pluit calamitates.
that a certain Rustic having blamed Antigonus while he lived, grew after
some trial had of his succession to recant his error, and to recount his
crime; and digging one day in the field, was questioned what he did there, he
said, O, Antigonum refodio, I seek Antigonus again.) Oh dig, and delve for
peace, that you may see both order and decency in Church, and State restored,
and the Land left in a blessed frame to the Posterities that are to come after
you, and betray as not in our good, and wholesome Laws, but maintain them; you
certainly see enough of that profane, and giddy hair brainedness that has been
all along in the heads of the illiterate, who have sought to bring the whole
Land into confusion, and themselves into the saddle. Honored Sir, I take my
leave of you, I present this piece unto you, I pray accept of it, and the God
of Heaven bless you, and guide you, shall be the prayer of him who is,

Sir, Yours to serve you in the Service of Christ, DANIEL PELL.
From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords in Hungarford House, upon the Strand.
London. April 20. 165^.
To the Right Worshipful Mr. GILES HUNGARFORD Esquire. D. P. Wishes all
prosperity in this life, and felicity in the life to come.
Reverend and Worthy Sir,
IT is an usual saying, Si musae Latin loquerentur (inquit Varro) Plantino
sermon loquerentur. Although I take the boldness to present you with this my
Nec inter vivos, Nec inter mortuos, upon the 107. Psalm, which was writ upon a
frowning and tempestuous Sea (whom I know to be a person every way so well
studied, read, and accomplished, not in the least inferior to him, whom a
great University Tutor much boasted of (that was a Pupil to him) fac periculum,
etc. try him in the Tongues, Rhetoric, Logic, and Philosophy, etc. in what
you will, he is able to answer you) I hope you will expect no such high
strained style and phrase from me, which the Muses, would delight to speak in,
and whom it would far better become than me, for the Sea is no place to write,
and polish books in, no more than hard riding is to him that would make a Map,
or true description of a Country. I confess, such is the great respect I bear
you (I speak now ex imis praecordiis) that if it were not for that, and also
for that worth and merit that I clearly see in you, together with that sweet
mixture of ingenuity, wisdom and good nature, besides a great many more good
things that is possible for to be in a person of your rank and quality, I
should scarce have adventured to have offered you this piece of my traveling
Operam and Oleum. I beg your acceptance of it, and shall assure you, that you
have a very high room in my thoughts, which is indeed reserved for all such as
both know and fear the Lord. I freely bestow this piece upon you, and give you
all the interest in it, that possibly can be bestowed upon you, I hope you
will both see, and also find something in it worth the reading, and the while,
in your perusing.

Sir, You are descended of a very high and honorable Family (a Family whom I
much honor and respect, and that is one of the grand inducements that puts me
upon an appearance unto you) and the only way to heighten your honor still is
to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I
know no one thing this day upon the face of the earth, that stamps such a
Nobility and eminency upon our Gentry in the land, as Piety and Religion does.
Nobility by blood (as one well said) is but a fancy, or an imagination, but
this has a reality in it, and where it is, it evermore begets a splendour, and
a luster. But, I will not further; the prayers of him shall be for you, and
yours, who rests,

Sir, Yours to serve you in the Service of Christ, DANIEL PELL.
From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords in Hungardford house upon the Strand,
London, May 4. 1659.
TO ALL THE Honest, godly, sober, pious, and Religious Sea-Captains, and
Seamen, whether within, or without the Commonwealth of England. Grace, Mercy,
and Peace, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
Gentlemen, Captains, and Seamen:
WAs not he a very stout piece of flesh, think you, The use of shipping I
conceive was first showed by God in Noah's Ark, whence afterward that Audax I
ape^i genus, Japhete offspring sailed and replenished the Islands.
that first adventured to put forth to Sea, of whom the Poet sings and vaunts?

Illi robur, and aes triplex
Circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci
Commisit pelago ratem
Primus, nec timuit praecipitem Africum, etc.
What shall I then say of you who are ten thousand times before him, the worlds
brave Viri Cordati, and his matchless and unparalleld successors? You have not
only the boldness to sail the ragingest and stormiest Sea that ever ran before
the winds, I would have none of you, Viris spectantibus praelio, and stantibus
instar stipitum, lookers on, and standers by, like stock^ and stones, but at it
down drive, when you see, others engaged
but to fight the proudest and out-bravingest enemy that ever was known, or
heard of under the Heavens; Your stout-hearted valor has been well known, not
only to the Dutch, but also to the French and Spaniard. For your badge of
Honor (which I hope you will still maintain) I give you the priority and
pre-eminence for fighting Tamerlanes, swordhandling- Scanderbegs, and
world-conquering- Alexanders, above all the Nations that be at this day under
the wide and spacious Universe. Terribler are you to your enemies, than those
two great piece of Ordnance which were feigned to be cast by Alphonsus Duke of
Ferrara, the one whereof was called an Earthquake, and the other Grandiobolo,
the great Devil, when they were fired. You, and your Friggots (Me thinks)
resemble the prancing valor of the Embattelized Horse in Virg. of whom the
Poet sings, If I were to give our English Captains and Seamen a Motto to the
life, it should then be that of Luthers Quo magis illi furiunt, eo amplius
procedo: The more my enemies rage, the more valiantly will I go on to charge
them.
-- Quod siqua sonum procularma dedere
Starae loco nescit, micat auribus, and tremit artus,
Collectumque premens volvit sub naribus ignem.
-- Cavatque
Tellurem, and solido graviter sonat ungula cornu,
Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum.


Such was the impatiency of the warlike horse, that the Poet here does sing of,
that they would champ their Byts, stamp, and tear the ground with their feet,
prick up their ears, dance it with their Riders upon their backs, foam it at
their mouhes, and hardly be held in till the enemy came up, but would gladly
be amongst the Pikes and Drums and the rattling and thundering of the Guns and
Cannons. Such was the gallantry of the Sibarites War-horses, that it is said of
them, Uni ad symphoniae cantum saltatione quadam movebantur.

What shall I further say of your valor? Lucan. lib. 1. Monstra enumerans quae
bellum civil praecesserunt.
Certainly what has been said of that War that was once on foot betwixt Pompey
and Caesar, when all the Sea seemed to be on a gore blood, it may more truly
be said of your most formidable and unparalled Disputes against the Dutch, It
was a Proverb in foreign parts, when they were in fear, to say, Clangite,
clamate, Hanibal est ad portas. Blow the Trumpet Hanibal, our enemy is a coming
upon us. Stand to your arms left Holland fall foul of you.
and also with other Nations.

-- Superique minaces
Prodigiis terras implerant, aethera, pontum,
Ignota obscura viderunt sydera noctes,
Ardentemque polum flammis, caeloque volantes
Obliquas per inane faces --
Fulgura fallaci micuerunt crebra sereno
Et varias ignis denso dedit nere formas.
Your fights at Sea have been as terrible to all the Nations round about you,
both far and near, as that great fight was, that was once fought in the world,
betwixt Amurath the third King of Turks, and Lazarus, Despot of Servia, in that
battle, the noise of warlike weapons, the neighing of Horses, and outcries of
wounded and fighting men, was so great and dreadful, that the very wild beasts
in the woods stood astonished therewith, the trees seemed to shake and tremble,
and the very ground to quake on which they fought on, and the Turkish History
to express the fatal terror of that day, vainly says, that the very Angels
themselves in the Heavens were so amazed with that hideous noise, Be valiant,
you are Englands Armataephalanges, to stand round about it, as Solomon's
threescore valiant Warriors did about his bed, Cant. 3.7, 8. They all hold
swords being expert in War, every man has his sword upon his thigh, because of
fear in the night.
that at that time they forgot their heavenly Hymns, etc.

Gentlemen, be entreated never to stain your reputation in the Seas, for the
best, and worst that an out-coming Nation can do against you. Let me tell you,
that if it be true what the Poet speaks, then are you men that live at the
upper end of the world, and seeing you so do, labor to outstrip the whole
world in valor, and undaunted prowess. The North is held to be the upper part
of the world, according to that of Virgil, Mundus ut ad Scythiam, Riphaeasque
arduus arces
Consurgit, premitur Libyae devexus ad anstros.


Let your stoutness resemble Alexanders the Great, who when being asked, how
he so soon overran the Universe, answered, I never held any thing dangerous
to be done, or unlikely, but would set upon it the rather, and say, Jam
periculum video par animo Alexandri, this is an enterprise for Alexander.
History tells us, that the noble Dogs which the King of Albany presented
Alexander withal, out of an overflowing valor and courage, scorned and
contemned to encounter any beasts save Elephants and Lions. Fear not the
number, nor the strength of your enemy, but ask where are they? They are like
the Echo in the Poet, -- Quem non invenis usquam, putas esse nusquam.
Julius Caesar (who had in his time taken a thousand Towns, conquered three
hundred Nations, taken prisoners a million of men, and slain as many) of whom
the Poet sings (should be your Card to sail by.)

-- Caesar in omnia Praeceps
Nil actum credens, dum quid superest ad agendum
Fertur atrox --
Difficulty does but sparkle men's spirits, and set on an edge upon Heroic
spirits. Hannibal made his way through the Alps by breaking down an huge rock
putrified with fire, and vinegar poured thereon, hence Juvenal, Sat. 10.

-- Opposuit natura Alpemque Nivemque,
Deduxit scopulos, and montem rupit aceto.
Gentlemen, I will assure you, that you both have, and also shall have my
prayers, that you may be the Lords, Kings, and Princes of the Seas, and the
Conquerours of all the Armadoes in the world that shall dare to meddle with
you, Inter caetera providentiae divinae opera, hoc quoque dignum est
admiratione, etc. Amongst other works of a divine providence, this is very
admirable, that the winds lie upon the Sea for the furtherance of Navigation.
and that they may all strike, and vail to you, as foreign Nations once did unto
the Kings, and Princes that were their Conquerors, of whom it is said, that at
what time they sent their Ambassadors to them, whom they both had subdued, and
would have subdued to them, they desired of them, Terram, and Aquam, and in
token of their subjection, they sent them both Water and Earth, because all
command is either by Sea, or by Land, and all possessions and riches are either
gotten out of the Sea, or out of the Land.

And now after all that I have said (in the high commendations of you) I pray
God bestow peace on our Nation, both at Sea and Land, for that is far better
than these dreadful, and heart-amazing Wars: There is small comfort in it to
see Nation rising up against Nation, and an imbruing of their hands in one
another blood. It is a very sad sight in these our days, the Lord amend it,
to see Nations running one against another, like the two Mountains in Pliny, of
which he tells (Montes duo inter se concurrerunt crepitu maximo, assultantes,
recedentesque inter eos, flamma, fumoque in Calum exeunte) that they ran
continually one against the other, Plin. cap. 2.83. Not. Hist.
from whom nothing but smoke and fire rise up, and ascended toward the
heavens, with a great, sonorous, and formidable noise, they that take delight
to see it, I wish they may have enough of it.) Give me leave to take my leave
of you in a few directions, which I would have you to look upon as one of the
highest expressions of my love and affection, that a man can possibly bear you,
I speak not only unto you altogether that fear the Lord, but unto the other
profane crew also shall I commend a word of counsel, and this Treatise is one
of the greatest Legacies of my love, that I either have, or know how to bestow
upon you, and truly I could wish that every Minister that goes in your ships,
and in the States service, would endeavor to show something of the improvement
of his time, that it may stand upon record for the good of you that use the
Seas, and so far would I have any from carping at what I have done, that I
would wish them to mend it if they can, or show something of their own. I had
no warm study to sit in, nor no place that was free of noise, and tumult, when
I writ it.

Sirs, You may visibly behold the great love I bear you, who has taken all
this pains in the Sea for you. What would you have me to do for you? I have
gone a begging to all the good Ministers in the land to pray for your
preservation, conversion, and sanctification. I have gone a begging to all the
Saints and servants of God to pray for you. It was somewhat a sour saying of
one concerning the viler sort of Seamen, when he said, if you see them not in
Seaport Towns in November, December, January, and March, which are the
windiest Months in the year, then you may conclude that they are all gone to
Heaven, or else they will never come there, They mount up to Heaven, etc. verse.
26.
I have exhorted all the Seaports in England to pray for you, and to remember
you that go in the turbulent deeps, and I will assure you that I will never
forget you, neither in Pulpit, nor in private, but pray hard for your
prosperity in the Seas, and felicity in the life to come. My hearts desire is
that you may be saved in the day of the Lord.

The Rules I would commend to you that travel, are such as these following, and
I would hand them not only to every good, and honest heart that goes in the
Seas, but to every profane wretch whatsoever.

1. Let not the irreligion of those places you travel into, whether France,
Spain, Italy, Barbary, or Turkey, etc. breed in you a neglect of divine duties,
or a disgustion unto the pure, and most reformed Religion that is amongst us in
England.

2. When you meet the Host or Eucharist in the streets (through which it is
often born to the houses of the sick) get out of the way that you kneel not to
it, which if a stranger neglects, he is liable to the Inquisitors, or one
mischief or other.

3. Go no further into the Outlandish Churches in the world, than the hand of
your own Religion, and conscience will lead you, lest you dash upon the rocks
of Atheism and Idolatry.

4. Pity rather, than spurn, scoff, and scorn at those you see prostrate
before a Crucifix, or a Saint. It has been matter of pity unto my soul many
and many a time when in foreign parts.

5. Neglect will sooner kill an injury, than revenge.
If you meet with injuries in foreign parts, prudently, and patiently put them
up, an ill turn in those parts is far cheaped passed over, than revenged, the
endeavor of which many times is but Gentleman usher to a greater.

6. Keep your selves out of all the Mercenary Harlot houses that be in the
Italian, French, and Spanish Cities, or in any other parts of the world you
traffic to, Prove. 5.8. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door
of her house.

7. Begin all your voyages with fear, and sincere and hearty prayer unto God to
go along with you through, and over the Seas, to carry you well out, and to
return you well back. You go very rashly upon all your designs. The Israelites
usually asked counsel of God first, and then they went. The Grecians went to
their Oracles, Gentlemen and Seamen, in your perusal of this Treatise, you
will find me sharply striking at profaneness in the Sea, and to those that
are bad I speak to, and those that are honest, and godly, are very silly and
simple if they quarrel with it, thereby they will bring upon themselves an evil
name, for let but me hear a man speaking against it, and I shall conclude him
to be some Swearer or etc.
the Persians to their Magi, the Egyptians to their Hierophantae, the Indians
to their Gymnosophista, the ancient Gauls and Britains to their Druides, the
Romans to their Augures. It was not lawful to propound any thing of weight and
moment in the Senate, Priusquam de coelo observatum est, before they had
observed from heaven whether God would shine upon their proceedings, and
enterprises, yea or no.

8. Abhor to go to Sea out of any Seaport Town in England in a drunken
posture. I would have those that are naught in the Sea, to say with the German
Emperor, Let us fight with our faults, and not with them that tell as of them.
How know thou, but God may meet with thee for that sin before ever thou
return again?

9. Have a care of entertaining all that doctrine that you hear preached by
those that are brought into your ships (by your Schismatical Sea-Captains)
under the notion of Chaplains, who never had any true call, to usurp the
Ministry. Thales sent a golden Tripos which some Fishermen took up in their
Nets, and the Oracle commanded that it should be given to the wisest, to Bias,
Bias to Solon, etc. when they had but seven wise men. If you will but believe
the times we live in, there are hardly so many fools now to be found, either
on Sea, or Land, and if such a thing were now to be had, we should all fight
for it, as the three Goddesses did for the golden Apple. We are so wise now,
that we have our women Politicians, women Preachers, preaching Soldiers,
preaching Seamen, and preaching Sea-Captains, teaching Tradesmen, every silly
fellow can now square a circle to an hair, make perpetual motions, find out
the Philosophers stone, interpret the Revelation of St. John, make new
Theoricks, new Logic, dispute de omni scibili. Town, City, Country, Sea, and
Land, are now full of these deified spirits, and divine souls. God be merciful
to us.

10. Be you respecters both of Ministry and Magistracy in the Land, there is
no greater, nor higher baseness at this day upon Land or Sea, than the
dis-respecting of them; such as live at Sea, or live on Land, let me tell
them, they have a foul name in Scripture, (he that is a despiler of these, I
desire to hear no more of the man, for I am satisfied what he is) Jude's Ep.
verse. 9. Filthy Dreamers, despisers of Dominions, and speakers of evil against
Dignities.

I would wish that every Seaman would get him one of these books that I have
writ, and that he would mind the good wholesome directions that are laid down
in it; What if thou sparest three or four shillings out of thy wages to
purchase it? that is no great matter, it cost the Author a far greater charge
to set it out, for the good of thee, and every poor soul that goes down into
the deeps.
11. When you come on shore into Seaport Towns where there are weekday
Lectures, and good preaching, hear all the good Sermons you can, for you stand
need of it, and tarry not bezling in an Alehouse, when you may have food for
your souls.

12. When you come into any Parts of this Land, or go into the Ports in foreign
Nations, let your outward carriage and deportment be good and orderly. A good
name is soon lost else. There is a pretty story, how that Reputation, Love, and
Death, made a Covenant (together) to travel all the world over, and each of
them was to go a several way, and when they were ready to depart, a mutual
inquiry was made how that they might meet again. Death stood up an said, that
they might be sure to hear of him in Battles, Hospitals, and in all parts where
either famine or diseases were rife. Love bade them hearken after him amongst
the children of poor people, whose parents had left them nothing, at Marriages
at Feasts, and amongst the professed servants of virtue, the only places for
him to be in. Reputation stood a long time silent when it came to her turn to
speak, and being urged to assign them places where they might find her, she
sullenly answered, that her nature was such, that if once she departed from
any man, she never returned to him again. I wish you wise.

13. Let your hearts and tongues go always together; it is a sad age we live
in, they are not relatives neither on Sea nor Land. It is well worth your
observation of the Peach, namely, that the Egyptians, of all fruits make choice
of that principally to consecrate to their goddess, and for no other cause, but
that the fruit thereof was like to ones heart, and the leaf to ones tongue.

14. Nothing but godliness will be a target to you, against your Aquarum
confluges.
Be not carried away with the damnable opinions that are in the heads of many
of your Seamen, and Commanders. There be many sorry Solecismes amongst them.

15. Lay aside all that vain talking that is amongst you in ships. A prating
Barber asked King Archelaus how he would be trimmed, the King replied,
silently, Surely in much prate, there cannot but be much vanity.

16. Many Seamen deal by prayer, as the Athenians did with their holy Anchor
in time of danger, they would throw it out, never else, whence the Proverb,
(...) i.e. Sacram anchoram solvere dicimur, quando ad extremum prasid um
confugimus. Erasm
Use prayer every morning you uprise, whether on Sea, or Land, if you would
have God to bless you. There are six seasons many Seamen take up prayer, and
never else.

1. When they are put to it to cut down their Masts by the board.

2. When a Cable breaks.

3. When the Rudder bands break off, and leave them Rudderless in the great and
wide Sea.

4. When they are thrown irrecoverably upon Rocks and Sands.

5. When they are put to it to pump night and day to keep up their ships from
sinking.

6. When the winds tear all their sails to pieces about their ears. And this I
like not.

17. Get a spirit of meekness and humility, detest a high, and a proud spirit.
I wonder why many should be so proud, and surly as they are at Sea, certainly,
if they did but recollect themselves, their descent, pedigree, and lineage,
together with their employment, they would find themselves to be but carried
up and down in the Sea, by a fart at the best out of Aeolus's breech, the god
of wind.

18. Shake off that rugged and churlish nature that is come only amongst you,
and get a more affable and courteous disposition, that will be your interest.

19. Pay the Lord all those solemn vows that you make unto him in the Seas,
when you are in deep distress, and dangerous storms. Not one of a thousand of
you does this, I dare be bold to speak it. Erasmus's Colloquium in naufragio,
is very much like you. In a storm the Mariner promises no less than golden
Mountains to be sacrificed, it but come safe to land, another vows to go on
pilgrimage as far as to St. James's of Compostella bare foot, and bare headed,
in a shirt of male next his skin, begging all the way, a third promises St.
Christophers Statue, which is (mons verius quam statua) a Mountain rather than
a statue, and this is to be seen in one of the great Churches at Paris, that
he would give him a wax Candle as big as himself, whom one of his
contemporaries checked, saying, if thou should now go, and sell all that
thou have, thou art not worth so much, neither can thou ever perform what
thou have vowed, to whom he replied, in the storm, Verse. 26. Their soul is
melt^d because of trouble. They are even ready to dye at this time. Junius
understands it of extreme vomiting, as if they that used the Seas, were casting
up their very hearts many times. Anacharses for this very cause, doubted
whether he should reckon Mariners amongst the living, or amongst the dead. And
another said, that any man will go to Sea at first, I wonder not, but to go a
second time thither, is little better than madness.
very softly and silently (lest St. Christopher should hear him) Hold thy peace
thou fool, do thou think that I ever meant it? if ever I recover shore, the
Devil take me, if ever he gets as much as a small tallow candle of me, or
the pairing of my nails. Make you the Application.

20. Believe that all storms that come upon you, are of the Lords raising and
commissionating. I have met with this passage, which was found, says history,
in a Council above a thousand years ago, Si quis credit quod Diabolus tonitrua,
and fulgura, and tempestates, sua authoritate, sicut Priscillianus dixit,
Anathema. This Canon was made against such as did simply attribute storms,
tempests, thundrings, and lightnings, etc. to the Devil, and not to God, as if
so be that he should be the causer, and the procurer of them; whosoever
believes this, said the Council, as Priscillianus has done, let him be an
Anathema.

But without any further wording of it to you, I freely bestow this piece, of
my Nec inter vivos, Nec inter mortuos, upon you all that use the Seas, and beg
your acceptance of it; The God of Heaven grant it may do you good; read it,
heed it, ye need it; pray for me, and I shall not be wanting in my prayers
for you, that God would bless, and prosper you in your employments; and thus
he that takes his ultimum vale of you, and the Sea, rests,

Gentlemen, Yours to serve you in the service of Christ, DANIEL PELL.
From my Study at my Lady Hungarfords, in Hungarford House upon the Strand,
London, May 4. 1659.
THE EPISTLE TO THE Christian Readers, Whether at Sea, or on Land.
Good Readers,
I Would very freely invite you, had I but that cheer, that I judge you
deservedly worthy of; Let this Epistle be thy Janisary, or Pole Star to the
perusal of this book. The stars that do attend the Artick-pole are the greater
and lesser Bear, and the least star in the lesser Bears tail, is called the
Pole Star, by reason of its nearness to it, and this is the guide of the
Mariners, as Ovid in his Epistle sings it, You great and lesser Bears, whose
stars do guide
Sydonian and Grecian ships that glyde,
Even you whose Poles do view this, etc.

if you therefore will come to such Fare as has been provided, dished, cooked,
and prepared upon the Sea for you, you shall be freely and heartily welcome;
and in your coming take this Advertisement along with you, or else you had
better let it alone. Guests that are invited unto some Grandee, King, Lord, or
Prince,

1. Respect with great desire the hour of his feast, and so give their diligent
attendance, that they may come in a decent, seemly, and orderly manner.

2. That nothing pleases the Prince better, than to see them feed soundly on
the meat dished, and prepared for them.

3. They are cautelous that they do not speak any thing that may be in the
least offensive to the person that invited them.

4. They do not (statim) by and by depart, but stay and sit a while, and
interchange familiar conference with the Prince.

5. At their departure they yield a great deal of reverence, returning him a
thousand humble thanks for the favor vouchsafed them, offering themselves
ready at his service. I question not your wisdom in the applying of what is
before you. The strongest Arguments that I can lay you down, that did put me
upon this laborious business in a restless, unquiet, and disconsolatory Sea,
were such as these,

1. It was the good pleasure of the Lord to draw, and hale me to undertake it,
by a strong, and an unwithstanding impulsiveness that lay every day upon my
heart and spirit, till I went about it.

2. To reprove that spirit of machless and unknown profaneness that is amongst
many thousands that use the Seas.

3. To that end they might be healed in their souls, amended and reformed in
their lives, and practices.

4. Because I never saw any thing writ unto them as suitable to, and for their
employment, the want of which did the more affectionately lead me on for the
good of their souls.

5. Because I bear an extraordinary strong love to the souls of those that go
down into the Seas, and would as gladly have them saved in the day of the Lord,
as I would my self.

6. Because I would have the world to know a little what perils and hazzards
those that use the Seas do run through, and meet with all in their employments.

7. What Ulysses's commendation was by Homer, I shall say of them that use the
Seas, (...), He knew the Cities, and manners of many people. They see many
brave Cities, and Countries that could not be seen were it not for shipping.
Our Gentry travel both Sea and Land with much bodily hazard, and with great
expense of state, and all, but to get a little more knowledge of fashions, and
a gentile behavior.
To let the world know what works and wonders of the Lord, those do see, that
go into the Seas, and beyond them.

8. To that end the world might know what great preservations and deliverances
the Lord bestows upon them in their affairs.

9. To that end the world might know, I made some improvement of my time when
at Sea, for I never affected the mis-spending of one day all the time I was in
it, but lived though amongst men, as if not amongst them (Mihi and musis)
knowing that time is precious, and tarries not. Upon a Dialpeece of a Clock in
the College Church of Gloucester, are portrayed four Angels, each of them
seeming to say something to those that look up to observe the hour of the day,
which is made up of two old Latin verses, 1. An labor, an requies, 2. Sic
transit gloria mundi. 3. Praeterit iste dies, 4. Nescitur origo secundi
Englished, Whether you rest, or labor, work or play,
The world and glory of it passes away;
This day is past, or near its period grown,
The next succeeding is to us unknown.


10. And lastly, To that end all the Lords people would be mindful of those
that use the Seas, They are like to a direct North-Dial, that has but morning
and evening hours on it. They are far from good means on land, pray for them.
and not forget them in their most serious and solemn addresses unto their God.
They stand in need of being prayed for, Job 9.26. They are called in that
place, Ships of desire.

1. When a man sees a goodly, and a stately ship, that is then a ship of desire.

2. A Merchants longing for his ships good return home, is a ship of desire.

3. A ship of desire is a swift Pinnace, o^ a Pirates Bark, or Vessel, that is
made on purpose for the prey, to out-sail all others.

But to proceed,

Let me tell thee, Good Reader, before I take my leave of thee, that I can say
(of, and by my going to Sea, for which I had as clear a all to, as ever man had
to any place in this world) as a good man once said, who had lion a long time
in prison (in the primitive times of persecution) I have (quoth he) got no
harm by this. No more harm has all my troubles at Sea done my inward man, than
a going up to the rops of those mountains (has done them that have made the
trial) where neither Winds, Clouds, nor Rain does overtop them, and such as
have been upon them do affirm, that there is a wonderful clear sky over head,
though Clouds below pour down rains, and break forth in thunder and lightning
to the terror of them that are at the bottom, yet at the top there is no such
matter. Me thinks I have heard the Seas say unto me, Vide hic mare, hic
venti, hic pericula, and disce sapere, See how ready the Winds and Seas are at
Gods beck, and wilt not thou fear him?
If I may tell thee my experiences of Gods doing of my soul good in the Seas,
then can I tell thee thus much (be it spoken to the praise of that sweet God
whom I serve and honor) that I have got no harm by going to Sea, but a great
deal of good, both to my soul, and also to my understanding and intellectual
parts.

1. I have learned by my going to Sea, to love the world less than I did
before. Love not the world, etc. 1 John 2.15.

2. I have learned to know men, and the world, far better than I did before.

3. I have learned to prize a life in heaven, far before a reeling and
staggering life here on earth.

4. I have learned to be far more shye and wary of sin, than I was before,
because I found my self so fearful of death, and drowning, many times in
storms, when in the Seas. I have read of a young man that lay on his deathbed,
and all that ever he spoke whilst he lived, was this, I am so sick that I
cannot live, and I am so sinful that I dare not dye. It is good to keep clear
of sin.

5. I have learned to live upon God, and to put my trust in him more than ever
I did before, so that I can comfortably speak it, Psalm. 7.1. O Lord my God, in
thee do I put my trust, etc.

6. I have seen more of the Creation by my going to Sea than ever I should have
done, if I had stayed on Land. The Lord sets men the bounds of their
habitations. It is said of Lypsius that he took such delight in reading of a
Book (I wish that thou may as much in this) that he said, Pluris faecio
quum relego, semper and novum, and quum repetivi, repetendum. The more I read,
the more I am tilled on to read.


7. I have learned to fear God more, and to stand in awe of that God who has
the lives of all his creatures under his feet (and is able to dispose both of a
man's present, and also future condition, even as pleases him) than ever I did
before.

8. I have learned to pray better, and to ply the Throne of Grace oftener with
my prayers for spiritual blessings, than ever I did before.

9 I have so learned Christ, that I made it my work, and business, all the
time I was at Sea, to lead my life so, as in the continual presence and aspect
of the Lord, Mere Heathens thought God to be every where, as appears by their
Jovis omnia plena.

-- Quascunque accesseris ora^, Sub Jove semper eris, etc.


Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, etc. and so I lived, and
have lived, both at Sea, and also at Land, that I shall give both foe, and
friend, and friend, and foe, their liberty to speak, and observe me as much as
they can.

10 I have learned to love my God more than ever I did before, and if I had
not, I should appear to be a very rebellious Child, As Demetrius Phalerius
deceived the calamities of his Banishment by the sweetness of his Study, so I
the troublesome Seas, and rude society, by mine.

I know that this poor Piece of mine has in it, its (...) and Na^vi, its
blacks, and spots, its Human frailties, which the good Lord remit; yet in it is
there truths Divine, and things very profitable and worthy to be embraced.


in respect the Lord has done so much for me, to preserve me, and mercy me as
he has done, in a cruel Sea, which is a place, as the Poet sings, Luctus
ubique pavor, and plurima mortis imago.

Good Reader, do thou live in times of trouble, and days of danger? then
turn over this Book, and thou will find that there is a wise and a powerful
God in the Heavens that sits at the Helm both of Sea and Land, to preserve poor
souls in them. Would thou hear of those Sights and Wonders of the Lord, that
those that go down into the Seas do see? then will I commend this small
Treatise to thee; what delight fuller thing can thou read than a Theme, or
Subject of the Sea, and Sea affairs? here may thou read, and peruse this my
Nec inter vivos, nec inter mortuos, which cost me much pains, and get some good
out of it. When Nebuzaradan burnt the rubbish of the Temple, he kept the Gold,
etc. Though in reading thou meetest with Creature-defects (which I will assure
thee was never writ upon Land, but drawn up as I studied it upon water,
Libenter omnibus omnes opes concesserim, ut mihi liceat, vi nulla
interpellante, isto modo in literis vivere. Tully. I would freely give all the
good in the world, that I might sit down in the world, and live, and lead a
studying life. But it was the Lords will that I should travel.
in the great and wide Sea) yet will thou meet with many a savoury truth, if
thou have but a gracious heart in the breast of thee. Accept of it. My suit to
you Readers is, that upon your perusal of it, you would seek the Lord in its
behalf, that it may do good to them that use the Seas. I beg the prayers of
every godly and gracious Minister, into whose hands peradventure it may come,
that he would pray, that it may be instrumental to reform these People that go
in the Seas, who stand in need of instruction, and I fear perish for want of
it, and also of knowledge. I took the pains (the Lord knows my heart) upon no
other account, but to do the Souls of those good that go down into the Seas;
and it shall be my prayer perpetually, that God would prosper this poor, and
imbecil Piece to every one of their Souls; certainly that God that put me upon
the dressing of this wholesome and savoury Dish for them, will bless it to them.
Which that it may be, shall be the hearty, and constant prayer of me for you,
and them, that the ever-living, all powerful, and most gracious God, would
fire, and inflame your hearts, and theirs, in all the duties of holiness, that
both you that sit on Land, and they that go to Sea, may find his favor, and
such acceptance as may sweeten your Souls and theirs in the saddest seasons. So
prays he, that is,

Yours, willing to serve you in Soul affairs, DANIEL PELL.
Study at my Lady Hungarfords in Hungarford House upon the Strand, London, May
4. 1659*
Reader,
IT is impossible that any Book should come from the Press void of Errata's,
provided thou know what belongs to Printing; therefore what thou find
amiss, in much meekness correct, for it is neither the fault of the Author, nor
the mind of the Printer.

THE PROOEMIUM.
I Question not but that the gallant Englishmans rare Navigating Art (and
deserving Science) is an Art out-stripping Arts. Who will deny (but
Ignoramus's) that this Art carries the Poop-lanthorn, or the high-hoised
Maintop-light, and many others for their inferiority and indignity, come on
Stern? If any will go about to set up their own, what would such do, but
Splendente Sole lucernam accendere, light up dim burning Torches or Candles in
the shining Sun? Who will say that this pre-excelling Art, is not an Art of
exquisite Excellency, Rarity, Mirability, and Ingenuity? Who will say that this
Art brings not in fair Engleterra's Wealth, her Silks, her Wines, her Sugars,
Spices, Stuffs, her Silver and her Gold, besides many other innumerable and
unreckonable Commodities? Whence came Solomon to, and by all his Gold, Precious
Stones, Silver, Ivory, Apes, Peacocks, Almug-trees? was it not by shipping? He
built himself a Fleet of Ships, 1 King. 9.26, 27, 28. which were employed and
sent about to that very end and purpose, to fetch unto Jerusalem the Gold of
Ophir, and those other Barbary Commodities? And how should we come by the
Silver Mines in Hispaniola, and those inestimable Riches that lie in great
abundance in those remote Occidental and Oriental parts of the World, if we
built not Ships, and sent them out unto them? The Riches that are in other
Nations and Countries will not come to as; we must go down to Sea to them, and
for them, if we would have them.

These Lads are Masters o^ the Seas, and the greatest Princes that ever crossed
the salt waters. They beat their enemies in the Seas, and make them run as fast
before them, as ever the Bezar ran, or runs before the dogs, of whom its said,
Cupiens evadere damno, Testiculorum, adeo medicatum intelligit inguen, rather
than lose his life, he bites them off his stones: when an enemy is pursued, out
of fear, goes overboard his Cask, next his Chests, and then his Boat, or any
thing that may but lighten his vessel to escape his hungry followers.
Who will say that this Art (under God) is not Englands safety from Forinsical
Invasions? If not, let that Octogesimus Octavus Mirabilis Annus speak, in which
was that desperate attempt that the Spaniard made against this Nation, under
God that little shipping that was then at that time in England, was wonderfully
instrumental to scatter and break to pieces their long hatched and contrived
purposes. Oh England! England! write this, and all thy other deliverances from
those dreadful fulminations of Rome, in aereis memoriae tuae foliis, in the
brassy leaves of a never-dying memory; write them down, I Will say again, with
the Pen of a Diamond. What would have become of England, if we look but into
nearer times, viz. in our late Wars with Holland and the French, if we had not
had warlike Ships out at Sea, both to have boxed them, and broke their bones?
Under God, this shipping that is in England, has been instrumental to keep the
Inhabitants of our Nation in their Possessions, Houses, Lands and Livings,
which otherwise would have been most miserably hazarded, and preyed upon ere
this day by a multitude of truculent and unmerciful Wretches. Its said of
Constantinople, that it is sufficiently fortified with three sorts of Bulwarks:
1. With Wood, 2. With Stones, 3. With Bones. By Wood is meant their warlike
Ships, which they keep out at Sea in the defense of the City, and their
Seaport Town: By Stones, is meant their thick and impenetrable Walls, which
is round about the City: And by Bones, is understood an invincible Number of
stout Sword-handling men, to fight any Enemy that shall or dare oppose them.
Such a threefold Bulwark as this, is the only way to keep up England in a
flourishing estate and posture, and that in despite both of the Devil, and all
its Adversaries. Our warlike Ships are the best Walls and Seaport Castles that
be about the whole Nation of England; keep but them up, and bid a button for
the World.

Our warlike Ships at Sea are to us in England, what those Canes Allatrantes,
sive Stridentes Anseres, were to the Romans, which kept their Capitol, by whose
barking and galling, if any attempted those Treasury-Houses, Give but chase
unto one of these Coast-creeping Pirates, and alas he is but a Virfugiens hand
moratur lyrae strepitum, he will not stay to dance after the Music of a lower
Tire of our Ordnance, but runs from us like the frantic Satyr, who had no
sooner blown his horn, but ran away amazed in the sound of it.
the Citizens were presently up in Arms. Englands safety lies in keeping out
their Gun-barking and Gun-fighting Ships upon the Seas, which scare our Enemies
more than if the Devil were amongst them: Nay, they are as much terrified at
the sight of one of our Warlike Frigots, as ever Brutus was with that Malus
Genius that disquieted him the night before he died. Nay, they are as fearful
of them, as ever the Burgundians were of every Thistle they did see, which they
thought was a Lance, and every Tree a Man, and every Man a Devil. Every great
Ship the Pirate sees in the Sea, he takes for a Statesman of War.

-- Non ita Bovem Argus. Argus never kept his transformed Io, nor that watchful
Dragon the Golden-fleece, nor Cerberus the coming in of Hell so narrowly, as
our vigilant and watchful warlike Frigots do the Coasts and Shipping of this
Land and Nation. And indeed, there is great necessity that they should act, and
bestir themselves with a Juno's-like jealousy, a Danae's custody, and an
Argus's vigilance: for had they as many hands as Bryareus, as many eyes as
Argus, and as many heads as Typheus, to dispose of, there is employment enough
in the Seas to look about, and into every coast and corner of this Land, that
the Enemy catch not hold of the Weaponless Merchant.

Our late ubiquitary Sea-ranging-Pirats, and our many other Out landish Enemies
call for it at their hands. Pirates in the Sea are harder to find than to
conquer: they are Planets that are not sine Errore, tamen sine terrore, though
they gad up and down in the Sea, yet have they no great matter of terror in
them. Non been succedit culici Elephantem mordenti, nec Scarabaeo Aquilam
sequenti; That Gnat thrives not that bites the Elephant, (that Pirat that
fights an English Frigot will assuredly come to the worst by it.)

The Beetle will do no good in following of the Eagle, I may say of Sailors, as
one said of the Falconers Hawks, that they were hooded in the house, and never
suffered to use their eyes, save to the hurt of other birds.
and the Mouse will not be able to deal with the Elephant. Our (Anglicani
Sculcatores-Ponti) Seamen, In campis pelagi Lepores urgent, Sylvasque fatigant:
They hunt the Pirat up and down in the Sea, and sometimes they find an Ostend,
or a Dunkirk Hare sitting in such and such a corner, under such and such a
bush, squatted down very closely at an Anchor upon the skirts of our own
Nation, and then is there brave gain, when our Sea-dogs follow after her. Now
when hese Outlandish Hares come upon our Coasts, they tremble every bone of
them, and they sleep as the tremendous Hare does, An Outlandish ship but once
encountered with an English Frigot, like the herb Trigion, which if out once bit
with an ill-toothed Aspis, will never grow nor prosper after. Its better to run
than to tarry.
both with their eyes and ears open: Nay, if they do but once espy an English
Greyhound pricking up his ears, and steering directly toward them, away they
start, and either cuts Cable, or lets it run out end for end, and away she
betakes her self into the great and wide Forest of the Sea, and the Dog runs
with Topgallantsail after her; and if he cannot come near her with his chaps, he
throws fire and faggot into the breech of her, for the quarrel grows as hot, as
it did betwixt the Giant and the Warrener (in that well known Story) The
Warrener finding a greatboned Giant in his Lords ground, told him that that was
no place for him to walk in, and if so be that he would not depart out of it,
he would be revenged on him: Well, come on, says the Giant, thou and I will
have a fair single bout for it: Nay, stay a little, says the Warrener, before
we strike lets pass a few words, for by a parcel of bad words we shall soon go
together by the ears; stand at a distance, thou dreadful Giant, and I Will give
thee some angry words. So at his request the Giant did, thinking scorn of the
worst that his Adversary could do against him: The Warrener takes his
advantage, and having his Arrow notched upon the string, let fly, and called
the Giant Rogue and Rascal, and at every word he spoke, flew an Arrow out of
the Warreners bow into the Giants breast: O dear, says the Giant, when shall
we once fight? every word goes to the heart of me. This hand somly applied, and
understood, has something in it.

Who will, or who can deny, but that by the Seamans valor, ingenuity, and
undaunted Prowess, Nations round about us are both bridled, awed, and apall'd
to meddle with us? I Will put this honorable Motto upon the Sailors back, pull
it off who will, Hostibus haud tergo, sed forti pectore notus. It was never
known yet, that the English turned their backs on an Outlandish Enemy, and I
hope they will so much stand upon their Honors still, as to scorn ever to do
it, for the worst that a Foreign Enemy can do against them.

Fought he not three times most stoutly and courageously the Hollanders proud
vaunting Armado, That which glares for a time in the air, and outbraves the
Stars even of the first magnitude, forsooth; after a few days, or within a
while plays least in sight.
who came with his lofty Crest, the Broom at the main Topmast head, as if the
English Skips had been of some Cobweb-metal, and easily swept into the Sea? but
what became of them and of the Broom, may some men say? I Will tell you what; The
English took it down, and laid it most sadly upon Jack-Sailors breech, and upon
the breech of the Hogen and the Mogen of Holland; and fetching most dreadfully
the skin off both their buttocks, they cried out unto England, more bitterly
than ever Ovid did, when his father took him upon his knee, and whipped him for
his versifying habit: Parce precor genitor posthac non versificabo. Good
England lets but have peace with thee, and we will never meddle with thee more.

And have not these Thundering Lads of Mars fought the French's Armado, These
are they that fight Englands Enemies with as much fury as ever Scanderberg boxt
the Turk; of whom its said, that he was so earnest in his blows, that the blood
would often start out of his lips. These blades with their great Guns have made
the blood start out of the Flemings sides, and run out at their scuppers into
the Sea.
and the Spaniards, as well as the Hollanders, and cut them in the Pate, and in
the Comb, more deep than ever the Grecians cut their Greek Letter (...)? and
does not, and have not these Lads looked upon all their Sea-engagements as
(...), empty dangers; or as Epictetus has it, (...), Scarecrows, and Vizors,
which children very commonly are astonished at? which is but merely out of
ignorance; for as soon as once known, no longer are they terrible.

These Lads are of a Scythian-metal, of whom its said, that they had rather
hear the Neighing of warlike Horses, than the sweetest and melodiousest Music
that's under the whole Heavens. Stouthearted Sailors take more delight in the
hearing of that Warlike Clangor of their smoke-ringing Canons, than in the
sweetest Paven or Galliard the skilfullest Musicioner can play them.

These fight Englands Enemies, ut Ajax, and Ulysses, pro Achillis panoplia, ut
Aeschines, and Demosthenes, pro Suada sua, ut Hippomaenes, and Atalanta pro
pomis aureis.

These are the Gun-handling and Canon-firing Lads of the World, who make their
Guns out-flame those Horrida Aetnae, and Incendia Vesuvii. Strumbelo smokes not
more terribly than these men's Ordnances do, when they encounter their Enemies
in the Seas; and their hearts shrink no more in the firing of them, or being
fired at, than the Leviathan of the great and wide Sea, when either Brass or
Iron is huried at him, Job 41.27. Canon-bullets, when they fly as thick as hail
about these men's ears, they no more regard them, than the Leviathan does the
throwing of darts, Job 41.29. which he counts as stubble, and laughs at the
shaking of of the spear. What Job says in one case of the Leviathan, I Will say
in another of the Sailor, Job 41.33. Upon earth there is not his like, who is
made without fear.

I Will say of Sailors, what Paterculus said of some Caitiffs in his time in
Rome, quod nequiter ausi, fortiter executi, that what they wickedly attempted,
they desperately performed.


These Blades laugh when broad-sides are poured into their Ships: And let me
tell you a strange story, You are Cousen-Germans to the great Leviathan in the
Sea, his heart and yours are both of a metal; Ver. 24. His heart is as firm as
a stone, yea as hard as a piece of the nether Millstone. Its not the loud Peals
of Ordnance, and of broadsides from your Enemies, that will dismay or break
your hearts. Nay, when the Sea is on a curded dye of gore blood, and runs as
freely out of the Skuppers of their Ships, as water does down the leaden Pipes
of high-tyled houses in a rainy day, these Lads have as good a stomach to
behold it, as ever Hannibal had, when he saw a pit of Man's blood, and cried
out, O famosum spectaculum! he was so far from swooning at it, that he took
great delight in it.

Our Sailors, like the Romans, are so used, not only unto gladiatory fights,
but great roaring Gun-fights, and bloody spectacles; and this acquaintance that
they have got of Wounds and Blood, makes them the less fear it in the Wars.

These are the Lads that make their Guns to roar far louder (upon their
Enemies) than Homers Mars when hurt, whom the noise of a thousand men and bells
could not drown.

These are they that do (totum concutere Orbem) puzzle and amaze the whole
world. Where ever these go, and sail, they give every Coast a most dreadful
Alarm: And that Immortale nomen that these blades in their late Wars have got,
is daunting terrible, Prope, and Procul, far and near; so that they are talked
of, not only Lingua Gallica, but, Italica, Turcica, Arabica, Persica, Belgica,
and Hispanica, etc. and with, and by all the Tongues that be in the World, and
happened at the Confusion of Babel.

These Lads, These are they that do Tonare armis, and fulminare cum Bombardis,
thunder in their arms, and lighten the night with their guns.
who ride in the golden Saddle of their Wooden and Warlike Horses, over the
great waves and billows of the seas, are of the very same metal of that proud
prauncing and curvetting Horse in Job 39.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. They are
men whose necks are clothed with thunder; They with their Frigots go on to meet
the armed men. They mock at fear, and are not affrighted, neither turn they
back from the Sword, or all the Ordnance that is fired on them. They say amongst
the Trumpets, The glittering Spear and thundering Guns, Ha! ha! They smell the
battle afar off, and the thunder of the Ships and Captains. They tear the Waves
of the Sea in pieces with their fierceness. And what Job 41.19. speaks of the
Leviathans mouth, I may say of these men's Gun-mouthes, Out of their Gun-mouthes
go burning lamps, and smoke and sparks of fire leap out of their Gun-nostrils,
as out of a seething Pot or Cauldron. Nay, its wonderful either to see, hear,
or think, how cheerfully the Mariners will shout, and throw their Caps
overboard into the Air and the Sea, when they come unto an Engagement; and
though shot fly as near their Coats and Caps, as the Grecians accent came unto
their Greek letter (...), they turn but up the nose at it.

Who will, or who can deny, but that by this Art Mariners have the fairest and
fullest view, and delightfullest aspect of the whole Creation, above all others
whatsoever? Who will deny, that the Seaman has not the amplest prospect of the
great Waters, These are the Lads that bark against the Crucifix of Rome. It has
been a Papal Proverb, that never any barkt against the Crucifix, but he ever
ran mad. But see you not how our Sailors keep in their right wits,
notwithstanding all that? These are the Lads that have taken as much pleasure
in setting the Hollanders ships on a fire, when they engaged them in their
three last dreadful Disputes, as Alexander did in Persipolis, when it was on a
burning blaze; or as Alcibiades did, in seeing that Athenian heap of Scrolls on
a fire, of which he said with much rejoicing, Nunquam vidi ignem clariorem, I
never saw a better fire in my life.
and of the Works and Wonders of the Lord in them, and upon them? whilst others
that sit on Land neither see nor hear of.

What Art or Science is there in the world that outstrips this? Let them come
forth to match her. I have read of one (in Aristaemeus, Ephemeris by name) who
did so much admire his Mistrisses beauty, that he challenged all tho Beauties
both of the East, West, North and South, to compare with her. Truly, so much an
admirer am I of this rare Art of theirs, who have by Providence been conversant
amongst them little less than a full Quatuorennium of time, that I am
transported to say, Let the Wits of the East, West, North and South, come in
and compare, as much of the flower, strength and wit of Man, and wisdom of the
Creator, is centred, and apparent in this one Art, and is daily demonstrable to
those that are but tantum beholders, as is sufficient to put the ingeniousest
piece that is into a Labyrinthical admiration.

And this rare Art is (Nuper admodum) of late, within these few years more
abundantly advanced and improved than ever, and I believe (if my judgment fail
not) grown up into a Superlativer perfection, than can or does appear to have
had or been in quondam times or ages. Was there ever more Merchandising than
there is now? Was there ever more crossing and adventuring upon the Salt-waters
in Ships, than there is now? Was there ever more busking or ranging the Seas out
of England, with great and terrible Fleets of the Warlikest Ships that ever
were seen in the world before, than there is now? Was there ever more going down
into the great Waters from Country to Country, according to David's phrase, than
there is now? Go but to years past, and enquire of them, and they will tell you,
We never practiced so much in the Art as you in these days do. Before the
virtue of the Loadstone (that points out the North) was revealed unto the
Mariner, its not to be spoke with what uncertain wanderings men were driven
about, following doubtful conjectures, and fallacious accounts and reckonings,
indirectly floating here and there, rather than sailing the right and direct
way. When the weather was fair, when either Sun, Moon or Stars gave their
light, they crept about the Coasts of the Earth, sometimes by the help of
Lights hoised up in high places for their direction; sometimes by the help of
Towers and Trees not far from the shore, and with a great deal of anxiety and
perplexity of mind, and great danger of shipwreck, they went to and again upon
the Seas: but if the Heavens looked angrily upon them, that they were Cloudy,
Sun, Moon and Stars withdrawn out of sight, and Tempests drawing on, they knew
not whither to go, nor what course to take, nor what way in all the Universal
World, to turn themselves unto for the best. What manner of joy may we think
could it not be unto the Mariners, when at first (whatever an unthankeful
generation of men that be now in the world do think of it) when this Magnetic
Neptune was found out, and ever since has been their never-erring and
never-failing guide, which does show unto them the path that they are to trace
through, and by those innumerable Rocks, Quicksands and Shallows that be in the
Seas, though it be, or were in the darkest night and cloudiest sky that ever
was? this points them out the several Angles of the North, South, East and
West, so that they can now most certainly judge in what Coasts of the world, in
what Latitude of places they are in, as also of what parts of the Earth, and of
what Ports they directed their course unto in sailing.

The first that ever found out the Loadstone (that I ever read of) was Nicander
an Herdsman of Magnesia, when feeding of his Cattle, observed that the point of
his Pastoral Staff, and the Hobnails of his shoes did stick in a piece of
ground where Loadstones were, insomuch that he was very hard put to it to
remove his feet from the place he stood upon, and so standing admiring what
secret virtue there should be in the place he stood on, or in the stones that
were under his feet, he took it up, and made report of it, but none was there
in all Magnesia, whether far or near, that knew the right use of it.

It has been observed, that this Stone has been found some Ages ago, but not
the use of it: both the learned and the unlearned at those times in the world
have had it oftentimes in their hands, and turned it to and again, but could
never make any thing of it. And until of late, the world was never sensible of
its turning unto the Pole, nor its use in Navigation, nor in the Art of
Dialling.

The greatest and the purest Wits and Conceptionists of the world at those
times, Loadstone, q. Lead stone, in Latin Magnes, because of its great force
and virtue; in Greek (...), Herculean, because of the strength thereof; among
the Hebrews (...) Shether, are^inendo, because of its retaining and holding
things.
were not able to find it out, and so it lay by the Lee, as I may so say, for
a long time; yea, for diverse hundreds of years in the secret Bosom of Natures
Majesty, and none in that time knew the use of it. Some are of opinion, that
the use of this stone has not been known in the world save of late, at the
exhibiting of Christ unto the world in the year of our Lord 1300 or
thereabouts; and that the world has been without the knowledge of it for above
5000 years and upwards. But now, the Lord taking compassion on Mankind, did
make mortal man happy, This Stone comes out of Elbe, Norway, Bengala, China,
etc. Now what the secret virtue is that is in this Stone, none can tell:
Philosophers are of opinion, that there is a secret, and an occult quality
engendered naturally in the Loadstone by that spirit that wrought in the
composing of all other stones, and that is the cause. Others are of opinion,
That there be certain incorporeal and spiritual evaporations 2nd issues which
proceed out of the Loadstone, and these are the causes thereof; but to assign a
certain, positive and determinative reason, is impossible: for Nature would
have many things hid in the bosom and lap of her Majesty, which she would not
have the understanding of man to attain unto, and so it remains unknown to this
day, and is more to be admired than searched into.
by declaring the secret Virtue of it unto Goias Melphitanus, who had the
revelation of the usefulness of this Instrument of the Mariners Compass, by the
help and benefit of which, Ships do now discover the remote parts of the world,
that were unknown heretofore, which lay hid, (like Aristotle's Works (...)) and
though public to, yet not made known. This Stone is now become the Seamans
most faithful Conductor to all their Ports and Havens, whether far or near; and
also unto them that travel by Land, it is no less helpful, when they cannot
journey but by the Card: This is another Mercury, and a most certain guide in
all journeys whatsoever, in respect it is the most powerful Ruler of the Iron
generation.

Now I hope it will appear by all this which I have asserted, that in Ages past
there was no such going down into the Seas as be in these days; for how should
they use the Seas, when that they had neither Card nor Loadstone?

But that I may now pass, by this rare Art we can go and talk with Spain, (and
fill our Coffers with his West-Indy Plate) and other Nations far off, as well
as round about us. This Lodestone, with a fair gale of wind, will carry out
our Warlike Boats unto Spain, who have been the causers of all that effusion
and expense of blood that has been shed both in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and in all the other remote parts of the World, in which they have massacred
many English, whose blood cries up to heaven for vengeance against them, Rev.
6.10.

By this Art we make the whole World to tremble: Not a few of those Southern
Kings and Princes have quaked at our Warlike Fleets, when been in the
Mediterranean Seas amongst them, viz. Spain, Portugal, Italy, Turkey, Barbary,
France, etc. Our Fleets when amongst them are Ad terrorem usque spectantium
omnium! an astonishment to them all, and are at this day a terror still both to
the Turk, Spaniard, and the Pope.

By this Art has the world, 53 years before the Incarnation of Christ, at
Julius Caesar his coming out of France into England, England worshipped Idols,
viz. Mars, Mercury, Minerva, Apollo, Diana, etc.
and all the remote parts thereof, been further viewed, discovered courted, and
sailed into and about; so that England wants not her traffic and intercourse
with various and multitudinous Nations, how far intervall'd soever; nor for
Knowledge, neither (in Theologicis, and rebus Humanis) in Divine and Humane
things, of which she is admirably free of, both to promulgate, convey, and
communicate: So that certainly there is something of great importance to be
eyed and considered in the Lords discovering this (Artem obnubilatam) difficult
and intricate Mystery, The Gospel of Christ came into England at the first by
shipping, says Chronicles, and that Joseph of Arimathea was the first bringer
of it into this Land.
who will gainsay me in this? that there has not something of Divine Providence
appeared as a moving cause, or the Causa Procatarctica, in God, to give man
light and understanding in it; to this end, that the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, which is the great power of God unto Salvation, might be
transported, Undoubtedly but he that filled Bezaliel and Aholiah with the
Spirit of wisdom for the work of the Tabernacle, Exodus 31.3. has not discovered
the use of the Loadstone, and the Art of Navigation unto mankind merely for
bare trading withal, but for some higher end.
and freely preached and held forth unto those multitudes of ignorant and
fettered captives of Satan's in those dark mansions, and remote Regions of
America, and unto the other blacknighted parts and corners of the world also.
We have now, by the help of shipping, many Plantations up and down in the
western parts of the world, which are and will be, by Gods assistance,
promoters of the interest of Christ, and instrumental in the pulling down the
interest of the Devil. We read of the Apostles, and the disciples of Christ,
yea of Christ himself, that they made use of shipping unto all the Islands they
traveled to, and Continents, without which, how should the Gospel of Christ
been made manifest?

It is observed, that the use of the Loadstone was never known in the world
till Christ's coming. I would infer thus much then (if there be truth in
History) That God was fully resolved at the coming of his blessed Son into the
world, to give man the right use and understanding of it; to that very end, it
might be the golden Key to open those many locks, bolts, bars and doors, that
lay upon the face of the Creation, which was little known or discovered, till
the Art of Navigation sprung up, and came into the world: So that by this Key
the door of every Nation is opened, to let in the Gospel of Christ amongst
them; and God has given man that dexterity and knowledge in this Art, that his
love unto the world, Joh. 3.33. and the Name of his Son Jesus Christ might go
far and near, in all the remote parts of the world over, there being no other
Name, neither in heaven nor upon earth by which man can be saved, Act. 4.12.
but by this.

This is an Art now which this Nation of late, and several other Nations also
in the world are grown wonderfully dexterous, ripe, and well accomplished in,
and some excelling one another. Its said of the Turk, that great Potentate (the
three half Moons, or the Top-gallant Sail of the World) that he is no great
Mariner, and if he had but that skill and Art that other Nations and Countries
have in Navigation, he would have attempted to have ranged the whole world
over; he would have been in Wars with Nations, though never so far distant, and
would have striven to have had a greater part of the world than he is in
possession of; he would have had the Silver Mines in Hispaniola ere this day,
but that he knows not how to sail his ships thither.

But, its time now for me to lay the Fore-Topsail of this my Compendious (nay I
fear) rather prolix Prooemium upon the Mariners Art, upon the Baek-steads, and
so lie by the Lee. Loquuntur Nautae, Loquatur Ars? Is not this now a rare Art,
I Will deal as kindly with you, as Hezekiah did with the Babylonish Ambassadors,
Isa. 39.2. as he showed them the house of his precious things, the silver, and
the gold, the spices, and the precious ointments, and all the house of his
armor, and all that ever he had: So will I set before you the great works and
wonders of the Lord in the Seas.
by which the glorious Gospel of Christ came into this Land? and by which comes
in all the delicate Fruits, Commodities, and scattered Excellencies that lie up
and down in the Creation, to our very doors? I will then no longer hold you in
the Porch of this delightful Prologue, lest you should think your expectations
to be either frustrated or defrauded; for there is a better Palace of Discourse
to walk in, and better banquetting-stuff to feed on. My Anchor then is on
board, if that you will put off with me a little from the shore, and lanch out
into the main Ocean, come now, for its high water for the Frigot of my
Discourse to turn out withal. When that the Fore-Topsail of any Ship is once
loose, no surer sign than that the Cable is upon the Capstock, and that the
ship is a going to make sail.

(...), Nec inter vivos, nec inter mortuos. Neither amongst the Living, nor
amongst the Dead. OR, A Compendious Improvement of the SEA.
PSALM. 107. Ver. 23. They that go down to the Sea in ships, that do business in
great Waters.


FOR our Introduction into the words before us, our care shall be to balance
every word and circumstance that is either considerable or material in them: To
that end you may behold that mature and goodly fruit that grows as plentifully
upon this Scripture stalk, as did upon that pregnant and most fruitful Tree
Pliny greatly gloried in, which he saw at Tiburts, Juxta Tiburtes Tulias omni
genere Pomorum, alio ramo nucibus, alio baccis, alio ficis, pyris, prunis,
malorumque generibus, etc.
bearing all Novelties; upon one bough grew diverse kinds of Apples, and that of
diverse colors, some red, other-some yellow, etc. some of one color, and some
of another; upon other some boughs grew several kinds of Nuts, and upon other
some again all sorts of Berries, upon other some again Pears, Plums, Oranges
and Lemmons, etc. Now who would not but take delight to have seen such a Tree
as this, were there but such an one in the world, that bears all those
varieties of fruits, which the many and several Trees of the world bring forth?
I question not but that the handling of this Text of Scripture will afford them
that have a sweet Spirit breathing in them, as various, and as delectable
Novelties as they can desire. David calls some of his Psalms Michtam, which is
in the Hebrew, Golden ones, as being full of choice treasure. And what will you
call this Psalm, I pray? I will assure you, that this is neither a Silver one,
nor a Leaden one, but a Golden Psalm, which is neither empty of worth nor
matter. It was the usual manner of the Hebrews to say, that all those things
were of God, which were chief and most excellent in their kind, as the Prince
of God, Genesis 2.23. the Mountains of God, Psalm. 36.7. the Trees of God, etc. We
cannot say that the new composed Psalms of this Age are infallibly Divine; but
I dare conclude it, that this Psalm is, and proceeded from God into David's
heart: and herein is, and lies the excellency and dignity of it.

For the Division of the words, there be four things presenting and offering
themselves unto our consideration: 1. The Persons, in this word, They. 2. Their
Posture, in these words, going down. 3. Their Business or Occasions, in these
words, that do business. 4. and lastly, Great waters, in these words, In the
great waters.


The Persons, they, are to be considered under a threefold respect and
denomination, as they are most commonly.

1. Juveniles. 2. Cognoscentes. 3. Servi. These Lads are (ad instar Halcyonis
contra ventum) like that bird Naturalists write of, which evermore breasts her
self against the wind.

These are they that can live Fame, frigore, illuvie, squalore, inter saxa,
rupesque, membraque saepe torrida gelu habent.



Juveniles. They are then young men that use the Seas, such as are (robore
nati) full of manhood, resolution, strength and valor, men that are of rugged
and undaunted Spirits and dispositions; Sea-headed, Sea-brain'd, Storm-proof,
hardy and stout to act and perform their hard and laborious Water-service, even
in all weathers that blows whatsoever. And is there not a necessity now that
they should be of this Tarpowling and Brass-pot-like metal, who have
perpetually the (Freta indignantia) froth-foming, and hill-swelling Seas to
ride over, in their unruly and uncommandable wooden Chariots? By these, dangers
are despised, difficulties adventured on, terrors contemned, fears laughed at,
cowardice vanquished, generosity and manhood is the only thing that is in
repute and esteem with them: And is there not a necessity that it should be so,
and that every one that will take upon him to go to Sea, should be (a Ludibria
rerum humanarum fortiter contemnens, ac aleam fortunae novercantis ridens) one
that can pluck up a good heart in the midst of the stormiest Seas, or proudest
Waves that ever elevated? Youth now is the prime time for the Sea, because the
body is in its best abilities to endure the Cradle-rocking Waves of restless
Amphitrite: (...), Old Age cannot brook the unkindness of the bouncing and
rolling billows of the Seas, for it makes their bones both to crack and ache;
and its very frequently seen, that when men that have used the Seas long, The
Sea is Navigandi locus, ac tamen commorandi non. Its good for navigation, but
bad for habitation.
and are come into years once, that they betake themselves to their heels, and
bid farewell unto it, as Gulls and Cormorants will hasten to banks or sheltring
places, when they see a storm a coming upon the Sea: They can endure it no
longer.

Let this word then ring in the ears of those many thousands of young and
stout, valiant and hardy pieces, that go both in the Merchant, and the States
Service of England: Had I but that faculty that Pericles that famous and
learned Athenian Orator had, I question not but it would take place, of whom
its said, that when ever he came up before the people, ere he left them, he did
in animis Auditorum aculeos relinquere, leave an itching upon their spirits. I
have read of Alphonsus King of Spain, how that he was petitioned to succor a
decaid Knight, but inquiring into the reason of his poverty, said, Had he
young, spent his estate in my service, I would supplied him when old. Its well
if God say not of you at last who forget God, that you served the States, the
Merchant, and the Devil, and now when you come to dye, you would have heaven,
and pardon of sin, Go, get you to hell. So of Hermanius in the (Bohemian
History) that that great Courtier, when he came to die, cried out most
bitterly, that he had spent more time in the Palace than in the Temple. This
will be the cry of Sailors one day, that they have spent more time in the Seas,
and in the States and Merchants service, than ever they spent in Gods.


Remember, young men, that as you are in your prime for States, Commonwealths,
or Merchant Service, that you are also in the same plight and equipage for
Gods; though you be now in your warm blood, yet there is a time of infirmities
a coming on, wherein your fiery spirits will be cooled, and your bloodshedding
hands exceedingly weakened. The time is coming, when you shall say, Eccl. 12.1.
We have no pleasure in the gallant Ships that sail the Seas; We take no delight
in seeing the brave Galleys that go with Oars, nor in the thundering and firing
of Guns, or in the sound of that ear-pleasing noise of Trumpets, that play
their Warlike Levets upon the gilded Poops of the State of Englands Ships. Some
there be (though God knows very few) amongst you, which do both serve, and
really and sincerely fear and love the Lord, and God will remember them, and
all their obedience, Jer. 2.2. I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth. God
is a great observer and notice-taker of the kindness of those that serve him in
their youth; and he takes notice also of the hard-heartedness of those that
neither fear him, nor obey him. Isa. 1.2, 3, 4. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear,
O Earth! The Heavens and the Earth blush at the graceless lives that you live
and lead in the Seas. Lay it to heart, I beseech you, and consider how flexible
and how obedient some young men are unto God, and how vile, stubborn,
rebellious and obstinate you are against him. Serve God with as much vigor,
strength, heartiness and cheerfulness, as you serve the States, or the
Merchant; you will hazard and venture your lives over and over for them, what
will you do for God then? Will you throw out of doors all Religion, and the
worship and fear of God? Will you do the hard Service of the Commonwealth of
England, and will you not do the sweet, blessed and easy Service of the Lord,
which will in the end bring you greater Salary than they can give you? Live
then in Prayer, Reading, Meditating, and all the good means, that you may in
time have that carnal part that is in you, killed, and sacrificed unto God.

2. Cognoscentes. As none will say but that the Sea requires the young man's
Service: What a learned man in one case said of the unlearned people of the
world, I may say of the unlearned and unskilful Mariner, (...), To be destitute
of learning, is to dance in the dark. To go to sea without Nautical
accomplishments is the only way to throw the ships upon the Rocks.
So I think none will deny but that it calls for judicious, knowing, and
understanding men to be employed in it. And such as have good skill in the
Mathematics, and in the use of those many Navigating Instruments, which
Mariners take to Sea with them; viz. Square, Cube, Astrolaby, etc. and in all
those needful Nautical, Astronomical, and Mathematical questions, to the end
they may be well accomplished for such undertakings, and apprehensive,
positive, and determinative, as to the Latitudes, Longitudes, and Localities of
Countries. Nay further, those that will take upon them that boldness to sail
rich and costly Ships in the Sees, they ought to be no crown-crazed-novices,
but such whose heads are well versed, and beat with a perfect knowledge of all
those Sands, Rocks, Shallows, Sea-depths and Havens, that be either about
England here near at home, or about all the other Foreign Nations and parts of
the World that are traded into, and far from home: Otherwise, if they be
destitute of this accurateness, what mad work will they make? that Ship is sure
to go to wrack, when the Master of her knows not how the Sands, the Rocks, and
the Shallows lie, nor how to shape his course into a farre-Countrey Haven, when
he is at the mouth of it.

When Solomon built his Navy in Ezion-Geber, (1 King. 9.26.) whom God had
richly endowed and qualified with Wisdom above all men that ever were, He had
need to have an head as subtle as the Serpents, eyes as sharp as the Lizards,
scent as quick as the Vultures, hands fast as Harpyes, feet swift for work,
that will take upon him the charge of great and considerable ships. How careful
have learned men been, not only to write of the nature of all those herbs that
are meet for food, and of such as have a medicinable virtue in them to cure
diseases; but of those also that are venomous and poisonable, to the end that
men being warned of them, might shun them as perilous? The like care has been
taken by men to give the Mariners notice of the Rocks, Sands, and Shallows.
or shall be in the world again; We may read, that he would not send his Fleet
out of his Harbors into the Sea by Cock-brain'd fools, and Novices, but by and
with Men that had good knowledge of the Sea, ver. 27. And Hiram was one of his
chief Navy and Admiralty-Commissioners appointed for that very end, to take
examination of the Abilities of those men that would undertake the careful
sailing of them; and thus taking special care in the ordering of Solomon's Navy,
by manning them with such men as he had knowledge of, and experience in, both
for Art, Skill, and sufficiency, he sent them out, and many of Solomon's
household (as Passengers) went along with them into Barbary for the gold of
Ophir, and many other Commodities, which is (as Josephus affirms) Terra auri, A
Land of Gold. A wise Governor, or prudent men that are in Authority, will
pitch upon, and enquire for the skilfullest Mariners to sail their Ships
withal: Ingenuous Architects will have none to work for them, but skilful and
able builders.

Now whether the Mariners which were provided by King Hiram to go down into the
Sea, Of what use the Hazel rod is unto the Metallaries, to find out the Beds
and Mines of Precious gold and silver, which is after this manner, That way it
inclines, there lie the Veins, and this they call their Divina virgula; Of the
very same use is the Loadstone to our Mariners, by it they find out the remote
corners, and spicy Islands of the world.
had the use either of Card or Loadstone to direct them in their Navigations,
to me its dubious, and, if History tell true, they had not the discovery of
their use, and of the Loadstones turning or pointing unto the Arctick and
Antarctick Poles, for Solomon's Navy was built many years before the coming of
Christ, and until, and after Christ's coming (is the judgment of many Writers)
that the use of the Loadstone was not known: So that to manage this Voyage, its
more than probable, that they sailed their ships within sight of Land, (and
took the calmest time of the year to go in) and being in the Mediterranean,
which is but a small run, they might make shift to sail their ships from the
nearest parts in the Land of Canaan into Barbary, which is no great distance,
though without the use of Card and Compass. All those places we read of in
Scripture, as Tarshish, Sheba, and Dedan, Ezekiel, 38.13. Tyrus, Zidon, Arvad,
Dan, and Javan, besides many others, were Seaport Towns and Cities, Ezekiel.
27.7. and these were all of them bordering upon the Mediterranean (if my
judgment fail not) I do not find mention of one place in all the whole
Scripture, that Zebuluns Tribe, the great Mariners of those times, ^ver went
unto, that was beyond, or out of the Mediterranean. They never traded into the
West Indies, nor into the East Indies, or the Northern parts of the World, nor
into those many parts that are since sailed into, and discovered. Its likely
they sailed from one Haven to another in the Mediterranean, but never came or
went out of the Straits-mouth into the great and wide Sea; which if they had
once done, its very likely they had never been able to have found their going
out at it again; and so been disinabled of ever bringing of their Ships back
any more into their Harbors. Now Jacob prophetically said; that he would bless
and prosper the Mariners Tribe, both in their goings out, and comings in, Deuteronomy.
33.18. and his blessing of them, by keeping off the raging winds, and directing
them where to go in the deeps, both from Rocks and Sands, He that would take
charge of a ship, its requisite that he should be a man, plurimae, multae, ac
prope infinitae lectionis, one that's well versed in the lying of the Rocks,
Shallows and Sands, Fire-lights are set upon the Seacoasts of most Countries,
as that fire-light that was fixed upon the uttermost wall of Jerusalem on the
North side, called by Cosmographers, Turris Turnorum, because it was a guide to
the people that were out in the night (traveling to the holy City) that they
might not wander from the right entry of the gates of the City.
supplied the absence both of Card and Loadstone, and was as good to them, as
if they had had the use and knowledge of them.

But to let this discourse pass, I think it will not be denied, but that I may
say (uno ore conclamant omnes) all that are wise will cry up able and knowing
men, as the serviceablest and profitablest to sail their ships. Does not that
woeful experience of the sad miscarriages of many brave gallant Ships in England
declare, and attribute it unto the weak and insufficient undertakings of men
that would go Masters, and Pilots, and I know not what, when they have not been
able to perform that weighty trust and charge imposed on them? How have many
Beetles mistaken themselves in the Light-houses about this Land of ours,
supposing them to be lights in other places, which are at a great distance from
each other, and hereby some have run their ships on ground, and others have
lost both their ships and lives? Certainly then its very requisite, that those
that go into the Seas with ships of such worth as they do, that they should be
well acquainted, and furnished with all those Nautical dexterities that tend
both unto the preservation of ships and lives.

A Traveller at Land, that has many hundreds of miles either to ride, or foot,
and not knowing above ten or twenty miles of the way, he will not take it as
sufficient that the Country that he is to go unto lies East, West, or North,
but he will get himself a short schedule of the names of all the Towns,
Countries, or Counties he is to travel by and through, and this note he carries
with him in his Pouch for his guide and direction. That which I would infer now
from this, is thus much, That it is not enough for a Seaman to know that his
course to such or such a Country lies South, East, North or West, but its
requisite that he should have an exquisite cognizance of the Rocks, Sands and
Shallows that lie in his way, that thereby he may be in a capacity to save both
himself and the ship he takes charge of, otherwise he may sing, Qui non ante
cavet, post dolebit.

Had they not need, think you, to be skilful men, that will venture themselves
to go into the Sea, where there is neither Lanes, Foot-paths, Highways,
Houses, Countries, Trees, Sea-marks, Mercuries, or men, to ask which is the way
to such a place? but all the directions that they can procure in their long
Travels, are fetched from the Pole and the Stars. These are their Mercuries
that they consult withal, the men that they ask for the way unto any place,
and these guides dwell in the Heavens, they come not down out of their Orbs, to
tell the Sailors whereabouts they are in their Voyages in the Seas, neither are
they sociable, or to be spoke withal, and yet notwithstanding though they be
both mute and dumb directors, yet can the Mariners interpret their Language,
and pick out their way in the Sea out of them, and get intelligence from them
(though they be many hundreds of miles from them) both of their advancings and
disadvancings, which they evermore compare with their Card and Compass,

What mad work would unskilful men make with a ship, Had they not need to be
better Artists that go down to sea, than he in Pliny, who when finding a
disproportion betwixt a Dial and the Suns motion, thought surely that the Earth
was moved from its Center, or that the Sun had taken a new course, but
suspected not that the Dial had been shaken by an Earthquake?
were they two or three hundred leagues in the Sea off any Land? even let her
drive this way and that way, like a company of children in a small Boat, that is
carried with great violence down the Tide or Stream. Phaeton get but leave one
day of his father to rule the Horses of the Sun, and for want of art and skill,
overturned the Chariot, and set the World on fire. The like mad work would many
men make, were they but trusted with ships in the Seas, either set the Vessels
they sailed in upon their heads, or run them upon the first Rocks and Sands
they came at, and thereby involve themselves in a dolorouser labyrinth, than
ever the Cretan Minotaure was shut up in. The Sea is like that Egyptian
Labyrinth which Histories tell of, that was full of dark and intricate mazes
and turnings, so that there was no passing in nor out, without Guide, Torch and
Candle: So no going to Sea without Card and Nautical skill.

Have they not great need to be pregnantly well skilled in the Precepts of
Navigation, and that after the exactest manner that can be, in all those Rocks
which lie lurking in the Seas to catch ships by the Keel, They that will go to
Sea, had need be Ex procera praescientes specula ventura videntes, men looking
about them. He that will ride, we say, must have an eye ad cursum equum, to the
running of the horse: He that will plow, ad arandam bovem, must keep the ox in
the furrow: He that will hunt must have an eye ad indigandam canem; and he that
will sail, ad Navigandam Navem. Quod in Navi gubernator, quod curru agitator,
quod in choro precentor, quod denique Dux in exercitu. A skilful Master in a
ship, is a comely thing.
and in all those Quicksands (which many ships are swallowed up with) how they
bear and lie, which things are engraven in their Maps and Waggoners, to that
very end, they may not perish nor be to seek? Surely Sailors should be as
cautious in the Sea, as the Foxes of Thrace (which is a very cold Country, and
subject unto much frost and snow every Winter) are, who will not, when they are
to pass over any frozen Pool, come upon the Ice without great fear and
jealousy, laying their ears unto the ground, to listen if they can hear any
stream of water bubbling underneath, which if they do, then back they go as
from an unsound and dangerous passage; but if they hear no breach of water
underneath, then on they go very boldly.

But to conclude, every one that uses the Seas, has not the ability to take
charge of ships, though for advantage sake they would be undertaking. To such I
shall say, what Sylla that Noble Roman said of young men, That they must first
take a turn at the Oar, before they come either to the Helm or Stern.

Such Novices as those that have not skill, when that they come once to lose
sight of Land, they have not the Art nor Prudence to judge how many leagues they
are run in distance from it; for being in the water, though they sail never so
many leagues, water is all alike at the furthest run, as it was at their first
setting forth. As it is with the Sun-dial, even after the same manner is it
with the Sea. Horologii umbram progressam sentimus, progredientem non. We may
perceive that the shadow goes, but cannot see it going: so men may perceive
themselves to have departed from land, but not know how far they are from it,
unless that they have better judgment in the Mariners Art.

3. Servi: and these are to be considered under a twofold denomination.

1. As they are servants unto the Merchant: And

2. As they are servants also unto the State.

1. Unto the Merchant. Its with graceless Sailors, as it was with Bruso,
Zeno's servant, when being taken with theft, alleged for himself, that it was
his destiny to steal, to which his Master answered, it was his destiny then to
be beaten.
You are employed by Merchants, whose moneys you are oftentimes betrusted with,
into the Foreign parts of the World, to lay out for them in all those several
Commodities they send you into the sea for, to bring them home, viz. Silks,
Wines, Stuffs, Sugars, Figs, Lemons, Oranges, Raisins, etc. And if you be
light-fingered, and rotten-hearted men, neither fearing God nor Man, what
havoc will you make of their Wines, Sugars, Fruits, etc? Consider with your
selves, that you are but hired servants for so much per Month, and have no
order nor allowance from them to drink their Wines, or steal their Fruits, etc.
you ought to be content with your Wages. I would have Seamen to be of Fabritius
his mind (or else I will not give a button for ten thousand of them) of whom
its said, that one might as well turn the Sun from his course, as sway him from
honest and ingenuous dealing.
Know this one thing, that Gods eye is upon you, though the Merchants or the
Trustees be at a vast distance from you. He is, said a Heathen, totus Oculus,
all Eye, (this is more than thousands of Sailors will either say or believe) as
if a man's body were all eye, to see as well backwards as forwards, and forwards
as backward. Christ saw Nathaniel when he was under the Fig Tree, when he
th^ught that no eye was upon him, Joh. 1.5^. and Gods eye is upon you in your
ships in the Seas, when the Merchants cannot behold you, nor cannot tell what
you have done. Read but these few Scriptures, and consider but Gods All-seeing
eye, and then tell me if you can play the Thief; Joh. 4.29. Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12.

There be two things that would exceedingly adorn the Seamen of England, and
raise out of the dust their lost and cracked Credit (and esteem) with the good
people of the Land, could they but be found dwelling in them; and they are
these two: 1. A working hand. 2. An honest heart.


1. A quick and working hand. There should be a diligent and quick dispatching
and expediting of their Masters businesses and commands, without loytering, and
taking their own ease and pleasures. Genesis 24.33. Abraham's servant was so
conscientious in the stirring in his Masters business, that he preferred it
before his meat, and would not eat till his errand was told them: Send me away,
(says he) that I may go unto my Master. I would have all the Captains and
Mariners in the States service to be of that honest mind, and upright spirit
that Drusius Livius was of, of whom its said, that this great Roman Counselor
bespoke a curious Artificer to build him an house in the City as curiously as
Art could make it: That I will, said he, and I will so contrive it, that none
shall ever see your coming into it, or going out of it, nor what you do at any
time in your house. God forbid, says he: I will have my house built so, that
the eyes of the whole City may run up and down every corner in it, and may
clearly see what I do in my house every day I up rise. Tell the States, that
you would have them to build you such Frigots, as that all the ships that sail
by you in the Seas, may see into your Cabins, and what you do every day. And
this would bespeak you honest men.
Jacob also served Laban with all his might, Genesis 31.6. night and day did he
take care for his gain and profit: Make the like conscience of your service,
and the discharge of those Trusts that are imposed in you, whether in the
Merchants or States service; and say, when you have got your sailing Orders, or
when your Ships are fraughted, Let Us be going, Send us away now whilst the wind
and opportunity serves. Loyter it not in Harbors.

2. An honest heart. You should do for your Masters, as you would do for your
selves: Nay, you should esteem of their business before, and above your own.
Upright Jacob did thus in Labans service, Genesis 30.30. And the Lord has blessed
thee since my coming: as if he were a going to say, I have followed thy
business honestly and closely, and my own have I neglected, And now when shall
I provide for mine own house also? Its wonderful to think what Jacob endured in
Labans service, Genesis 31.40, 41. Heat scorched him by day, and frost nipt him by
night, besides his loss of sleep, and nocturnal rest. I confess that Seamens
service is full of danger, hardship, night-watching; and day-labouring; but to
go through-stitch with all they do, out of a good principle, is the life of
all, that is that which makes the service venerable. Put on, put on, Masters of
Ships, and Seamen, for honest hearts and principles; God knows you are people
that are the furthest on stern of any people in the world. Use all fidelity in
the keeping, employing and increasing of Merchants goods for their gain and
advantage that you can. Purloin not, nor waste them in riotous eating and
drinking. What care took Jacob, that nothing might miscarry in his hand, Genesis
31.38, 39. when his Master thought that he had robbed him, he could not find a
rag amongst all his stuff that was his? And will not you take the like on the
behalf of those that employ you?

2. Unto the State. In this service there be five sorts of men that deserve
sharp Reproof, and they are those that go under the Notion 1. Of Captains. 2.
Pursers. 3. Gunners. 4. Boatswains. 5. Carpenters.


1. Of Captains. The Sea Captain is a Lad that has his faults, slips, spots and
blemishes as well as another. Alexander was continent, yet immoderate; Sylla
was valiant, yet violent; Galba eminent, yet insolent; Lucullus generous, yet
delicious; Marcellus glorious, yet ambitious; Architus patient, yet avaritious.
Is there not very many that are now employed in the Seas, who are no more fit
for that function, than the suit of a Giant is for a short-grown Dwarf? Many
creep into the States service, that are both a disgrace to it, a dishonor unto
God, and a gravaminous burden to the ships and men they go amongst. Let me
tell the States of England thus much, That the entertaining and countenancing
of heretical, erroneous, factious and unpeaceable persons in their ships, has
exceedingly hurt, poisoned and infected the silly and ignorant Sailors. There
would not have been found those damnable Errors in the heads, hearts and
minds of Seamen, that be now to be seen with great confidence and boldness at
this day amongst them, had there but been a careful keeping out of Command all
such worthless persons, who leave nothing else but a stink in every ship and
Country they breathe in. In former times, when there was as much Peace in
England as there is now, as much Piety as there is now, as much Honesty as
there is now, nay more Honesty and Sincerity, whatever any in this Age cry up,
and boast of, none but well-bred and accomplished men, both of parts and
estates, were put into Commands at Sea. Its a true saying that, Ex quolibet
ligno, non fit Mercurius: Every log of wood will not make a Scholar; and I may
with as great verity say, that every uncomb'd Sailor will not make a Captain;
every one that knows the Rigging, or the navigating and carrying of a ship up
and down in the Seas from Land to Land, or Port to Port, is not fit to put into
the place of government. I remember a pretty passage of one of this sort, who
had got good friends to present his name, and speak very well in his behalf at
the Admiralty Court, by whose means he got his foot into the stirrup of a
Wooden Horse, and rid as proudly over the waves, and the bouncing billows of
the Sea, as any Commander in the salt waters whatsoever: but wanting skill to
sit this Horse, and art to keep the Reins in his hand, and withal, which was
the main, a good Headpiece, the Horse stumbled in the River of Thames, and
threw the Captain out of the Saddle.

Will and pleasure is the fools Card, which he steers by all the Voyage, and
this makes so many ill-governed, ill-ordered, and ill-tutored ships as there be
at this day in the Sea.

But to come unto particulars, there be three things that are too apparent in
Sea Captains.

1. Negligence. The Merchant sends to you to shelter them by Convoy from the
Enemy, as the Grapes in Babel did upon a time unto the Vines in Judea, (as the
Jewish Talmud says) desiring them to come and overshadow them, otherwise the
violence of the heat would consume them in such sort as that they should
thereby never come unto any maturity. But you deal by the Merchant sometimes,
as the Vines of Judea did by the Vines of Babel, even let them perish in the
Seas through negligence. They that bear command should not yield to their men
in their cousenage and fraudulency, but say as Scipio said unto the Harlot,
when offered him, Vellem, si non Imperator, I would, if I were not Captain.
2. Injustice. 3. Unfitness.
1. Negligence. Is there not many that have good ships to sail in, and great
Salary to live upon, whose consciences serve them even to do very little
service and good for it, and had rather lie at an Anchor, or with their Noses
in a good Harbor, than be out at Sea in the preserving of the Merchant, and
destroying of the enemy? And is there not other-some that are as loath to
encounter their enemies (when they have opportunities for it) in the Seas, as
the Welchman was to fight the Englishman, of whom its said, that Her made the
challenge, and bid the Englishman take what Weapon he would, and her would
fight with him: The battle begun, the Englishman ripled her on the knee, and
her feeling the unkind salutation of the Englishmans Weapon, threw down her
Buckler, and her Sword, and would fight no more: What Is the matter now, quoth
the Englishman? What, said she? Apploot, apploot, was not her Buckler broad
enough, but must hit her upon the knee? Her will have no more of that. What
fair winds and opportunities do Commanders many times slip, by loytering about
the shores and coasts, when they should be in the Seas? to such let me say, Ad
rem, and Rhombum; Go to your work, go, the Country maintains you not to idle.
Some Sea Captains are Thales like, who contemplated heaven, not for any
devotion, but to pick some gain out of it, seeing by it that there would be
some scarcity of Olives, etc. which he monopolized into his hands, and sold.
These fellows would make the world believe that they are godly men, and indeed
this makes for the honor of Religion, that these men love the name of it, who
cannot endure the nature of it. Says many a Sea Captain. If I be not seemingly
religious, I shall not attain to any great honor or preferment, as the times
go, I must wear the garb of a Christian outwardly, though I disown it inwardly;
and by this means counterfeit Religion is mads a mere stooping horse of, to
bring Vermin into authority.
Look about you, do not you see how the Enemy spoils the Merchant?

2. Injustice. Remember, that a little with right, is better than great
revenues without right, Psalm. 37.16. Had I a voice of Brass, to make every
Captain in the Sea to hear me, I would tell them, and all that use the Seas,
That Injustice will in time undo them, and draw upon their heads the heavy,
severe, and impatible wrath of God, and throw them out of their ships and
livelyhoods, Jeremiah 9.19. How are we spoiled? we are greatly confounded, our
dwellings have cast us out. Unrighteous doings in the States ships, will hurl
Commanders out of them, and make them stink in the nostrils of all that shall
behold them. You Captains of the Seas! Look but upon your cogging now, as it
will appear hereafter; look but upon your assigning of false and unjust
Accounts now, as they will appear hereafter, and then tell me how you like it.
What? shall a Boatswain, a Gunner, a Purser, or a Carpenter, entangle me to lie
for them, that they may pocket up the States goods? God forbid. What, shall a
Pursers maintaining of your Tables with fresh victuals, The States of England
values not the Sea Captain, if once they find him but in some gross and
insufferable error (as there is righteousness in so doing;) 7 years service (is
an usual proverb amongst the Sailors) is not looked on, if but found in one
hours displeasure. So that the Sea Captain in one case is not unlike to the
sumpter-horse, who does good service, and carries the trunks all day, but at
night his treasure is taken from him, and himself turned into a dirty and foul
stable. Know you not the application of this?
engage and introduce you to give them the liberty to to be false? God forbid
that such doings should be found in my hand. And yet where is that Great Cabin
in any, or in all the Ships of England, but there be these doings in it? This
may be for a time lucrum in crumena, but in the end it will prove damna
conscientiae.

3. Unfitness. I would propound this question, Whether or no there be not many
in command that would make better Masters for navigating of ships too and
again, than of commanding, guiding, governing, or fighting of them? The great
Salary that they have for their service, is the thing they look at; as to the
ordering and well regulating of those many spirits that be under their command,
they know not what course to take in the steering of them. Pro. 14.1. Solomon
tells you, that the wise woman looks upon it as her greatest policy to build
her house, and having building-materials both of wisdom, understanding, and
instruction, the building work went forward, and the superstructure of it was
most rare: And so would you do too, if you had but those brains, and for want
of them, you bring many times an old house over your ears. Seamen might be
reclaimed, reformed, and reduced unto better carriage, order and deportment,
than there is amongst them, were there but wisdom, prudence, and a zeal for
God in you, to act and bestir your selves amongst them. Your partial and ill
managing of your Commands in the ships you are in, will in process of time hurl
you out. When David's house was out of order, he was forced to fly, 2 Samuel 15.
Ill orders in Commanders, is the only way to bring them unto wrack.

But that I may pass on, I Will make it my business, with very much brevity, to
lay down in some particulars the great Necessity of these following endowments,
to be in all that either do or would go Captains and Commanders either at Sea
or Land. There be five things then requisite in a Commander.

1. Wisdom. 2. Valor. 3. Authority. 4. Piety. 5. Circumspection.
And these, when opened, like Spices when they are pounded, will afford a
fragrant savor.

1. Wisdom. Eccl. 10.10. Wisdom is profitable to direct. If this be but wanting
in him that is in command, I may resemble him to a ship that lies tumbling in
the Sea without Ballast, Socrates at a banquet fell at odds with one of his
familiars and openly rebuked him; but Plato observing of it, could not hold,
but said, How much better had this bin spoken privately? Call your men into
your Cabbins, and there tell them their faults, and not upon the open deck;
this would win more than you are aware of.
or to a bad Helmsman at Sea, who makes most lamentable steerage of it; and
though the point, or the course he is to steer by, lies before his nose, yet
cannot keep the ship up unto it. What one said of a goodly and personable
Ambassador that came once over out of a Foreign Nation into England, I may say
of the Sea-Captains and Commanders; When the Nobleman was asked how he liked
him? his answer was, That he was a very proper, portly, and comely man. I, but
how do you like and approve of his headpiece? His answer then was very plain,
That tall men were like to houses of four or five stories high, wherein the
uppermost room is evermore worst furnished. The applicable part of this, is
this in short: If the uppermost room of a Captains head be not well tempered,
and well laid in with the materials of wisdom, prudence, and discretion, there
will be most ridiculous deportment in the ship he goes in.

2. Valor. The Seamans eye is much upon the Captains behavior. Its a true
saying that, Sol spectatorem nisi cum deficit, non habet; and that, Nemo
observat Lunam nisi laborantem: Every eye will gaze upon the Sun, when in an
Eclipse; and every eye will admire the Moon, when in her travel. Seamen will
take notice of you, with what courage you face and fight your enemies. Sea
Captains should resemble Gideon in his speech to his soldiers, Judge. 7.17.
Look on me, and do likewise.

Some ships carry upon their heads the Lion Rampant washed with gold, and some
again upon their sterns. Some upon their heads is pourtrayed the Unicorn in
golden gilt, in other some the George on horseback: Some titled the Tiger,
some the Resolution, and other some the Dragon, to show of what spirit, courage
and metal our States captains should be of in the handling of their enemies.


Captains should stand upon their honors, and carry the stoutness and
fierceness of Lions in their bosoms, when they come to the trial, of whom its
said, That out of state he scorns to run whilst any looks upon him. If I were
to give a Captain his warlike Motto indeed, I would present him with that of
Luthers, Cedo Nulli; I will yield to no enemy in the Sea, I will sink by his
side first. The sight of a Captains valor in the time of an Engagement, is an
encouraging Alarm unto all the Seamen to stand to their Arms, and their great
Guns, without which they will have but little stomach to encounter their enemy.
Plutarch said well, when he said, that an Army of Hearts with a Lion to their
Leader, was better than an Army of Lions, with an Heart to their Leader. Put on,
put on, Sea Captains, for valor and undauntedness: Some of you come far on
stern in comparison of that magnanimity that is in others. At the great Battle
betwixt Scipio and Hannibal, ad amnem Ticinam, the Roman General made this
brave warlike speech in the head of his Army, Cum iis est vobis pugnandum quos
priore bello terra marique vicistis. And I would have Sea Captains to speak
unto their Seamen in the like case, when come to Engagements, You are, says he,
to join battle with those, whom in the former war you conquered both by Land
and Sea. What brave Instructions also were those which Agamemnon gave unto
Menelaus, when the battle was a beginning, he commanded him to go into the
Grecian Camp, to animate them unto fight, (...), etc. Run through the Army,
cry, encourage them, mind them of their Progenitors, how valiant have our
forefathers been? Had but every Sea Captain this Martial faculty, he might soon
set on his Seamen under him (sit verbo venia) to pull the proudest enemy that
ever strutted in the Sea, to pieces; I may say of cowardly Sea Captains, what
one said of one after a great fight, that came to the Camp of Consalvo, who was
a great Captain, both proudly horsed and armed; Who is this, said one? and who
is this said another? Its St. Erinin, says one, that never appears but after a
storm. So say Sailors, What Frigot's that that never came near us in the fight?
Captain --
for these Lads but encouraged, would soon do it.

What a base, ignoble, and unworthy thing would it be, for any States Captain
to do as one did, when an Enemy was come up with him for to fight him, who was
but his equivalent both in Guns and Men, yet his heart failed him so, that he
durst neither stay upon quarter deck, nor the lower deck, but betook himself to
his legs in the view of all his men, and hid himself in a secret place, which
he questioned not but was below the flying of all shot, whether great or small:
And unbethinking of himself that the Charge was his, to look to the management
of the fight, would ever and anon put up his head and ears above the Hatches,
and ask his men if the Rogue they fought with was firing? yes, would the
Sailors say, he is now going to give us his Broadside, have a care of your
self, stand clear, or he will strike off your head from your body: at which
words he pulled in his Cowardly skull, and lay close a while till the storm was
over, and by and by he puts up his nose again, and peeps out of the ship, Has
he (says he) not yet done shooting? But to proceed.

3. Authority. Where there is not a putting into execution now and then that
Military Power the States has granted them that carry Commands in the Seas, its
no marvel if that such Captains meet with so many base, sordid, and ignoble
carriages and demeanors amongst Seamen as they do. For want of which they will
not fear to lie, swear, to be drunk, to fight, nor fear to raise Mutinies, and
to head Factions, and Discontents in the ships they go in. Every Commander in
the ship he goes in should make it his business to magnify and adorn his
Authority amongst his Seamen. He that will not keep up his dignity, will soon
lay down his duty. You must use Erga rebellantes audacia, erga subjectos
benevolentia. Either punish every Offender according to your Sea-Statutes and
Ordinances, or bid farewell to all good order and decorum. As Justice and
Authority is the best and sweetest Flower in the Crown of the Commonwealth of
England, it is the same, and the like at Sea in Ships. Columna and corona
Reipublicae. Prove. 16.12. It Is an abomination to Kings to commit wickedness:
It Is small credit unto any that are in the least commands that be in the
States of Englands Service, to allow of villainy, deboistness, and disorders.

Verse. 14. A little bit in a Geldings mouth, and the reigns in the r^^ders
hands, you know, commands him this way and that way, Ad equitislibitum, to the
Riders pleasure. Be sure that you keep the bridle of your power and authority
in your hands, and then may you sweigh your Sailors what way you will.
The wrath of a King is as messengers of death: but a wise man will pacify it.
Were there but a knitting of the brows in Captains, and a stamping with the
foot, and a discountenancing of evil, there would not be that boldness in the
foreheads, and skulls of Seamen, as is. It Is said of Eli in your Bible
margins, that he frowned not upon his children, and that was the reason they
became such unnurtured pieces as they were. I say again unto you, that you must
knit the brows upon base manner'd, and ill bred Seamen, or else you will have
nasty Ships, and uncomfortable habitations amongst them. Seamen are heady, and
peremptory, and would have your (...) in every thing, if you be not ready to
contradict them, and to break them of it. Evermore look upon Seamen as upon the
Cypress-tree; of whom it is said, that it cannot endure to be dung'd, or
watered, but hates all digging, and delv^ng about it, it cannot away with
cutting and pruning, but grows the worse for all good physic, Captains should
do by Seamen when they take them in gross and exorbitant evils, as that Roman
General did by one of his Soldiers, whom he found in the acting of a most
heinous evil, and notwithstanding he begged pardon with weeping tears, he
would not hear him, but said most bravely, Non licet bello bis peccare: It is
not lawful to offend twice in war, the sparing of these lads is but a bidding
of them do the like again.
nay all remedies to others are grievous to it, nay in a word, go about to
medicine it, and you kill it. The Seaman is of his like temper, he would
neither be corrected, nor punished, and the neglect hereof does but undo him.
Seamen are like unto the inferior Sphaeres, which if they were nor carefully
ruled, and in a manner corrected by the highest, the swiftness of their motion
would quickly set the world on fire. That ship is little better than half on
fire, that is not well ruled: God knows there be many ships in the sea which
carry fair names, and titles on their outsides, as boxes in Apothecary shops
do, when alas within, they are full of poison. Some ships are called the
True-love, othersome the Paragon, and some again the Amity, etc. both these,
and all the rest for want of good governing, may better bear the names of
Isaacs wels, Eseck, and Sitnah, strife, and hatred. For there is more of this
in ships, than any thing else.

4. Piety. If a Commander be irreligious, the men will be so too, but if he
be godly, and have a gracious faculty of sowing, and scattering good
exhortations, and admonitions amongst them, this will both civilize, and
abundantly reform them. It is a true Saying in which lies no small weight,
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur ^rbis. Alexander the great, and Alphonsus
King of Arragon, Numa Pompilius was so strict in his Religion, that he made
this Law amongst the Romans (which was no sooner put forth but the people
followed it, he being their pattern, and example.) That men should not serve
the Gods, as they passed by, or were in haste, or did any business, but that
they should worship, and pray to them when they had time, and leisure, and all
other businesses set a part. Our Sea-Captains want this zeal for God. And
besides, that worship that Sailors exercise themselves in, is done in the
midest of much confusion, one while sailing, another while when chasing and
never is there any Ordinance performed seriously and reverently.

An old Proverb, Confessor Papa, confessus Populus. If the Pope be an honest
man, so will all his people be. If a Captain be godly, so will his men be.
Melior est enim unus timens, quam mill impit filii: One honest godly Seaman
in a ship, is of more worth, and use than ten thousand swearers.


were both wry-necked, the one by nature, and the other by custom, therefore
all their followers would hang the head down in the like manner. Aurelius the
Emperor loved red wine best, and therefore Torquatus would plant no other
grapes. Dionysius for a time loved Plato well, and then all his followers loved
Philosophers. Such as the color of Jacobs rods were, such was the color of
the cattle which were conceived in the sight of the rods. If your examples,
Gentlemen, in ships be good, and virtuous, it will have a great influence upon
your Seamen to make them better. Their eyes are upon you. Beasts level their
looks at the countenance of the Lions, and Birds make wing as the Eagle flies.
If Trajane be just, then all the People will study justice. If Octavius
delight in Poesy, then every one will strive to be a Poet. If Cornelius fear
God, then so will also his whole household. I prae, sequar, said the Crab, pray
go you before, and I will follow after you. I have observed of late in England,
that when some colors have been cried up for the Lord Protector's color,
neither the Citizens nor the Countryman has been able to keep his money in his
purse, but he must needs apparel himself with the same colored cloth. Let
Sea-Captains but set Seamen good coppies, and examples, and they might in time
be learned to write after them. The soul of every man since the fall is
capabler of receiving evil than good.

5. Circumspection. Special care would be taken by those that go Commanders in
the Seas, 1. Of taking in, and keeping out. 2. Of leaving in, and casting out.

1. Take not in Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers, filthy, and frothy spirited
Seamen into your ships. The doing of this will but tend to the spoiling of the
rest. Is it not a well-known Proverb, that one scabbed sheep will infect a
whole flock? a drop of Colloquintida will mar a whole pot of pottage, and one
stinking Sailor will spoil a whole ships company. This was one reason why Sarah
would have Ishmael turned out of doors, because she saw in him an evil
disposition, and lewd manners, and therefore she greatly feared lest Isaac
should be tainted, Octauius Augustus observing Herennius a dissolute young
man, gave command that he should stay no longer in his Camp, for he took in
none but such as were civil, honest and orderly. The youngman being sensible of
the disgrace that would come upon him, entreated the Emperor not to send him
home, alleging that he could not tell how to answer his Father, Dic me tibi
displicuisse, Tell him that I am displeased with thee, said the Emperor.

I wish that that famous Decree of Theodosius were writ upon all the Entering
Ladders throughout the whole Navy of England, before men set their feet into
the States ships. Praesenti jussione mandaemus quicunque ad domum nostram (vel
navem) nosci^ur pertinere, etc. We command by these presents, that whosoever is
known to belong to our household, be not a Swearer, a Drunkard, an unclean
person, rude, and deboist fellows, etc. for he shall serve me that obeyes good
Laws, and therefore I will begin with good government with those that are of my
own household, that others abroad may be ashamed to do ill, and others
encouraged that do well, etc.


and corrupted by him. I would have Sea-Captains to declare themselves in a
courageous manner, as Caesar the Emperor was wont to do unto his Subjects, and
Courtiers, of whom its said, that he told them, that he would have those that
lived with him, and belonged to him, free, as well from suspicion of evil, as
from crime. Tell your Seamen thus, before you take them on board with you.

2. If you have any such in your Ships (make inquiry) be they warrant or
unwarrant Officers and Seamen (out with them) pack them out of your ships,
lest you pull Gods heavy judgments upon your heads whilst in the Sea's; Is it
not better that every ship in the States service, were both disgorged and
disburdened of such, than burdened with them? If it be possible, be careful
and wise to furnish your ships with men that have principles of honesty,
civility and sobriety in them, then may you expect the good presence of the
Lord with you in all your Sailings, and Outlandish undertakings. I old wish
that Sea-Captains would do by their ships as its said of the Lord by his
Vineyard, Isa. 5.23. that they would throw out of their ships even all your
stones. Our ships are full of stones, of briars, brambles, and thorns. This was
David's resolution, and shall it not be yours Gentlemen that bear command in
your ships? Psalm. 101.6, 7. He that works deceit shall not tarry in my
sight. Make this bold speech ever and anon in the head or hearing of your
Seamen: That he that swears shall not tarry in my ship: He that is a
Drunkard shall not abide with me: He that is a Liar shall not continue with
me. Dead Bees are cast out of the Hive, to that very end, that no
putrefaction, or harm may come unto the living, or their Hony-combs. Put on,
put on Sea-Captains for a Davidical principle, David at his first coming to the
Kingdom (if my judgment fail not) first sought to advance piety in his own
family, Psalm. 101.2, 3, 4, 5. You then whom God has favored, and betrusted
with Commands in the Seas, set up Religion in your respective ships, lest
hurling out follow not in the heels.

Theophrastus being asked (Quidnam Rempublicam conservaret?) how a Commonwealth
might flourish, answered, Praemium and paena, encouraging, and rewarding the
good, and punishing of the evil. And if this be not done in the
States-service, what filthy and nasty ships will there be?

It was a notable saying of another, Fiat justitia, aut mundus pereat. It is as
great a piece of justice in a Commander to pack out of his ship all rotten,
filthy, and soul-infecting Sailors, as in any one thing whatsoever.

I could wish that all the Scips in England, whether small, or great, both in
the States and Merchants service, were manned with men of my describing, and
characterizing.

I could wish that the States of England would be as curious in their pitching
upon men for to bear Command in their Frigots, as Theodore was of the
Schoolmasters that were to teach his children, of whom its said, that he would
have them (...), as well as (...). Its requisite that such should be men
fearing God, as well as knowing in the navigating of a ship. The Lacedaemonians
had this Law (and I wish it were in force at Whitehall) that none should be so
bold as to seek the Princes favor, but such as were known to serve the Gods
diligently. I would have none in the States service to be in any office or
command, that is not sincerely godly.
I would advertise both them that are above in Authority at Whitehall, and those
also who are below that go Commanders in the Seas, to slight, disregard, and
let go every swearer to seek their livelihoods and employments where they can
find them in the world, and never a one of them would I have you to employ, or
countenance, to that very end that that common profaneness that is amongst
these men in the Seas may be run down by the board, and utterly mangered and
crushed.

I would now beg (Poplitibus curvis) of the States of England, that they would
neither allow, nor suffer any to remain, and continue in their ships and
service, who are not both honest, solid, and godly, and that all Captains and
Commanders also in their several and respective ships under your Honors
Commands, would faithfully endeavor to pack the vile out of your ships, and to
receive none but such as these.

1 Take into your ships none but such as will not be offended at any wholesome
truth, though it be never so tart, untoothsome, and contrary to your corrupt
courses, and does ever more affect that Ministry most which lays them open, by
thundering against their Whoring, Swearing, and Drunkenness, and loves to be
admonished, and after warning and conviction from the word, will not
obstinately go on in any known evil, because their principal care is how to be
saved.

2 Take into your ships, none but such as do impartially believe the whole word
of God, Threats, Precepts, and Promises, and feel the power, and efficacy of
Gods word and Spirit persuading, and ruling in their consciences, and carrying
them after the guidance and directions of it.

3 None but such as are exceedingly inflamed with the love, and estimation of
God, a Christ, and then may you look to prosper.

4 None but such as are both meek, lowly, and humble, and not your heady,
high-minded, stubborn, and self-willed. Get such to go along with you that fear
more the want of grace, than confide in what they have, and ever more make it
their business to work out their salvation with fear and trembling, not
trusting in their own strength, but are jealous and suspicious lest their own
hearts should deceive them.

If the world knew but the worth of arighteous man, said some Hebrew Doctors,
they would hedge him about with Pearl. I would have Captains in every ship they
go in, to resemble Diana's image in Chios, of whom it has been said, that it
would frown upon all that were vile and wicked when ever they came into her
Temple, but looked blithe, and smiled on them when they went out of it, as
rejoicing to be rid of their ill company. He that is wise may quickly gather up
the application.
5 None but such as do highly esteem and love Gods people, and that above all
the people in the world, and not out of any carnal or sinister respects, but
for their graces, and the truths sake, because they are born of God, and such
as are evermore ready to justify them, and speak in their defense when they
hear them reviled, and slandered.

6 None but such as loathe, and abhor to sit in the company of the ungodly, and
will have no fellowship with the workers of iniquity, will not be in league,
amity, and friendship with Swearers, Drunkards, Whoremongers, and Scoffers.

7 None but such as make conscience of the sanctifying of the Sabbath in the
Seas, and will not take that liberty of profaning of this day, set apart by
God for serious, weighty, and solemn service by vain and idle discourse, as
most Seamen use to do. God knows you let every one in your ships live as he
pleases on this day.

8 None but such as are just, and upright in their dealings, and desire to pay
every one his due, and will not borrow without care to pay again, as the wicked
do, Psalm. 37.21. Is not this the custom of many of your Sailors, to build
Sconces in every place they come in? what should you do with such fellows as
these in your ships? they will but discredit your Command, and bring a disgrace
upon the Land where ever you go.

9 None but such as are just in getting, and will have a care of being too
profuse in spending. Some are such prodigals, tha^ they throw all their Salary
as soon (...) ^mes into their hands upon Drabs (...) ^ts, and this makes so
many ragged Sailors as there be in England.

10 None but such as deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and live soberly,
chastely, and moderately in the Seas, and whose speech is not stinking, and
unclean, as most Sea-mens are. What should you do with such Harlots in your
service? which calls for holiness, and better principled men.

11 None but such as are neither Drunkards, nor Gluttons, and neither will be
enticed to tarry long at wine, nor strong drink, as is the custom of the
ungodly sort of Seamen. What should you do with such men who serve their
bellies rather than do the work they come for to do?

I would not have Captains surprised with phanatical blindness, nor carrying
their eyes whilst on shipboard amongst their men in a box as the Lamiae did.
Mind every particular man under your Comman^, what he is in life, speech,
gesture, and carriage, that they may not remain to spoil and poison others for
want of looking to.

I could wish that that brave ponderous sentence of Chilo's, (...) Know thy
self (which was writ in great golden letters upon the Portal of Apollos Temple)
was writ upon all the Entering Ladders of all the ships in England.


12 None but such whose deportment and carriage is, neither to curse, lie, nor
swear (notwithstanding the many provocations that be in ships at Sea) but
abhor to take the holy Name of God vainly into their mouths, and so reverently
use his Titles either in Scripture talk, reading, or praying, and not in
common, and carnal discourse, as is the usual manner of most Seamen. What
should you do with such in your ships? both you and them, and the ships will
be in danger every day of being either rock't, shoar'd, or stranded.

13 None but such as ^^e not implacable, and seekers of (...) upon those that
have injured the^ ^^^d sought to bury their names in the world, although some
have lifted up their hands against you, you should shut your ears, and keep
down your spirits both in this and other cases, lest the temptations of the
Devil prevail upon you. What says Satan, will thou suffer thy name to be thus
abused? Can thou endure to see thy credit running down to the ground in the
world by such a soul-mouthed varlot as yond is? Go go, and kill him. But would
it not be far better for thee to hold thy hands? Now what should you do with
bloody and quarrelling fellows in your ships? Is it not a greater blessing to
have them out than in? Have an eye of these.

14 None but such as will neither backbite others, nor give ear to backbiters
of others, and will neither lend Satan his tongue to be his Trumpeter, nor his
ears to hear, nor his heart to believe lies, and slanders; And will pardon many
things in others, which he will not allow of, nor endure in himself. If you
take in a pack of lying, and slandering fellows, you will never have any good
order or quiet in your ships.

15 None but such, whose virtues and goodness gains them more enemies, and
breeds them more danger whilst on shipboard, than the open and public
vileness of the wicked does them. They are more pleased that are godly, that
the wicked abhor them, than displeased: for hereby they come to know that by
the worlds hating of them, they are not of the world, but that they hate the
stinking and vile courses of the world.

16 None but such who have low and mean thoughts of themselves (whilst on
shipboard) abhorring to think But I am talking of wonders, men thus qualified
cannot be got, well, but here is no harm in wishing them of this temper I hope?
It would be an heaven upon earth to be amongst Seamen thus divinely principled.
Could I find a ships company of men thus adorned with the graces of God, I
would compare them to the Sky in a clear evening bespangled with bright and
glistering stars, or to Aarons Ephod, beset with precious gems and stones, or
else to a Garden planted with pleasant flowers, and beds of Roses.
highly of themselves, and better than of others by their often comparing of
themselves with them, I am as good as he is, and better than thou art, etc.
Know this one thing, that God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the
humble.

17 None but such as cannot endure to hear God in ships blasphemed, and
dishonored, without being moved at it, and trembling in the audience of all
ungodly, and unreverent words and expressions. Such as are more vexed for that
dishonor a pack of ungodly men throw upon God, than they are for ^y
disparagement that comes upon themselves: And have an holy care and endeavor
in all places and companies in the Seas to walk so as that they may thereby win
glory to their God, and honor and credit to their professions. Be sure that
you that are Captains take not in men that will learn all the rest to swear,
lie, and blaspheme.

18 None but such as will seek the good, and preserve the peace of all the
ships they either go or sail in, and can comfort themselves with this, that in
their very callings and public employments, their aims and endeavors are not
more at gain, profit, or credit, than at the glory of God, and good of others.
And so being humble, and public spirited are active to pleasure others in any
good office, Good Commanders will say to their men, as Bernard said to his
friends when ever they writ Letters to him. Si scrib^s, non placet, nisi legam
ibi Jesum. I like not Sailors further than I see of God, and Christ in them.
or service they can, making themselves servants to all that stand in need of
them.

19. None but such as are sound in judgment and not rotten, for one of these
crown-crazed fellows will infect and poison all the rest. Suffer not such to
live under your Commands as deny Jesus Christ to be the Son of God. And deny
the immortality of the soul, and deny the sacred Scriptures to be the Word of
God. Such as these there be that go in your ships, and many that can neither
believe that there is either a God, a Heaven, or an Hell.

These are as dangerous in ships as the unclean person was to the Camp he went
into, Number. 5.2, 3. Put out of the Camp whosoever is defiled, that they defile
not their Camps. That unclean person defiled every bed he lay on, and every
thing he sat on, Levit. 15.4. Nay he defiled every man he touched, or came
near.

This do many Sailors in the ships they go in, they corrupt, and defile many a
hopeful youngman, who would have been far better, if he had never come within
the smoke of their chimneys, and within the reach of their rotten and
heart-putrifying discourses, and persuasions. I would have all the Captains in
England, both in the great and small ships that go in the Seas, to be more
curious, and cautelous about the choice of their men, than ever they have been:
I may say (unto our Sea-Captaines) of those many men that they have under their
Commands, as Libidinus said of that contentious debate that was betwixt
Caesar's and Pompey's Soldiers, who made a loud cry unto them, why talk ye
(says he) of these things? Nisi Caesaris Capite delato. Unless Caesar's head
be off there will be no peace. Unless you keep vile wretches down, and out of
your ships, you will never have peace and quietness in them.
If you did but mind the inconveniences of keeping Swearers, Drunkards,
Adulterers, and Quarrellers, etc. in your Ships, you would not give them that
countenance, and entertainment that you do.

I would have you to do with wicked men, in your ships, as the Jews did the day
before the Passover, which was after this manner, every Father of a Family,
with other men, lighted wax candles, and searched every corner in their houses
to purge out all crumbs, and remnants of Leaven. And their Scribes taught, that
a man was to search after Leaven in secret places and corners by the light of a
candle, lest any piece or parcel should be left behind, and so pull a plague
down upon that house. Oh that our Sea-Captaines were as fearful of carrying
Swearers, Drunkards, Revellers and profaners of the Lords day amongst them, as
the Jews were of casting out of the Leaven out of their houses, what ships
should we then have in the Seas for piety, and purity? They would then
resemble those glorious families spoken of in the New Testament, who had
Churches in their houses, Philemon ver. 2. Aquila, and Pricilla, 1 Cor. 16.19.
Nymphas, Col. 4.15. Our States ships should be little Churches, and Chapels
for the Divine Worship of God.

But that I may now pass, I will sail a while upon a Star-bord-tack, and draw
up the arrow of my discourse unto the Head, that I may thereby a little tell
our Sea-Captaines what their duties be in the several ships they are employed
in, and what also is requisite in those that either do, or would bear command.
God knows there be many in ships that be trusted by the States command, that
know not what to do when they are on shipboard.

1. It is requisite, and mainly necessary, that those that are or would be
Commanders, should be well qualified with knowledge in themselves of the
sacred Word of God (especially if they be destitute of learned and pious
Chaplins) to that end they may be instrumental to bring on their Seamen under
their Commands unto the fear of God, The more insight any Commander has into
matters of soul-concernments, the meeter are they to instruct their Companies
in the things that concern their souls. He that is well furnished and
accomplished with Scripture knowledge, and holy wisdom in his heart, is the
aptest man to advance Religion in a ship.

2. That they should seek the knowledge of their ships, and strive to get a
full, and perfect cognizance of the state of their Seamen, viz. of their
conditions, dispositions, necessities, capacities, inclinations, He that would
be an accurate, and an accomplished Politician indeed, let him turn over
Machiavell's bible, and travel the varieties of men in the world, and
laboriously pry into them, as well as pore upon his book.

I remember Austin begins one of his Sermons (and as he begins I would to God
our Captains would also begin, and end with no worse advice) Ad vos mihi
Sermo, O juvenes, flos aetatis, periculum mentis) To you is my speech oh young
men, the flower of age, the danger of the mind.


and of their dark, and blind judgments, and also of their immovable, and
dead affections. Had but Commanders now a full sight of these men's miserable
conditions, I would not fear but that their hearts would bleed to see many
brands in the fire. By this enquiry now prefixed, you may the better know how
to suit your Counsels, cautions, instructions, and admonitions, without which
you cannot. Husbandmen you know suit their seed-corn as the land, and years
require, and as their grounds will best bear.

3. It is requisite that Commanders should have tender affections, for, and in
the behalf of their Seamen, viz. Love and Desire.

1. You should have much love to God in your bosoms, and to your Sea-mens good.
I could wish that you were as careful over the poorest and meanest that go in
the Seas, as ever David and Bathsheba were over Solomon their son, Prove. 4. v.
3, 4.

Love set them upon the discharging of their duty, Prove. 31.1. Now Solomon was
a wise, and an understanding child. How much more then should you take care of
ignorant, knotty, illiterate, and unhewn Sailors, that have no more than a mere
hilum of goodness in them?

2. You should have ardent desires for God, and every poor Sea-mans good.
Where there are holy desires in a man, It is to be feared, that it may be said
of many a Sea-Captain, that when his voyage is ended, if the Quaerie should be
strictly put unto him, what good have thou done thy men all this time thou have
been in the Seas with them? the answer may be this, I and my men met together
to multiply sin, and not to do good, but to serve the Devil.

Homer says that Ulysses said, that Eloquence was like a shower of Snow which
falls soft, but soakes deep, whereas violent rain runs off the ground before it
can enter into it. Use sweetness and softness of speech now and then to your
men, and not always passionate.


he will take words, and speak ever and anon to his ships-company about him.
But some are such sots (God knows) that are in command, that all that they
mind, or look for, after they get their feet into a ship, is the fingering of
their 15, or 16. Pound per month, and let the Sailors then go to the Devil if
they will, so they can but compass that. You may live in a ship many months,
and years, and sit many weeks, and days in some Captains cabbins, nay walk
with them, and talk with them about other things, but not a word of God, of
Christ, of Heaven, or Hell in their mouths. If you begin with them in that,
then they soon grow weary of your company.

2. It is mainly requisite, and worth the while, that all Commanders should be
found in a daily performance of these two things.

1. Of following of their Seamen with sweet persuasions.

2. With sharp reprehensions.

1. Be continually persuading of your Seamen: Put on for that Principle that
was in Anthusam Chrysostom's mother, when Basilius was seeking to seduce him to
lead a Monastical life, she steps in and cries out upon him, Oh my son! my
son! for thy sake what have I suffered, what dolours have I endured, how often
have I stroked milk into thy mouth, etc. Oh my son! etc. and thu did Solomon's
mother, when she feared that he might be carried away with the young
beauties of Jerusalem, Prove. 31.2, 3. What my son! and what the son of my womb!
and what the son of my vows! Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways
unto that which destroys Kings. Oh, it is not to tell how you might win
ground upon poor Sea-mens spirits, would you but make use of your command over
them, and endeavor after a holy zeal for God his glory, and their good. If I
did see evil in any of my Seamen (were I in command) I would call them to a
strict account about it, If any man would come and ask me the definition of a
Seaman, I would give him this. He is a small Bark or Vessel in the Sea, that
is wonderfully well Rigged, Sailed, Masted, Pitched, and Tarred, but wants
Ballast, Helm, and Rudder, i. e. Reason. And that which is the excellentest
part in man, they are altogether deficient in.
and say, what one of my ships company, and a Drunkard? what one of my ships
company, and a Swearer? what one of my ships company, and a Liar, a Thief, a
Quarreller, an irreligious fellow? what one of my ships company, and a Sabbath
breaker? a rotten Heretic, that cannot endure any that are ought? I am not
able to bear these rotten and stinking carriages of yours, I beseech you let me
entreat you to amend these things, if ever you would have my love and favor
all the voyage.

2. You should be frequently in sharp reproofs. Stubborn Seamen will abide it
full well you know. Give them good instructions, if you follow them not again,
and again, they will shake it out of their ears, as soon as ever their backs
are turned upon you. Seamen are like to the weavers shuttle, which if it goes
forward one way, it presently goes backward again as much the other way. Give
them never so good counsel, it is one of the difficultest things in the world,
to beat it into the hearts, and heads of them. But how ever, knotty wood must
have the beetle and the wedge battering upon it, and that is the way to bring
it into parcels. God was not well pleased with Eli when he was so soft with his
sons, that he let them do even what they would, 1 Samuel 2. And will the Lord
take it well at your hands who are in command, think you, to let your Seamen
swear^, whore, ly, and theeve, without punishing of them, and sharp reproving
of such fellows? As the Lord suffered Eli to fall off the seat he sat on, and
to break his neck, take heed lest God give not way to storms, to throw you upon
Rocks, or Sands, to make an end of you. If I were in command, my conscience
would admit of such like fears in the neglect of so grand and considerable a
duty.

Give me but leave now to propound a few solid and serious questions unto you,
and I doubt not but that you will see the great necessity of your being
counseled, persuaded, and reproved, and that with greater regard than you are
aware of.

1. Are not our Seamen toward things divinely good, extremely ignorant? Are
they not as the Horse and Mule without understanding? Psalm. 32.9.

2. Are they not backward to all saving good, and cross to all good rules? Are
they not borne as the wild Asses colt? Job 11.12. Unruly, and stubborn? I
remember a saying of Seneca's which has oftentimes come into my thoughts
amongst these men. There is no living creature so wayward, and froward, and
needs such nurturing, as man, and with so much wisdom to be managed as the son
of man. Your Seamen are generally more incapable of being taught any thing
that is good, than Land-men are; is there not need then to do what ever in you
lies to reclaim them?

3. Are they not exceedingly tainted, and corrupted? Are they not like unto the
Earth after man's fall, which was filled with thorns, briars, and thistles? and
must not these be stubbed up before any good seed can be sown, or will grow
in them, or amongst them? Therefore Commanders should be axes and hatchets in
their places, to cut up whatsoever is evil amongst them.

4. Are they not excessively inclined to sin, and stand in great need of being
put on to that which is good? Are they not desperately bent to what is bad? and
if, not instructed in what is right, will they not take what is wrong? It was a
notable saying of one (whom I have read of) Whence is it says he, that at this
day we suffer so many miseries, but because we see, and suffer our households
to be profane, Is not the Sailor as well conceited, that a bare Lord be
merciful unto him, will take off all his guilt, and bring him in the pardon,
and remission of all his sins? As the Turks are by reason of the poole Zunzun
at Mecca, before which they will not stick to commit all manner of lewdness,
and when they have done, wash themselves in it, every one uttering these words,
Tobah allah, Tobah allah, pardon Lord pardon. And being once washed, they
return to their vile courses again, strongly imagining that they are washed
from all sin whatsoever.
and do not instruct them in better, and command them to break off of all
villainous courses. Now if Commanders in the Seas would ask me what is the
reason that they are so often in danger of being fired, rockt, and stranded in
the Seas, I would return them this answer, it is because they cut not down the
graceless swearers, and drunkards that be amongst them, I mean the exuberancy
of evil.

5. Are not these men far from God? And do not they grow worse and worse in
their sinful estates? as a dead man, the longer he lies above ground the more
he senteth, and savoureth, 2 Timothy 3.13.

6. Are they not without feeling, living in all the filthy lusts of their
flesh, without any trouble of mind, or compunction of spirit, and neither Satan
nor conscience affrighting of them, nor accusing of them for their ungodly
courses? These like dead men above ground that sent, and savor so strong as
none are able to abide or endure, yet feels it not themselves. These are
neither sensible of sin, nor grieved for it.

7. Are they not men that neither seek, nor will be persuaded to come out of
their carnal and unregenerate estates? Are they not like to dead men, who can
neither stir hand, nor foot, nor becken with the finger unto any to come and
help them up, and give them life?

8. Are they not unprofitable under all the means of grace that be tendered
them, both on board, and on shore, at Sea and on Land?

9. Are they not men that will not be counseled to nourish in their hearts
the fear of God, that they might hereby please him, and never offend him?

10. Are they not men that never sorrow for all their offendings,
dishonourings, and blasphemings of the holy name of God? I never yet saw a
weeping eye for sin in the Sea, amongst those thousands of men I have seen,
saving two.

11. Are not these men, that secretly wish in their inward thoughts, that God
were not, to that end they might live as they list, and be far enough out the
gunshot of his Justice?

12. Are they not men that look wrathfully on God and his ways, as contrary to
them, gainsaying their wills, and minds in every thing?

13. Are they not men that cannot endure to seek unto God for knowledge? when
as they stand in great need of eye salve.

14. Are they not men that are the least acquainted with God, his Word, and his
Love, of all people under the Heavens again?

15. Sailers are like to the Philosopher that lay beaking of himself in the
Sun, and said with a great sigh, Obutinam hoc esset Philosophari. Would to God
my studying were as easy. So would to God my good wishes would get me after
this life to heaven, for whilst I am living I cannot endure to set my foot in
the way.

Was it not a lamentable question that Solomon propounded when he said, Prove.
31.10. Who can find a virtuous woman? intimating, that one might sooner light
on a thousand vicious ones, than one virtuous. And I may mourningly say, who
can find a virtuous Sailor? Bring him to me, and I will value him above Rubies.

How desirous was the Apostle Paul Acts 27. That all those that saild with him
in the same ship should come safe to shore? If Commanders had but these desires
in them, they would stir them up to move mightily for the good, and welfare of
all under them, Romans 11.14. If by any means I might provoke them of my flesh to
follow, that I might save some of them. If you can but save one Sailor in a
ship, lose him not for want of good counsel.


Are they not men that cannot endure to have their hearts bound to the peace,
and good behavior, and to be willing to take in any truths that are
proclaimed, and revealed from God and Heaven unto them.

16. Are they not men that are walking in the nine easy ways to Heaven, which,
if they hold but one in them, they will never come there?

1. In the common broad way of liberty of life.

2. In the way af evil education. As wolves being young, are soon trained up to
the ravin, and prey.

3. In Balaams way of wishes. As the foolish traveller, that thinks to come to
his journies end without legs.

4. In the way of formality. Here you may find thousands of them at an anchor,
and will not be got to weigh, if you would threaten them with Hell, and the
dreadfullest curses that be in the sacred Word of God.

5. In the way of sloth, Prove. 20.4. The sluggard will not plow by reason of
the cold, therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing. No more stomach
to serve the Lord, than the Devil had to obey Christ, and depart from the herd
of Swine.

6. In the way of indifferency, Josh. 24.15. They are to seek in the choice of
their Religion.

7. In the way of self-love, 1 Timothy 1.20. God pity you!

I might now propound a great many more questions and Arguments to enlighten
you about the miserableness of the generality of your Sailors, but it is both
tedious unto me and unpleasant, to set my pen upon too much work in a restless
and turbulent Sea. Therefore to be brief, let me now beg thus much tenderness
at the hands of every one that is a Commander in the Seas, and I will assure
you that it will well become you.

1. Mourn and be sorry for your Seamens sins.

2. Pray for them, that God would give them hearts full of grace. Is there any
virtue gone from Chirst as yet to make any of their dark minds seeing, their
stubborn judgments yielding, their proud hearts stooping and relenting, their
filthy hearts breaking, and cleansing, their carnal affections heavenly, their
sinful souls to be holy? Ah souls, be much in prayer for them.

3. Labor to draw Seamen unto Christ. As one candle lights another, or one
piece of match in your Linstocks lights a great many. So light them.

4. Bring them forward, unto and in all good. As a man that plyes a lamp with
oil, lest that it should go forth, Heb. 10.24. And let us consider one
another, to provoke unto love, and to good works. As in a great family, where
there be many children, the elder will help to carry and bear the younger,
Act. 18.27. Help you, and put on Sailors in things that be good as the
Disciples of Christ did Apollos.

5. Admonish them of, and about their faults. Thou shall not hate thy brother
in thine heart: Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him, Lev. 19.17.

But seeing I am very importunate with you to reprove and carry strict command
over your men in the Seas: I would have our Sea-Captains of that brave and
noble spirit that Themistocles was of, of whom it is said, that when he found a
chain of gold in the street, he would not stoop down to foul his fingers with
it, but said heroically unto another, Toll tu, ego sum Themistocles. Seamen
take you the spoil, I will not have a farthing-worth of it. Beggarliness is an
uncomely thing in Captains.
Give me leave also to rub you a little upon the shore, for you are not
without your apparent slips no more than they are, but are as far over the
shoes in rotten practices, as others. Now I will show wherein, and that in
several particulars, and pray amend them.

1. In Prize and Plunder. Is there not more than a few couzening pranks played
by you in the defrauding of your Seamen of that which they have most
desperately hazzarded themselves for? It is a true Proverb, That he that
shares honey with a Bear, shall have the least share of it. Sailors who fight
hard for what they get, and you that do little or nothing in the engagement,
run and take it from them, what justice or equity is there now in this? Leave
off, Leave off this stinking course, and carry your selves Christianly amongst
your Seamen, and let them have what is their dues in such cases. Have not some
of you been disgracefully turned out of your places about these things?

2. In the solemn observation of the Sabbath. This day (God pardon you) is as
little observed, or regarded in the Seas by you that are in command, as it is
almost in Turkey. My ears have often heard to my sorrow, and to the dishonor of
my God whom I serve, that every day was a Sabbath unto them. What have such
Commanders intended now in such Diabolical speeches in the ears of an hundred
and fifty men, but to draw them off from the keeping of it? And it is to be
feared, that there be more than a few of such still in the States ships of
England, who are secretly profane, and licentious. What ever profane wretches
think of this day, I will speak thus much in the vindication of it, that God is
wont to sanctify his people more on this day than on another, and that more
have been converted in it than on any other day besides. Heathen Princes are
wont in their Coronation days to show themselves to their people in their
Royalties, and to cast about them great handfulls both of silver, and of gold.
The Sabbath is a day wherein God appears most comfortably to those that
conscienciously keep it, he shows himself to them, and they show themselves to
him. On this day God makes our spirits holy and heavenly, and sets them in tune
and order for every good work and business.

3. In the clubbing down of swearing, Many Sea-Captains stand in their ships
like Harpocrates the Egyptian, who was always painted with his finger upon his
mouth; Their fingers are in their mouths when they should speak for God in the
reproof of sin, and seldom or ever shall you hear them active in the pulling
down the Devils Dialect. Sea-Captains in this case are very like unto those
Idols, David speaks of, Psalm. 115. That have mouths, but speak not.
and profaneness. (God pardon you!) How does many of you walk up and down in
the ships you have command of, even day by day, and though you hear swearing
betwixt decks, or upon deck, and on every hand you, yet do not you open your
mouths to crush it, and to punish such vile wretches? who should beat down
this sin in ships but you? Let a Minister open his mouth against them, and they
are ready to eat them up, because they love not his reproving of them. More may
be done by that power you have over them, as to the reclaiming of them from
this evil, than any Minister in the world can do, though he either threw out
his heart amongst them, or spit up his lungs with thundering against them for
it. I profess I wonder how you can hear and digest with patience, and silence,
the very Oaths, and rotten speeches that be perpetually belched out of
stinking mouths that be in your ships. Instead of being valiant for God, you
are mere Cowards in good causes, and Traitors unto the State of Christianity.
Nay let me tell you, that you do think by this sinful silence to gain and
purchase unto your selves the name, and the applause of no Medlers in other
men's matters, and so are cried up for merciful men, and peaceable men, when
alas you are rather murderers of men's souls, than preservers of them. Ante
Vacunales stantque sedentque focos, Ovid. Put on, put on Sea-Captains, for that
brave spirit of Jeroms, who said in these words Si veritas est causa
discordiae, mori possum, tacere non.
To put you now upon the beating up of the Quarters of all swearers and
profane wretches in your ships, and to the discountenancing of all vice, let
these profitable Consectaries lie warm upon your hearts and spirits.

1. How know thou but that a seasonable reproof may by the blessing of God,
be an occasion of conversion to the offender? And know that he that
converteth a sinner from the error of his ways, shall save a soul from death,
and shall hide a multitude of sin, Reproof in your mouths would keep Seamen
from much sin, as holy Bradford kept B. Farrar (whilst he was prisoner in the
Kings Bench) from receiving the Sacrament at Easter in one kind, which he had
promised to do. And B. Ridley (whilst prisoner in the Tower) from going to Mass
which once he did, but was reduced by Mr. Bradfords godly letter.
Jam. 5.20. It is a noble employment, yea it is one of the gloriousest works in
the world, to have an hand in the holy business of the saving of a soul. Many
of your Seamen, Gentlemen, are running headlong unto hell, if you can by any
means stop them, do, take hold of any thing that you can first lay hands on,
and tell them that you have a strong love in your hearts for the good of their
poor souls. I fear it will be inquired into one day, what good you have done
the men you took a charge off. Come hither Seaman (will the Lord say) What
Captain was you under in the Seas? I served Captain -- whom I was never
bettered by all the Voyage. What Captain was you under also? I was under
Captain -- whom I never heard a word of God, or of Christ drop out of his lips
amongst us never in all my life. What Captain served you under? I was under
Captain -- who never reproved swearing, nor any kind of evil amongst us, but
gave us our liberty to do what we thought good. And what Captain served you at
Sea? I have served Captain -- this three years, but he neither ever prayed
amongst us, nor instructed us in any thing that was good. What a dreadful
reckoning will there be here to be made? many Captains think that they do not
stand charged with the care of souls, but one day you will find it, when God
shall bid you go to hell for the neglect of your duties.

2. Suppose a Captains reproof have not such success upon their souls as he
could desire, yet may it be that he may thereby tame, and take down their
high hoised insolency by seasonable contradiction, as that they shall not be
able to carry it away in a vaunting Bravado. You may cool and confound their
swearing, and swaggering humors that they glory not in it, by bringing them
unto shame, and condign punishment for it. If Seamen will swear, I would then
stand up, and tell them, that all this while they fight against God, damn their
own souls, and please none else but the Devil and wicked men, and that they
shall assuredly burn everlastingly in hell, if they hold on in their cursed
humors without timely repentance and reformation.

3. Suppose that reproof after reproof will not prevail, know thus much, that
it is not in vain, for hereby you shall the more increase, and aggravate their
inexcusableness, clear your selves, and glorify the Tribunal of Gods justice,
which shall one day smoke against them.

2. In all sinful cases you are bound to speak.

1. Because silence at such times when you hear swearing, lying, and behold
drunkenness in your ships, and amongst your Seamen, will greatly bewray either
your Cowardliness in the cause of God, or hypocrisy in your professions. Will
it not seem strange, think you, that you that pretend to stand on the Lords
side, shall hear the glorious Name of God profaned, in a base, sordid, and
blasphemous manner, and yet never open your mouths at all in his behalf
against them? who will not but say, Captain, Thou art an Hypocrite? and
Captain, Thou art another dissembling Hypocrite also?

2. If your consciences, Gentlemen, be either enlightened, wakened, tender, or
rightly informed, I will appeal to any of you whether or no they do not, and
will not smite, check, and quarrel with you for the omission of your reproving
duty by your cowardly and unseasonable silence? Hereby you do but entangle your
selves in their guiltiness, and pull upon your own heads an accountableness for
that swearing and villainy which you are privy unto; who would not then but
reprove, and slash the roots of sin?

3. How know thou but that by thy speaking in such cases, thou may lay,
and charm down the spirit of profaneness that walks up and down the ships thou
art in, so that it shall not be able to rage, and break out in others, as
otherwise it would do. Who would then but ever and anon be speaking?

4. Hereby you will exceedingly comfort, and cheer up the hearts of the godly
amongst you from being grieved, and cast down by a company, or crew of Satan's
swaggerers, Revellers, I am confident of it, that if our Sea-Commanders were
but as careful to put out the fire of swearing, and of lying that is in ships
every day, as they are to pass the word every evening fore and aft, put out
your candles allow there, There would not be so many ships lost and cast away as
there be.
and Ranters. Good people they mourn to hear the swearing, and the profaneness
that is in your ships, both betwixt decks, and in every corner they walk into,
or sit themselves down in. Their villainy is a mere dagger, and burden to their
hearts and spirits. I profess, that that bad order that is in the Sea, (and
that toleration of swearing, and profaneness) makes many an honest heart take
his leave of the States service, and bid farewell Sea, who would otherwise have
continued in it longer than they have done. I have known some that have striven
to be cleared upon an account of a great internal fear, lest God should fire
the ships from heaven which they have gone in, or otherwise in storms throw
them upon Rocks, or sands, because of that filthiness, and abominable
wickedness they have observed amongst them. I remember once, that when we were
coming out of the Sea from France into England, that we saild near to one of
our Seaport towns, and upon an occasion a piece of Ordinance was fired, the
smoke of which fell into our main-sail, and represented the ship on a fire to
those that were on shore, and great running forth there was, and weeping and
wailing by those that had friends in our ship, for fear of the loss of our
lives, but blessed be the Lord there was no such danger, though it was a great
town-talk. When I came to hear of it, I returned my God thanks, Chrysostom
speaking of youth, says, it is (difficilem, jactabilem, fallibitem,
vehementissimisque egentem fraenis) hard to be ruled, easy to be drawn away,
apt to be deceived, and standing in need of very violent reins. Seamen stand
in need of tutoring, and looking to.
that the swearing that was within board set us not on a blasing fire in the
sight of our own Country.

The Objections now that seem to arise against the putting what has been said
into practice, are some such invalid arguments as these.

1. Objection. I love not to meddle, and I have Scripture commands for it, Jam.
3.1. Be not many masters.

Answ. Not meddling in this case, is a kind of soul murdering: what say thou
to this now? wilt you lie under the guilt of murder.

2. Object. It is a thankless office.

Answ. Not with the wise, Prove. 9.8. I have read concerning the sweating
sickness, when it was in England, that those whom they carefully kept waking
escaped, but the sickness seized mortally on them that were suffered to sleep.
Oh keep your Seamen waking if it be possible, that they sleep not unto death,
and though it be an unpleasing work on both sides, yet shall you have thanks
for it one day.

3. Object. I shall lose my labor.

Answ. Venture that, thou have lost many a worse, Job 6.25. How forcible are
right words?

3. Object. Plato went thrice to Sicily to convert Dionysius, and lost his
labor.

Polemo a great Drunkard, by hearing Xenocrates, became a sober man, and a very
learned Philosopher.


I shall hereby lose the love of all my Seamen.

Answ. It may be not; but say thou should, thou shall find a better thing
than ever their good word, or well likeing of thee will ever avail thee. I will
present thee with one Scripture, that will, when thou read it, sparkle thy
spirits, and draw thee on to be more for thy God than ever thou have been.
Peruse it then, Mark. 10.29, 30. A man had better offend all the Sailors in the
Seas, and all the people in the whole world, than his own conscience. Christ
would not hold his tongue when he was in Martha's and Simon's house the Lepers.
And godly Commanders will not keep their tongues in their mouths on shipboard
when they hear swearing, and see villainy and profaneness.

But before I take my leave of the Sea-Captaine, I have yet a few more Rules in
my eye to present him withal, which heedfully followed, will in the end (I
question not) both show him the way of commanding, and of deporting himself in
his Command. I have much observed the weaknesses of men that have been
entrusted with Commands, and were not their pride, haughtiness, and
stubbornness, so great as it is, there might be hopes that they would in time
become pretty men. To such I will speak in the words of Solomon, Prove. 3.7. Be
not wise in thine own eyes, fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

1. Take heed of being suddenly, and easily provoked. An angry man is compared
to a ship that is sent into the Sea (Quae daemonem habet Gubernatorem.) that
has the devil for its Pilot, which will assuredly be thrown upon one rock,
sand, or other, when she is of his steering.
Be as swift as thou can to hear, but slow to speak any evil, and slowest of
all unto wrath. There is Gods command for it, Jam. 1.19. which should sway thee
a great deal more than an Act of Parliament. Ovid puts this down as a singular
badge of a noble and princelike spirit, to be tardus ad Iram. Certainly they
who are evermore on a fire, and do quickly take fire at every thing, they are
rather Tinder, Gunpouder, or anointed with Brimstone, than with the sweet oil
of the spirit of meekness. If thou be a choleric spirited fool, take
Seneca's advise. Imprimia finibus hostis arcendus est, non cum portis se
intulit, modum a captivis non capit. Above all things says he, beware to keep
the enemy from entering the city, for if he once get but in his head, he will
give thee the Law, This was the high praise and commendation that Nazianzen
gave of Achanasius, that he was Magnes and Adamas, a lodestone in his sweet
gentle nature, and yet an Adamant in his stout, and resolute carriage against
those that were vile and evil.

Inferiora tranquillima. The more heavenly the mind is, the more calm will it
be.

I have read of the Collossus at Tarentum. Uno digito mobilis; idem si toto
corpore impellitur resistens. One may move it with a finger, but if once that
you do offer to put your full strength to it, you can not then stir it. Weak
spirits are easily daunted, and a^ harsh, and rugged spirit in a Commander will
not win on Seamen, but do more hurt than good. Some again resemble tender
plants which dye if but touched with the knife or iron. Fine Crystal is sooner
crushed than hard marble.

Spots Gentlemen are soon seen in the Ermin, and as soon in you if you have not
an honest care of your selves.

The Snow is not so white but there is one Anaxagoras or other in your ships,
to make it black. Keep your fingers out of the fire, if you would not have them
scorched.


and not take it from thee.

2. Tolerate and bear with light and trivial failings. I mean with those which
have not in them any sin, and dishonor unto God, contempt of command, or
injury unto the state, and to one another. It is an old Rule Toleramus, and
Toleramur. Archytas when angry with one of his servants, said, Oh how would I
have beaten thee had I not heen angry with thee. Here he bore with him in a
small business. And so must you also if ever you would carry on good and
peaceable Commands.

3. Before you punish, give warning. Hereby men will be the more inexcusable
when they come to be found out faulty and worthy of punishment. It is a good
saying Praemonitus, praemunitus, forewarned, forearm'd. If warning will not
serve the turn, then let punishment be laid on. This Rule is laid down by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 12.10. When thou come nigh to a City to besiege it, first offer
conditions of peace to it. In this method we find God himself walking. Noah
was sent unto the old world to give them warning. Moses and Aaron into Egypt,
Lot unto Sodom, Obadiah to Edom, Jonah to Nineveh, Christ himself to Jerusalem.
Flashes of lightning do evermore appear before the coming of the Thunder-crack
in the clouds. Et afflatur omne, priusquam percutitur. Nothing is struck that
is not blasted before.

4. Take heed of trespassing in the breaking up of the Hold, when you take
purchase, and prize. Some hereby have not been able to hold up their heads in
their Commands, because they gave the vulgar sort of men such an articling
advantage over them. If Seamen get but this hole in your coats once, they will
set as light by you and your Commands, as the wild Ass (in Job 39.7.) does by
the Driver. He scorneth the multitudes of the City, neither regards he the
crying of the driver. I leave the application of this Scripture to your selves.

-- In Rutilo
Luxuria est, in Ventidio laudabile nomen.
Turpia cerdoni quaedam Volusosque, Brutosque
Decent --
Would you know the English of this? Feasting, and drinking in Rutilus was
rioting, in Ventidius brave munificence. What some do is an heinous matter,
what others do, nothing so.

Some may more cleverly steal the Horse out of the stable, than othersome look
over the Hedge. Some may better break open the Hatches in the Hold, than
other-some take what lies betwixt decks.

5. Quod semelimmissum non est revocabile tempus.

Post est occasio calva.

If you will not take hold of opportunities fore-lock, you shall be served with
a cold comfortless dish of her bald occiput.


Take heed of neglecting to speak to suspected ships, and searching of their
Cockets. Have not some been remiss in this particular thing, that have not a
little smarted for it? And besides, it gives your Seamen occasion to open
their mouths to the prejudice both of your present and future employments.
When you meet with ships that you are jealous of, be not put off with a parcel
of fair words, but enquire into their lading, and the Country they are going
to. I will present you with a very pretty, pertinent, and applicable story to
the admonition in hand. A great Fowler having found a bird in a snare, was
humbly intreatd by the bird that he would grant her her liberty, she would
requite his courtesy with three good lessons, which if duly observed would
profit him more than her small body: Upon this condition the Fowler was
contented to release her, provided that the Lessons were so profitable and
beneficial as she spoke of, whereupon both parties being agreed, the bird
begun to sing her three promised notes unto him.

The 1. Note was this. Lose not a certainty for an uncertainty. This note was
very taking with the Fowler, but did not all this time fadom her subtilty.

The 2. Note she sung was this. Give not credit to things beyond probability.

The 3. Note was. Grieve not for things which are past all remedy. These
lessons he liked well, and not knowing the worth of the bird, he let her fly.
Who no sooner saw her self at liberty, and out of his reach, she sung him this
sweet, and melodious Madrigall upon the branch of a tree.

Qui non ante cavet post dolebit.

He that will not when he may,
when he would he shall have nay.
If a man shut to his windows, we think they do not well, who will seek for
chinks to peep in, into us. Take heed, Sailors will play you these prancks.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

They are wise men that look to their feet when they see others stumble.


Had thou known the wealth I had
Thou would st ^ere have let me gone,
For it would have made thee glad
To enjoyed so rich an one,
In my bladder there is a stone
Of more value and more worth
Than ever the earth did bring forth.
You may gather up the Application, and so perceive what I aim at.

6. Take heed of too much intimateness and familiarity with Seamen. Many
Commanders have had their heels tript up by this indiscreet carriage, and
fallen most shreudly upon their noses, in so much that they have never been
able to rise up any more. I will tell you what Gentlemen, ill nurtured, unbred,
and false-hearted Sailors are not men for you to unrip your bosoms to. (I for
my part never trusted any of them, nor never should, were I to go a Methusalems
age amongst them.) If our Savior Christ would not trust the Jews, take you
heed of trusting Sailors, John 2.24, 25. But Jesus did not commit himself unto
them, because he knew all men. And needed not that any should testify of man:
for he knew what was in man. Captains should in one sense live in their ships
as the Sun in the firmament, which though it work upon all the inferior
bodies, cheering them with its light, and influences, yet is not moved nor
wrought on by them again, but keeps its own luster, and distance.

Nimia familiaritas contemptum parit. If thou will be familiar with Sailors,
look for contempt.


It is one of the wisest, safest, and securest courses that you can steer, to
keep your selves close, and to have no further to do with them than the bounds
of your Commands will limit you. There Is no small wisdom in the Owl, who hides
her head all the day long in an Ivy-bush, and at night when all the other birds
are at rest, she comes forth and takes her recreation and her sporting, flying
here, and flying there, and delivering her self in her harsh and nocturnal
notes. Be sure you learn thus much wisdom to hide your heads, and to keep your
tongues from babbling amongst Seamen in your ships. I know not the reason why
the Ancients of old have consecrated this bird to wisdom, except it be for her
discreet closeness, and singular perspicacity, that when other domestical, and
airie volatiles are blind, she only has inward light to discern the smallest
objects for her own advantage. Surely thus much wit is taught us, and to be
learned from her, that he is the wisest man that will have least to do with the
multitude, and that no life is so safe as the obscure retiredness; if it have
least comfort in it, yet it is evermore accompanied with the least danger, and
vexation.

Should this fowl now but come out in the day time, how would all the little
birds flock about her to see her uncouth visage and nocturnall dress she goes
in, Captains, If you would live wisely, and securely amongst your men, Let (an
(...)) a wolfs skin be your clothing, otherwise your Sailors are such notable
painters, that they will make candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra.

Captains must not live in ships as fire that is smothered in the ^mbers, and
so casts no shine, nor as the Sun obscured in a caliginous cloud, but must
show themselves for God amongst their Seamen.

When Cato was present (who was vir rigidae innocentiae) a stern and severe
censor of the manners of men, who durst call for the obscaene spectacles of
the Floralia? If Commanders had but a conscientious faculty in them to
discountenance that which is evil in their Seamen, they would sooner be
brought into the love of that which is good, than otherwise they ever will be.


and above all, to hear her untuned notes. If you open your mouths and speak
the very secrets of your hearts amongst Seamen, as some have done, you will
make but bird-lime for your feet to be fetterd in.

7. Put on for two rare things which will exceedingly grace you, advance your
names, and bring you into greater esteem.

1. Be Positive. 2. Oppositive.
1. Be Positive. Take up a full resolution and determination of will to serve
God. This God knows many of your are short of.

2. Be Oppositive. Seamen are apt to set upon sinful, and irreligious
courses, and care not for Sabbaths nor Ordinances, and if you will not pluck up
good hearts and spirits to your selves in opposing, withstanding, and
reclaiming of them, God will be exceedingly dishonored by them in your ships.

You must use constraint with them, if that entreaties, and persuasions will
not serve the turn. Let it be the serious, and fixed purpose, and resolution
of every Commander in the Seas (what ever the practices of others be in the
salt-waters) to engage all under your Commands in the daily worship, and
service of the Lord, and this is the only way to prosper where ever you go.

I fear that many a Commander is so taken up with the brave ship he goes in,
or otherwise with an innumerable crowd of anxious thoughts how he may get his
feet into one, that there is little Religion minded, or set up amongst them:
Are not some so taken up with the Great-gilded-first, second, and third Rates,
the sumptuous and gilded Cabbins, Lanthorus, and great Salaries which they
have, that they mind little else? Its well if these be not the gods that many
worship.

Hezekiah was asked by the Prophet what he had showed the Ambassadors from
Babylon; his answer was, Even all that was in his house, nothing was there of
his Treasuries, but they had a sight of it; but not one word of the things of
the Temple, and of Gods worship named all this time, but his Treasuries and his
Riches. Are not many Captains so taken up with the goodly and stately ships
that they are in, that when their friends come on board, and visit them, they
carry them into their gilded Cabbins, and show them their brave warlike ships,
and how on every side stands their roaring Ordinance, and in every corner their
Complement of men, but not a word of God all this time?

8. Maintain your dignity, and execution of Justice in your ships, and that
within her certain bounds, let equity mercy, and justice kiss each other. It
was St. Augustines censure that Illicita non prohibere, consensus erroris est,
not to restrain evil, it to maintain evil. Impunitas delicti invitat homines ad
malignandum, sins chief encouragement, is the want of punishment. Commanders
should boldly and heedfully crush, and break the neck of all quarrels and
dissentions that rise amongst Sailors within board. Dulce nomen pacis, the very
name of peace is sweet, said the Orator.

And the Suevians thought it should be Sovereign when they had enacted that in
a fray where swords were drawn, if but a woman, or a child at a distance cried
but Peace, they were bound to end the quarrel. Captains should cry aloud Peace,
and stamp down that A^na-like sparkling, and inflamed spirits, otherwise you
will find the smart of it. If a Schoolmasters eye be always upon his scholar
to observe him, if he still correct and check him for his faults, it is a sign
that he bears singular love and affection to him, and will in time bring him to
a good Genius, but if he let him loyter, and play, and abuse his fellows, and
never call him to an account for it, its a sign then that he little regards
him. It was a sweet saying of one to his friend, whom he prayed hard for, I
have desired to live no longer, dear friend, than to see thee a Christian, and
now seeing my eyes behold that sweet day, I desire to leave thee and to go unto
my Savior. Should not Commanders have these yerning bowels over Seamen? and
say, Oh my soul even travels sorry our conversion, and to see you Christians
before our Voyage breaks up. I long to see you live and lead a converted life
in the world, and that will be happiness enough unto me. A religious Commander
has the like thoughts that John had 2. Ep. 1.4. I have no greater joy than
this, that my children walk in the truth. I have no greater delight in the
world than to see the men that are under me walking in the truth. Nothing
delights me more than to see my Master godly, my Lieut. heavenly, my Gunner
religious, my Boatswain pious my Carpenter conscientious, and all my Seamen
well disposed under me.

Young men no sooner come to Sea amongst a pack of filthy fellows, but they are
as prone to be corrupted with them (and especially with your old Sailors) as
Fred. 3. King of Sicilia was with the bad lives of the corrupt Church of Rome
which he no sooner pryed into, but out of liking of it, he began to doubt of
the veri^y of the Gospel.


Liberty is an enemy to Law, disorder to Justice, faction to Peace, and error
to true Religion.

Captains should take upon them that resolution, I have met with concerning
one, and say unto all his men round about him, Animos actusque singulorum
agnoscam, and si quid in eis vitii invenirem, statum ego castigam. I will take
an exact knowledge of all the men that are under my charge, so as to correct
and amend whatsoever is evil amongst them. States Ships should be places of
Justice, and good Discipline; Houses of Correction, and Chapels for the
worship of God.

I wish that that Distich that is writ in Zant over the place of Judgment,
were writ upon all the Entring-Ladders of all the ships in England, and not
only writ in a good legible hand, but also strictly executed and performed.

Hic locus Odit, Amat, Punit, Conservat, Honorat,
Nequitiam, Pacem, Crimina, Jura, Bonos.
Our Ships do Hate, Love, punish, conserve, do good,
Wickedness, Peace, Vice, the Laws, unto the good.
And I could further also wish that that Distich that was writ over King
Henry's Table, were writ over all the Tables that be in the great Cabbins of
all the ships in England.

Qusquis amat dict is absentem rodere amicum,
Hane mensam vetitam noverit esse sibi.
Who speaks of the Absent one defaming word,
Know I forbid him coming to my board.
Some Captains Cabbins are little better than mere Cock-pits and Stages, on
which is acted nothing else in the world save their scorn, derision, and
contempt of others for their small failings. These Lads will tell you exactly
how many Atoms there be in other men's eyes, but they will never tell you what
Beams and Trees there be in their own.

9. Do what ever in you lies to call Seamen off, and out their vile courses,
and wicked practices, to that end you may beget a generation of men that would
be some credit to the cause and quarrel in hand, and also fit^seful, and
instrumental to carry on the glorious designs of Christ that are on foot for
him against the Antichristian powers of the world.

Shame as much to let men go out of your ships unreformed, and unbettered by
being under your Commands, as a Schoolmaster will with Scholars that take not
their learning, or as a Physician does to see many patients dying under his
hands. I know it, that an honest heart will irk ill, and fret, and grow
discontented at it, if he should see men never a whit the bettered by Command,
nor seasoned with grace and godliness when the Voyage breaks up; but it may be
that corrupt hearts and consciences will never check, nor flash in the faces of
some for their negligence herein, and so it is no trouble to them, but good
Commanders cannot so stop the mouth of conscience, nor so lightly answer their
God for their remisness in doing that good which they might have done in their
public advancements.

But to be short, my friends, I have one thing more in my eye (which is of
very great consequence and concernment) I would present unto all, that either
for the present, or for the future, shall be in Command in any of the States
ships of England.

And it will be worth the while, that you take a stricter, and a speedier
course to discharge that trust which the State and Commonwealth reposes in you.
For my part, I must needs condemn that Epidemical negligence and remisness that
is amongst the Sea-Commanders, because it was never my hap as yet to find any
of them so conscientious and careful in the thing, as they ought to have been.
All the men that ever I have been under, who have bore command, have lived in
their ships, and places more like Drones, and self-seeking men, than any thing
else, wanting extremely a public spirit.

The thing is this then,

Take special, and circumspect heed, and care over all the young men that be
in your ships in what relations soever, whether as servants unto your selves,
to the State, or unto others with you, and allow not of any evil in them,
amongst them.

I will give you now good reason why you should take upon you this carefulness
and vigilance over them.

Reason 1. Because if you do not, they will learn to be as vile, profane,
deboist, and wicked, as the old Seamen are. Suppose now that young men who
come to Sea never swore before (in your ships) if you take not care of them,
they will soon learn the Lingua. And if they were civil and sober men at their
first coming to Sea, if care be not taken of them, they will soon put on
inhumanity and barbarousness. Grant they never used drinking and bezling before
they came to Sea, if you take not heed of them, they will soon find out the
art of swallowing down both pintes and quarts of the strongest liquors. Grant
they never used lying before they came to Sea, Flexilis est Juncus, salices
flectuntur amarae, -- Robora dura minus, A Rush and a Willow are easily bent,
when that a strong, and long-grown Oak cannot be bowed.

Gentlemen stand up for God, and that with the greatest zeal that can be
attained unto, and stand up for the honor of the Nation, lest that we have the
young men of this age, as corrupt, vile, and frothy, as the old Seamen are,
and as those that have lived in former ages, There is small hopes of those that
have used the Seas long, of their ever being good, and religiously disposed.
But there is some for those that have been little at Sea, and are untainted
with their godless and graceless swearing practices.

You have many Sailors in your ships that are as hurtful to conditioned and
sober minded men when they get them on board once, as that sort of Beast is
unto the Dogs which Naturalists call the Bonosus, who having a reflexed horn,
and thereby dis-inabled to defend himself, lets fly out of his tail such
filthy dung at the mouths of the dogs his mortal pursuers, that he either
poisons them, or makes them run mad with it. Oh what rotten, filthy and
soul-corrupting discourse and counsel comes there out of these men's stinking
mouths to impoyson all round about them?


if you have not a care or them, they will learn it on shipboard. Grant they
never used to steal when in the Country, when they come to Sea, if you be not
careful and indulgent over them, they will soon take up the trade.

2. Because we have great designs in hand for Jesus Christ. Therefore there is
much lies upon you to take care in the modelling, ordering, and well regulating
of those that be under your command and charge. Let the designs of Christ that
are on foot for him in the world, sparkle your spirits against all profaneness.

3. Because there is more hopes of breaking, reducing, reforming, and of
bringing the young comers unto Sea to that which is good, than there either is,
or ever will be found in the old, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed
to do evil. This is meant of old, and gray headed sinners. A plant whilst it is
young may be bended any ways, but when it is grown unto an Oak, there is no
dealing with it. If you neglect your young men now, what hopes can you have of
them when they are old?

4. Because there is bad, noisome, venomous, and soul-infecting company in your
ships. Is there not many on shipboard that have stinking breaths, and unclean
spirits breathing, and dwelling in them, which they make use of to make others
as lewd, bad, and profane as themselves? where did you ever see it in any
ships that there was any men in them that took delight to do one another good
in their souls, and to make one another better than they are? I must needs tell
you that my eyes could never behold it. I will not say but there may be such
men in ships, but pray where are they? Youth that is bred up with, and amongst
persons that are of cross, froward, crooked, and corrupting conversations,
rarely prove ever right. Young sprouts in hedgerows hardly ever grow straight.
When in an evil way the young man's own corruption will incline him to go one
mile, bad company will egg them on to go with them twain. Advise your young men
to fly all soul-staining, soul-hurting, and soul-damning fellowships, Ephesians.
5.11. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them. This is the Rule that both young Seamen, and Commanders should
walk in and by, on shipboard. Austine tells a story of Alipius, a civil young
man, who was enticed to go with a friend of his to behold the bloody, and Roman
gladitory Games, where men to make spectators sport killed one another, that
he resolved in his going to shut his eyes, lest the sight thereof should stain
his soul, but at last upon a mighty shout at a man's fall, he opened his eyes,
and looked upon them, and then he liked the sport so well, that he ever after
frequented them, and coupled with that rout in all their rude and barbarous
acts. It may be now that young Seamen never liked swearing, but now when
their eyes are upon other men, to see how boldly they will swear, and how their
roaring oaths gingle in their mouths, they begin to take it up, and swagger as
stoutly, and as proudly as they. Oh have a care of young men in your ships.
Call young men unto you, and ask them one by one, What, have not thou learned
to swear since thou came into my ship? And have not thou learned to be drunk
since thou came under my Command? And have not thou young man learned to lie
since thou came to me? Have not thou learned to profane the Lords day since
thou came to me? have not thou learned amongst my sinful crew of men to serve
the Devil, and to neglect the worship and service of God since thou came?

5. Reason, because there is much rottenness, looseness, and unsoundness of
judgment, and opinion, in most of the Sailors skulls in England. Have you not
in your Fleets that stick not with impudent foreheads, and with brows rubbed
on brass-pots, saying, That there will be no Resurrection? And have you not
othersome that stick not to say, One rotten Sailor in a ship, it as ill as an
High Elm, or Elder-tree in the midst of a Garden, that harms all round about
it.
that what ever the New Testament speaks of Christ, there was no such Savior?
And have you not othersome that say that the Scripture is no Scripture but
only the invention of man, to keep mankind in subjection? And have you not
othersome in your fleets that say, every day is a Sabbath? And is there not
othersome who boldly assert unto the poisoning of all the Seamen they come
near, with that, the more they sin, the more it will make for the honor of God
to pardon?

Have a care Gentlemen of young men that are under your Commands, that they be
not poisoned with, and by those who live upon the brinks of Hell. If you know
of any thus erroneous, pack them out of your ships.

10. Take heed of admitting to come on board too much strong drink, If you
suffer your Sailors once to be fudled on board, they will be no other in your
ships than those waters whom the Poets feign, and call Phlegeton, and
Periphlegeton, which were ingitae, and flamina undae. They will set all on a
fire.
and head-toxicating liquors. Much dishonor comes to God through this
negligence of yours. And besides, much disorder, feud, and quarrelling. How
lies one drunken beast in one place, and another of them in another? Here lies
one spueing, there lies another swearing. Here lies one talking vainly, and
idly, there another like a Sot. Here lies one speaking evil, there lies
another in another corner of the ship hallowing, and making a noise as if he
were elsewhere than on shipboard. Capt. should take that course with their
Seamen on board, If you be not valiant at these times, it will be said of you
us it was once said of the three Roman Ambassadors that were sent to Bythinia
to appease the discords, and to salve up the differences that were betwixt
Nicomedes, and Prufias. The one was troubled with an akeing in his head, the
other with the Gout in his toes, and the third with a fainting in his heart.
Cato wittily jerked them, when he said, that the people of Rome sent an
Embassage that had neither Head, Heart nor Feet. You must be all heart in
these disputes.
which the Inhabitants of Gaul did with and by their Country, who would not
suffer any wine to be brought in amongst them, because persuaded that it would
make men idle, lazy, and effeminate, and unapt to endure labor.

11. Take heed when you come up in your chasings of men of war in the Seas (to
speak them) of showing the least faint-heartedness that may be. Are not your
Seamen Eagle eyed, and quick with their pens to article against you? When they
see a cowardly principle at such times acting in you. Be valiant Gentlemen, and
if they be enemies that you have to speak with at any time, steer directly
upon them, and clap them on board, that your Sailors may not have cause to say
that you durst neither fight, nor come near them, and play but your Sailors a
few of these stout-hearted pranks, and I warrant you they will cry you up for
fighting lads, or otherwise have their mouths stopped in the aspersing of you.

12. Take heed of tarrrying too long in Harbors when you go in to wash and
tallow. You are beat up to it very well, that Seamen within board take special
notice of your managing of your Commands. And know you not also that your
White-Hall-Lords, and Masters, have power to tear your Commissions into pieces,
and bid you seek employments, and neglect not theirs. Some of you get foul
checks, The States of England give their Commanders the like charge to follow
their business, in safeguarding the Merchant, and destroying the enemy, That
the Heathen Poet gave his wooden God. Look to my Garden says he, (and in it
was this commination) yea see that thou look well unto it.

Alioqui et ipse lignum es. otherwise know that thou art wood, and fuel for the
fire. The Application is easily made.


and rubs about these things.

13. Take heed of loytring, and lingering too much within the sight of land when
your employments lie out at Sea. This wilful neglect feeds your men with matter
to complain of you.

14. Take heed that you swear not within the hearing of your men. I may say of
some of you what one said of Sempronia a Roman Lady, that she could (Saltare
magis quam necesse probae est.) dance more than did become her. Some of you I
am sure can swear a little more than does become you.

15. Take heed that your Seamen see not the least appearance of drink, in your
eyes, faces, crowns, and legs. You have the gift that other men have to set the
bottle to your noses, but have a care of drinking till your faces be inflamed,
your eyes distorted, and your legs debilitated, these external signs else will
speak you at the very next door of drunkenness.

16. Take heed of being found in a lie, or untruth. It is no credit to you to
be laughed at by your men for speaking untruths. And how easy a thing is it
for your men to trap you in them, and say this Commander of ours is given a
little to lying.

I have now four things more in hand which I would present the Sea-Captains
withal, and when I have compendiously laid them down, I will tack about and
come unto the second thing I promised you. These things that I am now
presenting, will extremely tend unto the heightning of a Commanders repute, and
esteem, without which he will but have a bad name, and not only amongst
Sailors, but also the godly on land.

The 1. Is Harmelesness. 2. Quietness, and gentleness. 3. Sobriety. 4. Fidelity.


If any would ask me what I think of many Sea-Captains, I would tell them as
once a wise Physiognomer did those that demanded of him, what he thought
concerning the natural inclination of Tiberius the Emperor. I see in him said
he, (...): Dirt, mingled with blood. Meaning that he would prove a covetous,
and bloody fellow. I see that in them that would vex a man's soul to behold.

Aristippus of his own accord a mere Heathen, went to Aeschines his enemy
saying, shall we not be reconciled till we become a table talk to all the
Country? And when Aeschines answered that he would most gladly be at peace
with him: Remember then said Aristippus, that although I be the better and
elder man, yet sought I first unto thee. Thou art indeed a far better man than
I (said Aeschines) for I began the quarrel, but thou the reconcilement. I wish
our States-Captains were of this temper, then would they not be so much
Table-talk, Country-talk, and Sea-talk as they are oftentimes by their own
folly.


1. Harmelesness. The fairest flower that grew in Samuel's Garland was this, 1 Samuel 12.3. Behold here I am, witness against me before the Lord, and before
his Anointed: whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
defrauded? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind my eyes
therewith? and I will restore it to you. This was the high praise of Paul that
blessed, and Evangelical inspired Apostle, Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise
my self, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward
men. It would rejoice me to see this temper in those that bear Command in the
Seas, but God knows they are so far from making this their exercise, that they
are rather exercised in serving of the devil, and studying all the evil,
malice, and despite they can spit out of their mouths against poor Sailors
that go under their Commands. You do many of them much wrong in turning them
out of your ships at your pleasure without any ticket for their hard service.
An honest heart would reflect on these things, I do not deny but that sometimes
you may have occasion for so doing, but many times will and pleasure is all the
reason.

2. Quietness, and gentleness. This is as sweet a flower amongst all a man's
virtues, and enamelments, as any other whatsoever, of such rare worth is it,
that the Apostle deemed them that were without it to be a dishonor unto God,
Christ, and their profession, 1 These. 4.11. And that ye study to be quiet,
Mich. 6.8. And what does the Lord require of thee but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Heb. 11.12. Follow peace with all men
(let them be what they will be) and holiness, without which no man shall see
the Lord. But now whilst I press this virtue upon you, mistake me not, I would
not have you of this temper when there is occasion given you to the contrary
amongst your men, no, no. I have observed that a carrion crow will sit upon the
back of a silly sheep, and pull the very wool of it from its skin, when as
this bird durst not do so to the Wolf, or Mastive. I leave the Application unto
you. I confess too much meekness, and soft spiritedness at Sea is a mere peble,
though at land an excellent Jewel. He that is of this temper, commonly throws
himself upon the Rocks of many injuries, patience and mildness of spirit is ill
bestowed where it is not deserved, and especially where it exposes a man to
wrongs, and insultations. Sheepish dispositions are good for others, but worst
of all for themselves. I do not deny but that it is good to be of a meek and
harmless carriage, but if any one would dare to tear off my coat, there is
good reason then to bid him look to himself.

3. Sobriety. This virtue will be as sweet ointment poured out upon your
names. And the want of it will both crack, and stain your credits in the States
Service.

The Apostle presses on the Romans with very strong, and cogent arguments to
take up the practice of it, Romans 13.12, 13. The night is far spent, the day is
at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the
armor of light. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering, and wantonness, not in strife, and envying. Let
this Scripture be your pattern.

I would have the Sea-Captains and every land Captain, and Commander as
saithful as Pontius Centurio was to Caesar the Emperor, who was one of his
Captains, and being taken by Scipio, Pompey's Father in Law, had his life
offered him with an honorable place in Pompey's Army, if he would but forsake
Caesar, and serve Pompey. But he faithfully answered Scipio, that though he
thanked him greatly for his kind offer, yet would he not accept of life upon
such unequal conditions, choosing rather for to dye than to falsify his faith
to Caesar.
4. Fidelity. It is very requisite that none should go, or be employed as
Commanders in the States ships of England, but such as are both faithful,
trusty, and well affected to the present government, otherwise the States may
hereby suffer damage. I could wish that the States of England would do by those
whom they employ either at Sea, or Land, if once unfaithful, as the
Lacedaemonians did in one case by their King Pausanias, who finding it out that
he held correspondence with their enemy Xerxes, they sent for him home, and
when he came back, perceiving that his treason was discovered, he took
Sanctuary in the Temple of Pallas, and the Lacedaemonians fearing to violate the
privilege of the place durst not fetch him out to punishment, but rather than
he should escape unrevenged they made up the door with stones, and starved
him unto death. Men that are unfaithful and disaffected, in your ships should
be called in, and not trusted in such disloyal hands.

Consider you that are trusted by the States with Seafaring Commands, what
sweet Scriptural Examples you have of the fidelity of those that were employed
in great, and weighty affairs. What think you of Abraham's servant unto his
Master? Genesis 24. What think you of Jonathan's faithfulness unto David? and of
David's unto Jonathan? 1 Samuel 20.15. 2 Samuel 9.1. What think you of Jacob's
faithfulness unto Laban? Genesis 31.38? and what think you of Jehojadah's
trustiness unto Joash? 2 King. 11.4. Behold Nehemiah, cap. 7.2. Behold Daniel,
The Romans so highly esteemed of faith in all their public affairs, that in
their City, they had a Temple dedicated to it, and for more reverence sake
offered sacrifice to the Image of Faith.
cap. 6.4. Behold Joseph, Genesis 39.8. Behold Rahab with the spies, Josh. 2.4.
Behold the workmen about the Temple, 2 King. 12.15. All these are set forth as
examples of honesty, fidelity, and godliness.

And these Examples are not like to unprofitable fables which feed the eye for
a while, and then are cast aside and seldom ever looked on more, but here they
are inserted for particular uses, practices, and applications, and to be
practiced by every one that is in any kind of trust, Darius junior, accounted
nothing more sacred than faithfully to keep, and perform all his Leagues,
Covenants, and Promises that ever he made. Xenophon.
whether great or small.

2. Pursers. These are Gentlemen that take in all the ships provisions, viz.
Bread, Bear, Beef, Pork, Butter, Pease, Cheese, and Fish, etc. And whilst they
take in this, they think with themselves, that he is a sorry Cook that will
not be now and then licking of his fingers. These lads shame no more to play
with the mouse in the Bread-roome, I mean to be sharing in every victualling,
than Dorio that impudent slut, of whom Terence tells of, that when she was
reproved for her lewd life (Non te Pudet Dorio? minime, dum obrem.) She
answered, when asked if she were not ashamed, no in good truth, as long as I
get gain by it. I leave the application.

These lads are like to the Mountain Stork, of whom it is said, that she has a
greedy and hungry worm in her Gorge and Crow, A Purser is an homo manibus
aduncis, and picacissimis (...).

If Sea-Captains did not wink at their Pursers, they could not trade so
handsomely as they do. I would gladly have Sea-Captains to do by them as
Themistocles the honest Praetor of Athens did by Simonides the Poet, who when
he came to importune him for an unjust thing, he answered him thus, Neque tu
bonus poeta esses, si praeter leges carminis caneres, neque ego civilis
praetoressem, si praeterquam quod leges permittunt, tibi gratificarer. As thou
Simonides should be no good Poet, if thou should swerve from the rules of
Poetry, so neither can I be a good Magistrate, if to gratifio thee, I should
swerve from the rule of the Laws.


and never lives contentedly, but cries out for more, more. I leave the
Application. These Lads say in the ships they play their panks in, Eamus
faciemus, pudet non esse impudentem. This Gentleman does (Largas corrigias
corio secare exalieno) Cut large thongs out of other men's hides. He is in a
word the Sea-mans cruel, and unmerciful Fezavallo.

That good counsel Seneca gave his friend Lucillus, I would present unto all
the Pursers in England. He desired him that when ever he went about the doing
of any thing, that he would strongly imagine Cato, Scipio, or some other
worthy Roman to be in presence. Pursers when you are about to cheat the States
in this, and in the other thing, strongly fancy that the Navy and Admiralty
Officers eyes are upon you, and this may in time reduce you to become honest
men.

Gentlemen, to be short, you ought to be contented with your Sallary (and as
you are servants unto the State) it does not become you to be filching,
dishonest, and unfaithful to them, you will find the smart of it one day, I,
and find a harder digestion of it in hell than ever you found on earth. When
Scipio robbed the Temple of Tholossa, there was not a man that carried away any
of the gold that ever prospered after. I fear you will hardly thrive in the
world, though you have fraudulent ways of attracting and substracting unto
your selves. It is well it that curse in Zach. 5.4. lie not at your doors, that
it may not, behave your selves like honest, godly, and conscientious men in
your places of trust.

3. Gunners. These are another sort of Gentlemen, that undertakes the charge of
all the Ordnance, Harquebusses, Firelocks, Powder-barrels, This Lad is a Trium
literarum homo (and that summo gradu) as well as the other.
and those many kinds of shot and bullet, which they have out of the Artilery
Tower, for the managing of their fights. To tell you the truth of this
Gentleman, he has as many ways to cousen the State, as the Purser has.

This Lad is as cunning as he that stole the Goat in Virgil, Eclog. 3. of whom
the Poet sings, -- Post carecta latebat. He skulked behind the bush, but at
last was discovered. It is a notable Proverb, that Taurum tollet qui vitulum.
He that will steal a Calf, will in the end take the Cow. Gunners if you love
to be fingring of one barrel, you will soon have your hands in a great many
more. Sin is of an incroaching nature like a small River (crescit eundo) it
grows in going, and like the Gangreen, it creeps by degrees. Small beginnings
if not resisted, will in the end usher in peccant and unwarrantable
proceedings. Gunner, every corn of Powder thou steals from the States, will
make the fire the hotter, thou shall burn in, in hell hereafter. Read thou
not in Job. 18.15. That brimstone is scattered upon all the habitations of the
wicked. Surely Thieves and Knaves are near to blowing up. Thy Linstock (I fear)
is in the hands of Justice already, to give fire to one of the great Ordnances
of Gods ^rath, to take thee off by the middle. Read that Text in Zach. 5.4. and
have a care left thou bring a curse upon thy self, and also upon thy house when
thou art in the Seas. Know thou not Gunner, that all Thieves shall be
punished with exclusion out of the Kingdom of heaven? And if God will have
none such in that glorious habitation of his? Read 1 Cor. 6.10. Before I take
my leave of you, I will tell you two things, which I am persuaded, few that are
Gunners in England could answer to, if they should be posed in them.

1. The first Invention of Guns and Powder.
Who found out the Invention of Guns and Powder?

2. Who taught men to steal?

For the first of these, I answer, That he was a German Friar, of the order of
St. Francis, called Bertholdus Swart, one that was very studious in Chemistry,
and one evening as he was very busy in the finding out some experiments, in
his tempering of brimstone, sulphurous powder of dried earth, and certain
other ingredients in a Mortar, which he covered with a stone, it growing dark
he took his Tinder-box to light him a candle, and a spark by chance falling
into the Mortar, fired the materials in it, and blew up the stone about his
ears; the cunning Chemist observing of that strange act, guessed very well
which of his ingredients it was which wrought that effect, and never left till
he found out the certainty of it, and taking an Iron pipe, he filled it full
of that ingredient which he found to be so sparkling, and putting fire
thereto, it would go off with great force, and noise; and this Invention he
shortly after made report of, and presented unto the Venetians, by the help of
which they did in those times often vanquish the Genoes.

For the second, I answer, That all theft is learned of the Devil. Did not he
make the greatest robbery that ever was made upon any man in this world? Genesis
3.4, 5. Some men have lost hundreds, and fifties, and their forties upon the
Road, but he damaged and impoverished at one single bout the whole world. I
will not stand any longer in discourse with you, save only in this word, that
if you steal, cousen, and purloyn from the States, you have learned to make
these Robberies from the Devil.

4. Boatswains. These are another sort of Gentlemen as they call them in the
Sea (that never were worth an acre of ground in their lives.) These have all
cordage store in their hands, viz. Cables, Haursers, small bowers, Sails,
Riggin, Canvas, and many other things. This Lad has as many Subtle and
clandestine projects in the pate of him to cheat the State as the rest have.
This Gentleman's Salary is not very much in the mouth, but to eke it out, he
swears that he will have a piece of the States Cables, or Haurser, come on it
what will. But let me tell thee Boatswain, How can thou answer God that art
not true unto thy Masters? The stealing of their goods will but prove an halter
to hang thee in by the neck in Hell, to keep thy neck out of the Collar, let
not thine hands touch their Cordage, but let thine eye be upon that Curse that
is menaced against Stealers, Zach. 5.4. and hereby there may be hopes thou
may remove that curse that is impendent over thy own head, and thy Families.

5. Carpenters. These are another sort of Gentlemen (as they call them at Sea)
who have neither Lands, nor Livings no more than the rest of them have. These
have under their hands, all Plank, Deal, Lead, Iron, bolts of Iron, Nails, and
many other things which I might reckon up. And these Lads will, and are now and
then fingering of their stores toward bearing of their charges as they say.
Datque porrecto pede, virgam accipies, Give him but a foot, and he will take a
yard. This Lad is no more fool than the rest, but if his Salary be not enough,
he swears be will fetch it out of his stores by one slight or other. And
when he comes to make up his accounts in Arithmetic, he is notably pregnant,
and as dexterious he is whilst on board (all the time) in substraction. It is
an old Proverb, Tradesmen that will not lie, can have no trading in this world.
I leave you the Application of it. Gentlemen, to tell you plainly I like no
juggling, nor no balking of you that are in the States and Commonwealths
service, there be many base, gross, and felonious carriages not only amongst
you, but the rest also in general. I could wish that the States ships were well
manned and officer'd, even with godly, honest, and conscientious men, men
fearing God, walking uprightly, and hating covetousness. Look into Zach. 5.4.
and 1 Cor. 6.10.

God knows many Masters of ships in the Merchants service, have as covetous,
and as greedy a disposition in them, as ever Julius Caesar had, of whom it is
said, that in his making war in Spain, that he picked quarrels with diverse rich
Cities that he might plunder them. And do not you the like by your Seamen,
that you may at the Voyage end keep something back of their wages?

I would have all the Masters in England that go in Merchant affairs to be of
that honest mind that Tyberius the Emperor was of, of whom it is said, that he
accounted (Aurum illud Adulterinum esse, quod cum subjectorum lachrymis
collectum esset) that moneys no good coin that was levied with his subjects
tears.

Read Lev. 19.13 Seamen that are thus abused with their Masters may well say
unto them as Car^^acus, one of Britains Princes said, when taken prisoner, and
carried unto Rome, and after his viewing of the stately magnificence of the
City as he passed on, what mean you (quoth he) to do, that have these, and such
like buildings of your own to covet our small Cottages? So what mean you to do
with us, who have enough to live well on, and yet gripe and grutch us our wages?


But to shut up this Discourse, I will add one word more, and that of
Advertisement unto those that go under the notion of Masters, and Boatswains of
ships, whether in the States or Merchants service; and after I have in brief
told them a little of their bad, dishonest, and tyrannical carriages toward
poor laboring Seamen. I will then give fire to a great piece of Ordnance that
all the Mariners in England may hear me into every part of the Sea, whether
West, East, North, or South, or where ever they are, and go. And if any at the
hearing of the dreadful report of it should ask and inquire what the matter is,
that one of the Chase-guns out of the most famous and golden-gilded Nasby of
England is fired, I shall tell them, that it is upon this account, to command
all the Seamen in England for to strike, and to call them off from all their
vain, Idle, irreligious, souldamning, deboyst, and ungodly lives, practices,
and conversations.

For the first then, In the Merchants service. Masters, your demeanours in the
ships you go in are very rotten, putrid and unsound, and should they either
come to the light, or unto the touchstone, they would be found to be mere
dross, and worse than the very shingle that lies upon the Sea side. What
stoppage do you make many times of your poor hired Sea-mens wages? Any trivial
detriment or accident that comes upon the ship in the Voyages you make, must
forsooth, be abstracted and squeezed out of their Indents. I would advise all
such Masters to look upon these doings, and all their other crafty and cruel
dealings with their men, as they will appear hereafter, and then come and tell
me how good it is to put that into your pockets, which is your Sea-mens dues.
I will tell you how they will appear unto you one day, Jam. 5.4. Behold the
hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept
back by fraud, cries; and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into
the ears of the Lord of Sabboaths. Behold! Behold the cries of laboring
Seamen which have carried your ships out, and brought them home, are both
great, and very many, they are come into the ears of the Lord already as so
many Bills of Indictment against you. Woe be unto you! how will you answer the
Lord in that great day of account? Take in that good counsel of Christ's
betimes, Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware of covetousness, for a man's life
consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.

2. In the Merchants service, Boatswains, All is not right with you neither.
There be those holes in your coats that proclaim you tyrannical, and
unmerciful amongst your men. You are like to Pharaohs Taskmasters, who put the
children of Israel upon making of Bricks, Exodus 1.14. you make the lives of
many poor Seamen under you very bitter unto them by reason of your hard and
unkind bondage, and if not in Mortar; and in Brick, yet in multiplicity of
needless and useless service, you cry as Israels-Tyrants did over them, Exodus
5.13, 14. Fulfill your works, your daily tasks as when there was straw: which if
they do not, perhaps their bones are broke by your unmerciful hands, for their
neglecting of that which they are both overcharged and burdened in, many
times. You are in a word a jovial crew of Carmen that never leave jerking, I
would have all the Boat-swains in England that are in the Merchants service, to
walk toward the Seamen that are under them, according to this Scripture rule,
Levit. 25.43. Thou shall not rule over him with rigor, but shall fear thy God.
and Geoing of their horses till they hale the hearts of them our. I may very
well say of you as it was once said of Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.7. Cursed be
their anger, for it was fierce: and their wrath, for it was cruel.

2. In the States Service. Masters and Boatswains. You are the two only men
for the commanding of a ship, what ever a Captain pretends, and keeps a stir,
and a busling amongst you. I look upon you two for the well ordering of a ship,
were there but those Principles in you, as much as I do upon him. As to the
commanding of the men, you have as much to do with them as he has. I mean in
things that have a tendency unto good order, and decorum on shipboard.

I may compare the cow-heartedness that is in Masters, and Boatswains of ships,
toward those that go under the notion of Captains in them, To that foolish
soul, Grato, in Terence, of whom it is said, Quicquid dicis, ego dicam,
quicquid negis, ego negam. What you say Sir, I will say, and what you deny, I
will deny. What you will, I will, and what you will not, I will not. Make you
the Application.

But more pertinently to the thing in hand. There be three things that are too
visibly amiss in you, and I would desire you all that are in these places, If
that our Masters and Boatswains that are in the Statesships, were but pious and
religious, their lives would have as great an influence upon their men, as
Hilarion's had upon Hierome. It is said of Hierome, that having read the godly
life and Christian death of Hilarion, he folded up the book, and said, well,
Hilarion shall be the Champion whom I will follow. Seamen would say (if they
did but see good things in you) the very same of you. I will follow our Master,
our Boatswain, and our Captain, etc. I may say unto all the Masters and
Boatswains of ships in England, that Longum iter per praecepta, brevius per
exempl^. Every thing in you should be exemplary whilst on shipboard. No evil
should be seen in you, left that they should learn it and take encouragement
to be profane.
in what ships of the States of England soever, to amend them. It would be
more credit to you amongst men, and more pleasing unto God I will promise you.
It would vex a man's soul to see, what loose, cold, lukewarm and indifferent
principles there be amongst you in the performance of your duties in these
things.

1. In the strict observation of the Sabbath. Let me tell you thus much, in
respect that there is not an heavenly zeal, love, and fervor in your souls,
to and for this day, that you do much harm in the ships you go in: If Seamen
observe you to be remiss, and indifferent in the keeping of it, they will be
as careless as you. I profess I wish from the bottom of my soul that every
irreligious Master and Boatswaine, throughout the whole Navy of England, were
turned out of their places, to that end men might be put in that have a zeal
for God, and a care to thunder up the careless Seamen upon this day unto the
worship of God. It was never my hap to see any thing of God either in the
Masters or Boatswaines that have been in command in those ships that I have
gone in. For if there had, there would have been a greater appearance of it in
the rousing up of the men that were under them. To what end do thou bear the
name of Master in this or that Friggot, if thou let, and suffer the
Sailors to live masterless upon this day; who should more stir up Seamen unto
the serving of God than thou? because thou have not an heat to serve God, thou
leavest them in this, and the other corner of the ship to serve the Devil.
Whilst Seamen are not called up to those public duties that are performed in
your ships, they are but consulting with their own carnal hearts, and carnal
thoughts are their companions all the time they are absent, those they dandle,
I may say of the Sabbath day, as once Alsted of his Germans, that if the
Sabbath day should be named according to the Sailors observing of it in the
Sea, De^^^niacus petius quam Dominicus diceretur. It should not then be called
Gods day, b^^ the Devils.
and are the babes, and brats of their own brains, which are more pleasing to
them than a sin-opening, and sin-convincing Sermon. To what end do thou bear
the name, and office of a Boatswaine in the States ships, if thou give the
Seamen the liberty to profane the Lords Day, and to live as they list? What a
filthy shame is this that our Masters and Boatswaines have no better things in
them.

Is this commendable for you to live like drones, and sots in ships, that
should be examples of good? If one could but look into every ship in England,
what their carriages be every day in them, might not one spy here a knot of
wretches spending their time in filthy discourse, whilst others are at Prayer,
and in another corner a pack of Varlets profaneing of the Sabbath whilst others
are at the Sermon, and this is allowed of by our God-less and Christ-less
Masters, The common sort of Sailors are lad^ that ^are not for Sabbaths, but
had rather pass de delitiis, ad delitias e coeno ad coelum, as Hierome has it.
They would dance with the Devil all day, and sup with Christ at night. They
would live in Dalilah's lap all their lives long, and then go to Abraham's
bosom when they die.

Our Masters and Boatswains are of the Athenian strain, of whom it was said,
Athenienses scire quae rectae sunt, sed sacere nolle. You know what is right,
but you have no great stomach to it.


and Boatswaines. I will tell you what, Masters, and Boatswaines, look for some
heavy judgment to arrest you before you go out of the world. Better that you
anger all the Sailors in the Seas by being godly, and conscientious, and
pressing of them unto those public Ordinances which the States allows of for
the instructing of that wild generation of men, than to have God to be angry
with you, for being ungodly and careless in your places, where you might
advance, and promote much good.

2. In the crushing and discountenancing of all swearing and drunkenness in
your ships. You can hear God-dishonouring oaths rapping out of your Sailors
mouths on every hand you, and sit in their company, whilst oaths fly like
Gunpowder in your ears, and faces, and yet not open your mouths to reprove
them; who should now take upon them a courage for God in this case but you? If
you did but let them see once your dislike, they would the sooner leave it, but
when they see that you can digest it, and endure it, and sit in their company,
they take it for granted that you see something that is good in them, and
hereby you do a great deal more bolster graceless fellows in their wickedness,
than you are aware of. How knowing and privy also are you to all that swinish
drunkenness that is amongst your Sailors? Masters and Boatswains of ships
should have as ardent desires for the good of poor Seamens souls, as reverend
Claviger had over his relations. Of whom it is said, If I may but see grace in
my wife and children, Satis habeo, satisque mihi, meae uxori, filiis and
filiabus prospexi. I shall then account them sufficiently cared for. If I could
but see grace in the men under me, and a leaving of their swearing, drinking,
and whoring, I should then think them happy men.
and yet it is buried, wincked at, unpunished, and untold unto your Commanders.
Nay when men come on board like beasts, or creatures bereaved of sense, and
reason, and can neither go, see, sit, nor stand, but as they are carried in
men's arms to their Cabbins, or to their Hammocks, this is but a matter of
laughter with you. Art thou now (I will put the question to thee) fit to go
Boatswaine of a ship that can turn thy back on these things? And art thou fit
to be a Master, and a Ruler of a family that can stand upon deck, and see men
come on shipboard in this pickle, and have no grief and vexation at that
dishonor that comes to God by them? I wish that all such men that go in the
States ships were packed out of them, and men fearing the Lord, and zealously
abhorring swearing, lying, whoring, and drunkenness, etc. were established in
their steads.

But Thirdly In your cruel usage, and tyrannizing of it ^^er your men. Swearing
and Drunkenness is no part of your quarrelling with them, for you can very well
dispense with these things amongst them, and swallow down many other notorious,
and nefarious evils. You are like to Pharaoh's Taskmasters unto them, and in
many things do you abridge them of a comfortable, and peaceable living in the
ships they sail in with you. I would have all the Masters and Boatswains in
England that are, or shall go in any of the Statesships, as humble minded as
Willegesins was, of whom it is said, In thalamo grandioribus literit in scripta
habuit, Willegesi, Willegesi, recole unde voneris. Being a Carpenters son, and
afterward by his learning Bishop of Moguntia, had this written in his
bedchamber in great letters, Willegesius, Willegesius, remember of what thou
came on. Is not this a good memento to you?

When Jacob was grown rich he forgot not his former condition how he came over
Jordan (perhaps) with never a penny in his pocket, Genesis 32.10. He makes
mention of nothing that he had but his staff.


What choler, what fury, what anger, what hatred, what devillising breaks out
at your hands, eyes, feet, and tongues against them? I and many times too,
unjustly. Consider with your selves what God has done for you in exalting you
into places of Command, and how he has not done so for others that are better
deserving good encouragements than you are, and this may pull down your high
stomachs, and your flidged plumes. What have not thou been Boatswaine in former
times? Have not many of you been Cabbin-boyes, common Seamen, ship-swabbors,
etc. what and now so proud, so high, and so lofty? verify not the old Proverb,
Set a beggar on horseback and he will ride a gallop. Master, what have not thou
been before thou came to that preferment? wast thou not many years ago a
Cabbin-boy, or a Boatswains servant? a mere common Seaman, or some low,
obscure, and uncredited fellow? be thou not too high in the ship thou go in,
to Lord it over the Seamen, left thy fall be with a vengeance. Prove. 16.18.
Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.

The next thing then promised you, is unto the common and inferior sort of
Seamen, wherein I shall tell them that I have many things against them, And
how it would become them far better that there were not so many spots in their
coats, in respect of those great designs that are in hand, and on foot for
Jesus Christ in the world. I will lay them down in particulars.

1. Drunkenness. I will say unto our Sailors what Demosthenes said of Philip
King of Macedon, when commended for a jovial man and one that would drink
freely, This is a good quality in a sponge, but not in a King. So it is a good
quality in a sponge, but not in a Captain, Boatswain, Gunner, Carpenter,
Purser, Master, or Sailor.
This bewitching sin has tript up the heels of many thousands of you, and got
such victory and mastery over you, that I think you will never be able to
decline it as long as you live. This sin has stolen your hearts away from God,
and goodness, in so much that he has neither honor, remembrance, nor
obedience from you, Hos. 4.11.

Sailors let me tell you thus much, that there be many foul sins and
souldamning iniquities to be found in your hands in these last, and evil
days, which elder times were angry at, and would have blushed to have seen
them crawling in any corners amongst them. You blush not to ^will till you
vomit, and to drink b^ ^^asure without measure. You conten^ (...) your
drinkings when you get your noses into a Seaport town who should drink most,
and he that has the strongest brain, or the widest and largest tankard to
contain it, carries away the bell, and glory of it. Peruse but the 5. Isa. 11.
and consider what an eternal, and everlasting woe will follow that course of
life, and me thinks you should grow out of conceit with it. Whilst I reprove
you for these things, I free my own soul before God. This sin is against
reason, (had you but reasonin your brains) it is also against the necessity of
nature, good health, vigor of the mind, and alacrity of the senses. Drunkards
may be better called, Bottles, Barrels, Pipes, Sinks, Tubs, and Hogsheads,
than men.

Drunken Sailors are the likest unto that tankard-lifting Zeno, If you will
needs do as Asops Grasshopper did, you will in the end smart for it, of whom it
is said, that she did, per aestatem ca^care totam. Sung all Summer, and
starved in the winter.

Throw your moneys away freely in the Alehouse, and go through a thousand
storms, and bitterments in the Sea for as much again. Frugalitas Attacis est
Sophrosyne, Ciceroni modestia. Frugality with the Athenians was wisdom, with
Cicero modesty, and shall it not be so with you? May it not be just with God
to do by you as he did with Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia, who when
excessively drunk, fell distracted, and never recovered his wits any more. How
if God should do thus by you, when you are vomiting, and spueing, were it not
justice?


of any that I can resemble them unto, of whom it has been said, that he was
such a drinker, that he would often lie as one dead for many hours with his
drinking, and in the end grew so odious unto all, and to his own wife, who when
finding of him in that case, caused him to be laid in a Tomb, with a great
stone on the top of it, whereby the Emperor was miserably pined to death.
Drunkards when found in this condition would be served so, and it might be
then, that the rest would be afraid ^^^^t wright in the perusal of his
Consc^^^ and publication of his Repentance unto the world, cried out after this
manner, Oh it wounds me to think of my blasphemous oaths uttered in passion,
and distemper, my disobedience to my parents, my excess in my drinking of
healths, etc. If ever the drunken Sailors of England; come to be touched with
the filthiness of their soul-damning pottings, they will roar out as he did
for them. Seamen, will you live all your life time in this sin? Woe be unto
you if this sin, and your lives end together.

2. Swearing. I verily think there is scarce one in five thousand of you that
is clear of this nasty and stinking contagion. What Chrysostom said in one
case (that if he were the fittest in the world, to preach a Sermon to the whole
world gathered together into one Auditory, and had some high Mountain for his
Pulpit, etc.) I shall say the like in another. Were all the whole Navy of
England gathered together, and that a Chaplains Pulpit were, or could be placed
in the Maintop of some goodly ship that he might have a prospect of all the
ships in his view, and were furnished with a heart of brass and a voice as loud
as a trumpet of an Archangel, that all the whole Navy might hear him. I would
either choose for him, or for my self, these two texts of Scripture, Jam. 4.12.
But above all things my brethren swear not at all, and Isa. 5.11. Woe to the
Drunkards of Ephraim etc. This is D^vinity enough to be preached unto Seamen,
and my reason is this, that they that will not leave off swearing and
drunkenness, they will practice nothing in the whole book of God.
To scour you of this rotten distemper, let me prescribe you this soul-healing
medicine, which lies in the sacred word of God, and if you can but digest it, I
dare promise you that you will neither swear more, nor affect it in others when
you hear it; Look then into Jam. 5.12. But above all things my brethren, swear
not at all, etc. Why so, seems many a profane wretch to say? I will tell thee
wherefore, the reason is ready at hand, ^xod. 20.7. God is tender of his Name.
It is said of the Jews, that they were so tender of the Name of God, that one
should never hear them presume to pronounce that dreadful name of Jehovah in
the Law, but read Adonai, unless it were by the Highpriest once a year.

Augustus (as Suetonius reports) would not have his name obsolefieri, worn
threadbare. What think you of the Lords holy Name then, Sailors, which you wear
and tear in your mouths day by day? The name of Mercurius Trismegistus was not
commonly pronounced, because of great reverence to him.

1. Swearing is a grievous sin, if thou consider but well the object about
which its conversant, and that is the Lord.

2. It is a grievous sin if thou consider the occasion, and that is none at all.

God knows, It is with the major part of the Sailors in England, as it was with
a great swearer in the days of King Edward the sixth, to whom when that godly
Minister, Mr. Haines replied, when hearing of a brave Gallant rapping out most
horrid oaths, told him that he should one day give an account thereof, the
young Spark ill-mannerly answered him, Take no care for me, but prepare for
your winding sheet. Well said the good Minister, Amend, for death gives no
warning. At which counsel, he still broke into a far ^^her rage and strain of
swearing, till such times that he came to a bridge (which passed over an arm of
the Sea) and putting the spurs to his horse, the metalness of the beast took
the wall, and down went the horse, and the great swearer into the depths, and
his last words were (when he saw no recovery but death) Here is horse and man
going now full speed unto the Devil. I pray God it may not be said both of
some men and ships when they sink in the Seas, That there is a ship, and all
the swearing Seamen in her (the other day, or the last week) gone to the
Devil. My reason is this, the preaching of the word, and the telling them of
the danger of this sin, would never take, nor prevail with them, and therefore
what other end can such expect at their death than a mere going unto the Devil?

Our English Sailors are too like, and too near a kin unto that desperate Boy
of Tubing in Germany, of whom it is said, that he was a most damnable Swearer,
and inventer of new Oaths, even of such as were neither common, nor ever heard
of before. A swearing ship is an ill air for holy zeal to breathe in, a good
heart will soon be weary of such an abode, and say, Woe is me that I dwell in
Meshek, and that I sojourn in the Tents of Kedar.
But what became of this blasphemous wretch may some say? I answer, (and what
the Lord did by him, I pray you Sailors take notice, lest God do not so by you
for your swearing) God sent a canker or some worse disease, that did eat out
his tongue which was the instrument he blasphemed with.

I have read also of another, and his usual oath was, By Gods Arms, shortly
after this man's arm was hurt with a knife, but nothing in all the world could
ever cure it again, but it wrankled, festered, and rotted off his body, and
through anguish and pain thereof, he dyed most miserably. Is it not just with
God, think you, to rot your arms, legs and tongues off, and out of your mouths
(for you are worse swearers than any of these that I have presented unto you
out of history) as arguments to deter you from the practice of it.

This sin of swearing, or any other sin indeed (if it be but born withal a
while) will not know it self to be sin at all, but plead innocence to be no
iniquity. Consuetudo delinquendi pro lege est, said Tertullian. Custom is for
a Law, and so will be accounted good; if a man use himself, but to this or any
other sin a while, he will never take notice of it, nor know when he does
evil. And truly after sin once becomes customary, Citius finienda vita, quam
vitia. Life may sooner end, than they will part with their vices. Most Seamen
are got into such a garb, and habit of swearing, that I may take up the words
of the Prophet, Jer. 23.13. and tell them, that the Ethiopian cannot change
his skin, nor the Leopard his spots. Woe be unto you, if this sin and your
lives end together.

3. Lying. I know no people under the whole Heavens again, given, and addicted
so much unto this evil as our Sailors are, should inquiry be made into all the
Kingdoms, Provinces, Continents, or Territories of the world, their accounts
would be at last that they had none such amongst them as be, and go in the
Seas. A Talebearer, or a Tale-carrier in the Hebrew Tongue is compared to a
Pedlar, who will when he has furnished himself, and filled his pack with
variety of pedling, and petty stuffs of several colors, of Ribbanding, and
Inkling, trot up and down from Town to Town, where he can find best custom,
and trading. After this manner does the pedling Seaman carry upon his back his
paltry pack of lies, and opens it on board every ship he comes into, I would
Commanders would do by liars in their ships as Artaxerxes did by one of his
Soldiers, when finding him in a lie, caused his tongue to be thrust through
with three needles. This is a good course to discourage lying.
or every house and Town he goes into, he matters not the truth of any thing
he speaks, but out goes his rotten wares to impoyson all round about him.

Now if these Tongue-libelling-lads in the Sea, would look into Rev. 21.8. and
pause a while upon that Scripture, they would find such sharp, tart, and sour
sauce, that they would never love lying, more. I dare say there be thousands
that have been of your employment, that are now roaring as so many damned
miscreants in hell, that feel the verity of this Scripture which they would
never believe, nor credit when they were alive in the world, as you now are.
Let God, Christ, and Scripture then bear and carry the highest and strictest
rule and command over you in your hearts and consciences, and not the Devil,
Ephesians. 4.25. Putting away lying, speak every man the truth with his neighbor,
etc. Woe be unto you, if this sin and your lives end together!

What one says of the Pea and Turkycock (I will say of the Sailor) Quodvis
rubrum gallo-pavos animat, Every thing that is red inrageth the Peacock. Make
the application. Sailors are much what of Lysanders moral the Lacedemonian, of
whom its said, that he was of such an implacable disposition, that nothing
could appease his malice, but the death of the person with whom he was angry,
whereupon grew the Proverb, That Greece could not bear two Lysanders. And truly
I would have Captains to say that our ships shall harbor no such Sailors.
4. Choler, passion, and anger. If I had a desire, or that I did know of any
that were desirous to see these three feral passions in their proper raging,
and predominating colors, I would either go, or send them unto the Sea amongst
the Mariners, and there they should be sure in two or three hours expense of
time on board with them, to behold them both in their faces, tongues, and
hands, as so many sparks of fire in barrels of Gunpowder. These are the three
Faggots (or ingredients) that a Seaman is made of. There is scarce one in ten
thousand of them, but he has fire and powder in the mouth of him, and the
sight of this drives all good people away from holding any society or converse
with them, and makes it an intolerable penance to be near them, or within the
smoke of their Chymnies. God pity you, and in his good time bestow another
manner of heart and spirit upon you, than is to be seen amongst you. Ther^ is
the greatest weakness of spirit, and unmanliness of mind to be seen amongst
the Sailors of all the people under the heavens again. What argues the
disgrace, and inferiority of the understanding part more (which is the noblest
power of the soul) than passion? Prove. 17.27. A man of understanding is of an
excellent spirit. In the Hebrew, he is of a cool spirit. The lowest men of
parts are oftentimes the passionatest men. But that now this unclean spirit may
be clubd down, and kicked overboard out of all the Navy ships in England, I
would present all the Sailors in the Seas with these ensuing Consectaries, and
I dare promise them that the practicing of them will procure them much peace,
comfort, and quietness, whilst, and in what ships soever they sail in. The main
reason why Sailors are so contentious and quarrelsome one with another is,
because they are either ignorant of their carriage and behavior one toward
another, or else in respect of trivial, and frivolous provocations that arise
amongst themselves, which wisdom would soon hurl out of doors, and dash out of
countenance.

1. Sailor, Sailor, Immensae virtutis est non sentire ^e esse percussum. It
will well become thee if thou meerest with vvrong on shipb^^^ to take notice
of them.
If you would then live peaceably and comfortably on board your ships, Trample
under foot all delicate niceness of bearing wrongs: If thou will not do thus,
go not to Sea, for thou will meet with them. Where there is an impetuous
impatiency, and an effeminate facility in men, they will be moved at every
trifle. It is a special piece of manly wisdom to be able to pass by many petty
provocations to wrath and anger without notice taking. And it is no less also
to digest the witless brawlings and clamours of silly, foolish, irrational, and
headstrong men, with the same patience that Chirurgions will the injuries and
blows of mad, and frantic men.

When an inconsiderate fellow had stricken Cato in the bath, and afterward
cried him mercy, he replied, I remember not that thou did strike me, Tu
linguae ego aurium Dominus, said one to another that railed on him, I cannot be
master of thy tongue, but I will be master of mine own ears.

S. Paul, Act. 2.8 shook off the affronts and injuries offered unto him, with
as much ease, as once he did the Viper.

One having made a long and ^ous discourse to Aristotle, at last pleaded his
prolixity, to whom Aristotle replied, that he was not tedious unto him, because
he gave no heed to any thing he said.


2. If you would live peaceably and comfortably on board your ships, Trample
under foot all credulity and lightness in believing whatsoever comes first to
hand and ear. If thou will not do thus, never look to live quietly on board any
ship thou shall set thy foot into. To believe every word, tale, and tattle thou
hear, is the only way to set thee on a fire. Tale-bearers, whisperers, and
Tongue-slanderers are the Devils bellows.

3. If thou would live peaceably and comfortably on board any ship. Out a
doors with all curiosity, itching humor, and needless inquisitiveness to know
and hear of every thing that is done or said. My reason is this, If a man be
thus disposed, he shall find matter enough to fill his gall, and set his
Irascible part on a burning fire. That man shall never want wrath, and woe,
that lets the doors of his ears stand wide open to listen to every one. I have
read of Antigonus a most famous Prince, how that he did, when he heard two
unworthy subjects of his speaking ill of him in the night near his Tent door,
willed them to go further off, lest the King should hear them. That man that is
of this temper is the best to pass, let him be at Sea, or on Land.

4. If thou would live peaceably, and comfortably on shipboard, Out of
doors with all timerousness of being wronged or contemned by others, in word,
deed, or countenance. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, Ephesians. 4.28. but
many Seamen suffer the Sun to go down, and rise again upon their anger, yea
again, and again, before they will part with it. But let that man know that
lets the Sun go down upon his wrath, he takes the Devil to bed with him.
I have observed it, that many men do needlessly fret, and perplex themselves
when they see but two talking or smiling, and now and then casting an eye upon
them, they presently conceit within themselves that they are their discourse,
and the object of their scornful observation. This argues great weakness and
folly.

5. If Seamen would live peaceably and comfortably on shipboard, when
occasions of anger, and discontentments are given them, I would have them to
follow these Rules.

1. Contain your bodies in quiet, and your tongues in silence, because the
stirring, and agitation of the body, and stamping, and flinging about, Plutarch
writes, that it was the custom of Pythagoras his Scholars, however that they
had been at odds, jarring and jangling in their disputations, yet before the
Sun set, would kiss and shake hands as they departed out of the School. I would
all our Sailors in the States ships were of this temper.
sets the blood and humors on a fire. The walking of the tongue will keep in
that passionate heat that usually starts up in the heart, which otherwise would
evaporate its self, and dye. Silence is an admirable cooler to all indignities
and affronts. Would Seamen take this advice, there would not be such wording
of it, as oftentimes there is amongst themselves.

2. If Seamen would live comfortably on shipboard, and seek the peace of the
ships they go in; let them then always, give reason leave to interpose and
debate. It was very good advice that was given to Augustus the Emperor, when
the object and occasions of choler were in his eye, Angry fools in former times
were counseled to look themselves in a glass. If Seamen did but see their
faces when they are angry, they would be ashamed of them when they are calm and
quiet. Prove. 16.32. Latius regnes avidum domande Spiritum, quam si Lybiam
remouis Gadibus jungas. Horat. Od. l. 2.

The Hebrews call anger Aph, because therein the nose rises, the color
changes, the tongue stammereth, the teeth gnash, and the hands clap, the feet
stamp, the pulse beats, the heart pants, the whole man swells like a Toad, and
glares like the Devil.


that he should not be moved before he had pronounced over the letters of
the Alphabet. When Seamen give the reigns unto their passions, it beats out of
doors, and out of their brains, both all reason, and judgment.

3. If Seamen would live comfortably on shipboard, and seek the peace, and
welfare of the ships they sail in, then would I have them, to set their hearts,
and stomachs against all the feral passions, and bodily distempers they see in
other men. What heating of the blood, and the vital spirits be there in many
Sailors? How are they transported with fieriness of the eyes, inflammations of
the face, furiousness in their looks, extraordinary panting of the heart,
beating of the pulse, swelling of the veins, stammering of the tongue, gnashing
of the teeth, bad language, and many other uncomly behaviors? Abhor these
devilish gestures that are in thousands of your pedling Sailors, bend your
minds and spirits against them, and consider what a sweet loveliness, and
amiable virtue there is in a mild, gentle, and unpassionate spirit. It is the
very finew of all delightful society, the flower of humanity, and the very
sweetness of civil converse, it both draws love from others, and also keeps the
heart in a perpetual calmness. If Seamen love nothing but frowardness, and
hastiness, you that are wise will never take any delight in their company. It
is storied of Earl Elzearus, that he was much given to immoderate anger, and
the means he used to cure this disordered affection, was by studying of Christ
and of his patience, and this meditation he would never let pass from him
before he found his heart transformed and conformed into that heavenly pattern.

But further, I have one word more, and that unto all the young Seamen in
England. It has been my observation, that many thousands of them are apt to
be spoiled and corrupted with that Soul-poysoning society they daily are in
company of in the ships they sail in, and could I now, or were I able to rescue
them out of the hands of the Devil, and to fetch them off from under the nose,
or command of hell, and all the black powers of darkness, and also out of a
dislike unto all ungodly wretches, I should then think my self extremely happy.
To work this effect amongst them, I will give them a whole broadside of
Arguments, and if they will not do, nothing in the world will prevail upon
them; I may even then do as a Physician who has striven long with his patient
and sees no hopes, gives him up at last, I shall give you up for lost men.

1. Take heed of holding any intimate compliance and correspondency with men
that are publicly profane, It is a very hard thing for a man to live amongst
corrupt fellows without corruption, it is easier to walk upon burning coals,
or to carry fire in ones bosom, than to be amongst such and not be tainted
with them, Prove. 6.27. Admit said Isidore that a man were made of iron, yet if
he stood continually before some great fire, he is in danger of growing supple
and soft as wax.

Though a man greatly like not the sin, yet company with a sinner may work him
to it. Et quos vitium non potuit vincere, familiaritas vincit. Whom vice cannot
overcome, familiarity will.


and wicked. My reason is this, There evermore steals in upon that man that
does not, a very secret, insensible, and undiscernable dislike of his own
former pious, sober, and commendable courses. Such a man in time will begin to
shake off his former strictness, of piety, and innocence of life and
conversation, and boldly say, I was but too straight laced before, I will now
have my youthful liberty, and I am sure that will bring me in more pleasure,
and contentment in an hour, than my other life did in a whole year. It may be
thou were a very civil, serious, and sober-minded man before thou came to
Sea, but since it has been thy hap to fall in amongst a pack of rude Sailors,
as a drop that falls out of the clouds into the Ocean, thou have become one of
them. The sweetest apples are soonest corrupted, and best natures are quickly
depraved: Sailor, Sailor live in all the ships thou go in as fish in the
Sea, who are both born, and bred in it, yet have no taste at all of the
salt-waters in them. Be sure thou live at Sea, as not to have any taste of a
stinking Sailor in thee, and take up none of their stinking, rotten, and
unsavory speeches, and phrases, And as thou wentest on shipboard well
educated, so come out again without any tang or smell of their ill-bredness.

2. He that has not a care of himself herein, it is no wonder though there
slily insinuates into that man's heart a pleasing approbation, and delightful
assenting, and consenting unto the sinful practices, sensual courses, and
wanton pleasures and dalliances of such men. God knows, many young men are
utterly undone, and led away into much soul-damning evil by keeping company,
and following the counsel of rotten companions. Laus tribuenda Murenae, non
quod Asiam viderat, sed quod in Asia, continentur vixerat. That man is to be
commended that can live godlily on shipboard, and wisely turn away his back
from all soul-poysoning discourse. He that will not, and cannot do thus, let
him go to Sea white, and he shall come out of it black, let him, go on
shipboard a Saint, and by payday he shall come out (again) a Devil.

3. He that will not take this course, will in time find a resolved, a
fortified, and an habitual change in his affections and conversation. Bad
society will usher in a transformation both of the mind, manners, and
conditions of them with whom they do converse. Oh the many youngmen that are
slain by these filthy Sailors that use the Seas: Joseph living in Pharaoh's
Court learned to swear, and Peter in the Highpriests hall to curse. And thus
learn our young Seamen of the old in the ships they go in.

4. He that will not thus do, he shall be sure ere long to find growing in and
upon his heart, Rubiginosus coins etiam candido suam affricuit rubiginem. A
rusty companion says Seneca, rubs some of his rust upon a man of fair
conditions, and none of his candor stickson him.

A good man on shipboard, is like Joseph in Poriphar's house, liable to many
temptations if he have not the grace and the courage to turn his back upon
them. ( Decorus facie sed pulchrior mente: Corporis formam oculi herae
contemplabantur, sed ad castum cor non penetrabant, etc. Gregory. Joseph, said
one of the Ancients, was a servant in Potiphar's house, the beauty of his face
his Mistress saw, but the beauty of his grace which surpassed his external
beauty she could not see. Young men when they come to Sea, if they have not a
care of themselves they will soon be spoiled. You are too much like (would God
you were less) to Aristotle's smooth table, unto which he compares the mind of
man, which is varnished with pictures, and is fit and apt to have any thing in
the world either delineated, or adumbrated upon it, either the deformed Idol of
ugly vice, or the glorious image of celestial virtue.


an ill affectedness, and disconceitedness, both toward good people, and all
godly and religious exercises. Such foul mouths as you make your bosom
familiars, are great enemies unto God, they are as it were in open defiance
against God, and heaven, and daily throw out their rotten contempts upon the
word, and religion, which pulls back many a hopeful young man. If thou would
hold thy integrity, and well-disposedness unto the best things whilst thou art
on board with Sailors, live then as Jacob did in Laban's family. Dives erat in
virtutibus etiamsi serviret Labano, illarum tamen decorem and claritudinem non
amiserat ut ignobilem servorum conditionem incurreret. Ambros. Epist. 4. He
lost not the luster of his graces in it, neither did he fall into the ignoble
condition of a servant so far as to soil himself with his Masters sins, for
though Laban worshipped Idols, yet Jacob served his God. If some Seamen will
serve the Devil, serve you the living God, and let them and the Devil go
together if they will.

5. Put the case that they be civil men, and such who profess in form, but are
ignorant of the great mysteries of godliness, unseasoned with the power of
Sanctification, and unaccustomed to the ways of sincerity, companying with
such will but eat out all the goodness that is in thy soul. These plausible
companions do a world of hurt to those that give very promising hopes of a
maturer growth and progress in Religion. Socrates was wont to say of
Alcibiades, that he was a Parragon both of body, beauty, and mind, but when
he saw him amongst wanton gallants, I fear not thee but thy company. The
Application is fair enough in view. Such kind of consorts as these, are like to
Flanders pieces, of whom it is said, that they are fairer further off than near
at hand. Shake off these men, or else thou will in the end find a defection in
thy zeal, and forwardness in thy servings of God, and also thy graces both to
be worsned, and impaired by them.

6. If thou do not, thou crackst thy Christian reputation, and favorable
esteem with all good men. Who will not but be ready to say upon the sight of
thy consorting with them, let him profess what he will, he is of their
humor, and of their conditions, It is a good Spanish Proverb, Tell me with
whom thou go, and I will tell thee what thou art. Let me but see a Captain
of a ship sending for this, and the other shandy fellow, day by day, to fuddle
it in their cabbins, I shall surely be able to comment upon the man, what he
is.
otherwise he could not be so boldly familiar with them. If thou would be
thought well of, either at Sea, or on Land, then stand upon thy Christian
reputation, and come not amongst the wicked, have little to do with them, and
if thou be in their company at any time, through the management of business,
get out of it again as quickly as thou can. For thou can not sit it with
them, and tongue it with them, but hazard Faith, and a good Conscience.

7. The wicked, and the godly are mere Antipodes whilst in this world, walking
one contrary to another, the wicked cannot cordially, and really love and
embrace the godly, because there is an absolute enmity, and antipathy betwixt
the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent, betwixt light, and
darkness, Christ and Belial. Holy David was a man after Gods own heart, and yet
he was disliked of by the Drunkard, Psalm. 69.4. They that hated David without
a cause were more than the very hairs of his head. If thou can not dispense
with the swallowing down of as much profaneness as the wicked can, they will
hate thee, therefore to what end should thou intrude thy self unwarrantably
into their companies. Melius est habere nautarum odium, quam consortium. It is
better to have the hatred of ten thousand graceless Sailors in the Sea, than
the society of one of them, unless he be godly. Seamen love the godly as
well as Hypemenestra was, of whom the Poet sings when she was cast into
prison, because she would not do as they would have her in the killing of her
husband, as her other Sisters had done.

Clausa domo teneor, gravibusque coercita vinclis, Est mihi supplicii causa
fuisse pium. Purum dignoscitur aurum saepe adulterino. What the Poet said of
the unequal yoke of Oxen, may I say of the godly and the wicked.

Quam male inaequales veniunt ad aratra juvenci?

Ovid. Ep. They cannot set their Horses together.


Ovid. Epist. Those that acknowledge themselves to be under the government of
Christ, they know full well that they are bound by the Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances of Heaven, upon their allegiance unto their Lord and Sovereign, to
maintain no intimate, or delightful converse with the wicked, which are
professed enemies unto God, and Christ, no, they dare not do it, therefore
blame them not when they look shily upon swearing Sailors, and care not for
coming amongst them. They have the sacred Word, and all the reason in the
world on their sides, and therefore let this stop every Bedlamite Sailors mouth.

1. They dare not come into wicked men's company for fear of the infection of
sin.

2. Out of a fear of an infliction of punishment.

He that would keep himself unspotted in the Sea, let him resemble the River
Alphaeus of Elis in Arcadia, Mocum est quicquid mihi nocere potest. I find
that in me (said Bernard) that is apt to take fire. How much more in Sailors,
Than shun profane men, as thou would shun the devil, orone that has the
plague running upon him.

I have often seen a parcel of ground, once a fair Garden of flowers over run
with stinking weeds; so good men turned bad by stinking company.

These Seamen are like Pharaohs seven ill favored kine, if they see but any
amongst them that have grace, and heavenly mindedness in them, yhey will be
sure to set their teeth in them. They desire to eat up the wel-favoured.


which runs through the Sea, but will not mingle with it. He that will not take
this counsel, and resolvedly begin to shake off all profane societies, he
shall never be able to live, or lead a godly life; this is the first step to
heaven, Sailor, and if thou have not this resolution in thee, let me tell thee
thus much, thy foot is in the way to hell. Now after this sweet word of
Advertisement, which I hope may prove profitable, if the Lord set but in with
it, let me tell you thus much, that it is a very hard thing to live
religiously at Sea, and therefore evermore look for these two things.

1. Wicked men will assault you, and make onsets and invasions to shake you out
of your profession, and to fetter you in the same looseness of life they live
in. Set your eyes upon these sons of Belial, and resist them with courage.
There be many thousands of godless Sailors, that be too like that bird Pliny
writes of, which Naturalists call the Vulture, that when she beholds her young
to thrive and feather, and wax lively and strong, that she will clap them, and
beat them with her wings till they look lean, and languish again. It is thus at
Sea, you will meet with the like cruelty amongst them, and find Seamen
discouraging of you in the good ways of holiness, but bear up courageously
against all the storms and oppositions of good that ever you shall meet withal
in the world.

2. Wicked men are so far from God, and his ways themselves, that instead of
taking delight in you for that good that is in you, you will find hatred from
them. It was a divine saying of Seneca, That no man did set a better rate upon
virtue, than he that loses a good name to keep a good conscience. In die
praelii, naufragii, tempestatis, mortis, plus valebat Conscientia pura, quam
Marsupia plena. Boldly say unto all the wicked ones in the Sea, as David said,
Psalm. 119.115. Depart from me, ye evil doers, If it were not for the godly
ones that be in the world, the Sun would not shine long upon you, the heavens
would fall upon the wicked, the earth would open her mouth to swallow them up,
and all the creatures of God would arm themselves against them, and yet these
are cruel haters of them by whom they are gainers.
for I will keep the Commandments of my God. Bestow thy affections upon the
godly whom thou shall live for ever with in the Kingdom of heaven, and not
upon those whom thou shall never see more in the world to come, and never be
the better for in this life, but an hundred times the worse.

There is yet a further word of Advertisement in my eye, and I would gladly
press it home upon all the Sailors in England, if that I did not behold these
things (which I am now going to speak of) amiss in them, I would not trouble my
self to take the pains in an uncomfortable Sea to write them down.

The first then is this, You ought to love and tender godly men in their names,
and when ever occasion is offered, you should willingly make report of that
good that is in them, and not throw dirt upon them, 3 John 12. Demetrius has
good report of all men, and of the truth it self, yea and we also bear record,
and ye know that our record is true. There is many a precious soul that is of
great worth, I would have men that are godly at Sea not to be daunted,
discouraged, or disheartened from well-doing, but to do as the Moon does, who
follows her continual course, task, and labor, though many Dogs and Curs bark
and leap at her, En peragit cursus surda Diana suos.
credit, repute, and account amongst the godly on land, that must not have a
good word, nor a good look from such wicked men as many of you are that go in
the Seas.

2. If you hear the godly that are, or have been amongst you falsely charged
with any thing, and evilly spoken of, you should stand up in their defense, and
be contented to hazard some part of your own credit to vindicate theirs, 1 Samuel 20.32. And Jonathan answered Saul his Father, and said unto him, wherefore
shall he be slain? what has he done?

3. Take heed of raising, and laying slanders upon the godly. Miriam did so by
Moses, I would have all the Captains in the Seas to do by their men when they
find them slandering good men, as Vespatian and Titus did to all the detractors
and slanderers they heard of, when ever any were taken that were guilty
thereof, they caused them to be whipped about the City, that others thereby might
be deterred from the like practices.
but consider Gods just judgment against her, Numb. 12.1, 9, 10. Miriam became
leprous as white as snow. Take heed, Sailors, of meddling with the godly that
shame you in this world by their innocence of life, and conversation, and will
rise up in judgment to condemn you in the life to come. You are prone to
fasten your fangs in the reputation of those that would scorn to be like you,
nay think every hour that the Devil would come and fetch them alive out of the
word, should they but be in that degree of wickedness that is to be found in
your hands. Most of our English Sailors are too like those we find to be
reproved in Scripture, Jer. 18.18. Come let us devise devices against him.
Psalm. 35.11. They laid to my charge things that I knew not of. They are kindred
to those that aspersed godly Mr. Luther, of whom their lying tongues, and
graceless hearts would needs say that he dyed despairingly, and that in his
grave there was a great stink of brimstone, and his body presently afterward
taken out of it, when as Mr. Luther was alive to confute it. They are like to
those that vilified precious Mr. Beza, slandering him with this lie, that he
run away with another man's wife. And brethren, to those that aspersed Mr.
Calvin, when they said, that he was branded on the shoulder for a Rogue. I
have met with a dreadful story in some readings, which I would present to every
Sailor in England, and if but well paused upon, I should think that it should
startle them in slandering of the godly. There was a vile wretch who had most
injuriously abused the godly Martyr James Abbes, and after all his base usage
of him he was shortly after taken with a strange fit of phrenzie, and cried
out, James Abbes is saved, and I am damned, James Abbes is saved, and I am
damned! There is many a precious soul whom you hate and speak evil on
shipboard that shall be saved, when thousands of you shall be damned. I am
damned may many a Saylor say, when such a good man whom I slandered, and spoke
evil of, is saved.

Sailors rail on many a good man as causelessly as dogs in the street upon
passengers, unto whom a good man might say, what have I done to this Dog, that
he follows me with this angry clamor? had I rated him, or shaken my staff at
him, or stooped down to have taken up a stone to have thrown at the head of
him, I had then justly drawn on this deformed noise; but what need I wonder to
see this unquiet disposition in a brute creature, I would have Sea-Captains to
follow Dominitian the Emperor, and then should they soon find few slanderers
in their ships, his stomach so riss against them, that he could not endure
them, but banished them out of the City, saying, That they which do not punish
slanderers, encourage them, Platina.
when it is no news with the reasonable. How is innocence, and merit bayed at
in the Sea by the quarrelsome and envious Sailor, without any just provocation
or grounds in the world, how do they show their tongues, their heels, their
teeth? but let them rail, so I serve but my God.

4. You should not lend your ears unto the reports that are made against good
and godly men, Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not raise a false report; put not thy
hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness, Prove. 11.13.

5. You ought not to blaze abroad the failings, and infirmities of the godly,
should you either hear or know of any, Prove. 11.13. A talebearer reveals
secrets: but he that is of a faithful spirit, concealeth the matter.

6. You ought not to amplify and aggravate men's failings as you do the most in
the Seas of all people under the whole heavens again, Act. 16.20. Una guttula
conscientiae malae totum mare mundani gaudii absorbet, One drop of an ill
conscience will swallow up a whole Sea of worldly joy and cheerfulness. Mr.
Perkins mentions a good man who being ready to starve, stole a Lamb, and being
about to eat it with his poor children (as his manner was before meat) and to
crave a blessing, durst not do it, but fell into a great fear, and perplexity
of spirit, acknowledging his fault to the owner, promising payment if ever he
should be able.
These men being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our City.

I have now nine things more in my eye, which I would present unto every
Captain, Master, Boatswain, Gunner, Carpenter, Purser, and Sailor, in any of
the States ships of England. And after I have lain them down in brief, I will
pass on in what I further intend.

1. Keep daily in thy bosom a good and quiet conscience, or otherwise it will
when thou come unto the trial, gnaw out all the roots of valor out of thine
heart. It is said of the Earl of Essex, that he was never fearful of fighting
any enemy in the field, but when his conscience charged him with guilt for some
sin or other.

I would have all the Sea-Captains, Masters, Boatswains, Gunners, Pursers,
Carpenters, and Seamen to prize a good conscience in one case, as Benevolus
did in another, who said when offered preferment by Justina the Arrian Empress,
if that he would but be an instrument of doing vile service for her: What
(says he) do you promise me an higher place for a reward of iniquity? nay,
take this away that I have already, with all my heart, so that I may keep a
good conscience, and thereupon threw at her feet his girdle, the ensign of his
honor, Acts and Mon.

2. Be careful in the avoiding and renouncing of all the sins which the
generality of Seamen are incident unto.

3. Evermore count the chief Magistrates, and Rulers lawful commands to be
sufficient warrant to engage and fight a foreign and Commonwealths adversary.

4. Esteem all hardships easy through hope of victory. Julius Caesar is a
worthy example for you Sailors, William the 2. of England going to imbark at
Sea the Master of the ship told him it was rough, and there was no passing
without eminent danger, Tush said he, set forward, I never yet heard of a King
that was drowned, therefore fear not the waves. This valor would well become
Sailors in all their pe^illous affairs.
of whom it is said, when forewarned of a Conspiracy, that was made against him
in the Senate, he boldly answered, Mallem mori se, quam timere: I had rather
dye, than admit of fear.

5. Look through your wages at Gods glory, and your Countries good.

6. Expose not your selves in a Bravado to needless, and incommodious peril.
King Richard the first of that name, who when the rest of the Princes and
Gallants that were traveling with him in the Holy land where they then warred,
were come to the foot of an hill from whence they might clearly view Jerusalem
the Holy City, (then possessed by Saraceus without all hopes of recovery) they
begun to put spurs to their horses every one in a youthful countenance saying,
that they would strive who should be the first at it, and have the maidenhead
of that goodly prospect; but the King more solid and serious than the rest,
pulled down his Beaver over his eyes, and told them, that he would not gratify
them with a vain pleasure of so sad a spectacle. God forbid said he, that I
should behold that City, or come so near unto it now, though I could, which
though I would, I know not how to rescue. The Application is clear enough.

7. There be three things that I would commend unto every Sea-Captain, Master,
Gunner, Boatswain, Purser, Carpenter, and Sailor in England.

1. To be holy at Sea.

2. Stout-hearted in a fight.

3. Sparingly merry when they come on shore,


Choose rather to dye ten thousand times, than once to stain your credits. The
Lion out of state, scorns to run whilst any looks upon him. I would not have
our Sailors to resemble that company of cowards whom I have read of, of whom
Comminaeus observes at that Battle that was fought at Montlehery, where some
lost their livings for running away, and they were given to them that ran ten
miles further. Should all Sea-Captains, and Sailors be thus served when
cowardice is to be found in their hands toward their enemies, they would be
well rewarded. Their Friggots should be lent unto those that would fight them.

8. And yet in some cases count it no discredit to yield when over matched, and
bore down with plain force, strength, and violence both of Ordinance and men.

9. Evermore count it murder ^t kill any in cold blood. I have me with a story
of one that murdered a man in Spain, and being supposed to be the man that did
the act, being convented before the Judge, he caused his bosom to be opened,
and his heart who had done the murder was found to palpitate, and tremble far
more than any of the rest whose bosoms were opened in the very same manner that
his was. You will find as little peace in so doing as he did, Ah That I should
be forced to say of Seamen, as it was once said of, and by many profane
wretches in Luther's time, when a religious Reformation began, some of the
worst of men professed that they had rather live under the government of the
Turk, than in those Countries where all things were ordered by the Word. The
Application is within any ones reach.
if you once make but the trial. But to proceed.

There be two great evils that I observe amongst Sailors in the Seas, and I
would desire them to decline them.

1. That they will, and are ready to place themselves in those ships they know
there is the least religion, and where God has the least service, and also
where there is not strict and severe command. Here licentious and Godless men
love to be. Oh what work is there amongst the Sailors to be cleared out of
this and the other ship when the Commander is a little strict, and severe with
them, in beating down their swearing, and their drunkenness! Sailor, Sailor,
Thou would Hagar-like leave a good family, and fall into a worse. But the
Angel of the Lord bid her return.

2. Many Sea-mens designs are to be where wickedness may pass free. Those
ships, and Commands under which they can have their liberties to rant, swear,
and be drunk in, are the best Taverns they can put their heads, and noses
into. Good, and religious command in ships, is a burden to unruly Sailors.

There be four evil things also to be seen in most Captains carriages in the
Seas.

1. An heedlesness in keeping down disturbing passions. When rents, breaches,
and divisions are made in your ships, salve them up again, or else courageously
stamp them down. It was a brave saying of Caesar, that he could with one stamp
of his foot quell the mutiny of an Army. One Seaman is all fire, another all
water, so that there is but little heat for God; One is a wing, and another is
a weight, So that there be many hindrances amongst them to the worship of God,
and very poor flights for Heaven. When a Commander in a ship holds forth no
light amongst his men, of a good conversation, I may say to such an one, Matthew.
24.29. The Sun is darkened, the Moon does not give her light, and the Stars fall
from Heaven in our ships. The Sun shines, and the Moon appears in some
Commanders, but in other some not so much as a twinkling Star of any thing
that it good. When the Fore-horse in the traces will not draw forwards, but
runs this way, and that way, he wrongs all the rest. And thus does an
irreligious Commander in a ship at Sea.
When Bees are out of their hives in a disordered flight, then is the bell, or
brazen mortar alarmed and struck up to quell them again. Angry passions, and
quarrels amongst your Sailors will pull the whole ships companies, in pieces,
and set them together by the ears.

2. A neglecting of enkindling their Sea-mens affections unto that which is
good, and stirring of them up unto love, and unity. The want of which is one
strong reason, why Sailors are so unfit for Morning, and Evening Prayer as they
are every day. If there be a decay of love and unity in your ships, there will
be no encouraging of one another in any zeal for God. When a ship is full of
discord, it will be evermore empty of all religious acts.

3. A want of a Gospel Spirit in speaking often of God, and for God, amongst
their men. Captains and Seamen should be like the two Disciples of Christ,
that were going to Emaus, who talked, and conferred of all the things that had
happened them, and whilst they thus communed one with the other, in comes
Christ amongst them.

4. A want of a Praying Spirit, and a speaking often to God in Prayer with
their Seamen. If you have not Ministers along with you, you have fair
opportunities to call them unto that needful duty. Were your carriages good,
holy, solid, sound, and not so light, you might stamp that upon their spirits
that would not rub out again a good while. Every Commander should be a pair of
Oars in every ship he goes in. He should row, and labor till he sweat again
if it were possible, to land all his men in Heaven, against wind, and tide.
But, God knows where is the Sea-Captain that has his hand upon an Oar to save
his Sailors. I will tell you of enough that have their eyes, and their hands upon
their Salary.

Gentlemen and Friends, I will now leave you, all that I desire, or all the
harm I wish any of you is this, (if it can be termed any) even to fear God in
this life, and to amend what is amiss, that you may see the Lord to comfort,
and not to astonishment in the world to come. I will say unto you, as Socrates
said unto his Scholars, If I can but provoke you to learn, I have attained my
end, after he had followed them with elaborate instructions. If I can but do
the like with you in provoking, and persuading of you to walk in these good
counsels prescribed, I shall greatly rejoice in it. These things premised I
come unto the next thing in the words before me.

2. And that in order to their posture, going down, Two things would be
considered, and enquired into.

1. What is simply, and absolutely to be understood by going down into the
waters, or how that sailing may be said to be a going down.

2. What positively, as to their posture and ingenious order, and discipline in
their going down.

1. For their going down. Water (we know) has its natural course, and tendency
deorsum, and not sursum, downwards rather than upwards. How can it be forced
upwards that is contra naturam? When Solomon says, Eccles. 1.7. That all Rivers
go into the Sea, his meaning is, that they go down into a lower place than the
land is of, and not up to an higher. When the Psalmist says that the earth is
founded upon the Seas, It is the judgment of some, that the Sea is far higher
than the Land. And that a ship in the Chanel is as high as Paul's in London.

It is well known that they that live beyond the line in the West, and East
Indies, that they never see the North-Star in their lives, because they live so
far below the height of it.

Mount Chego that great Spanish Cranado, may be seen many leagues off in the
Sea, and yet in a little time may it soon be run out of sight. The Alps also
(those high Italian Mountains) and Mount Arrarat, may be seen fifty or an
hundred leagues out at Sea, say some which are far higher than the cloudy
Regions, yet soon run out of sight in a little time.


he means that the earth is placed above them, as it is made a fit, and
convenient place of habitation. And the Learned understand the Hebrew word Gnal
in such a sense as signifies above, and not below, in which sense the waters
that it sustaines does not hold it, but are holden by it. Neither is water so
heavy a body as earth is, yet heavy enough to descend, because it is of no
aspiring nature, but presses eagerly toward the same center, that a stone, or
any ponderous thing will do, and cannot therefore possibly be higher than the
earth (though in some natural considerations I will not deny but that it is,
and may) for, we have Scriptures speaking after this manner, Psalm. 104. Jer.
5.22. When God gathered the waters, he provided stations, and lodging places,
or receptacles for them, lest they should return, and cover the earth as they
did before, both at the Creation of the world, and also at that time of the
Deluge. And this appears by the Hebrew word Kavah, the signification of which
is to congregate, or gather together, from whence is that Latin derivative,
Cavus hollow. This is observable that the Mariners sailing beyond the Line, or
after they have passed some certain hundreds, or thousands of leagues beyond
England, that they run the North-Star, which is of such an admirable height
with us, clear out of sight, and under water. Now whether or no is this an
ascending, or a descending, let any one judge, and whether this be not a going
down yea or no? And so again, the more they run Northward, the more they
advance, and raise the Septentrional Pole, and decline the Austral. And so
again, the more they sail southward, the more they advance the Antartick, and
disadvance the Artick. Again, this is a very frequent and common thing, to see
two ships at some small distance (when the Seas are as smooth as a dye) and
nothing is there to be seen of them save the very top of their mastes, and if
by their neer-drawing, and advancing on one unto another, the topsails may be
seen, when the lower sails, and all the Hull seem as if below in the Sea. I
have laid down some of my thoughts about this word, They that go down, But
Interpreters say, that it is to be understood either from the Midland which
was an high, and hilly country, as that of Judea was, unto the Sea side wherein
the land is lower, or otherwise from the shore.

That whithersoever a man would go, he must be furnished with leave and power
from God to go thither, I am confident that one main reason why we have so many
ships castaway, either in the Septentrional, Oriental, Ausiral, or Occidental
parts of the world year by year, is, They never sought God in their goings out,
nor comings back. And therefore no wonder though they come to wrack.

Go not to Sea unless thou will ((...).) make God thy beginning, and ending, in
all thy Voyages.


Jam. 4.13, 14. Go too now, ye that say, to day or to morrow we will go into
such a City, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain,
Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow, etc. Come says many a
graceless wretch, I will go into Spain, and ere a while into Barbary, I will
have also one turn in the West Indies, and when that voyage is done, I will
into the East Indies. I will go to Greenland says one, and I will into Holland
says another, I will go to Norway says one, and I will into France and Portugal
says another, I will to the Berbado, says one, and I will into New England says
another. Many Sailors go hither, and go thither, but few of them to be found
asking God leave to go any whither. If I could find a man thus doing, I would
speak highly of him.

2. What positively, now as to the posture, and ingenious order and discipline,
in their going down,

1. That is usually as near as they can with company, and in Fleets, and herein
is no small wisdom, for according to the axiom, vis unita fortior est. If one
have two guns, and another four, one six, and another ten, when together they
are the stronger thereby to encounter their way-lying Pirates.

2. Their order is commendable and admirable, if that by day any one in the
Fleet discover an enemy, he is presently to make report thereof by firing of
Guns.

3. If any one in a Fleet of ships discover Land, Rocks, or Sands, he is to
make report thereof unto the rest by firing of Guns.

4. Every one is to do his utmost to keep company with the Fleet he sails in,
that they may not be separated, if possible, from each other, and if any in
the Fleet be heavy Sailors, and keep much on stern, the best Sailors either
shorten Sail for them, or take them in a Towe.

5. If foul weather come upon them in the night, every ship usually carries his
light, and the Admiral one upon his Poop, another upon the Maintop, and the
Fleet follows after him.

6. If that stormy weather force them to Try, or Hull, the Admiral puts out his
two lights, and the rest one.

7. If the Admiral tack in the night, when tacking, he usually hangs out his
two lights in the Mizzon shrouds of equal height, and every ship answers him
with one.

8. If in case any in a Fleet spring a leak by day, or any disaster befall any
of them by night, whereby they are dis-inabled from the performing of their
voyage, It is then with the Mariners for one that is in this distress as it is
with Bees, and Sheep, of whom it has been said, agrotante una, lamentantur
omnes, If one be sick, all the rest will fall a mourning. It is with the
Mariners one for another, as it is with, and amongst Sheep, as Naturalists say,
If one of them be faint, the rest of the flock will stand betwixt it, and the
Sun, till it be recovered. So one ship by another when leaky, if weather will
permit.

As Kine which feed on honysuccles and other sweet flowers in the Spring, which
are not known nor seen by the owners of the Cattle. Altamen occultum referunt
in lacte Saporem. Virg. Georg. 4. So though no eye can behold the Merchant in a
foreign Nation what he trades in, yet the benefit of his going out is evermore
found at his return.


such ship, or ships, is to make report thereof by firing of Guns, and if in
the night, by hanging out of lights, and firing of Guns.

9. If that the Admiral in a Fleet be minded, and resolve to anchor in the
night, he makes sign thereof by hanging out (perhaps) his two lights in the
Mizzen shrouds one above another, and when anchors, fires a piece of Ordinance,
and all the rest of the Fleet come to an anchor.

3. Their business, or occasions, and those has respect unto two things.

1. Merchandising. 2. Warring, and Fighting.
1. Merchandising. The Merchantmans employment lies wholly in traffiking from
Country to Country, buying and selling, and selling and buying, according to
that in the Poet, Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad Indos. He goes down into
the Sea to bring into the Land those costly Silks, Spices, Wines, Sugars,
Stuffs, and Fruits, etc. which are in other parts very plentifully to be had.
And by these wealthy, and vendible commodities is both the City of London, and
the whole Nation besides, both marvellously benefited and enriched. What our
Nation is destitute of, it is fetched into it out of other Countries (that
affords it) by shipping. So that England wants not for those scattered
varieties that have their growth, and being in other climates, but has a full,
and sufficient supply of every thing. Now the Merchants business is various, in
respect that it lies sometimes here, and sometimes there; sometimes in the
Eastern parts of the world, and sometimes in the Western; sometimes in the
Southern, and other some times again in the Northern. Its an Italian Proverb
that the world is theirs that are bold, Paradise theirs that are devour, and
Learning, theirs that will but study for it. The application is fair enough in
view.
Sometimes for one commodity, and other some times for another, by which rare
calling and employment he does Angliam valde locupletari. He goes into
Countries (Omnia copiarum genere abundantes) that flow with all manner of
varieties. The Merchant-ships are continually going and coming, and coming, and
going into England, and out of England, into the remote parts of the world, as
Bees out of an Hive in Summer time. Vt in prat is ubique apes serena floribus
infidunt variis. As in Summer time every eye may behold the laborious Be one
while in the field, and another while in the garden, one while bringing home,
and another while flying out for honey; so do our ships take flight upon their
Canvass wings, and bring home the riches, and the wealth that is in other parts.

These are they that are like to Zebulun, the Mariners Tribe, who dwelt at the
Haven of the Sea, Josh. 33.19. and sucked of the abundance of the Seas. They
that go too and again in the Sea, may see in one part twenty sail, in another
forty, in one fifty, and in another sixty, or an hundred, going this way, and
that way, Eastward, Westward, Northward and Southward, Sicuti apes omnes
circumvolitantes, and quod est utile domum adducunt. As Bees light on every
flower, so some or other of the Merchants ships upon every Nation, and that
which is profitable, and beneficial they bring with them into the Land.

That the worlds wealth is not to be gotten without great pains and diligence,
whether at Sea, or Land. That do business in the great waters. Many a perilous,
and rocking storm does the Merchant-ship go through before she either gets to
her journies end, into a foreign part, or from thence unto her home again. What
one said when he stood admiring what pains Gentlemen take in hunting of the
Hare, the same I may say of the Merchant in his hunting out of foreign
Countries. Tanto labor, pro uno lepore homines valde torqueri video, quos
montes ascendunt, quas paludes transibunt, quas vepres, sentesque sine sensu
percurrunt, modo unum lepusculum Capiant. What mountains does the Hunter climb,
what waters runs he through, and hedges breaks he over? with what toil and
sweat does he follow after the Hare? Even the like pains takes the Merchant in
climbing over the great mountains in the stormy Seas. There is scarce any wind
that blows, but some ships are both going out, and coming in or out one harbor
or other in England. But,

2. Warring and fighting. I would have our Sailors when they fight an enemy to
strive as much for the wind as the Heron does her endeavor to be above the
Falcon, that she may wet his wings with her excrements to that end he may fly
both heavily, and also that his purpose may be made ineffectual.
Having now spoke something of Merchandising business, it follows that I should
descant a little upon that warring and fighting work and business that we have
now in this age to do. Shipping business then lies not altogether in trading,
but sometimes in fighting and warring upon the Seas, when there be breaches
and fallings out betwixt State and State. And when the quarrel is once begun
betwixt two Nations, there is great care taken on both sides who should run
down one another by the board first. So that if there were not a careful
employing of warlike Fleets both at home and abroad,

1 For securing of Merchant-trade.

And 2. For guarding of the Nation,

Englands enemies are so many, that they would soon put down the Merchandising
of it. Ships might either stay in their harbors, or otherwise if they went out
to Sea without men of War they would come short of their homes. How quickly
would our cruel, and bloody-minded enemies clip their Canvass wings from ever
coming into our English Ports again? Nay they would not stick to come and visit
us with great and dreadful Armadoes, threatening to land, and break in upon us.
Besides, we have a cunning and subtle enemy to deal withal, which plays us as
notable pranks as the Fowler does the birds with his Larking-day-net which he
spreads out in fair mornings, and himself whirling about with his artificial
motions, thereby not only the merry Lark, and fearful Pidgeon are dazzled and
drawn into it out of admiration, Let me say thus much unto the Hollander, which
Archidamus once said unto the Aeolians when he saw them intending to aid the
Argives against him. He writ a letter unto them, the substance of which was in
this, Quietness is far better. Take heed of aiding the Spaniard.
but stouter birds of prey, the swift Merlin, and towering Hobbie are sometimes
enticed to stoop unto it, which proves the loss of their lives. Our Merchants
that are small birds are not only snapt, and taken by the enemy now and then,
but sometimes our fighting birds that are for prey.

The Commonwealth of England has many small birds of prey which she sends out
of England to fly up and down in the Seas to ruin the enemy, and protect the
Merchant, which sometimes are caught themselves, viz. Falcon, Hawk, Merlin,
Drake, Dove, Raven, Parrat, etc. What the Thistle in the Scottish coin once said
when feigned to speak, I will say of England unto the whole world, Ne^ impunc
laceseit, If any man meddle with me, he had as good hold off his hands.
The poor Parrat very lately for want of good wings was taken by an Ostend
Falcon. And I wish the other little birds either to fight hard in an encounter
with them, or else to run betimes, lest they come to the same sauce the Parrat
met withal. Is not the Turk a great enemy unto us? And is it not their faith
that he that kills a Christian shall the sooner go to heaven for it? Unto the
murdering of us would they go with as great alacrity as unto some play or
sport. And what is the French, though we have a National peace with them, they
are no great friends to us, neither is there any great confidence to be
imposed in them, or any of those that are of a Papal spirit. And what is the
Hollander, Is he not an Ambidexter? and one that plays a game with every
Nation, which they call, (...), Holds with the Hare, and runs with the Hound.
We have many Nations to deal with all, and the Seas lie round about England,
and is no other, but an Island, ships may come on every hand and side of her.
All our Historians, Chronologers, and universal Maps tell us that England is
(as it were) thrust out of the world, separated, and at a great distance from
it, and the greater Continents, and so stands but at the outside of it. Toto
divises or be Britannos. Is there not then great need of looking to our selves?
What the Oracle told the Cirrheans (I may take upon me to tell old England)
Diesque belli gerendum, they could not be secure, I will further say of
England what one says of a strange kind of stone called a Pyrrhites, which
Teneri se vehementius non permittit, ac si quando arctiore manu premitusque
digitos adurit. If any Nation handle England roughly, it will burn their
fingers.

Had France and England been in one Continent, that there had been no Sea
betwixt us, and them, we had had our throats cut ere this day by that Papal
crew that is amongst them and other Nations.


unless they waged war night and day. Our warlike ships (under God) are
Englands walls. Keep up your wooden walls, and you will amaze the world. If
great and dreadful Fleets were not kept out at Sea, our Nation might expect
that of the Orator, for ought I know. Fractam laboribus juventutem, seget es
proculcatas, abacta pecora, incensos vicos, desertos agros, oppugnatas urbes,
eversa maenia, compilatas domos, dissipatos liberos, direpta phana, tot senes
orbos, tot liberos Orphanos, tot matronas viduas, tot virgins violatas,
corruptos mores, luctus, lachrymas, funera, arts praeterea extinctas,
oppressas leges, contemptam Religionem, confusa humana, divinaque omnia.
Frustra nostrorum codices, frustra servantur aditus, Oraeque maritimae: frustra
domus, arcae, scrinia, capsulae, minimam etiam nostram Rempub. jucundam, and
amaenam cito depecularentur.

Gentlemen, in short, you might expect to have your Towns, Cities, and Houses
that you live in to be fired about your ears, such is the enmity of your
Christian adversaries. Nay would they not Omnia flamma, ac ferro delere long,
lateque vastare? And will not all this stir up your spirits to wage war against
them? what the Roman Orator said elegantly of their annoying enemy Carthage, I
will invert, and use as an argument against Spain, Qui sunt, Qui faedera saepe
ruperunt? Hispanienses: When there are true, and determinative tidings of
wageing war with Holland, Spain, or any other foreign Nation that does or may
hereafter oppose us, I would then have all the Sailors and Sea-Captaines in
England to be of a sparkling, and martial spirit. When it was told the house
of David saying, Syria is consederate with Ephraim: his heart was moved, and
the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind, Isa.
7.2.
Qui sunt, qui crudele bellum in Remp. Angliae gesserunt? Hispanienses: Qui
sunt, Qui Angliam deformaverunt? Hispanienses: Qui sunt, qui sibi postulant
ignosci? Hispanienses: videte ergo quid conveniat eos impetrare! Quid hoc
turpius? Quid hoc faedius? Quid hoc nequius? That I may stir up the spirits of
our Nation, and of the brave fighting Soldiery, and Seamen in it, Pray
consider who they are that have waged cruel wars against England, and have made
many assaults, and invasions to have dispossessed us of the Land, was it not
the Spaniard? Pray consider who they are, (that are) and have been so
perfidious a people both to us, and unto all other Nations round about them, Is
it not the Spaniard? Pray consider who it was that has been the occasion of
that expense, and effusion of blood that has been lost in England, and also in
foreign parts of the world, was it not the Spaniard? Who was it that would have
overrun all England with Popery, was it not the Spaniard? Who is it that
upholds the Pope at Rome, is it not the Spaniard? Who is it that upholds that
unjust and cursed Inquisition, which cuts off men for calling their Religion
into question, and debate, is it not the Spaniard? Who is it that will not
suffer England to drive a free trade as well as themselves in the West Indies,
is it not the Spaniard? Who has it been that has caused so many thousand of
harmless, and innocent Christians to be burned like faggots at their greedy,
and unsatiable pleasures, was it not the Spaniard, and the rest of that Papal
crew? Who is it that opposes England with such a concurrent and united fury, is
it not the Spaniard? Who is it that are as blood-thirsty as ever Mahomet was,
who in his time was the death of 80000 men, is it not the Spaniard? Pray
consider who it is that are as blood-thirsty as ever that goring Bull of Rome
was, who has for many years bore the bell for insatiableness in blood-sucking,
and has been long since drunk with the blood of the Saints, as with new wine,
and in his drunken, and bestiall humor has furiously spilt it, and poured it
out upon the face of Christendom, and much of it in our remembrance, is it not
the Spaniard? Pray consider who it is that are as avarous to have their hands
imbrewed in English blood, as ever Farnesius was, when at his departing out of
Italy he wished he might see his horse swim in the blood of the Lutherans, is
it not the Spaniard? Who is it that could wish all the Towns, Cities, and
Houses in England to swim as deep in blood, even as the streets and pavements n
Paris have done in the late civil wars of France, when at one time they cut off
1200000 Protestants, is it not the Spaniard? Qui sunt, qui ardoribus tantis
sicut Aetna and Vesuvius aestuant? Hispanienses: Qui sunt, qui Crabrones,
Cynomyae, Viperae, and Cantharides Angliae? Hispanienses: Qui sunt, qui vivas,
and aternas venulas aquae reliquerunt? Hispanienses: Pray consider who it is
that sends the Jesuit into England, which does us so much hurt in these days,
is it not the Spaniard? Pray look about you (if you have fighting spirits in
your bosoms) do you think it fit or meet that they should do thus with us? I
would it lay in my power to play England such a fit of warlike music as
Alexander's Harper once did the Emperor (when feasting with his Nobles, and
chief Commanders, the music was an embattailying alarm and assault, at the
sound of which he had no power to sit at the table and banqueting cheer any
longer, but betook himself to his armor, his spirits were so revived) then
would I make all the able Inhabitants in it to dress themselves in armor to
fight against the Pope and Spaniard. Hark! Hark! how the trumpet sounds to war!
When Caesar the Roman Emperor was privately murdered, one of the Nobility
took up his bloody clothes, and showed them to his Subjects, that he might
stir up their spirits unto a detestation, and revenge of so cruel and barbarous
a murder. What a many of English has the Spaniard massacred in the Indies, and
in other parts, and corners of the world? and shall all this my friends be
forgotten now? After Socrates was put to death at Athens, Aristophanes
rehearsed the Tragaedy concerning Palamedes, (who had been executed by the
Graecians long before at the siege of Troy) in which was these verses.

(...).

Ye have slain of Greeks the very best,
(Ay me) that never any did infest.
The people hearing of these lines, were so moved, that they presently fell
upon the authors of Socrates's death, and drew them out to punishment. And will
not you do thus Sailors, by the Spaniard, who has killed so many of your
calling?


He made a great cry in the ears of the people. Ecce! Ecce! vestimenta
Caesaris sanguinolenta! Here is the bloody clothes of your Emperor. In the
like manner give me leave to cry, Ecce! Ecce Christianorum vestimenta
sanguinolenta! Look, Look upon the bloody clothes of Christians. How many have
they murdered in this, and in that part of the world? Can you read the sad
stories and not be moved thereat? Can you endure to hear of those bloody
Massacres made by the Spaniard? P. Clodii mortem aequo animo nemo far potest,
luget Senatus, maeret equester ordo, tota civitas confecta senio est: Squalent
municipia, afflictantur coloniae: agri denique ipsi tam beneficum, tam
salutarem, tam mansuetum civem desiderant. The Spaniard defends his old rotten
Religion, not so much by argument, as by sword, blood, fire, and powder.

Dumque ego pugnando superem, tu vince loquendo, Ovid. Met. lib. 13. is the
Bloody practice of the Spaniard. This did all the Heathens, they evermore
disputed against the Christians with fire, and sword. When they were about to
disprove the Resurrection, they would keep the Christians and themselves from
being buried. And other sometimes they would set on dogs, and wild beasts to
tear their bodies in pieces, and other sometimes burn their bodies into ashes,
and then cast them into Rhodanus. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 10. I prof^ (...) I
either Hecatonchiron'd or Hecatompedon'd (hundred-handed, or hundred footed) as
Briareus was. I would set them all on work to pull to pieces both the Spaniard
and the Pope.

Give me leave to tell our English Seamen, that it would be a great shame
unto them now since our Spanish war is on foot, that they should be spoke unto
as Menelaus, in the Poet, said unto the Graecians, when fearful to undertake a
single combat with Hector (...)? What Grecian Soldiers turned to cowardice?
So, what, English Sailors, no stomach now to fight the Spaniard? What credit,
what repute, what report have you gained in the late wars with the Hollander?
Hold your ground still, and take these as Arguments to sharpen your spirits in
warring to the Seas, till you have brought down the Spanish Monarchy, and that
Italian beast at Rome.


Do not you hear them saying in Spain of the good people in England, Psalm.
74.9. Let us make havoc of them, and burn up all the houses of God in the land.

But now, in waging of war (lest I should be misunderstood) there are evermore
two things to be propounded in the wagers of it.

1. A just cause. 2. A right intention.
1. A just cause. This is primarily requisite, lest there should be a falling
under the lashing, and bitter reproof that is recorded with detestation in the
Book of Psalms. They persecuted me without a cause. The cause ought to be
just betwixt Nation and Nation, neither is every light, and small trivial
injury a just cause of war; because war is a thing that punishes men, with the
greatest, and grievousest punishments that can be. And besides, war is not to
be undertaken but upon some injury, which is both great, and heinous, either
in it self or consequences. And again, great and heinous injuries do not
warrant war, unless it be after the trial and use of all the lawful means
that can be for peace, Deuteronomy. 20. Judge. 20.11.

2. A right intention. The intention in the first place should drive, and aim
at the glory of God, and in the next, at the justice of war. War is not to be
waged out of passion, and hatred, but out of zeal for justice, that war may
always tend to a fit peace, and tranquillity, as to its proper end and center.

As for the instruments of war now that are to carry it on, when once it is
begun, I conceive that they are of two sorts.

1. Some very good and godly. 2. Othersome very bad and wicked.
This cannot well be helped in Seawars (in land-wars there is oftentimes
better redress of things) for men eminently godly, and well qualified are not
to be found to make Armies and Armado's of. And again, I think it is not
unlawful that the worst of men, (yea the very scum and filth of the world) are
employed. I find in Scripture, Genesis 14. that Abraham had some of the forces of
the King of Sodom joining with him, which were no other than an unclean and
stinking crew of men. Yet wicked, profane, and deboyst men they ought to be
carefully avoided, and ejected out of Navies, Ships, Armies, Troops, and
Regiments, because they both bring great scandal upon a Nation, and upon their
Generals, and Commanders; and that is not only all neither, but hereby, where
such are either at Sea, or Land, there may the sooner be a looking for a curse
than a blessing in all their undertakings. And again, a war that is undertaken
upon just and good grounds, It is not unlawful to use the help of those who
fight out of a bad intention, either out of hatred, violence, ambition, honor,
or desire of plunder; for their bad intention does not violate the
righteousness of the cause. Is there not many Sea-Captains that fight for
nothing in the world but their 10 pound and 15 pound per month? I may say of
Sailors what one said of Law, Logic, and Switsers, They may be hired to fight
for any one. Sea man, Seaman, get better principle.
And is there not thousands of Seamen that fight for their 18. shillings per
month? Nay, may I not say, that they would fight for the Devil would he but
give them better wages than the States do? How many thousands be there of them
that are now fighting day by day (in one part or other of the world) and they
know not what they fight for, save only this, Sail ship, and come pay-day.
They look not upon the glory of God, nor the cause that is in hand, against the
proud opposers of Christ and his glorious and everlasting Gospel. And now I
will not deny but that these will serve to go on in the wars to do Christ's
work in the world withal, though he hurl the rod into the fire after all is
done. It is well known in all Histories, that the trash and trumpery of the
world have evermore gone in the wars, and indeed they are the fittest men to
lose their lives for the godly, and well-minded people in the world cannot well
be spared, and should they be slain, the world would sustain great loss in
their deaths.

But now what shall I say of all the wars that are on foot in the world,
whether in the North, or in the East, in the South, or in the West? May I not
say, that sin has made a man a very hurtful, and harmful creature; man is not
now become hurtful to beasts, and beasts to man, but one man unto another, and
one Nation with, and to another. And this has been so of old, and is no new
thing still, but likely to be so, as long as there is so much of the first
Adam in the world, both acting and ruling in the sons of men; as long as Pride
shall be seen exalted above the grace of Humility, Covetousness above
Contentedness, Lust above Chastity, and Enmity above Love and Charity, never
look for better in the world. Man till sinful was never thus hurtful. Before
he sinned was he not naked, and neither feared nor offered wrong, and will
not his sinless estate ever be known by the state of innocence? When that lost
Image of God comes once to be recovered again in all men generally, and when
the Kingdoms of the Earth shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord Jesus Christ,
then shall there be peace, and quietness in the Earth, that one may walk up
and down in the world at pleasure, but not till then. When mankind shall become
a lamb, then will it be a glorious age, and never till then. It is observed,
that all other creatures save the lamb are armed by natures providence, but the
lamb is sent into the world naked and un-armed, comes into it with neither
offensive nor defensive weapons. When mankind comes once to receive the
glorious Image of the Lord, then will there be no longer this fighting, and
contentious principle that is in the hearts of most men, but they will be as
meek and harmeless as the Dove, who in the Greek is called ((...), Sine
cornibus, non feriens cornibus.) An hornless creature, Phil. 2.15. But now Dii
boni, what indignities, what affronts, what pushing with the ten horns, and
with the little horn spoken of in Scripture? When that you see once the Lions,
Bears, ravening Wolves, and Tigers of the world to be turned into Lambs, and
their wolvish, and Lion-like natures changed and metamorphosed into a Dove-like
meekness, then may it be said that there is then new Heavens, and new Earth,
and in the interim never look for a cessation of war in the world, till there
be some great Gospel-work wrought in the Earth.

But fourthly, That which now follows in order, is, the consideration of this
word, Great waters. The Spirit of the Lord here takes great delight to put this
distinguishing accent upon them, and indeed it is a very famous and glorious
title that God is pleased to set upon their heads, Great waters: calling them
great in opposition to small Rivulets which the eyes of Inland dwellers are
upon. It is a well known axiom in Philosophy, Set but contraries in the
presence of each other, Opposita juxta se posita magis elucescunt.
and the difference is quickly made. Therefore in our speaking of the Great
waters, pray what are the Aquae Stagnantes in a Land? and what are the
Fontaneae Scaturigines, sive Torrentes, sive Fluvii maximi? What are the great
Rivers, or the standing pools, and running torrents of a Land in comparison to
the great and wide Ocean? As vast a disproportion, and dissimilitude is there
betwixt them, as there is betwixt the shining Sun, and a twinkling star, or
betwixt the massy Elephant, and the little bodied Mouse. The Spirit of the Lord
titles them Great waters, and to speak ( re vera, Legere and non intelligere,
est negligere.
in re tamen seria) really, they are so, as I shall by and by declare upon
several accounts. They who have never seen the Seas, nor ever sailed in them,
and upon them, they cannot credit their magnitude, latitude, and longitude, and
when they read over that 1 Chap. Genesis 9. (where God said, Let the waters under
the Heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear:
and it was so.) it is but transiently, inconsiderately, and at the best
unponderingly, for there is but few that mind, or apprehend what they read.
Why, These are waters indeed in respect they are little less in spatiousness
(nay if not greater) than the whole Earth, join all the small, Ex pede
Hereulem, (we say) The skilful Geometrician finding the length of Hercules
foot upon the hill Olympus, made the portracture of his whole body by it. You
may judge of the Seas though you never saw them.
and great Islands and Continents that be either in the East and West, North
and South together, they are not so vast and large as the Seas be. Now I know
that many are very prone to deem this assertion as a thing not credible,
because of the weakness of their judgments; but that I may bring those into a
belief of it that may call what is laid down here into question, I will tell
them what they shall do to put the thing out of all doubt and controversy,
even take shipping, and make trial of it. Let the waters, says God, be
gathered together, and at his word they fled, and tarried not for another word
of command, but away they ran roaring and raging off the Land which they held
in their possession, till God gave them Commission to give it up to mankind,
and the creatures the Lord intended to live in it, which were choyser
inhabitants, and so ever since that word of Command they have continued in
those Caves, Pits, Depths, Cells, and bottomless receptacles, which God out of
wisdom dug and delved for them, Psalm. 104.9. Thou have set a bound that
they may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the earth.

2. And that in order, it will appear that they may well be called great, What
Writers say of the Jasper, may better be said of the Seas, that its easier to
admire them than to declare them.
in, and upon a fourfold account: 1. For Latitude, 2. Longitude, 3. Profundity,
4. Potency.


1. Respectus latitudinis. Every string in David's Harp warbles out the immense
latitude of the Seas. In Psalm. 104.25, 26. You may behold David as one amazed
at the beholding of the great works of God in the deeps. So is this great and
wide Sea, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts.
There go the ships, there is that Leviathan, whom thou have made to play
therein. They are called in this Psalm, both great and wide. What Policritus
writes of a certain water in Sicily, the same will I write upon the Superficies
of the Seas, Quam si quis irgrediatur in latum extenditur, into which the
deeper a man wades, the larger it does extend in self, and the further he goes
into it, the further he may. Some call it into question and debate whether the
Sea or the Land be greater, and the controversy cannot well be decided. By the
Maps of the world it is told us that some of the Southern parts in the world
are not yet known and discovered, which they title at this day by the name of
Terra Australis nondum cognita, and whether it be Sea, or whether it be Land,
it is not yet known.
These are two words if but well considered, which comprehend such vast
dimensions as is not easily demonstrable, by reason of that roomy and spacious
magnitude that they are of. Some we call the narrow Seas, because Lands and
Countries are not far distant from each other. In the Straights the Sea carries
the name of Mediterranean, because it parts Europe and Africa, which are but a
very small run betwixt each other. But after one is out of the Straights-mouth
(or the Mediterranean) they may in sailing Westward, travel long enough ere
they see any land again. And after that ships get out of our narrow Seas in
England (here) they may sail many hundreds of Leagues ere they come within the
sight of land again. The Seas that are betwixt England and France, is but a
very narrow cut and (also betwixt it and Holland, and betwixt England and
Denmark, Norway, Jutland, and Zealand, etc.) in comparison what other Seas be
both Westward Southward, and Northward. Some to prove that the Earth is far
greater than the Sea, alledg that in Esd. 6.42. that God gathered the waters
from off the seventh part of the earth, and dried up the six other parts; and
if this Scripture were Canonical, and of authority in the Church of God, we
might believe it. But it is not my judgment to think that the Land is greater
than the Seas.

2. Respect a longitudinis. What an unspeakable, and almost incredible way may
one sail directly end-wayes in the Seas, from the East into the West, and from
the North into the South? Of all visible latitudes indeed, the East and the
West are the largest. What a vast longitude is that which our shipping run when
they go out of the East into the West? the North star, and the Septentrional
spangles are run down into the Sea (out of their sight) long before they come
within sight of the Indies, and at their return back, when they come to such an
elevation, as once to behold the peepings of it forth out of the Sea (which
does ask them a long time sailing before they can bring themselves within the
sight of it) how cheerful are they in their spirits, of their advancings
England-ward? The Mariner makes many a look (in his solitary and nocturnal
Navigations) upon the heavens for the appearance of this Star; and when once
his eye beholds it, his first sight of it is as if it riss out of the water, or
as the rising of the Sun in a Winter or Summers morning which rises so low (to
outward appearance) as if it had its surrection out of the earth. After the
same manner does the North star to them which go far down into the Seas, as if
it riss out of the waters.

3. Respectu profunditatis. The salt waters are of such an unfadomable, and
intangible depth and abyss in many parts, that no bottom is to be found,
though one would tire themselves with Line and Lead to make the trial of it. I
have heard it told again, and again, by some of the civilest, and soberest of
Seamen, that they have known of the Duchess (who are very great and expert
Mariners) to have taken with them a small vessels loading of Line to sound the
Seas in some of the Southern parts, I have read of one that fell almost into an
irrecoverable swound at the sight of seeing one sounding of the Seas in the
ship he sailed in, beholding such an infinite length of Line run through his
hands, he looked like a dead man on it, when he apprehended what dangerous
depths he sailed over, and when he came to himself, he cried out, Mira
profunditas!
and though they have painfully rafled out all that great and mighty Clew,
consisting of many thousands of Fathoms, insomuch that they have been a whole
day in letting down of Line and Lead, and haling up, yet not touched the
bottom of it. What truth there may be in this report, I know not. But without
all controversy the Sea is of an unkennable depth. Some that are of the wisest
and prudentest of Seamen are of this judgment, that the Seas in some parts
are twenty, thirty, yea forty miles in depth from the very top upon which ships
swim unto the very bottom. Of such depth are the Seas after our ships get out
of the Channel Southward, that there is no anchoring for them, because the Seas
are far deeper than their Cables are in length.

4. Respectu potentiae. I will follow the Musicioners method in the handling of
this, for he that plays upon the Harp, strikes not upon one string, but upon
all, and that is it that makes the Music. The great waters then are of such
power, force, and strength when the winds lift them up into swelling Hills and
pyramidical Mountains, that they do no more value ships of a thousand or
sixteen hundred Tun, than the wind vallues a light and unballasted feather. The
sporting Student for recreation bandies not his Tennis-ball with more facility
from side to side, yea and sometimes over the Court-wall, than the Seas do both
the great and small ships that they carry upon their shoulders. It is true,
water is a very weak creature, The water in the Sea far exceeds the strength of
waters out of it, viz. in Rivers, Pools, Wells, and Ponds. It is observed of
ships in their coming up the River of Thames, that they will draw a foot or two
more water than they will do when in the Sea.
and of creatures one of the very weakest (if my judgment fail not) but when
and where there is much of it congregated into an Alpine mountain, and so
carried up on the wings of the wind in a rolling manner, it carries no small
terror in it. The rising of a Lion out of his sandy Den, or the appearance of
a Greenland Leviathan, looks not more grimly and ghastly upon one, than
merciless and rolling waves in time of stormy Seas. Many a one that is in the
stormy Seas would wish to be at a distance from those great rolling waves and
billows that threaten to run over their heads, ships, and yard arms; of such
force are the Seas, that let a ship be great, or small, strong, or weak, if it
be her hap to fall upon sands, or stick upon the bottom, they will knock her
all to pieces, If any one would read what terrible and dreadful Majesty there
is in God, let him go down into the Sea a while, and he shall see so much of
God in that clear water-looking glass, as might be sufficient to turn him from
sin to holiness, from the world unto heaven, and from the devil unto God, all
his days. What Jerome speaks of Asella, I may even say of my self after all
that I have said, Habebat silentium loquens, whilst she spoke, she was silent.
quicklier than if there were an hundred Carpenters set on work to do such a
thing.

The Seas did so by the ship the Apostle Paul was in, Act. 27. and they will,
and do so still, if they take ships but once stranded. The Eagle is a great
bird, yet is her virtue seen in a feather, because it will consume all other
feathers. As mighty as the fire of Aetna is, yet may one feel the beat of it in
one spark; as huge as the Sea is, one may taste of its saltness in a drop; and
as great as the Whale is, one may perceive his power at a distance. So the Sea
either in a little storm, or quiet calm, if but in it. And now what shall I
say? the more Painters when they have used strokes of gold to make the
brightest radiancy they can of the Sun, we see how weak and faint a shadow
they represent of its beams and light. So what I, or any other would undertake
to write of the Seas, it is nothing comparatively what they are in themselves.

That the Mariners employment in, and This text of Scripture which we are at
this time handling and speaking from, does naturally treat of Navigation, as
the vocation and occupation of some men, viz. Such as have business in the
great waters. And have not many men affairs and commerce betwixt Nation and
Nation, to manage and dispatch, which cannot any otherwise be either done or
performed but by this art? If it were not for this art, the creation could not
be traveled into, nor the eminent works of God discovered, nor the excellent
fruits and commodities of the earth that be in other parts of the world,
participated of. Now this vocation has been an ancient employment, and of very
long standing and continuance, it has been in use before Christ's time, and of
use in his time, and ever since Christ's coming into the world. Gods own people,
the Jews, were very great Merchants (and so are all the Jews generally unto
this day) the word Canaan signifies a Merchant, denoting, that they were not
ordinary, but of the greatest of Merchants.

And God has not prohibited, nor forbid men from coming upon the Seas, no more
than he did in those times. If that this calling had been unlawful and
unwarrantable, then Zebulun the Mariners Tribe would have been forbad it (Deuteronomy.
33.18. And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice Zebulun in thy going out, etc. verse.
19. For they shall such of the abundance of the Seas, and of treasures hid in
the same.) But it is so far from being forbid, that it is rather encouraged and
allowed of; and if it were lawful for Zebuluns Tribe, it is the same for
England, or any other Nation in matters of trading and commerce one with
another. Some have their callings, stations, and habitations on Land, some
again at Sea. Some are ingenious in one thing, and some again in another. All
men have not the like equality of gifts, parts, and graces that othersome have;
and certainly one main end is, that they be helpful to one another. Moses had
not the voluble tongue, therefore he was beholden to Aaron to be his
prolocutor. God sets men their bounds, and their work and task, whilst they are
in this world; some must go to Sea all their days, and other some not so much
as set their footupon the Salt waters.

But now for a little further confirmation of the Doctrine, were there no
Scripture to prove the lawfulness of the Mariners Calling, I would then demand
of any one,

1. To what end the Lord did cut out all those Harbors, Creeks, Channels, and
convenient places for ships to ride in in time of storms, and to go into, to
fraught themselves, both in this Nation of ours, and in all the other Nations
in the world?

2. To what end were the great Rivers cut out for, but to carry ships up to
Cities and Towns, viz. All the Seaport Towns, and Cities, whether in England,
France, Spain, Holland, Norway; and the rest of the Nations in the world.

3 To what end grows the great and tall Fir, of which is made masting and
yarding for all the ships that be, or shall be built in the world? These grow
in great plenty, both in Norway, New England, and diverse other parts in the
world. Now I would not be misunderstood, I do not deny, but that Fir is useful
in many other things: But I propound but this as a question, and so leave it
with you.

4. To what end were Pitch, Tar, and Iron in such abundance as is in many parts
of the world (though useful in, and about diverse things besides) if this art
were not lawful?

5. To what end is the use of the Loadstone discovered, It is a wellknown
axi^me Deus nihil frustra fecit, God never made any thing in vain, but for some
use or other.
and also the secret virtue that is betwixt the Loadstone, and the two Polar
points (the Artick, and the Antartick) which keeps the Mariners Card most firm
and stable in all his Navigations and courses that he steers and shapes, if
this art were not lawful?

I will give you now in a few particulars a Praelibamen or taste of those
various uses, and singular benefits that mankind (generally) has of, and by
the Seas.

1. All the Nations of the world have this benefit by the Seas; They yield them
an easy, quick and speedy passage or transportation to and fro, by which every
place or part in the world partakes of what one another enjoys. Hereby are
earthly blessings transmitted unto one another. Esau's earthly portion or
blessing was the fatness of the Earth, plenty of corn, wine, and oil, etc.
Genesis 27.39. and these good things that are in the world, some in one part and
some in another, are carried into those parts that are wanting and destitute of
them. Now speed is a great advantage in all businesses for quick dispatch of
things. What one says of the heavenly bodies, I may in one sense (as well) say
of the Art of Navigation, Heavenly bodies do convey their sweet influences non
qua calidae, sed qua velocis motus.

England, thou art happy that thou art an Island, and at a great distance from
the cruelty of the dark corners of the Earth.


And we know that all Nations are careful to keep up and maintain their
Stationary post (both in England, France, Spain, Italy, Turkey, Germany, and the
rest of them) to that end the Nations may be quickly informed in all secular
occurrences, or all assaults by the breaking in of foreign powers. And of the
same use are the Seas, upon which, and through which do our shipping, and the
shipping in all Nations fly upon their canvas wings, and are by good winds in a
little time carried unto the furthest ports in the world, and when fraughted
(if weather favor) as speedily returned.

2. They quell the rage of the hottest Element, and are very useful and
instrumental to keep sublunary mansions from being converted into cinders, and
ashes.

3. They part Nations from one another. If all the world were in one continent,
it is more than probable that sin which has brought in such an hurtful
Principle into the minds of men, that there would be nothing but a daily
killing, slaughtering, and murdering of one another. Now God might (if he had
pleased) have laid all the whole world in one continent, and not separated one
Nation from another as he has done. What intrudeing is there upon one another
borders? what fireing of Towns? what burning of Villages? what slaughtering at
their pleasure is there evermore amongst those that are in one Continent? and
would it not be thus every where were there not a Sea betwixt them, to part
them from pulling one another by the throat.
And he might have given commission to the great waters to have lain upon the
back of the world, and not in the heart of it as they do; but the Lords
unsearchable and incomprehensible Wisdom has contrived all things for the good
and convenience of mankind, blessed and ever blessed be his holy name: Does
not the great, infinite, and wonderful Wisdom of God appear in this, in that
he has divided, and taken the world, and broken it into many pieces, for one
people to live in one place, and another people in another of it? Look but into
some great continents in the world, where there be several Kings, Princes,
Dukes, and Emperors, and they are never at quiet, but in a perpetual
hostility, and enmity one against the other; witness France and Spain, the Turk
and the Persian, and diverse other parts in the world.

4. The ebbing and flowing of the Seas are of mavelous use and benefit unto
all the Haven-towns in all Nations whatsoever, whether East or West, North or
South, far or near; by this, ships come in with the flood, and go out with the
ebb, Genesis 41.13. Zebulun that dwelt at the Haven of the Sea, found the benefit
of the fluxes, and the re-fluxes of the Seas, by which their ships came in, and
by which they went out.

How useful is the flowing, What this ebbing and flowing of the Seas it, as to
the natural causes of it, none knows, the supernatural every one can tell. Some
fictitiously attribute it unto an Angel, whose office is (as it was in the Pool
of Bethesda) to move the waters to and fro.

Other some have these guesses at it, that there are certain subterranean or
under Sea-fires, that give the Seas their motion. One calls the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea, Arcanum naturae magnum, natures great secret. Contra
rationem nemo sobrius. Contra Scripturam nemo Christianus. Contra Ecclesiam
nemo pacificus. They that are wise may see both reason and Scripture in the
proof of the point.


and re-flowing of the Seas, both to London in the Thames, and Hull in Humber,
besides many other ports and places in this Land and Nation, where ships are
continually coming in and going out? Some attribute the flowings, and the
re-flowings of the Seas (which is a most wonderful thing) to the various
effects of the diverse appearances of the Moon, and this is not improbable not
unlikely; for experience teaches us that according to the courses of the Moon,
tides, they are both ordered, and altered, from whence we may positively
conclude, that the waters have their attraction from the Moon. And indeed it is
the judgment of the best Philosophers, that the Moon by her operation sets the
Sea, the worlds great wonder, on ebbing and flowing. Aristotle, because he
could not find out the natural cause of the Seas flowing, and ebbing, told the
Sea, that if he could not comprehend the reason of it, the Sea should
comprehend him, and out of grief immediately he threw himself into the Sea.
Others again think that the final cause of the Seas motion was ordained by God,
for the purging, and preserving of the waters, as the air has its purgings,
by, and from the winds, which are as brooms and besoms to sweep away all the
contagious vapors, and infectious savours that climb up into it. Standing
waters, we know, are apt to putrify, corrupt, and stink, if it were not for
sweet springs that feed them; but what are small Rivulets that are extracted,
and strained waters through the veins of the Earth (though out of all the
Nations in the world) to the great and wide Sea? they are but as the drop of a
bucket, or a molehill to a Mountain.

5. The Sea affords all mankind this great, singular, and public benefit, in
respect it yields them such an innumerable variety of all sorts and kinds of
Fish, both great and small, which is a great supply to many Towns, Cities, and
Countries, both in the Eastern, Western, Northern, and Southern parts of the
world. And of these are killed infinitely every year, amounting to an
unspeakable value and worth of moneys. Fishers kill as many great and massy
Sea-beasts every year (what in one part, and what in another) as Butchers do of
Kine, and Cattle at Land. But having presented you with the several benefits
that are received by Sea employments, which could not otherwise be, if that
there were not skill in this Art; I hope none will be so absurd or irrational
as to deny the legality of this calling. If any will demand of me wherein the
lawfulness of this or any other calling lies, I will say in this, when it is
manifestly approved of in Scripture: But the Sea-mans employment is approved of
by Scripture: Ergo it is lawful.

It is first, profitable unto mankind.

Secondly, It is of good report, and herein lies the lawfullness of this or any
other calling, Ephesians. 4.28. Working with his hands the thing that is good.
Philip. 4.8. God does variously call and dispose of men, some to one thing, and
some to another, some to go down into the Seas, and othersome to stay on land,
to follow those several callings they are trained up unto, which be for the
public good, and weal of all. And indeed, if we look into Scripture, we
shall find no plea, or excuse for any to live out of lawful callings. In times
past, no Roman durst go in the streets if he bore not his badge how he did
lives to that end it might be known that he lived by his labor, and not upon
the sweat of others. I would it were thus in England.

It is more commendable to weave, and un-weave, with Penelope, than to beidle.
Amongst the Turks, every man must be of some trade, the Grand Signeur himself
not excepted. Aurelianus the Emperor would never suffer any day to pass over
his head, wherein he exercised not himself in some hard labor or military
employment or other. Idleness is (putvinar Diaboli) the Devils cushion, or
pillow, on which he both sits, and leans. Fabius was called the Shield of Rome,
because he waited upon all opportunities. Charles King of Naples was Surnamed
Cunctator, because he lost all opportunities. Post est occasio calva. Time is
bald behind. The Be goes not every day to labor, but as often as the Heavens
offer occasion she goes. Every man's mind is created active and apt to some or
other ratiocination, his joints are stirring, his nerves made for helps of
moving, and his occasions of living call him forth to action.




1. It is an ordinance of God, that every one be exercised and employed in
some honest, and laudable calling or other. When God made man, he found him out
both work and employment to perform, Genesis 2.15. He would not have him to be
swallowed up with idleness, 1 These. 4.11. And do your own business, working
with your hands. He that follows not some honest employment or other, either
at Sea or on Land, cannot be free of grievous sining, that man is a fit
instrument for the Devil to take hold on.

2. Every one has received some talent or other, or some part of a talent at
leastwise from God, and to that very end which cannot warrantably be hid nor
buried without sining, Matthew. 25. When God gave Bezaliel and Aholiab those
talents of working his glorious Temple-work, it was not given them to ly by,
but to do the things that God had to be done. God has given many Seamen an
extraordinary dexterous faculty in their Art of Navigation to sail the Seas by,
now will any say, that this talent is not given them for improvement?

3. Idleness is abominable, abhorred of God and man, it is the matter, and
nutrix of a thousand vices, but especially of sinful, and unclean thoughts and
desires, and many other wicked contrivements. 2 These. 3.11. For we hear that
here are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are
busybodies.

But further for the exercising of an honest calling, which either in the Seas,
or on Land, there be these things very necessary and convenient.

1. Skill. Every one that will undertake any thing, is to know perfectly the
things which he takes in hand, and to be able to give good grounds and
reasons thereof, which properly belongs to his own vocation. Prove. 14.8. The
wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way: but the folly of fools is
deceit.

2. Attention to his own affairs more than to others. 2 These. 3.11. 1 Timothy
5.13. And withal, they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house.

3. Diligence in going about his affairs. Prove. 10.4. He becomes poor tht
deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent makes rich.

4. Wisdom in observing, taking, and using all opportunities rightly. Prove.
10.5. He that gathers in Summer, is a wise son: but he that sleeps in
harvest, is a son that causes shame.

5. Courage and Constancy in overcoming all difficulties: for what calling
soever it be that a man sets himself to, I have observed, that if he want
courage and boldness to manage it, he will but bungle in it. Prove. 15.19. The
way of the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns: Young Eagles peck at the
Stars, before they prey on dead carcasses. Diogenes laying his money at his
head, a thief was very busy to steal it from him, which troubled him so much,
that he could take no rest, and so at last rather than he would deprive
himself of his sweet sleep, he threw it to him, saying, Take it to thee than
wretch, so I may but take my rest. Opportunities are headlong, and must be
quickly caught, as the Echo catches the voice, there is no use of after wit.

-- Praecipitat tempus, mors atraimpendet agentes.
but the way of the Righteous is made plain.

6. A moderation in the desire of gain, and care of his wished success. Some
are so avarous in their gain and gettings, that they care not how they come by
it. And many are so well versed in all the Topics and common places of profit
and gain, having got in readiness all money-traps to catch it where ever it is
stirring and to be had: per fas and nefas Rem, rem quocunque modo, rem. 1 Timothy
6.9. But they that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.
The Indians observing that unsatiable desire of Gold in the Spaniards, said
that it was their God. Money, and the things of the world may better be said
to be their God, than the true God himself, in respect of their inordinateness
after them.

7. A Religious sanctifying of all our labors (both at Sea and Land) is
required or us. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. Genesis 24.12. And he said, O
Lord God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and
show kindness unto my Master Abraham.

That the great work and business that is England thou have argumentum
Aristotelicum, and argumentum Basilinum, on thy side.

Three special things desire to be seen and enjoyed in this world.

1. The fall of Babylon, and the destruction of Antichrist.

2. The destruction of Gog and Magog the Turkish Monarchy.

3. The full conversion of the Jews.


is to pull down the house of Austria, and the Pope of Rome.

That do business in great waters, etc.

Amongst the many reasons that might be deposited, take these for some.

1. Because the time draws on that that which is prophesied shall be
fulfilled, Rev. 11.15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great
voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of
the Lord Jesus, and he shall reign for ever and ever. St. John saw the elders
casting down all their crowns before the Throne, 1600 years ago (what may we
not expect now then) saying, thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and
honor, and power, Apoc. 4.10. He that has but a seeing eye at nearer times
may clearly discern, What valiant spirits were they of in former times? History
tells us that the whole world was fought for thrice.

1 Betwixt Alexander and Xerxes.

2 Betwixt Caesar and Pompey.

3 Betwixt Constantine and Lucinius.

Were they so valiant in those days, Sailors, and will not you be as valiant in
these days of ours?


that both Crowns and Kingdoms are staggering. And soon after John heard every
creature in heaven, and in Earth, and Sea, saying Blessing, Honor, Glory, and
Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for evermore,
Chap. 5.13. And soon after he saw Christ with his Crown upon him, going forth
conquering, and to conquer, Chap. 6.2. And he that has a seeing eye, may
observe the approach of this day.

2. Because it has stood so many hundreds of years in the opposition of
Christ's, and still remains, and perseveres a malignant, and peevish enemy unto
the interest of Christ, and the very life and power of godliness.

3. Because God has given the valiant Joshuahs of this age, and generation, a
most wonderful, magnanimous and undaunted courage and resolution to go on in
their Sea-wars against them: Yea they are admirably fitted with fighting
spirits for the work. Surely that universal and military spirit that is now in
the fighting breasts and bosoms of the English, do bee-speak the great things
that God has on foot in the world, otherwise to what end is it that men should
be in these days so unknownly valorous and courageous, if God had not some
work for them to do?

4. Reason, may seem to be this, Englands late activeness and carefulness in
building of so many famous, brave, What was said of Epe^s (I will say of England
against Spain, and Rome) that he did Lignum facere equum in eversionem Troja
England builds wooden horses (that carry great Guns in their panches) to ruin
their enemies withal.

Divide the world into thirty equal parts, nineteen of those thirty are
Heathen, six of the eleven, Mahumetans, five parts of the thirty Christians. Of
Professors of Christ most Papists, few Protestants. And of Protestants, how few
believers? By this we may see that Christ has but a little share in the world.


sumptuous, warlike ships, this be-speaks England (ni fallor) to be an
instrument in the hands of Christ to crush the Papal, and Antichristian powers
of the world. No Nation under the whole Heavens (look all the whole universe
thoughout) is in that gallant posture, and warlike equipage by Sea that the
Nation of England is in at this very day: God preserve it.

To stir up your British blood, that they would every one of them lend their
helping hand to tear the scarlet Whore of Rome to pieces, and those Papal
powers and adherents of the world, I think it convenient to press some
ponderous and considerable motives. For I know by experience that the Soldier
prepares not to battle until he hear the sound of the Drum, or Trumpet,
sounding an Horse, Horse, or a Stand to your Arms. Therefore to put you on,
brave Warriors in the Seas, Nil desperandum Christo duce, and auspice Christo.
Be not afraid, Christ is your Captain, and he is resolved to have all the
sinful powers, and the irreligious Kings and Emperors, and Princes of the
world down (and if you will not do it, Generations after you will do Christ's
work) for Christ will no longer be crowded into a corner of the world, but he
will have the world in his own hands, Rev. 11.1, I would have Sailors to be of
Themistocles metal, against the Spaniard, of whom Plutarch said, that after he
had heard once that Miltiades had got himself so much honor in the Marathonian
battle, he was not able to sleep, because Miltiades was so far before him, and
he so short of him in honor.
7, 15. He will take unto himself his great power, and reign, etc. Zach.
10.11. The pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the Scepter) of Egypt
shall depart away. It is usual to express the enemies of the Church by the
names of old enemies, as Assyria and Egypt was.

1. That it is one special piece of Englands generation-work. Therefore look to
it, and withdraw not till you have laid Babylon in the dust.

2. That God is arising to recover his lost glory and honor in the world. And
will not you arise, and bestir your selves then?

3. Consider but seriously the soul-damning vassallage, and infringed liberty
that Southern Nations lie in, and groan under. What groans? what cries? and
what sighs be there in Spain, and yet dare not be known in their secret
disaffection to their impertinent and God-displeasing worship. Gentlemen, have
you not fought out your own liberties in England (yea fatis superque satis) And
why will you not now venture as deeply for Christ's interest still as you have
done? I would have our English to overlook the greatest difficulties that are
to be objected (prima facie) in a work of this like nature, and resemble
Hannibal in courage, who said, when upon the Alps with his Army, Aut viam
inveniam, aut viam faciam: I will either find out a way over these cloud
topping mountains, or make my way through them.
Does not the captived condition of foreign parts call for help?

4. Consider seriously that general disowning and denying of the Gospel of
Christ, either to be read or preached in public and private as it should be;
This is in Spain and Italy, etc. Will not this set your spirits on a fire
against those subtle, and soul-murthering adversaries of the Lord Jesus Christ's?

5. Consider seriously the damnable, cruel, and Diabolical Inquisition that
they have in Spain, which has been hatched betwixt the Devil, and two
sophistical Spanish Jesuits. By this they can take off any man's life for
questioning of their Religion, and that at their pleasure. Shall not this set
an edge upon your spirits to do your utmost in the suppressing of these
intolerable evils? What is become of that Heroic and Warlike spirit that in
former Wars have acted in you? Hark! Hark! is not the Drum beating, and the
Trumpet sounding? Has not God bid England sound the Trumpet, and beat the
Drum, and prepare war against the enemies of Christ? God is setting on England
to break the yoke of Christ's and Sions enemies, and many of you are sitting
down in the Nation, one in one place, and another in another. One Commander
sits down with his hundred pound per annum, that he got in the late Wars, and
another sits down with his two hundred, and perhaps another with his four or
five hundred. Thus it was with Alexanders Soldiers (and it is the same with
many of you) that when they grew rich, they would follow him no longer in the
Wars. What one of Englands late famous Sea-Generals said of some Sea-Captains
(the like may be said of the Soldier) says he, You are grown so wealthy by
being Captains three or four years, that you are afraid to fight. What a shame
is it that now your swords rust in your Scabbards, and your Pistols in your
Holsters, which have been formerly very valiantly in your hands in the high
places of the field. That I may give you one sound alarm more, where ever your
quarters be in this Land of ours, let me tell you that you will grow aged,
therefore you have need to run well, and to do all the good you can both for God
(the world) and Christ his Son. It is usual for those that run races, to whip,
and spur hard when they come within sight of the Goal. Have not many of you
gray hairs upon your heads, or at leastwise will have very shortly? and will
you not have one fling at Spain, and at the gates of Rome before you dye, and
go to your graves?

2. A word unto the Seamen. This is a time wherein the ten Kings of Europe
have given their power to the Beast, but they are a tumbling down, and if they
fall, surely many will fall with them, I have read concerning Joshua that
valiant Soldier, that when he was a young man and more in the strength of
nature, he was then least in vigor and valor for God, and sometimes in cases
of danger concealed himself, but when he grew older, and found the strength of
nature declining and decaying, then he be stirred himself for God. I bring but
this in as an instance now to our English Soldiery, that they may take notice
of this rare president.
weigh but what God is a doing, and will do. When the tree is falling, the
Proverb is, Run for the Hatchet. It is an old Proverb, Gentlemen, and a true
one, Post folia cadunt lirbores. After the leaves are once off the trees, the
trees themselves do fall at last. God has prospered you against the Spaniard
hitherto, keep shaking of the tree, and it will fall, or break at last. Be
every one of you willing now, when the Monarchy of Spain is staggering, and
tottering, to contribute all the help that lies within you against them. What?
It is not enough that the Merchandizings of this Nation be kept up (though
sufficient reason enough for it) but there is far greater work in hand.
Therefore what Domitians Empress said unto him the Emperor when fishing and
angling, O noble Emperor, it does not become you (said she) to fish for
Trouts and Gudgeons, but for Towns, and Castles. The same I say to you, Stand
to your Arms.

Now I will a little touch upon the means whereby we may in England (under
God) bring down the Spaniard, Mahumet would never enter into any City, and
especially the City of Damascus, lest he should be ravished with the pleasures
of the place, and so should forget to go on with the great work he had in hand
This is a president for the Soldiery of England whether great or small, who ly
perfuming and effeminating of themselves in London, and in the Land. Mary Queen
of Scots, that was mother to king James, was wont to say, That she feared Mr.
Knoxes prayers more than she did an army of 10000. knocking men. Plutarch in
the life of Pyrrhus said of Cyneas that rare Thessalian Orator, that he
overcame more by sweet words and speeches, than Pyrrhus did by the sword. So
more by prayer, than by strength.
and the Pope of Rome, and these I find to be twofold.

1. By Prayer. 2. Shipping.
1. By Prayer. In Salem was the arrows of the Bow broke, Psalm. 76.3. and the
shield, and the sword. Prayers and complaints unto God are the Churches best
weapons to fight their merciless enemies with all. Exodus 17:11. Whilst Moses
held up his hands, Israel prevailed, but when he let his hands go down, then
Amalek prevailed. 1 Chronicles. 5.20. When some of Israel who warred with the
Hagarites the sons of Ishmael, in the midst of the battle cried unto God, he
heard them, and gave them their enemies into their hands. This was that which
Solomon desired after the building of the Temple, 1 King. 8.44, 45. When thy
people shall go out to battle, and shall pray unto the Lord toward the house
that I have built, hear thou in heaven their prayers, and judge their cause. O
admirabilem piarum precum vim, quibus caelestia cedant, hosts terret manus
illa, quae victoriae suae trophaea in ipsis Caeli orbibus figit! Oh the
admirable power of godly prayers, to which heavenly things give place, that
hand terrifies the enemies, which fasteneth the tokens of its victory in the
celestial orbs. Bucholcerus. St. Augustine gave this reason why David put off
Saul's Armor (when he went to fight with the Philistim) Mystica ratione
significavit, arma Ecclesiae non esse carnalia, sed spiritualia. The Churches
weapons are not carnal, but spiritual, and David was not armed with iron, but
with faith and prayer. Prayer is the very best whole Canon that is in England.
Luther calls it Bombarda bellicosissima. The Lord in Scripture is called a man
of War (and he may be taken to fight against all the Navies, and Gunn'd
Armadoes in the world) for four Reasons.

1. Because he gives victory.

2. Because he fights the battles of his people, 2 Chronicles. 33 7, 8.

3. In respect of his prudence and policy, as a wise Captain will watch all
opportunities of advantage against his enemy, he knows how to bring down the
crafty, and how to take them napping.

4. He will encounter his enemy boldly, though not with so s^eming a strength
as they have. Pray unto this God.


If that the people of God in England would but join in their prayers together,
I am confident they would be of greater force than if we had a thousand
Canons marching in the fields of Spain. Therefore what a shame is it that there
is no more zeal for God, and for his interest and glory, in their bosoms, and
that they are no more pouring out of their hearts and spirits for the
accomplishment of Gods promises, and that Babylon may fall and rise no more.
God is resolved to down with it, and it may be because England is not fit for
such a mercy, and because they pray not more earnestly, constantly, and
vehemently for its downfall, the work sticks, and goes but slowly forward. God
is resolved to do it, but he will be inquired of, for, and in the doing of
it, Ezekiel. 36.37. When God was about to do great and mighty things for Israel,
he tells them in plain terms (totidem verbis) that he would be inquired of, and
sought unto in the performance of them. And will not God be sought unto more
than he is for the downfall of the Pope, and that incestuous and villainous
house of Austria, together with that cursed and tyrannical Inquisition, before
he bring ruins and desolations upon you that live in your seiled houses, and
lie upon beds of down. You that have all things at will and pleasure, where are
your prayers? Where are your wrestlings with God you that live in the City? And
where are your loud cries against the powers of darkness you that live in the
Country? History says that the Lord gave Na^setos victory more through zealous
prayers that he used than his force and valor, for he never went out into the
Sea, nor ever began battle, or determined upon any war, nor never mounted on
his warlike Steed, but first he went to the Temple, and served God.
You did pray at a very high rate once, and prayers issued out like a mighty
stream, some in the West, and other some out the North, some out the East, and
some out the South of England, for your land Armies, when they were engaged in
the fighting out your inbred Vipers; where are they now for your water Armies?
For your Fleets? and for that great and glorious work that is at this day on
foot for God and Christ? How might you help them on in those difficult and
perilous undertakings and hazzards that they run? How many thousands be there
that go in the Seas daily venturing of their lives in a just and lawful quarrel
against one of Christ's greatest enemies in the world? Oh send, send out your
prayers for them and after them, that you may hear of glorious things, and
remarkable, and wonderful actings from them that be daily in the Seas.

Ovid begins his Metamorphosis, and Cleanthes his Iambique verses with prayer.
Pliny in an Oration which he made in the praise of Trajan, commended the
customs of the Ancients in making invocations and prayers at the beginning of
any great business, saying, That there can be no assured honest, wise
beginning, The Lessons of Pythagoras, Plato, and their Disciples ever more
began, and ended with prayer.

The Brachmans among the Indians, and the Magi among the Persians, never began
any thing without praying unto God.

Prayer is Englands (Alexipharmacum generale) precious drug against her many
maladies, her Cornucopiae, because it brings her in many good tidings against
her enemies.

It is her (Delphicum gladium) Delphian sword by which she prospers both at
home and abroad.


or successful ending of any enterprise, without the special aid and assistance
of the gods. For all works, affairs, employments, businesses, and wars, that
we, or any Nation takes in hand, are to begin with prayer, and to be daily
followed with our prayers. Prayer is so wonderfully advantageous, that I cannot
think that there is any in our late Land broils, but will acknowledge the
profitableness of it; nay, our Armies could not have done what they did, nor
gone through that which they have, if they had not had the prayers of the godly
in the Land; and how must our Fleets prosper, and do the hard and desperate
work that they have to do, if you give over praying for them now?

There be ten sorts of people that I would gladly put upon this needful duty
of prayer, for the War that is begun by England against the Spaniard.

1. Ministers, 2. Magistrates, 3. Parliament Men, 4. Statesmen, 5. Land, and
Sea-Generals, 6. Colonels, 7. Land, and Sea-Captains, 8. Religious, sober, and
godly Soldiers, 9. Honest and well-minded Seamen. 10. The Respublica, or the
Common people of England.
Gentlemen, Do you desire the downfall of Babylon? then let me tell you that
you must be earnest with God in prayer for a speedy accomplishment of your
desires. Are not these feral Beasts of Rome and Spain, to be prayed against?
Pray consider.
Do you desire a blessing upon the Church and State in which you live? Then let
me counsel you to pray hard for them, that they may increase in purity, piety,
peace, and plenty. Do you desire that the Pope at Rome, and all that cursed
rabble that is in, and about that incestuous and libidinous house of Austria
may stumble and stagger? Longius vulnerat quam sagitta, Prayer will wound an
enemy further than a shot out of the longest Gun, or Arrow out of the strongest
bow.
Then let me tell you that God will be sought unto for this very thing ere
he do it. Pray, pray that that proud Romana urbs aeterna, as they have
formerly most lyingly styled her, may be brought down to ruin, and to shame
and poverty, though she has got up again (since she was sacked and ransacked
twice by the Visigothes, taken once by the Herulians, surprised by the
Ostrogothes, destroyed and rooted up by the Vandals, annoyed by the Lumbards,
pilled and spoiled by the Grecians, and whipped and chased by many others) I
hope ere long that she will receive her last blow of the indignation of the
most mighty, and be thrown headlong into an everlasting and horrible
desolation, where she shall never rise any more. Now do you desire that your
warlike Fleets may prosper against them? then pray, pray. The Spaniard would be
more afraid of our Fleets in England, did we but pray more.
I profess (be it soberly spoken) that you deal with prayer in this case, as
the world dealt with Christ, Joseph, and Mary. How dealt the world with them
you will ask me? I will tell you in few words, the Scripture is pleased to
inform us, that they could provide no better lodging and entertainment than a
stable for the Prince of Glory to lie in. But the gallants, and the rich guests
of the world they had the best beds and chambers that the house afforded. As
unkindly deal many with prayer against the adversaries of the Lord Jesus
Christ, they both put it out of door, and out of mind and thought. God is a
rising (undoubtedly) to cut down his great matured, ripened, and old
gray headed enemies, When Athens was straightly besieged and very stoutly
assaulted, so that within the walls they were hardly put to it to keep their
enemy out, Diogenes that before lived in his Tub, tumbled it up and down the
Town, thinking it an unreasonable thing for him to be idle, when the greatest,
and best of Citizens were in an Hubbub and in Arms Now then, you that live on
Land (let me tell you thus much) it becomes you not to be idle spectators, but
rather pious abertors, yea zealous and cordial assisters of them that go in the
Sea wars, both with your purses and prayers.
and where are your prayers, your thoughts, and considerations of what God is
doing, and will do in the world? Do not you see what changes, chances,
alterations, wars, maladies, mutations, and eversions, are falling upon many
States, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths in these days? and whence come they? come
they not from the Lord. Who so is wise will observe these things, Psalm. 107.43.

2. By Shipping. And this I will lay forth in two things, wherein we may take
our enemies down.

1. In their Plate-Fleet. 2. In their Merchandizings.
1. In their Plate-Fleet. This is another instrumental way and means (under
God) to bring them down. By keeping out an Annual and strong Armado, we shall
cut them off from sending out, and receiving of their Plate-Fleet, which indeed
they would, if we had not good store of shipping to lie in and upon the
Southern Seas. This Fleet brings them in such vast sums of money every year,
(besides many other precious, and costly things) that they prick up their ears
both against and above all Nations. Money we all know is the very sinnews of
war, take that away, and there is an end of war, and that Kings high stomach
that is in and under the want of it. In Siedges we all know, that an enemies
aim is to deprive them of the benefit of their springs, wells, and fountains,
and if they can but draw these away from them, let their Castles be never so
impregnable, their Cities never so inaccessible, and their Towns never so
powerful, and strongly walled, they will soon bring them to a parley, and a
soliciting surrender. If we can but hold out some few years, in keeping out
Fleets to deprive the Spaniard of his Plate-Fleet, that has come unto him year
by year, the failing of these mony-springs will greatly impoverish him, and
lose him many of his Provinces, and also bring him into a better decorum of
subjection unto England. England is esteemed in, and by the world, to be but a
shovel full of earth, for so the great Turk said, when he looked in the Maps
of the world, asked some of his Nobles where it was, to whom they said, that
his Thumb covered the sight of it, Here is a shovel full of earth indeed quoth
the Turk, I will take it and hurl it into the Sea, or husse it over the Moon.
The less thou art little England, the more instrumental (for ought I know) in
the hands of God, to carry on his designs. The Land of Canaan was far less, and
yet it became the terror of the whole world. If we look into the wars that
are now extant in the Holy Writ of God, a handful evermore (under God) did the
work. And if we look into nearer times in our own wars and battles, we shall
find that they have evermore been sought and purchased by a few, and unlikely
instruments.
Grudge not in the mean time (my Friends) at the costly and warlike ships that
are built in England, and now employed upon, and about this very design, which
is both very excellent and superlative, aiming at the bringing down of the Pope
and Spaniard, and of bringing England into the like liberty of trading which
the Spaniard has in the Indies, where Gold and Silver will be as free for you
as him. Did not the well-affected in England formerly send in their Plate, and
their very Rings off their fingers, and Bodkins out of their heads, that the
war might be carried on against the enemy that would have grind the faces of
the Godly unto powder? And in so doing you did well, for you have got the thing
you desired, even your back burdens of peace, and sweet Christian liberty, you
may now be as holy as you will; consider then that other Nations are far from
what you enjoy, they are still under bondage and thraldom. Oh remember them
that are in bonds, as though you were bound with them.

2. In their Merchandising. By our careful, diligent, and circumspect keeping
out of warlike Fleets upon the Seas, we shall detain them from their trading
from Nation to Nation, which will prove a very great disadvantage, and
annoyance to be deprived of it. This will make them to bite upon the bridle.
What sorer punishment can there befall them than this, in respect they cannot
look out into the Seas with any ship or ships, but we have Men of War ready to
snap them. And this is the course that we are now taking with the Spaniard,
for his cursed Inquisition, and his denying of England a free trade into the
Indies as well as himself.

Take notice of this well known proud speech of the Spaniards, and you will
soon see, that there is good reason in keeping of them at the staffs end. It is
extant to this day.

Te veto ne pergas bello defendere Belgas;
Quae Dracus eripuit nunc restituatur oportet:
Quas Pater evertit, jubeo te condere cellas:
Religio Papae fac restituatur ad unguem.
Englished.

These to you are our Commands, I would hearten on all the Sailors in the
States Service, to be as valiant against the Spaniard, as the two Scipios,
Pub. and Cu. Cornelius was, who were famous for their wars in Spain, and
against the Carthaginians, so that they were ever called the Duo fulmina belli.
The two thunderbolts of war.

Claudius Marcellus fought 51 Battles, for whose valor they ever after styled
him Gladius Romani Populi. The Sword of the Romans. I would have our Sailors to
take after these fighting praesidents.



Send no help toth' Nether-lands, Now they say by Blake.

Of the treasure took by Drake,
Restitution you must make.
And those Abbeys build anew
Which your Fathers overthrew.
If for any peace you hope
In all points restore the Pope.
Unto which Embassage the Queen of England, the most famous Princess in the
world, returned this bold, smiling, and disregarding answer.

Ad Graecas, bone Rex, fiant mandata calendas.
Worthy King, know this your will
At latter Lammas we will fulfill.
Thus much I dare promise all the Sailors in England, that whilst they or any
people fearing the Lord, do walk in obedience and conformity unto God, they
shall have the upper hand of their enemies, whether far off, or near at home.
Levit. 26.7, 8. And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before
you by the sword. And five of you shall chase an hundred, an hundred of you
shall put ten hundred to flight: and your enemies shall fall before you by the
sword. It appears now that the spirit of courage and valor is from the Lord,
When Henry the fifth King of England, before the battle at Agincourt, heard of
the great and warlike praeparations that the King of France made against him,
he began to be exceedingly perplexed. One of his Commanders standing by, made
answer, that if there were so many, there were enough to be killed, enough to
be taken prisoners, and enough to run away, which resolute speech of his much
cheered up the King. I would not have Seamen to regard how many their enemies
be, but where they are.
who by small and weak means, does often times effect great and wonderful
things, to that end, the glory of all may be his. What the Lacedaemonians once
sung of in their three dances, I think it may be sung of England.

The first was of Old men, and they sung.

We have been young and strong, and valiant heretofore,
Till crooked age did hold us back, and bid us do no more.
The second of Young men, who sang.

We yet are young, bold, strong, and ready to maintain,
That quarrel, still against all men that do on earth remain.
The third of Children, who sang.

And we do hope as well to pass you all at last,
And that the world shall witness be, ere many years be past.
To sparkle our English spirits a little that go in the Seas against the
Spaniard, Look, Look, Sailors, upon that brave Military and fighting spirit,
that breathed in Epaminondas, who most nobly said, that if all the riches of
the world should be given him, they should not draw him off from any the least
duty and service that he owed his Country. Let me tell all the brave spirited
Sailors in England, that go in the wars against the Spaniard, that Pulchrum est
pro patria mori. It is a very commendable thing, for men freely and valiantly
to venture and lay down their lives for the welfare, safety, and privileges of
the Countries they live in, and belong unto.


Look upon Reverend Mr. Calvin, of whom Mr. Beza tells us, that in the year
1556. when Perin had conspired against the State of Geneva, that he ran into
the midst of their naked swords to appease the tumult, well knowing, that Nemo
sibi natus, that men are not born for themselves, but for their Country. Look
upon brave spirited Cratisolea the mother of Cleomenes, when he was loath to
send her for a pledge to Egypt, she said unto him, come, come, put me into a
ship, and send me whither thou will, that this body of mine may do some good
for my Country, before crooked age consume my life without profit.

Look upon King Edward of England (whom the Chronicles of Flanders tell of)
when warring against Philip Valesius King of France, he courageously sent him
a challenge in his letters, and offered him three Conditions. 1. Either person
to person. 2. A thousand against a thousand. 3. or Army against Army. But the
King of France durst admit of none of them.

Sailors, you have to deal with an enemy that is like to Plutarchs Nightingale,
of whom it is said, that she sung purely, and made a great busling in the
woods, as if she had been some greater bird (like the fly upon the Charet
wheel, who was heard to say, Oh what a dust do I raise) but when she came once
to be handled, and finding little meat on her, he raps out into discontent,
vox es, and praeterea nihil. You know the applicatory part.

I may say of England now, as a great Politician once said very well, Nulla
magna Civitas quiescere diu potest, si foris hostem non invenit, quaerit domi.
No Nation can long be quiet or at peace, for if it have no enemies abroad, it
shall, and will so on find some at home. I leave you to find out my meaning.
Gentlemen, You have run valiantly upon the Swords, Pikes, Halberds,
Gunmouthes, Fireships, and the ragged shipsides of your enemies in former
wars, to purchase that peace that England is now in possession of, but is your
work all done now? Show your selves as hardy and as stout as ever against the
enemies of Christ, and following these rare Examples I have presented you with
all to whet up your spirits, Haec imitamini; per Deos immortales, qui
dignitatem, qui laudem, qui gloriam quaeritis, haec ampla sunt, haec rara, haec
immortalia, haec fama celebrantur, monimentis annalium mandantur, posteritati
propagantur, etc.

Verse. 24. These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the Deep.
IF I have trespassed in detaining you so long in the porch, Let me tell you,
every thing that I have touched upon lay so fairly in my road, that I could not
otherwise choose but let all ly by the Lee, till I had sufficiently spoke with,
and to, those things that I know stands in need of reprooving, and correcting,
in the Seas. I have done my part in speaking advertisingly unto the graceless
crew that goes in the salt-waters, Oh that the Lord would not be unwilling to
do his part upon them, and to pity them that have no pity upon themselves.
And besides, I have not only laid them down many very good, and profitable
rules, but I have also spoke of many other things which lay in my way.

My purpose is now to lead you into the Palace, where you shall have a clear
and delightful view of all those various objects, and scattered excellencies,
that lie up and down upon the face of the creation, which are only seen by
those that go down into the Seas, and by no other. These see the works of the
Lord, etc. in the Hebrew, who see, etc. If the question be demanded who sees
them? the answer is easily returned, they that go down into the Seas in ships.
And who are those may the question be?

Answ. They are Seamen, or Sailors, and these be the men that have the
fullest and clearest aspect of the creation, above all people under the Heavens
whatsoever. These see the works of the Lord, etc. As if David were a going to
say, It is not those that sit on land, and travel no further than the Soil of
their nativity, no, no, but it is those that lanch off the shore into the Main,
to arrive in foreign and far remote Countries, that have the sight of those
heart-ravishing varieties of Gods six days works and wonders. Undoubtedly the
Psalmist took great delight and pleasure in holding discourse with some of the
best disposed, It is worth the while to talk with Seamen (provided they be
pious, sober, and civil) for they have more admirable passages to tell you of,
than all the world besides. What Pliny said of the Nightingale, I will say of
the Mariner. Si quis adest auditor, Philomela, prius animus quam canius
deficiet. The Nightingale is a bird, that if any one will but give her the
hearing, she will sing her self sooner out of breath than out of tune.
and well-minded of the Mariners, because this Scripture comes droppingly, and
admiringly from David, as if he had been amongst them, hearing them telling of
the wonderful works of God. Nay it is more than probable that they did tell
him, and inform him of many things that his eyes had never seen, otherwise we
had not had such a sweet composed Psalm upon the Mariners most famous art of
Navigation, and going down into the Seas, as is now extant to be read of by us
at this very day. I shall adventure to speak it (Dabe and audaciam verbis) and
give it out, deny it who will, and that (in laudem Nautarum) in the praise and
honor of the Sailors and Seamen, both in England, and elsewhere, that they
have the fairest view, and the greatest discoveries of the works of God, of all
the men upon the face of the earth.

What is there that Travelers do not see, whilst others do but read? Seamen
have a full sight of the strength, riches, honors, glories, and sweetnesses of
Countries. They see the great Cities, the renowned men, the magnificent Courts,
the rich Mines and veins of gold and silver, the spicy Islands, the Crystal
mountains, coasts of pearl, rocks of Diamond, how the earth is paved with her
various sweet smelling herbs and glorious flowers, and how she is decked in
foreign parts with flourishing trees, green woods, watered with Seas and Rivers,
replenished with great Majesty of towns, and Cities, garnished with all manner
of fruits, and spices, and furnished with all living creatures Beasts, Fowls,
and Fishes, serving for man's necessity, use and pleasure.
They that follow their callings on Land, and have no other discoveries but
Map-knowledge, or Book-knowledge, they may read of much, but the Navigating
Viator carries the bell away. Such may say, Insulam videmus, etiam cum non
videmus, we see a fair Island by description, when we see it not, but they
that go down into the Sea in ships, they have a real, a full, and satisfactory
sight of all the sweet and delightful Countries, and fruitful Islands, whilst
others by Maps and Books, do but read of, or at the best but hear of them.

Before I go any further, I will cut up the words in this following method, and
set them together again in a Doctrinal composure.

In the words you may soon espy these two things.

1. Persons seeing, 2. Things seen.
1. The persons seeing. They are declared to be such as go down into the Seas,
These see the works of the Lord, etc.

2. The things that are seen. They are of two sorts.

1. Opera Creationis, The works of Creation.

2. Opera Conservationis, Works of Salvation.

For the first of these. The thing then in hand, and that which is inquirable
into, is what is to be understood by Works in this place, or what those Works
of God are, that Seamen, or Sailors and Mariners, have such a full sight of in
their goings down into the Seas.

To be short, I humbly conceive that they may be ranked into these five
infallible heads, under which I shall comprehend what I will, and do intend (
Deo permittente, in a rolling and quarrelling Sea) the Lord assisting, to speak
of, and herein I shall be forced to stay you a little, till I have broke off
the opening of these promised particulars, that I may come unto the next verses
that I would speak to, and infer something from. These Works then are, 1.
Aquatical. 2. Terrestrial.


And under this term I would comprehend, 1. Gressile, 2. Volatile, 3. Reptile.


Now these are the things when opened, that Mariners and Travelers have a very
large, and ample satisfying sight of.

That the most, or the greatest part of The Sea is an Hive, wherein the honey of
good instruction may be made and gathered.
are seen by Seamen. These see the Works of the Lord, etc. I will now leave
the point thus collected and stated, only thus much, I will say for, and in
the behalf of it, that man has not now that advantage which Adam primarily had
in Paradise, before whom all the creatures were summoned in, to come and make
their personal appearance before him the Lords chief Deputy (or Terrestrial
Viceroy) that he might behold their several forms, shapes, kinds, and
species. (It is a question whether the fish in the salt waters, or fresh
waters, were seen by Adam yea or no; it is likely he did not see them, because
they live in another element, and would soon perish, if but any while removed
out of it.) Those that were volatile, it is probable, that they took wing, and
hastened to present themselves before their Lord and Sovereign, and those that
were Gressile (it is likely) and of slow pace, and heavy bodies, that they
paced it unto him, and the rest that were Reptile, they came crawling and
rolling upon the ground with all the speed they could make, to show themselves,
and acknowledge Adam, with the rest, as their supreme. But it is not thus now,
these creatures that were thus seen by Adam, are wandered up and down into the
world, some dwell in the East, some in the West, some in the South, and other
some in the North. He that would behold the various living creatures, and the
wide world, must betake himself to travel, or would be acquainted with the
habit, modes, and fashions, laws, and actions of Countries, these cannot be
seen (though may be known by reading) without perambulatory pains and travel.

That travel is the only thing to complete, He that would travel the world,
must take this course 1. He must furnish himself with Out-country language, or
otherwise it will be but a beggarly thing to live upon, borrowing from friends
or Interpreters. 2 He must have a veil over his eyes, a key on his ear, and a
compass on his lips.
furnish, adorn, and perfect any man. These see the works of the Lord, etc.
Their eyes behold that by going into the Seas which will find them matter of
discourse and meditation all the days of their lives. Nay they hear that,
which they would not for a world, but hear, and know that, which they would not
for a world but know. Josh. 2.1. And Joshua the Son of Nun, sent out of Shittim
two men to spy secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. Thus much I
would infer from this presented Scripture, That it is travel that does
accomplish a man, and not sitting at home, for hereby he comes to have a
copious cognizance of foreign parts, and of the whole Creation.

These see the works of the Lord, etc. I would a little now speak unto, and of
the excellency of that ocular Organ that God has bestowed upon man, The eye
has the greatest variety of objects to feed on, and delight it self in above
all the other senses in the body, none ranges so much through the world, nor
through the Seas by shipping into foreign parts and Countries, nor none pierces
the skies, and the fixed stars so much as this ocular and visory sense does. I
have read of a young prodigal Londoner, who had a great longing to give all his
five Senses a pleasure at once, and allowed to the delight of every sense a
several 100 l. by which, and such like practices within the space of three
years he wasted an estate of 30000 l. in money, left him by his father, besides
land, plate, jewels, and houses furnished very richly to a great value. I bring
but this in as an instance to tell you that he that w ll feast his eye with the
sight of the Creation, it will both cost him penny, and pains.
by which he sees his works withal, and then I will lay-down the promised
particulars of what Mariners do see. 1. Very wonderful is the sense of hearing,
tasteing, smelling, feeling, but far more wonderful is the sense of seeing. If
it should be demanded of me what definition may be given of the eye, and
what it is, I think it may be said truly, that the eye is a little globe, that
is very full of visory spirits, which do exceedingly resemble the round
animatedness of the world. The visory spirits have their generation from the
Animal, which flows from the brain to the eye by the nerve Optic, and from
those proceed the visible and reflected rays in the eye, as in a glass which
will soon form any image that it beholds, and so is received into the
Chrystalline humor, and by the visory spirits through the Nerve Optic is
conveyed to the brain the object to be considered of, and by, the internal
senses, as imagination, memory, and the common sense.

That good and perfect eyesight, is a singular mercy, and special blessing
from the Lord. These see the works of the Lord, etc. If it were not for this
comfortable sense that God has bestowed upon man, his works could not be
seen, nor discovered, and viewed, as to this day they are to his everlasting
praise, glory, and honor. I would exhort all the Sailors in the Seas now to
consider how favorably God has dealt with them in giving them eyes, and
perfect sight, without which their lives would be but a burden to them, as his
was that was brought to our Savior Christ, Mat. 12.22. Then was brought unto
him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb, and he healed him, in so much
that the blind and dumb, both spoke and saw. Are you not bound and much
engaged to God that he has given you eyes to see withal, whilst other men
wanting sight, better deserving it than you, are like to go without it, and so
are forced, and must go groping and grovelling in the dark all their days, till
they come to lie down in their graves? with what suspicion and fear walks the
blind up and down in the world? how does their hands and staves examine their
way, with what jealousy do they receive every morsel, and every draught? how
do they meet with many a poast, and stumble upon many a stone, fall into many a
ditch, and swallow up many a fly? to them the world is as if it were not, or
were all rubs, gins, snares, and miserable downfalls, and if any man will lend
him an hand, he must trust to him, and not to himself. Consider but the blind
in the Gospel, how they lay in the high ways, and roads that lead unto the
City of Jerusalem, and also amongst us here in England, in every high way,
Towns end, or Bridge, and you will find reason enough of your blessing of the
Lord for his goodness unto you, more than unto others, Mark. 10.46, 47. And
when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say
Jesus thou Son of David, have mercy on me.

2. The eyes in number are two, the better to give direction to us, Oculists
observe, that whereas other creatures have but four muscles to turn their eyes
about with, which is the main reason that they cannot look upwards, but
altogether downwards, now man has a fifth, whereby he can look upwards into
the Caelum Empyraeum.

Os homini sublime dedit caelumque tucri. Oculus ab oculendo.

I may say as God has set (...), in the great world, both the Sun and Moon, as
instruments of light to serve it, so has he most wisely and wonderfully placed
(...), in man the little world, two eyes in the highest part of the body, as
Organs to serve him. This is the sense by which the Sailor or the Traveller
turns over and over that Volumen magnum Creationis Elephantinam. And though
this be a very quick and nimble sense, and one that is never weary of seeing,
yet is there work enough for it in the Creation to behold, and more than it can
ever run through and range over, should it do nothing else but travel the whole
Creation over.


and information unto the internals; in figure round, and thereby they are the
more capable of all objects by their motion. Their situation is placed very
high above the rest of the senses, to direct our motion, and to foresee our
dangers.

3. The necessity of this Organ is very great (if we do but seriously
ponderate) for the welfare of our outward being, and the government of our
selves, and our affairs, without which sense the life of man would but be a
very toylsome and wearisome thing unto him in the world.

4. By this Organ man sees and foresees that which is good or evil, helpful, or
hurtful, and that at a distance. The Mariners Proverb is, Praevisa saxa minus
feriunt; Rocks but seen beforehand, will never hurt us.

The first circumstance then, that I will a little run on in, is those
creatures that are Aquatical, and live in the element of water, which are some
of the principal and wonderful works of God, which Seamen, or men that go down
into the Seas do behold. And these I will a little set out in view, to the end
it may the cleerlier appear that they see most, or the greatest part of the
works of the Lord, in, and thoughout the Creation.

1. They that go down to the Sea in ships, etc. They often times have a
frequent sight of that strange and prodigious sort or kind of fish called the
Flying-fish, Flying-fish.
whom God out of wisdom has given wings unto, (like a foul) for the
preservation of its life in the great waters. This poor creature is often
hunted, chased, and pursued, by the Boneto, Porpise, and other ravenous fish,
which follow it with as much violence as the hungry hound does the poor silly
and shelterless Hare. Insomuch that it is forced one while to fly, and another
while to swim; and although nature has provided for it in giving it two strings
for its bow, yet is all little enough to carry him clear of the snatching chaps
and jaws that make after him. This fish, whilst in the water (I have observed
in the Mediterranean) is exceedingly exposed to irrecoverable danger, and when
he is out of the water upon his wings, he is then again in no less hazard
than he was before, in respect of that multitude of Sea-fouls that lie upon
the waters for the catch, and to make use of all such opportunities. It is
observed by the Mariners, that this fish rather than it will be taken by its
enemies in the waters, it will many times betake it self in its flight into
ships, or boats. And alas this makes the Proverb good, Out of the drying pan
into the fire. Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim.

Our blessed Savior the Lord Jesus Christ had an excellent way and faculty of
drawing holy and heavenly thoughts and discourses out of, and from terrestrial
objects, as appears by his Parables, and the whole course of his life and
conversation; his eye was one while upon birds, another while upon lilies,
Matthew. 6.26, 28. One while upon the Sower, and another while upon the Seed; one
while upon the ground, and another while upon the tares; one while upon the
mustard seed, and another while upon leaven; one while upon hid treasure, and
another while upon pearls; one while upon the net cast into the Sea, Mat 13.
and another while upon the five Virgins; one while upon lamps, and another
while upon oil; one while upon the Master, and another while upon the servant;
one while upon the Shephard, and another while upon the sheep, besides many
other things which I might reckon up and instance in.
The use now that I have made unto my self upon the sight of this creature, will
be as follows, for I have made it my business, and it has also been my
practice whilst at Sea, and I wish it were the practice of all Seamen (who
where I have seen a leaf of the Creation, they have seen a volume) to abstract
spiritual thoughts from all the uncouch creatures that they fix their eyes
upon, whether in the Seas, or in the Nations beyond the Seas. This has been my
exercise whilst in the Seas, and I think and take it to be a very notable
improving way to grow heavenly, and spiritually minded. Romans 8.6. For to be
carnally minded, is death: but to be spiritually minded, is life and peace.

1. That if God had not Satan in his chain, he would make greater spoil and
havoc of the Saints of God, than the (...) do in the Seas, whose work and
business is to go about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. He
may well be called a murderer, for he has been so from the beginning, he has
been a soul-killer this five thousand years, and upwards, and he is the same
still. But this is the Saints comfort (though he be one of the ragingest
beasts that walks in the Forest) that Christ Jesus who is the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, bridles him.

2. That many a precious, and gracious soul is as hardly chased, and pursued
with heart-daunting terrors, both from sin, conscience, law, and Satan, as
ever this poor creature was in the waters, and in a far dolorouser sort. Sin
makes a Hubbub in the soul, and Satan he makes an assault, and conscience
accuses, and oftentimes there is little peace, but at last like the Moon, that
wades through many clouds, or the ships that go through many sto^ns, they
arrive at the fair Harbor, and port of quietness; All the good creatures of
God, whether fish in the Seas, fouls in the air or beasts of the field, are
flowers, and none but the labourious Bees of contemplating spirits (that give
themselves unto meditation) either do or can suck forth the sweet honey of
instruction out of them. Therefore it is good (and would do well) that all our
Sailors were found praying unto Christ, for the teaching of them this holy art
and skill, to behold God more fully in the creature.
for it is the custom of the Lord Jesus to send in a Quietus est into the soul,
after it has been troubled with the tempestuous storms of the guilt of sin. Son
be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me ye
that are weary and heavy laden, etc.

2. They that go down to the Sea in ships, oftentimes have a frequent sight of
that marvailous fish, Sun-fish.
called the Sun-fish, whose usual property is to come out of the depths in the
sweetest and calmest weathers, to lie sleeping and beaking of himself upon the
Surface of the Seas, not fearing, nor thinking, nor praesupposing in the least
of any fish to prey upon him, or of Sea-foul to light upon him, or of ships to
run over him, or of boats to row to him, or of darts, or bullets to be shot,
and thrown at him. The very sight of these creatures have very much wounded me
(when I have seen them sleeping) when the ship has been even ready for to run
over them. Mariners sometimes will hoyse out their boats and take them up, but
when once they come to be awake, then they will, and do struggle very much to
regain their precious liberty, which they lost so carelessly by sleeping.

1. It brought into my mind, that it is a very perilous thing for a Christian
to be found asleep (by that mortal and deadly enemy Satan) when and whilst he
is standing Sentinel upon his guard. Meditations.
The Devil is of an indefatigable spirit, (...), in the present tense, which
reports him not to be lazy but busy, not a loyterer but a stickler, and a
stirrer in his pernicious work; shut him out at the street door, and he will
come in again at the backdoor.

2. That as the Sun-fish lies carelessly upon the salt-waters, exposing of
himself in the very warmth of summer to be preyd upon by the ranging fish in
the Seas, or to be surprised by the Mariner, or crushed by the ships which
have their quick and speedy passage through the Seas; after the like
carelessness live thousands of the poor Sailors, of what shall become of their
precious and immortal souls. Their souls are starving, and there is a delusion
upon their spirits that all is well, when alas, all the sail is out that ever
they can make, to carry them hood-winkt to hell. The Devil has winds, gales,
baits, traps, and gins, in all corners to carry them destruction-ward. Yet the
Lord knows (my soul even bleeds for the poorest, and the meanest of them to do
them good) They are too ignorant of his devices. But knowing the subtilty of
the Devil, and also in some measure the terrors of my God, whom I serve, I
would persuade you all upon the bended knees of my soul, to make more
conscience of your ways, of Gods good Word, and how you may come to be
eternally saved at the last, than you do.

3. They oftentimes have a frequent sight of that sociable and companionable
Seafish, called the Dolphin. Dolphin.
Naturalists tell us that these creatures do take great delight to accompany
the swift-sailing ships that come through the Seas, out of an ambitious and
aspiring nature, to compare, and try whether they or the ships should swim or
sail the fastest. This is not unlikely, for to my experience, I have seen them
accompanying of us for a longtime together, both in the Mediterranean, and
elsewhere, some swimming on head, some on stern, some on the Starbord-side of
us, and othersome on the Larbord, like so many Sea-pages, or Harbingers running
before our wooden horses, as if they were resolved by the best language that
fish could give us, to welcome us into and through the waters, and telling us
that they would go along with us, And notwithstanding all this wonderful
kindness of theirs to us, which I have oftentimes much delighted in, it has
ended very tragically unto their sorrow; For it is the Sea-mans custom, to take
al opportunities of killing those fish that are good and mandable, and
thereupon they have got their fisgigs or other instruments in readiness, and
upon and by reason of their propinquity and neerness, have oftentimes most
sadly wounded and killed of them.

Meditations.
1. I have hereby learned thus much wisdom, that it is dangerous fawning upon
strangers, and that all acquaintance and intimateness, with carnal, natural,
and unregenerate men, who are, and have no more in them than a natural
principle, and are in possession of no higher excellencies, that their
friendship will suddenly turn into enmity, and hatred, ruining both a man's good
name, estate, and liberty. Our Savior Christ who was so well accomplished, and
imbued with all spiritual wisdom, would not commit himself unto man, John 2.24,
25. Because he knew right well what was in man. They that disclose their
secrets to plausible and carnal men, they play the Thrashes part, to halter
themselves. I^ is said of this bird. Turdus sibi malum cacat, She leaves her
doing in the trees, and the Fowler makes Bird-lime of it to take her withal.
Wisdom will apply it.
Is it not then great folly in people, to lay open themselves to men whom they
know not?

2. That Gods righteous and holy children, who are both harmeless, and innocent
doves, even as quiet and peaceable in the world as domable, or indomable doves
are that sit upon their Columbaries, or other birds that perk themselves upon
the highest or lowest branches, or as Dolphins in the Sea, which intend the
Mariner no hurt nor harm, yet cannot the godly and the upright live at quiet
for them in the world, for their arrows are daily notched and upon their
strings, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart, Psalm. 11.2. It is
an infallible argument, that the spirit of the Devil is in those that have no
love unto the godly, for they tarry but here for a while, till death, the
Saints transporting chariot, comes to waft them out of it, of whom the world
is not worthy ( Heb. 11.38.) and then they will be gone from that unclean,
impure, and soulvexing rabble that they do live near, and amongst.

3. That the wiseman foresees a danger, and therefore hides himself, whilst the
foolish run on, and are punished, Prove. 22.3.

4. They have in the Salt-waters a frequent aspect of the ravenous, feral, and
preying sort of fish called a Shark, Shark.
of whom the Mariner is more afraid than of all the fish in the Sea besides.
Some have observed of this fish, that they have not stuck to clammer up upon
their ship sides, out of a greediness to feed upon the Sailors in their ships.
This Pickroon, if he can but take any of them bathing themselves in it in the
Summertime, he will tear them limb from limb, so great a lover he is of the
flesh of man. To describe you this creature, I must tell you, that he is of
very great bulk, and of a double or treble set or gang of teeth, which are as
sharp as needles, but God out of his infinite wisdom considering the
fierceness, and violence of the creature, has so ordered him, that he is
forced to turn himself upon his back, before he can have any power over his
prey, or otherwise nothing would escape him. This fish has dismembered many a
poor Seaman, and also taken away the life of many a man, before ever they
could be rescued out of their cruelty.

Meditations.
1. The sight of this creature imprinted no less than this in, and upon my
spirit, That sin has not only brought a curse upon the earth, and upon, and
into, many of the creatures that are upon the Land, Psalm. 8.6. The foul of the
air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the
sea. Not so now. Fallen man has lost (Imperium suum, and Imperium sui) the
command of himself and the command of the creatures.
but also into and upon those that be, and now are also in the Seas. Insomuch
that there is both great danger in walking amongst them, and sailing upon the
Seas. Sin has exceedingly dishonored man, in respect that the creatures have
such ferity, and audacity in them, to disown him, and to rise up in arms
against him, whom at the first, they owned as their Supreme.

All the creatures when they came before Adam, subjected themselves, but now
not so, for that was in the time, or state of man's innocence, and integrity, in
which if he had permained and continued, he might still have expected the
same, or a more willing obedience and subjection from them, than either now is,
or can be had since the fall. Certainly they should then have carried man, and
not have groaned under their burden as now they do, The Greek word is (...),
and it imports thus much, that all the creatures stand upon tip to listening,
and harkening for the day of their deliverance.
Romans 8.21. Look upon all the creatures, and tell me what hearts they have to
serve sinful man! It is true, God gave man at first dominion over all the
creatures, Genesis 1.26. And this prerogative being given to man, the question may
be, to what man, and in what condition? not to sinful man, but to man after
Gods own Image and likeness, to man made upright, Eccles. 7.29. Not to the
ungodly man, so that the prime end of all the creatures service, was directed
to righteous man, man after Gods own Image and likeness, but for the creatures
to serve wicked, ungodly, and unrighteous men, is both beyond, and besides the
prime end, and therefore according to their nature, they groan (because they
obtain not their first end) that is, they are not pleased. Indeed they are not
intelligent, and in that respect they know it not, but yet it is against the
first law of their creation that they should be servants unto wicked men, they
were not created for that end. If the Horse, the Ox, etc. knew but thus much,
it would greatly displease them, but it is not fitting, nor convenient that
they should know it, because it would be great aggravation to, and of their
sorrows.

If man had continued in that happy estate he was in at first, then would there
have been no such fear of the Lion in the wilderness, nor of the Bear in the
Forest, nor of the Wolf, or Tiger by land, or of the Shark, and Crocodile by
water.
I am very apt to think that all the creatures of what kind or sort soever,
would have been willingly serviceable unto man, and never groaned under their
service, as at this day they do, provided man had not so relapsed, and turned
into sin. It is probable, that if man had continued in his purity, and
primitive integrity, that creatures should have fawned upon him, and when ever
he had pleased to come amongst them they should have obeyed him, and not been
so ready to prey upon him as now they are, by reason of that nature that is
come into them since the Rebellion of man.

5. They want not for objects, the greatest want I see amongst the Mariners is
pondering, meditating, and contemplating hearts. In their voyages to Greenland
(tempore oportuno) at the time of the year, in that slaughtering house of the
world, they have not only a sight, but hot disputes and skirmishes with the
great and warlike Horses of the Seas, Sea-horses.
which to take their pleasure come out of the water to range upon the land, in
great, and (almost) innumerable Troops. Sometimes by three or four hundred in a
flock; sometimes more, and sometimes less. Their great desire is to roost
themselves on land in the warm Sun; and whilst they adventure to fall asleep,
by their appointment, they give orders out to one of the company to stand
sentinel his hour, or such a certain time, and upon the expiration of it,
another takes his turn upon the watch whilst the rest sleep, during such time
till it goes round amongst them. And provided any enemy approach them, the
Sentinel will neigh, beat, kick, and strike upon their bodies, and never leave
till he has rowsed them up out of their snorting slumbers to shift for
themselves, and betake themselves to the Seas. But Sailors being too cunning
for them, get betwixt them and the Sea, and fall a beating out the brains of
the first that comes to hand, on purpose that their great bodies, may be a
stop to the rest that come with such violence to make for the Sea. And by this
project, many sober, solid, and honest minded men that use the Seas, have
averred that they have killed of them whilst they have been no longer able for
want of breath and strength. And the reason why they kill so many of these
creatures is, because their teeth is of great worth and value, and very
vendable in the Southern parts of the world.

Meditations
From this Creature I have learned to apply thus much unto my self in
particular, That it is a very dangerous thing for a man to be out of his
general and particular Calling. I remember what I have read of a certain young
woman, who was undoubtedly something a kin to spruse gadding Dinah, Genesis 34.1.
she had a strong desire to go unto a Stage Play, and that upon the Lords day,
which was indeed contrary to her profession and principles; well, you will say
she smarted soundly for it when you have heard the story, in her passage on,
before ever she got to it, Satan met with her, and arrested her, and
afterward took possession of her, and thereupon she was most grievously
tormented with that unclean Spirit, and she exceedingly bewailed her
unwarrantable going forth upon that day about such an unlawful action, and
Satan (the Devil) being asked the reason of his possessing of her, told them,
Inveni came infundo meo, I found her upon my own ground. The applicatory part is
very fair in view to him that has a seeing eye.

I have heard of a very admirable passage that has been backed again and again
by the good and honest people in one part of Kent, It is good walking by
warrant in every thing, as Israel did by the Cloud.
how that to their knowledge, there was a very gracious man (a neighbor) that
was walking in the fields about the shutting in of the evening (probably to
meditate as Isaac did, for he was a very spiritual heavenly-minded man in all
his talk) he cast up his eye upon the sky, and he beheld a cloud as it were
descending, and hastening to come to the earth, and at last he observed it to
draw nearer and nearer him, and that in another form than before, now it was
got into the shape and likeness of a Foal, and so lighted into the place he
was walking in, at a very little distance from him, unto whom the good man
being full of faith, spoke on this wise, What art thou? I am says he, the
Prince of the night; Well, said the good man, God is God of the day, and God is
God of the night, and God is God unto all those that walk in his way, and Avoid
Satan, and thereupon the unclean Spirit vanished. Certainly it is good being
well employed. But when men are out of their Callings, and out of Gods ways,
it is as ill with them then as it is with the Deer that breaks out of the Park,
and straggle, and range into the fields and pastures of others, who will not
let them take any rest, but are evermore setting on them every Dog to chase
them, and this is their experience of it at last; when we were in our bounds,
it was better with us than now it is, for then we were (Venantium procul a
dentibus canorum rabiosis) in safety from the clamouring and pursuing Dog, and
after this manner they lamented, and bewailed their going forth. Nay the rest
said they, that kept themselves in the Park, whilst we broke out, are (extra
telorum jactum) put of danger. It is an observation that Out-lying Deer, are
never seen to be so well liking as those that keep themselves within the Pale,
and the reason is assigned, that those straglers, though they have more ground
to range over, more grass, and ground to take their repast upon, yet are they
in constant fear, as if conscious that they are trespassers, and being out of
their protection, because out of the Pale of the Park, this makes their eyes
and ears always to stand sentine for their mouths.
Prove. 27.8. As the bird that wanders from her nest, etc. Whilst the bird keeps
her nest, she is safe enough from the Kite, the Falcon, snare, gin, and
Fowler, where as when out of it, she is endangered by them.

I need not trouble my self in the application, these instances preach
themselves, only be pleased to take thus much notice, that I shall forbear my
many other meditations, because this Book would swell into too great a Volume.

6. The Whale is a mere Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, etc.
They have a very frequent sight of the Leviathan, which is one of the greatest
Sea-beasts, or Monsters of all the creatures that are to be found either in
the Seas, or upon the Land. What the sweet and blessed Spirit of the Lord is
pleased to say of him in that Job 41.12. the very same shall I conclude with,
that I will not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion.
And this Scripture its wonderful pregnant in the describing of him (in very
elegant Dialect, and excellent Rhetorical Phraseology) what he is in the Seas.
Can thou draw out Leviathan with an hook? That is, can thou by an angling
line bring such a beast as he is out of the Seas in that order thou do pull
small fishes out of some shallow standing Pond, or running Rivulet? Here the
Lord speaks of him in opposition unto small Fishes that are caught by small
Line and Angle.

Verse. 8. Lay thy hand upon him, Whale.
remember the battle, do no more. Give me leave to run over a few of these
verses, 5. Ver. Will thou play with him as with a bird? Will thou bind him for
thy Maidens; that is, Can thou handle him like a bird that will come at thy
chat and beck? It is impossible to reduce this feral creature unto that
domableness that young women might play with him, who has so much dreadfulness
and ferity in the very shape, proportion, and countenance of him.
which lie so fair in my way, and you will have him lively enough emblemed, or
limned out unto you. The spirit of the Lord then seems to say from those words,
draw but near this terrible creature, and offer him but the least violence, and
he will make the stoutest of your hearts to quake and tremble, and wish to be
out of his reach. When the Mariners go about to kill of these Sea-beasts, it
stands them in hand (as indeed they are very careful) to have their line ready
to vere forth, otherwise when wounded, the Whale flies with such violence, that
she would pull an hundred boats underwater, so fast does the line thunder out
of the boat, that the boats head it often times set on a fire, did not the
Mariners throw on water to quench it. When they wound the Whale, it is
observable that blood will spurt up twenty or thirty fadom high into the air.
This creature is of such an incredible, and inexpressible strength and force
in the Seas, that in Greenland (that great Whale-slaughtering place of the
world) when they come once to dart an Harping-Iron into him, he will so rage,
rend, and tear, that if there were an hundred boats or shallops near unto
him, he would make them fly in a thousand shivers into the skies.

Verse. 9. Behold the hope of him, is in vain, shall not one be cast down at
the sight of him? God would here set him forth, as indeed he is, a very
formidable creature, insomuch that there is very small hopes of taking of him,
because his assailants and pursuers may as well be slain in the battle, I and
sooner too, than escape. They that adventure to encounter him, cannot say, we
will come off conquerours, for there is many a boatfull of lusty, hardy, and
stouthearted fellows, that leave their bones in the Sea by meddling with him.
The very sight of this creature is so terrible, and dreadful affrighting, that
it would even share one to behold him, when he raises himself up above the
waters, which is with such majesty, and fierceness, as if he were able to
overturn the greatest ships that sail upon the Ocean.

Verse. 13. Who can discover the face of his garment, or who can come unto him
with his double bridle? The meaning of the words is, who can or dare go unto
him in the waters, as he can unto a gentle and tamed horse that feeds in the
fields, or stands in the stable? Can any one go to him in the Seas without
shipping? or can any one go to him in shipping as the stable groom does, unto
his geldings, with halter, or with bridle? He that shall venture either to
saddle, or bridle this unruly, and indomable beast, never need to look to come
off again with life, and his bones unbroke in his skin.

Verse. 14. Who can open the doors of his face? his teeth are terrible round
about. A man might as well go and take a wild Lion by the chaps, or a truculent
Bear, (or a merciless Tiger) by the ears, as meddle with this creature after
that manner. They that will attempt the killing of these beasts, stand in need
of a great deal of art, skill, and dexterity, otherwise it may cost them their
lives, were there a thousand of them in a boat together. When this creature
comes once to receive a mortal blow, what by expense of blood, and extreme pain
which he undergoes, he gives up his life to him that gave it, and his body to
his pursuers, and at such time as this, may any one go unto him, and look upon
him, and open the doors of his mouth, for there is neither life nor strength in
him then to make resistance. (but were he living, all the men in the world
could not hold him, nor do so by him) Now may they take a view of his head,
When the victory is got over the Whale, then they may go round about him, and
tell all his goodly fins, which are as so many Oars upon his sides, to row his
great and corpulent carcass to and again in the Seas at his pleasure, which are
reckoned to be three hundred and upwards, and by these he goes at what rate
he ploases in the waters, as violently as an arrow out of a bow, or a bullet
out of a piece of Ordnance.
in which are eyes as large as some pewter dishes, and room enough in his mouth
for many people to sit in. Now may they look upon his terrible teeth, and
handle his great and tree-like tongue, which is upwards of two yards in
breadth, and in length longer and thicker than the tallest man that is upon the
earth. Out of which part the Marines extract above an Hogshead of Oil.

Verse. 20. Out of his nostrils goes smoke as out of a seething pot or
cauldron. In the Mediterranean I have seen, and observed these creatures, but
it is not very usual to see any store of these beasts in those Austral parts,
for there be more in those parts of your Minor Whales, and Granpisces, than of
those Major Sea-beasts. In smooth water, warm, and calm weather, they are now
and then to be seen sporting and playing of themselves, and showing their
great and massy bodies above the waters, unto the aspect of the ships that sail
hard by them in the Seas. One while rising up, and another while falling down,
one while appearing, and by and by disappearing, and in their mounting up above
water, there goes evermore a smoking breath out of their Nostrils, as if it
were the smoke of some thundering Bombard or piece of Ordnance, the report of
which is commonly audible above a mile. In some serene mornings I have seen
many of them playing and sporting of themselves in the Seas, Is not this a most
formidable creature, that sends out a smoke out of his Nostrils as if it were
the smoke that flies out of a great gun, or a smoke that comes out of some
great seething vessel, when taken off the fire?
at a great distance one from another, and sending forth such strange, and
prodigious smoaks and fumes, as if there were some Town or Village of smoking
chimneys in the Seas. Until I became acquainted with their postures, I have
been oftentimes put into no small wonderment, what smoke it should be that
flies so high above the waters.

Verse. 25. When he raises up himself, the mighty are afraid, by reason of
breakings, they purify themselves. When he is pleased to show himself upon the
waters, and to come forth out of the deeps, to the view of all that shall or
dare behold him, he puts them into an astonishment, and trembling fear, and
pavor. Sword, and buckler are no weapons to fight him withal; for such is the
fierceness of his motion in the waters, that the great and burdensome ships
cannot make their way with that speed that he will do, though they have the
stiffest and strongest gale that ever blew. This beast (seems the Lord to say)
will make the boldest, and the hardiest of men to betake themselves to flight,
and prayer, and seriously to consider of their latter end, before they can get
clear of him after they have once encountered him.

Verse. 31. He makes the deep to boil like a pot of ointment. I have observed,
that when this creature is pleased to cut his sporting capers in the Seas, and
to take his frisks, and skipping gambals, or to dance his musical galliards in
the waters, The sight of this creature has put me to a Me non tantum admiratio
habet, sed e^tam stupor.
being then in his pomp, and grandeur, all the waters forsooth fly round about
him in fomeing froth, and bubble, which has oftentimes occasioned that in the
Psalms to come into my mind, Psalm. 104.26. There is that Leviathan whom thou
have made to play therein. This creature is very much delighted in playing, and
sporting of himself in the waters, insomuch that I have observed of them, to
curvet and rear* themselves directly upwards out of the water, so that the
waters have flown this way, and that way into the very air (at his falling
down again) he has been so much out of the water with his great, and massy body.

Verse. 32. He makes a path to shine after him, one would think the deep to be
hoary. This creature being of such an incredible magnitude, latitude, and
longitude, whose fins are like to the boughs or branches of the tallest Cedars,
and are the Oars which row and carry on the great vessel of his body withal
from place to place at his pleasure, The Whale puts as admirable a beauty upon
that part of the Sea his body swims in, as the Sun does upon the Rainbow, by
gilding of it with its golden, and irradiating beams.
by which when he comes, and makes his princely appearance near unto the
surface of the waters, the Seas where he is are of such a luster, verdancy,
and greenness, as is most admirable to behold, insomuch that if this creature
never showed himself at all, one might know where he is by the shining of the
water, were he a mile or two in distance from the ship the Mariners sail in.
The often sight of this clear truth, has not been a little delightful unto me.

The sight of this creature, 1. Meditation. Naturalists tell us, that the Whale
never swims any way without his Pilot (which is a small kind of fish, called
Musculus) for he being a deep drawing vessel, stands in need of a guide to
direct him, lest he should either run on ground, shallows, creeks, rocks, and
sand^, and when he comes near any of these, his Pilot gives him warning and
intelligence.
thus beautifying of the Seas, imprinted no less than this upon my heart, that
the Saints and servants of the most high God should shine with a bedazeling
luster and beauty, in the several places of the world they live in. Ezekiel. 43.2.
The earth shined with the glory of the Lord. Holiness has a majesty in the
countenance of it. How should the people of God get, and labor for shining
lives, shining faces, and shining conversations? hereby comes the Gospel of
Christ to be honored, and others encouraged to come unto Christ, and to be
won with the love of the truth; and this is that which our Savior expressly
commands, when he says, Matthew. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that
they may glorify God, etc. and that they may say, yonder is a child of God,
and yonder is a believer, and yonder is one that lives up in very deed to the
height of his profession.

Verse. 33. Upon earth there is not his like, for he is made without fear. Look
and range all the whole earth over, look into all the storehouses of Gods
creatures, examine, and run through the deeps, and the earth round about, from
East to West, and from the South into the North, none shall or can be found
either in the Sea, or on Land, resembling this intremendous and fearless
creature, all creatures else are fearful, and timorous, and are not without
something of fear in them, but there is none at all in this.

This has imprinted upon my spirit, 2. Meditation.
no less than a bewailing of thousands, yea of millions of people that live in
the world, as if they would tell all round about them, that they are of this
Leviathan Metal, without all trembling fear of God, the fear of sin, and the
fear of hell, as if they had neither sins to be pardoned, souls to be saved,
heaven to look after, nor a God to serve, and please.

Verse. 34. He beholds all high things, he is King over all the children of
pride. This creature, it seems, is not without pride, loftiness, and arrogance,
swelling with selfe-confidence in his own strength, (who is of a conceited
undauntedness of spirit) out of a scornful opinionativeness, that the mightiest
and greatest of monsters, either in the Seas, or upon the Land, are not
comparable to him, accounting them his inferiors, and himself the supreme, and
sovereign of all the elementary creatures whatsoever.

7. I cannot but write this upon these three crearures, Creaturae ego Creatorem
admiror!
They have many times a frequent sight of that pleasurable, and most delightful
fish-combat that is betwixt the Sword-fish, the Whale, and the Thresher, the
manner of this Fish-fight is admirable, and very contentful to behold, for the
Sword-fish is so weaponed, Sword-fish.
and well armed to encounter his enemy, that he has upon his head a fish-bone
that is as long, and as like to a two-edged sword, as any two things in the
world resemble one another, save only that there be amany of sharp spikes, or
scuers, as it were, upon either edge of it, and the property of this Fish is to
get underneath the Whale, and there to riple him, and rake him all over the
belly, which will cause him to roar, and exclaim upon the Thieves that beset
him, as if there were a dart in the heart of him, and the Tresher plays his
part above table, Thresher.
for when his partner forces him upwards, he lays on to purpose upon the
Whales back, insomuch that his blows are audible two, or three miles in
distance, and their rage and fury is so great against the Whale, that one would
think they would cut him, and thrash him to pieces.

8. Amongst the rest of the works of God in the waters, they have a frequent
sight of that strange sort, and kind of fish, Sea-swine.
called (Porcus Marinus) the Seahog, or Swine. This creature is headed like an
Hog, toothed, and tusked like a Boar, and this kind, consort and keep much
together, What hurt and harm Swine do on land when they get into fields of
Corn, Meadows, and Pasture-grounds, far greater hurt, harm, and havoc, do the
Sea swine make in the salt waters by their killing up of the great and small
fishes that be in it.
according to the Proverb, Pares cum paribus facillime congregantur. These
beasts take such delight in one another company, that they are to be seen in
greater troops and herds, than the greatest land-herds of Swine that ever were
seen, for they are not comparable unto the multitudes that be of them, and are
in the Seas; sometimes a Porpise troop is to be seen consisting of four or
five hundred, and sometimes more, and sometimes less, running and ranging, and
snorting in the waters, like the snuffing and snorting of Swine at land, or as
a pack of Hounds that run straggling and bawling after an Hare.

I have observed, that when this fish has been wounded by shot or Harpingiron,
that he is no sooner peirced, and mortally wounded, but every one of the same
kind will follow him with the greatest violence that can be, striving and
contending who should beat him first, and have their teeth and mouths the
deepest, and fastest in his carcass: now whilst they are living, they will not
meddle with one another; but when dead, or dying, they will fall foul upon them
as their proper right and due.

It brought this into my mind. 1. Meditation.
That when a man is once down, and underfoot in the world, that every malapart
Pedantick is ready to set his foot upon him. Lucianus Timon when he lived in
prosperity, was the sole spectacle of Greece, who but Timon then loved,
honored, and applauded by all, every one offering their service to him, and
seeking to be a kin to him, out when his gold was spent, fair possessions gone,
Timon was then of no more value with them. I leave the Application.
Every one looks upon the Sunrising of a man, but they will never look upon
his Sunsetting.

9. They are not without a frequent sight of that admirable fish called the
Sea-calf, Sea-calf.
which is both headed and haired like a Calf, swiming oftentimes with his head
above water. There be very many of this kind, in, and about the several
Islands in Scotland (being providentially sent into those parts, I have
observed very many of them) at night they will come on shore to sleep and rest
themselves, and early in the morning, they will betake themselves to the Sea,
not daring to stay on land for fear of surprizals.

1. Meditation.
It has brought this to my mind, that many take the night (in the States
service) for their cloak and knavery. As the Thief, and the Adulterer, that Job
tells us of, used to do, Job 24.15, 16. The eye of the Adulterer waits for the
twilight, saying, No eye shall see me, and disguiseth his face. In the dark
they dig through houses which they had marked for themselves in the day time;
they know not the light.

Sea-turtle.
10. They are not destitute of a frequent aspect of that wonderful, and
Jehovah-extolling-creature called the Sea-Turtle, If the Turtle float long
above water, then will the Sunbeams harden her shell, that she cannot go down
any more into the Sea, but lie for a prey both to Mariners that go through the
Seas, to fishes in them, and f^wls that live upon them.
or the Tortoise. This Bird-fish at the time of the year constantly leaves the
Sea, and betakes her self to the shore, where she will shoot an infinite
number of Eggs, and cover them in the sand, and as soon as ever she has done,
she departs the place, and makes for the Sea again, not daring to stay and
brood them, as other birds will do, because she has no wings to fly withal,
and to help her self, if in case she should be set at. And when her young
ones are once hatched (which come to that maturity by reason of that warmth
that is in the sand) they will go as directly toward the Sea, as if they had
been in it many a time before they had their being, and although the Sea be a
mile or two from the place the old one left her Eggs in, out of a natural
instinct they will find the Sea, although it be out of fight.

It is observable, that if any of these Sea-fowl be taken on land (as
oftentimes they are by Seamen) that they will never give over sighing,
sobbing, weeping, and bewayling of their Captivity as long as life is in them,
tears will drill, and trickle from their eyes as from children, in great
abundance.

The sight of this creature imprinted no less than this upon my spirit, 1.
Meditation.
that all those affronts, indignities, wrongs, and injuries that the righteous
ones do suffer in this world, whose eyes are evermore running down with tears,
like the surprised Sea-turtle, shall turn to their good, and the time is
advancing on, when sighing shall fly away, fears, cares, troubles, griefs,
wrongs, and afflictions shall cease, and all tears be wiped away from their
eyes, Jam. 1.8. The support of the Apostles spirit lay in this, that the coming
of the Lord was drawing near, and that was one thousand and six hundred years
ago, therefore what cause have all the godly to rejoice in that that time is
one thousand six hundred years the nearer than it was in the Apostles time.

11. They have oftentimes a sight of that admirable Fish called the Torpedo,
Torpedo.
or the Cramp-fish, which is endued with a very prodigious and clandestine
quality, if it be but touched, or handled, the body is presently stunned, and
benumbed, as an hand or leg that is dead, and without all feeling. I have known
some that have taken of this kind at unawares, who have not a little lamented
and repented of their infelicitous and incogitant misery; They have been for
some hours in a very desponding estate, whether they should ever recover their
pristine constitution, and health again, or no?

1. Meditation.
It laid no less than this applicatory truth upon my spirit, That it is
dangerous handling, touching, or looking upon any of those prohibited objects,
the Lord has writ a Noli me tangere upon. Elisha's servant had a very good
stomach to finger and digest Naaman the Assyrians silver, 2 King. 5.22.27.
and golden wedges, but no sooner were they in his hands, but the Leprosy was
upon his body: Better is a little with right, than great revenues without
right, Prove. 16.8.

12. They have a frequent sight of that Water-beast called a Crocodile,
Crocodile.
and in respect that he lives in the water as well as upon the land, I will
bring him in amongst the rest; of these there be to be seen both in Egypt and
the Indies, he is of a scaly and impenetrable substance, tongue-less, say
some, but marvellously cruel toothed. It is said of this creature, that he
will weep over a man when he has devoured him, and the reason of it is, not
out of pity, but out of an apprehension of his want of another prey to live
upon, from whence started that Proverb of Lachrymae Crocodili.

The sight of this creature, did fasten, 1. Meditation.
and fix thus much upon my spirit, That it is a very common thing for
desperate, hasty, passionate, and hot-spirited men, to kill, Sailor, Sailor,
Let the life of a man be precious in thy sight, God will have no murdering, if
thou will fulfill thy bloody mind in thy brutish challenges, think with thy
self, that thy life lies at the sta^e to answer his whom thou gracelesly goes
about to take away. Thou art just then going to the Devil when thou art about
such work. I would all the Murderers in the world would spend a few hours in
serious consideration of these Scriptures, Numb. 35.30, 31, 32. 2 King 24.4.
Whither go all Murderers when God will not pardon them, but unto the Devil?
and commit murder in their hot blood, but when in their cold, it has cost
them many a tear to get the guilt of it washed off, Psalm. 51.14. When Murder
was sound in David's hands, he could take no rest day nor night, till he found
a pardon from the hands of the Lord for it, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness,
O God, thou God of my salvation; The blood of the murdered stuck upon his
stomach, and the like it will be, and do to every one that bathe their hands in
innocent blood.

13. They have sometimes a sight of that strange kind of creature called a
Meermaid (q. Maris mulier) and the Meerman also (q. Maris vir) which is very
admirable, Meermaid.
of these here be both male and female. The Seamen have a sight of these
sometimes in their Voyages into the Indies, but their espying of them proves
very unfortunate, and ominous, for when they appear, they presage no good to
the Mariner. Storm and shipwreck often ensues those ships that gets a sight of
them. I have heard of the honest, and soberest of men that frequent the Seas
say, that they have seen of these sort of creatures, but presently after has
the winds rise, clouds begin to drop, and Seas to rage, and swell to their
terror and affrightment, as if all were a going to wrack and ruin.

14. They have a frequent aspect of that wonderful and impenetrable sort of
Beasts which the Mariners call an Alligator. Alligator.
This creature is mostly visible in the Indies, and in respect that he lives
in the water, as well as upon the land, I give him his entity amongst the rest.
This Beast is of a vast longitude and magnitude (some say many yards in length)
in color, he is of a dark brown, which makes him the more invisible, and
indiscernable when he lies his Trapan in the waters, and Sea sides, as it were
an old liveless tree, or as one destitute of motion, and his only subtilty and
policy of lying conchant is, to get hold of the fat, This beast has his three
tyer of teeth in his chaps, and so firmly scaled and armed with coat of Male,
that you may as well shoot, or strike upon or at a Rock and Iron, at offer to
wound him.

This beast is of a very slow pace, and goes jumping, leaping, and gathering up
of his body, and had not the wisdom and goodness of God so ordered it, he
would soon make the Indies uninhabitable, for he would kill up all the people,
and the varieties of Cattle, and creatures that be in the Mountains.


and wild Cows and Bullocks that be in those parts in great abundance, when
they come down out of the woods and mountains to cool themselves in the waters,
but no sooner are they in the water, but he has hold of the throat of one or
other of them, which he tears to pieces. Of such strength is this beast, that
no creature is able to make his escape from him, if he get but his chaps
fastened in them. This beast at his pleasure goes into the waters, and again
unto the land.

Now lest I should be too tedious both to you, and to my self (in a bitter,
restless, and uncomfortable Sea, either to write, or study in) I will take
leave of the scaly inhabitants in the salt waters, which I might have asserted,
for indeed I have but spoken of small, or very little in comparison of what
Seamen have experience of, both as to their kinds and qualities; but this I
hope will serve for a praelibamen unto any that are either delighted in
reading, or taking a view of the works of the Lord in the Seas.

The second circumstance then comes above board to be discoursed on, and that
is about Terrestrials, under which term I am minded to comprehend and handle
some of those creatures, that are both, 1. Volatile. 2. Gressile. 3. Reptile.


And these are objects which none but those that go down into the Seas, either
do or can behold.

Pelican.
1. Volatile. They that go down to the Sea in ships, They have a very ordinary
and frequent aspect of that most amiable, and delectable bird, called the
Pelican, from the Greek word (I suppose) (...), perfozo, to beat, or pierce.

Naturalists say, that this bird to recover her young when they are upon a dye,
King John, late King of Portugal, to express his tender care and affections to
his people, and Subjects, would be emblemed by no other kind of creature than
the Pelican.
and wounded by stinging and mordacious Serpents, she will tear her body to
give them of her own dear blood to fetch life, and health into them again. The
sight of this creature has not procured little wonderment from me, when I have
considered her shape, and form, which is on this wise; she has a great bag or
sachel hanging under her bil (which is the likest unto a leathern pouch of any
thing that I can resemble it to) which will contain, and hold a full gallon (of
any thing, whether liquid, or unliquid) and upwards.

2. Amongst the rest of the works of the Lord, Eagle.
they have a frequent sight of that princely bird, called the Eagle, and where
her dwelling is, who is the Supreme Rex of all birds, and of her do all the
rest stand in awe, and give her the pre-eminence as their Sovereign. It is
observed of this bird, that she is attended with sharpness of sight, to
discover her prey, with swiftness of wing to hasten unto it, and with strength
of body to seize upon it. It is further observed of this bird, that she has
many followers, both great and small, unto whom she is very candid and
courteous, in the distribution of the prey she seizes upon, It is observed,
that there is this noble, and magnanimous spirit in the Eagle, that when she
is in want, and greatly suffers hunger, that she scorns to pout and make a
noise, and a clamor as other bird will do, but rests her self satisfied, If I
have it not now, I shall have it hereafter.
but if she toil long in seeking of it, then hunger (which is her durum
telum) puts her upon the falling foul of her followers.

3. They have a frequent sight of the fouls in Greenland every year, which are
(aestate ibi, hyeme attamen veniente avolantes) there for a while in the
summer, but gone long before the winter. When the Nocturnal time of the year
draws on, which is all night and tenebrousness, the birds make a terrible,
doleful, and dreadful howling, as conscious, or foreseeing of that dismal time
of black night's approaching, they then betake themselves to their wings, and
fly into other Countries, leaving that black-nighted part of the world unto it
self, and to the Involatile creatures that do inhabit in it, viz. Deer, Wolves,
Bears, etc. Which would, if winged, (or able to run out of the land) be gone;
for they take small pleasure to stay in it, but in respect they cannot pass the
Seas for want of wings, they are constrained to live in that uncomfortable
darkness, and insufferable cold.

Meditations.
1. That the two great lights of the Sun, What an uncomfortable place would
England be, if it had not the light of the Sun and Moon both in in the winter,
and in the summer?
and Moon, are wonderful comfortable, profitable, pleasurable, and delightful,
both to man, birds, and beasts, and very uncomfortable is their absence, either
unto the sick, the healthful, and the unhealthful. Eccl. 11.7. Truly the light
is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun. What cause
have we to bless the Lord for the light of the Moon, and of the Sun, that he
has not denied us their light, and that we have not our beings in those black,
and benighted parts of the world, that are all winter long without? The light
of the Sun is a sweet benefit, but not prized, because common and ordinary.

Manna was esteemed but a light kind of food, because common and lightly come
by, without any price, and money. David beholds the Sun with admiration, Psalm.
8. and not with adoration as an Idol. The Sun is a vessel, into which the Lord
gathered the light, which till then lay scattered in the whole body of the
Heavens. In Hebrew the Sun is called Shemesh, to serve, because God has made it
a servant unto and for the world.




2. God might have done by England, as he has done by Greenland. But blessed
be his glorious Name, he has dealt better by it, and with it.

3. It has laid this impression upon my spirit. That as birds, who by the help
of their wings will not tarry in that Nocturnal Land, but fly out of it into
other Countries, where they may have the blessed light of the Sun, and of the
Moon; What would the poor damned, and tormented in the pit of Hell give, that
they might come out of that dark, and black excruciating Hell that they do
howl, and roar in, to live in that lightsome, and glorious pearl-sparkling,
and diamond-glistring Heaven, where there is no need of Sun by day, nor of the
Moon by night? Luke 16.24. is a doleful spectacle of one crying out of the
burning flames he lives in.

4. They have a frequent aspect of that lovely, and amiable bird, called the
Stork, much noted by the Holy Ghost in Scripture. Stork.
As for the Stork the fir tree is her house, Psalm. 104.17. This bird uses
Holland and other places, and is very famous for her natural love unto her
young, and her young unto the aged again.

Storks when young, and able to help their young, when decayed, helps the aged
by feeding of them, when they are not able to go abroad to gather their food.
Her name comes of (...) in Greek in Latin, no more but Amor. The Graecians
call her Love, denoting, that she is the truest emblem of Love, of any
creature in the world again.

5. They have a vulgar aspect in the West Indies, of those various kinds of
foul (that be in those parts both small, Upon Sandhills there is to be seen in
the Summertime (say Seamen) whole bushels of eggs that are both of various,
and wonderful speckled colors.
and great) which are of diverse colors, some green, some blew, some red, some
yellow, some white, and other-some of a niger color. There they see the Parrat
flying in great flocks, and droves like to our Pigeons, and Pelicans, flying
in lines like to wild-geese. Such an innumerable number is there of all sorts
of fouls, that great, and broad rivers are covered over from side to side with
them.

6. They have a very frequent sight of that admirable bird, Ostrich.
called the Ostrich, whom some will compound to be both bird, and beast,
because she resembles the Camel in legs, and feet, in the head, and bill a
Sparrow. This creature is of such an hot digesting stomach, that it will
swallow great gobbets of Iron. I have known some to present them with a
two-penny, or a three-penny nail, which they have taken as greedily, as a cock
will pick up a barly-corn out of a dunghill.

Job 39.14. She leaves her eggs in the dust of the earth. In this now, this
creature differs very much from all other birds, who carefully sit to brood,
and hatch their eggs, and are very desirous to bring them forth, yet this
creature leaves hers in the sand, forgeting that the foot of the wild beast,
or the Traveller may come that way, and crush them.

Verse. 15, 16. She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not
hers: (and is it not thus amongst many Parents toward their children? Verse. 3.
What time she lifts up her self, fix scorns the horse and the rider. This
is to be understood, not that she is of that strength, and ability of body,
to contend with an horseman in fight, but in her wings, legs, and flight. This
bird is too ponderous indeed to fly, but what by the help of her wings and
legs together, the swiftest horse that runs will scarce fetch her up.
) When they are brought forth she is monstrously unnatural unto them, and the
reason of it is, God has given other birds an instinct of love, and providence
to love their young, which she is both denied, and deprived of.

7. They have a frequent aspect of a bird, which is called by the Mariner a
Fezerallo, Fezerallo.
which is a black-coloured bird, but somewhat less than a Sea- Gull. Such is
the truculent, and feral property of this bird, that he will give unkind
assaults to the Gulls (and the rest of the Sea-birds, who take great pains in
fishing) till that they vomit up all that they have caught out of their bellies
to feast this tyrant withal. This bird will not take the pains to fish
himself, as the Sea- Gulls, and other birds do, who fly up and down in the Seas
day by day to feed themselves, but he will have his diet, and daily commons
out of their panches, or else he will break their bones. It has been matter of
much wonderment unto me in the Sea, to observe this bird, The Hawk chases not
the Partridge with greater violence, than the Fezerallo does the Gulls in the
Seas, till they vomit up their almost digested modioum.
how he will hunt up and down in the Sea to find out the Gulls, and when he
has found them, he will not leave pursueing of them one by one, till they drop
the fish they have taken upon the waters, and when he has stooped down to take
it up, he will fall fresh of another Gull, and so upon the rest, till he has
satisfied his hunger.

1. Meditation.
1. The sight of this bird presently imprinted this collection upon my spirit,
That there is many an idle person in the Commonwealth (and more than ever, both
at Sea, and Land) that lives upon the sweat of another man's brow. What was said
of some Poets, may well be said of such, that Homer vomitted, and they licked
it up.

8. They have in the Indies a frequent sight of an infinite and numberless
number of Cranes, Cranes.
that dwell in that part of the world, which fly, and feed together in great
flocks, and troops. It is observed of these birds, When these birds fly our of
Cilicia over the Mountain Taurus, etc. they diligently carry with them in their
mouths little pebbles, lest that by their galling, and gagling they should
become a prey unto the Eagles, that listen to all such opportunities upon the
cragged rocks.

Uobrideled tongues bring themselves into much mischief often times, and rouse
the Eagles about their ears, whereas in little meddling is much security, and
tranquillity; and nothing said is soon amended.


that where ever they light, that they will appoint one to stand Sentinel, and
when his time is expended, there is another ordered to take his turn, and after
him another, whilst the rest both feed, and repose themselves. It is also
further reported, that the Crane-sentinel (lest he should sleep in his watch)
he will hold a little pebble in his claws, that if in case he should chance to
nod, or slumber, the fall of it will awake him. It is observed of these birds,
that if in case there be any jangling, or disagreement amongst themselves, the
King, and Supreme over them, and amongst them, quickly salves it up, and
moderates betwixt them.

9. They are frequently seeing an other sort and kind of bird, which is called
the Heron, which are in great plenty, and abundance, in the Indies, Heron.
and elsewhere. This is a foul that lives much about waters, and does
exceedingly abhor and dislike of rain, and tempests, and to avoid them, they
will betake themselves to their wings, and fly as far on high as ever they are
able, into and above the cloudy region, that they may be above the winds, and
rains that fall upon, and into, the lower world.

10. They are frequently seeing a sort and kind of bird, which the French call
an Hop-foy; and these are to be seen upon the banks in Newfound Land, Hop-foy.
and that which is admirable in them, is this, that they are so greedy of the
livers that the Fishermen throw out in the dressing of their fish, that rather
than they will forsake their desired food, they will be taken with ones hand,
and forfeit both lives and liberties for a worthless morsel.

11. They are ever and anon seeing of those strange kind of creatures in the
Indies, which the Spaniards call Muscitos, and these flies will draw the blood
where ever they light, Muscetos.
though it be upon the cloths, and not upon the bare skin. Insomuch that there
is scarce any sitting, standing, lying, or walking in the fields for them (in
the summertime) they are such a mordacious, and phlebotomizing creature.

12. They have a frequent sight of that strange kind of creature, called a
Fire-fly, Fire-fly.
which is an uncouch, and admirable light, and luster. In the night it shines
like the coal of a match. It is observed, The Indians (say Seamen) do use of
the Fire-flies in the night time, instead of candles, binding five or six of
them together, and by this bundle it affords them very good light in their
Booths and Cottages, even as well as if they had burning torches or candles to
spend in their houses.
that this creature carries four lights about him, two in the sight of his
eyes, sparkling like candles, and two which he shows when he opens his wings.

13. They have a sight of that sort of creature, that is commonly called, a
flying Locust, which are to be seen in great supernumerary swarms in Barbary,
Locust.
and other of the Austral parts of the world. Sometimes these creatures come in
such volatile multitudes, that they are observed to darken the very skies in
their military marches upon the wings of the wind. These, if God will but give
them a Commission, will take wing, and come and fall upon any Nation which he
pleases, and eat up all the fruits of the earth, the plenty, the fatness, the
sweetness, If that Proverb be true (Erucam viz pascit hort^s unam) that the
whole Country will scarce satisfy one avarous Caterpillar, what will then
satisfy a multitude? God knows we have a great many of these vermin,
Locusts, and Catterpillars in England, that do nothing in the world but eat up
the green f^^^ of God Word.
and the very greenness, and verdancy of Nations, they will devour, and swallow
up the grass, corn, and grape of Countries. Psalm. 78.46. Psalm. 109.23. I am
tossed up and down as a Locust. David offers to our view in this Scripture,
that they are carried to, and fro, up and down, at the will of the Lord, upon
the wings of the wind.

14. They are not indigent of the sight of those strange kind of birds, which
are neither able to fly nor to run so fast, as to escape their pursuers, in
body somewhat less than a Goose, but bigger than a Mallard, short, and thick,
having no feathers, but instead thereof a matted down that is very hard, and
their beaks are not much unlike to the bills of crows, these foul lodge in
earth as Rabbets do.

15. They have a sight and cognizance of that strange sort and kind of foul,
Noddy.
which is called a Noddy. It is observed, that when this bird is pleased to
take her flight into foraign Countries, being much toyled and wearied by flying
over that dreadful deluge (or Sea of water) she will betake her self to the
first ships she can descry, to rest her self upon, and the Mariners who both
know them, and are very observant of them, (or any other birds that light upon
their ships, which they know do come unto them out of a mere necessity) will
fall a hollowing and shouting at her, and after she hears that noise and
clamor below, the poor bird has no power to spread out her wings and be gone,
but the Seamen may run up the shrouds and fetch her down with their hands, for
there she sits as one bewitched or necromantickly enchanted.

16. They have a sight of that strange kind of bird, which is called by some a
Tumbler, Tumbler.
of which sort there be many in Barbary, which will fetch a flight up to the
Heavens, and then come tumbling down again, over, and over, as if some thing
were a falling in a praecipitant manner out of the Heavens with very great
violence. This bird is in shape, and form, like to one of our Land-Pidgeons,
differing a little in size and color.

17. They have a frequent sight of that domableness, that is in the major part
of the birds and souls that be in the Indies, how one may walk amongst them,
turn them over with their feet, It is observable, that the fouls in the Indies
will come and lay their eggs at ones foot (if they walk amongst them on their
Sandhils) and if they be upon their nests, they will not stir unless they pull
them off. The little Pygmies are forced to stand to their arms, when they hear
the sonorous alarms of the Cranes, who will come and carry them into the clouds.
and take them up in their hands, and it is probable, that this tameableness is
in them, because man is a great stranger to them, and seldom comes amongst them.

18. Amongst the rest of that novelty and variety of objects, they do tell us,
that if they shoot but off a gun in those parts and places where the Fouls lie,
that they will rise both off the waters, and from off the land, with such an
hideous, and sonorous noise, that one would think the very heavens were a
crashing and falling upon their heads. Their clapping of their wings make a
greater noise than an Army of horse and foot, when they are on their march.
Hence sings the Poet from the like experience.

Ad subit as Thrae^um volucres, nubemque sonoram,
Pygmaeus parvia currit Bellator in armis.
It would yield much laughter in our parts, to see a Pygmye, and a Craines
quarrel.

19. Amongst the rest of that novelty, and variety of creatures, they do survey
and behold, this is one, which is no less admirable than the rest, that they do
call Pemblico, because her usual and constant note is, Pemblico.
Pemblico, Pemblico; this bird is seldom seen on the day time, and in the night
she is very clamorous, but if heard by Seamen; it is oftentimes too true a
presage and prognostic of some dreadful storm, and tempest. When the Seaman
hears this bird in those occidental parts of the world, he looks for little
good, and moderate weather.

20. Cahow.
They have a sight of the bird called a Cahow, and is one of them, The Arara is
a bird which they often see, about the bigness of a Goshawk, seeming a whole
garden of Tulips, every feather being of a several color, which beheld in the
Sunshine dazles the eyes.
which is one of the nocturnal kind, and loves not to be seen in the day, but
in the night, as the Bat and the Owl with us, but in the night when all other
Foul are at roost and quiet, she will come forth, and if she hear any loud
sounding, hollowing, or shouting, she will make directly toward them, for
she has no power of her self to stay where she is, so that oftentimes when
Mariners have set up a shouting in the night, they would come and light upon
their heads and shoulders.

21. Dotteril.
They have a sight of the Dotteril, of whom they say, that whatsoever is done
in the sight of her, she will exactly imitate, and endeavor to do the like,
if an hand be but put forth, she will stretch out her leg, if they beck or
nod with the head, she will do the like with hers again. And all this time,
the poor silly bird has no power to fly away, but becomes a prey unto the
Fouler, after this ridiculous order.

22. It is observed of the Quail, that when he is grown weary with flying, that
he will light in the calm Sea on one side, resting of himself, with his other
held up above the water toward heaven, lest he should presume too long a
flight, so that at first he usually wets one wing, and lest he should despair
of taking a new flight afterward, he keeps the other wing dry.
Amongst the rest of that amaene novelty, and variety that they have in the
Seas is the Quail, in whose flight over the Sea, it is observed, that when this
bird is defatigable, and wearied with flying, that he will betake himself to
any ship that is within the sight of him, to rest himself upon it. Sometimes
great flocks and droves of these birds will light clogging and cleaving to the
yard arms of ships, as if they would break all down with their ponderousness.

Thus much shall suffice now to speak of Birds; and may I Apologize for my
self, it is but little, in comparison of that which others that have traveled
are able to report of. I will now take my leave, and run upon the other
particular that I promised unto you, and follow that rule of (Alium post alium
florem in pratis oarpere) smelling, and savouring of one flower after another.

The second circumstance comes now upon the stage to be insisted and descanted
upon, is of those creatures that are Gressile.

1. They that go down to the Sea in ships. Amongst the rest of that novelty,
and variety that they have in their viewing of the Creation, they have a full
eye-satisfying sight of one of Gods greatest and mightiest land-creatures that
be upon the face of the whole earth again, which is in Scripture called the
Behemoth, Elephant.
and with us an Elephant. This beast is of a crusty nature, and of an
impenetrable skin. Some Writers tell us, that there is writ in legible
characters upon the tongue of an Elephant, this noble and generous sentence,
The Lord loves a cheerful giver.

This beast is willing to let all sorts and kinds of creatures feed by him, he
medles not with them, nor molests them in any wise in the enjoyment of their
privileges. If there were as many several creatures nere to him as there were
Lambs upon the Sicilian hills, of whom the Poet sings, he would not meddle with
them. Mill meae Siculis errant in montibus aguae.


There is none of the creatures in all the Lords Storehouses that are like
unto him; view, examine, and survey all the beasts in the world, and you will
find none of them resembling of him for magnitude, strength, and wisdom, for
he is one of the amplest demonstrations of the power and wisdom of God, of
any other creature throughout the whole universe, that lives a sensitive life.

Job 40.15. He eats grass as an Ox. Though this creature now is of
wonderful strength, and greatness, yet by ordination harmless and hurtless. His
food is grass, and not flesh, even the very same that the beasts of the field
do live upon, and yet a far greater strength has he in his loins than any of
them. If God had appointed this beast to have eaten flesh, then would he have
killed up the poor and hurtless beasts of the field.

Verse. 18. His bones are as strong as brass, his bones are like bars of Iron.
There is not the like of this beast in the world, that is so firmly and
strongly made, and boned, and ribbed as he is. Those bones that are either in
the Ox, or in the Horse, which are the strongest creatures that are visibly
amongst us, are nothing comparable, and so may easily be broken, but the
Elephants are of greater strength.

Verse. 19. He is the chief of the ways of God; he that made him, can make
his sword approach unto him. He that made him, can bridle him, but man is too
weak an instrument, either to handle him, or command him.

Meditat. That Sin-burnt souls delight in nothing more than to fit under the
shadow of Jesus Christ when God is angry with them. Cant. 2.3. I sat down
under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.
Verse. 22. The shady trees cover him with their shadow, the willows of the brook
compass him about. These beasts being gendred, and bred up in hot Countries,
are naturally creatures of that vehement heat, that they desire the coolest
places and shades that they can find to hide themselves in from the heat of
the Sun, and the extraordinary warmth of the day, which is very scorching in
those Austral parts that they do live in.

Verse. 23. Behold, he drinks up a River and hastes not; he trusts that
he can draw up Jordan into his mouth. It is no small proportion of water that
will satisfy that extraordinary drought that is usually in this creature, for
he will continue a long time drinking in a brook or river, before that his
panch and thirst be filled and quenched.

This creature fears no danger, nor no affront whilst drinking, as other beasts
commonly do, because they are so timorous, in respect that their heads and
necks are so much stretched forth, and bowed down to take of the water.

Verse. 24. He takes it with his eyes; This beast will tear up young trees and
bushes, brambles, and shrubs by the roots, if they lie in his way in those
bewildered places that he inhabits. I have observed that the strength of this
creature is very great, in respect that he will take a man upon his Trunk, and
carry him on high as easily as I could carry a feather.
his nose pierces through snares. In the Margin it is, will any take him in his
sight; as much as to say, let him that will attempt any such thing be aware of
that: by his nose is to be understood his Trunk, with which he makes his way
against all snares, gins, or oppositions that be laid against him.

2. They that go down to the Sea in ships. Amongst the rest of that various and
manifold kind of objects that they have to look upon, is that indomable, The
Wilde-ass had rather have the barren lands of the world to live in, together
with his ease and quiet, than the fattest Fastures that the laboring Horse and
Ox do enjoy and go in, in any inhabited Nation in the world. In the
wilderness says he, I can eat and drink, and lay me down, and rise up when I
will, and walk whither I please, there is none to control me, whereas all
laboring beasts are under the servitude and command of man to do this and that
The Bull when wearied with the yoke, cried out, That it was better with him when
he did (inter vaccas, sylvas, saltusque peragrare) live at ease in
Pasture-grounds amongst the Cows.
and wild sort of beasts called a Wilde-ass. There be many of this kind to
be seen in the inhabitable parts of the world. The sight of this creature
presented that that is spoken of him in Scripture unto me, which I will take
occasion to lay down before you, with as much succinctness as I can.

Job 39.5. Who has sent out the Wilde-ass free? or who has loosed the bands
of the Wilde-ass? The meaning of the words seem to be this, That there be but
very few people in the world that would grant any serviceable creature that
freedom, and that ease and liberty that God has given him, they would make
use of them, and employ them here, and there, and every way, but God has given
this creature this privilege, that he is free from all servitude and bondage.

Verse. 6. His house is the wilderness, the barren land is his range. This beast
makes a very good shift to pick up a living in the abjectest and outcastenest
soils that is in the world, and in his portion he rejoices not a little, that
he is out of the hand, and sight of man, where he ows him neither homage,
service, nor subjection, as other creatures do.

Verse. 7. He scorneth the multitude of the City, neither regards he the
crying of the Driver. He is a perfect stranger unto man, and knows no
obedience that is due unto him, if they call and hollow after him, he scorns
to take any notice of them, as other Cattle will do, to go, and come at the cry
of the Driver.

I have known some of these wild creatures to be taken, and kept by the
Spaniards, but if they offered either to ride upon them, or set them unto any
work, they would lie them down, and dye upon the place they have stood upon,
rather than buckle to do any thing for man. It put this Scripture into my
thoughts, that this creature was sent out free, and being violently taken away
out of its native soil, it might very well resist, and tell man in the best
language that it could utter, that it would do nothing for him.

3. Amongst the rest of that Congeries, Passown.
and delectable novelty that they have of the works of the Lord, the Passown is
one of them, which is a very strange kind of creature; it is observed of the
female, that she has that prodigious faculty (if in case she be pursued) to
sup up her young ones into her belly, and betake her self to her legs to escape
them, and when she gets her self both out of sight, and danger, she can at her
pleasure, turn them out again.

4. Strange Sheep.
They have the sight of those strange kind of Sheep that be to be seen in
the Province of Cusk, which are of extraordinary height and length equal unto
our Kine, and are in strength, fully answerable unto them: Insomuch that two or
three heavy-bodied men have been seen to ride upon them. These Sheep have necks
like Camels, and heads bearing a reasonable resemblance unto ours in England.
Their wool is very fine and pure, and in those parts they use them to supply
the room of Horses, which they have not.

Auroughscoun.
5. They have a sight of the Auroughscoun, which resembles a Badger. This
creature lives on trees, and will leap from tree to tree, like our Squirrils
with us. But the Squirrils in Virginia are bigger than ours, for they are as
large as Rabbets are with us.

Assapanick.
6. They have a sight of the Assapanick, which flies after a very strange
manner, by spreading out of his legs, and stretching out the largness of his
skin, by which he can fly at a great distance, and so often times escapes his
pursuers, but if he had not this shift, he is so slow of foot, he would be
too often preyed upon.

Zebra.
7. The Zebra, which is a beast both for beauty and comeliness very commendable,
and admirable, whose form is after that exquisite shape and composure, that is
in the horse, but not altogether like him in swiftness; this beast is laid all
over with party-colored laces and gards from head to tail, and there be very
great herds of these visible in Africa, and other of the Austral parts of the
world.

His name comes of Porcus and Spina, because he is a thorny hog. This beast,
if assaulted with dogs, or men, will spurt out quils that he has armed in
readiness, that he will make the blood trickle down their legs and noses.
8. The Porcupine, of this kind there is many in the Indies, in bigness he
resembles a Pig, and his body is beset about with many sharp quils, and
prickles, which are as so many halberds that Nature has armed him withal, to
stand up in his own defense against any opponent.

9. Zibet, or the Sivet-Cat, Sivet-Cat.
which is a very admirable creature; for from this beast comes all that
precious drug of Sivet, which is no other but an excrement, that has its growth
not only in the cod, or arcane part, but in a peculiar receptacle, by its
increasing every day unto the weight of three pence, or four pence, which is
taken from the creature every day, otherwise, if it should not be taken once a
day, the creature would rub it forth and lose it.

10. The Muks-cat, Musk-Cat.
which is a very comely creature, not unlike to a Roe, both in greatness,
fashion, and hair; from which beast comes all our Musk and the growth of it is
on this wise; in the navel of it lies a little bag, in which that precious drug
has its residence, and when it draws on to its maturity, the beast is
frequently troubled with a pruritiveness, or a kind of itching, that forces the
creature to run against rocks, or stones, to dilate its sweet perfuming
liquors, and in process of time it fills up in the like manner again.

11. They behold, Apes, Monkies, Monkies.
and Baboons, which both in shape, and countenance (fit verbo venia) are very
near, and like unto man. There be great store of these to be seen in the
Occidental parts of the world, and especially where the Sugar Plantations are.
They are such lovers of Corn and Sugar, say the best sort of Travelers, that
they will come in great Troops, and fall upon fields of Corn, or Plantations of
Sugar, and appoint one to stand Sentinel whilst they feed, and burden
themselves, and if in case they see any of the Owners approaching, the watchman
gives a squeeking alarm, and they presently betake themselves into the woods,
and trees, where they neither can, nor will be spoke withal to answer the
trespass, This pleasure they have that travel in the Woods in the Indies, the
trees are full of Apes and Parrats (as if they bore no other fruit) one
chaseing of another with such noise, and chattering, that it is no hearing of
one another in discourse, and those that have young, are seen to go with two or
three about their necks fast claspt.
and if none come in the interim whilst they are plundring, and stealing, they
will every one of them carry their burden, and that they lay up against winter.

Bear.
12. The dancing Bear, which is a creature that is well known, in respect that
he dwells in diverse parts of the world. There be many of this kind in
Greenland, Nova Zembla, and those Septentrional parts of the world, which are
of a very large, and corpulent size. This beast ravens extraordinarily all
Summer, and kills many Deer, and other sorts of beasts, with which they grow
very far, but when the winter comes on, (says the Mariner) they cannot walk
abroad, by reason of that abundance of snow, frost, cold, and ice, that falls
most bitterly upon that uncomfortable side of the world, and therefore he is
constrained to keep his hole, and suck his pawe all the winter, to keep himself
alive withal.

13. The Buff, The Scythians were wont to use the skins of these beasts, to
make brestplates of for their wa^s.
who is headed and horned like an Heart, and in body shaped like a Bull, or Cow,
and in color resembling an Ass.

14. Amongst the rest of the works of the Lord, they are not without this
pleasant aspect, that the valleys in Greenland are richly clothed, and covered
over in many parts, with fat and goodly Herds of innumerable numbers of Deer,
of which the Mariner kills, These are to be seen gregatim currere, quodcunque
omne animal, cum humanitate communicate. Concolores aves pariter volare videmus.
and feeds on abundantly every year, till his return for England.

When I think with my self how these creatures live in an un-inhabited Land
where no man is, 1. Meditation.
it brings into my mind (that of Job 39.1. Can thou mark when the Hinds do
calve?) that God has an eye over all his creatures for good, and that to help
them when and where there is neither an hand to releeve them, nor an eye to
pity them. It is thought, as is apparent in Psalm. 29.8.
They how themselves, they bring forth their young. That God does for the good
of those creatures that live in deserts, Wildernesses, and uninhabited places
in the world, send out of the Heavens a dreadful thundering, which is heard
running and ecchoing up and down, from one side of the Porrests and
Wildernesses unto another, that thereby the ligaments of those creatures that
are with young are loosned, and by this voice of the Lord the travels of all
the wild beasts in the world are facilitated. The voice of the Lord makes the
Hinds to calve.
i. e. Surely that they may not wrong they young, or offspring of which they
are so careful, that they seem to strain and dilate themselves for the speedier
passage of their deliverance, and this is their natural midwifery. Psalm. 50.10,
11. Every beast of the forest, and the cattle upon a thousand hills is the
Lords, and he knows all the fouls of the mountains, and the wild-beasts of the
desert.

Wild-Goat.
15. The Rock-climing Wild Goat, which is undoubtedly the surest footed beast of
any other in the world, for they will go up unto the top of the inaccessiblest
Crag that ever yet was seen, without any staggering, haesitancy, or stumbling,
and when dogs are in chase of them, they will fly to the Rocks, where they do
know themselves to be both safe, and out of the reach both of dogs, and man. I
have not a little admired the nimbleness of this creature, when I have seen of
them, both in Norway, and other places, how they will climb places, that one
would think they would be praecipitated by coming upon them. This Scripture
has come into my thoughts, Job 39.1. Know thou when the wild Goats of the
Rock bring forth? I learn thus much from thence, that the eyes of God are in
every secret part, and corner of the earth, where man has neither being nor
dominion, and that all the various actions that be amongst his creatures, are
daily viewed by him.

16. The Tiger, Tiger.
which is of beasts the furiousest, and cruelest, he out-strips them all in
matter of truculency, and unmercifulness, his abode is usually in the hottest
Countries, because it is supposed, that their generation does require much
heat. This beast is of an incredible swiftness, and fierceness, especially in
the time of his lust, or when he has his young to bring up, and though many of
the Mariners be frequently skirmishing with him, yet notwithstanding all their
firelocks, and staffs, does he tear some of them to pieces, and makes his
escape.

17. The Lion, Lion.
who is indeed the Kingliest, and Princeliest beast of them all. This creature
is of that stately prowess, and most noble spirit, that he will not seek his
prey himself, but sends his Caterer, or Jack-call to run about to seek it him,
which very much resembles a dog, and this creature waits upon the Lion, and at
his pleasure searches him the bushes, and thickets in the wilderness, and when
he finds any beast worthy preying upon, he makes report thereof to his Lord,
and Master, Latrante voce, with a barking mouth, welk, welk, and the majestic
Lion answers him again with a teering mouth, as if it were the crack of a great
Gun, Bou, Bou, and as soon as he comes up to the creature, which has no power
to escape the Lion, after it hears his heart-daunting mouth, he seizes upon
it, and when the Lion is well fed, his servant Jack-call goes to dinner, and
not till then, but stands at a distance from him.

Wild-Cows.
18. The Wild-Cows, and Wild-Oxen, that be to be seen in the Indies, there be
thousands of these that run wild upon the Mountains, that are very tall,
goodly, fat, and broad-headed beasts, that know no homage unto man, nor will
not own him, but if they see him walking at a distance, they will leave their
pasturing and follow him, This dictares thus much unto me, that when God at
the first became an enemy unto man, because of his falling from him, all the
creatures did, and are also become his enemy in the world, every one of them
ready to fall upon him let him go where he will.
with as great violence to kill him, as any other feral creature in the world
will do.

Wild-bore.
19. The Wild-boar, of this sort, and kind of Wild-Swine there be without
number, that live in the Indies, ranging upon every hill, and Mountain, these
creatures are very fierce and furious, for if they set but an eye upon any man
that is walking to and again near unto them, It is observed of the Wild-Swine
in the Indies, that they will at some certain time (every year once) especially
when there falls much rain, come running down off the mountains, and creep into
holes to hide themselves, for they can endure neither rain, nor wind, at this
time they will come into the Indian towns, and out of the windows they will
kill them.
they will pursue him with the greatest ferity that can be, with their
bristles raund and their mouths wide open, which are beset on each side with
long, great, and dreadful tusks. But to avoid them, they betake themselves
into trees, out of which they will shoot, and kill many of them.

I may now take up the words of the Apostle in his Epistle unto the Hebrews,
11.32. and tell you, And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to
tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jeptha, etc. So truly the
time would fail me, I, and it would be too hard and too tedious an
undertaking for me, to go about in an uncomfortable Sea, to tell you of the
many more things, May it not now be said in the praise of the Seaman, that
he is a lad that walks with Apollo per Xanthi fluenta, and with Diana per
Eurotae ripas, and perjuga Cynthi, in suburbanis agris, and hortis irriguis,
ubi multiplex arborum genus, florum varietas, pomorum ubertas, fluviorum
cursus, parietum vestitus, avicularum melos, vallium amae^itas, and stagna
omnis generis piscibus abundantia, Juga florea dican Creationis errantque ripas.
that Seamen do behold in their travails, who are far more able to give you an
account thereof themselves than I am. What has been presented is but small, in
comparison of what is seen, and to be seen, and read of in the great volume in
the Creation; yet I hope sufficient to demonstrate, and prove the foregoing
proposition, That the most or the greatest part of the works of the Lord are
seen by Seamen.

The third circumstance then that offers to our view, is, of those creatures
that are of a creeping, crawling, and reptile nature, I will take the pains to
run over a few of them, and come unto the prosecution of that which is more
material.

1. Reptile. They that go down to the Sea in ships, Amongst the rest of those
delightful, and heart-taking objects that they have, that venomous creature,
called a Scorpion, is one, which in form, and shape resembles a Lobster,
Scorpion.
having many legs, and stings in the tail of it. There be many of these in the
Austral parts of the world, as Barbary, etc. and also in the Occidental in the
Indies. They lie amongst rocks and stones, and are harmless, but if trod upon
unawares, they will sting most mortally. They that are stung with them at any
time (to cure themselves) take hold of the Scorpion and bruises him in pieces,
and apply him to the place pained, and grieved, and are thereby in little time
recovered again.

2. They that go down to the Sea in ships, Amongst the rest of that amaene, and
voluptuous prospect that they have of the works of the Lord, the Asp is one,
Asp.
which is not unlike the Land-snake, whose eyes are red and flaming, but their
poison incureable, from whence that expression, The poison of Asps is under
their tongue. God out of his infinite goodness has cast a dimness and dullness
into the eyes of this creature, and also given it slowness of pace, that it
cannot do the mischief that it would.
This creature is very hurtful and perilous (and not a little a destructive
enemy) unto mankind if he can but approach unto him.

3. Amongst the rest of that sugared and dulce aspect that they have of the
works of the Lord, Camelion.
the Camelion is another, which is a very admirable creature, from whence
started that Proverb, Camaeleonte mutabilior, because of its perpetual
variableness. I know not well how to describe it (although I have seen of that
kind) it is as I conceive of a very aerie substance, The Camelion is thought
to live either upon the air, or upon Grasshoppers, Cataterpillars, and Flies,
because it has such an Adamantine atractiveness in the tongue of it that it
will not miss the smallest fly if come near unto it.
and very alterable in its colors. Pass but by it, and it will be first of
one color, and then of another, now white, then green, now red, then yellow,
etc.

4. The West India Spiders, Spiders.
of which it is observed, that they are of very large size; these are visible
to Travelers in their hanging upon trees after a most pleasant and admirable
manner (not in the least venomous) and of various colors as if all over-laid, I
have observed, when in Norway (walking in the woods of that Septentrional part)
that the Spiders threads are of an incredible strength, and will endure as much
viss to break them, as ordinary thread with us.
and dressed with gold, pearl, and silver, these creatures are of an eye
be-dazeling luster. The webs that these creatures do weave from tree to tree,
are made of a perfect raw silk, so strong with all, that birds of diverse kinds
are frequently caught in them.

5. The Crab, which is to be seen in innumerable numbers crawling and creeping
upon the sands on the Seashore in the Indies, they are of such a crawling and
ranging nature that whatsoever lies in their way, they will climb over it, let
it be house, rock, or mountain, etc. These creatures take great delight to go
into the woods, and to crawl up the bole of trees, and upon the bows and
branches of them, insomuch that they make a very dolorous, and turbulent noise,
knocking, and rattling in their shelly armor, that one would think there were a
multitude of men thundering in their arms in the woods, when as it is nothing
else but a multitudinous company of crawling Crabs.

But to recall my self, I will not expatiate any further in this circumstance,
for it is not a little dolorous and painful to me in an unmercifull element to
write of things, when that the Sea will scarce suffer me to hold my Pen in my
fingers, let this suffice.

The next thing that is in my eye is those many and various sorts and kinds of
trees that be in the world, and these are viewed, A short model of the names
of those various trees that are seen by those that travel over Seas.
found out, and discovered by those that sail in the Seas, I will run over a
few of them, and call them by their names, tell you what fruits they bear, and
the several benefits that the world have by them, and then I hope that you will
have an ample account of the things that are seen by those that go into the
Seas.

1. They that go down to the Sea in ships; Amongst the rest of the wonderful,
Palm.
and delectable creatures of the Lord, the goodly Palm is one, Put what weight
you will upon the Palm, and it will rise up again, says the Seaman. It is
thus (or should be thus with Christians) Plura sunt toleranda.
whose comely branches in antiquated times were carried (Sicuti quoddam
vexillum victoriolae) before the Victor, as a badge of victory and conquest.

2. They that go down to the Sea in ships, Amongst the rest of the sweet and
precious creatures of the Lord, the Nutmeg is one, which is not unlike to the
Peach, or Pear, the fruit of it is very like the Peach, Nutmeg.
but the inner part which is the Nutmeg, is covered, and interlaced with Mace.
When the fruit is ripe, the first, and outermost part opens, as our Walnuts
will do, and then the Mace will flourish and show it self in a very fair red
and ruddy color, which in ripening, turns in the conclude to a sad yellow.

This tree (resembles a graceless Sailor in a ship) it is very harmful unto all
round about it, and will not suffer other trees to thrive by it, if lying near
unto it.

Invidet alterius rebus macrescit opimis.


3. The goodly and lofty Pine, which is seen to grow in great and vast woods.
This wood is not subject to worms, nor to decay.

4. The Fir is one which is of a tall, vast, and incredible height, of which
all our yarding and masting is made for the ships that go in the Seas; there
be great and mighty woods of these, both in the Septentrional, and also in the
Occidental parts of the world. When I have been walking amongst them in Norway,
that Scripture has sprung in upon me, Psalm. 104.17. As for the Stork the
Fir Tree is her house. That bird that builds in the top of a Fir Tree is safe
enough from any hands coming up to molest her; if the Axe be not laid unto the
root of the tree, she is in as great security as any bird in the world,
because no boughs on the bole, save at the very top.

5. That wonderful and admirable sort of tree, Cocus.
called a Cocus tree, which is seen in many parts of the world. It is observed,
that this tree is never without fruit, which is shelled about like our Nuts,
but far larger, and also of a different form and shape, some of these shells
when the innermost substance is taken forth, are known to hold near upon a
pint. The leaves of this tree are said to be very useful to the people in
those parts where they grow, to afford them coverings for their houses, and for
their Tents Mats; besides several other things to no small admiration.

6. The sweet senting, Clove.
and perfuming Clove, which in form, is like to our Bay. This tree brings forth
blossoms, first white, then green, afterward red, and then obdurates, from
whence come the Cloves.

7. The goodly Cypress, Cypress.
which is a very tall grown tree, the wood of it is yellowish, and of a very
pleasant and delightful smell, if but approached unto. It is held to be of a
very durable nature, and will not rot, nor decay, neither will it Hyeme
amittere viriditatem, lose its greenness in the Winter.

8. The Ebone; Ebone.
many of these have their growth in the Indies, and other parts of the world.
This wood never yields so sweet a savor as when it is thrown upon the back of
the Fire.

What think you of a child of God when he is thrown upon the back of
Afflictions? Some trees are seen in the Sea-mens Travels that are of such a
vast bigness, that they are seven or eight Fathom in Diameter, and seventy or
eighty high. Of which they make Canoes, and Boats of two or three hundred Tun.


This wood is white on the outside, but the inside of it is black.

9. The Pepper tree, which has its growth on this wise, it springs up at the
foot of other trees, climbing up like your Ivy, by the help of another, and
grows in bunches, as grapes do upon the Vines.

Locust.
10. The Locust tree, many of these trees have I seen in Italy, whose fruit is
very sweet, and luscious, and having sometimes pulled of it off from the trees,
in eating of it, that Scripture in Matthew. 3.4. sprang in upon my thoughts, And
his meat was Locusts and wilde-honey. It is very probable that that tree Locust
was that which John the Baptist did eat.

Ginger.
11. The Ginger tree, whose growth is after the very same manner that young
reeds do shoot up, Notwithstanding now this dreadful displeasure that is in God
against all such filthiness, the Turk lives in the sin of Sodomitry, as boldly
as ever. And to excuse himself he says, he learned it of the wanton Italian.
and is in blossom like unto the Lilly.

12. Some do assert, and tell it for a very truth, that have traveled into the
Austral parts of the world, that there is a Town above, or beyond Cypress, on
which the ruining hand of the Lord fell most bitterly, (certainly to give the
world a warning) insomuch that not only all the trees that grew in it, or near
unto it, are turned into flint, both bole, bough, and fruit, on which there did
grow both Lemon, Orange, Apple, Pears, etc. And though they have the very
color of fruit, yet are they through Gods severe anger perfect stone, and in
the fruit there is to be seen engraven in visible Characters (as if God were
resolved to let the world know wherefore, and what was the cause of that
unheard of judgment) men buggering Boys, and Asses, etc. And the men and
women also of that place standing, and turned into perfect stone, save only
that they do still bear the shape of men, and women.

13. The Cynamond tree, Cynamond.
which is very like to the Olive, for greatness, and bears leaves like the Bay
with us, and the fruit of it is not much unlike to the Olives, and of the inner
rind of this tree is that Cynamond that comes into England.

14. The tall and lofty Cedar. Cedar.
These are called, The trees of the Lord. The Cedars of Lebanon, (...), for
excellency sake. These trees are straight, their leaves are thick, and very
sweet sented. This tree is never without fruit, come at what time of the year
you will, you shall not find it fruitless, as the Fig tree was that our
Savior cursed. The fruit of this tree is much like unto that which the Pine
bears.

15. The Toddy, Toddy.
which is of as great height and tallness almost as the Fir, without any
branches upon the bole, till you come unto the top, up which notwithstanding
the nimble Indian will go with his Calabasse upon his back for that sweet jucy
liquor that it affords out of that teat that grows near unto the top; this
liquor is as strong, and as nourishing as Sack. They (to get this liquor) take
a sharp pointed knife, and cuts into the teat, and it will distill and drop out
of the cicatrized place into the vessel which they hang upon the tree to fill.

Arbor Triste.
16. That strange kind of Tree, which they call the Arbor triste, this is a
sad, a sorrowful, or a melancholy kind of tree, the leaves of which tree will
shut up at the rising of the Sun, and open at its down setting.

Great is the wisdom of the Lord, yea it is unsearchable, and past finding
out. It was upon my heart to conceive when I was in Norway, where I did see
some of the trees to run, and sweat with their Turpentine liquors in the very
height of the Summer, that if these trees had their growth in the Southern
parts of the world which are extraordinary hot and scorching, the Sun would
either cause their oily liquors to run down upon the ground, or otherwise set
them on a blazing fire. Now the Lord to prevent that, has given them their
growth in the coldest soils of the world.
17. The Terebinth (or Turpentine) both this, and the Pitch drop their liquors.
These have their growth in Norway, Russia, etc. which are very cold Climates.

18. That strange kind of tree which they call the Weeping-tree. Weeping-tree
It is observed of this tree, that it is a very great distiller of water, which
drops out of the leaves of it in such abundance, that in those hot parts, where
the wisdom of the Lord has set its growth, they are destitute of Springs and
Wells, and instead thereof, though they want water, and seldom or never have
rain, yet this tree supplies them, and serves an Island of many thousands of
people, besides Cattle, etc. It is observed that there lies a Mist continually
over the tree.

19. They have a frequent sight of that strange kind of Tree, that grows in the
Northern Islands of Orchades in Scotland, which they call a Barnacle, Barnacle.
upon which grows the Shel-fish, which is of a very white color, in which lie
little living creatures, in the form and shape of birds, and in process of time
come to their maturity, and perfection, the shell opening by little and little
as they grow in it, and in fine, they will drop into the water, and become
lively, swiming, and flying foul, but those that fall upon the land, never come
unto any accomplishment.

I will not instance any further in this circumstance, Miscelaneous
Observations. These stand by themselves, like the Quoe genus in the Grammar,
being deficients, or redundants, not to be brought under any rule.
because the Seas are a debilitating to my spirits, only give me leave to
throw you in a few Miscelaneous, yet I hope delightful, and pleasing
Observations, and then I question not, but that I shall have given you a taste,
and relish of every thing in order, though not in that multiplicity that I
might have done.

1. They that go down to the Sea in ships, Amongst the rest of that amaene
bundle of novelty that they have in their travels, those sundry, and strange
kind of sensitive creatures, that be in the Indies, are some, in which God has
kindled many kinds of living, and going fire, walking to and fro in the Earth,
some creeping under feet, some flying over head, viz. in the Snake, Adder,
Cockatrice, flying Serpents, and other strange kind of Flies, In the evening,
if any be disposed to walk in the Woods, Seamen tell us that there be great
swarms of flies, which will keep a very great buzzing, and humming about the
trees, and cost such a light and luster as if there were sparks of fire, or
lighted matches hanging upon the boughs.
which will sting, and burn to death, Numb. 21.4. And the Lord sent fiery
Serpents among the people, and they bit the people, and much people of Israel
died.

2. Amongst the rest of that eye-delighting, and mind-contenting novelty that
they have in their travels, those great and many Woods that be in the Indies,
and elsewhere are some, there be such vast, and unknown wilderness-places in
the world, in which grow such a rankness, and thickness of trees, that they
cannot be traveled through, nor known how great and how far they reach, it is
not known to the Indians themselves what is on the other side of them, and who,
or what lives beyond them.

3. Amongst the rest of that eye-delighting, and mind-contenting novelty that
they have in their travels, the Magellan Straits is very wonderful, in respect
of those terrible winds that be frequently in them, and upon them, which fall
with such vehemence, as if the very bowels of the earth would set all at
liberty, or as if the clouds under the Heavens were called together, to muster
their fury, and lay on their force upon that one place: the Sea in it self
naturally is of a very heavy, and ponderous substance, History tells us, that
Ferdinando Megalanus was the first that compassed the world, and found out this
Southern passage, called Fretum Magellanieum, and after him followed Sr. F. D.
yet notwithstanding in this place it is so rowld up with storms, that the very
roots of rocks are unbar'd, so that ones eye may almost behold the bottoms of
the deeps, the Seas swell, run, and rage in such monstrous hills and mountains
sometimes there, that it is no small terror to the Mariner, when he is either
under sail, or at an anchor. Anchors are like false friends, give way, and the
wind is so violent, as if the mountains would rend, and the heavens, and the
earth would come together.

4. Those wonderful cloud-climbing, and heaven-aspiring Promontories, that be
in many parts of the world, many, or the most of them lie in the view of the
ships that go in the Seas, and other some lye-upon the very skirts of the Sea.
These are Natures bulworks, Some writers tell us, that the Land of Canaan was
but threescore miles in length, and twelve score in breadth, and that it is
exceeding mountainous; and so the hillier, and mountainouser, any Country is,
the greater it is; and in this little land were there, 1 Chr. 21.5. A thousand
thousand, and an hundred thousand men that drew sword, and Judah was four
hundred threescore and ten thousand men that drew sword.
cast up, as the Spaniard says, at God Almighties charge, and they call them
heaps of rubbish, or offals, that were left at the Creation of the world, and
so remain as so many warts, or pimples, disfiguring the face, and beauty of the
earth, the difficulty of their ascent is admirable, the horridness of their
craggs is wonderful, and an uninhabited wilderness are many of them, upon
which, and in which, live nothing else but wild beast. The Alps, Mount Ararat,
Mount Chego, and Teneriffe, etc. are estimated to be far higher than the
clouds. Upon these it is no matter of wonderment, to see Snow lying all summer
long, although those parts have a greater heat from the Sun than we have in
England; and the reason seems to be this, because that the Sun does leave its
work as imperfect, and has not that force and power to melt the Snows that be
upon them, by reason of those chill aires that be upon them. Nay such an
intolerable chilness is there upon some of their snowy and frosty tops,
Corpus-zant. Sometimes Seamen will aver, that there will come down many of
these Corpus-zants, insomuch that they have seen upon evey yardarme one, as so
many blazing, and lighted candles.
that they are altogether inhospitable, and not to be endured to breathe in
for an hour.

5. The Corpus-zant, which is so called in the Spanish, and Italian Language,
and in Latin Corpus Sancti (which they say it is) this is a very strange thing,
it seldom appears but before the ensuing of some dreadful storm. It is like
unto the light of a candle, and is never seen but in the darkest and windiest
nights upon the Sea. It most commonly chooses to light upon the Truck of the
Antient-staff, about which the ships-colours do fly, and there it will lie a
long time like the light of a candle, and what it is, or from whence it comes,
or whither it goes, none can well tell. Sometimes Seamen say, that they will
light in other parts of the ship, and when they have endeavored to touch them,
they would vanish away. The sight of this thing did much admire me.

6. The Male-stream-well, Male-stream-well.
which lies on the back of Norway; this well draws water into it during the
flood (which continues for the space of six hours and twelve minutes) with such
an avarous indraught and force, Mariners call this dreadful Gulf the Navel of
the Sea.
that it makes a very hideous, and most dreadful noise, the waves tumble in
with such a violence one upon the neck of another, that would daunt the
stoutest heart to hear it, and suck up the strongest ships that should dare to
come within a league of it, and at the Ebb the water returns with the like
violence, that it went in in the Flood; so that should the ponderousest thing
that is, be thrown into it, the strength of it is such, that it would carry it
up again.

7. The Water-Spouts, Water-spouts.
that be to be seen in the Southern parts of the world, of which certainly
David speaks of, Psalm. 42.7. Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy
Water-spouts. It is observed by those that use the Seas, that these
Water-Spouts come down from heaven in the form of a cloud, and at the one end
it is in the form and likeness of a funnel, which will descend upon the surface
of the water, and suck, till it be full: out of the Ocean, and so returns,
ascending up again into the heavens. These are daunting and dreadful unto the
ships that pass on in the Seas, for if the cloud rends, then down falls that
infinite massy weight of water into the Sea again, which will make the Sea to
flash, and froth at a great distance, but if it come directly upon any of the
ships, it will endanger to sink them, and to break down their decks, masts, and
boltsprits. Many ships have come to sad losses, and woeful hazzards, by the fall
of Water-Spouts. Certainly after this manner, does the Lord call and send for
the waters of, and in the Seas, to pour out upon the face of the Earth, The
Ordinances of the Heavens, are not seen, nor known by, and to every one, Job
38.33. But to such as go down to the Sea. These water-carrying Tankards come
out of the Heaven, to fetch water out of the Seas at Gods appointment, to
distill in silver showers upon the face of the whole Earth.
even upon the face of every Nation, and Country that is in the World, Amos
5.8. Now these Water-Spouts are not seen to any but ships that sail in the Seas.

8. That various view that they have of the several sorts, and kinds of People
that be in the world, how they differ one from another in form, habit, speech,
gesture, and deportment. The Indians are wont to paint themselves with diverse,
and sundry colors, some with white, and othersome with red; some with the
characters of the Moon in white, and othersome with the Sun in black upon their
bodies, etc.

9. That burning Island Fogo, Burning Fogo. These are the lads now that do
Ultimas Provincias, and terras peragere, and in Remotissimas mundi parts
navigare.
which is of an unspeakable heat, and in height computed to be twenty miles,
and upwards. At the top of this Mountain there is a burning fire, that shows it
self four times in an hour, most terribly to all the ships that sail in the
Seas near unto it. It flies up in horrid flames, as if the fire of it would not
stay until it reached the heavens; after this like manner I have seen burning
Strumbilo very vehement, which lies in the Austral parts of the world.

10. The People in the Torrid zone, is another sight that they have, who are
afflicted most sadly with the scorching heat of the Sun, It is observed, that
if there were not all the day long (in those scorching parts of the world, as
the Indies, etc.) a cool breeze, which blows for the greatest part of the day,
to moderate that excessive roasting heat that is there, it were impossible
almost either for man or beast to live there.
they are so tormented, and roasted with the beams of the Sun, that they curse
the up-rising of the Sun, every morning they get out of their beds, yet
notwithstanding this vehement heat they have these accommodations (to allay the
intemperateness of the Zone) many sweet springs of cool water to refresh
themselves in, and goodly rivers to bathe in, many great and pleasant trees for
shade, which yield them both meat, and drinks, and besides they want not for
Spices, Sugars, Lemons, Oranges, and juyces to quench their thirst withal, and
cool their bodies, etc.

11. A sight of those many Orange, Olive, and Lemon (besides many other) trees
which they see growing where none inhabit, Job 38.26, 27. even their boughs
ready to break with plenty of fruit, and no hand nigh to take them in their
maturity before they fall to the ground, and perish.

In these parts lies the Lords storehouses of Snow, Hail, and Ice. Job 37.9.
Out of the North comes forth cold.
12. The Northern parts of the world, into which parts they adventure sometimes
as far as they can for extremity of cold, but there is such an intolerable
frigidity in some parts under the Poles, as that they cannot be discovered nor
approached unto. Job 38.18. Have thou perceived the breadth of the Earth?
declare, if thou know it all. Many will make great cracks and brags, that
the world is so many thousand in rotundity, and so many thousand in breadth,
but it is none of my judgment to believe any such trifling assertions, or
computations.

Nova-zembla.
13. Those Septentrional Zones that be in Greenland, and Nova Zembla, etc.
which only in Summertime may be spoke with, but not in the Hybernal,
insomuch that many parts under the Poles are inhospitable, by reason of that
excessiveness of cold, frost, snow, and ice, that lies in those parts, which
would kill people to live there. Those Sunless, Starless, and Moonless, nights,
and days, that be in the Wintertime in those parts, have fetched in that in
Matthew. 25.30. to my thoughts. And cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. If a man were in
those parts, he would find nothing else but darkness, weeping, Meditate the
torments of hell (Seaman) when thou go Norward. Thou durst as soon eat thy
fingers as go into the Northern parts of the world, as Greenland, etc. if thou
thoughtest not that thou had a good ship under thee to bring thee back again.
Thou know full well that the cold in that place would kill thee.
and gnashing of teeth, and with ten thousand times that he were in England,
or in any part of the world, than in that uncomfortable part, and side of the
world.

14. Lapland.
A sight of that People which live in Finmark, and Lapland, etc. who to avoid
that extremity of Winter-cold, that commonly falls upon those parts, turn
Troglodites, they delve themselves warm holes, and caves in the Earth, to
shelter themselves from the rage of that brumale tempus that breaks out upon
them in that bitterness.

15. A sight of those huge Icy Mountains that be in those Northern Zones,
which make such a dashing, and crashing one against another, making such
hideous noises, as if it were the very roarings of hell, or those ear-deafing
Cataracts that are to be heard, and seen in Egypt.

16. This is one that is as remarkable as any thing that has been spoken of,
That in Island, Greenland, and in diverse other Northern parts of the world,
that are destitute of wood, (scarce having one stick growing) yet
notwithstanding, they are most miraculously provided for every year, and though
they have not vessels, nor ships to fetch wood withal, yet does the Lord
supply them on this wise, Many great trees, and billets, are carried unto them
upon the waves, and billows of the Seas, both out of Norway, and elsewhere,
which come and lie in their creeks, It is no small wonderment to me, to think
how prodigiously they are provided for, that are without fuel in Island, and
elsewhere. In this Island there is another very remarkable passage, that there
be several waters in it, which are of such a vehement ardency, that they will
boil both fish, foul, and beef in. And in these waters the people both dress,
and cook all their victuals.
and bays, which the people take up and reserve for winter. Certainly he that
guided the Kine which bare the Ark, 1 Samuel 6.12. guides, and orders that these
parcels of wood, faggots, or fuel, should come unto those that would be
starved, if they were not thus helped every year, and besides, if there were
not a visible hand of providence appearing for this people, that live in a
Country, where doubtless wood will not grow, or otherwise (for firing) it has
been destroyed; these pieces that swim upon the floods of the Seas might go
from them, and into the middle of the Sea, rather than unto them, if not
directed, etc.

17. Their aspect of the Sea, which is sometimes of such an ignifluous luster,
as if it were full of Stars, insomuch that if a piece of wood, or any other
ponderous thing should be thrown into it at such times in the night, it will
show it self as if it were full of firesparkles. Whence that Proverb, As true
as the Sea burns.

18. The sight of those two burning Islands, Hecla, and Helga, is another,
these are often times covered over with Snow, yet burn within, and belch out
very terrible, and vehement sparks of fire.

19. Their viewing, and walking up and down in the goodly, sumptuous, princely,
and stately Cities that be in the world, viz. Constantinople, Grand-Cair,
Genoa, Venice, Naples, Rome, etc.

20. A sight of those fearful, and unusual Lightnings, and Thunderings, that
be sometimes in the Occidental, and Austral parts of the world, which are with
such vehemence and dreadfulness, that one would think that the Heavens, and the
Earth would come together. I have heard the honestest; and godliest of men,
that use the Seas say, that when they have been in the Indies, if they did but
see a cloud appearing in the bigness of ones hand, they need no other warning
but that a most dreadful storm would ensue. Insomuch that they have been forced
to make all the haste they could, to get sails furled, yards peak'd, and their
ships fitted to endure it as well as they could.

The Observation was this. That the most, or the greatest part of Gods
glorious, and wonderful works, are seen by Seamen. The point then will afford
us these two uses.

1. Of Reproof.

And 2. Of Exhortation.

1. Use, Reproof.
1. Is it thus then, that you that are Sailors, and Seamen, do see most of the
Lords works, yea more than all the people in the world besides? Platonists by
the sight of Nature see more, yea and will shame thousands of our Sailors, for
they could say, that all that pulchtitude and beauty that shines in the
creature, was but Splendour quidam summi illius boni, pulchrum coelum, pulchra
terra, sed pulchrior qui fecit illa.
Surely this point looks with a sour look upon you that make no improvement,
nor application of things unto your selves, for better amendment, than you do.
I may say unto you in the words of Job 35.11. (who teaches us more than the
beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven,) that God
has taught us more than the beasts of the field, and has made man wiser than
the fowls of heaven, therefore God looks for another manner of glory and
understanding from you that are men, than he does from them, and more from
those that are Christians, than from natural, and carnal men. It is a notable
saying of Mr. Calvin's, Diabolica is it aec scientia (said he) quae in natura
contemplatione nos retinens a Deo avertit. That is a Devilish kind of
knowledge, that in the contemplation of nature keeps men in nature, and holds
them back from God. After this manner may I speak unto you, that it is a
devilish kind of knowledge that you have of the Seas, and of the Creation, if
that all you see, know, and hear of, keep you still in nature, what better art
thou than a beast for all thy travel? Give me leave to tell you thus much.

1. That there is a seeing eye in the world, an eye that is much in, Quaelibet
herba Deum, stella, creaturaque.
and upon Gods works, Isa. 40.26. Job 26.8. He binds up the waters in his
thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them. A seeing eye looks on
nothing that is either in Sea or Land, but thinks of God in it. I have read of
one that was so spiritual, and heavenly-minded, that when he was in the world,
where he had a full view of many wonderful things, he said there was nothing
that ever he did behold* but he saw God in it. When I cast mine eyes upon the
Earth, I saw that God was every where. When I looked upon the Heavens, I
considered with my self that that was his Throne. When I looked into the depths
of the Sea, I beheld the power and wisdom of God in the creating of them: And
when I looked upon the many creeping things that were in it, they told me that
God was there. I looked also into the breathing air, with all the inhabitants
of it, and it told me that God was there, whose proper Attribute is to be
every where. I looked up into the Starry sphere, and spangled roof of heaven,
which glisters with innumerable stars, from whence I learned, that that is a
Christians Country, who is in Christ, and from thence do I look for my Savior;
and the longer I do look upon those glorious, and burning and shining Tapers of
the heavens, which are estimated, the very least of them, to be bigger than
the whole earth. I consider, that God has undoubtedly great and just
expectations from man that he will do some work and service for his Maker.
Most Masters will not allow their servants to sport and idle whilst their
candles are burning, but if they find them so doing, they will blow them forth.

Certainly Seamen, you may conclude that God looks for great things from you,
who see so much of the Creation that others see not. Will it not be
tollerabler for the ignorant Indian, etc. and the miserable heathen that is in
the world, than it will be for you, who have no other light but the light of
nature to walk by, I may compare the generality of Seamen unto a Traveller who
does in his vagaries leave all things behind him in his way; he passes by
stately Towers, and comely Turrets, brave buildings, both of Marble, Brick, and
hewn stone, goodly Cities, Towns, and Countries, comely, and beautiful people,
and other some both black and tawny, and these he beholds for a while, and
admires them, and passes on, and leaves them; afterward he goes through the
^ields, Meadows, Vineyards, flourishing Pastures, upon which he looks a while
with great delight, and on he goes again, and meets with fruitful Orchards,
green Forests, sweet Rivers, with silver streams, and behaves himself as
before; and at length he meets with Deserts, hard ways, rough, and unpleasant
soul, and overgrown with Briars, and Thorns, here he is entangled for a time to
stay laboring, and sweating, with grief to get out of them, and after our, he
neither remembers his toil, nor the objects that he saw.
yet does many of them learn out of it, and from the creature, that there is a
God? God upbraided Israel for their stupidity (and will he excuse you, think
you?) they had before them the Ox, and the Ass which were creatures that they
might have learned wisdom enough out of Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner,
and the Ass his Masters crib; but Israel does not know, my people does not
consider. The word consider, comes of con and sydus, and so signifies, say
some, not one bare simple stella, but a multitude of stars, intimating, that it
is not a bare transient aspect, or flash, but an abiding, and dwelling upon a
thing that is to be pondered and considered of, as a Be will stick upon the
flower, till she extract honey out of it. God complains again in Jer. 8.7. The
Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane,
and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people know not the
judgment of the Lord. God puts an En and ecce exprobrantis upon them for their
Caecity, and inobservantness of the works of God. And will not the Lord say to
you one day that go down into the Seas, and see his creatures and storehouses,
that are both in the waters, and on the land, viz. Fish in the Sea, Beasts of
the field; and Fowls of the air, etc. that in respect you have made no
soul-profiting uses of them, they shall be bitter and tart aggravations of
your future condemnation? Oh lament, lament your blindness, and inexcusable
stupidity, that you can look upon the wonderful works of God, and go so boldly
and undauntedly, and unaffectedly amongst them, without wondering at the wisdom
of God, and reading of Divinity lectures out of them. Can you look upon the
Leviathan when he plays in the Seas, or upon the Trunked Behemoth when he
feeds upon the land, and not stand admiring and blessing of the Creator of
them? Can you look upon the many and strange kind of Fishes that be in the
Seas, of creatures that be on the land, and Fowls that be in the air, and not
be affected and drawn out with new love, new fear, and new obedience to serve
your good God?

Ah Seamen! Seamen! I will deal plainly with you; If I should see the Lord
feeding of Sparrows, and clothing Lilies, I should be both stupid and
faithless, if I learned not, that his providence were the same over me, both
to cloth me, and to feed me. If that I should look upon the Heavens, and see
nothing in them, but that they are beyond my reach, the Horse and the M^^e
would see that as well as I. May not many Seamen be painted as the Egyptians
were wont to set out an inconsiderate man by? To set such an one out in his
colors, they pictured him with a Globe of the earth before him, and his
looking-glass behind him. What Solomon says (in Prou. 17.24.) I shall say
unto those that travel, Wisdom is before him that has understanding; but the
eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.
If that thou see nothing in the earth but a place to walk in, or to take thy
rest on, the Beasts of the earth, and Fowls of the air sees that as well as
thou. If thou can see nothing in the Sea (to admire God for) but a place to
swim and sail ships in, the fowls that daily sit upon the floods see that as
well as thou. If thou see nothing in the Be and Bird, but that they are
winged, other creatures see that as well as thou do, though not to admire
them; how they sail through the vast sea of air, that when the Be is out in the
flowery field, she should be able to steer directly homewards again to her
hive, and the Bird when abroad, to her nest, though at never so a geat a
distance. What shall I say? If thou see nothing in gorgeous apparel but
pride, the proud Peacock sees that as well as thee, Laudatus paevo extendit
pennas. If of all thy meat and drink that thou live upon, thou know
nothing but the pleasure, and the sweetness that is in them unto thy taste, the
Hog and the Swine have as great a portion as thou have. If of hearing, seeing,
smelling, tasting, feeling, be all the delight that thou can find in the
works of God, the dumb creatures do far excel thee in this; and thy heart is
little better than the heart of a Beast.

2 Use of Exhortation. If it be thus, that you that go in the Seas have the
fullest and greatest aspect of the Lords works and wonders, both in the Sea and
Land, suffer me but to leave two things with you, and I will pray unto my good
God that they may be profitable unto you, and do some good upon you.

Oculi idcirco dati sunt corpori, ut per eos intutamur creaturam, ac per
hujusmodi mirabilem harmoniam agnoscamus ^pificem.
1. Labor for a conscientious eye: There is an eye in the world that makes not
a little conscience of that glorious sight and Chrystalline humor that God
has put into it for to behold his works with all. What a large Book is the
Earth, that the eye ranges over, and how large a Volume is the Sea, through
which you sail, certainly you might learn more than you do, and be better
scholars in Christ's School than you are. They that live pind up in one Nation
or Country, are far from the view of the Creation, for they stand but as a man
that comes to some great Earl's or Knight's house, and stands in the Court, now
unless he be invited in, he sees not the sumptuous rooms, and places that be
within it, only at a distance he sees a little of the outward superstructure;
but they that go into the Sea from Country to Country, they see the riches of
the Earth, the beauties, wealth, honors, and strength of Nations, and
Kingdoms; and truly let me say thus much, that they that see all these things,
and learn nothing out of them, as incentives to love and fear their God,
Creatio Mundi Scriptura Dei. Vniversus mundus. Deus explicatus. The whole
Creation is nothing else but Gods excellent handwriting, or the Sacred
Scripture of the Most high. The Heavens, the Earth, and the waters are his
three large Volumes, or the three great leaves, in which all the creatures are
contained, and the creatures themselves are as so many lines, by, and out of
which he that has a seeing eye, may read profitable, and singular Divinity
lectures.
that they are greatly to blame. There be many tenderhearted people on Land,
that would even melt into tears, if they did either see, or know but of the one
half of what you both see and know. But, what is it I pray, for a man to see
nothing but whiteness in the Lilly, redness in the Rose, purple in the Violet,
luster in the Stars, or perfuming sweetness in the Musk? etc. other creatures
see this as well as you, if you make no better use of these things. Plutarch's
little Be when it spoke, could say, Ex fl^sculis succum mellis colligere cum
alii non delectentur, nisi color, and odore. I could gather honey out of any
flower, whilst others passed by and would not light upon it.

2. Do what ever in you lies, to get a seeing eye, for want of which some in
their travels are but mere beetles, (Nycticoracis oculos habentes) or men that
carry their eyes in their heels, when they should have had them in their heads.
A seeing eye will affect the heart, let a man go where he will in the World.
Lament. 3.51. Mine eye affects my heart. I wish that every poor Seaman in
the world were so spiritual, Seamen might gather rare documents from the
creatures, as the little decimo se^tos that be both in the Sea and Land, as the
small fish that are in the Sea, and the Dove, and Aut that are on the Land, as
well as from the great folios of the Whale, and Elephant, etc.
that every thing that he sees in the Sea, or on the Land, affected his heart.
Holy David was so heavenly, that he could lay his eye upon nothing, that his
heart was not affected with. Psalm. 148.8, 9, 10. One while his eye was upon
Fix, another while upon Hail; one while upon Snow, and another while upon
Vapor; one while upon the stormy Wind, and another while upon the Mountains,
Hills, Trees, Beasts, Cattle, Creeping-things, and flying Foul, etc. and none
of these but his heart was exceedingly affected, and taken in the thinking, and
beholding of them. Again, says Solomon, Prove. 15.30. The light of the eyes
rejoices the heart.

Give me leave to speak one concluding word unto you; who are so much (as it
were) in the heart, and garden of the world as you are? you might pluck many a
sweet, and savoury flower to make nosegays of, I may say of the Sea, and the
foreign parts of the world, what one once said of the Sacred Bible, that there
was evermore aliquid revisentibus. Something to see again, and again.
to serve you to smell on in your hearts, all the days of your lives. A
gracious heart will evermore be drawing out good observations out of the
creature, and will take an occasion to breathe after God in every strange thing
it sees, or enjoyes. A goodly Ancient being asked by a profane Philosopher,
How he could contemplate high things, since he had no books, wisely answered,
that he had the whole world for his book, ready open at all times, and in all
places, and that therein he could read things Divine, and Heavenly. Bees will
suck honey out of flowers that flies cannot do. But to proceed.

2. The next thing, is to insist a little upon those singular, and providential
preservations, and deliverances, that Seamen meet withal in their navigable
employments. My last work, you know was to set before you a Praelibamen, or a
small parcel of the works of God, that they behold in their travels, and my
next task is to prefix a few of those works, which may very properly, and
pertinently be called Opera conservationis, works of mercy, and preservation
from, and out of those many dreadful dangers and life-hazarding perils, that
they do run, in the stormy, and raging Seas. And before I begin (arenam
descendere) to enter upon them, I will lay this proposition before you.

That the Seaman, of all the men under the whole Heavens (none excepted) is
one that is both a partaker, and a seer, of the greatest, and remarkablest of
temporal deliverances. These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the
deep. The course that I shall shape, and steer in the handling of this
doctrine, will be in these following Corollaries, that I shall lay down before
you, the divulging of which unto the world, cannot but advance and exalt my
Masters name. And I hope it will lie as an engagement upon the hearts of the
godly, (as it was upon David's) to love, and fear that God the more, that
bestows such great, and so many undeserved preservations upon them that go in
the Seas. For this reason is it, that I do take upon me to call their
deliverances to mind, because their dangers, and their preservations, are not
known to every one, the major sort of people that live on Land, are not
acquainted with the things that I shall sing of; My Song shall now be that of
Virgils, ab love principium.
now I will make it my business to present you with some of them, though indeed
not the one half of what I might, and what others who are more knowing in them
might tell you of. And if you will but give me that audience, and attention,
that the beasts of the field, and the fouls of the air gave unto Orpheus's
music, that is all I will desire of you. It is said of the Beasts of the
field, and of the Fouls of the air, that they forgot their several appetites,
who were some of prey, some of game, and othersome of quarrel; some for one
thing, and some for another, insomuch that they stood very peaceably, and
sociably listening to the Aires, Tunes, and Accords of the Harp, and when the
sound ceased, or was drowned with some louder noise, then every beast returned
to his own nature again. To be short (the truth of it is) they are very
ear-delighting, and heart-melting deliverances that I shall speak of, and
therefore they are both worthy reading, and also hearing.


1. They that go down to the Sea in ships, are many times most dreadfully
surprised, and bewildered with dangerous, and perilous leaks, at which water
comes gushing into their Vessels, as it will out of a cistern, or conduit-pipe,
when once the cock head is but turned about, and it may be, when they are thus
unexpectedly taken, they are many an hundred mile from any port, or Land to
save their lives, I and further to aggravate their misery, they are not within
the sight of any ship, or ships, to come and help them, which is not only an
heart-akeing discouragement, but an heart-casting-down condition. Now goes the
hand-pump, and the chain-pump (which they carry in their ships) as fast as ever
they can turn them about, to throw out that water that springs in upon them,
and when they find the water to flow in upon them far faster than they can
throw it out, their hearts do exceedingly fail them, and there is nothing else
then but crying, weeping, wailing, and wringing of the hands, for that
lamentable and deplorable condition that they see themselves irremediably
involved in; now are they in a confusion, ransacking, and running to and again,
to throw the ponderousest of their goods over board, that their Vessel may be
the lighter, What Dolor cordis, is there amongst the Seamen when the ship is
dangerously leaky? yea what animi molestiae? and what Suspiria flebilia ab imo
pectore? one while they work, and another while they weep, to see themselves
irrecoverably at deaths door. Undique facies pallida mortis, Death is now on
every side them, and with David they cry, Psalm. 39.13. O spare me, that I may
recover strength, before I go hence and be no more. Being once in a dangerous
and leaky Vessel, in which the hearts of the Mariners were greatly daunted, in
respect that we were very far from Land, when we arived safe on shore, I
could not but turn about, and in the first place, look up unto my God, with a
thankful feeling of heart, and in the second look back upon the Sea, from
whence we were delivered, and write down this upon his undeserved mercy, Psalm.
56.13. For thou have delivered my soul from death!
and now do they unloose every knot of sail that they can make, to run unto
the nearest shore that they can get unto, to save their lives, and ever and
anon are they sending up one or other unto the topmast head, to see if he can
descry either Land, or ships in the Seas, which if they can but espy, toward
them they will make with the greatest cheer that can be. I have known some
that have been seven, or eight days in this very praecedent case, and
condition, that I am now speaking off, wherein they have most laboriously
pumped, and sailed (as for their lives) and at the last, when they have been
both despairing, and desponding of life, (in respect that all their strength
has been spent with hard working, and the ship they sailed in, filled even half
full of water) the Lord has looked down upon the travel of their souls, and
sent them one ship or other within the sight of them (when they have been far
out of sight of any Land) toward which they have made with all the speed that
in them lay, and by firing of Guns, which is commonly a signal of that ships
distress that fires, they steered their course directly toward her, and taken
out the men that would have been lost in her, and in a little time the ship
that they sailed in has sunk into the bottom. Again, others in leaky ships,
when that they have been denied the sight of any ship in the Seas to fly to,
have got safe to Land, notwithstanding that dreadful distress. But now to look
back, upon, and over this deliverance, permit me to move these two questions,
and they will magnify it.

1. Who is it that sends the Seaman a ship out of the Seas to take him up,
when there is no possibility of keeping the ship that he is in on flote, and
above water? is it not the Lord?

2. And who is it also that gives the Leakship leave to arrive safe on shore,
whereas in the eye of reason she might rather have perished in the Seas,
having so far to sail before she could come to any port, and besides, could
see no support nor succor from ships in her way? Is it not the Lord?

2. They that go down to the Sea in ships, in their passage and re-passage from
Country to Country, and Nation to Nation, have been oftentimes most sadly set
at, and assaulted by the Turk, and other Pirates, insomuch that when the enemy
has come up very near unto them almost within the reach of his Ordinance, God
has most wonderfully (many a time) appeared for them, either by calmning of the
winds in that part of the Sea their pursuing enemies have been in, or by giving
of them a strong gale of wind to run away from them, when the enemy has lain in
a calm with his sails flat to his Masts, God has many and many a time calmed
the winds for the English when they have been pursued with the Turk, etc.
insomuch that the Seas have layn (to admiration) like a Mare mortuum, de quo
antiqui feruns, sine vento, and sine motu. By which means God has kept them
from unmerciful thraldom and captivity. And the enemy for want of wind has not
been able to come up with, and to his desired prize.
or otherwise by granting them a stiff gale until the going down of the Sun, by
which they have made their escape from the Pyrat, in the black of the evening,
for then has not the enemy been able to see his chase, nor to cast for the
best, because the chased very gladly alters his course. This has the Lord
Almighty done for many a Merchant ship (blessed and for even blessed be his
sweet Name) he has denied to fill the enemies sails with wind, when they have
had strong intentions to make spoil and prey of them. Oh the many Seamen that
have been thus delivered!

3. They that go down to the Sea in ships, often and sundry times when they
have been surrounded with way-lying Pirates and Robbers, I, sometimes with two,
or three for one, (which is contrary to that well known rule, Ne sit Hercules
contra duos) notwithstanding in their hot disputes, and exchange of Ordnance
one against the other, even when shot has flown like hail on every side them,
some striking their Hulls, I say no more but this, Good Lord how bold, and
witty men are, to kill one another, what fine devices have they found out to
murder a far off, to slay many at once, and to fetch off lives at pleasure?
what honor do many place in slaughter? the monuments of most men's glory, are
the spoils of the slain, and subdued enemy, whereas contrarily, all Gods titles
sound of mercy, and gracious respects to man.
some their Shrouds, and othersome their men, and though they have been most
desperately beset both on head, and on stern, they have most courageously by
the assistance of the Lord cleared themselves out of their hands with very
little and small damage; I, and other sometimes got the victory in their
quarrels by sinking of the enemy, and sending him down into the bottoms. Oh the
many Seamen that have been thus delivered!

4. They that go down to the Sea in ships, many times when they are in chase of
a pestilent enemy (this I have seen satis, superque satis) and when we have
come almost up with him, within Demi-culverin distance, so that Ordnance has
been levelled upon him, and the shot has flown over and beyond him, the Sea has
presently layn all on a calm, and (as it were) the winds have been called off
from filling our sails, insomuch that there has been a stop put upon us, from
coming up to make him a prisoner, or otherwise to sink him; whereas before,
for many hours chase, the wind has carried on our ship with as great celerity
as could be desired.

This is clear to me now, that there is an overruling power above (that
orders all affairs even as he pleases) which keeps ships in the Seas from
murdering of one another: Herein certainly appears the very visible finger, or
hand of God, Two ships in the Seas, if they be at variance one with the other,
they are not unlike to the two Pitchers, upon whom this Motto was writ, Si
collidimur frangimur. If we meet, we must either one, or other break.
in giving our very enemies their lives, and liberties, which otherwise would
have been taken from them, many, and many a time, if that the wind would but
have contributed its help unto us.

5. Others are many times beat, and forced out of the Seas (vi, and arm^) even
by, and with the violency of storms and tempests, insomuch that they are hurled
upon the shore, and most dangerously ship-wracked, the weather being so
boisterous, and extreme, that they have not been able to bear themselves up
against it, nor to free themselves from the ruining consequences of it, yet has
the Lord showed them mercy, when that the Vessels has been denied to be saved,
even then when the Seas have seized upon her, and broke her up into an hundred
pieces, and parcels, and upon these Plancks, Yards, Masts, and offals of the
Vessel, have all the Mariners got safe to the shore. Thus has God provided for
men in the deepest of danger, when that they would have been drowned, if that
they had not had those Offalls to have been as Boats to have landed them out of
the stormy Sea.

6. Some have been too often (if it had been the Lords will) either through
their heedlesness, or negligence, in a most dreadful estate and condition by
fire, which has come either from Candle (as the snuffs of it) or by the fire
from the Ashes that have been carelessly blown out of their Pipes, hereby has
the ship been set on a burning blaze, and roaring flame, and before the ship
has been burnt, or the fire has got so low as the Powder, boats have been sent
out of other ships to fetch the men out of her. And in a short time afterward
the ship has blown up into the air in a Million of shivers. How often have
some been thus miraculously delivered, and how often have others perished in
the burning flames of those Tarry-materials?

7. Othersome of them have many a time been taken captive by the Turk, and
after the expense of several years in cruel bondage, and unmerciful thraldom,
they have after a most wonderful manner (inimicorum contra voluntatem) been
delivered out of it. It seems that it is the custom of the Turk, to make use of
many of his vassals, and captives in the Seas, to sail his ships to and again,
about their Pyrating, and filching designs, and the Lord undoubtedly, who sees,
and looks down upon the bitter sufferings of his people, provides most
admirably to, and for their freedoms, for many a time has the Lord sent out a
strong wind to blow upon them, against which they have not been able to
contend, and thereby have been cast upon the Christian shore, These are the
Angliae crabrones, Cyno^yae, Viperoe, and Cantharides.
sometimes in France, and other sometimes in Spain; sometime in Portugal, and
other sometimes in Italy, etc. by which means the poor captived, and
imprisoned, have been freed, and the Turks perpetually inslaved. Oh the many
Seamen that are still living, and can tell of this very deliverance!

8. Sometimes when they have been taken by the Turk, and lain long in smarting
vassallage and bondage, they have cleared themselves out of their enemies hands
by stealing away in the night, and taking the water adventuring life (rather
than stay in such an Egyptian usage) to get into the ships that have been
riding in the Turks harbors, Why may not I tell of these deliverances to the
praise of my God? I find in Scripture that as small is made mention of, Act.
9.25. Then the Disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a
basket.
by which means they have got their liberty, and come home for England.

9. Others have been sometimes taken by, and with the Turk, and also other
Pirates, whereby they have lost liberties, freedoms, and costly ships of an
unspeakable worth and value, and when that the enemy has been carrying them
away in a most victorious and triumphing manner, I may sing of this frequent
and providential deliverance, Hic been de laxis cassibus exit aper.
he has not had his prize over a day, or half a day in his hands, but some
ship or other has got sight of them, as it is the manner of Men of War to
speak with every sail they espy in the Seas, and after that they have begun
once to give them chase (it is the usual custom of an enemy, when he is far
off to fly, and make all the sail he can to escape) if they find them
unwilling to be spoke with all, Frigots let fly all the sails that ever they
can make, and those that are of a singular going, will in time fetch them up,
as oftentimes they do, and hereby are the Captives most miraculously redeemed
out of the hands of their blood-thirsty enemies. Oh the many Seamen that a^^
still living, and can tell of this very sweet and seasonable deliverance.

10. Others (many times) have been taken by the Turk, and upon their
preconsidering of their misery that would ensue (in their captivity and
slavery) have set their heads on work how to get their freedoms again, I may
write upon this deliverance, Tunc cum tristis erat, defensa est Ilion armis,
Militibus gravidum, laeta recepit equum, Whilst Troy was too secure, the
panched horse ruined her.
as indeed I have known several such who have been taken by them, have given
the Turks all the wine that ever they could get them to swallow down, to that
end they might get them fudled, by which means they have got both their ship,
lives, and liberties again, and an enjoyment of England, which they were in all
likeliness never to have seen more.

11. Some are oftentimes meeting, one another at an unawares, both in the day,
and especially in the night, stem, for stem, and this is so dreadful a thing,
that many times either one, Gentlemen, you are bound in the very same
obligation that Israel stood in unto their God for all your deliverances. I
leave the charge with you, answer the contrary another day if you can, Deuteronomy.
4.9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou
forget the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy
heart all the days of thy life. Your eyes have seen wonderful preservations.
or both of those ships that do so meet goes down with all their passengers in
the very bottom where they are never seen more. Other sometimes again, I have
seen them meet (and through mercy) they have escaped sinking, only this, they
have gone off with a great deal of damage, as to the breaking of the ships
heads, Boltsprits, ships Boles, and strong Timbers etc. These are as cunning to
watch all opportunities, as the little Arabian Spider, who spreads out her tent
for the prey, how heedfully does she watch for the passenger, as soon as ever
she hears the noise of the Five a far of he hastens to look out at his door,
and if she come near unto him, he presently weighs and stands after her, and
brings her at last to a most cruel end for he binds him fast with his most
subtle cords, and so drags the helpless Captive into his Cave.


12. Some have been taken sometimes in the West Indies by that feral and savage
kind of people which are both of a Cannibal, and Anthropophagite nature. It is
very common for that people in some parts of the Indies, to come running out of
the Woods, Holes, and Caves (if they epsy any Outlandish people coming amongst
them, and to kill them with their bows and arrows) and many a poor man have
these cut off, for they are an avarous and an inordinate kind of people as
unto the flesh of man which they do love-above Duck, Goose, and Mallard, which
they have in as great plenty to go to when they please as the greatest Prince
in the world has any thing at his command. And if they take any men that come
in ships, they will feed them with the best Venison, and the fattest, and
finest Fowls that ever they can get, and after they have got them once fat, and
in good liking, they will kill them, and eat their bodies. I knew one that was
a very sober-minded man that affirmed it unto me for a truth, that he was in
their hands for above a quarter of a year, and lay in holes and caves with
them, and being begged by an Indian-woman she kept him from being killed, and
living not far from the Sea side, I may write upon this deliverance, Non avis
utiliter viscatis effugit alis.
he every day had an eye upon it, looking out if he could see any ships a
coming to that place, and after the expense of some sad and solitary time
amongst the Indians, it happened that the same ship came to that very place
again, little expecting him to be alive, and as soon as he saw the ship, he
ran down to the Sea side unto her, where they most joyfully embraced him, and
the woman that kept him seeing him running away from her, made after him with
the greatest violence that could be, and ran up to the middle in the sea for
him.

13. Some are many and many a time thrown upon sands and rocks, and yet
notwithstanding those danting, I may write this upon this deliverance, Evasi
per mill pericla demum incolumis. He that will go to Sea, had need to carry an
(...), along with him, whether to drown or live.
and dreadful hazzards they have (by and through the mighty power of Gods
outstretched Arm) lain safe, and in the end got happily off them. How commonly
visible is this very thing, that ships may be seen here and there sticking, and
stopping, upon the sands, whereas if the Lord should but give the winds
commission to blow, and to raise up the waves of the Seas upon them, they would
beat them into a thousand parcels. Oh the many ships, and Mariners that have
been thus delivered! Who deserves the praise of this mercy?

14. Others oftentimes are most sadly hazzarded in stormy, and tempestuous
weather, insomuch that when they have been busied about their Masts, Yards, and
Sails of their Ships, that both the Yards and Masts have broke, and the poor
men have fallen overboard into the Sea, and although that the ship has had
fresh way, and is long before she can be stopped, many of them have been
saved, The great and wide Sea is not unlike to that Sea in Panten, of which it
is said, that who, or whatsoever, falls into it, is never seen after. It is
like the Spanish Inquisition, into which if any one come, they are never heard
of more. God keep our poor Sailors out of it.
yea even such as never had the art to strike one swiming stroke have been
found lying upon the water (to admiration) as if the Sea had no commission to
hurt or drown them. Oh the many Seamen that are still living, and can tell of
these very deliverances bestowed upon them!

15. Some oftentimes when they have been thousands of miles from any Portland,
or Country, have been in smarting want, and most miserable, Certainly it is a
dishonor for a parent, or any special friend, to hang his Picture in a dark
hole, in some obscure and contemptible place, because it is expected, th^^ we
should make it as conspicuous as may be, and so hang it up in some eminent
place, signifying, that we do rejoice in it as an ornament to us. Let me
therefore take upon me to tell all the Sailors in England, that it is a great
evil in them to hide and obscure great and remarkable deliverances, by which
God should be glorified both before Men and Angels. I have therefore
endeavored to hang up some of your forgotten, and underfeet trodden mercies,
and preservations, in the very view of the whole world.
and pinching stints, and allowance, and the wind has lain in their very
teeth, even in the very way that they should steer homewards, as if threatening
to block them up, and starve them in the Seas. I have heard some Sailors say,
that they have been glad to feed upon Rats to keep themselves alive with, and
othersome have been forced for want of victual, to kill Porpoise, and other
uncouth fish they could dart, shoot, or lay their hands upon in the salt
waters. You may now see that it oftentimes goes hard with the Mariner; I, and
that the Lords own people have not always the fattest Pastures to graze in,
Daniel lived on Pulse, Elijah upon his Cake that was baked upon the Coal, and
Cruse of water, Luther lived upon his Herring, and Junius upon his one Egg a
day, when means was short with him by reason of the Civil wars that were in
France.

16. Some are oftentimes so hard put to it in the remote parts of the world (in
their long and prolix voyages) that for want of fresh water, Sailors, Darius
like, who said, in his flight when he could get no better liquor for his
thirst, than thick and muddy water that stood in an horse-stepping, that he
never drunk sweeter water in his life. I will write thus much upon this hard
case, and condition that the Mariner is often in, Qui fitiunt in Medi^ mari,
non stati^ e quovis bibunt font. Jejunus stomachus raro vulgaria temnit.
Lapsana, called of the Arabians Wild Colewort, and of Physicians Cera, with
the roots of this herb lived the host of Caesar a long time, when far off any
refreshments, and this was at Dyrrachium, from whence came that Proverb,
Lapsana vivere, to live wretchedly, and hardly.
which they cannot come to, by reason of their great distance from any land, or
harbor, they are constrained out of an impulsive necessity to lay their lips
unto the same water the ship swims in, now the water of the Sea, we all know,
is inutilis potui, though good alere pisces, and servire navigantibus, the
drinking of which water throws many of them into irrecoverable sicknesses, and
diseases. Again, it is the special care of Mariners in these long voyages (when
grown short of water) to hang out all the sail that ever they have, that it may
be in readiness to receive all the showers of rain that falls upon the ship,
and this they will wring out of the Canvass to quench their thirst withal. And
this is sweet water in their mouths, although it run down the Tarry shrouds,
and Roaps about the ship, which does exceedingly imbitter it. Against Rain,
Sailors are like Spiders in providence, who hang their Nets in windows where
they know Flies do most resort, and work most in warm weather, because Flies
are then most abroad buzzing and stirring in every corner, Prove. 27.7. To the
hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.

17. Others are oftentimes most sadly endangered in rugged and violent storms,
I will write thus much upon this remarkable deliverance, Ps. 142.4. I looked on
my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge
failed me, no man cared for my so^^*
insomuch that the Rudder is forced off its bands by their being thrown upon
ground, or sands, and then is their case to the eye of reason so impossible of
being remedied, that they have no more command of the ship, than the driver
has of the wild Ass spoken of in Job 39.7. Who scorneth the multitude of the
City, etc. Now will not, neither can the ship be got to go by the Card at this
and that Point as formerly she would. I have known some that have been many
days in this condition driving too and again upon the Seas, Verse. 5. I cried
unto thee, O Lord, I said thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the
living.
not able to help themselves, and though they have made great and vast
recompencing promises unto ships that have seen them, and comm'd by them in
this distress, yet would they not take them in a tow, nor afford them any
relief; and yet notwithstanding when they have been thus forsaken in all their
hopes, and no eye has pitied them, nor no help from man has come unto them,
yet has the Lord looked out of the heavens upon their sorrows, and beat down
the waves of the Seas, and the raging winds over their heads, and then by weak
and poor means they have got themselves safe to land. Oh the many Seamen that
are yet living, and can tell of this very mercy!

I may write thus much upon this deliverance, In communi rerum acervo plurima
videmus saepe inter Scyllam and Charydim pofita. I may further say of this
memorable mercy, Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken
heart, and saves such us be of a contrite spirit. Verse. 15. The eyes of the
Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.
18. Some are many times by, and through the violence of storm and tempest,
exceedingly hazzarded in their being overset, insomuch that the ships Masts
have been seen to lie in the very Sea, and the ships decks covered all over
with water, which is one of the dreadfullest, and heart-bleedingest conditions
that can be seen. They that fall into this predicament of misery, there is
small hopes of their recovery, or rising up again, because when a vessel is, or
comes once to be foundered, there is no possibility of her being helped up,
insomuch that where one recovers, five goes to the bottom.

19. Many times when they are riding at an Anchor, they are very dolorously
hazzarded by violent gusts, and stormy blasts of wind, insomuch, that Cables
oftentimes break, and their Anchors give way, and so are most dreadfully put
upon the drift, and that which is the saddest circumstance in this unparalleld
misery is, the propinquity, and nearness of sands, upon which they are many
times likely to perish, I may write upon this remarkable deliverance, Tria
talia poma quadrante cara sunt. Three other such Apples are too dear of a
farthing. I leave the Application. It is with Mariners in this case, as it was
with the Egyptians, when they had the Israelites amongst them, Exodus 12.3^. We
be all dead men. I may say of Sailors, as the Spirit of the Lord says of the
Church, Lamentat. 5.9. We get our bread with the peril of our lives.
if there were not a singular providence stepping betwixt, and to prevent the
fatal stroke of such like stormy consequences. Many (through the undeserved
kindness of the Lord) have escaped when (their Cables have broke in storms,
and) others have gone to the bottom. Is not this a mercy worth perpetual
boxing, and recording in the heart?

20. It falls out oftentimes in rugged and blustering weather, that they are
forced, both when they are at an Anchor, and also when under sail, to lay
violent hands upon their masting and yarding, and cut down all by the Board,
for the safe-guarding of their lives and vessel, Being once in this condition
when upon the coast of Norway, I observed, that there was not a little terror
and affrightment of being cast away among the Sailors, for the wind failed us,
and the current heav^d us into the shore, and the Rocks lay round about us, and
the Sea was so deep that there was no anchoring for us, so that all hopes of
being saved was taken away, yet casting our selves upon our God, he provided
deliverance, and sent out his breezes, some from the Land, and some out of the
Sea, some on Head, and some on Stern, making all the haste that ever they
could, as if they had been resolved to tell us that they strave who should be
the first at us to fill our sails, and carry us back from dying upon the Rocks.
and oftentimes before they can take the leisure to hew them down, the
strongness of the winds breaks them down: now in this most dreadful and
heart-affrighting, and soul-amazing weather, when the Seas run Mountain-high,
as if resolved to swallow them up alive, the Lord does wonderfully preserve
them, they live in this hard stormy time, and others perish in it.

21. Others are oftentimes becalmed in the Seas, when that they are in the
dangerousest, and perillousest of places, and when that there is both Rocks and
Sands on every hand them, and a strong current under them to throw them upon
them; for the Sea being far beyond Cable length in depth, there has been no
anchoring for them, insomuch that if the Lord had not appeared in granting them
gales, and breezes to deliver them, they had assuredly perished. Oh the many
experiences that those that frequent the Seas have of these like deliverances!

22. Others, when they have been most greedily chased by the Turks and other
Pirates from the dawn or break of the morning, unto the going down of the Sun,
and the enemy has got very near upon them, to escape him, their wits have been
set on work, and by this poor quirk, and fallacious stratagem they have
beguiled their chasing Enemy, by throwing out of an empty Cask into the Sea (in
the evening time) into which they have put a light, and the Enemy taking that
light to be the ship, has followed it, and the chased has steered quite the
contrary way, and run his Enemy out of sight.

23. Others have sometimes been chased by the Turks, I will write thus much
upon this stout bout, and miraculous deliverance. Non minor est virtus quam
quaerere parta tueri.
and when the Pyrat has come up close with them, they have most valiantly let
fly their broad sides at each other, and in the dispute the English Merchant
by loading of his Ordnance with bar-shot, has mown down his Enemies shrowds
and Rigging, insomuch that the Pyrat has been left incapable either of
fighting, working, or sailing of his Vessel, and by this prospered, and
succeeded endeavor, they have escaped the ferity of those hands that would
have made them their perpetual bondslaves.

24. Amongst the rest of those many remarkable deliverances that we have been
telling of, May I not write upon this escape out of the hands of their enemies?
Job 5.12. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise.
this is one, that when the Turk, and diverse other Pirates have pursued our
Merchants in the Seas, and come within a very little of their desired prize,
Providence has so admirably disappointed them, that they have fallen on stern,
and never come nearer, by reason of the Fore-top-mast, or the Main-top-mast
yard breaking, then have they been disinabled to run with that speed, and
celerity, which they did before when they were whole. I cannot but look upon
this, and upon the rest of those deliverances that I have spoken of, to be
from God, what ever carnal eyes will say.

It is dangerous playing the part of the foolish fish in the Poet at such an
exigent as this, of whom he sings, Occultum visus decurrere piscis ad hamum.
24. Others are often, and many a time deceived by Sea- Pirates, in respect that
they take them at a distance for friends, when alas they prove their mortal,
and deadly enemies; for their policy is such, that they will hang out false
colors, to the end they may imbolden the Merchant to suffer them to speak with
him, and hereby if they do many a time make a prey of them, yet some escape,
when others are taken in such like Nautical stratagems.

25. Amongst the rest of their deliverances, they meet with the Pyrat, that
plays them this cunning and sophistical pranck, and project, (to the end he
may crouch, and steal in upon them) He goes in the Sea with all his Ordnance
haled in, and kept close betwxit his decks, insomuch that he is often adjudged
and taken for a Merchant, I may write upon this wonderful deliverance, and
notable subtilty, Qui aucupantur aves, plumatis utuntur tunicis. They that will
go a birding must put on the fallacious feathered coat. The Cat when she could
get no Mice, had a trick to disguise her self, and to tell them, Quod fueram
non sum frater, caput aspice tonsum. And hereby she drew the Mice out of their
holes, but the next time they grew so wise, that they told her, Cor tibi restat
idem, vix tibi praesto fidem.
but when he comes up with a ship where he thinks there is both prize and
booty, out goes his guns, and into them does he pour his broadside, and
notwithstanding all this, the poor Merchant being thus betrayed, and at a
disadvantage, and unreadiness both to fire and to repulse his enemy, he has
either in the end taken the Pyrat by desperate fighting, or gone clear of him
by the good Providence of the Lord.

26. Amongst the rest of their deliverances, this is one, I may write upon this
project, Nulla merx difficilior cognitu, quam homo. No ware harder to be known,
than a Pyrat in the Sea.
which I cannot but speak of, The enemy is so cunning, that to the end he may
take prize, and spoil rich fraughted ships, he will venture to Sea in small
boats, and Vessels, with one or two pieces of Ordnance, and hereby he takes
many a ship that mistakes him, and miskens him for some Fisherman, when alas
he is full of armed men to man the prizes that they take, and to board the
ships that they do assault; and whereas many ships have been thus betrayed, and
taken, others have escaped. I may say of these men of War, En bella gerunt
Scarabaei, Behold, Behold, Beetles make War!

27. Others have sometimes been taken with an enemy, who has made it matter of
sport, and of delight, to set their poor prisoners upon an uninhabitable
Island, where there has been, neither, man, beast, nor foul upon it, nor any
manner of food to keep them alive withal, I may write upon this considerable
mercy, Multa eveniunt, quae non volumus. The Sailor is like that Scholar, that
got a knock upon his head, and fell in oblivionem literarum. Or he that fell
upon his mouth, and so fell in Oblivionem Sermonis, when he had been at the
Sermon, they forget all their mercies.
and being left in this forlorn, and highest sort of misery that men could be
plunged into, God has looked down upon them, and put it into the hearts of some
ships or other to touch at that place for firing, or one thing or other, and
hereby they have been most miraculously delivered from being killed by those
two cruel enemies of man's life, famine, and hunger.

28. Amongst the rest of their deliverances, when chased, and pursued by their
enemy, this has been one of their shifts, to put out a Vanting Flag upon the
main-top-mast head, which has been such a danting defiance unto the Pyrat, that
he has not had the heart to come up with them, I will write upon this
fortunate deliverance, Cum pellis Leonina non sufficit, vulpina assumenda est.
If one shift or project will not do, study out another, to get out of the hands
of thine enemy.
fearing that they were of greater force, and strength than himself, whereas if
he had but adventured, and known the reason of that project, they had been his
prisoner.

29. Others have been delivered from being preyed upon by an enemy, when he
has come most vantingly up with them by their putting out of their Ordnance, I
will write down thus much upon this deliverance, Omnes qui sapiunt manifesta
pericula vitant. They that are wise will use any lawful shift to get out of
danger.
upon that (one) side of the ship, that has been most in view of the enemy, and
hereby supposing them to be well gunn'd, and fortified, they have been afraid
of engaging, and meddling with them. We know it, that the thief will not meddle
with him that is a bold, and fighting traveller, whereas alas, if he had but
begun with the Merchant, he had then carried him.

30. Amongst the rest of their deliverances, I may say of this remarkable
deliverance, as one said of the Crocodil, Crocodilus in fugaces terribilis est,
fugax autem contra insequentes.
this has been used for a subtle project, when that they have seen a Pyrat
giving of them chase in a most violent, and avarous manner, they have lain by
the Lee, with the greatest part of their sails close haled, insomuch that the
enemy observing them to be no more afraid of him than so, has taken it for
granted, that it has been some man of War that would fight him; and hereby he
has got his contrary tacks on board, and stood another way.

31. Others, when that sometimes they have been taken and carried away captive
by an enemy, providence has so presented, that some of our English Friggots
have got the sight of them, and making after them to speak with them (as it is
their usual custom to speak with the most ships they see) they have made the
more sail to get from them, I may say of this, or any other deliverance, Admota
manu implorandus Deus. The use of means, and Prayer together, ever prosper.
and then has our ships been set on with the greater earnestness to pursue
them, and fetching abundantly of them, some of the poor prisoners have had the
heart to run up the shrowds, and cut down some of the yards, and thereby the
ship has been disinabled in her sailing, and so quickly fallen into the hands
of the English again.

32. Others have sometimes been taken with the Pyrat, and when chased by our
men of War, I may accuratly say of this deliverance, as the Poet said of the
Fouler, Fistula dulce canit volucrem dum decipit anceps. The Pyrat is as
cunning as that Fox of Gregory's, of whom it is said, that he blackt himself
all over with Ink, and told the Poultry, it much repented him, that ever he did
them so much hurt, to make them an amends he was got into their habit, that
they might the more familiarly converse with him, but no sooner had he
preached on this wise to the Poultry, but he got some of them by the neck,
whom he could not catch before.
they have very cunningly put forth the English Colors, upon that account that
they might give them no longer chase, but the English mistrusting of them, have
pursued them, and fetched them up, yet such has been the dexterity, and policy
of the enemy, that he has kept the English under the Hatches, and appointed
one (that could speak the Lingua well) to stand upon deck, and answer all the
questions that the man of War has moved, and propounded unto them, insomuch
that they have verily believed that the ship was no prize, save only that some
of the prisoners have been heard to shout on high, that they were taken by the
enemy, and then further search has been made, and the Vessel, and the poor
imprisoned have been set at liberty.

33. Others have many and many a time been delivered, when pursued with a
Pyrat, by fireing of a piece of Ordinance now and then, the report of which in
calm weather will run a great way upon the Sea, and it is the custom of all men
of War, to take notice where those Ordinance are fired, and if they be East,
or West, North, or South, they will stand that way, I will say of this
wonderful deliverance, Cavendi nulla est dimittenda occasio. No occasion of
taking heed is to be let slip.
and thereby have they saved some poor Merchants that have been running before
the Pyrat, as the Partridge before the Hawk, and would assuredly have been
preyed upon, had not the Lord on this wise appeared for them.

34. Others have many a time escaped by hanging out of false Colors, insomuch
that the Pyrat has supposed them to be ships belonging to another Country, I
will write upon this memorable deliverance, Melior medicus qui excludit morbos,
quam qui curat. He is a wiser man that prevents a danger, than he that
struggles out of it.
and thereby has neglected the speaking with them; whereas if it had come into
his thoughts to mistrust them, they had assuredly come into his hands.

35. Amongst the rest of their many preservations, this has been wonderful in
my eye, and mind, when that I have either heard, or known that our ships have
been pursued with Pirates, and when the enemy has been almost within shot of
them, I will write thus much upon this deliverance, that the Pyrat follows
harder upon the Merchant, than the Libbard does upon his prey, Quod terno saltu
non prehendit, amittit, that which he catches not at three jumps, he gives it
over. Take one of these Pirates and threaten to hang them, they will plead like
the Fox in the Fable, who when taken, and arraigned at the bar for killing of
the Poultry, pleaded not guilty, because he never broke any justifiable Law,
and to prove this he denied the act that was brought in against him to be
lawful, because both he and the Kite, and the Raven, never consented to it.
in clear, bright, and Christaline weather, the Lord has presently covered them
over with a Fog, and wrapped them up in a Cloud, making that brave day, a day of
thick darkness upon the Seas, and that unto all admiration, by which means
their eyes have been benighted, in as marvelous and miraculous a manner, as
theirs were in Sodom, when they came to Lot's door, (Genesis 19.11. And they smote
the men that were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and
great, so that they wearied themselves to find the door.) And hereby have they
lost their much-expected, and desired prize.

36. Others have been delivered, when in an anxious, I may say of this sight,
Hic tremit ut trepidat Caper inter mill Leones.
and ambiguous case of being surprised, by a sudden, and an incogitant, and
unexpected tacking, and by the help of their Oars (though they have been within
the reach of shot) they have kept their Vessel so upon the wind, that they have
by that means, together with little and easy winds, got their freedom.

37. Others again have been delivered when pursued, and followed with Pirates,
by taking into the Ports and Harbors in other Nations, and if they had not
been so near them at such time when they were chased, and had those refuges to
shelter themselves in, I will say of this deliverance, Qui non potest volare ut
Aquila, volet ut Passer; He that cannot sail well, let him thrust in betimes
for an Harbor.
they had been taken.

38. Others have been delivered on this wise (when they have seen no
possibility of escaping the pursuer) by running themselves (on purpose) into
the perilousest places that they have been acquainted withal, as Sand-banks,
and uncertain shallows, I may write upon this deliverance, Expertae credunt
aquae, inexpertae nulli. The Mariner will not now stand, Viamerranti indicare,
If he should, he would but be counted, both a fool, and a knave.
insomuch that the enemy who has been a deep drawing Vessel has not dared to
adventure after his prize, but given her up for lost.

39. Others again have been delivered on this wise, when that the enemy has
come up with his chase, and been in very great and probable hopes of boarding
of her, providence has thrown the dye of their expectations quite contrary, by
sending a violent, and strong gale of wind upon them when all their sails have
been out, insomuch that the Pyrat has either had his masts and yards broken
with it, or otherwise been forced to hand his sail, and the ship that he has
pursued, being a stronger Vessel, has been able to carry more sail, and thereby
has escaped.

40. Others have also been delivered by this means, and low kind of shift (when
they have been put to it for to run indeed) by throwing over board their Boats,
This may be the Mariners Motto, Vita nostra nunquam molestiis and periclis
vacua.
their lumber, and their luggage, by which their Vessel has been much lightened,
and drawn little water, and so out-saild their pursuers.

41. Others again have escaped, when assaulted by an enemy in the night in an
Harbors mouth, by a quick, nimble, I will say of this deliverance, Nauta
nimium onerantes, sunt in periculo. Non cuivis homini contingit adire
Corinthum. He that cannot do as he would, must do as he can.
and stout-hearted stirring of themselves in their cutting of their cable, and
speedy loosing of their sails, by which means they have cleared themseves from
being boarded by an enemy.

42. Others again have been delivered on this wise (when they have been taken
and over-powred with their enemy) their enemies have gone down very boldly to
ransacke in the Hold, and quaff, and drink of their wines, with which they
have been in such a merry vein, that they have not feared an after clap, by,
and from those that were there prisoners, because perhaps but few in comparison
of them, yet notwithstanding, when they have been thus frolicking, and fudling
of it, they have courageously nailed down the Hatches, and brought them away
prisoners into England, Upon this deliverance I will say no more but this, In
labyrintho properantes ipsa velocitas implicat. He is the likeliest man to get
the soonest out of a maze, that makes the most haste out of it.
that thought to have carried them away prisoners into another Nanation.

43. Others have escaped danger, by enquiring of ships that they have met in
their passage, and re-passage, whether they saw any Pirates yea or no, and
according to their directions they have altered their courses. I may sing of
this deliverance. Invadunt urbem somno, vinoque sepultam. Latratus molossi
furem manifestat.


44. Others again have been delivered on this wise, when that they have sailed,
or do travel single, and alone, in thick, misty, and foggy weather, then cannot
a Pyrat see them because they are wrapped up in a cloud, and their way is never a
whit the worse for Navigation, I will say upon this deliverance, Ibant obscuri
sola sub nocte per umbras. Virg. Aen. 6. Or if you will, Gygis annulum habet.
That man is highly favored, that goes through the dangerousest Seas
(invisibly) with his ship hung and covered with the Caelestial curtains of
providence's weaving.
because the Sun shines not, or the Moon and Stars appear not, provided they
be but far from Land, and have Sea-roome enough, for their Card is their
Magnetic Neptune, by which they shape their course either night or day, and by
this means many a rich Merchant-ship is secured, that would otherwise
undoubtedly be made prize of.

45. Others have been delivered in misty weather, but more especially at its
breaking up, when that Pirates have got the sight of them, so that when
providence has been pleased to furle up the foggy curtains of the Heavens, that
have lain upon the face of the great and wide deeps, Nautae veluti visco vaga
aves sequa^i illaqueantur.
the enemy being nearer them than they were aware, has made after them with all
the sail that ever could be, but providence providing another refuge for them,
(in their flight) some of the English Friggots have releeved them. Having thus
recovered one (as soon as the Fog had broke up) out the hands of an enemy, I
could not but look upon it (though the mercy were not mine but another) with
admiration and affection.

46. Others also have been delivered from their way-lying enemies in the Seas,
by their curious and ingenious working, moulding, I will say of the poor
Merchant, Qualis populea maerens philomela sub umbra Amissos quaeritur
faetusque captos, He trembles.
and forming of timber in the form and representation of Ordnance, and these
being blacked and counterfeted, the enemy observing them to be so well gund
upon their quarters, that they have passed by them, and been discouraged to
meddle with them.

47. Others again have been admirably delivered (when in Greenland and
elsewhere) in their killing of wild beasts, as Bear, Tiger, Wolf, etc. in their
intending to strike them mortally, many times they have stumbled and failed in
their performance, Sea men, the Lord knows my heart, your deliverances do much
affect it, which makes me rake them out of the ashes of forgetfulness, why may
not I speak of them? Look into the 1 Samuel 17.34. and you shall hear David
telling us how he was delivered, both from the Lion, and the Bear, two dreadful
creatures.
and the wild beast observing of it, has leaped upon them and carried them away
in their mouths, and others of their companions being not far distant, have
seen these dreadful spectacles, and followed on very violently to rescue, and
thereby redeemed their lives.

48. Others have been wonderfully delivered, when in ships that have been on a
burning, and blazing fire, when that the fire has run up the tarry shrouds and
masts, and broke out at the port-holes in a most terrible manner, and never a
boat on board left to preserve them, and to carry them away from the fire (for
it is a common thing amongst the Mariners in such cases, to run away with the
boat, and leave all the rest to the mercy of the fire) yet notwithstanding
boats have been sent off from shore with all speed, and their lives have been
saved.

49. Others have been delivered after this miraculous manner, when the ship
has sprung a dangerous, and an incurable leak, which could in no manner, art,
Now have the Seamen trembled within themselves, and their inward desires have
been like those of Moses, Deuteronomy. 3.25. I pray thee let me go over and see the
good Land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly Mountain and Lebanon. The Lord has
given them leave to come safe on Land, when that they thought that they should
have drowned in the Sea.
and skill be stopped, their lives being greatly hazarded, the Lord has sent
unto them a fish, that has gone into the leak and made it up with its own body,
as firm and as tite as ever the ship was before, to the admiration of all that
were in the Vessel, insomuch that when they have brought the ship on shore,
they have found the fish lying in the leak, as fast as any planck about the
Vessel.

50. Others for want of victuals in their long voyages in the Seas, have been
forced to put into strange and uninhabited places, into which they have come
thinking to find relief, yet could they not see with their eyes neither man,
beast, nor foul, yet in some time tarriance there, the Lord has to admiration
provided for them, insomuch that great flocks of fouls have been seen to come
out of other parts, I may say of this wonderful preservation, as it is said of
Isreal's manna, Joshua 5.12. Neither had the children of Israel manna any more,
but they did eat of the fruit of the Land of Canaan that year.
and light in those inhospitable places, where the poor people were like to
starve, and lay them eggs in great abundance, and thus they did for many days,
till at such times they got supplies, and then the fouls went away, and left
them, but not till then.

51. Others have been no less wonderfully delivered, when sprung great and
dangerous leaks, in time of dreadful storms they have been thrown upon the
sands, and when thinking themselves past all hopes of being saved, God has
turned all for good, by calming of the Seas, and winds, The sight of this truth
appeared to be no small mercy in my eye. Seems not this to be the language of
those many Sands that ly up and down in the Seas, that sin has filled the great
deeps with them, and many other unequal shallows, by which ships are most
dreadfully perplexed, and ruined, many and many a time. If mankind had not
sinned, nothing should have lain in his way to harm him in the Seas. As that
curse (at man's unhappy fall) fell upon the whole world, Genesis 3.18. to this day
all grounds are cumbred with Thorns, and Thistles, and so the Sea with
thousands of Rocks and Sands.
and also stoping of the leak, and to boot besides, both their ship and lives
again.

52. Others again have wonderfully been preserved, when in boats that have been
towing at a Friggots stern, the ships way being so furious, and violent through
the Seas, the boats bows has been pulled out, and all the men thrown into the
naked Sea, some lying here, and some lying there, in a most dreadful
condition, insomuch that he that is a spectator of these lamentable accidents,
would think that never a one of them should be saved, and besides, it is a
long time ere a ship can be put upon the stays when she has her freshest way.

53. Others again, have been most wonderfully preserved, when storms have come
down upon them in the dreadfullest rage that ever was seen, or heard, insomuch
that their cables break, and are thereby forced from their anchors, and that
which ponderates, and proves the greatest inconveniency in the circumstance, is
their propinquity unto Sands, and being thus put to it in a Moonless, and
Starless evening, This seems also to be the language of all the in-Sea-lying
Rocks. We know that the Mariner would have us to depart the deeps, and lie in
the bowels of the Earth, with the rest of our fraternity, but truly here we are
ordered for to lie, and to be a trouble unto mankind, that he might not have
all the sweetness, safety, and security in his trading.
it is something terrible, in respect that they are thrown upon them, and at
every held the ship has laid her very hatches in the water, and the poor men
looking at every roll that the Vessel should overset upon them. I have known
some in this condition, that have lived, and got off again both with ship, and
lives.

54. Others have been very admirably preserved, when sailing in the Seas
without any mistrust or jealousy of Sands, or running on ground, yet has it
pleased the Lord, to put into the hearts of some or other in the ship, and
given them secret hints to sound the Sea, and no sooner have they fadomed their
depth but the ship has struck, and by a speedy handling of the Helm, through
the blessing of the Lord they have very narrowly escaped.

55. Others again have been wonderfully preserved in this respect, when they
have unawars come on ground, or upon a Sand-bank, it has but been upon a small
point of it, I cannot look upon any of these prementioned deliverances, but my
soul tells me, that there is the visible finger of the Lord in them. Psalm. 92.6.
A brutish man knows not: neither does a fool understand this.
whereas had the ship run directly upon it, she had been lost without all
recovery.

The often sight of this precious deliverance (I hope) will lie warm upon my
heart as long as I live.

But to break off, what shall I now say of all, and after all these remarkable,
and notable deliverances? My thinks I cannot pass by the point that was laid
down, without one short word or two of use,

1. Of Reprehension. 2. Of Exhortation.
Use 1. Of Reprehension. If it be thus, That the Seaman of all the men under
the whole heavens (none excepted) is one that is both a partaker, and a seer of
the greatest and remarkablest of temporal deliverances. How are such to be
checked, that out of blind eyes, hard hearts, and sottish spirits, never look
upon these pre-mentioned mercies and deliverances, as either mercies, or
deliverances, but hurl them at their heels, and value them no more, than they
do their old shoes. The end of my gathering up these your mercies and
deliverances, is only to stir up your hearts unto thankfulness, and to let the
people that live on land, both see and know what God does for you in the deeps,
the truth of it is, these are buried mercies that I have been telling of, and
such mercies as have lain in the grave of oblivion, where few have taken any
notice of them (many of these I have gleaned up both from my own experience,
and from the mouths of others that have been both good and pious) I never knew
any one that ever undertook to write any thing upon this subject, nor to gather
up the Sea-mercies that I have done. If they be not savoury unto thee, or any
that reads them, let me tell you thus much, it is an argument of a carnal heart.
Did Jacob, Genesis 33.10. undervalue his deliverance from the hand of his brother
Esau, as you do? Did David look upon it as a small mercy, that he had so good
a friend as Jonathan? 1 Samuel 20.36. Did the Apostle Paul, and the rest of those
passengers that escaped that dreadful storm and shipwreck, look lightly, and
think lightly of that deliverance? Act. 27. God knows you are men that are at
this day trampling these mercies under your feet. Swine tread not corn, nor
trample Acorns under feet more brutishly, than many do their deliverances at
Sea.

Use 2. Of Exhortation. Be persuaded to be much in thankfulness, and more
than ever you have been. Ah souls! consider what you owe unto your God, you are
in so great a debt to him, that do what you can, you will never be able to
come out of it. I may say unto you in the words of Job, 33.29. Thanks laid out
this way are laid up, non percunt shall I say of them, sed parturiunt, Is.
32.8. The liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal things he shall
stand. One would think that he would the rather fall by being so bountiful, but
indeed he takes the right course to thrive; Giving is the only way to an
abundance, God looks not that men's thankfulness should come from them ^ as
drops of blood from their hearts, or that it should be squeezed out of them, as
wine out of the grape, but that it flow from us as water out of a spring, as
light from the Sun, and as honey from the Comb.
Lo all these things works God oftentimes with man. Even all those
deliverances that I have been telling you of. Let me press these things upon
you.

1. Acknowledge that it is the Lord and he alone that has wrought all these
deliverances both for you, and for others, and that not for your merits, or for
theirs, but his own mercies sake.

2. Praise his most glorious Name with your tongues, and call upon others so to
do.

3. Obey God the more in your lives, and entreat every Seaman so to do.

4. Love him entirely in your hearts, and beseech every Seaman so to do.

5. Depend wholly upon him in all your distresses for the time to come, and bid
other Seamen so to do.

6. Be evermore in a diligent circumspection and godly fear of provoking of
the Lord unto anger, and beseech other Seamen so to do.

But to proceed, Exodus 9.30. I know that ye will not yet fear the Lord God.

4. And lastly, If it be demanded of me, What is meant and understood by the
Lords Wonders in the deeps, I shall give you my most humble thoughts in brief;
before you had it, Works of the Lord, and now his Wonders; why, his Works which
we have spoken of before are wonderful works, and works and wonders in this
place are both relatives and concomitants, and as they go, and may be taken
together, I shall say of them, Deus conjunxit, nemo separet. Such excellency
and eminency is there in the works of the Lord, that a seeing eye cannot but
look upon the meanest of them as matter of wonderment and astonishment. All the
deliverances that have been presented, and now stand in view upon the Stage
before the whole world, are nothing else but Gods wonders in the deeps, and all
those fishes in the Seas, of which I have run upon, and told you of, are Gods
Wonders in the deeps, viz. the Whale, the Seahorse, the Granpisce, and the
Sea Monster, etc. Again, every wave is a wonder, and he that has a seeing eye
in a storm, may see ten thousand wonders, how one mountainous wave rowls, and
follows in the heels of another, which make most dreadful, and amazing
downfalls, and hollows, in so much that it is a terrible thing for a strong
brain to look out of a ship into them, and amongst them. When the Seas are
congregated into mountainous heaps (rolling tonanti voce) ships are jetted up
unto the heavens, and this is matter of wonderment.
Yonder is a wave a coming says the Seaman that will be with us by and by,
yea and break in upon us, and in it comes over the ships waste; and when that
is over, yonder is another a coming that will roll over our Poops, and
Lanthorns; and when delivered from that, a while they sail, and by and by rises
another billow that threatens to run over the Main-yard arm, which is four or
six Fathom higher, and above the ship; insomuch that the Mariner is exceedingly
affrighted, lest that the ships decks should be broke with that intolerable
weight of water, and also of being run down into the bottom.

But thus much shall serve for an account of those Works and Wonders that
Seamen do see in the Seas, and so I proceed.

Verse. 25. For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up
the waves thereof.
IN our handling of these words, I will not stand upon that curious, quaint,
and fine-spun division that might be made of them (believe me the Sea will
not permit it) only thus much I shall promise, to give you all that this
Scripture will afford us, and that which is materially in it.

In the words then you have these two things.

1. Gods Sovereign and Supreme power. 2. The creatures ready and willing
obedience.
The Seas, like the Heliotrope or your (solsequii flores) Sun following
flowers, which stand constantly gazing and opening unto the Sun from whom they
draw their life and nourishment, even follow the blowing and blustering winds if
they be stiff and strong, they make the Seas for to rage and roar.
For he commands, etc. The particle for in this verse is used as a note of
the effect or sign, and in our common speech when we would express our selves
in something that others are either ignorant of, or desirous to know, we then
take an occasion to proclaim it, and say, yonder is ships in the Offin of the
Sea, for I see their white sails, and yonder is Guns fired to wind-ward, for I
see the smoke flying, and ascending; so that we may read the word thus,
Because he commands the winds to blow, therefore is it that the waves are
lifted up. When the winds have blown hard in the remote parts of the Seas,
whether in the East, West, North, or South, the effects thereof are usually
seen in far distant parts of the Seas that that storm never light upon, for the
winds disturb the Seas by blowing upon one part when they travel not the half
way; nay it may be that a storm that has fallen upon the Occidental Seas, is
felt and seen (in the South, though many hundred miles from it) by its rolling
restlesness; the Hebrew Expositors read it, How he commands, and raises,
that is, makes to stand, etc. And indeed none see how the Lord raises up the
stormy wind but those that go down into the Sea, these see the dreadful billows
that be at such times upon the face of the deeps.

All that I find now either remarkable, or observable in the words, is this.

1. That the great God has all the creatures at his command. All the creatures
Magnalia, and the Minutila) throughout the whole universe, are at Gods command,
to come and go, and go and come at his will, and pleasure. Nay let the errand
be what it will, they will perform it if but commissionated from him to go
about it. If that he say but unto the winds, Go, I will have the Seas thrown
into heaps, hills, and mountains; There be storms which fall upon the sandy
plains in Egypt, that bury many thousands of travelers that pass over them.
The least gnat in the air, but empowered, and set on by God, shall choke one, as
it did once a Pope of Rome, a little hair in milk strangle one, as it did a
great Counselor in Rome, a little stone of a Raisin stop ones breath, as it
did the Poetical Pipe of Anacreon.
how quickly is it done? and when the Seas were but even now on a sweet,
smoothe and silver calm, they are upon an instant thrown into dashing and
dreadful clashing waves. This Wind-army when the Lord stands in need of it (may
I so speak) or has service for it to do, it is presently upon the march to run
and dispatch his errands, whether of indignation, or of mercy. If that the
great Lord General of Heaven and Earth, the great supreme Commander of the
winds, will have them to destroy a people, to throw down their houses on land,
or break their ships at Sea, it is quickly done, 2 Chronicles. 20.37. Because thou
have joined thy self with Ahaziah, the Lord has broken thy works, and the
ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish. Nay, the snuff of
a candle, a tile of an house, a crum of bread, a Chery-stone, has been
empowered to mortalize man. God wants not for means to punish the wicked diverse
ways, When God is about to fight against a people, all the creatures will
march in rank and file against them, the Drum of Gods wrath is no sooner struck
up, and the Trumpet of his indignation blown, but the creatures are up in their
arms.
his servants are in every corner of the world, let a man travel what way he
will, he has a rod in every angle of the universe to lay upon their backs,
and that will follow them at the heels. God is Lord General in chief, and all
the creatures are his hosts and servants; if he say to the Plague, Fever,
Ague, etc. Go, and fall upon such a Town, Country, or person, it is gone. The
unruly Sea tamely stands still, if God command it, and lovingly opens its
bosom to entertain the Israelites. The Sun goes backward at his command, Josh.
10.12. The greedy and cruel Lions are quickly muzled, and grow gentle at his
command, Isa. 38.8. So the Sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was
gone down.

The course that I shall now shape in the handling of this Proposition will be
to inlighten you further in this truth in a parcel of very clear evidences. The
four Wind-armies of the world.
This Wind-army of the Lord, then (as I may properly call it) I shall rank,
divide, and marshal into four Squadrons, because they lie quartered in the four
corners of the world, at a great distance from one another.

1. The first is quartered in the North, and it is a very terrible Army when it
has a commission, and is set on by God, vi and armis, as we say, it makes the
Seas under the Artick pole, and elsewhere, to snere again, and if it does not
execution enough in that quarter, he can give it command to advance on to the
North, and by West, and do his will there, and if not in that place in the
North North-west, and there shall it stay and blow, and accomplish his ruining
work upon ships even as he pleases; and if not in that place, on it marches
into the North-west and by North North-west; and if not there, on it goes again
into the North-west and by West, West, North-west, etc. Who so is wise will
observe these things, Psalm. 107.43.

2. The other lies quartered in the East, and it is no less potent, and
powerful than the other, but does presently at the sound of Gods silver Trumpet
(consurgere in arma) rise up into arms, and military postures either to break
ships, or to throw the Seas into pyramidical hills, Be advertised all ye
graceless Sailors that go in the Seas, that think your selves (because you have
good ships under you) so safe, and so secure, that neither God, Winds, nor
Devils, can harm you; alas, if God commissionate empower, and set but on one of
these Wind-armies upon your backs, you would not be able to stand under the
blows of it, it would either tear your ships to pieces, throw them upon the
shore, the Rocks, and Sands, or else sinck you down right into the bottoms,
where you should never be seen, nor heard of more.
and mountains, and this Army wheels as easily about to serve the Lord in any
part of the world, as the flaming sword did to keep the Garden of Eden, Genesis
3.24. If it be not serviceable enough (either to do good or evil in the Seas)
in the East and by East, it will advance on into the East, South-east, and if
not in that place, it will go on into the East and by South; and again, if the
Lord will have some Vessels or other ruined and drowned, it will wait upon his
pleasure in the East, East and by North, and from thence again to attend upon
his sacred and most holy will, it will be in the twinkling of an eye, in the
East North-east, I, and round about the Card if he pleases, to break ships in
any part of the world whatsoever.

3. The next Army is quartered in the West, and it is as blustering and stormy
as the rest, and when it has pleased the Lord to suffer this Army to draw the
sword, many ships have perished in the Seas by it, and been both forced on
shore, and also unmercifully, and irrecoverably thrown upon the Rocks and Sands
of destruction. This is one of the great, supreme Lord General's attendants,
and is ready at hand to be his messenger, either of good or evil, where the
great Sovereign of Heaven and Earth shall appoint him, either to take ships and
break them in the West South-West, or if not there, in the South-West and by
West, etc. Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise will observe these things.

4. And lastly, The other Army lies quartered in the South, and this oftentimes
is (very commonly) the fiercest and furiousest of them all, This Army may be
called neque manner finet neque navigare. Sometimes it will neither suffer
ships to sail, nor to keep the Sea.
insomuch that it makes the Seas run mountain-high, and lie all upon a bubling
froth, and curded foam. This Army marches one while into the South, and by East
South, and by and by, into the South-East, South-East, and by South, etc. and
is very ready and attentive to carry on the Lords designs, either for good or
evil.

There is both a wonderful vertibility, and also variableness in the winds, one
while they are here, and by and by they are there, Eccl. 1.6. The wind goes
toward the South, and turns about unto the North: it whirleth about
continually, and the wind returns again according to his circuits. Oh what
quick eyes, hearing ears, ready feet, strong arms, (may I say) has these
four-wind armies to go, yea run, If that an Italian General could say, (when
one of his Noble^ complained unto him of their want of men) I can have all
Italy up in arms with one stamp of my feet upon the Earth. What do you think
then of the Lord? cannot he have all his forces both in Heaven, and Earth, up
in arms, Land sooner than Armies of men can be, at the sound of trumpet, or at
the beat of drum?
and fly upon Gods commands? What more frequent than to hear this amongst the
Mariners, We were shipwracked when the Nothern wind-army lay in the North
North-West? and we lost our ship says another, when the Eastern wind-army lay
in the East and by South, etc. and we lost our ship says another, when the
Southern wind-army lay in the South and by East, South, etc. and we lost our
ship seems another to say, when the Western wind-army was upon its march in the
West South-West, etc. But to proceed. I will run on in a few more particulars;
as God has wind-armies at command, so has he many other strange, unminded, and
unobserved armies, to march into the field against a people, when he pleases.

1. God has his Angel-fighting-armies, some whereof are good, and other some
are bad, 2 Samuel 24.16. And when the Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem
to destroy it, the Lord repented him of the evil, etc. 2 King. 19.35. And it
came to pass that night, that the Angel of the Lord went out, If one Angel
could do thus much, what could not Christ's twelve Legions have done upon the
wicked Jews?
and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand,
etc.

2. The Lord has his Sun, Moon, and Star fighting Armies, and this is another
sort of army, that the Lord has sometimes mustred up, to show his mighty Power,
and these are called the Hosts of Heaven, Deuteronomy. 17.3. This Host was up in Arms
in Joshua's time, Josh. 18.12, 13.

But some may object and say, this is something strange, how should the Sun,
the Moon, or the Stars fight?

I answer, God may take away the use, the benefit, the light, and the
influences of them, and in this sense the battle will be found too hard to
escape in.

3. The Lord has his men-fighting-armies at command, Exodus 12.51. By these did
the Lord bring Israel out of Egypt. The wicked are Gods sword, and his Armies,
Isa. 10.5, 6, 7. Jer. 25.9. God has Armies of men, both good and bad, and when
he pleases, he can presently arm them, and send them upon errands of ruin
and destruction against a Nation.

4. The Lord has his water-fighting-armies at command, Genesis 6.17. And behold I,
even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh,
wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven, and every thing that is in
the earth shall die.

5. The Lord has his fire-fighting-armies at command, Genesis 9.24. 2 King. 1.10.
Levit. 10.2. And this Army shall be up in arms, either in ships at Sea, or
Houses, Towns, and Cities, on Land, to set them on burning flames.

6. The Lord has his air-fighting army at command, and when he is pleased,
(and displeased with a people) he lets fly the arrows of pestilence out of
the strong bended bow of his fierce wrath, and irresistible indignation. He can
infect the air ( Numb. 16.46.) and this arrow shall neither fly over nor
short, but hit the white, the person, or the persons, that the Lord aims at;
whether they be Towns, or Cities, Nations or Countries, this contagious air
shall lay siedge unto them, and over them, and the Sun shall not be able to
drive it away, nor the winds to sweep it away, and this stinking air is able
to stifle all, whether in Towns, Cities, or Countries, if he do but empower it
and set it on.

7. The Lord has his Hail-stone-army at command, this Army was up, and on foot
for God in Joshua's time, Josh. 10.11. I would all the Drunkards, and Swearers,
Take heed Sailors, how you sail to and again in the Seas, with hearts full of
guilt, hands full of blood, tongues full of lies, and heads full of sinful
projects, and unreconciled men to God.
that are either in the States or Merchants Service, would tremble before the
Lord, and be in fear lest their pates should be broken with hailstones out
of the Heavens.

8. The Lord has his Earth-fighting-army at command, Numb. 16.32. And the Earth
opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, etc. Take heed
Godless man, how you walk on Earth, lest at every step thou take, the Earth
open to bury thee alive for thy drunken, and swearing life.

9. God has his fighting Armies at command, out of the meanest and
contemptiblest minutila's that are, and these shall come in as good regimental
and warlike order, as the Soldier at the sound of trumpet, or beat of drum,
viz. Lice, Frogs, Worms, etc. How have these adventured into Kings Palaces, and
who gave them that boldness? These broke in at the windows, ranged like rude
Soldiers into every room belonging to Pharaoh's house, Exodus 8.6. and 16.17.
Acts 12.23.

10. God oftentimes makes Conscience a terrible, gnawing, and fighting Army,
and this the great God of Heaven has command of, to send a tormenting Hell into
it; who is able to stand in the face of this battle? This enemy shoots through,
and through. Job could not stand in it, for he cried out, Have pity upon me,
have pity upon me, Oh my friends, for the hand of the Lord has touched me.
But to proceed.

There is one phrase in the words before us, that would be a little opened and
explained.

1. What we are to understand by a Stormy wind.

2. What the effects of it are.

1. I find that Scripture is delighted to speak of this very vapor, Of that
force some storms are known to be of, that they will overturn houses on Land,
and ^^nd up trees by the roots, 1 King. 19.11. Sambelicus sets out the
strength, the force, and the power of the winds, when he tells us, how whilst
Cambyses and his Army sat down to dinner in a sandy desert, a dreadful storm
arose, and beat up the sandy mountains about their eats, and became as so many
Sextons to delve the graves of the greatest part of his Army for them. This
vapor sets forth the great power of God, let those therefore that go upon the
Seas, learn to fear the Lord, lest he bury them in the deep.
Psalm. 148.8. The stormy wind fulfilling his word. The fierceness of this
creature is little known, and as little understood, supposed, and imagined to
be so terrible as it is (I mean) to those that live on Land, and are far from
the view of the dreadful, and military force and power that is in it; but it is
too well known to those that live in sailing, and floting houses upon the Seas.
The word Stormy wind comes from a borrowed metaphor from the Soldiary, and
Land-Armies, who will, when they do assault, and storm, either Forts, Towns,
Castles, or Cities, even lay on their greatest force of Men and Ordnance, and
then is there the greatest frowns in their faces, and palpitations in their
hearts.

It is called here a Stormy wind, in opposition to smooth, gentle, and benign
gales and winds: as the Sea was but even now in a fair, temperate, and moderate
calm, so that the smalest boat might have rowed to and again in the Seas, now
cannot scarce the greatest and strongest ships live in them, but are in
perpetual jeopardy of being drowned.

2. What the effects of a stormy wind are, and these are twofold.

1. Lifters up of the waters.

2. Sinkers or ruiners of ships.

1. The word lifting up, has its countenance the clear demonstration of this
like borrowed Metaphor, as it is with, and amongst men that are proud, high,
and haughty, (and of an Elephantinum hominis genus) who will lift up themselves,
strut, look big, speak loftily, and magnify themselves, or else from those
Strapados which they have in the Austral parts of the world, by which they will
hoyst up their malefactors many fadoms high, and then lower them down again
with the greatest violence, that their weighty bodies can descend withal.
After this manner are the ships lifted up in storms, that use the Seas, and as
violently thrown down again. As the potentest military power is seen to put his
enemy unto flight, as great, So dreadful are the downfals that are made in
storms, that they seem to outstrip the deepest Valleys that sit under the
cloud-topping, and cloud-imbraceingest mountains that be in the world.
I and greater disorder do the Seas run in, and fly before the stromy winds.

2. Ships are oftentimes cast away by them, Acts 27.41. And falling into a
place where two Seas met, they ran the ship a ground, and the forepart stuck
fast, and remained unmovable, but the hinder-part was broken with the violence
of the waves.

And again, storms end in the debilitating and disinabling of ships.

That all perilous storms, and ship-wracking and sending, What are storms but
the uttering of Gods voice in wrath, and judgment upon the Seas? If the winds
blow harder at some times than their ordinary course is, which is most useful
and profitable unto the Mariner, it is no other but a curse, a judgment, and a
token of the Lords displeasure. But where is the Seaman that believes this?
for he commands, etc. If this point stand in need of proving, I will make
it out both pregnantly, and sufficiently, that the Lord lays claim to it, and
challenges his propriety in it, and so consequently that it is his act, and
none but his; therefore that I may not put you off with words, I will throw you
in these inlightning, and doctrine-confirming Scriptures, Psalm. 147.18. He
causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow. Psalm. 148.8. Stormy wind
fulfilling his word. That word of his that God has, and will fulfill, many
times may be sinking and perishing (for ought I know) as well as floting and
keeping above water. The Lord has the winds at command to be his executioners,
and administratours, either of destruction, or preservation; he it is, and he
alone, that finds them with employment. 2 Chronicles. 20.37. And the ships were
broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish. May be many of them were
hurled into the bottom of the Sea, and others of them thrown upon the Rocks,
and Sands.

But to speak shortly now, and yet exactly unto the interest of this praegoing
point, I would then have all the Sailors in the world, to conclude upon this
ground of truth, that all stormy and tempestuous winds are of the Lords raising
and sending, and that he is to be acknowledged in them; and herein I would
have you to soar far higher than the natural causes of things. He that drove
man out of Paradise, both does, and can drive graceless wretches out of the
Seas, and hurl them upon Rocks, Sands, and Shore. The Rocks, the Sands, and the
Winds, I may fitly resemble unto the Cherubins, and the flaming sword that was
placed at the East end of the Garden of Eden, Genesis 3.24. Which turned every
way, these are ready at the Lords command, to break ships in the East, in the
North, and in the South, or in the West.
It is said of the Earth, that it is given by God unto the children of men,
Psalm. 115.16. But the winds the Lord keeps in his own hands, to move, and fly
to and again, this way and that way in the Heavens, even as it pleases him
best, to do this, and to do that, and their dependency is in the heavens; no
creature has them at command, but God solely, and properly, for every Tempest
that comes, has as it were an express command from the Lord, and that under
both hand and seal, and if the winds should be questioned and summoned in to
give an account of the sad perils they throw the Mariners into, and the many
shipwracks, and great and innumerable losses they put them to year by year,
they would tell such as should demand an answer of them, that they had order
from above, for so doing, and that sin which abounds in ships was the only
cause of those fatal, and ominous ruins, and desolations. But that I may give
you the grounds of this Proposition, you will in the end (I question not) be
fully satisfied about the Lords proceedings in this manner.

1. Because God would show his Divine is never a storm that comes down upon the
Seas to endanger you, but God is exceedingly angry with you; what more frequent
than to hear this out of Scripture, Psalm. 7.11. That God is angry with the
wicked every day. If God be angry with the wicked every day, then I will pawn
my salvation upon it, that he is not pleased with you every day.

But Seamen, to fasten this truth upon your spirits, and to drive it into your
heads: pray consider what a dreadful storm the Lord sent out after Jonah, when
he sinned against him, and provoked him to anger, Jonah 1.4. But the Lord sent
out a great wind into the Sea, and there was a mighty Tempest in the Sea, so
that the ship was like to be broken. Did not Jonah now, and those Heathen that
he sailed amongst, acknowledge that that storm came upon them, for their sins?
This was more than ever I heard English Sailor say, or confess in all my life,
(during that too long time I have spent amongst them) where is the Sailor that
will say, when the masts are a going down by the board in a storm, or the ship
is a going to be cast away upon the Rocks, or upon the Sands, and shore, what
is the Lords design now? Some iniquity or other is amongst us, some carnal
filthiness, some stinking and abominable impurity that we have not been
humbled for, nor turned from, that has brought this misery upon us; now are our
lives jeoparded and at the very stake, by reason of that swearing, drinking,
and audacious gracelesness that is amongst us. I dare be bold to say it, that
the ungraciousness of that generation of People that goes down into the Sea,
and is amongst them, does put the Lord many and many a time to rouse up his
wind-Lyons, Seems not this to be the language of all storms, Isa. 1.24. Ah, I
will ease me of mine adversaries, and avange me of mine enemies?
or wind-Eagles to fly about their ears, with a raging austerity, and
heart-daunting cruelty, yet notwithstanding this generation cannot be got to
abate in swearing, reform in drinking, and return from their filthy doings.

Sailors, if ever you would travel the Seas with safety and freedom from storm
and Tempest, follow the Example of the wild-geese that fly over Caucasus where
the Eagles roost, lest they should be heard in their gagling, they will not
take any such flight or voyage before their mouths be well crammed with
pebbles, and then they know that they are far enough out of danger. If you
would not now have God to send down storms upon you, let him not see you drunk,
nor let him not see you profaning of his holy Name, yea be sure of this, that
you never let him hear you swearing.

I am confident, were you but an humble, and a godly sort of people, neither
beasts of the field, the Seas you swim in, and the winds that are above you
would never hurt you so much as they do, and so you should find more peace,
more quiet, and less dread, and terror than now you do. What is it that sin
will not do? it will batter down Cities, I have read a notable passage of some
Heathens, who when at Sea, and in a very dangerous storm, where they were all
like to be cast away, began every one apart to examine themselves, what was or
should be the reason of so dreadful a storm, and after they had cast up all by
quaerying with themselves, what have I done, and what have I done said another,
that his occasioned this storm, it amounted to this, they remembered that they
had Diagoras the Atheist on board, and rather than they would perish, they took
him by the heels and hurled him over board, and then the storm ceased, and the
Seas were at quiet with them. If any one would ask me now, what is the reason
that the State-ships meet with such hard storms, and so many Sands, and
dangers, I should tell them, this it is, because they are so full of filthy
Swearers, Drunkards, and Atheistical Adulterers: These have made my heart for
to tremble, more than all the dreadful storms that ever I have been in, in all
my life.
Nations, Towns, and Countries, and lay them level with the ground, and
therefore well may your sins bring many ships to ruin, Hos. 4. verse. 2, 3.

It is that profaneness that is amongst you, that puts the Lord upon suffering
of your ships to blow up, and to fall upon Rocks, and Sands, etc. Think not
that the strongest ship or ships in the world, are able to keep you from
drowning, when there is nothing but swearing and carnal filthiness amongst you.
It was but a foul mistake, and also a carnal conceit, that Dionysius was of,
that great Sicilian Tyrant, when he said, that his Kingdom was bound to him
with chains of Adamant, for time soon confuted him. Is there not now as strong
a conceit in you about your valor, and the strength of your ships? Alas one
sturdy storm will make them rock and tremble, I, and carry them unto the
bottom, or throw them upon the shore, if but licensed and empowered by God. The
strongest walled Cities in the world cannot keep judgment out if sin be but
within, neither are they sufficient Canon-proof against the Arrows and
Canon-bullets of an heavenly vengeance; the height of a Cities proud-daring,
and out-braving Turrets, may for a time keep the earth in awe, but they cannot
threaten heaven, nor stand it out against the Lord; the sinfuller a City, a
Nation, a Country, a Ship, or Family is, the weaker are they, and the more do
they lie open to Gods dreadful thundering and lightning upon them, Isa. 40.15.

I will tell you of a story that will make your ears to tingle when you have
heard it, and it is of that famous City of Jerusalem, which was the glory and
beauty of the whole earth; It thought it self so strongly fortified, and manned
within, that there were an impossibility of ever being stormed, and ruined, but
alas, sin being in its full weight within, set open the sluices, and floodgates
of Gods displeasure, and so let in the raging surges of cruel, and intestine
wars, and brought it unto a heap of stones, and to an uninhabitable place.
After Titus Vespasianus Soldiers had set the Temple on fire (it was observed)
all the industry and skill that ever could be used, imagined, or thought on,
could not quench it: Titus (says the history) would gladly have preserved it,
What is it that God cannot do, who is able to marshal, and draw into a body
even all the scattered forces that lie upon the face of the Creation together,
and draw forth their vigor and virtue, and so arm them, and that which is
more, set on every degree of that vigor and force that is in the creature
according to the strength of his own powerful Arm? Gods anger is able to change
and alter the very nature of all creatures, yea the smallest and the weakest,
and feeblest of them shall not only go, but run upon Arrands of Destruction,
in obedience to their chief Generalissimo, who can empower and commissionate
for services of the bloodiest severity that may be.
as one of the worlds great wonders, but it could not be, such was the fury of
the fire, and the rage of the Soldiers, both of them undoubtedly set on by
God, so that the fire would not be extinguished when they threw in both water,
and the blood of the slain into it. Josephus tells us, that Herod the King had
for eight years together before the ruin of it, employed ten thousand men at
work to beautify it. This was a very glorious thing, yet how quickly brought
down for the sinfulness of a people? 1 Cor. 10.11. Now if these things came
upon them for sin, and security, my application is this, in short, to you that
use the Seas, Take heed that your sins bring not storms, shipwracks, and fires
upon you, when you are in the Seas far from any land: If you ask the reason why
such a famous City was destroyed, the answer is easily returned, It was for
sin: And if you ask what is the reason of such and such Towns, and Cities in
the world have been fired, the answer will be, That sin was the cause of it;
and so consequently of the ruin of all your ships.

2. Because God will show his power, Matthew. 8.24. And behold there arose a
great tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves,
but he was asleep, and his Disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord
save us, we perish. Proud man is very prone to ascribe that to himself which
is absolutely and properly due unto the Lord, Proud man is oftentimes priding
of himself with high thoughts of himself, what he is in point of wisdom,
parts, art, and skill, but when God puts him to the trial, he is a mere
nothing; Bulla, vitrum, glacies, flos, fabula, faeuum, Vmbra, Cinis, punctum,
vo^, sonus, aura, nihil.
and therefore God would undoubtedly teach man thus much in storms, that there
is no wisdom, art, skill, or strength can carry him out of his dangers, but it
must be God alone that must do it for them. But many Seamen are like to
Aprogis (that Egyptian Tyrant) in many of their storms and dangers, of whom it
is said that he was grown to such an height of pride, and impiety, and
contempt of God, that he professed that he held his Kingdom so safe, Ut a
nemine Deorum, aut hominum sibi eripi possit, Behold what a weakling the Sailor
is in a storm. Isa. 33.23. Thy tacklings are loosed, they could not well
strengthen their Mast, they could not spread the sail.
that neither God, nor men could take it from him; but has not God let you see
an end of your vain thoughts and imaginations, many, and many a time? and have
you not run upon sands when you have purposed to come well home? and have you
not at other times run on rocks, and gone into the very bottom amongst the
dead, when you have both confidently thought and said, you would come safely to
your Ports? God oftentimes sufficiently convinces you what you are in your own
strength, and wisdom without him.

But to proceed.

3. Because God would have some Jonah before he could get him to buckle to his
work, Jon. 2.1. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the Fishes
belly. Nulli rei natus es nauta, nisi paenitentiae, Sailor, thou and every one
is born for no other thing but for repenrance, and the Lord knows there is none
in the world, or under the whole heavens that repents less than thou do.
Rugged storms will both dissolve men, and cause their eyes to run down in
rivulets of tears; yea it is an argument of a good heart to be afraid of Gods
righteous judgments, when the stormy winds are out upon the Seas: Good people,
look upon them as no other but the sword of the Lord that is drawn out of the
Scabberd of his indignation, which he waves to and again, over, and upon the
face of the great deeps, which puts them upon begging and praying upon the
bended knees of their hearts, that God would put it up again.

4. Because God would have some Jonah 1.16.) that that storm that came down
upon the Mariners, proved their conversion. Then the men feared the Lord
exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows. Now they
feared God whom they never owned, knew, nor feared before. Storms have been the
first converting Sermons that many a man ever met withal. Yea God has met
with them in a storm, Truly God is forced to do, and deal with Seamen many
times, as Land-men do with unruly Jades, and unbacked horses, when they have a
mind to take them, they must drive them up against some hedge, gate, or bank,
where they can neither get forwards, nor backwards, or else they can never
halter them. If God do not send down rowsing storms upon the Sailors heads,
that even threaten to rend both heaven and earth, I fear they will I never
return, nor come home to God.
whom a Sermon out of the Pulpit could never take, nor reach. I, many have been
caught in a storm, that have stood at as great a distance, and in as much
opposition to God and his word, as Ataliba that Indian Prince once did to Friar
Vincents book, which he presented to him, withal telling him that it was a
small Treatise of all the mysteries of salvation, heaven, and hell; he looked
upon it, and told the Gentleman, that he saw no such thing in it; asking him
withal how he knew it. Many who have heard the word, and have said in effect
they saw no such matter in it as the Preacher tells them of, have been taken
napping in a storm. God sometimes takes here one, and there one napping in a
storm, that could never be catched in a calm. The word converts but few at
Sea, but a dreadful storm may fetch in them whom a Sermon could not reach.

All ground is not alike, some must have a shower, some a clodding, neither is
all wood to be used alike, some will plain, and other some must be taken in the
head with wedge and beetle.
Truly one would think that one of those fearful, and most dreadful storms that
fall now and then upon the Seas, were, and should be sufficient to turn the
heathenest Sailor that is in them into a very good and gracious Christian.
Quaedam fulmina, aes ac ferrum liquefaciunt, Some Thunders will soften both
Brass and Iron, and that is an hard heart surely that is not melted, and
converted before the Lord in those loud thundering claps of storm and tempest.

Sailors, the Seas are turbulent because of you, the winds above thunder, and
roar more over our heads every day than they would, the skies are cloudy,
thick, and foggy, because of you, and the Sun does not give his light unto the
Sea, we take not our enemies in our chases, because of you, neither do we, nor
can we bring them down with that violency as we might, if you were but good,
and gracious.
a gloomy and a dreadful day, as long as our ships are full of Diagoras's and
drunken Zeno's, etc. I am confident there is more danger in going to Sea
amongst the unsavory crew that is in ships in England, whether Merchant, or
Men of War, than there was for Lot to stay in a stinking Sodom, and yet in
very deed he had been burnt, if the two Angels had not come down from heaven to
give him warning, and to usher him out of the City, whilst fireballs were
making in heaven, Genesis 19. The Mariners that carried Jonah had like to have
lost their lives, what then may one expect in going amongst Sailors, that are
as full of sin and filthiness, as a Dog is full of hairs and fleas.

6. To put faith on work, Christ was Peter, Matthew. 14.29, 30. But when he saw
the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying,
Lord, save me. The German drinks down his sorrows, the Spaniard weeps it away,
the French man sings it away, and the Italian sleeps it away, all these are but
sorry shifts, but if thou have faith in God in stormy times, this will make
thee sweeter melody in thy foul, than all the fidling jigs of Musik in the
world.
Christ soon saw the weakness of his faith. It is a strong faith that God
delights in, and indeed the greater the strength and boldness of it is in God,
the more it makes for Gods honor, declaring him to be All-sufficient, in the
worst, and greatest of dangers. He that is faith-proof, may go with comfort to
Sea, whether to the East, or to the West, to the North, or to the South; nay
such an one ma adventure to embrace the Artick an Antartick Poles, when as a
faithless person is but like a Soldier without hi arms. Get this grace of
faith, and thou will then see that all thy safety is in God, that he is thy
only (...).

Paulinus when under that great trial, when the savage Goths had invaded the
City Nola and ransacked it, and taken from him all his richest goods out of his
house and coffers, he yielded not unto the stream of sorrow which might have
carried him down into the gulf of despair, When Cato's Soldiers were
discouraged in their march through the Desert of Lybia, because of thirst,
heat, ^^d and ^^^nts, he (...), this (...) unto (...) Come (...) friends, and
^^at my ^^uldiers, imp^ nt and d c^uraged? these are all plea^^ to a valiant
man; and to all the storms, hazzards, and dangers that Sailors meet with all,
to them that are both valiant and patient.
but striving against it, he lift up his hands to heaven after this manner,
Domine, ne excrucier propter aurum and argentum, ubi enim omnia sunt mea tu
scis. Lord (says he) let not the loss of these things vex me, for thou
know that my treasure is not in this world; here was patience exercised. The
grace of patience is evermore in this world both at Sea and Land upon the
trial, and sanctified trials both do and will evermore leave in the soul a
tranquil calm and quietness. Heb. 12.11. Now no chastening for the present
seems to be joyous, but grievous, nevertheless, afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. This
is Patiences language, Plura sunt tolleranda, there be harder storms to be
undergone. Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, as if he
should have said, Should an harder storm come upon me, I would bear it without
murmuring. Patience will bear every thing quietly, and sit as mute in the Sea
in time of storms, as that Egyptian's goddess whom they call Constancy, which
they paint upon a rock standing in the Sea where the waves come dashing and
roaring upon her, with this Motto, Semper eadem, Storms shall not move me.
Certainly all repining comes from an unmortified and an unsanctified spirit;
the fault lies not in any condition how desperate soever, but in the heart,
because the heart stoops not to it.

8. To set prayer on work, If fire be Bias the great Philosopher, sailing over
some small arm of the Sea amongst the Mariners, at that very time there fell a
most dreadful storm amongst them, insomuch that the ship he was in was greatly
endangered of being cast away, and the Mariners falling to their strange and
confused kind of prayer and worship, the poor Philosopher could not endure it,
but calls to them, and entreats them to hold their peace, lest the gods should
hear them, and he should thereby fare the worse for them.
if grace be in the heart it will appear in time of storms; and this is the
method that God uses many times to put Seamen upon prayer. Isa. 26.16. Lord, in
trouble have they visited thee; they powered out a prayer when thy chastening
was upon them. Isa. 33.2. O Lord be gracious unto us, we have waited for
thee; he thou our arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.
Storms are like the tolling of a Bell in a ship, and when they are dreadful,
and violent, they call all that are in the Seas at those times to prayer and
fasting. The dumb Son of Craesus could then speak when he saw the knife at his
fathers throat. Storms will open those men's mouths at Sea, that never opened
them to God in prayer in all their lives. The Sea-mans devotion is up in a
storm, but dead, and down in a calm. He is religious whilst the judgments of
the Lord are roaring upon the face of the great deeps, but as great a Swearer,
Drunkard, and Adulterer is he after they are over, as ever he was.

The hunted wild beast betakes himself to his Den, and the wounded Heart to his
medicinable herb Dictamnum; the pursued Malefactor to the Horns of the Altar,
and under the Law, the chased Man-killer to the City of Refuge. Seamen are a
generation of people that can carry the damnable burden of their Oaths,
Drunkennesses, When the destroying Angel was abroad the Israelites fled into
their chambers, Ex^. 12.32. A good example (for Sailors) in time of storms, for
they that use the Seas deserve little better at Gods hands than those whom the
Angel cut off, they may well think, that when God is killing, and sinking
others with a vengeance, that they deserve the same, and so ought to lay it to
heart, as the Israelites did in their chambers.
and Adulteries (in calms) as easily as the Sea can bear the great and heavy
loaded ships, or as Sampson did the gates of Gaza upon his shoulders, but in
storms, when grim-countenanced death stares them in the face, the top-gallant
sails of their high hoysed spirits, are a little lowred and melted.

10. To bring their hearts into better Prove. 27.7. The full soul loatheth the
honeycomb. One dish too often, is stalling and cloying, and Sardanapulus never
liked any dish twice.
they would as little estimate it, as those that never set their foot upon the
salt waters, but spend and end their days in Lands and Countries of peace and
ease; it is a general rule, that most things are rather valued (Carendo potius
quam fruendo) in their want, than in their enjoyment.

I have observed, that when we have had a week, or a fortnights sweet and
tranquil weather, so that we have both sailed, and anchored in as much
quietness and stability, as if we had been lodging in beds and houses upon
land, but these continued mercies have been little prized by the Mariners,
Calms at Sea are devoured like Acorns by the Hog at land, who never looks up at
the hand that beats them down.
and little considered of as high favors from the Lord, and begot little
warmth, love, and affection in their hearts to God again. It is very just with
God, to take his abused and unconsidered mercies from them, and give them
storms and tempests, rolling raging Seas, that never valued the kindnesses of
God in mild and lovely weather. When the Mariner is ruggedly dealt withal for
a fortnight, or three weeks in stormy and turbulent weather, then how welcome
is, and would the tidings of a cessation of those winds and Seas that are up in
arms against them be? Ah souls, it is a mercy, that every day is not a day of
sorrow, of dread and terror to you; Calms have been very sweet to my soul, and
have drawn out my heart very much to bless my God for them, and shall they not
have the like impression with you? Fear then lest God take mercy from you, and
license his indignation to arrest you.

To purify the Seas. It is not the fairest and calmest day that purifies the
air, but thundrings, lightnings, and blustering storms and winds that are the
airs cleansing brooms, and so consequently the same unto the Sea. Storms do
undoubtedly refine, and purify the salsitude of the Seas, and that liableness
that is in them unto depravity, and coruption.

12. For the furtherance and increase Chron. 7.13. If my people which are
called by my name shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn
from their wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their
sin, and will heal their Land. Every storm should be as the Alarm that is
struck upon a drum, to call all that go in the Seas to Repentance, and godly
sorrow for their sins, and the voice of storms seems to be this, Aut
paenitendum, aut pereundum. I may better say that to Seamen which holy Anselm
said unto himself, than that he should speak it of himsel. In his Meditations
he confessed that all his life was either damnable for sin committed, or
unprofitable for good omitted, and at last concludes, Quid restat O peccator,
nisi ut in tota via tua deplores totam vitam tuam. Oh what remains Seaman, but
that thou should not only in storms, but in thy whole life lament the
God-provoking sins of thy life.
When the Lord once gets a people into fetters, then does he show them their
work, and their transgressions, Job. 36.9. and makes their ears open to
discipline; good hearts when they are locked up in the stormy bolts, and
fetters of the Seas, they then consider that it is for some sin or other, and
their ears are open and attentive to hear God speaking unto them. Ezekiel. 36.31.
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not
good, and shall loath your selves in your own fight for your iniquities, and
for your abominations. God many times sends down storms upon the Seas, that he
may put that impaenitent crew that frequents them into a godly frame and
compunction of heart for their sins, but the Lord knows there is little
reformation, or amendment amongst them, Non est poenitens sed irrisor, qui
adhuc agit unde poenitea. That Sailor is but a counterfeit, that makes a show
of piety in a storm, and wears the Devils (and not Gods) livery in a calm.
notwithstanding those dreadful dangers that they do daily converse withal;
this is the Lords complaint against the Sailors in England, if I know any thing
of the will and mind of that God whom I serve, Jer. 8.6. I hearkened and heard,
but they spoke not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What
have I done? Every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the
battle.

Aristippus told the Tarpaulings he sailed with (when they wondered why he
was not afraid in the storm as well as they) that the odds was much, for they
feared the torments due to a wicked life, and he expected the reward of a good
one.
the Mariners did so in that storm they were in, Jonah 1.7. And they said every
one to his fellow, Come and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause
this evil is upon us, so they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah. There is
some cause or other, why such dreadful Tempests come upon you, if you would but
enquire them out, and for my part I look upon it as a wonderful mercy, that
every day in the Sea is not a day of storm, and a day of terror, so that you
can neither sail, nor take any comfort; my reason is this, there is such
swearing, cursing, and profaning of the holy Name of the Lord amongst you, that
a gracious heart that goes in ships with you, would think that he were rather
in an hell conversing with Devils, than Men and Christians.

How ought all our Sailors in the time of storms to say with the Church unto
their God, Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the
Lord. Jonah was searched out in the storm, and Achan when the Camp was
troubled; no better way, or course to pacify an angry God, than to seek for all
that filthiness that is upon, and in your hearts and spirits, and so to throw
it over board, and take out the new and sacred lesson of piety and uprightness
of heart and spirit.

14. To put the godly upon the growth Corrupt blood must be drawn out before
the Leech falls off, and all carnal filthiness parted with before the storm
end. Boisterous storms are Gods people's kitchin-scullions, to scour off their
rust, their dross, and canker.
to let Seamen bleed withal, for they have a great deal of corrupt blood in
their veins, and though they carry Chirurgions with them at Sea, yet God is
their best Physician. This course God takes, that they may bring forth more
fruit, Joh. 15.2. And every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it
may bring forth more fruit. Flowers have a sweeter savor after a shower than
ever they had before; so a gracious soul a brokener heart after a storm than in
a calm. Wheat under the flail parts with its chaff. Gold when put in the fire
loses it dross.

Job's resolution, Chap. 34.32. If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. I
think it would be the Sea-mans greatest wisdom, not only to say so, but to
have a care of offending God, who is able to hurl the Seas into dreadful waves,
and raging surges, about his ears.

The game -- hunting dogs of Cicily, lose their sport oftentimes by reason of
the sent and sweet smell of flowers. And so thoughts of God and Heaven, if all
calms, and no storm.
and every thing as you would have it, that were the only way to have you to
forget your God; Israel soon cast God out of their thoughts, and hearts, when
they got into Canaan, but oftener in their thoughts when in a pinching and
hard-faring Wilderness. The Be is quickly drowned if she fall but into the
pot of honey, and a good heart is soon overrun with weeds, and corrupted, if
not under imbitterments and afflictions.

lays wormwood upon them, then they will grow weary of them, and even be ad
instar canis ad Nilum, as the dog at the river Nilus, that dare not stay to
take his full draught, for fear of the Crocodile.

The Uses of this doctrine are various, but especially they are these five.

1. Information. 2. Circumspection. 3. Meditation. 4. Reprehension. 5.
Consolation.
1. Use. This doctrine may inform you, and let you see, that every boisterous
Storm, and Tempest, that breaks out upon the face of the great deeps, is no
other but an arrow shot out of the bended bow of Gods displeasure against you,
or one of the lower tier of his indignation that is fired upon you. Nahum 1.3.
The Lord has his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm, and the clouds are
the dust of his feet. If shiphazarding storms fall upon you, you may conclude
that the Lord is in them, and not far from you, I, and that he is not well
pleased with you.

2. Use. This doctrine may serve to put you upon a serious meditation, and
deliberative ponderating upon the Power, and terrible Majesty of God, who has
the whole universe at his command, to wage war against whom he pleases, but
especially in these three things.

1. What is the cause or occasion of immoderate storms.

2. What is his end in the sending of them upon you.

3. And lastly, what improvement you should make of them.

3. Use. This doctrine may serve for a word of advice to startle you, and to
tell you, that you have great need to look about you, if so be that all
perilous and ship-wracking storms and Tempests are of the Lords commissionating
and raising; I mean not only to make the best provisions that you can to
prevent dangers, for common reason prompts you to that, but my advice is this,
that you would live every day preparedly, seeing your lives are the deepliest
engaged, and in the greatest hazzards of any under the whole Heavens; if a man
were to go over some narrow bridge, under which he knew that there was deep
water, how gingerly, and how carefully would he tread? I, and if there were no
way else to go but that, what prayers would he put up, that he might go
safely over? and if not, that God would cancel all his scores? my thinks it
should be thus with you, who are in greater dangers in the raging Seas.

1. Sin less, swear less, and drink less than you do, if you would have God to
preserve you in time of storms.

2. Please God more, if you desire favor and preservation in the day of
calamity, and irremediable adversity.

3. Make it your business to get sin daily pardoned, or otherwise you may look
for nothing but an open hostility from the winds and Seas.

4. Use. This doctrine may serve to reprove, and to lash that bold profaneness,
and atheisticalness, that is amongst the generality of Seamen and Sailors, who
never have it in their thoughts when the greatest storm that ever blew, is from
the Lord, but a thing in course, or common, and ordinary, and so never
acknowledge the hand of God in those dreadful judgments that he lays upon the
Seas, and those affrighting, and heart-melting sorrows that they are often
plunged into. There be four things that I would reprove you for.

1. Ignorance. 2. Carelessness. 3. Want of the fear of God. 4. Negligence.
1. Ignorance. This is an Epidemical distemper, that all, or the greatest part
of Seamen are aegrotant off or in. Suffer this doctrine to reprove you, and I
am sure it will tell you to the full, that it is the Lord that sends out his
stormy wind, fulfilling his Word upon you, I and also condemn you for your
infidelity, and paganism, in this very particular.

2. Carelessness. Who more loose, who more profane, and who more secure, God
usually scourges security, not with ordinary rods, but with Scorpions, plagues
and vengance, Dilavium fuit circa finem Aprilis, cum orbis quasi reviviscit,
cum aves cantillant, and exultant pecudes. Luther. The old world was destroyed
in the end of April, which is the most pleasant time of the year, (and in that
month most commonly the most showers, and thereupon came the flood the more
unawars upon them) and it was observed, that the Sun broke out very sweetly
upon Sodom, the very same morning that it was destroyed: who would now have
looked for such a flood? the winter was past, and the year in its prime, and
who would in a fair Sunshine morning have looked for such a dismal event of
fire from Heaven? Jer. 29.31, 32. Get you up to the wealthy Nation that dwells
without care, and has neither Gates, nor Bars. Deuteronomy. 29.19. God in this
Scripture pours out threatening upon threatening, as if he could not be
satisfied with threatening the sin of carnal security, and where is there more
of it than at Sea amongst the Sailors?
than you that are perpetually night and day at the Lords mercy of saving or
drowning?

3. Want of the fear of God. Is there a people under the heavens that fear God
less than you do? although that you are in the rugged and boisterous storms of
the Seas, and are daily as a small bird (inter periclitantes Aquilas) betwixt
the very paunces of two griping Eagles.

4. Negligence, I mean as to the matter of providing for your latter end. How
know thou soul but that the very first storm will be the last that ever
thou shall see and be in? yea, how know thou, but when the Lords
wind-trumpets sound on high, that there is a summons for thee? but where is the
man amongst you that fears this, or thinks of an eternity, on the backside of
this world.

5. Use. This doctrine may serve for comfort and consolation to all those that
fear the Lord, and are daily employed in the Seas, that he is the great
Generalissimo, and Sovereign Commander both of the winds and Seas, so that a
blast of wind cannot pass without his leave, license, and cognizance; me thinks
this should rejoice you, and this should revive your spirits; my heart, I can
tell you, has even leaped within me when I have sat down in stormy, and
uncomfortable weather, considering that the Lord has both the winds and the
Seas in an halter, and a strong bridle, so that they shall not do more than he
has appointed them for to do, as to matter of ruin, and danger. Me thinks I
have found the Lord saying unto me, when the waves have come swelling, foming,
and flying over us, and round about us, on every side our ship, Fear not, be
not dismayed, for I am he that commands the greatest waves that have their
motion upon and in the Seas, and the strongest, and stormiest winds are in my
hands; and under these contemplations I have sat very sweetly and safely under
the wing of my God, when nothing but death, has been round about us.

6. This doctrine may serve us to draw out a very profitable Use of admiration
by, in the casting about, and viewing of the wind, which has in its stormy, and
tempestuous strength very much (undoubtedly) to set forth the great power and
glory of the Lord by; how strikes it upon all high things, upon the proud
towering-tops of steeples, and the high-hoysed and advanced turrets, of the
terrestrial Kings, and Princes Palaces, and also upon the high and low
top-masted ships, that go in, and through the Seas? whereas lower building are
both safe and at quiet from their turbulent rage and fury, yea, the bramble and
the shrub have the happiness of standing fast, when that the tall grown Cedar,
and the lofty Pine does both rock and tremble? The wind is one of the great
wonders of the Lord, in which, and by which, If it should be demanded what the
wind is, neither I, nor none can tell, but all that either is, or can be said
of it, may be summed up in these three words, that it is a creature that may
be 1. Fel^, 2. Heard. and 3. Little understood. Very wonderful is the rise of
the winds, there is no outward cause either visible or perceivable at any time,
and yet when it is very calm and still, insomuch that there is not a breath of
air scarce upon the Seas, upon a sudden are they here, and there, and every
where. Psalm. 135.7. He brings the wind out of his treasuries. But what these
treasuries are, and where they are, all the men in the world are to seek to tell
us.
the Lords name is wonderfully magnified; but what it is, and from whence it
comes, and whither it goes, none can tell; there be a thousand guessings at it
in the world, but what it is, every man is in the dark; some say to speak
accuratly, and learnedly, that it is a^r motus, air moved up and down; others,
vapors raised up into the middle region, and thereby cold is reverberated, and
so moves in the air, after a collateral manner. There are no winds stirring
upon the tops of some mountains, because they reach beyond the ascension of
earthly vapors, and so are beaten back, as the mountain of Olympus, of which
many Travelers tell us, that either manuscripts, or pedescripts may be seen
in the very loose dust and sand that is upon it for many days and years after.
Pliny that great searcher out of the secrets of Nature, in his Natural History
does tell us, and withal speaks very doubtfully of the winds, whether it be
(says he) a spirit, or the spirit of Nature that ingendereth all things,
wandering to and fro, as it were in the womb, or rather air broken, and driven
by the several influences and rays of the straggling stars, and Planets, and
the multiplicity of their beams, plain it is, that they are guided by the rule
of Nature, not altogether unknown, though not truly, and distinctly known.

1. It is of wonderful use for Navigation; if it were not for the winds, what
might ships do, or how could the foreign and remote parts of the world be
traded into? by the help of the winds, the ways of God, the works of God, the
wisdom of God, and the riches of God, that are scattered up and down in the
world, are discovered by them. Seneca, a mere Heathen, was so great an admirer
of the winds, Ingens naturae beneficium.
that he called it Natures great benefit, and did he not speak ore Christiano
potius quam humano? it is more than many Christians do either mind, or observe.

2. It is of wonderful use for Mils to grind the country peoples corn,
especially in those places where they have not the help and accommodement of
brooks and rivers to do that work withal.

3. It is of wonderful use to us that go in the wars, to carry out our floating
Castles against the Spaniard, and the rest of our feral, and remote Antagonists.

4. It is of wonderful use to the purifying of the air, off, and from its many
infections, and contagions; the winds are the cleansing engines of the world,
or the airs sweeping-brooms, by which the air is kept both sweet and
salubrious; and this they do by their oblique and ubiquitary motion, which
would otherwise corrupt and stench, as standing pools, Job 37.11. But the wind
passes and cleanses them. Jer. 4.11. This benefit every Land and Country has
of the winds, both to fan, and sweep the foul corners of the air that are
amongst them.

5. It is of wonderful use, as to the scattering of the clouds here and there,
in this and in the other Country, How are the clouds seen sometimes in a very
pendulous manner, to hang over the very heads of parched Countries, as if
unwilling to dilate and part with their watery liquor, because of the sinfulness
of those Countries? Clouds fly, and hang over them, yet drop no fatness.

God allows all Countries (excepting Egypt, which is supplied in a wonderful
manner, by the River Nilus) the benefit of the clouds, and of the Heavens, he
misses not the smallest of those many Islands that he has lying here and there,
up and down in the world, but remembers them all, yea the uninhabitablest place
that is in the world.


both procul, and prope, for the use, and benefit, and accommodement of
mankind; by these are the Lords water-pots, or cloudy water-bowls of the
Heavens shaked, and poured down upon the dry and thirsty places of the Earth.
All Gardens, Orchards, Cornfieldsd, valleys, hills, and deserts, that be in the
world are watered by them. Job 37, 11. He scatters his bright cloud. The
winds are of very considerable, and important use, as to the conducting, and
convoying of the aquatical clouds of the Heavens, to water the many Islands,
Territories, and Countries of the Lords, that be in and throughout the world.
It seems that God has a special care of every Country and corner in the world,
that none of his Gardens, and Orchards, should parch for want of water, and
therefore he has cloudy tankards in the Heavens, which fly upon the wings of
the wind, to fall upon what place he pleases, to supply them.

6. It is of wonderful use in its various vertibility, and instability, Non ita
Carpathiae variant Aquilonibus undae. The wind is a very varying and turning
thing.
in respect that all parts in the world are served by it; one while it serves
to carry some Mariners, into the North, some out of the East into the West, and
other some again out of the West into the South. It stays not long in one
quarter, but is a mere Camelae^nce mutabilior, (Eccl. 1.6. The wind goes
toward the South, and turns about unto the North: it whirleth about
continually, and the wind returns again according to his circuits.) And
hereby is it the more commodious, because, if it should have its abode any long
time, either in the Eastern, Southern, Northern, or Western parts of the world,
then the opposite parts would be greatly obstructed in their sailing into those
parts from whence the wind should blow. Great is the Wisdom of our infinite,
and good God, who has ordered, and created all things for the good of man, in
that he has thus appointed, and disposed of the winds, to be one while in one
place, and another while in another, both to fetch Mariners that are far from
home, and also to carry them out that are desirous, and have business and
occupation to do from home.

7. It is of wonderful use to alter Seasons, it cannot be gainsaled, that the
winds have not an altering influence in all Seasons, because they bring in our
heat, and by and by comes in our cold, Job. 37.17. How thy garments are warm,
when he quieteth the Earth by the South wind? When the wind comes out of the
South, how is every one warm, and cheerful, both in City, and in Country,
although but in a thin, and Summers garment, but when it comes out of the
blustering North, or the frigid and mordacious Oriental of the world, how is
every one then cold within doors, and without doors, I even in the thickest
habit that they can put on? Job 37.9. Out of the North comes forth the cold.
Now undoubtedly that cold comes upon the wings of the winds, out of and from
under the Artick, and also heat in the same manner from the Antartick of the
world. When the wind comes out of the North, or out of the East, how quickly is
the heat of the Earth cooled and taken away? but as soon as ever it comes out
of the South, how is the Earth warmed, and all the Animals of the world
revived? Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise will observe these things.

8. It is of wonderful use to dry up the wetness and dirtiness that is upon the
face of the Earth; how are all foot-paths, and all horse-rodes shoveled, and
cleansed by the winds? It is wonderful to think how an Easterly wind will sweep
all the beaten paths and corners that are in the world; this wind is called in
Scripture a supping wind, Hab. 1.9. because it drinks up the moystures that
have been laid upon the Earth by the clouds. Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise will
observe these things.

9. It is of wonderful use to clear the Heavens for us, and to feed us with the
light of those glorious lamps and luminaries that are hung up in the Heavens,
to make the world comfortable to us; how would the Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
and the face of Heaven, be absconded, over-shaddowed, and obumbrated to us
with clouds, fogs, mists, and ascending vapors, that are as so many curtains
drawn over those great and glorious Lanterns of the Heavens, if the winds did
not sweep them, and reduce them to an annihilation?

10. It is of a wonderful, and most dreadful use in the hand of the Lord, to
break, and ruin the greatest and the strongest ship, or ships, that ever
crossed the salt-waters. 2 Chronicles. 20.37. The ships were broken, that they were
not able to go to Tarshish. And the great Spanish Armado that came against us
to invade our Land, were broken, and scattered by the winds, so that they were
frustrated in their Dice-games, and carried into the bottoms, when that they
thought they should have had the full possession and enjoyment of this English
Island.

7. Use. A word of Exhortation, and that unto all you that go in the Seas. Is
it thus indeed, that all perilous storms and ship-wracking Tempests, are both
of the Lords raising, sending, and impowering? give me leave then to commit
three sweet words unto you, and I will pray hard, both in private, and public,
that they may be a heart-wining, and an heart-perswading word; but before I
hand them unto you, I will lay down a few of those natural symptoms,
prognostics, and common observations of the approaching of winds, and storms,
only as argumentative motives to induce you unto the practice of what I intend,
for you will see the more clearly that there is a great deal of reason for so
doing when you have heard all.

1. If the body of the Sun it self appears at its first setting of the color
of blood, It is Virgils observation in the first of his Georgicks, that if the
Sun be never so glorious at his rising, yet if he set in a cloud at night

-- Quid cogitat humidus Auster, Signa dabit -- It is a sign that foul weather
will follow.


it then presages great and tempestuous winds for many days.

2. If the Sun when it rises be encompassed with a circle, let wind be
expected on that side which the circle opens on.

3. If clouds look red at Sun rising, they are true prognostics of wind, if at
Sun setting, of a fair and beautiful day.

4. If about the rising of the Sun clouds gather themselves about it, it
foretokens rough and dolorous storms that day.

5. When clouds encompass the Sun, the less light they leave it, and the lesser
the orb of the Sun appears, so much the more furious will the tempest be.

6. If circles about the Moon (is a common nautical observation) be double or
treble, they are the prodromus's, or the preindicants of a rough and violent
tempest.

7. The running and shooting of stars in the heavens, is a common observation
of stormy winds to come from those places from whence they run and shoot.

8. If clouds spread abroad like fleeces of wool in the skies here and there;
this is a most certain evidence of a strong and boisterous wind.

9. When the superficies of the Sea is calm (is a common observation) and
smoothe also in the harbor, and yet murmures within it self, though it does
not swell, signifies wind.

10. The shores resounding in a calm, and the sound of the Sea it self with a
clear noise, and a certain echo heard plainer and further than ordinary,
presages winds.

11. If in a calm and smooth Sea, there be water bubbles, or froth lying here
and there, or white circles upon the waters, it foretells winds.

12. Sounds from the hills, and murmurs from the woods, growing shriller, and
louder, presage winds.

13. When Water-fowls are seen flying one over another, or flocking and flying
together, but especially the Gulls and the Mews that live upon the Sea, when
these begin to leave the Sea, and to betake themselves to land, lakes, banks,
and shores, making there a noise, and a clutter in their consorting together,
betokens a most dreadful storm a coming.

14. It is an observation also, when leaves and straws are seen to play and
dance upon the ground without any apparent breath of wind that can be felt, or
the down of plants flying about, betokens wind at hand.

15. Is not this another common observation (besides the many more that I might
reckon up) that you have to foretell you of the coming of a storm, even the
blewness of your Ordnance? what spots be there in them many times, which you
usually say are forerunners both of wind and rain? your knowledge of these
things, besides the many more signs that you have of storms, should put you
upon the fearing of that God, who is able to brew you such a cup of liquor in a
storm, as would be sufficient to run you down by the board into the bottom of
the Seas.

The three words then that I have premised, I shall present unto three sorts of
men.

1. Seamen. 2. Statesmen. 3. Merchants.
In the first place my speech is to you Seamen.

1. Look for storms. You usually say (as I have frequently observed, and I wish
you had no worse phrases amongst you) that when you have fair, I would have all
Sea men to imitate the Nobilities of Rome in one case, and also of Arcadia in
another, of whom Plutarch speaks, that they were evermore accustomed to wear
half Moons upon their shoos, to that end they might always have the mutability
of their prosperity before their eyes (and has not the Pope and his Nobles the
same occasion now?) Your calms Seamen are often turning into storms, look for
it.
calm, and comfortable weather, you shall have heart-aking weather for it ere
long; looking for these things will prove auxiliary and useful to take away, or
at leastwise to mitigate the bitterness of them when they do come upon you,
then will you be able to bear up your selves in the violency of them, and to
say, this is that we looked for, we expected no less than to see the Seas
running in mountainous billows, and the winds to roar upon us, and make our
lives both bitter and uncomfortable; Licet in modum stagni fusum aequor
arrideat licet vix summa jacentis elementi spiritu terga crispetur, magnos hic
campus montes habet, tranquillitas ista tempestas est. Look for a storm
Seaman, though the smoothe Sea smile upon thee, and seem to be no other than
a standing pool; I, although the top of the water by the wind be not so much as
cast into bubbles like the curles of hair, trust not the deep, the plain thou
see has many mountains in it, for the present calm, both may, and will end
in a very bitter storm. I have seen the heavens very fair and lovely to the
eye, as lovely Paris was in Hectors, The Sea resembles the Moon in its
mutability, which is subsubject to many changes, never continuing long in one
shape, but sometimes horned, sometimes half, and sometimes again in the full,
from whence Horace called the Moon, Diva triformis, and Virgil, Trigeminamque
Hecaten, tria virginis or a Dianae. The Sea is full of vicissitudes, and its
motto may be that dis-joynted verse in Ovid, Mihi nulla quies, ut lapis
aequoreis nudique pulsus aquis. I neither have, nor can give any quiet unto the
ships that go through me, I cannot but toss them again.
described by Homer, Il. g. 45. -- (...). She had beauty in her face, but
inconstancy in her breast. Presently has a great change of weather come upon
us, and the Seas been thrown out of a calm, into a frowning, raging, and
rolling storm. Were that brave spark, and high-fortuned gallant of the world,
that the Apostle James 2. speaks of, (who was the (...), one of the worlds
golden fingured Lads) at Sea in a storm, though he has great respect in the
world in all tablings, banquettings, feastings, and meetings, yet would the Sea
favor him no more than the raggedest Sailor, that is either in the Merchant or
States-service. The Seas will not be brought to any such composition to favor
one more than another, no further than there is a divine Commission from above
for the doing of it; they will not be brought to do that which history tells
us of, as Hospinian observes, that the Dogs that kept Vulcans Temple did, as
others of the Bohemian Curs would do, fawn upon a good suit, but fly upon a
ragged one.

Seamen, Seamen, look for storms; it is your usual saying, that Pallida luna
pluit, rubicunda flat, alba serenat; The Moon looks red, and tells us that we
shall have winds. You have just occasions many times to look for winds and
storms, therefore give me leave to say, Delicatus nauta est, qui fortunae
rabiosas novercantis procellas non expectat, that he is too little a right
bred Seaman, that neither would, nor does look for storms; the best sort of
Seamen dare not trust the smiling countenance of any one day or night, though
never so fawning and proffering; If he comes to an anchor, he sits down, and
casts about, and considers, how, and what the harbor is, and how the winds may
turn, and change, Minus etiam quam luscinia dormit, the pleasant Nightingale
sleeps more than he does, because he is burdened with many cares about his
fore-casting of all things for the best. It is a great folly for any to think
that they may go to Sea, and not meet with brushing storms, and that man that
desires to go to Sea for recreation, and not for employment (save only to see
the Seas, and sail here and there a little upon them) would wish with all his
heart that he was back again when he sees a storm a coming. Alas! the Sea is
a place where the greatest storms are laid on that ever befell any element
whatsoever, there are not those gusts and storms to be found on land that be
upon the Seas, neither are the great deeps like the smooth-faced fontes,
fluvia, stagna, and lacus's of a land, that lies with never a wrinckle upon
their frontlets, but they lie in raging froth, and foam, and by their
restlesness give all that come upon them a bitter cup, of a plus aloes, quam
mellis, telling them, that they shall have more storms than calms.

2. Storms, as well as calms, come from the hands of God, For he commands
the stormy winds, Matthew. 8.25. The stormy wind was up for a while, in which the
Disciples of Christ were most dreadfully rocked and tossed in, but afterward
it was rebuked and stilled; this is a comfort, Nullum violentum est perpetuum,
things that are violent are not long lasting. I would have all Seamen to be
of that heavenly temper that Job was of, when they are in and under perilous
storms, Job 2.10. What, shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall
we not receive evil? It seems evil as well as good happens sometimes for a
peoples trial.

3. Days are evermore seen for to travel with Gods decrees, Fair Sunshine
mornings have I seen, and known to end in sad and dismal evenings, the Proverb
is, Nescis quid serus vesper vebat. Thou know not what is in the womb of a
big-bellied day.

The Willow would never be good, if it were not lopt, and cut, cutting of it
makes it spring the better at the root, and bear the fairer head. The Sailors
will never be ought till they be cut to pieces, I mean laid low upon the bark
of affliction.


if he say they shall be stormy, who can let it? and if he give command that
they shall be tranquil and calm, they shall be so. Prove. 27. Boast not thy
self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. It may
bring forth sickness, as well as health, storms as well as calms, and death, as
well as life.

4. God will humble and correct you; and stand you not in very great need of
being humbled, and corrected? Where is the Sailor in the Sea that is so good,
as may not look for a brushing? The Sun is more resplendent after an eclipse,
the Sea more calm after a storm, and the air much brighter after a shower,
which made a great Statesman of out Nation to say, that storms and tempests
contribute to the cleerness of the heavens, and the smoothness of the Seas.

5. Where there is a looking for smooth and calm Seas, the sudden alteration
thereof, Art thou going to Sea my friend, make much of this short word of
counsel, there is multum in parvo, ne quare mollia, ne tibi contingant dura,
would thou have i^ Englished Sailor? then this it is, Expect not too much
favor from the Sea. Jactantur oequora ventis. He that will sail the great and
wide Sea, must look for many a roaring gust.
both has, and does prove a sad, and bitter disappointment to many a man's
expectations; when Christ's Disciples were out at Sea, they looked for smooth
and calm water, and meeting with a rugged and boisterous storm and tempest,
where they saw themselves greatly endangered, they could not bear it, Matthew.
8.25. Lord save us, we perish, Jer. 8.15. We looked for peace, but no good
came, and for a time of health, and behold trouble. They that will go down to
the Sea must not look for to have all calms, and no storms, but oftener storms,
than calms. They that will travel upon the Sea to this and that far and remote
Country in the world, they must expect to meet with many a sore rub, and
brushing storm, before they shall or can be transported to them.

2. I would have all those that are Grandees and Statesmen of our land, to look
for storms also; my reason is this, in respect that your Honors have many
brave, Golden-stern'd, and Golden-headed Sea-boats, going to and fro, and up
and down in the great waters, where all the other ships do go, and much work
you have now in hand for them to do, which lies both far, and near, and I
think, (that it is my judgment) that there never was an Age, or people called
on so much as the English now are, both to do, and carry on that work, and
those glorious designs that God has on foot against the Anti-Evangelical, and
Antichristian powers of the world; it is clear to me, that the Lord Jesus
Christ, who both will, and shall rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, and in
whom is all power, and through whom is the guidance of all the affairs that are
on foot upon the face of the Earth, that you are acted by him against them; but
that which I aim at is this, Right Honorable, your gallant ships are now and
then rocking, and staggering in the waves, as well as others, and are now and
then most dreadfully spending of their Masts, and Yards, by the board; and some
again most dangerously are hazarded in their running upon the ground, the winds
favor them no more than they do the other ships that use the Seas, but fall
upon them belluino impetu, with as much violence as they do upon others. The
winds take no more notice of the golden gildedst ship, than they do of the
coarsest, Nunc pluit and claro nunc Juppiter aethere fulget.
meanest, and plainest stern-painted that goes in the Salt-waters. You cannot
expect it, that the Seas should be always of a gentile, and silver-glistering
calm, but intricate, and desperate perils and hazards do, and must they run in
your affairs through the Seas, to accomplish the work that you have in hand
against our foreign and cruel enemies. That pitcher that goes long to the well,
comes home cracked at last. But ten thousand pitties it is, to and upon my
spirit, that any of your golden warlike boats should either perish in storms,
What Taxaris said to his Countryman Anacharsis, when he saw him in Athens,
the very same will I say unto any, either in, or out of England, I will says
he show thee all the wonders of Greece. Viso Solone, vidisti omnia. So visis
navibus nostris Anglicanis, vidistis omnia. They that see Englands warlike
ships, see the greatest wonders that are either in it, or belonging to it.
or in any other accidents. But alas, they are not exempted from those ruins,
no more than others; there are but few Trees that have their growth in the
world, that are freed from the Thunder, save the Laurel, and alas there be
very few ships, but the winds and the Seas will have a bout with them.

Be ever and anon looking for some sublunary and temporary accidents or other
befalling of your ships, they are out in the Sea, where there is a million of
dangers, and not in the Harbor. I would have you of the like resolution that
Anaxagoras was of, of whom it was said, when news came to him that his son was
dead, that he told the messenger, he knew full well that he had begot him
mortal. Conclude you in the like manner, that your ships, the very best, and
strongest of them, are but made up of wasting, and frangible materials, and
ingredients, and the looking for the approaching of these like contingencies
now and then, will in fine tend to the setlement, I, and to the better
establishment of an Heroical spirit under them. When the great Naval, or the
inferior rank of your ships are in their Harbors, they are in the greatest
safety that can be, but when out at Sea, they are not only liable, but must
stand to all the hazzards that shall happen, and befall them.

3. You that are the great Merchants of England stand in need of cautioning to
look for storms; Your ships are a mere uncertainty, whilst in the perilous Sea,
an obscurity, a fallacy, one while they are, and by and by they are not, they
are like to stars, which for a while appear, but by and by disappear, or
meteors in the air, or as the black dive-dappers in the salt-waters, or as the
flock of birds that lighted in the husband-mans field, and when he thought
they had been his, they took wing, and flew away. Yea, they are not unlike to
Bajazet, that ball of fortune, as one termed him, because it was one while well
with him, and another while it went most sadly.
you live its true in the brave accomplished, and best Cities, and
Sea-port-Towns in the Land, but whilst you are on Land, your great adventures
are in dreadful dangers in the Seas, in one bottom it may be that you have a
thousand, in another four, and in another twenty, and truly there is small
wisdom of adventuring all in one bottom. I have read of one that wittily said,
he never liked that wealth that hangs in ropes, meaning ships, because, where
one ship came well home, twenty perished, and miscarried; and have you not
great reason to fear, and look for losses? do not think that all the ships that
you have, either in the East, or in the West, in the North, and in the South,
shall come all safely home. The country Shepherd that puts his Lambs and Ews to
pasture upon the great and wide forests, does not think to find them all the
next day, some are worried with the dog, some with the wolf, and othersome
taken away by stealth. Many times your interests are seized on by storms,
sometimes by Pirates, and other sometimes by Rocks, and Sands. Qui in immenso
mari navigant, valde turbantur. The Seas are not unlike to an hilly and
mountainous country, through which they that travel, after they be in the
bottom of one Valley, they know not what danger of way-liers may be in the
next; it is the very same at Sea, for it is not many leagues that one can see
upon a direct line, and what Pirates may be in those places, the eye cannot
reach unto, is not known to the Mariner, but the proverb is, Sub omni lapide
dormitat Australis Scorpius, There is a peevish Pyrat in every corner to fetch
off your ships from coming to you. But to proceed.

My speech is unto and toward all the Seamen again, that they would make sure
of one thing, that I would fasten upon them, were I able to drive the nail of
Truth to the head in all their hearts, and that is shortly this.

1. That they would prepare themselves for storms, Whilst Seamen loose from
the shore of life, they lanch out into the main of mortality, and immortality.
and that you may follow this sweet and blessed counsel that the Spirit of my
God has put into my heart, for to tell you of, I will give you directions what
you should do.

1. Get sin pardoned to you.

2. Rest not either on Sea, or on Land, till God be at peace with you.

And when you have accomplished these two things, go whither thou will, Me
thinks Seamen do not look like those whom God will bless, for the want of
their putting on for these two things.
and the God of Heaven go along with thy poor soul, then may thou leave the
Land for many days, with a great deal of comfort.

1. Get sin pardoned to you, or else it would be better for thee that thou
never wentest to Sea. How dare thou that art a Captain, a Master, a
Lieutenant, a Boatswain, a Gunner, a Carpenter, a Purser, or a common Seaman,
be so bold, to venture to Sea with thy back burden of sin unremitted, Ah how
ought you to stand in fear of that God, whilst you are in the Seas, that is
ablest to set on, and to call upon the winds to destroy you, and when you go
with sin unpardoned, may you not daily expect the roaring storms of the Lords
displeasure? Isa. 7.18.19. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord
shall hiss for the Fly that is in the uttermost parts of the rivers of Egypt,
and for the Be that is in the Land of Assyria. If it were my case now, as it
is yours, I should verily fear every hour that I spent upon the Sea, that God
would hiss for the North, South, East, or West winds, to rear the vessel I
were in, to pieces, should I venture to Sea without a pardon, and an
acceptance of my person with, and from my God. Take heed lest that the Lord do
hear you swear, etc. If you give him occasion, he can presently hiss for the
winds to overwhelm you.
and unforgiven? None but men that are out of their wits, and men that are void
of the fear of God, would run such an hazard, and foolishly play such a card;
how many of you are killed when you go to Sea, and diverse others drowned, and
cast upon the Rocks, and Sands? and art thou sure that thou shall escape? take
my word for it, your unpardoned sins, will be as a thousand holes in the
bottom of your Vessels, to sink you into the bottoms. The very Heavens even
blush at the gracelesness of those men that go down into the Seas in these
days, and are ashamed of this Age in which we live, that men can or should
be able to take that boldness in that employment, which is one of the
dangerousest ones that is under the Heavens, with so much confidence of safety,
and security, as if they were on firm and solid Land, when alas they are in no
favor at all with God, but God is a dreadful enemy unto them, and they no
friend to him.

2. Make up your peace with God before ever thou go off the Land on board
any ship whatsoever, be she in the Merchant or States service, and if thou
wilst so do, the God of Heaven go along with thee, I will not fear thy
perishing in the Seas; (...). It is good to begin your voyages in God, and end
them with your God. It was a good saying of one, Nullius est faelix conatus and
utilis unquam, Confilium si non de^ que juvetqu^ Deus. Whilst the ship is out
in the Sea, none can tell whether she may ever or no come to the Land again.
take this sweet Scripture along with thee, and get thee going, there is no
danger, Isa. 41.14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel: I will
help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the Holy one of Israel. To
encourage every poor Seaman now unto the thing in hand, be persuaded upon
this ground of Truth, that if thou will seriously, and sincerely treat with thy
God, he will treat with thee, all the scruples, and objections that ever thou
can make, are no hindrances to thy peace; the Prodigal had no sooner a
returning thought in his heart, but the Lord very readily owned it, and ran to
meet him. Si impius es, cogita publicanum, si immundus, attend meretricem, si
homicida, prospice latronem, si iniquus, cogita blasphemum, peccasti?
paenitere: millies peccasti? milles paenitere. If thou be wicked, and have a
mind to leave thy wickedness, think of the Publican, if unclean, consider the
Harlot, if a manslayer, look upon the Thief, if unjust, think on the
Blasphemer; have thou sinned Sailor? repent, have thou sinned Seaman a
thousand times? repent a thousand times. Heaven gates were never shut upon
crying and knocking Paenitents. To put you now upon this good and needful work,
I will present unto you three serious considerations, that will take with men
that have the tincture of grace in them.

1. Consider the uncertainty of your lives, whilst you are in the Sea; there is
not an uncertainer thing upon the face of the Earth, than the life of man is,
and although you cannot command one hour to live, and breathe in, how prodigal
are you of your days, and years whilst in the Seas, as if you had time in a
string. The Spirit of the Lord would gladly bring men into the Faith and belief
of the shortness of their days and lives, by its comparing it with the
brittlest ingredients that can be reckoned up in the world, viz. a vapor,
grass, a post, a Weavers-shuttle, etc. yet who so void of Faith, as you that
use the Seas in this very particular. Are not your lives poor souls ten
thousand times in greater danger of being spilt, and lost than those that live
upon the Land? He that went into the wars of old (Qui ad bellum
proficisceretur, necesse est testamentum condere,) usually made his will before
he went, as doubtful of his return. But our Seamen are far from this temper,
and harder hearted are they in this Age than in former. I may say of them, as
it was once said of a graceless Seaman, Nec mergi, nec damnari metuo, I am
neither afraid of drowning, nor damning.
It may be that you have escaped many storms, and com'd off with life and limb
in many a fight, but are you sure you shall do so in the next?

2. Together with the uncertainty of your lives, I would have you consider, and
lay to heart the uncertainty of Gods tender of Grace; grant thou had a lease
of thy life, and that thou should go in the Seas many years, and never
perish, art thou sure after all that long life, and good success in the Sea,
that God will give thee grace, and that God will give thee that which now thou
undervalues? Genesis 6. The Spirit of the Lord will not always strive.

The tides of Gods Grace, and Mercy are not like to your Sea-tides, which come
at set, and certain times, and hours, so that he that has no mind to go to Sea
in the morning, may go toward, or in the evening. I have read that Bernard
having a younger brother brought up a Soldier, being a riotous, miserable, and
wretched young man, sought earnestly with the best, and sweetest arguments that
ever he could use to put him upon the leading and living a better course of
life, but the young gallant took snuff at it (as most of your Sailors will do,
when reproved for evil, and counseled for good) well said Bernard, time may
come when God may let in my words into your heart by a hole in your side; this
yongster shortly after received a wound in the wars, of which he lay a long
time sick, and then his brothers words sprang in upon him to his amazement, and
affrightment. Seamen, slight nor good counsel now, if you do, the time will
come when your so doing will make you a Magor Missabib unto your selves. In
what an hurly-burly is the Seaman in, when he sees a gallant warlike ship
making toward him, with all the sail that ever she can make? Hostium
repentinus adventus magis aliquando conturbat, quam expectatus. This is but a
confused time to ask the Lord the forgiveness of all your sins in, and to
prepare for death in. Isa. 9.5. Every battle of the wariour is with confused
noise, and garments rolled in blood.


3. Death is no fit time to learn the making up of your peace with God in. Who
would not count it a very absurd and ridiculous part in any Commander, to have
his ship to trim, and to set in a fighting posture, when the enemy is coming
upon him? But surely, though there be that wisdom in you to provide, and to
have your ships trimed for the fight, I dare be bold to say it, there be
thousands of you, at those times, whose hearts and souls are not trimmed for
death, and for that long entity of eternity. Be persuaded upon it, all you
that bear command, you that are Captains, Boatswains, Gunners, Carpenters, etc.
that it is one of the indiscreetest and desperatest cards that you can play to
have the work of your peace with God at such times to do and make. It may be
that in an engagement you may come to lose both legs, and arms, and such
dreadful and mortal wounds given you, under which you may lie groaning in your
ships, and then what through excessiveness of pain and dolor, together with
the fears of death, your souls will be then taken up withal, you will be the
unfittest men in the world to come into the hands of your God at death, in such
conditions thou will be little able to pray, to think of any good, or to do
any thing that is good; but where is the Seaman that ever thinks of these
things beforehand? Nay this has, and is still the very burden of my soul, when
I think of it, that when, and whilst you are chasing of an enemy, for six, or
seven hours together, all this time, or part of it, might well be spent in the
thoughts and meditations of your death, yet notwithstanding should God give you
many days chase, it would be no otherwise with you. I could never see any of
you so serious as to say, Gentlemen, we are going to fight, and whose hap it
may be for to die I know not, it may be mine, as soon as another man's, I have
a great many sins to get pardoned, I have an Heaven to look after, and an Hell
to escape, whilst time permits, my heart shall be taken up with these things,
and therefore let me request the like care in you; it will be no blot, nor
badge of disparagement, neither in me, nor you, for so doing; none can brand
us for cowardice to be careful of our dying. Oh that our Sailors could be got
to meditate death, and the day of Judgment. If your leasurable hours in the
Seas were thus spent every day, what rare men would you come to be in the end?
I am confident, that Nihil sic revocat a peccato, sicut frequens mortis
meditatio. I have sometimes met with a story of one, that gave a young Ruffian
a ring with a deaths head in it, and that upon this condition, that he should
one hour daily for seven days together look, and think thereupon, which he
accordingly did, and in the end it bred a blessed change in that man's life. Oh
would to God that you that go in the Seas would be much in the thoughts of
death, and that you would set before your eyes the very shortness of your
lives. Those red and Military vestments that you hang about your ships in the
times of war, are no other than the black mourning burial-cloaths that lie upon
the Corpses and Coffins of the dead, and so should be advertising Sermons unto
you of your mortality. Philostrates lived seven years in his Tomb, that he
might be acquainted with the grave before his bones were interred. I am sure
that there be thousands of our Sailors that have lived five times seven in the
wars, Might not many men that have been slain in ships in our late Sea wars,
have lived longer, if they had but served God better? I speak of Captains and
Seamen, etc. It was observed of old, that that man that durst be so foolhardy
to go into the Wars without his house undedicated to the Lord, that he never
returned off the field alive. Deuteronomy. 20.5. Let him go and return unto his house,
left he dye in the battle.
and Merchants service, and that in ships, which are no other and no better
than slaughtering and butchering houses, or mere Coffins of mortality, in which
lie murdering Guns, mortal engines, and dis-mangling bullets, yet may you find
them living in them, as if there were no dying time to come, nor no God, no
heaven, no hell, nor no devil to be thought on. I pray God that this might not
be too suitable a Motto for thousands of poor silly Sailors when they dye,
Anxius vixi, dubious morior, nescio quo vado. I toyled hard all my life time for
a living, but that which is the worst of all I dye despairingly, and so go out
of the world I know not whither: Or otherwise that of Adrian the Emperors,
Animula, Vagula, Blandula, etc. Ah poor soul, whither art thou now going! It
will not now be granted thee, when thou art upon thy dye, that thou shall ever
have any more respite for to jest it in, to sport it in; nay there will be no
more time allowed to swear in, to drink in, and to whore it in, as many of the
Sailors have done. I may sing this of the jovial crew of the careless Sailors,
Hen vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur: Vita cito avolat, nec potest
retimeri, Mors quoti die ingruit, nec potest resisti. Mors ubique vos expectat.

Aut veluti infernus fabula vana foret.
Seamen do live as if they should never dye,
And as if hell were but a foppery.


Me thinks I hear the Seas saying unto all the profane Sailors in England, as
the heathen Priest said to the people when begun to sacrifize, (...), Who is
there? the answer returned was this, (...), good and honest men; if not, says
he, Procul, oh procul este prophani. The Seas say, Be gone you Swearers, Take
heed left you meet not with the Lord whilst in the Sea, as the Church did on
land, when she said, Lamen. 3.10. He was unto me as a Bear lying in wait,
and as a Lion in secret places, Does not your wickedness in the Sea pull down
storms upon you, and give you to experience that in Nahum 1.6. Who can stand
before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierteness of his anger? his
fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.
Adulterers, and Drunkards, come not upon us in your ships, lest we send you
going to thousands of those dead that we have drowned.

2. When you go to Sea, resign up all, and recommend your selves, your souls,
your bodies, your friends, your wives, your families, goods, and habitations,
I, what ever you have, or desire that the Lord would keep, or fear to lose,
into the hands of your God, and you will find him a faithful keeper of what
ever you do commit unto him; the Apostle Paul found him so, 2 Timothy 1.12. And I
am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him
against that day. Psalm. 121.5.6. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade
upon thy right hand.

3. If you would prepare for storms, fill your hearts then every morning that
you uprise, with the fear of your God, who has the rule of the day, and is
also the Sovereign King, and Lord over it, and also of the night, and so
consequently is able at his pleasure to make it stormy, or calm, comfortable,
or dreadful. It is the counsel of the Wise man, and I present it to you, for I
know none stand more need of it than your selves? Prove. 23.17. Be thou in the
fear of the Lord all the day long. None knows what may happen unto them before
the Sun goes down.

4. If you would prepare for storms, take fast hold on God by the hand of
faith, before they come, and also when they come, Job 13.15. Though he stay
me, yet will I trust in him. Though he should bring tempest after tempest
upon thee, let not thy hold go, but take as fast hold of him, as ever wrestling
Jacob did upon his God, and thou will find both safety and comfort enough.

5. Would you know now Sailors, why the Lord sends many storms upon you? And
would you know also what Gods ends and aims are in storms? I will give you in a
few grounds to those preceding ones that I presented unto you, and the first
will be this.

1. That Gods aim in stormy winds, is not always for destruction, but
sometimes for trial, Matthew. 8.25. Gold is often thrown into the fire, but what
is the Goldsmiths end in so doing? not that it should be consumed, but fined.

2. God sits by his blowing blasts, I know not whether it would be worse or
no, that the heavens should always look upon us with one face, or ever varying
for as continual change of weather, causes uncertainty of health, so a
permanent settledness of one season causes the certainty of distempers,
perpetual moisture dissolves us, perpetual heat evaporates, or inflames us,
cold stupifies us, and drought obstructs and withers us.
and stormy winds that are sent out upon the Seas, you sit not more carefully
by to hand in your Top-gallant Sails, or Topsails when winds blow high and
fresh, than he does sit by the winds to keep them from destroying of you. The
Goldsmith sits not more carefully by that precious metal to watch its first
melting, than he does by the winds, lest that they should wrong your vessels.
This God does for those that fear him in the Seas.

3. Storms come for improvement, God would have the grace of faith, and of
patience exercised, Matthew. 8.25.

2. It will not be amiss, if that you that are the Great Statesmen of our
land, prepare for storms. It is true, you are out of the wind-blowing Sea
blasts whilst on land, but your gallant and sumptuous warlike Sea-boats are in
them oftentimes at Sea: Well, all that I shall say unto your Honors, is this,
Prepare to meet ill news, and sad, and dismal accidents to befall them now and
then, that comes in an hour, that usually falls not out in an hundred. And
grant that ships be cast away, It was a brave mind that Antisthenes was of,
when he desired nothing else in all the world, to make his life either
comfortable or happy with, but the spirit of Socrates, which was of that
temper, that it could cheerfully bear the saddest tidings that ever came, or
the greatest evils that ever befell man.
or that any other fatal Omen do befall them, he that trusts in the Lord
shall not be moved at it. Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.

3. It will not be out of my way, to give the great Merchants of our land the
same advertisement to prepare for storms. Gentlemen, It is with your ships at
Sea, if but without Convoyes, as it was with Aesops Geese and Cranes that were
feeding in one Pasture altogether, Venatoribus autem visis (understand Pirates)
the Cranes being light bodied volatiles, betook themselves to their wings, and
would not stay to answer the reckoning, but the Geese that were heavy bodied
Sailors (capti fuerunt) were taken and knocked in the head by the Hunters. The
best Sailor escapes, when the slowest falls into the Pirates hands.
Great losses come upon you many times, and how will you take, and entertain
the sad news that shall, and oftentimes does come to your ears, of one ship
lost in the North, another in the South, may be one in the East, and another
in the West? if you be not prepared for this news, it will be too heavy a
trial for you to bear. When you send out your ships, prepare for the worst,
and expect not always the best, and I will assure you that what ever
contingencies befall you, they will be the more comportable for your spirits.
I have great ventures at Sea, some in one bottom, and some in another, some in
the Eastern parts of the world, other some in the Western, some in the
Northern, and some in the Southern; and if the Lord will be pleased to return
them in safety, I shall be very thankful unto my God, and if not, I will pray
for patience and strength to submit to his will. As soon as ever the Soldier
has intelligence of the enemies advancing toward him, he prepares for the
battle at the sound of Trumpet, and the beat of Drum, and on goes his best
arms, and armor, for his defense and safeguard, and the like provisions should
you make in my apprehensions for the ships that you have out in perilous Seas.
But to proceed to the next words of counsel that I would present unto our
Seamen, it will be shortly this.

3. And lastly, Bear storms stoutly; when dangerous and perilous sinking, and
shipwracking storms and tempests are upon you, bear them courageously with
patience, silence, and without all murmuring, or repining, and without all
passion, choler, distemper, or any other unquietness of spirit, or thinking
hardly of the Lord. When David was under affliction, we hear no more of him
but this, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.
Plutarch in a consolatory Epistle to his good wife on the death of a child,
amongst many other arguments sent her this, We must always think well of what
the gods do. And will not you Seamen think well of the Lord when it goes
either ill or well with you at any time. Ulysses encouraged his companions
thus, when in a raging storm upon the Sea, (...), etc. Sirs, says he, We are
not now to learn what sorrows are.
When ill news came to Eli, how did he bear it? 1 Samuel 3.18. And he said, It
is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Paul and Silas were so far from
murmuring, and repining, that they were very cheerful when in the Dungeon, and
Philpot and his fellows when in the Cole-house, and the many Martyrs when in
the flames. It was a gallant speech of Stilpo that great Philosopher, when King
Demetrius had sacked that famous City of Megaera to the very foundation, he
asked the Philosopher what losses he had sustained, none at all, quoth he,
for war can make no spoil of virtue. Jewel, when banished, comforted himself
with this, Haec non durabunt aetatem, This will not always endure.

2. Bear all your storms, and Sea-imbitterments, with faith, and confidence in
God, for his general and particular presence with you; that sweet promise has
quieted my heart within when we have had nothing but horror without in the
great and wide Sea, Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee.

3. Beg every day at the hands of your God for a submissive frame of heart,
that you may resign and give up your selves, and all that is of worth and value
in your eyes, to Gods will, It was a sweet frame that a Stoic was in (I would
all our Sailors were of that temper) when he said, Quid vult, volo, quid non
vult, nolo, vult ut vivam, vivam, vult ut moriar, moriar, It is good to be of
this temper in storms, to be contented either to live or dye, swim or drovvn.
for his disposal, even as he shall will and please, to that end you may be
in a capacity to yield to whatsoever God shall do, though it be never so cross
and contrary to your own carnal wills, and in all your storms and dangers say,
Fiat voluntas sua, the Lords will be done.

One of King Cyrus's Courtiers having but little state, and being about to
marry his daughter, one asked him how he would do for to give her a portion,
his answer was (...), Cyrus is my friend, and thus he casts his care and
confidence upon the King, and will not you do thus in storms?
4. Cast all your fears, cares, and troubles that you meet withal in the Seas
upon the Lord; and he will take care of you, and for you, you have it under
hand and seal for so doing, if you have but faith to lay hold on the promise,
Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee; he
shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. The burden of a dreadful storm
is too heavy for thee to bear, thou have sufficient warrant and commandment to
unload thy self, and cast it upon thy God; there is many a man and woman in the
world might go a great deal lighter both at Sea and Land, if they had but the
art of laying their cares upon their God; has not many a man had his back
broke, I, and his heart broke, because he evermore bore his burden, and had
not the wisdom to run to God to desire him for to bear it for him? Sailors,
lay those dreadful burdens that you meet with all in a stormy Sea, upon the
Lord, and he will bear them, I, and carry you out safe and alive from them.
But to proceed,

2. It will not be out of the road, if I present this advertising word unto
those that sit at the stern with the helm of our Republic in their hands, It
was a brave temper that Cato was of, of whom it was said, that he bore
things so stoutly that no man ever saw him to be changed, and though he lived
in a time when the Commonwealth was often changing, he was a semper idem in
every condition.
even to bear storms stoutly, I mean, as to the effects of them, which
oftentimes end in the ruining of many a goodly sail, and if so be that ships
be cast away that are in your employments, which are of vast worth, cost and
charge, it cannot be helped, such casualties will be coming and falling upon
them now and then; the Seas have a Million of dangers in them.

3. I would hand this word unto the Merchants of our Land also, that they would
bear storms stoutly. I have seen people in the world, when unexpected losses,
Our Merchants of late resemble too much the mourning Nightingale, of whom it is
said, that when her young ones are taken from her, that she will tell every
bird of it, and (maestis late loca questibus implere,) fill the woods with her
complaints. And so you the States ears with your losses.
and crosses have come upon them, fall a weeping and wringing of their hands,
and cursing with their tongues, in the greatest impatiency that ever was seen,
as if they were utterly undone; now there is none that can be, or is undone,
until they be damned, then they are undone indeed; and then they may howl, and
weep, where weeping and gnashing of teeth is in course; but whilst in the
world, and in fair hopes for Heaven, temporal accidents should not have that
impression, to breed that disturbance. It is a notable speech of Seneca,
Suppose says he, that a man who having a very fair and goodly House to dwell
in, and fair Orchards and Gardens, planted and plotted round about it, with
diverse other fruitful trees for ornament and profit, Plutarch reports of a
certain people, that to manifest their disliking and disdaining of men
overmuch dejected by any affliction, they condemned them in token of disgrace
to wear women's apparel, because they so much unmanned themselves.
what an indiscreet part were it for that man to murmur and repine, because the
winds rise and blow down some of the leaves of it, when as they hang fuller of
fruit than leaves. God has given your ships many a prosperous voyage, and
murmur not at it, if you lose one or two now and then, it is nothing but mercy
that you have any left to trade and trafick withal, I, and moreover, it is a
great deal more than you deserve. Chrysostom when speaking to the people of
Antioch, like himself, who was a man of an invincible spirit, against the
tyrants of his time, delivered himself thus, In this should a gracious man
differ from thc Godless, he should bear his crosses courageously, and as it
were with the wings of Faith out-soar the hight of all humane miseries, he
should be like a Rock incorporated into Jesus Christ, inexpugnable and
unshaken with the most furious incursions of the waves and storms of the world.

It was a gallant speech of Galienus the Emperor, when tidings came unto him
that all Egypt was lost, What then quoth the Emperor? cannot I live without
the flax of Egypt? And by and by came tidings to him that the greatest part of
his dominions in Asia were gone also, What then quoth the Emperor? cannot I
live without the delicacies of Asia? This is a rare example for Merchants when
they lose rich-fraughted ships in the Seas, either by storm, or Pyrat. What? It
was a gallant spirit that Habakkuk was of, when he said, Chap. 3.17. Although
the fig tree shall not blossom, nor fruit upon the Vines, nor Herds in the
stalls, yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.
Grant now the worst, suppose you had not one ship in the Harbor, nor one to
come safely home, is there not a good, and a merciful God for you to rejoice
in, that is better than ten thousand Sail?
cannot I live without that ship that I have lost?

There is a pretty story in Esop of the Goose, that laid the poor man her
Master every day a golden egg, and finding such a benefit by her; he thought
that his best course was to kill her, and then he should find them all, and
upon that conceit he did, but finding himself frustrated, (Ansere Aesopico
invento vacuo, stupebat miser, ac plangebat, and rem, and spem periisse.) he
fell a weeping for the loss of his golden eggs, because he had taken away her
life, which if had been preserved, would have laid him more.

Thus the Merchant mourns when he loses his goodly ships that brought him in
his riches, and upon the consideration of their ruin he laments to think what
accommodement they were unto him. But I will let pass this discourse, and
hasten unto another Proposition that I will lay down, and it is shortly this.

3. That God threatens before he strikes. How clear and undeniable is this
point unto every ordinary capacity that goes in the Sea? where is the Mariner
that is bet up to storms and Tempests, but knows beforehand when a storm is
coming in the Heavens? Every Sailor is as perfect a scholar in the great volume
of that over-head canopy of the skies, I, and knows as well by the Physiognomy
of the sky, out of what part the storm will come, as the child can tell you
his A. B, C. when posed in it. Before the Lord sends out his stormy wind, he
usually gives men that are in that employment notice of it, Supra civitatem
Hierosolymae st^tit sydus simile gladio, and perannum perseveravit When God was
about to strike Jerusalem, he gave them warning by a Star that hung in the
form of a sword (in a perpendicular manner) over their heads, which dreadful
sign hung over the City for a year together.
either by the strange flying of the clouds, or otherwise clothing of the skies
with the black, thick, and sable curtains of a nocturnal darkness, or otherwise
by laying upon the airy region a condensation of fogg and mist, which are
usually forerunners and contemporaneous messengers of what the Lord is above
preparing to lay upon that Element, and besides these, they have many other
familiar signs, and observations, to tell them that the storm is a hastening
upon them. When the Cormorants leave the Seas, and betake themselves to the
shore, or any of the other Sea-foul, that ship that is in the Sea would be
very happy, if she were but in the Harbor. But to lay down the ground of this
point.

1. Because he is not willing to execute judgment, Alexander the Great, when
ever he laid siege to any City, he hanged up three flags, 1. white. 2. red. 3.
black, if they compounded and surrendered not before the black flag was set up,
there was no mercy for them. Take heed that God do not so with you Sailors.
if either threatening or fair means would but serve the turn. The loving Father
is very loath to lay the rod upon the child's back, if admonition would but serve
the turn, And good Physicians that bear tender love to their Patients, when
upon the dye, will shed tears when they will not take their potions prescribed
for their health. Luke 19.41. And when he was come near, he beheld the City,
and wept over it. Genesis 18.32. And he said, I will not destroy it for tens
sake. God takes little pleasure in the cutting off of souls, he is loath to
destroy you Sailors, but that you wrest judgments out of his hands to sink you.

2. Because he would let the world know, that he is full of patience. Omnis
minatio, amica monitio. Every threatening is a gracious warning.
Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plentious
in mercy.

3. The Jews when ever they see the Rainbow in the clouds, they will not stand
gazing upon it, but presently go forth and confess their sins, acknowledging
that they are worthy of being deluged and drowned with a second flood. They are
persuaded that that holy Name of Jehovah is written upon the Bow, and therefore
do they celebrate his Name at those times. Oh that Sailors were in this posture
to confess their sins to God, when they see storms appearing by the heavens.
To that end men may be left without all excuse; does not the Schoolmasters
warning take off the Scholars excuse when he comes to whipping? A people
proudly standing at defiance with their enemy, when he sends them in his
summons, and tenders of peace for a surrender, may thank themselves, and not
blame the enemy, when their streets run down with blood; blame not God if he
split your ships in a thousand pieces upon the Seas, so that your masts swim
one way, the rudder another, and the broken parcels round about you, God showed
you his wrath before it came in the face of the skies, but you took no notice
of it, neither prepared you your selves to meet your God.

Verse. 26. They mount up to the Heaven: they go down again to the depths, their
soul is melted because of trouble.
FOr the division of the words, you have three things that are very remarkable
in them.

1. Their ascension, in these words, They mount up to the Heaven.

2. Their descension, in these words, they go down again into the depths.

3. Their perturbations, in these words, their soul is melted because of
trouble.

I will begin with the first, and give you a brief explication of their
ascending and mounting up. The word comes of Mons, a Mountain, showing that the
Seas are oftentimes conglomerated or accumulated into great and dreadful
pyramidical hills, and mountains.
They mount up to the Heaven. This phrase in the extent of it, is but
metaphorical, and not really and absolutely so, that any ship, or ships, should
rise so high in the violentest storm that is, but it is to show that their
elevation is exceedingly raised beyond their ordinary altitude (usque ad sedem
Hyperbole beatorum Olympicam) far above, and beyond that hight that calm Seas
are of, for when the Seas are of a virgin-like smoothness and clearness, then
are all the ships that go upon them at quiet, there is no mounting then, nor no
going up, nor no going down, but when the ever-moving Ocean that is liable to
continual agitation, and subject to every storm, and blast, is once raised and
stirred up by the winds, Storms are like to Ovids Chaos when he sung that
there was, -- Tanta est discordia rerum. There is an omnium rerum permixtio in
them.
it flies in rolling billows, and raging surges, upon the backs of which, the
great and weighty ships are tossed up, as the ball that is jetted to and fro
upon the racket. In a troubled Sea, ships may be compared to a man that runs
up an high ladder, and as soon as ever he is got up to the highest stave of
it, down he goes till he comes unto the lowest, and by and by he returns
unto the highest. Solomon tells us, Prove. 23.5. that the Eagle takes wing and
flies toward heaven, but he does not say that she flies so high, but it
denotes that she is one of the highest flying birds of any of the fouls under
the Heavens. Christ tells us also, Matthew. 11.23. that Capernaum was exalted unto
Heaven, when alas it was not so, nor so, because it was but an hyperbolical,
but rather an Ironical expression, for Capernaum was so far from Heaven, that
her feet was rather upon the very threshold of Hell than Heaven, as appears by
the point she steered by. But this elegant Hyperbole of the Psalmists, is to
set forth the Sea-mans high soaring sursums, and his down-falling deorsums,
They mount up almost as high as that caelestial (...) which is feigned to be
Elemenci quarti nomen.
how that he is one while carried upwards upon the swelling billows of the
Seas, even (ad aulam astriferam) as high as the starry mansions, and bespangled
roofs of Heaven, and then by and by they are returned down again.

2. They go down again; to break up this word unto you, there is nothing
difficult in it, only we may take notice, that their descension in storms, is
not gradatim, or pedetentim, but rather in the violentest manner that can be,
even as a stone that is hurled up in the air, it will not tarry there any
longer, than the strength of the hand is upon it, and then it will down again,
because it covets to be at its Center. So the weightier any thing is, the
speedier is, and will be the descent of it. I am confident it would produce
many a gallon of salt tears from the eyes of the godly that are on Land, if
there were but a possibility of their seeing of ships how they labor, rock,
and reel, ascend and descend in the restless Seas in time of storms, for by and
by they are to be seen, anon they are not to be seen, but as if they were
covered all over in the Seas.

That Seamen are the nearest Heaven etc. These are the only cloud-climbing
lads of the world, Sea men are like to the pinnacles that are praefixed upon
all high battlements which point upwards to Heaven, but poyse downwards to
their center. Exodus 8.15. Whilst the judgments of God were upon Pharaoh, he was
some thing conformable, but when the storm was over, he was as vile as ever.
and none go so near, or are so fair for Heaven as Seamen are, seems the
Psalmist to say, but let me add this, pray God they ever come there (my
prayers shall be for them, 1 Samuel 12.23. Moreover as for me, God forbid that
I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you
the good and right way. Verse. 24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth
with all your heart: for consider how great things he has done for you.) For
I fear that many an hundred Seaman, when he is got up to the top of an high
water promontory in the Sea, that he is as near Heaven, as ever he will be.
It was once said of one that preached well, and lived ill (upon a time when in
the pulpit) some importunate messenger or other came for him to come out of the
Church, but one of his auditors made answer, Oh let him alone, for he is as
near Heaven, as ever he will be. So I may say, it is a thousand pitties that
ever some Seamen should come off and down from the high-towering waves of the
Seas, because they are in those stormy times peradventure nearer Heaven than
ever they will be when they come on Land again.

That all Seamen generally (without all exception) whether they be young, or
whether they be old, both do, and shall assuredly go to heaven. They mount up
to the heaven. Me thinks the Seaman likes me well in the laying down of this
proposition, and the godly on the other hand look very strangely upon it, and
so consequently conclude, I know Seamen are as confident of going to Heaven
(the Lord help them) as the Turks either are or can be of that lock which
they keep upon the top of their crowns, that they shall be drawn up into
Paradise by. Pray God Seamen would once forsake their confidence, and then
there would be some hopes of them.
that I have no warrant, nor ground in Scripture to build it upon. To clear up
the point unto you, I would have you to observe, that there are two parts in it.

1. That they do go to Heaven.

2. That they shall all go thither.

For the first of these, that they do go thither, I would have you to
understand me rightly, without any misconstruction. I will have nothing to do
with their Salvation in this point, for that is as doubtful to me, as
Solomon's was to Toledo the Archbishop, who weighing that much-disputed
controversy, whether Solomon was saved, or damned, and not being satisfied
with their arguments, caused Solomon to be pictured upon the walls of his
Chapel, the one half in hell, and the other half in heaven. There be three
Heavens, 1. Coelum Aerium. 2. Coelum Astriferum. 3. Coelum Beatorum. It is not
the latter now they go to in storms, but the two former.


But to the point in hand, that you may understand my meaning in it, take
notice, that it is stormy and tempestuous weather that Seamen go to Heaven in,
even then when the winds lift up the waves of the Seas, by which, and upon
which they are in this sense transported unto Heaven, what they do, or whither
they go when dead, I have nothing to do to judge, and therefore whilst they are
living we need not credit that they go into Heaven, Sailors are like to
Grasshoppers in goodness, who make faint essays to fly up to Heaven, and then
presently fall down to the Earth again. Seamen that have their feet (as it
were) in stormy vveather upon the battlements of Heaven, should look down
upon all earthly happiness in the world, as both base, abject, slight, and
slender, waterish, and worthless. The great Cities of Campaniae seem but small
cottages to them that stand on the tops of the Alps.
for I never knew any of them so holy; Enoch indeed Genesis 5.24. Walked with God:
and he was not, for God took him.

There is a vast difference betwixt going to Heaven, and into Heaven; the Eagle
that Solomon speaks of, flew toward Heaven, but he does not say that she
went into it. There is a vast disproportion betwixt a man's going to a place,
and going into a place; many a Seaman may be sent out to Spain, and France,
and do business there by proxy, and yet not go into France, nor into Spain;
and on this wise would I be understood of the Sailors going to Heaven, for it
is my judgment.

1. That none can enter into the kingdom of heaven, but they for whom it is
prepared, now it is not prepared for filthy, and unclean swearers, cursers,
adulterers, and drunkards, 1 Cor. 9.10. All such shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. Matthew. 20.23. But it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of
my Father.

Charon (in Lucian) requested Mercurius to show him Jupiters palace above, how
quoth Mercurius? would such a Catiff as thou, whose conversation has been in
hell, and altogether with black shades, and impure ghosts, think thou to set
thy foul feet in that pure palace? Ah what a dishonor would it be to Heaven
that thou should ever come there.
2. None can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but such as are prepared for it.
Now all villainous, deboyst, and graceless wretches are not prepared for it,
therefore they shall never come there.

3. None can ever come to Heaven, but such to whom it is promised, now Heaven
is not promised to the wicked and abominable, James 2.5. but to the godly.

4. None can come to Heaven but the friends of God, now I fear that God has few
friends amongst the Sailors, because they like not his ways, nor cannot endure
his Word, therefore unlike to come to Heaven.

5. None shall enter into Heaven, but such as are born again; this is a sad
word may some say, I, but it is a true one. Then I may conclude, that there be
hundreds, if not thousands of Sailors that never were born again, and therefore
they shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven till they be born again,
John 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. What
will become of you poor Sailors, that have no handwriting of the work of
Grace, and of the Image of God stamped upon you as yet, for to show for Heaven?

6. None shall ever come to Heaven but holy ones; whither shall such swearers
as our Sailors go then? whither shall such drunkards as our Sailors are go
then? Now the Sailors life is like King Eldred's reign, prava in principio,
pejor in medio, pessima in ultimo. Naught in the beginning, worse in the
midst, and worst of all in the end, and therefore I fear unlike to come to
Heaven.
whither shall that irreligious crew that goes in the Seas go? surely to Hell.
Heb. 12.14. and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

2. That they shall go to Heaven, my meaning is, if any will use the Seas they
shall nolenti, volenti climb the great water-mountains that are in it, which
are made by the stormy winds, which will in David's sense mount them up to
Heaven, but neither he nor I do say, that they shall go into Heaven. I will
not take upon me, neither dare I flatter wicked wretches, and therefore I have
cleared up the proposition; and yet again on the other hand I pity them, when
I consider how much those that use the Seas, are without the grace, and fear of
God.

That all Seamen generally go to heaven against their wills. They mount up to
the heaven, I would they were as unwilling to go to Hell, as they are to go to
Heaven in a storm, I should then have great hopes, that none of them would ever
come there.
and David tells us, that their souls are melted because of trouble; from
whence this point arises, and is also firmly grounded, that it is small
pleasure for them to go to Heaven in a storm. And as they have no mind to be
jetted up to the Heavens in a storm, I fear that they have as little stomach to
go to that Heaven, in which God, Christ, Saints, and his holy Angels live in, I
mean as to walk in that way that leads thither; but truly it were the greatest
piece of wisdom for all our Sailors, let the wind be never so cross and
contrary, to strive to get thither, if they can by any means, although they
make a thousand, yea a million, or the greatest number of boardings that can
be reckoned up, it will be worth the pains so to do.

That when Seamen are near to heaven, they find no entrance, or admission, but
are sent back again after a violent, praecipitant, and disrespected manner.
Sailers are like to Belerephon, who got upon the back of his winged horse
Pegasus, and when thinking to ride in, horse and all, at the gates of Heaven,
Jupiter looks out and throws him down to the Earth again, insomuch that he had
like to have broken both their bones.
They go down again to the depths, etc. I would I could, or were able to
persuade every soul in the Sea, to look seriously into one text of Scripture,
which will tell them, that Christ will disown, and reject many that have strong
hopes, I, and as good thoughts as any of you have, of their Salvation, Matthew.
7.21. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. Then I
fear that there will be the fewest Sailors of any people under the Heavens, that
will come thither; my reason is, they do not Gods will, but their own and the
Devils. I fear we shall see but few Sailors saved at the day of Judgment.

Seaman, call thy condition into question, and debate the case with thy self,
and say, what, shall not I enter into Heaven? Captain, ask thy own heart this
question; Master, say thou unto thy self, shall not I enter into Heaven?
Boatswain, Gunner, Carpenter, Vulcan left the Earth, out of a dislike, and went
to Heaven, but says the Poet (the clown was no sooner there, but) Jupiter grew
to be displeased with him, and thereupon threw him down, and before he got
unto the Earth a whole summers-day was run out from Sun to Sun, and in Lemnos
Isle he broke his leg. I leave you to find out my meaning.
move this question ever and anon; Christ says that every one shall not, why
may not thou doubt that thou shall be one of them? Thou may justly fear
it, if thy life be naught.

That Seamen had need to have good etc. It is not every head, or brain, that
can brook, and endure to soar into the volatile region of the air. The Seaman
stands in much need to have such an head as Polyphemus had, of whom it is said,
that he was so tall, that he rubbed the hair of his skul off upon the
Heavens. A good head does well in the deeps, but a clean heart is far better
company.

That the Seaman has a very notable head for the Sea, but not at all for the
Land. They mount up to the Heaven, etc. They go down to the Sea in ships, etc.
It is requisite that they should have very good skill, and knowledge. The
Seaman will never make good Statesman. Not one of a thousand of them have the
brains for the Land. What a Countryman said of a goodly head which he saw
most exquisitly painted, I shall say of the Seaman, (...), What an excellent
skul is here, but no brains at all in it. So it is admirable to think what
excellent Sea-brains those men have that use the Seas, but very shallow
Land-brains, they can very well sit, and abide the jumping waves of the Seas,
even when they are thrown up unto the heavens, but no brains for the great
affairs of the Republic.

3. As to their perturbations, Their soul is melted because of trouble. The
Sailors Motto may be this, Cum Homero loqui -- (...). Maror ex marore subit,
One sorrow follows in the heels of another.
I have observed, that their troubles are infinite at such times, some of which
I will give you in at this time.

1. Vomiting. Tempestuous Seas both do, and will oftentimes put the stoutest
and the strongest stomached Sailor upon the picking up of whatsoever lies in
his stomach. Now I conceive it is not the tossing, but the stomach that causes
their sickness. It is choler within, and not altogether waves without that does
it. And this now is no small trouble that lies upon some in storms, and yet it
is comparatively but a pulex, culex, and urtica pungens, a mere fly-biting to
what they undergo.

2. Day-labouring. How is the Seaman now at work running to and fro, and up
and down into every corner of the ship? When Demosthenes was asked what was the
first part of an Orator, what the second, and what the third, he answered,
Action; the same I shall say, if any should demand of me what is the first,
the second, and the third in a Sailor, even Action, Action in a storm, for it
is no dallying then.
one while they are running up to the yards, another while they are lashing of
their Guns, one while they are peaking of their yards, another while lowering of
their Masts, The Sea-mans Motto in a storm should be that of the Emperors,
Laboremus, Let us I beseech you, Si^^, be doing what ever we can to save both
the vessel and our precious lives, Hic labor, hoc opus est.
all hands are then full in a storm, whereas before, when the Sea was calm,
they were at their sports and plays of mirth and jovialty, perhaps dancing
after the music of the Fiddle, or some such recreating game or other. But in a
storm, all this is laid by, and every man falls to Circa res arduas exerceri,
and occupari in multis, and magnis negotiis. The Sea-mans otium in the time of
storm, would end in a doleful, and woeful naufragium. It is reported of a ship,
that when she was in great danger of being cast away through the Sea-mens
negligence, that she spoke on this wise unto the Master, and the Helmsman,
Aristotle was not more careful of too much sleeping when he held the brazen
ball in his hand to keep him waking by its fall into the brazen basin, than the
Sailor is in time of storms.
Perge contra tempestatem forti animo, ant sax is illis miserrime perirem. Bear
up good Helmsman against this storm, or otherwise I shall fall upon yonder
rocks, for I am nearer unto them than thou art aware of: but the Helmsman, and
the Master not giving car unto her, minded not the cunning of the ship, and
shortly after she ran upon them, and went downright unto the bottom.

3. Night watching. As long as the storm lasts there is a careful walking to
and fro in the Hold of the ship, and that from side to side all night long,
lest that any leaks should spring and break in upon them; for such is the
violency of storms, that they will make the strongest timber, and the thickest
ship sides to dis-joynt and open, in at which, water will flow most dreadfully.
Now hang the lighted Lanthorns betwixt decks and in the Hold to give them light
to watch and work by, and if that ships be in a fleet together sailing, or at
an anchor, in such nocturnal tempestuous seasons, every one keeps out their
light upon their Poops, that thereby they may judge of one another driving,
sailing, or breaking loose: for should one ship light upon another in a storm,
they would instantly stave themselves, and go downrights into the bottom. If
Elephants go backward in a fight when wounded, they tread all under their feet
they come near; what then will not ships do if they break their cables in a
storm? All sleeping now is abominable in the eyes and thoughts of every one
that is in the ship, Jonah 1.6. So the ship-master came to him, and said unto
him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? It is reported of a ship, that she made
this doleful complaint when she was run upon the rocks in a dark blustering
night, Ego scopulis perii dum naucleri, somno sepulti; I was ruined when all my
Mariners were fast a sleep.
As if he were a going to say, Is it fitting that thou should sleep when
we, and the ship that we are in are like to perish? I have observed some of
the skilfullest of the Mariners when dreadful storms have surrounded us,
insomuch that we have thought that neither cables, nor anchors would hold, nor
Masts stand before the fury and violency of the winds, that they would go out
in the night time, and look one while upon the East, and another while upon the
West, one while into the North, and another while into the South, to see if
they could espy the rising and appearance of any one Star, the sight of which
is taken by them for an infallible sign, that the storm will not last long, but
when the stars are all veiled and covered over, insomuch that they cannot be
seen, that is a sign of a storms long continuance, and after long waiting they
have got the sight of a star, which has given them as great an occasion of
rejoicing, as ever Archimedes had when he found the resolution of the knotty
Mathematical question, God out of his infinite goodness suffers not the violent
Belluas of the air to continue long, which are so called oftentimes for their
violency, because they roar like the roarings of Bulls, and beasts, or as the
roarings and howlings of hell.
which transported him into such an hilarous fit of mirthsomness, that he
broke out into this expression, (...), I have found it, I have found it.

4. Perpetual life danger. I wonder what day, what night, or what hour there is
in the year that the Seaman is not liable to some fearful jeopardy, and
casualty or other? he cannot positively and absolutely say, any day that he
either sails or anchors in, that it shall be a day of peace and quietness unto
him. He cannot say, after this day is over, I will live, and go into this and
that place to morrow; it was therefore a very humble, and also a very gracious
saying of one, when invited to come and give his friend a visit upon the morrow
ensuing, to which courtesy he returned this answer, Ego crastinum non habui
hos plurimos annos; I have not had a morrow in my hands this many years. What
greater dangers of losing life are those in that go down into the Seas, than
that poor soul was that ever lived in the expectation of death? The Sea has a
million of dangers in it, I, and fuller of perils to the Mariner, than Africa
either is, or can be unto the Traveller. It is observed, What I have read of
one concerning that which he did see in a vision, I may bring in and say of the
Sea, when he beheld the many snares of the. Devil that were spread upon the
face of the earth, he sat down mourning and lamenting in this manner, Oh (Quis
pertransiet ista) who shall pass through all this? and by and by after some
long debate, a voice behind him was heard (Humilitas pertransiet) Humility
will carry thee through them. Good Lord, seems many a stout man to say, how
shall we ever go through those many dangers that are upon the Seas, in one
place lies lurking rock, in another perilous sands, and every where the stormy
wind. I answer, that faith in God will carry thee through them all.
that he that will travel in Africa, must take these following directions,
besides the many more that are prescribed, or otherwise they will soon be cut
off with that multiplicity of venomous creatures that be in it.

1. He must not take his journey fasting, because if he should accidentally
be bitten or stinged by any of them, the poison will have the greater
Influence upon the body, in respect that the veins, and arteries are the more
open and empty at those times than at ohers.

2. He must have a care of traveling when the Sun is hot, and shining,
because all manner of vermin lie very much couchant in every field, and
graminous place; and not only for that reason neither, but because if they
should be stinged at such a time, the wound will be the harder to get cured.

3. He must have a special heed that he foot it not over graminous, bushy,
leavy, and bramble places, because in those places the veniferous creatures
take up their abode, and so will ceize upon any one that shall but tread, or
come amongst them.

4. He must not go without that antidoting herb, called A veneniferis
creaturilis libera me domine, The good Lord deliver me from all venomous and
hurtful creatures. I bring but in this dangerous part and place of the world as
a comparison to the Sea, which is as full of hazzards as Africa can, to him
that shall travel it.

Nay further, to set it home, that they that use the Seas are in perpetual
danger, give me leave to cast about, and to tell you, that all the creatures
which encompass us about, do as it were bend their whole force against us; the
very Sun in the firmament which is the days bright shining lamp of the world,
and is as a certain general Father to all living things, does sometimes so
scorch with his beams, that all things are parched and burnt up with the heat
thereof, at another time it takes its course so far from us, that all things
are like to dye in its absence with very cold; the earth also which is the
Magna parens mundi^, the great mother of us all, swallows up many thousands,
with her gulfs, and earthquakes, and the Season the other hand they devour and
kill up men abundantly; what an infinite of Rocks, Sands, El^^s; Shallows,
Sirtes's and Charybdus's be there in the Seas, all which endanger the ships
that go in them, and upon them? What shall I say also of the air? Is not it
many times corrupted? And does it not engender and gather clouds, thick mists,
pestilence, and sicknesses? neither Land, nor Sea, Desert places, private
houses, or open streets are free from ambushments, conspiracies, hatreds,
emulations, Thieves and Pirates. Is there not spoiling of fields, Terror ubique,
trer^or, timor undique, and undique terror, said the Poet. This may be the
Sailors emblem, Eccl. 2.23 For all his days are sorrows, and his travel grief,
yea his heart takes not rest in the night.
sacking of Cities, preying upon men's goods, fireing of houses, imprisonments,
captivities, and cruel deaths falling upon mankind in one place or other of
the world? It is at Sea, as it is with a man that is of necessity (having no
other way) to travel over some great, wide and thorny wilderness, in which is
all manner of ravening beasts, in one corner Bear, in another Wolf, in one
Lion, in another Tiger, in one Wild Oxen, in another Wild Boar, in one
Elephant, in another Alligator, in one Serpent, in another Scorpion, in one
angry Leopard, and in another the murdering Crocodile. Would you think now
that a man should ever get safe over such a place? Consider all things, and I
know that the Sea is little inferior to it for danger.

5. Ship-leak springing. The Mariner meets oftentimes with this most dreadful
and inevitable accident, which is of more trouble to him than any one thing in
the world besides. I, a leak in a ship has more terror in it than an house
that is on fire, because the inhabitants may at their pleasure run out of it,
even when they please, but it is not so at Sea, in a ship, for let the ship be
on fire, or half filled with the waves of the Sea, there is no back door for
them to run out at, That Log which Jupiter hurled out of heaven upon the heads
of those Rana co axantes in cavernulis, which molested him with their croaking
Petitions for a King, was not more terrible unto them than a leak is unto the
Mariner in a storm. It is reported of a ship that she made this doleful
complaint when going to sink, Ego mergor, quippe nautae mei aquam non
extulerunt, They let me sink for want of pumping.
which if there had, then many a thousand sail would have been left to run this
way, and that way, ere this day, at the pleasure of the winds and the Seas,
because men in such straights will give any thing for their lives. A Leak in a
ship is like to a sting in a Tortoyse, of whom it is said, that if she be
stung with a Viper, she dies upon it, if she get not to that medicinable herb,
Margerum, or Pennyroyal. This is an hour of sorrow amongst the Seamen, for
they are all at work now in the throwing overboard, both Wines, Fruits, Silks,
and Spices, even any thing, that their Vessel may be lightened, they also take
the course that some fishes do, Lympham ore immissam per branchi as emittere,
let in water at their mouths, but pump it out at their gills.

6. Shiprest lesness. Inter alia dura, The Sea is like Plutarchs Moon never in
one shape long, who desired the Tailor to make her a Petricoat, but before the
Tailor got it made and brought it home, the Moon was hopt into another quarter.
and tristia, amongst the many other sad and gravaminous troubles, this of the
Mariners inquiescentialness is none of the inferior ones. If the winds begin
once to hollow, and to fiddle upon the Sea, if there were ten thousand sail of
ships, they should all of them quickly dance after the music of it. Profane
History speaks of the powerfulness of Orpheus's music, that it was so
melodious, and ear-charming, that the beasts of the field could not stand upon
their legs at the audience of it, but were most admirably acted, and
transported beyond the nature of brute creatures, to dance after that high
strained music which they heard. And truly I may tell you, that when ever the
Southern, Northern, Eastern, or Western Bagpipes of the world begin to play,
there is never a ship in the Seas (excepting those that be in their harbors)
but dance their Galliards, and cut their Capers after it. Now begins every
Seaman to stand fast, to take hold with his hands, If that the Wind-timbrel of
the East, the Vial of the North, the Tabret of the South, and the Harp or Pipe
of the West, begin but once to music it, all the ships that be in the Sea^
have no power to stand still, but after it they will dance and cut far higher
Capers than ever the conjured body did, of whom history tells us, that he
danced chamber height with the brass pot upon his head.
or lie flat down upon his belly in the storm, or otherwise the ships rolling,
and bouncing, will endanger the beating out of his brains. And now begins the
Cooks Kettle for to dance in the Cook-room, and to terrify all that come near
it for their victuals. I have often thought, that if the stone bigd houses of
the world, and also that if the famous Towns and Cities thereof of reeled, but
as ships do in the Sea, the inhabitants thereof would not be in such deep love
with them as they are, and so little in love with heaven. No, they would not
take that delight they do in their great inheritances and possessions that they
have upon earth, if that their earthly mansions staggered but as our wooden
transporting, and sailing habitations do upon the Seas. But he that puts his
foot into the stirrup of a States, or Merchants Woodden-horse, must look for
more jumping leaps, and frisking capers before he gets out of the saddle
again, than the wildest unbackt, or untaught beast in the world can give him.

The Seas vaunting, and out-braving trepidations, together with their ascending
tumors, and raging murmurs, have not very seldom exasperated my spirit into
this like irascible, It is reported that a company of Seamen did upon a time
very strictly summon in the Seas to give them an account why they were so
restless, and wherefore they svvallovved up so many ships every year as they
did, and the Seas being at the bar gave them this answer, That it was not in
their power to be quiet, because the winds above did beat them up into
undulating billovvs, if they would not disturb us, your passage would be both
smooth and quiet enough, but we are thrown into heaps, that you may fear that
God that is above, because your are men that live without the fear of God, and
therefore are quiekly up in arms to s^^k you.
and objurgatory speech unto them, because they have been so unquiet, and
restless under us. Quousque, quousque tandem abutere, Neptuni unda patientia
nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor iste tuus cludet? quem ad finem sese effraenata
jactabit audacia? nihil ne te, quotidianum naut arum praesidium? nihil eorum
pericli? nihil eorum timor? nihil eorum maestitia? nihil consensus honorum
omnium? nihil opulentarum navium? nihil horum ora? v^ltusque moverunt? Quamdiu
inhorrestes subito mare: tenebrae multoties conduplicantur: noctisque and
nimborum occaecat nignon: flamma inter nubes coruscat: Coelum t^nitru
contremit, grandomixta imbri^largistuo repante praecipitans cadit: undique
omnes venti erumpunt: saevi existunt turbines: fervet aestu pelagus, and
perpetua mortis imago ante omnium oculos o^versatur.

7. Trouble of conscience. Many a Sailor that never knew before what the
compunction of conscience meant, comes to have a shreud guessing at it, when
the ship is like to be lost in the storm, then flies in his face all his
whoring, swearing, lying, wronging of men, all his drunkenness, and his
graceless, unprofitable living and walking before God in the world, and this
storm within is ten thousand times more dreadful, than the storm without. From
the foregoing words I would lay down this point of truth.

That the generality of Seamen are far more fearful of being drowned in storms
than they are of sin, or of the second, and eternal death. Their soul is melted
because of trouble. Their sorrows, and tears are spent upon the likelinesse of
their losing of their lives, and not for their sins, and the great hazzards
that their souls are in at such times.

1. If our Seamen were but as much afraid of sin as they are of dangerous
sands, I am confident that the good people in England would think that there
were more Saints at Sea than there are on Land. When I consider how I have seen
the Mariner for to quake, and tremble, yea their faces to gather paleness,
their spirit even ready to run over their lips out of their bodies, and their
joints to be loosed, and their very knees to knock upon one another as they
did in Belshazzar, I have wished that the committing of sin startled them but
as much, and then there were hopes that they would be out of conceit with it.

2. If our Seamen were but as much afraid of sin, as they are of those known,
and unknown in Sea-lying rocks that be up and down in the great Ocean, we
should have them a very precious people, nay an unparalleld, and matchless
squadron of souls.

3. If our Mariners stood but in the half of that trembling fear which they do
in stormy, foggy, and Euroclydon days that come upon them in the Seas, in
which they are so much be darkened, that they have neither the light of the Sun,
Moon, nor Stars, I am confident they would be as much afraid of lying,
swearing, and whoring, as ever the burnt child is of the fire, or the
Crocodile is of the Safron, or the Tiger of the Trumpet.

4. If our Sailors trembled but as much at their committing of sin, as they
both do, and will, when a leak springs, and breaks in upon them in their ships,
I would wish my self to be amongst them, for there would be no fear of
sinking, of winds or seas ever to have any power over them, for to drown them.

5. If our Sailors were but as much afraid of oathing of it, and of liveing
that vain, vile, If our Sailors were but as fearful of letting God-dishonouring
oaths fly out of their mouths, and of doing, and commiting that filthiness,
which they do, even as the three famous children were of sining against their
God, in bowing unto the Kings great Idol, Dan. 3.13. Who was resolved rather to
burn than do it; I would put the meanest of them into my bosom, and cry them up
as fast for Saints, as I do decry them down for notorious sinners*
and soul-damning life that they lead, as they are of the roaring broad-sides
that their enemies pour into them, then you should not hear one oath, nor lie
in the mouths of them.

6. It that our Sailors feared but God as much, and stood but in the like fear
of committing sin, swearing, drinking, and profaning of the holy name of God,
as they do of sparks of fire, when lyeable to fall amongst their barrels of
powder, I dare then be bold to say, that there would not be that braze-face
of voicing oaths that there is amongst them, both in the States, and Merchants
service.

7. If our Sailors trembled but as much for sin, and at the allowing of sin in
their souls, Ah that I should say of the generality of Sailors, what Salvian
said once of many in those ill times that he lived in, that they objected and
said, that Religion was but the stain, the blur and blemish of honor, whereas
nothing in the world ignobles men more than the want of godliness.
as I have seen them tremble at an Anchor, when the wind has come suddenly upon
them, and endangered them of being cast away, those men would be far fitter for
Heaven than for the world.

8. If our Sailors were but as much afraid of offending God, and damning of
their poor immortal souls, as they are in stormy weather of meeting one
another, when under sail, stem for stem, I dare conclude it, that no people in
the world would have that fear upon them, either of sining against their God,
or losing of their souls.

9. If our Sailors stood but in the quarter of that fear of hell, and of
eternal death, that they do of perishing in the Seas, when that the Rudder of
their ship is broken off, I dare be bold to say it, you should not at the day
of Judgment see one of them to go to hell with the Devil and the damned.

10. If our Sailors were but as much afraid of losing the favor of God, as
they are of losing life, when the Cable breaks in a storm, I dare speak it,
that they would be a people as high in the favor of God, as any under the
Heavens, be what they will.

I find four very ill things in the Seas amongst the Sailors.

1. A very slight apprehension of sin, I once very sharply reproved a wicked
wretch for his audacious, and open swearing, when we were run most dangerously
under much sail upon a Sand, and that which troubled me most, was his most
lamentable want of the fear of God, as appears in the answer he returned me, Is
it any more, or any worse to swear now (quoth he) than it is at another time?
What delight is there to be taken amongst these filthy spirits?
and that it is too hard, and too difficult a task for any man, let him preach
his heart out amongst them, to make them believe that sin is so criminal, and
so damning as it is. And this I conceive arises from that commonness of
profaneness that is amongst them.

2. A strong connaturalness in them unto the sinfullest courses that possibly
they can follow. Tell them of their wickedness, and they are apt to say as a
graceless Seaman once said, when reproved for his lewd life, What? would you
have Seamen Saints? I never knew any Saints of our profession in all my life,
and for my part you shall not persuade me to be one yet.

3. That they are very fully, and strongly bent with an inward resolution to
cleave to sin; even as it is said of Ahab, that he was sold to do wickedness,
I may say the same of them; I may write Solomon's words upon the Sailors, Eccl.
8.11. The heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. I profess
unto you Seamen, Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I never feared any thing in the Sea
but sin; I was never so much afraid of Storms, Rocks, Sands, or engaging with
an enemy, as I have been of that filthiness that is amongst you.
Eccl. 9.3. Madness is in their heart while they live, and after they go to the
dead.

4. That they are apt to reject, and disesteem of all Scriptural counsel, and
exhortation, as if preaching, and speaking in sound words, were but wind, and
so consequently, that all such wind will shake no corn.

Verse. 27. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at
their wits end.
TO speak shortly, and yet pregnantly to the interest of this Scripture,
Sea-reeling, and Sea-staggering then, is very well known to those that go down
into the deeps, but those that have their abode on Land, I do confess are
altogether ignorant in it, and therefore upon that account I will be a little
the larger in this my rerum gestarum narratio. The waves seem, as if it were a
matter of sport, and pastime to them, to throw the greatest of ships from
billow, to billow, Ut levi Zephyro graciles vibrantur aristae.

As full ears of Corn do fall, and rise, and rise and fall by the strength of
winds, even so do the greatest, and the very strongest of ships that go in the
Seas.


and that with such violency, that one would think that it were impossible for
either Wood or Iron for to hold in those tempestuous seasons. One while they
are thrown upon one side, by and by they are thrown upon the other. Sometimes
they are tossed up with the waves, as if the Seas intended to show spectators
their very keels, and bottoms. Sometimes their masts lie in the Sea, as the
glorious morning Titan of the world dips in his golden locks into the Sea at
his rising. But to follow the Metaphor a little, it is borrowed from a filthy
Drunkard, that has poured in more strong liquor than the Vessel would carry, by
which means it has sometimes been overset. We know, when a man has over-drunk
himself, and that his heels are tript up with it, that all runs round with him
in the house he lives in. It seems David could not find a better emblem in the
world, to set out a ships reeling, and staggering by, than by one that is in a
drunken and reeling posture, because he flies first of all this way, and by
and by he goes with as great violency that way again.

That Seamen reel not always, by, and through the swelling, raging, and rest
less waves of the salt-waters, but frequently and too often, both on board, and
on shore, by, and with strong drink, and heady liquors. I will say for the
confirmation of this point, Job 24.25, And if it be not so now, who will make
me a liar, and make my speech nothing worth? Englands foulest stain, or one of
its tauntingest reproaches at this day in the world is, for the sin of
dunkenness. How common a sin is this even in the very skirts of our Land? is
not every Sea-port-Town England throughout, a mere nest of Drunkards, and a
seat of piping tiplers? whereas these Towns should be full of righteousness,
and sobriety, because they are the very skirts of our Land; and if filthiness
and iniquity be found abounding in them, strangers that come from beyond Seas,
will be apt to conclude, that the whole Land is as ill, let them adventure to
travel never so far into it.

But again, were our Sea-mens carriages good in foreign parts, they would not
disparrage our Land so much as they do, by their swearing, and drunkenness.
Certainly if you carried your selves soberly and religiously, they would say of
you, as Gregory the first once did, when he beheld some English boys to be
sold in the open Market at Rome, and asking them of what Country they were of
(beholding of them to be fair skinned, beautifully faced, and flaxen-haired)
the answer returned him, was, that they were of an Isle called England, and
they were Angli; well quoth the Pope they may well be called Angli
(Englishmen) quasi Angeli, for they have very Angelical faces of their own. Oh
Seamen, labor to be like Angels in grace, and purity, Ah that I should be
forced to say that of Seamen, which Parafius an exquisit Painter said once of
Helen, when he was to take the counterfeit of her person, he drew her with her
head attire loose, and being demanded the reason thereof, he said, She was
loose. Ah Seamen, you are loose creature^. I would have all Commanders in the
Seas, to be very careful in their discouraging, and beating down of
drunkenness in and amongst their men, upon these considerations, and if they
ponderate not, I know not what will.
when you are in the foreign parts of the world, that they may say you are
rather Angels in practice than men. But that I may take you off from this sin
of drunkenness, which is a blemish to our Land, to our Governors in it, and to
the Commanders that you serve under in their respective ships.

1. Consider, that by thy taking in too much strong drink at any time, that
thou do thereby very sinfully deface the Image of God in thee. And is not
that a grievous, and an heinous sin for thee to do? Genesis 1.26. And God said,
Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness. Now what kind of creatures do
men make themselves, when they drown themselves in drink? what boiled, and
distorted eyes have they? What redness have they in their faces? and how
misshapen are they, and carried out of that image God made them in?

2. Consider, that by thy immoderate drinking, thou art about the selling of
the excellentest part that is in all the whole nature of man, even for a
contemptible and despicable pleasure, and that is the use of reason, Prove.
23.34. Yea, thou shall be as he that lies down in the midst of the Sea, or
as he that lies upon the top of a mast.

3. Consider, that all immoderate drinking does render men unfit, and
incapable, either of serving their God, or men.

4. He that has no moderation in his drinking, is at the very next door of all
profaneness, that man will not stick to do murder, and commit adultery. When
men tarry long at strong drink they get this evil by it, In one hours
drunkenness Lot uncovered those thighs, which had been covered six hundred
years by sobriety. Hierome. Quem non vicerat Sodom, vicerunt vina. Whom Sodom
could not overcome, wine did.
Prove. 23.33. Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall
utter strange things. Nunquam vidi ebrium castum. I never saw a drunken man a
chaste man, said Jerome.

5. By immoderate drinking, a man exposes himself to many mischiefs, which are
very incident to light either upon the body, name, Vbi fuisti, where have thou
been? Apud inferos, said Erasmus very wittily, when he compared tipling-houses
unto Hell.
or outward condition, Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has
contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has redness
of eyes? They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. Many
Sailors drink God out of their hearts, wit out of their brains, money out of
their purses, health out of their bodies, themselves out of their ships,
strength out of their joints, wives and children out of doors, and themselves
also out of the Land; and hereby are miserably constrained to go to Sea for a
subsistency all their lives long. These lads drink the Land out of quiet, and
threaten both Sea and Land with misery. If they have but a groat, it burns the
purse bottom out till it be melted into liquor. Had these lads gold, they
would change it, or plate, they would pawn it, or if great Lordships, all
should go in a merry quaft and humor amongst their fellow Compotators.

That the great and wide Sea is of such a restless nature, that every thing
that He that would go to Sea had need to be of that candid, or rather hardy
temper, that they are of that exercise themselves in Olympic plays, who
patiently suffer their hands to be bruised, their feet to be disjoynted,
their mouths to be filled with dust, and gravel, and now and then very sad, and
smarting blows.
They reel to and fro, etc. Isa. 57.20. The wicked are like the troubled Sea,
when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. The Seas do superba
gerere front caperata supercilia. The Sea tosses every thing that comes into
it, not because it is wronged, but because it is unquiet. One main reason why
the Sea is so restless, seems to be this.

1. Because People do not pray for the Seas. The Inundations of Nilus make
Egypt fruitful, and I dare say, that if you were but importunate with God, at
the throne of grace in poor Sea-mens behalfs, that you would soon make their
voyages the more prosperous, and successful.
No wonder though the Seas be so rageing, and the winds above so roaring
rampant, when there is no prayer on foot that they might be bridled. There be
two sorts of people that take not up this duty of prayer for the Sea.

1. Many that live on Land. 2. Many that go to Sea.
For the first of these, you shall find not wanting in their prayers that their
crops of corn may grow, and that their fields of grass may be full of plenty,
and it may be also that they pray for the quietness, and peaceable
establishment of the Land, but not one word for the Sea, How fitly may it be
said of the Sea, which Solinus said of the river Hipanis, they that know it at
first, commend it, but they that have experience of it at last, do not without
cause condemn it. Qui in principits eum norunt, praedicant: qui in fine experti
sunt, non injuria execrantur.
in the remembrance of them that go through a thousand dangers. I am confident
that you might by your prayers make the Sea-mans passage the more facile, and
less dangerous to him, Ah souls! how do you know, but that many Seamen might
be much helped, and prospered, if you prayed but for them? Jam. 5.16. The
effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much. To put you upon the
duty,

1. Consider, that the Seas are often tempestuous and stormy.

2. Consider, that many ships are frequently cast away in storms.

3. Consider, what a many Rocks, and Sands, rich and wealthy ships have to pass
by, before they can come into our Land, and this might be an argument to
induce you to pray for them.

4. Consider, the many dangers, and hazzards of Pirates, besides a thousand
other several casualties that they have to run through.

5. Consider, the many desperate engagements that they do meet withal now and
then.

That sin has without all doubt put an hurtful quality both into the Element
of water and wind. Is it not more than probable think you, that man's sin and
transgression, which did so much incense the Lord to provocation against him,
that he cursed the ground for his sake, Genesis 3.17, 18. which unto this day is
full of briars, and brambles, that the same curse, though in a different manner
has seized upon the Sea, and also upon the winds, insomuch that there is little
safety in venturing amongst them, because they are up in such rebellion, and
hostility against mankind, as if they would tell them at some times that their
intentions are to tear their Vessels into pieces?

1. It appears that there is an hurtful quality in the East Wind, Of all the
winds that be in the world, Pliny never liked the East Wind, but evermore
called it, Navigantium pestis, the Mariners plague. Psalm. 107.43. Who so is
wise will observe these things.
because it breeds sharp fevers in choleric bodies, and also rageing madness,
and perilous apostumations. Acts 27.14. The stormy wind that ship-wracked the
Vessel that Paul was in, was called Euroclydon, because it came out of the
Oriental part of the world, Quando una Eurusque; Notusque ruant creberque;
procellis Africus, and vastos volvant ad littora fluctus.

2. Has not sin put an hurtful quality into the South Wind? How came it to be
so unhealthful as it is? It is observed of this wind, that when it continues
long in one quarter, that it breeds corrupt humors, and in hot bodies cramps,
giddiness in the head, the falling sickness, pestilence, and cruel fevers,
besides the many ships that are often cast away in it.

3. Has not sin put an hurtful quality into the West-wind also? How came it to
be thus otherwise? It is observed of it, that it breeds phlegm in moist bodies,
procures sleep, causes apoplexies, and is worst of all in Winter, besides
ships are oftentimes cast away in it.

4. Has not sin put an hurtful quality into the North wind also? If not, One
calls the North wind, the Mundi magnus follis, the great bellows of the world,
which blows cold into every part of it.
I would demand how it came to be so unhealthful as it is; it is observed of
it, that it breeds Coughs, Gouts, Sorethroats, and in cold bodies Plurisies,
besides the many ships that are oftentimes lost in it.

That Sea-imployments are not only fall of troubles, but all other callings
and employments,

They reel to and fro, etc. Ask but the Mariner at Sea, and he will not deny
the truth of this Proposition. Me thinks all perilous Sea-storms should commend
heaven to you, a tempest commends the haven, and the preserved a strong hold.
Mare turbatur and amatur. You love to be upon the Seas trading to and fro,
though God makes it a bundle of thorns to you, what would you do then if it
were a nose-gay of flowers?
Ask but the Magistrates of our land, and they will all say that this is a very
undeniable truth. Ask the reverend, painful and godly Ministry of this land,
and they will all say, uno ore, that this is a truth. Ask but the rational
Commonalty of our land, and they will cry up the Proposition for a truth.

To that end we may be kept from not too much delight in them, for fear of
surfeiting upon them. This was the Churches experience, Psalm. 102.10. Thou have
lifted me up, and cast me down.

Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. That he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to
do thee good at thy latter end. God had a great care of his Israel to do them
good.

But to be short, I will now speak a little unto the interest of the latter
clause [And are at their wits end.

To be curt in the anatomizing of these few words, they seemingly bear a
twofold sense.

1. Either when Seamen are in such storms as that they are put by all sail,
and all skill and art, I may say of the Sailor at this time as it was said of
Achilles, who hearing of the sad loss of his dear friend Patroclus, cubans in
faciem mox deinde supinus. One while he turned on his back, and another while
upon his belly for very grief and trouble. How often have I seen the
skilfullest of men in a ship for to beat their breasts with their hands, and to
stamp with their feet at the consideration of the present dangers they have
been in?
which before they did, and could make use of, and so can do no more, then may
they properly be said to be at their wits end.

Or 2. When that they are in, and under such an intricate condition as they
know not what to do, or what course to take for the best, when all the skill,
wit, and art that they put forth cannot help them, then may they be said to
be at their wits end.

That the Seaman is very frequently, Now cries the Mariner, whom you could
never see to cry before, Psalm. 142.7. Bring my soul out of prison, that I may
praise thy name. The Sea-mans condition may well be resembled unto a prison,
which notes confinement and enclosure, insomuch that there is as little
possibility of evasion, I may say of Sailors in this case, as Job said of
himself in another, Job 30.31. My Harp is turned to mourning, and my Organ into
the voice of them that weep.
and escape as there is for them that are in Jayls, Irons, and Fetters. Oh the
many heart-akes, and affrightments that my soul has had in the unmerciful
Seas, and not only I, but those that have skill and knowledge in the Seas,
when we have been thrown, and run upon sands, our condition has been no
better than that which the Apostle was brought into, Act. 27.20. And when
neither Sun, nor Stars in many days appeared, and no small tempest lay on us,
all hope that we should be saved was then taken away: Yet in these straights
the Lord never left me (nor them that were with me) comfortless, but has at
one time or other, when that I have thought that the ship would fly in pieces
at every billow that has come upon her when fast upon the sands, supported
me, bidding me stand still and see the salvation of the Lord; though no
possibility of escaping was in view, and sight, yet has the Lord seemed to
say, Fear not, for you shall ere long be delivered; and after some little
expense of time, we have wonderfully got off again. When Ziglag was burnt with
fire, and the people spoke of stoning David, yet found he much comfort from
the Lord in that gravaminous distress, 1 Samuel 30.6. But David encouraged
himself in the Lord his God.

That the terrible and heart-daunting Every unreasonable creature when put to
it, will make use of their horns, others of their teeth, some of their claws,
and other some of their feet, the Soldier to their Guns, Pikes and Swords.
do put them upon the setting of their wits at work to think and contrive all
the ways and means that ever they can imagine to get themselves out of them.
And are at their wits end. Act. 27.17. They used helps undergirding the ship,
and fearing left they should fall into the quick sands, struck sail, and were
so driven. Verse. 18. And being exceedingly tossed with the tempest, the next
day they lightened the ship. Oh the pale faces that be at these times amongst
the Mariners! Oh the many trembling joints amongst our stoutest men! Oh the
witless heads, and the helpless hands that be amongst them at these times!
Act. 27.29. Then fearing lest we should have fallen upon Rocks, they cast four
anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day.

That the Seaman is oftener out of his This is the Sailors miserable Motto,
Nec sine te, nec tecism vivere possum, I cannot live without I go to Sea, and
when I am there, I cannot abide it.
The Seaman has but a little wit, but he is oftentimes out of it, and
besides it, and that six several ways, 1. In a storm. 2. In a fit of anger. 3.
In a fit of drunkenness. 4. In the sin of uncleanness, Prove. 6.32. 5. In his
graceless swearing. 6. In the act of murder.


Me thinks I hear the Country man saying is it thus, That there are such
hazzards in the Seas, and that the Mariners are put to these heart-affrighting,
and soul-consternating dangers, I would not be solicited to go to Sea if they
would give me the choysest and cost-liest ship that is in the world, for I
should conclude that if those men that use the Seas be so often at their wits
end, I should be oftener at the end of mine. Are they in such dangers that many
times the Masts break by the board upon their heads? Are they in such jeopardy
that their sails tear in pieces like to white paper by the winds? Do the Seas
come leaping over their Poop-lanthorns, and sometimes over their yard arms? Are
they ever and anon running upon sands? And by, and by upon rocks? What would
become of me were I in the sight of such storms? I confess, there is a vast
disproportion betwixt the Sea-mans, and the Land-mans life, because the one is
tossed, and tumbled in a turbulent Sea, and the other is both night and day in
quiet at land.

1. The Sea is full of dangers, whereas the Land is full of peace, and safety
from those perils that be at Sea.

2. The Sea is restless, and unquietly raging, but the land is stable, and
firm, and quiet, because it stands upon that uncontrollable Decree of the Lords.

3. There is small comfort, and contentment to be had, or expected in the Sea,
The Sea is a great Element, in which both fish and fowl take great delight to
live, but there is none of the sons of men, but take far more pleasure in being
at land. Englands Navy is not unlike to David's Army, 1 Samuel 22.2. Every one
that was in distress, every one that was in debt, and every one that was
discontented, gathered themselves unto him. It is poverty makes many go to Sea.
but the land affords both a multiplicity, and variety of it.

4. When men are at Sea, they are neither amongst the living, nor amongst the
dead, but the land affords sweet converse, and good society.

Verse. 28. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble; and he brings them
out of their distresses.
Who will not say but that it is high time for men to betake themselves to
prayer when they are involved in such straights, as that they are at their very
wits end? This Scripture I conceive, is partim queribundus, partim precativus,
and partim consolatorius.

1. It is expostulatory, and full of complaints. 2. Supplicatory, and full of
requests. 3. Consolatory, and full of hopes.
1. You have the Seamen in this Scripture expostulating their case with God,
and making their dolorous distresses known unto him.

2. You have the Seaman praying unto God to deliver him, and all with him out
of the storm, and dreadful hazzards that they are in; Then they cry, etc.

3. Here is the Seaman partly comforting of himself with hope that the Lord
(in his good time) will deliver him, and those that are with him, out of their
dangers. And this hope springs from the strong confidence that he has in God,
who is the great Commander of the waves and winds. The reason now is easily
rendered why the Seaman prays.

1. Because all humane helps are vain, but the Lords divine assistance is never
in vain. Man's importunity is Gods opportunity. Man's worst time is the Lords
best and prime season. Man's help comes oftentimes too late^, but the Lords
never. It is never too late for him to help, were the ship half full with
dreadful waves, or were she foundred in the Sea.

The words Logically handled afford these particulars.

Supplicantes.
1. Persons praying, and those are Seamen.

Supplicatus.
2. The person unto whom they pray, and that is the Lord.

Supplicaciones.
3. Their prayers and requests are for preservation.

Modus.
4. The manner how they desire to be saved, and that is not by any weak,
feeble, frail, evil, or indirect means, but by the Almighty power of the Lord.
I have met with a pretty passage of one that trusted much to the strength of
his arms, and when lying something long upon them, they grew very numb, and
senseless, insomuch that he could not perform those exercises which he could
before, well, says he, whilst I used it to other services it never failed me,
now that I have rested upon it, I find it to complain. Surely it is no
trusting to an arm of flesh, let the occasion be what it will.


The words Theologically handled, and resolved, take them then thus:

1. How can deep distress be better expressed than by pathetical, and
energetical prayer, and such as is here offered up? Then they cry.

2. Who are, or have greater need to pray than Seamen?

3. Who is more worthy to be invocated, and called on than the Lord Almighty?

4. What can a man desire for himself (be it spoken with respect to his
outward man) that is better than salvation, or preservation? and this is the
substance of the Sea-mans prayer.

5. By what means can any be better preserved from distress and danger, than
by the Almighty power, and outstretched Arm of God, which is the Sea-mans only
Asylum?

That without a divine Providence there Many profane Sailors are too much
Cyrus-like, of whom it was said that he would have it Epitaphed over him,
(...). I could do all things.
in the highest pitch of humane wisdom, as to carry any safely out of deep,
and deadly dangers: Or if you will, the point may lie thus:

That the making use of all the means that ever can be studied, procured, and
invented, without God, and the very placing of a man's confidence in them, are
not of ability to answer the creatures expectation. Then they cry, etc. Paul
and the Mariners together, bare up very bravely against that dreadful wind, and
weather that lay upon them whilst either art, skill, or industry could befriend
them, but finding both to fail, and that they could not any longer bear up into
the wind, ((...)) or look it in the face, they then let her drive, Acts 27.15.
The Mariners that Jonah sailed amongst, wrought like men in the storm, Chap. 1.
verse. 13. Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring it to the Land, but they
could not, for the Sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them. Every man had
his hand upon his Oar, but all was in vain, and to no purpose. Many a man's too
much doteing upon his own skill, and parts in time of storms without a
dependency upon God for help, has smarted most shroudly for it. Those men that
stand upon the broken legs of their own wisdom, parts, projects, and
contrivances, do many times get sad falls. Many have confided to ride upon the
steeds back of their own fore-castings, whereas alas, that unperforming Palfray
has deceived them, and left them in the lurch. Many think themselves to be
never better mounted than when they have their feet in the stirrup of that
saddle, that sits upon the back of that ill conditioned beast, called carnal
policy.

The French Proverb is, When the danger is over, the Saint is forgotten. Homo
Deo servire debet, non ad procellam, annum vel ad tempus, sed in aeternum. It
is not a little fit of Prayer in a storm will serve the turn, but thou must be
holy all thy life long.
That the Sea-mans devoutness, and religiousness is never to be seen but in a
storm. Then they cry etc. If it were not that they were in danger, you should
neither see them go to prayer, nor hear them at any such sacred duty. Jonah
1.5. Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man to his God, and cast
forth the wares that were in the ship into the Sea to lighten it of them. As
you shall never see a white Weezel but against a storm of Frost, and Snow, so
shall you never see any thing that is good in the generality of Sailors, but
when they are most dreadfully souzed in storms, and hardly then neither.

That tempestuous storms, and deadly If any one would know at what time the
Sailors take up the duty of Prayer, let me give them in this short hint, it is
when death stares them in the face. If ever you see the Heavens veiled in sable
blackness, When the Sea rages and sto^ms increase, think with thy self that God
is angry, and who withal? even with thee, for some threat or other is come out
against thee. Lions when they enter into their choler, will beat the ground
with their tails. God is angry when he beats up the waters into hills, and
mountains. When Alexanders Macedonians had offended their Emperor, they laid
down their arms, and put on mourning apparel, and came running in great
troops, both of wives and children, sheding of many tears about his Tent,
acknowledging themselves sorrowful for what they did. I would our Sailors were
of this temper to their God.
the clouds flying, and the winds roaring under them; you may conclude that
some of them (though God knows but few) are at prayer, yea hard at it with
their God. But never believe it, that there is any prayer amongst them when the
skies are clear, the winds down, and the Seas smooth. David tells you not of
their praying in good, and comfortable weather, but that it is in time of
storms, for I believe that neither he, nor I ever see many of them of that
strain. I have observed that in summer Thunders, when the loud ratlings of it
has run, and ecchoed all the Country over, that it has struck a very great
fear, and forced many unto prayer, Exodus 8.9, 28. Entreat the Lord (for it is
enough) that there be no more mighty thundrings and hail, and I will let you
go, and ye shall stay no longer. This was that that dreaded all Egypt, and as
soon as the blast were over, Pharaoh was at his disobedience again.

That God hears oftener from an afflicted people, Curae leves mutescunt,
ingentes loquientur. Small dangers are dumb, but great ones make men for to
speak. Periculos^or tranquilitas Nautae, quam Tempestas. Sailors are like to
Bees, soon killed with honey, but quickened with vinegar; spoiled with calms, but
bettered by storms.
than he either does, or can from a people that are at ease, quiet, and out of
danger. Then they cry. The prodigal Son was very high, and resolved never to
return till brought low by pinching, and nipping afflictions, then his Father
had some tidings of him. Hagar was proud in Abraham's house, but humbled in the
wilderness. Jonah was asleep in the ship but awake, and at prayer in the Whales
belly. Jonah 2.1. Manasses lived in Jerusalem like a Libertin, but when bound
in chains at Babel, his heart was turned to the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12.
Corporal diseases forced many under the Gospel to come to Christ, whereas
others that enjoyed bodily health would not acknowledge him. One would think
that the Lord would abhor to hear those prayers that are made only out of the
fear of danger, and not out of the love, reality, and sincerity of the heart.
If there had not been so many miseries of blindness, lameness, Palsies,
Fevers, etc. in the days of Christ, there would not have been that flocking
after him. Too much fertility hurts the Corn; Storms invite men to go to God,
as the sight of Bugbears do children into the bosoms of their parents. In calms
Seamen either pray not at all, or if they pray, rarae fumant faelicibus arae,
faintly, yawningly. Oration sine malis, est ut avis sine alis.
overmuch fruit breaks the limbs, boughs, and branches of the Tree; the body is
the worse for too long health, and the Seaman baddest of all in the enjoyment
of many calmes. Sailors are not unlike to the dumb son of Craesus, who was
never heard to speak a word, but then to call out clearly when he saw the
knife a going to his Fathers throat, (...). May not the Sailor say in stormy
weather as the Heart of Apollo said, when seething in an hot boiling kettle,
(...). I have been the cause of this.

That none have any assurance of the continuance of their lives, and comforts
in It seems that both ship, and men, and all are now at the stake, and ready to
be sacrificed. There be very many strange mutations, and unexpected eversions
befalling of the Mariner now, and then. That counsel that Xaverius presented
unto John the third King of Portugal, the very same would I give our Sailors.
He bid the King meditate every day a quarter of an hour upon that text, Matthew.
16.26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and loose
his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? It is reported
of a ship, that she spoke on this wise when in a dreadful storm, after all
that ever the Mariners could do to save her, The Sea is Proteus-like, assuming
all forms, and shapes, now calm, now stormy.

Fiet enim Subito sus horridus atraque Tigris Squamosusque Draco, aut fulva
Cervice Lcaena.

Virg. Georg. l. 4. Sometimes like bristled boar it fomes, Like scaely Dragon
now it roams.


by lightning of her, and throwing not only of the worst but of the best
commodities into the Sea. Fie! Fie thou angry Sea, wilt not thou be hired?
will neither gold nor silver do any thing? must I perish? Alas I am fraughted
with rich Wines, Silks, and Sugars, ask what thou will for my ransom and thou
shall have it; reverse, reverse, I pray thee thou great Sea, thy cruel
intentions, and if thou will take the greatest sum that ever was given for a
ship, thou shall have it for thy sparing of me, and the lives of them that
live within me. But all this fair speech that the ship made unto the Sea, was
not prevalent, but shortly after she sunk into the bottom. I bring but in this
passage now, to show you that we have but a slippery hold of any thing that is
temporal.

That there is such terror and astonishment etc. Jonah 1.5. Appius Claudius
was the most out of love with the Greek letter (...) that ever I heard of,
because when it is pronounced it represents the gnashing teeth of a dying soul.
Sigismund was much out of love with death also, for when he was upon the dye,
he gave command to all his servants about, not so much as to name death in his
hearing. Life is sweet, and nature would preserve it self.
Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his God. One cried out
when death knocked at his door to take him away out of the world. Oh spare me
yet a little longer, Inducias vel ad horam, let me but have reprival for a
day, truce but for an hour, respit for a minute, but all would not do. What is
it I wonder, that men will not do in time of storms, to save their lives? I
have read of one, who was a Syracusian by Country, that did in a storm when all
ponderous things were hurled overbord, cried out to the Mariners, come let us
clap on the tagles and out with my wife! and his reason was, (Quia maximum
pondus erat.) that she was the greatest burden in the ship.

Because there is so much flesh both in God in storms, and also not be so much
dejected at them as now they are.

ut hunc lignorum fascem super humeros imponeres. That he would help him up
with his burden of sticks. The man had no more stomach to dye, Those that are
in Christ, if they perish in storms, or be killed in Sea-engagements, death is
but the daybreak of eternal brightness unto them. Storms are but sturdy
Porters, which set open the doors of Eternity, a rough passage to eternal
happiness. Why should they fear to pass the waters of Jordan, and take
possession of the promised Land, that have the Arc of Gods Covenant in their
eye?
than the Mariner has in a storm to drowned.

I would now observe two things.

1. That death is comfortable to one sort of people.

2. It is dreadful and terrible unto another.

1. It is comfortable to the godly, that have walked before God in the Land of
the living, with a true, sincere and upright heart, in all holy, and true
obedience, and conformity unto the will of God. Such a soul may boldly triumph
over, and in the face of death, 1 Cor. 15.55. O death where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy victory? Death is not terrible unto such, because it is no
more but the running, and rattling of Joseph's Chariot wheels upon the pavement
of this world, to waft ancient Jacob's soul in the golden streets that are
above this sublunary world, and that caelestial Orb into that heavenly
Jerusalem.

Every bullet that thou hears to come singing and flying over thine head, that
is shot out of the Gun-mouths of Christ's enemies, is but a Chariot that is sent
for thee to fetch thy soul to Heaven. Let the seas rise up and drowned thee they
are but Chariots to transport thee into future happiness.

If I should be slain or drowned at Sea, in the wars against the Spaniard,
Objection.
then would there be an end of all my comforts, and thereby I should leave
Houses, Lands, Wife, Children, and all the good things that I have raked
together in this life, behind me.

I would have all our Seamen, and all our Commanders to take off their eyes
from looking upon those things, and fix them upon the great and glorious
designs that Christ has on foot against the Antichristian powers that are, and
be in the world. Be willing Gentlemen, I and be you valiant, to do Jesus
Christ all the service that you can, you shall have better comforts for them,
regard not your stuff, and worldly trash, Genesis 45.20. For the good of all the
Land of Egypt is yours. When General Zelishlaus had lost his hand in the wars
of the King of Poland, the King sent him a golden hand for it, If thou lay out
a penny for Christ against his enemies, thou shall have a pound for it.
You shall have it well paid again in Heaven, over and over, double, and treble.

2. It is dreadful to the wicked, because that after death comes judgment. How
doleful, Sailors live, eat, drink, play, card, dice, swear, whore, sing, rant,
as if they had passed over the judgment day. They think not of that day that
will be cumbred with distress on every side them, accusing sins on one side,
revenging justice on the other; a gaping hell beneath them, an angry Judge
above them; a burning conscience within them, and a flaming world without them.
Good Lord, what will become of those wicked wretches at that day, when the
trumpet of the Lord shall sound, mountains melt, stars fall, fire falling,
sinners fainting, poor creatures cry for graves, hills, and mountains to hide
themselves in.
and heavy is this summons of death, this roaring storm is not for our ears,
but for our hearts; it calls us not only to our prayers but to our
preparation. Oh with what terror does the graceless Seaman stand in now? his
hand trembles whilst it is lift up to Heaven, his very lips quake, and quiver
whilst he is praying, Lord have mercy upon me, his countenance is pale,
sorrowful and wan; his fear is ready to execute him, before the hangman is the
condemned malefactor. I would to God, that our Seamen had but the like horror
upon them both in calms, and storms, which the guilty and damned souls of men
will have, when they stand before that dreadful Tribunal, in the day of the
great Assize, where there will be the presence of an infinite God to daunt
them, conscience to give in its evidence against them, Legions of unclean
spirits to seize upon them, and to torment them, they would then be more
afraid of death than they are.

That although those that go down into etc. Isa. 43.2. When thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee. Sailor, Sailor, Durante pugna, non
cessat tuba. Whilst the storm lasts, be thou at prayer, if thou hopest and
look that God should protect thee.
God will have every thing fetched out by Prayer. When God had promised Israel
great things, Ezekiel. 36.37. Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be
enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. If thou would be
saved in stormy, and tempestuous weather, let God hear from thee, he will
expect it, if thou expectest mercy at his hands. The word storm in the Greek
springs of two words (...), a (...), which signify much sacrificing, importing
that that should be a time of much praying.

Noah pitched his Arc within, and without. The Carman cried out to Hercules in
the Fable, when his Cart stuck in the dirt, but would not put forth a finger to
help it out.
God himself has ordained, yea commanded that it should be so, and he that
neglects the use of means in such cases, tempts but Gods Providence, which the
Lord Jesus himself dared not to do, Matthew. 4.7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God. Christ speaks this of himself, and not of Satan, for that unclean
spirit was never so happy since the fall, as to be in a capacity of fearing,
and submitting unto God in any divine, and sacred precept.

Prayer should in storms resemble the Stars about the North pole, which never
go down.
or I would say, the ordinary means appointed by God for the obtaining of a
promise, or of what the soul desires. Prayer is causa and conditio sine qua
non. By it we may obtain any favor from God, and without it we cannot.
Matthew. 7.7. Ask and ye shall have, etc. God does not in this promise limit any
one in their asking, but let them be as large as they will, and in what they
will, and they shall have it.





1. Of Encouragement. Use.
They who ^oe really call upon the Name of the Lord in dreadful storms and
dangers, do acknowledge him to be omniscient, one who knows best of all their
wants and necessities.

2. They acknowledge God to be Omnipotent, and one who is able to supply all
their wants in their greatest straights that ever they are surrounded with.

3. They acknowledge him to be an all-good, and one who is very merciful, and
bountiful; and upon these considerations any one may take encouragment to pray.

That the Seaman commonly makes the I have read of some Mariners, that vowed
wonderful largely when their ship and lives were at the stake, what they would
do for their God whom they served; they told him, if ever they got to shore
alive, they would sacrifice a Candle to him that should have as much tallow in
it as the mainmast was in length, and substance, but when got safe to Land,
they forgot their vow, and one of them being more religious than the rest,
begun to tell them of it, and to prompt them to it^ push quoth the Sailors, we
are now at Land, and on^ small candle of eight in the pound will serve the turn.
which afterward he never performs. Then they cry, etc. As if David should
have said, in time of danger they will both protest, and vow, nay and almost
swear too, that they will turn gracious and precious souls, but when the storm
is over, their vows are all forgotten, and they are at their swearing again.
Jonah 1.16. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a Sacrifice
unto the Lord, and made vows. It seems that this is a very common thing amongst
them. Plato had persuaded Alcibiades to live justly and honestly in the world,
during the whole course of his life; and when he protested, and vowed to him
that he would do so, I pray God said Socrates that he would once begin. So our
Sailors make large vows in dreadful storms, when the ship is upon Sands, or
when she is leaky, and half full of water, and they tell God very largely,
what paenitents, and what religious people they will be, if he will but
grant them their lives; but I may say unto them, pray God they would once
begin; there is not a people under the heavens that are slower to good, and
that have a less skill in good than they are, they are cousen Germans to
Seneca's Semper victuri, and I pray God that they hit on it before they dye.
Sailors are like Nebucadnezzar's image, in storms, whose head was all of pure
gold, the arms of silver, the thighs of brass, and the legs of earth and clay.
They are gold, and silver in storms, but at Land and in calms, mere dross, and
brass. It is with Sailors in storms, as it was with Israel at that dreadful
time of Gods descending out of the heavens upon Mount Sinai, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Go
thou near, and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us
all, and we will hear it and do it. Here was a large protestation you will
say. Well, verse. 29. carries sad tidings in it. Oh that there were such an
heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always,
that it might be well with them, and with their children for ever. The
Sea-mans large promise to his God in a storm, is like to false fire to a great
Piece, which discharges a rich expectation with a bad report. Siquidem vovens,
and non solvens, quid nisi pejero. Bern. He that vows in storms, and does not
perform his vows when delivered out of them, forswears himself before the Lord.
If there were but such an heart in Sailors as they pretend to have when in
storms, I am confident that no people under the heavens would outstrip them in
piety.

That the Seaman never takes up the This was an unsavory saying of one of the
Sailors to the rest of his companions, when laboring under a most dolorous
storm, My lads, be of good cheer, I will go and take a turn at prayer, both
for you, and for my self, for I am very confident that the Lord will hear me,
because I am n^ common beggar. I used prayer as little as any man in the world.
I have observed it, that at such times when we have been thrown on Sands, and
when our sails have been rent in pieces by the violence of storm, even as one
would tear careless paper, and linen, that then they have prayed. Jonah 1.5.
Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his God. You should
never have heard those Sailors at Prayer that Jonah was amongst, if that their
lives had not been in that dreadful jeopardy. It was a graceless saying of one
Sailor, when in a most inevitable danger, that he had never used any prayer
for seven years together, but he was now fallen into that distress, that he
must be forced to do that which he neither liked, nor never used to do.
Sailors are not unlike to Agrippa's Dormouse, that would not, nor could not be
awaked, till she was thrown into the boiling Copper, and then the kettle rang
with her dolorous Sonnets, Ego uror, Ego uror. Alas, I burn, I burn. It is
danger makes many in the Sea go to prayer, and not grace, conscience, or the
fear of God.

The Sailors life is not unlike to Herman Biswick's, of whom it is said, that
it was his judgment, that the world was eternal, and that there was neither
Angels, nor Devils, Heaven, nor Hell, nor future life, but that the souls of
men perished with their bodies. And if our Seamen hold but of this strain,
they may live as they please. But grant they do not, their prayerless lives
tell us, that the thoughts of Hell, and the thoughts of God, and of another
world, is not in their minds, they have not another place in their eye, but
only this present world.

One of the sadest things that my soul has mourned for, and at, whilst in the
Sea, was my serious consideration of the many Vessels that go in the great
deeps, that neither do, nor never did, and I fear never will, take up the work
of prayer. Prayer at Sea, is like to a poor Beggar, or Traveller on Land, who
goes from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, but is never invited in,
or taken notice of by any. strangers, and travelers, we usually say, meet but
with cold entertainment. Oh the many ships, both in the States, Ah that I
should be forced, to say that of the ships that go in the Seas, which the Lord
complained of once in the sons and daughters of men, Romans 1.29. Being filled
with all unrighteousness, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of
envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, back-biters, haters of
God, despightful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to
Parents, without understanding, covenant-breakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful.
and Merchants Service, that cannot allow Prayer any room amongst them, I speak
not of ships that have Chaplins in them, but of the Seamen in general, they
cannot be got to take up prayer in those very ships that they have Chaplins in.

What was once said of Solomon's building, I may even say of most ships that go
in the salt-waters, 1 King. 6.7. There was neither hammer, nor ax, nor any tool
of Iron heard in the house while it was in building. There is no noise of
prayer amongst them, or to be heard of; you would think that all the Sailors
were rather dead than living. May I not most lamentably speak it, as it was
once said of Egypt, Exodus 12.30. And there was a great cry in Egypt, for there
was not an house where there was not one dead. Is there one ship in the Sea,
that is either in the States, or Merchants Service, but there is the greatest
part, the better half, I, and I fear even all indeed but are dead men, I mean
as to prayer, or any thing that is good; but grant there be, is it not a dead
Religion, and a dead kind of prayer that they live in? this is the state and
condition that Sailors live in, excepting a few, I question not, that is
amongst them, whom God has otherwise taught, principled, and quickened. To stir
you up, to take up the duty of Prayer, consider of your danger by your neglect
of it.

1. You are in danger of being overcome by your enemies, Exodus 17.12. And it
came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he
let down his hand Amalek prevailed. If you take up the work of prayer, you will
engage the Lord to stand by you, in the dreadfullest disputes that your enemies
can assault you withal, Zach. 2.5. For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a
wall of fire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her. I, and
you will engage him to help you when you are at your wits end in time of
storms. If you will but, good Sailors, take up prayer-work, I will engage in
this for you, against the proudest enemy, that ever strutted in the
salt-waters; and it is that of Pope Pius the second, which he writ in a letter
to that great Zamzummim of the World, the Grand-Turk, Niteris incassum Christi
submergere navem, I shall say of that ship where all the men use prayer in her,
as one said of Troy, Victa tamen vinces, eversaque Troja resurges, Obrint
hostiles illa ruma domos.

Fluctuat, ac nunquam mergitur illa ratis.


Let both Sea, and Outlandish enemies do their worst, a godly ship was never
known to be overcome, or drowned.

2. You are in danger of being overcome, and overrun with sin, for want of
prayer Sin is both Master, Captain, Boatswain, and Yeoman, in every ship, and
every man is at sins command amongst you for want of prayer; how reigns sin in
the Captain of the ship, in the Master, Gunner, Boatswain? Sin sits as a King
in his Court in your ships, who rules by immediate commands, whereas the power,
Ships like bottles may dip, and not drown, may be filled with waves, and yet
^ise again. The Palm tree in the emblem had many weights upon the top of it,
and as many snakes at the very root of it, yet could it say, Nec premor, nec
perimor. Ships in the Sea that use prayer in them are not unlike to the Artick
Pole, of which it is said, Semper versatur, nunquam mergitur.
and the voice of prayer, breaks the very head, and insolency, and dominion of
sin; your ships might be wonderfully healed of all that filthiness that is
amongst them, would they but practice prayer. It is no wonder though there be
such an hellish voice of swearing, lying, idle talking, and all manner of
filthiness crawling in every man's tongue, heart, hands, and eyes in the Seas,
as there is, the main reason of it is, because there is no prayer used by any
of them.

3. You are in danger of being overcome with Satan, whereas fervent prayer
would drive the Devil overboard, and where no prayer is, the Devil will be
sure there to take up his abode. I am confident of it, that the Devil has not
better entertainment in all the world again, than he has in ships amongst the
Sailors; my reason is this, they are such vassals and slaves to that unclean
spirit, even to rend, and tear that sacred Name of God in their mouths, besides
that infinite mass of wickedness that they commit Matthew. 17.21. Howbeit, this
kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting. If any one would ask me at what
sign the Devil dwells in the world, or where the Devils dwelling is, I would
tell them, that it is at the sign of a prayerless family that lives either on
Sea, or Land. The Devils June called by the name of an Empty house, Mat. 12.44.
Every Seaman that is a prayerless man, is one of the Devils lodging houses,
and the Devil is the Landlord of all such houses. Empty houses, viz. empty of
grace and prayer.
Prayer and the Devil it seems cannot (set their horses together) dwell
together, no more than sweet Spices, and Tigers can accord together, who will
at the smell thereof betake themselves to their legs. The Devil could no more
endure powerful prayer in ships, were it but there, than the Tiger can endure
the melodious sound of the Trumpet, or skipping Squirrel, the blowing of the
Horn.

4. You are in danger of the wrath of Gods great and sore displeasure, when in
perilous and boisterous storms; that this is a truth, consult Jer. 10.25. Pour
out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that
call not upon thy Name. If you would be preserved in the Seas, let not God
find you prayerless men. Prayer is the best cable that is in the Hold, or
about the ship, I, and it is the best tackling, and the best Anchor that is in
any of your ships. Prayerless men are open to the judgments of God in the
Seas, and are liable every hour whilst they are in them, to be swallowed up by
the mountainous waves. Helericus King of the Goths, after his conquest,
proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, that none should molest or hurt those that were
fled into the Temple of Peter and Paul to pray, and worship God. God will do
thus for you in the Seas, his Herald shall go before you, and declare unto the
winds that they shall not hurt you, than the Seas shall not drown you, Rocks
split you, nor sands take hold of you; Prayer is thus privileged.
Never was there a ship cast away in the Seas, I dare be bold to say it, if
there were but some in it godly, or grant they were, the people in them got
safe to shore by one means or other. Prayer will not only keep off storms from
ruining of you, but also from fire, and from the wrath of God to seize upon
you. Prayer will be as commodious for our States ships, and for our Merchant
ships (yea I dare be bold to say it) as that Antidote was which they used in
ancient times in their besmearing of all their wooden buildings with Alome, in
trial whereof Archilanus Mithridatis is a witness, when he washed all the wood
of the Tower therewith, which he had in charge, and when Sylla attempted to
set it on fire, he could not, but gave it up as invincible. It is no wonder
though we have so many Frigots fired, and so many warlike boats blown up,
rocked, and stranded, surely the main cause is, there was not the fear of God
in those men's hearts that sailed them, Plutarch reports that at the sacking of
Cities, those houses that stood near to any Temples, evermore fared well for
it, whilst others went to ruin.
and there was not prayer amongst those men that went out with them into the
Sea, Exodus 11.2: And the people cried unto Moses, and when Moses prayed unto
the Lord, the fire was quenched. Pray Sailors, pray, or else your ships will
either meet with fire, rocks, or sands.

5. You are in danger of being unpittied, and unhelped in the time of your
distress, because of your neglect of prayer, What Chrysostom said in one case
of the Christians sins, I will say of the Sailors in another, Nostri peaca^is
fortes sint barbari. That the Christians sins did furnish Arms to the very
heathens to invade Christendom.
Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
prayer shall be abomination. Now who turn their backs and ears more from the
sacred rules of the word, than those that use the Seas? Is it not one of the
Lords great Commands, that every one should pray? How then can thou expect
that he should look upon thee when the ship is even going into the bottom?
Does not the Sailors swearing, prayerless and irreligious lives lay them, open,
and consequently furnish their enemies in the Seas with courage, and valor to
overcome them? and does it not also lay them open to the winds, Seas, sands,
and rocks, to catch hold of them, and to tear them to pieces.
I am afraid that God will say of you, when in storms, Prove. 1.26, 27. I also
will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind, when distress
and anguish comes upon you.

6. And lastly, you are not only in danger of being unpittied at such times
(when you are most in danger) but also of being unheard in your prayers, though
you call never so vehemently. Prove. 1.28. Then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. This
is a dreadful thing, that men should thus desperately run themselves out of
Gods favor, I could not if I had all the language in the world set off your
misery souls. I will pray that Seamen may not give the Devil the like occasion
to triumph over Christ, as he did in Cyprians days, whose words I will thus
invert, quoth Satan, I never dyed for any Seamen that serve me with such
diligence, as Christ has done for his, I never promised my Sailors that serve
me, so great a reward as Christ has done to his, and yet I have more Seamen
that are servants unto me, than Christ has amongst them that are servants unto
him. Christ has here one in a ship, and there one in a ship, but do not you
see that the greatest number, and the greatest part of men, even in all Nations
that are sent out in ships to the Sea, are my servants.
And yet notwithstanding though you run your selves upon these six dangers,
besides the many more that I might reckon up unto you, I am afraid that you
will not for all this deal with prayer.

What Objections lie in my way, I will remove, and then Seamen answer God
another day for your prayerless, and irreligious lives; it is not I, but your
selves that must give an account of your selves, yet such is my love and
largeness of heart toward you all, that I cannot better express it than in the
Apostles words, Romans 10.1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for
Israel is, that they may be saved. Whether ever, or never that I shall see the
face of a Seaman again, or set my foot in a States ship again, yet shall my
prayers be for you both in private and public, and if I should not so do, I
think I should not be well-pleasing to my God, because I seriously lay to
heart what need you have of it, both for your conversion, and also for your
preservation, and sanctification.

Sir, we cannot pray, we have not those praying abilities to lay open our
selves in to God, otherwise we would not be so backward in the practicing of
your good, and Christian counsel, and advertisement as we are.

Answer.
Abilities to pray are evermore found to increase upon, and in the use of
prayer. Precando disces precare, by practicing prayer, thou will learn to pray.
Do thy part, and God will not be wanting in the doing of his. Moses begun to
object to God his weakness in speaking, but would God take, or dispense with
that excuse? Exodus 4.12. Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and
teach thee what thou shall say.

Me thinks I hear many Seamen

I am afraid that their prosperity is their plague, and penalty, Answer.
for because they prosper for the present, Are not most Sailors Nero-like who
said (when counseled, Ut facta superi semper comprebent sua, that the gods
above might approve of all his doings) Stulte, verebor esse, cum faciam Deus,
Thou doting fo^l, shall I stand thinking, or fearing the gods, when I go about
my own designs. In like manner says the generality of Mariners, What? would
you have us to be godly, and to use prayer? this we never did, nor never will
do.
they sinfully presume, and sinfully presuming, they presume to sin, and sin
will in the end set the doors wide open to let in the Seas, and winds upon
them. Prayerless ships, the more they prosper, I am afraid that they are the
nearer unto judgment. Phericedes's boast was this, that he had as much
contentment and safety, though he never sacrificed to the gods in all his
life, even as others did with their Hecatombs, but did he prosper afterward?
Dionisius was the great ringleader of that jovial crew that went against
Proserpinas Temple in Locris, which they both robbed and spoiled, and in the
head of that wretched company he made this out-braving speech, Videcis ne
amici, quam bona navigatio abist is Diis sacrilegis tribuatur? See you not my
friends, what a fortunate Navigation the gods have vouchsafed us in this our
sacrilege, but did he ever prosper after?



Ans.
I will not deny now, but that such ships may suffer sadly, yet not Gods sore
anger, many miseries may befall those ships that have good, godly, and
religious people in them, that are not the effects of Gods fury; were not the
Disciples of Christ soundly tossed in a storm? and also the Apostle Paul, Act.
27.41. And falling into a place where two Seas met, they ran the ship a ground,
and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmovable, but the hinder part was
broken with the violence of the waves. And yet for all this, God loved Paul
never the less.

That trembling hearts in the time when Matthew. 14.26. But streightway Jesus
spoke unto them, saying, Be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid. Psalm.
147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him. Most Seamen in the
time of their greatest dangers, are both void of fear, tears, and grace, for I
have observed, that they are so inured, and bet up to storms and wars, that
dangers are no dangers to them, and storms no storms to them, which are indeed
no other than the visible tokens of Gods displeasure; Are not many Seamen
Sigismund-like, who was the young King of Hungary, when hearing of the great
Turks coming against him, proudly said, What need we fear the Turks, who need
not at all fear the falling of the heavens, which if they should fall, we were
able with our spears, and halberes, to hold them up from falling upon us.
Sailors say, what need we fear the Seas, or the winds, our ships are strong
enough. An humbler spirit would better become you.
but if I know any thing, let me tell them thus much, that that frame of heart
is not lovely in the eyes of God, Jer. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord?
will ye not tremble at my presence? You may conclude upon it, that God loves
not, not likes not such a judgement-out-braving temper. The greatest plague
that could be seen in Pharaoh, was his hardness of heart under all those
judgments that God sent upon him and Egypt. Seamen, God will not, nay I dare
tell you of it, that he likes not of you.

That the generality of the Seamen are a very holy, praying, pious, religious,
and precious kind of people. Then they cry, etc. Under favor, I am but
telling you of the Sea-mans piety, as it was the Hebrews custom to give those
that were vile, and abominable good names and titles, to make them the more
despicable and contemptible. When they would set out a whorish woman in the
defamatoriest dress that they could devise, they would call her a sanctified
woman, and so when they had a mind to set out wicked and profane men, and
that unto the life, Nautae plurimum in tempestate Deum advocant, quem non
crederent esse in caelis. The Seaman will call upon God in a storm and when
out of it, he lives as if he would tell the world, that he believes that there
is neither a God in heaven, nor a Devil in hell. What a many invocations be
there amongst Sailors in time of storms, what various devotions, and general
recourse to their prayers, and how many absurdities are committed amongst them,
confessing themselves one to another? others in a loud voice making confession
of their sins, stretching out their throats toward heaven, as if God were
either deaf, or thick of hearing.
they would call them holy men, to that very end they might render them the
more odious. Alas! Alas! I may better say of the generality of Seamen, even
that which was said of Basilides that great Russian Emperor, who refused the
celestial globe of gold (wherein the cunning Artificer, as it were in emulation
of the Lord, had curiously framed the model of heaven, so that nothing was
wanting of the number of the spheres, or of the life and motion) that was sent
unto him as a very rare present, and out of good affection from the German
Emperor, but his answer was, I do not mean to busy my self in the
contemplation of Heaven. Is not this the Sailors resolution, and also all their
piety?

That bold and graceless wretches are etc. Belshazzars metal melts in the
fiery furnace of a rugged storm. Dan. 5. Tells us, They that said but in now,
What? I swim not in the Sea, its air I tread, At evey step I feel my lofty and
advanced head. To knock out a star in Heaven -- Sing another tune. Those that
out-faced the heavens, and out-braved the stars, and neither feared God nor
man, are now at their wits end, Deuteronomy. 28.67. Would God it were morning: for the
fear of thine heart which thou shall fear: and for the sight of thine eyes
which thou shall see.
that he was impudently hardy to profess defiance against the God of Heaven,
by the profanation of his holy Vessels, and also by other external, and
visible testimonies of his enmity, and despite, but as soon as he saw his
doom written upon the wall, down fell the high-hoysed proud vanting flag of his
spirit.

It is at these times with the Sailors (especially when the ship is leaky, or
upon, and near to the Rocks and Sands that lie in the Seas) as it was with that
great worldly Roy or Monarch, Dan. 5.6. Then the Kings countenance was changed,
and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and
his knees smot one against another. Now are the Sailors countenances as pale as
clouts, and their hearts as feeble, and as full of fear as ever they can hold.
Now is it with them, as it is said in Deuteronomy. 28.66. And thy life shall hang in
doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day, and night, and shall have none
assurance of thy life.

The hearts of wicked men are as much down in storms as the Cucko's is at the
going away of the Summer, of whom Naturalists tell us, that before they betake
themselves to their winter quarters, they express their loath to depart by their
faultering and doubling of their voice, which is not half so clear nor so
pleasant as it was at first. Nay, they are as much down when their lives are at
the stake, as the Seryphian Frogs were, of whom it is said in Scyrum deportatae
mutescunt, eaedem alio translatae Carry them into Scyrus and you silence them,
What Pliny said of Rome, I may say of the Sailors at Sea, that there was never
any earthquake in Rome, but it was the forerunner of some great change, event,
and alteration. So no appearance of windsly in the Physiognomy of the skies but
some change of weather. Praecedunt paenas nuntia figna graves. There was one
that went up and down Jerusalem 80. years before ever the war begun to be
commenced against it, crying, a voice from the East, a voice against Jerusalem
and the Temple, a voice against all this people. Sailors God gives you some
warning many times before he claps his stormy wind upon your backs; let all
external signs of storms carry you then out to seek your God.
let them alone in Seryphia and you shall hear them sing, and croak.

That it is and would be the Sea-mans greatest wisdom and safest course, when
he sees a storm a coming, to run unto the Lord, that he would become his
friend. Then they cry, etc. You see the heavens, grow black, and many
observations, and guessings you have from, and of the skies what weather is a
brewing, will you not then prepare to meet the Lord, by sending out your
prayers as Ambassadors, to plead with him in your behalf? Amos 4. ult. people
that are on Land, if they see but a Tempest or a shoure of Hail, or Snow a
coming, they will with all the speed that ever they can make, betake themselves
either to some good sheltering hedge, or the nearest neighboring house that
they can get unto. How much more should you then fly (even as the young
Chickens will under the wings of the old ones, when the Kite is hovering to
fall upon them) to the protecting arms of God, that you may be supported in a
shelterless Ocean. Shall the sight of a warlike ship coming before the wind,
with all the clew of sail that ever she can make and spread, Top-gallant
sails, Stay-sails, and Boome-sails call upon you, I, and startle you too, to
get your ship into her fighting weed, and dress? Insomuch that you are in such
a toss at those times, that you cut down Hammoks, knock down wooden stanchions,
hale out your guns, keep your matches lighted, and your Ordnance primed, your
chartages filled, your shot, and powder, upon, and betwixt decks, and all your
men in arms; some to stand by the great Guns, and other some upon deck by your
small shot; and will you not be in the like fear, when the Heavens frown above
you? How should you make toward your God at such times? Plutarch reports of
Athens, that when their City was visited, and long punished with mortal
sickness, that they had recourse to the Oracle of Apollo, to know what they
should do in their extremity, who made them this answer, that their only way
was (duplare aram) to double their Sacrifices. The only way for Sailors to be
delivered in time of storms, is, to ply God hard, both before, and when they
are come, with prayer.
Nautae sereno coelo non nihil laxant vela, cum autem suspicio tempestatis
contrahunt. In fair weather Mariners will have their Top-gallant sails out, but
if foresee foul, they presently take them in.

I would have Seamen to strive, who should be the first at prayer in such
times as these, as it is said in Zach. 8.21. Let us go speedily to pray before
the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts: I will go also. The Tulipant which
our Herbalists call Narcissus, because it is an admirandos flos ad radios solis
se pandens, a flower that will constantly expose it self unto the fulgency of
the Sun, but when ever it apprehends the Suns setting, or a Tempest a coming,
it hides it self, and will not hazard its tender flower to be shaken, and
rent with the wind. Learn thus much from this creature, as to betake your
selves unto your God, when you see storms a mustering in the clouds, and starry
Sphaeres.

That he that has a gracious purpose, etc. Psalm. 119.175. Sailors in storms,
resemble the Frogs in the Countrymans pond, of whom it is said, that whilst it
thundered, they were very silent, but no sooner was the thunder over, but they
betook themselves to their croaking, and obstreperous notes again: whilst
storms are upon the Sailors backs, they tell God many a fair story which
afterward they leave undischarged.
Let my soul live and it shall praise thee. As if David were a going to say, if
it were not for that end, I would not wish to live a minute, nor a moment upon
the face of the Earth.

Seamen, if this be not your design in your prayers, I cannot see how you can
have the face to expect audience from your God at such times. Tell me what is
thy end Captain in this storm? what is thy end Master? what is thy end
Boatswain? Seamen what are your ends now in this storm, where our lives are at
the stake? are they not to swear? to lie? to drink? and to dishonor God as you
have done? are they now fixed upon the glory of God, and the honor of God, and
the obedience of your God? Fear not then, I will join with you in prayer, for
the Lord will never drown us, if our hearts have these resolutions in them.
Psalm. 119.17. Deal bountifully with thy servant: that I may live, and keep thy
Word. Oh that this were the prayer, and the very thought of every poor Sea-mans
heart, when he is beset both on head, and stern, with that affrighting enemy,
pale death.

I shall say thus much for the encouragement of all those that go in the Seas,
that are thus graciously disposed, as it was said to the Emperor Marcus
Antonius, when in Almany, with a very great Army, and being beset by the enemy
in a dry Country, where all passages was stopped up, and there being no other
likelihood but that both he and his whole Army should perish, and that for
want of water, the Emperors Lieutenant seeing him so sadly distressed, told
him that he had heard that the Christians could obtain any thing of their God
by prayer; whereupon the Emperor having a Legion of Christians in his Army,
he put them all upon prayer, both for him and for his Army, and shortly after,
dureing the time that they were at prayer, great thunder fell amongst their
enemies, and abundance of water upon the Romans, whereby their thirst was
quenched, and the enemy routed, and overthrown without any fight at all. You
shall have any thing from God for prayer.

That the strength of the strongest faith etc. Mat. 8.25. And his disciples
came to him, and awoke him saying, Lord, save us, we perish. Psalm. 119.120. My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgment.

He that would have the Lords help in a storm, let him bid adieu to all
confidence in the strength of ships, and in the deepest wit of men. Then they
cry, etc. Psalm. 108.12. Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man.
This is a good conclusion, and the only way to engage your God to take care of
you, when neither man will, nor can stand by you to help you.

That Seamen seek not the Lord so earnestly Does not many Sailors say to
prayer when the storm is once over, what Felix said to Paul, Go thy way for
this time, when I have a convenient season I will send for thee. Seamen never
pray but when the Sea crosses them, and is ready to run them down by the board,
I am afraid that many Seamen pray against sin, as if they were of Austins
mind (malebam expleri quam extingui) we had rather serve our corruptions, than
have God to grant our petitions. How can you expect to be heard in time of
danger, when that you pray against sin, as if you wished that God might not
hear you?
but they have need of stirring up to seek him earnestlier. Then they cry, etc.
Jonah 1.6. The ship-master came unto him, and said unto him, what meanest thou
Oh sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us,
that we perish not.

I am afraid that there is these two ill properties in many a Sea-mans prayer
at such times as these.

1. That they flow from, and out of a constrained heart.

2. That they flow also from a divided heart.

1. From a constrained heart. Prayer comes from their hearts, as fire out of a
flint, or as blood out of the nose that comes not spontaneously, but
wringingly. Pii non trahuntur ad Tribunal Dei, sed sponte accedunt. Good souls
are not drawn, and haled before God, in prayer, but go freely, and delightfully
before the Lord. Psalm. 119.108. Accept, I beseech thee, the free will Offerings
of my mouth.

2. From a divided heart. Their hearts are not integral, and entire in prayer.
Whereas the prayer of a gracious soul flows from the heart as naturally as
water out of the fountain, or honey out of the comb, Psalm. 119.10. With my
whole heart I have sought thee.

1. Sailors come not to God often.

2. And with God they take no delight

The Seaman now appears in fits, as if really looking toward God, and good,
and by and by, when out of danger he casts off all again; no Polypus, nor
Camaelion has more colors than the Sailor has changings. You would think
that some Seamen in dreadful storms had directly set their hearts upon God,
and good, and that they were really pitched upon him, but when out of storms
all presently breaks, and falls unto the ground again.
That the worst, and very vilest of men in the time of affliction, and
inevitable distress are forced to seek, and sue unto the Lord for help. Then
they cry, etc. They that never practiced prayer before, but spoke as unkindly
unto it, as Pharaoh did unto Moses, Get thee from me, and see my face no more,
now are constrained to call upon the Lord. Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them,
then they sought him: and they returned, and enquired early after God. Sailors
cry hard that the storm may cease, and be allayed, for it is the wind, and the
Sea that is all their trouble, they cry not to God that sin may be pardoned,
and mortified in them which raised the storm; sin, and the Devil has quiet
entertainment amongst them.

1. Reason. Because nature it self is professly cross unto all trouble, danger,
disquiet, and vexation; it is tired therewith, and so willingly would have
ease. And upon this account I fear many cry unto God in storms, even because
the Lord has summoned in, and called off those former comforts of calmness,
peaceableness, and quietness that they had in the Sea.

2. Reason. Because all the means that can be used in time of storms, are but
helpless without Gods help, and therefore are they forced to fly unto God,
because all their helps have an invalidity in them. Those prayers that are
running out from men's mouths by force in the time of storms, are never good,
Forced, and constrained prayer is both commonly false, and also of no esteem,
or account with God, because men care for no more, if they can but have their
lives, and ships, it is not the living of an holy life afterward that they beg
for.
neither is, or should much confidence be imposed in them. God loves prayer in
the times of peace, and when prayer comes out of love to God, and to the duty,
he likes it well, else not.

That the dolefullest miseries that can befall m^n that go in the Seas, or the
extremest dangers that they may ever be surrounded withal, if but laid forth
before God in prayer, are good arguments of hope, that God will in his good
time help them. Then they cry, etc.

That the dreadful dangers that Seamen are in, when in storms, should make
them sensible of their sin, and of Gods just displeasure against them for the
same. Then they cry, etc. Jonah 1.7. Let us cast lots, that we may know for
whose cause this evil is upon us.

That the estate of Seamen may be such at some times, as God will lend no
further succor and deliverance to it. Then they cry, etc. They may well cry
indeed. Remember may the Lord say, If you hear of any ships cast away at any
time, in any part of the Seas, you may conclude that the Sailors were swearing,
drinking, and cursing at that time, for had they been praying, fasting,
humbling of themselves, and calling upon their God, their ships might have
lived in the storm, and their lives also been spared.
the time was that I heard your cries, your tears, and prayers, and has pitied
you when your ships has been thrown upon Sands, and I have taken care to keep
them off from splitting upon the Rocks many, and many a time, but you have
turned all these gracious deliverances of mine into wantonness, therefore will
I deliver you no more. Jer. 5.7. How shall I pardon thee for this? Isa. 1.24.
Ah I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. I am
afraid that Seamen are a burden unto the Lord, and that he sends many of
them packing to hell, when he sends them down alive, ships and all into the
very bottoms. When the Idol Apis of Egypt, had a mind that Germanicus should
be ruined, she would not take meat from his hand. This was the answer that
the stormy-wind gave, when demanded what was the reason that it had shipwracked
so many goodly Vessels at such a time, Si precantes eos ventus invenisset,
nihil contra eos efficere potuisset. If I had but found them praying, I could
not have ruined them.
So God, prayers from your hands.

That is is not for naught, that the Lord etc.

It was a great dispute betwixt Doctor Philomusus, and Learned Philosophus,
what might be the reason that Seamen outstrip all people in rudeness,
deboystness, wildness, and ungodliness.

Philosophus. Worthy Sir, to answer you exactly ratione causae, it cannot
otherwise be, but they should be a wild, and a brutish sort of people, in
respect they live so much out of the Land, if they lived on land amongst good
people, there were some hopes of their reformation and amendment, but living
amongst vain, idle, and ungodly men they become like a drop that falls out of
the clouds, even one and the same with the Ocean: Fowls that live on the waters
are never known to be tame, viz. your Duck, Mallard, Goose, and Seagul, these
are all wild, and not like unto your Land Fowl.

2. They must needs be wild, because they never tarried so long on land as to
get good nurtriture, literature, and breeding, but their parents pack them out
to Sea from small children to seek and work for their living. As it is with the
Lapwings young, so is it with the Sailors. Naturalists observe of this Bird,
that if the shell does but once crack and break, they are of that running
mettle, that they will force their way out, and run with the shells upon their
heads. The generality of Seamen run to the Sea before they be seven, eight,
nine, or ten years of age, and therefore this is one main reason why they are
so rude, contemptible, and absurd in their manners.

3. Their ignorance, and brutishness, together with their audacious
gracelesness arises from their early and timely running out of the land, on to
the water, before they are able to give any account of Faith, Scripture, and
the Ten Commandments.

4. The main reason why Seamen are such notorious, and nefarious swearers,
rises either from their nesciency of that Commandment of the Lords, Exodus
20.7. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain: There would be a
greater number of Swearers, Drunkards, and Adulterers amongst the Sailors, did
not White Hall keep them down, and in awe. Surely that is a dreadful house
whose lofty Turrets keeps both Sea and Land in subjection. I may say of Sailors
what Juvenal once said of a people in the times he lived in, Non habent
ulterius quod nostris moribus addat posteritas. Our Sailors flow with those
sins in the Seas which former ages were ashamed of, and which following
posterities will never be able to add or commit.
Or otherwise from a want of the fear of God.

5. The main reason why Seamen generally are such filthy and immoderate
Drunkards, is, their want of principles to fortify themselves against it, or
otherwise being kept out so long at Sea, when they come on land, they pour down
their cups as Swine do their swill, which are of such an avarous gurmundizing
nature that they think they can never have enough.

6. The main reason why the generality of Seamen are such extravagant, and
irregular liars is, their deficiency in Scripture-knowledge, and also in the
strong converting work of Gods grace upon their hearts, were that once wrought
in them, the running issue of their foul-tongues would soon take up, and cease.

Philomusus. Worthy Sir, you have very fully, and pregnantly satisfied me as
to the question I propounded to you, for which I thank you, should I yet press
you to tell me more of them, I know that you could do it, but the time not
permitting, I will not move in this case any further.

To cast up all shortly, Sailors you may conclude that God will one day reckon
with you for your unparalleld profaneness, and that storms come not upon you
for naught, neither are any of you cast away in your ships but by reason of
your ungodliness. May I not objurgatorily speak it, that there goes many ships
in the Sea, which if they were deeply loaded with the filthiest excrements that
lie in the stinkingest Jakes, Channels, and Boghouses about the City of London,
would be far sweeter receptacles for gracious hearts to breathe and walk in,
than they either are, or ever will be, because of that voice of swearing,
lying, and profaneness that is amongst them. I have met with this passage
concerning an Hermit, that was taken away in the evening by the conduct of an
Angel, through a great City, to contemplate the great wickedness that was daily
and hourly done in it, and meeting in the street a Cart that was full laden
with the excrements of men, the man stopped his nostrils, and betook himself to
the other side of the street, hastening from the sour carriage all he could,
but the Angel kept on his way seeming no whit offended with the ill savor of
it, and the man much wondering at it followed after him, and presently they met
a woman gorgeously apparelled, perfumed, and richly attired, well attended on
with Torches, and Coaches, not a few, to convey her to an house of Baudry,
Surely our States Captains and the Merchants Ship-masters have good noses, and
also good stomachs, that can live so contentedly in ships which are mere
Hell-houses of swearing and profaneness. If I were a Commander, I would either
run out of the stink of swearing, or make them to run out of the ship that
should take that boldness to make such a filthy funke in it.
the good Hermit seeing this, begun something to be revived with the fair
sight, and sweet smell thereof, and so begun to stand and gaze upon them, but
the Angel stopped his nose, and hastened away, beckning to his companion to
retreat from the stench of the Coach, telling him withal, that that brave
Courtezan laden with sin, was a far fouler stench and savor to him, and before
God, and his holy Angels, than that beastly, and stinking Dung-cart he fled
from which was laden with excrements. They that are wise will make the
Application.

That great is that stupidity and benummedness that is in Seamen when they
cannot, nor will not be awakened to seek unto God before, and until storm and
danger comes upon them. Then they cry, etc.

[And he brings them out of their distresses. This phrase is joined to the
other by a copulative particle. And, is in this verse as the Taches and Loops
were amongst the Curtains of the Tabernacle. The Taches put into the Loops did
couple the Curtains of the Tent, and sew the Tent together that it might be
one, Exodus 26.10, 11. So does this very particle couple with the other phrase.

In the words you have these two things,

1. An act of mercy.

2. An object of misery. And he brings them out of their distresses.

Here is transcendent mercy showed to them that are oftentimes drowned, and
plunged into irrecoverable misery.

There is nothing difficult in the words, but the view of them is very obvious
unto the meanest capacity that is.

That God loves not to give deliverance till it be welcome. Then they cry unto
the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of distresses. When the
ship is upon the sand rapping and knocking, as if at every blow she takes upon
the ground would make her fly into a thousand pieces, then, and not till then,
comes deliverance, Act. 27.44. And the rest, some on boards, and some on broken
pieces of the ship; and so it came to pass that they escaped all safe to land.
When the ship is half full of water, with dangerous leaks, then, and not till
then, does the Lord many times appear for them by sending some ship or other
into their sight, unto which they will make, and thereby miraculously they are
delivered from drowning, by flying out of theirs into that. When the ship that
Christ and his Disciples were embarked in, was covered all over with waves,
then, and not till then, did Christ appear to abate and assuage the storm, even
but then, when there was in the very eye of reason little or no possibility of
being saved. When Isreal's Bricks were doubled, then, and not till then, was
Moses sent; and this is Gods usual time, and method, to deliver, when there is
no visible helps or hopes within sight for deliverance.

1. Because mercy will not be valued if men should not be thus dreadfully put
to it. The sound man cries puff, Reasons
and a fig for the Physician, the Soldier a rush for his enemy, when in a
strong hold, and so the Mariner a straw for storms, when in a good harbor, but
when in the hazards of their lives, the mercy then is highly prized.

2. Because God would have the glory of his power, wisdom, and free goodness
clearly beheld. Act. 27.30, 31. And as the ship-men were about to flee out of
the ship, when they had let down the boat into the Sea, under color, as though
they would have cast Anchors out of the fore-ship, Paul said to the Centurion,
and to the Soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved. God
is tender of his glory, power, wisdom, and honor, he would have it seen by the
eyes of men.

3. Because he will have the tribute of praise out of every salvation, and
this is one reason why mercy, and deliverance, is so oftentimes delayed in the
Seas.

That God in his providence has a special hand, a seeing eye, and a prudent
care, in, and over all his creatures for good. And he brings them out of
their distresses, Psalm. 104.10.21. Psalm. 107.6. Beasts of the field, Fowls of
the air, Fish in the Sea, and all crawling and creeping things upon the face of
the earth, are preserved, and cared for by him. If God stepped not out of heaven
(may I so speak) to fetch poor souls out of the griping talons of the stormy
Seas, where no succor and relief can come unto them from the land, except it
come out of heaven, When God would express the tenderness of his love and care
to to his people, he makes it out by naming the very tenderest part that is in
the body, Zach. 2.8 Every little thing you know will offend the eye, that which
we call the eyes Apple, Philosophers call the Chrystalline humor, Isbon, in
Hebrew Ish, in Latin Pupilla, of pupa, because within there is the pretty
resemblance of man, or otherwise because man is prized and preferred before,
and above all the creatures besides, Heb. 13.5.
the Seas and the winds would tear them and their ships to pieces. They would
soon take down the proudest high decked ships that ever came upon the Seas, if
God watched not over them both by night and by day. How soon would the Sea
drink them up, even as that great water-drinking Behemoth in Job 33. who drinks
up a River? I could abundantly enlarge my self in, and upon this point, but it
is such tedious writing in the Sea, that I shall be short, and give you in a
few inductions to the bargain.

1. I would have Seamen to mind how undeservedly God is with them in their
distresses, even many ways, A gracious soul spoke on this wise when in a
storm, and tempestuous night, Surely I shall not perish, there be so many
stars, and eyes of providence over my head, because it was a bright and clear
night.
one while strengthening of you, and another while comforting of you, Act.
27.22. And now I exhort you to be of good cheer, for there shall be no loss
of any man's life among you, but of the ship. This was the Apostles experience.
This was David's experience, Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy
staff they comfort me.

2. Mind how God does deliver you out of storms, and also the manner, and
means thereof, and the very nick of time that God appears for you, and works it
in. All which circumstances well heeded, and observed, will make your
Sea-deliverances the more wonderfully, Seamen may well say of their
deliverances, as Moses said of the burning Bush, Exodus 3.3. I will now turn
aside, and see this great sight. Ah turn about souls, and look with a thankful
eye upon all your preservations.
and the more marvellously glorious in your eyes. Paul was a great observer of
the deliverance that he and those that sailed with him partaked o^, Act.
27.44. And the rest, some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship; and
so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land. Call to mind the times
when you were shipwracked in Italy, Spain, or France, etc. and observe the
manner of your deliverances.

3. Mind how God delays, and defers sometimes to abate violent storms, and to
deliver you, till that your wills be conquered into a conformable contentment
and obedience unto Gods will, to be delivered or not delivered. This was
Peter's experience, Matthew. 14.30, 31. that Christ reached him not his hand till
he was a sinking. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught
him. This was Abraham's experience, Genesis 22.12, 13, 14. That God was not seen
but in the Mount, and Isaac was not delivered from being made a sacrifice of
till the knife was at his throat. Have you not found it many times, that before
deliverance has come, Masts have broke upon your heads, Sails have rent,
Cables broke, and Anchors come home, The Patient earnestly desires such, and
such things under his distemper, but the Physician wants nor will to give them
him, but resolves to give them him so soon as he is fit, and therefore makes
him stay till he has purged, for till he be made fit for it, and for such a
cordial, and such a medicine, it may prove very hurtful for him.
Ships half filled with water, or by stress of weather thrown upon sands? Psalm.
107.43. Who so is wise will observe these things.

4. Mind how God Sounds the deeps for you in calm, and serene weather, when you
are boldly sailing on, in the Seas, with a great deal of confidence, and
security, that your depths of water are sufficient to swim your ponderous ships
in, that even then, Qui scrutantur saepe marinas aranas, nihil potest illudere.
They that will but sound the Seas carefully in dubious places, cannot be
deceived, but they that are overcome with laziness, to throw the Lead
overboard, may quickly (for ought I know) run the ship on ground.
at such times God has struck some in the ship with a great fear, putting it
into their hearts that they were in great danger, whereupon they have called
for the Lead, and made inquiry into the Sea, and water has scarce been found to
keep up the ship from the very bottom. Who so is wise will observe these things.

5. Mind how the Lord goes before you, sounding of your depths in the darkest,
foggiest, and mistiest weather that you are surprised withal, when you are
going on with strong confidence that there is no danger, even contra improvisum
omnem ictum, then are you in very great peril, It is with Sailors in black,
dark, and foggy weather, as the Poet tells us of, Virg. Eclog. 3. Dic quibus in
lymphis (and eris mihi magn^s Apollo) Tres pateat coeli spatium non amplius
ulnas. There it little of the heavens to be seen in the Seas at these times.
The fire that came down from Heaven upon the Altar, was miraculous, yet when it
was kindled they kept it in with wood. Seamen, let your deliverances never
starve for keeping warm upon your hearts.
for having neither the benefit of the Sun, nor of the Moon, nor of the Stars,
you are so dreadfully bewildred, that you know not how near you are to any
Land, nor how such, and such sand-banks bear off you, nor what course to shape,
and steer, then does the Lord direct you; and when you are near to Sands, he
gives some or other amongst you secret, and impulsory hints and warnings, to
make an examination of your depths, by which you are many and many a time
preserved. Who so is wise will observe these things.

6. Mind how God informs you when you are not aware of many in-Sea-lying
sand-banks, which are visible, and obvious enough to a seeing, and a watchful
eye, that is but careful to cast about for the preventing of danger, yet when
you have mindlessly been running on, without either wit, or fear, holding a
direct course upon them, it has pleased the Lord to put it into the heart of
one or other to look out of the ship, It was a good saying of one at Sea, when
espied a breach, and making report of it, the Mariners within said, that they
could not believe it, and withal asked him where it was, Ne quaeramus ubi sit,
sed quomodo illam fugiamus. Let us not make inquiry where it is, but let us
strive how to avoid it.
who has cast his eye this way, and that way, and quickly observed the breaches
that the waters make upon the sands, by which means they have brought the ship,
with all the speed that ever in them lay, upon the stays, and so gone clear.
Who so is wise will observe these things.

7. Mind how God directs you in your Navigations, when you are not advised of
those many in-Sea-lying Rocks, that be up and down in the great Ocean, both
North, and West, and South, and East. Ah how near have you come to these with
your ships, The Butterfly in the fable, asked the Owl how he should deal with
fire which had singed her wings, her counsel was this, be sure thou never come
so near it again, nor as much as ever come within the sight of the smoke of it.
Your are prudent, and want not the skill of applying of it.
many, and many a time, before you have been aware of them? and when you have
been steering upon a direct line, to the hazzad of both your ships, and lives
upon them, God has providentially put some or other upon the looking out, who
have seen the Seas breaking over them in most dreadful froth, and presently
have made report thereof, by which means the ship has been stopped, and altered
in her course. Ah Seamen! surely the Lord has a great care of you. Who so is
wise will observe these things.

8. Mind how God does miraculously many times in misty and foggy weather, (when
you are nearer to Land than you do estimate your selves to be) One was lost
when nearer Land than he was aware of, but quoth the Ship-master, It is but a
fog-bank, there is no danger, and when they came near unto it, it proved the
white clifs of the Land, and there the ship perished in the storm. All are not
so favored.
even pull by the obumbrated curtains that are drawn over the face of the
deeps, by which providential dispensation you have a clear vision of the white
clifts of the Land, and thereby alter your course upon the sight of danger;
whereas otherwise you might have perished sundry times, if God had not haled up
the foggy curtains of the air, and let you see, that if you ran any nearer,
death would be the conclude of that undertaking. Who so is wise will observe
these things.

9. Mind how frequently, I, and what tender care the Lord has of you in the
Seas, by his often hushing of the winds when they are up in roaring, and
rampiant hostility against you at such times, when you are irrecoverably run
upon Sands, and cannot get your ships off them again, if the Lord did not thus
appear for those that go in the deeps (who are I fear very slow in the seeing,
and also in the acknowledging of this singular mercy) many an hundred sail had
been split to pieces at this day, which have been at time, and times preserved.
Do not you often see this favor undeservedly to be bestowed upon you? Theseus
was never better guided by Ariadnes's thre^ which she tied at the entrance of
Daedalus's labyrinth, than those ships that fear the Lord, are guided by their
God from Rocks, Shoars, and Sands, in the great and wide Seas. May I not say of
this frequent experienced mercy, that the eyes of the Lord are as swift as the
very shoots, or flashes of Lightning, and far nimbler for your good, than
thought it self?
Who so is wise will observe these things.

10. Mind how the Lord does very frequently in the time of dark, misty, foggy,
and uncomfortable weather, (when you are in a labyrinth, and know not what way
to steer) take off, and unbare the Sea-buyes, by pulling off from their heads
those night-caps of dismal squallour that they have been dressed, and trimmed
up withal, by which means you have been enabled to pick out your way, and to
glean up your praeinformations how the Sands have lain, and if the Lord had not
thus favored you, you had assuredly perished. Who so is wise will observe
these things.

11. Mind how wonderfully God appears for you at such times, Me thinks you
should receive these deliverances at Gods hands with more thankfulness to him,
and contentedness with them, than ever the Paphos Queen did the golden fruit
that was sent her for a present. This mercy came to you (as the Italian says) a
buona luna, in a good hour, or happy time.
when both foggy weather, and also contrary winds arrest you in the Seas, and
detain you as their prisoners for many days together, insomuch that you are
confounded in your Navigations, not kenning where you are, wishing continually
that you could behold one sail, or other, that thereby you might be informed
how your way lay, and in what propinquity, or interval you might be of Rocks,
or Sands. Has not the Lord now when you have been thus puzzeled, many and many
a time given you the sight of a Vessel, after which you have made, and so
received directions from them, how to set and shape your courses? Who so is
wise will observe these things.

12. Mind how the Lord does oftentimes direct you when you are coming in into
Harbors that you are accustomed to, and well acquainted withal, there
commonly arises great debats, and various disputes about your steerage into
them; my heart has often aked to see your contentions, and also that diversity
of judgment that has been amongst you; some protesting this, and some that,
that your course lies by the bringing of such a light house, The Graecians
being delivered but from bodily servitude by Flaminius the Roman General,
called him their Savior: and so rang out Savior, Savior, that the very fouls
of the air fell down dead with the cry thereof Plutarch. What cause have you
that are now and then delivered from drowning, to be oftentimes in the high
praises of the Lord? God gives you hold of an Ariadne's thread, to wind you out
of the perplexed mazes of the Sea, a subtle Daedalus.
or such an hill, or such a mark upon the Land, upon such a point, and in the
midst of all, contrary to the minds of many that would have had the ship
navigated upon such a point, or sailed by such a mark, the Lord has established
the mind of the Master Pilot, or Commander of the ship, to sail upon such a
point, by which means the ship has come safe into the difficultest Harbors.
Who so is wise will observe these things.

13. Mind how Providence is at work for you in the foreign parts of the world;
it may be that you have good, clear, and serene weather, all, or the most part
of your Voyage, till your arrival within sight of the Country where your
business, and Harbors lie, and then upon a sudden it grows black, cloudy, and
foggy, and also stormy, insomuch that you are put to an anxious extremity, and
dare not approach, or advance any nearer, either to the Land, or the Harbor
you would be at, that then upon the fiering of some pieces of Ordnance, boats
come off that promise to undertake the Pilotage of your Vessels, by which means
you are freed from abundance of care, and trouble. Corrupt blood must be drawn
forth, before the Leech fall off, and carnal filthiness parted with in your
ships, before the storm ends.
Who so is wise will observe these things.

14. Mind Whether the Lord does not bring storms, shipwreck, terrible, and
heart-daunting dangers upon you for your good, yea, or no. Look upon every
blast that blows, every storm that befalls you in the Sea, as a messenger sent
from the Lord to humble you, Humility is not unlike to the low-lying Land in
Holland, but pride is like the Hogen and the Mogen in it.
and to better you. This was the method that God walked in of old, and also the
course that he took with Israel, Deuteronomy. 8.16. That he might humble thee, and
that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end. This was David's
experience, Psalm. 119.67, 71. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now
have I kept thy word. This was the experience of a well-educated Scholar to his
Tutor, when upon a dye, Istae manus mihi portant ad Paradisum: by your
correcting, and instructing of me. I am now going to Heaven. The Walnut-Tree
is evermore most fruitful when most beaten, and flowers do evermore smell
sweetest after a shower. I would it were thus with all our Sailors after their
storms.
Good hearts in storms, like Vines, bear the beter for bleeding.

15. Mind whether the Lord does not send tempestuous storms upon you in the
Seas, to fit, prepare, and dispose you for mercies, calms, and peaceable
weather? Good, and comfortable weather will not, neither is it valued by you,
Although I wander now in the America and untravelled parts of truth and
experience, yet may I (if minded) prove advantageous to those that use the
Seas. -- As soon may I collect the scattered wind into a bag, or from the
vvatery surface scrape the gilt reflections of the Sun, as tell you of all the
Lords appearings for you in your inevitable perils.
till you have been a long time tossed in Neptune's cradle-rocking surges, and
in the roaring blasts of Boreas, then serene weather is valued, and highly
prized, and cried up for a mercy amongst you. Who so is wise, etc.

16. Mind how apparently Gods goodness, and infinite Wisdom is visible to any
seeing, and observing eye, in this respect, that he lays not on storms upon
some parts of the world, and not upon other some, and that some harbors are
blockt up with them, and not other some. Storms come not always out of the
South, nor always out of the West, nor always out of the North and East, but
sometimes they are in one quarter, and by and by in another, every part of the
world that is traded into has their share, as well as another. Who so is wise,
etc.

17. Mind whether or no the winds be not many times unwilling to serve such
wicked wretches (as you mostly are that use the Seas) by reason of their long
tarriance in a quite contrary quarter to your courses. Are you not oftentimes
wind-bound, or wind-blockt and fettered? Look out for the reason of it, some
sin, or God-provoking iniquity or other is amongst you. Who so is wise, etc.

18. Mind well Gods dreadful dealings with others in the Seas, how he lets
the winds fall upon them, It is reported of a Cable, that it spoke on this wise
when it broke in a grievous storm and let the ship run upon the sands both to
the fatal loss of the ship and all the passengers that were in her, Grande
peccatorum intus onus, me extra fregit. The grievous burden of sin within
board, laid a greater stress upon me, than the storm without did, and
therefore I was not able any longer to hold the ship and the wicked that were
in her from perishing, but the Lord bid me break, and let them go, for they
were not worthy the holding, and preserving from the jaws of death. You are
wise, and know how to apply this.
and the Seas seize upon them, insomuch that both ship and men go down into the
uninhabited bottoms. Is not the news coming to your ears very often, that such,
and such a sail is cast away, such, and such a ship was split to pieces in the
occidental, or oriental parts of the Seas? Cast up the sad sorrows that others
taste of, and consider what God has done for you in sparing you with your
lives in those many storms that you have been in, and in those many voyages
that you have made. Who so is wise, etc.

19. Mind how God has disposed of the winds, and granted unto them a very
varying and altering motion, insomuch that they blow not always one way, The
Seaman makes no doubt of it, but if he have wind to carry him into foreign
Countries, he shall have a wind to bring him back again.
which he might have so ordered, and decreed, if but been pleased, but his
providential care for the good of man has made them changeable, whereby they
blow one while out of the East, and another while out of the West, one while
out of the North, and another while out of the South, by which ships are
carried out of all parts in the world, and so again returned. Who so is wise,
etc.

20. Mind how the Lord has had a tender eye over you in stormy and blowing
weather, when Pilots have undertaken to carry you into foreign harbors,
promising, and protesting to you that there has been a competent, and
sufficient profundity of water to swim your ships in, Me thinks this mercy
should be sufficient to make a Sailor melt if he were composed of marble,
whose very Physiognomy has a Magnetic force to ravish souls with the goodness
of God.
and when come to the trial your ships have been run on ground, where you have
lain beating for two hours together, as if the ship would fly into shivers at
every billow that has rushed upon her, and heaved her up, and thrown her down,
yet after some expenditure of time, the flood has heightened and carried you
off clear both with ship and lives. Who so is wise, etc.

21. Mind how the Lord has taken a fatherly care of you when your ships have
unexpectly been on fire, that it has entered into the heart of some one or
other to go down into the Hold, not dreaming of any thing, have espied the very
initials of fire burning upon the cordage, and timber of the ship, Ah that I
should say of Seamen as the Rabbis say of the Jews, who throw the book of
Hester upon the ground before they read it, because the name of God is not in
it. Sailors throw their precious deliverances at their heels.
by which means it has been extinguished, and the ship and your lives
miraculously preserved. Who so is wise, etc.

22. Mind how the Lord undertakes for you when you are come to an Anchor,
either in France, Holland, Italy, Could I tell of more of your mercies I would,
for as the Apostle says, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, I shall say
unto you, and unto the world that I am not ashamed to tell of the mercies that
the Lord bestows upon you in the deeps.
etc. when the wind has come fair off the land, you have taken the greater
boldness to anchor under it, thinking your selves secure enough, but in a
little time the wind has wheeled about, and been upon your backs, and yet
through an overruling providence has favored you till you have got up your
Anchors, and freed your selves from the shore by turning it up into the Sea,
and then the storm has grown on amain which would have hazzarded your lives if
you were in that place at an anchor again. Who so is wise, etc.

23. Mind how the Lord has favored you when been coming to an appointed
port, or station, where there has been a very intricate sailing by reason of
those many sand banks that have lain on every hand you, steering and holding
(in stormy weather) a direct course upon them, and the ships you have been sent
too to anchor by, considering your danger, This inquiry now that I have made of
the Lords appearances for you in the great deeps is but small, and I have but
played the part of the skilful Mathematician, who takes special notice of the
many parts of the world, and is able, exactly, and distinctly, to set them out
to any one as they lie in this and the other climate, but yet when he has
done all, he leaves a great space for a terra incognita, and that unknown
World for ought I know may be five times bigger than all the known World.
Your deliverances are far more than I can tell of.
have fired some pieces of Ordnance, one toward you, and another from you,
which is the usual sign of danger, you have thereby altered your course, and
been delivered. Who so is wise, etc.

24. Mind how the Lord has troubled some of you (that are, and have been in
command) in your sleep by dreams when sailing in the night, how that the ship
has been near to land, insomuch that you have started out of your beds, and
gone and looked over the ships head out of fear, What was once said of Henry
the third King of France, that he had not the ingenuity to discern his friends
from his foes, may be said of the Mariner in dark nights at Sea, had he not
the Lord to direct him.
and presently got a sight of it, whereas both the ship, and your lives had
been at the stake, if the Lord had not looked out for land for you. Who so is
wise, etc.

25. Mind how the Lord has, and does still very frequently help you, when in
dark, and heart-danting evenings; how does he establish your hearts when there
are great and hot disputes amongst your selves about the lights that are upon
the Seacoasts both in this, and other Countries, insomuch that you have gone
on in a great deal of boldness upon such a point, and preter-navigated all
rocks, sands, and dangers. Who so is wise will, etc.

26. Mind how the Lord has looked down out of the heavens for you, Accensam
lucernam nemo moleste aspicit extinctam dolent omnes. When Seacoast
light-houses burn clear and bright, the Mariner greatly rejoices in it, but
when dimly and dully, he fre^^ and curses.
when Land-lights have burned very deadly and dimly in black, dark, and
blustering evenings, upon the sight whereof you have judged your selves to have
been at a greater distance than you were, and thereby have hazzarded your
ships, and lives, by standing in so much to the shore, yet in fine some or
other in the vessel have had a fight of the land through the thick darkness,
whereby you have been precautionated, to alter your course. Who so is wise, etc.

27. Mind how the Lord looks out of heaven into the deeps for you in the
absence of the Moon, which is oftentimes over-cast with thick clouds, and foggy
vapors, insomuch that when you have been standing in for the shore, and been
nearer to it than aware of, that the Lord has caused the Moon to break out
very clearly in the skies, Wear not these mercies a^ the Romans ^^d pearls upon
their shoos because of the commonness of them, but put them upon the file, and
hang them the nearest your hearts of any thing in the world besides. Alexander
thought all cost too little to make a Casket to keep Homers Poems in.
by which means you have seen what would have been your portion, if providence
had not been at work for you. Who so is wise, etc.

28. Mind what a care the Lord has of you in black and formidable nights of
wind and rain, when in the wide and shelterless Sea, The Seas in the night time
are as difficult in some places to navigate, as the Hirc^nian Forests are to
travel through in the night. Writers say that they are so intricate and
difficult to get out of, if a man once get into them, that the skilfullest
traveller that is, is oftentimes put to his shifts, and were it not for the
flying of certain birds which afford such a bright, and glistring luster in
their leasurely flight by reason of their white feathers, they might take up
their lodgings in them.
who causes the stars to afford you a glimmering light in the absence of the
Moon, by which means you have in your Navigations observed the frothy breaches
of the Seas over the Sand-banks, which places you have taken as ominous, and
altered your courses, and thereby gone safe away, and clear. Who so is wise,
etc.

29. Mind how the Lord takes care for you, by giving you secret fears, and
hints in dark nights, when you are in narrow Seas, through which many ships
trade, and travel all the night long, insomuch that when they have come within
the touch of you, by a speedy handling of your helm you have escaped, whereas
either one, or both would have gone down into the bottoms, if providence had
not looked out for you. Who so is wise, etc.

30. Mind what the Lord does for you when you are in great distress, as to the
want of Victual, Beer, and fresh water, when you are many hundred leagues off
England, how he gives you a very fair wind which carries you on for a spurt,
may be a day, or half a day, and then it fails you, and so a contrary wind
looks you in the face, and puzzles you, and being in many fears and doubts of
starving, the Lord alters that wind again, and causes a gale to stand and wast
you over to your desired Ports. Who so is wise will, etc.

31. Mind what a mercy it is, The Earl of Ulster endeavored fifteen times to
sail over Sea into Ireland, but the wind drove him ever back. Every one is not
privileged as you are. Satius est claudicare in via, quam currere extra viam.
Better to stop and sound in the Channel, than run the ship on shore.
when in dark, stormy, and blowing weather you come out of the Southern parts
into the channel, and are at a stand, not knowing where you are, whether you
be nearer the French shore, or the English, but by sounding you distinguish
your propinquity to either of them, in respect that the one is a white sand,
and the other red, and hereby your ships are preserved many a time.

Keep these mercies in remembrance, as Alexander kept Homers Iliads, pro
viatico rei militaris, for his fellow, and companion in the Wars.
32. Mind the Lords appearances for you in all your Sea-engagement-mercies,
when your Masts have been shot down by the board, and the enemy has lain
pouring in his great and small shot upon you, how seasonably some ship or other
has come in to relieve you from the mouth of the Lion. Who so is wise, etc.

33. Mind how the Lord has taken care for you when fire ships have been
grapled to you, that before those combustible materials (which they are usually
fraught withal) have taken fire, you have cleared your selves from being
devoured in that unmerciful element. Who so is wise, etc.

I may write upon this deliverance, In tempore veni, quod omnium rerum est
primum. If I had not come in time, you had been sent into the bo tome.
34 Mind what care the Lord has used for you in your engagements, when you
have been so shrewdly worsted by the enemy, that you have been put to your
flight, to the end you might carine and stop your leaks, and the enemy
observing you at such a disadvantage has made after you to sink you
down-rights, which he would have done if Providence had not set on some ship
or other to prevent him. Who so is wise, etc.

If it be thus then, Use Comfort.
that God has such a special eye, etc. This Doctrine may serve to cheer up the
honest hearts, and spirits, that go into the Sea, that God will take care of
them. When one asked Alexander how he could sleep so soundly, and securely, in
the midst of danger, he told him, that Parmenio watched, and when he watched
not, he durst not sleep so soundly. Go to Sea with comfort you that fear the
Lord, not only Parmenio watches for you, but the Lord.

That if the Lord brought not ships out

That Sea-mens distresses are both infinite

That all impossibility in man's narrow Fides in pericu^is, secura est, and in
securis periclitatur.
And he brings them out, etc. Witness that wonderful deliverance that Paul,
and his fellow-passengers received from the cruelty of the Seas, Act. 27.

Because his power is an unlimited,



That God in his Judgments upon the Seas, often times remembers mercy. And he
brings them, etc. God is slow to wrath, I wish I may not say of the Lords
indulgency to profane wretches in the Sea, what Sigismund the Emperor used to
say of his enemies, Is inimicum occidit, qui inimico parcit. I am afraid Deus
non nunquam parcendo saevit. That the Lords long sparing, will end in rageing.
and may I so speak, he is seen walking toward sinners in the shoes of
Asher, which were of ponderous brass, Deuteronomy. 33.24, 25.

That the greatest dangers of the Seas, and the proudest waves that ever
elevated, are, and should be no plea for unbelief. And he brings them, etc.
Matthew. 14.30, 31. When Peter saw the wind boisterous, his heart begun to fail
him, but was he not reproved for his distrusting of the Lord? Poop-lantern,
ship-covering, and yard-arm-rising waves should not daunt and discourage faith
in God. Were the Seas in a storm as high as the mountains of Merionethshire in
Wales, (whose hanging and kissing tops come so close together, that the
shepherds sitting on their several mountains may very audibly stand and
discourse together, but if they would go to one another, they must take the
pains to travel many miles) Sailors should not be apalled, and terrified.
Dangers are faiths Element, and in them it lives and thrives best. Such was the
high-raised valor of Luther, that when he was to go to the City of Worms,
they told him of strange things, Faith like the Ivy, the Hop, and the
Woodbine, which have a natural instinct in them, to cling and lay hold upon the
stronger Trees, lays hold on God in time of danger.
(as many will do, fresh water travelers at Sea) but quoth Luther, if all the
Tiles that be upon every House in the Town were devils, they should not scare
me. Sailors should have the like courage in storms which one had when in a
great straight.

Certa mihi spes est quod vitam qui dedit, idem
Et velit, and possit suppeditare cibum.
Good hearts may say to the Sea, when in a storm, what Luther said to his
enemies. Impellere possunt, sed totum prosternere non possunt: crudeliter me
tractare possunt, sed non extirpare: Haec est fides, credere quod non vides.
dentes nudare, sed non devorare: occidere me possunt, sed in totum me perdere
non possunt. Faith will put your heads into Heaven, and your ships into an
Harbor, when in a storm, it will set you on the top of Pisgab with Moses, and
descry the promised Land, when you may come to be denied the sight of Land in
storms.


1. Great Faith is seen in this as much as any one thing whatsoever, that it
both can and will believe in God, as a man may say with reverence, whether God
will or no; it will believe in an angry God, in a killing God, and in a
drowning God, Job 15.10. Great Faith is not easily shaken.

2. Great Faith is never clearer seen, than when in the midst of souzing
storms, and dangers, there is great confidence, and strength of heart in the
soul at such times.

That God will have every thing wrested from him by prayer. And he brings,
etc. Good Seamen should play the part of Daedalus, Templum Cybelis Deorum
matris, non manib^es sed precibus solummodo aperiebatur. The gates of Cybeles
Temples could not be opened by hands, but prayer quickly threw them open.
who when he could not escape by way upon Earth, went by way of Heaven, and
that is the way of prayer.

Five Motives to put Seamen upon Prayer.

1. Solemnly consider, that in the creature there is nothing but emptiness, and
helplesness.

2. Solemnly consider, that you cannot have any hopes of winning ought from
God, but by prayer. The Champions could not wring an apple out of Milo's hand
by strong hand, but a fair maid by fair means got it presently.

3. Solemnly consider of God, what he is whom you serve, naturally no other
but goodness it self. Nothing animated Benhadad so much as this, that the Kings
of Israel were merciful Kings. It was said of Charles the great (I would to God
I could say so of every Tarpowling that goes in the Salt-waters) that he
delighted so much in prayer, that Carolus plus cum Deo, quam cum hominibus
loquitur. That he spoke more and oftener to, and with God, than he did with
men. Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus.
And nothing encouraged Titus Vespatian the Emperor's Subjects so much as
this, that he did (nunquam dimittere tristem) never send any away sorrowful.

4. Solemnly consider, how many in the Seas go upon the very same errand that
you go on to him, and mind how they speed, and are carried securely out of all
their distresses.

5. Solemnly consider what Prayer is to God, he loves it, Let me hear thy
voice, for it is comely.

6. Call to mind your former experiences, did you ever pray in a storm, but you
fared the better by it? Consider what cases you have been heard in.

That servent Prayer will prevail with I would all the States Tarpowlings were
of James the Just's principle, of whom Eusebius tells us, Genua ejus in morem
cameli obditrata, sensum contactus amiserunt. That his knees were hardened like
the Camels, by his frequent kneeling to Prayer. Prayer is Optimus dermientium
cuslos, certissima navigautium salus, tutissimum viatoribus scutum. The
sl^epers best keeper, the Sailors surest safety, the Travelers protecting
Shield.
And he brings them out, etc. Witness the Mariners calm, Jonah 1. and witness
Christ's disciples deliverance in the storm. Impartial fire that comes from
above, has been often times seen to spare yielding objects, and to melt
resisting metal, to pass by lower roofs, and to strike upon all high-Towered
pinnacles. I wish that our Sailors were as much given to Prayer, as Anna the
daughter of Phannel, of whom it was said, that she never departed out of the
Temple, but served God night and day in prayer, and fasting. I wish it were the
resolution of them that use the Seas, to do as Ambrose the Bishop of Millain
did, when news came to him that Justina the mother of Valentinian intended to
banish him, he told them that he would never run away, but if they had any
purpose to kill him, they should at any time find him in the Church, praying
for himself, and for his people.

1. Use of Comfort.
For all that fear the Lord, that when they cry they have a God to hear them,
when they call they have a God to answer them, when they need they have a God
to help, when they mourn they have a God to pity them, when ready to be
overwhelmed with the great waves of the Sea, they have a God to defend them; So
that I may say of such that go in the Seas, blessed are the people that be in
such a case, yea happy are all they that have the Lord for their God, Psalm.
144.15. who is easily prevailed withal by Prayer.

That in tempestuous, and ship-hazzarding Charles the fifth gave the Emblem
Vlterius, stand no^ still but go on further. But in this case, us amplius
procedas.
and look up to God for life, and for Salvation. And he brings, etc. If the
Lord must bring ships out of their distresses, then let Seamen look up unto
the Lord for deliverance, and trust not too much to their own art and skill.
Vicount Hugo de Millains motto was on a ship without tackling to stay it with,
In fil^ntio, and spe fortitudinem. My strength is in silence, and in hope.
Haedera undemis invenit quo se alliget, (...) Ivy being weak, upon a time
looked upon the Elm, and spoke on this wise, I am not able to stand of my
self, pray let me lean on you. Sailors you are not able to save your selves in
storms, lean upon your God.

That God is the great Savior, and deliverer Sailors are evermore hurling out
of their mouths the demiculverin shot of their own praises. Decempedalia, and
sesquipedalia verba. You shall seldom hear them say, that God ever delivered
them out of a storm.
in and out of all their storms and Tempests. And he brings, etc. The sweet
singer of Israel quickly spies out the Sea-mans deliverer. But this is more
than many a beetle-headed Sailor can do. Every eye observes not the
stupendous, and astonishing mercies of the Lord. Dextra mihi Deus est, said a
profane man, my right hand was my God, or else I had lain my bones in the
danger I was surrounded with. Another said, Haec ego feci, and non fortuna, but
never prospered after. We see that Nebuchadnezzar trusted in his princely City
Babel, and that Babel became a Babel of confusion to him. Xerxes trusted in his
multitude of men, and his multitude incumbered him. Darius trusted to his
wealth, and his wealth sold him. Eumenes in the valor of his Regiment called
the Silver-shields, and his Silver-shields sold him, and delivered him up to
Autigonus. Roboam in his young Counselors and his young Counselors lost him
the ten Tribes. Caesar in his old Senators, and the Senate conspired against
him. Domitian in his Guard, and his Guard betrayed him. Adrian in his
Physicians, and his Physicians poisoned him, so that the proverb ran, Multitudo
Medicorum, perdidit Adrianum Imperatorem.

That although men at Sea in their dangerous storms, seem as it were both
forgotten and forsaken, yet does the Lord at last, very frequently make it
evident unto them, and to the world, that he does not forget them. And he
brings, etc.

That the evil, and unworthy deservings of men at Sea, does not always
interrupt the course of Gods goodness toward them. And he brings, etc.

Verse. 29. He makes the storm a calm: So that the waves thereof are still.
THe words offer unto us two things to be considered of.

1. The Agent. 2. The Act, or the Effect.
1. The Agent, that is the Lord, in these words, He makes the storm a calm.

2. The Act, or the Effect, So that the waves thereof are still.

That the cessation of all storms and etc. Xerxes finding Helespont to be a
little unsmooth, would needs throw Irons into it to fetter it, so impatient.
Or if you will take the point thus, That God is the great allayer and
principal calmer of the raging winds and Seas.

Philosophers tell us, that the winds are allayed several ways.

1. When the air is over-burdened, troubled, and softened by vapors contracting
themselves into rain.

2. When vapors are dispersed, and subtilized, whereby they are mixed with the
air, and agree fairly with it, and they live quietly, then is the wind allayed.

3. When Vapors, or Fogs are exalted, and carried up on high, so that they
cause no disturbance until they be thrown down from the middle Region of the
air, or do penetrate it.

4. When vapors gathered into clouds, are carried away into other Countries,
by high-blowing winds, so that for them there is peace in those Countries which
they fly beyond.

5. When the winds blowing from their nurseries, languish through their long
travels, finding no new matter to feed on, then does their vehemence abate, and
expire.

6. Rain oftentimes, and for the most part does allay winds, especially those
which are very stormy.

That the insensiblest of creatures have an ear unto their makers speech, It is
said of Caesar, that he could with one word quel the discontentedest motion
that ever rise in his Army. What is the Lords power then in the stilling of the
winds?
and do out of an obediential subjection yield to his will, to carry on his
purposes, and designs, whether of good, or evil, of preservation, or of
destruction toward a people. He makes the storm a calm, etc. If the Lord
speak unto the winds, they have an ear to hear him; if to the Sea, the Sea is
attentive to listen to his divine pleasure, and be it good, or be it evil,
they are both of them loyal and fiducial Soldiers under Heavens Flag or
Standard, to execute his pleasure. Jonah 1.4.

That God can when he sees it fit* preserve a people from ruin, in, and after
an incredible, unlikely, unexpected, and miraculous manner. He makes, etc.
Acts 27.20. When all hopes of being saved failed the Mariners, then began the
Lord to stir for them. The Lord oftentimes keeps his hand for a dead lift.

That the great waters stilness, and etc.

That it is the Lord that makes changes etc. The Seas are quickly alarmed, and
beat up into dreadful waves (even in all quarters) at the commands of the Lord,
and shall puzzle and torment wicked men as much as those Ciniphes that bred in
terra Egypti de fimo muscae, quaedam sunt minutissimae, inquietissimae,
inordinate volitantes, in oculos irruentes, non permittentes homines quiescere,
dum abiguntur iterum irruunt, etc. The Flies that were sent to quarter in
Egypt, so pestered, and plagued Pharaoh, and his people, that they could not
take any rest, they did so chase them, and fly into their mouths, and eyes. Of
the like restlesness are the Seas, when once commissionated by the Lord. And
also the Seas are calm, and quiet, when and at what time the Lord pleases to
give out the word, either to the winds, or Seas. Mark 4.39. Christ speaks but
the word to that raging Sea that had so much disturbed his Disciples, Be
still, As if he had said, statim penitusque obmutesce, Let us not hear any
noise in you. (...) from (...) fraenum, he put a bridle upon the mouth of the
Sea, or haltered it, that it might rage no more. Truly if God did not halter
the Sea, I wonder whither that unruly beast would carry our wooden horses? He
that has a mind to go to the Sea, let him expect to meet with such waves as
Jude speaks of, he calls them (...),
rageing waves; the word (...) rageing, signifies untamed, wild waves, roaring
like the wild beasts in the Woods, Forests, and wide Wildernesses of the
World. Some render the word, fluctus maris. Erasmus, undae efferae maris.
Others Vndae maris efferatae. He that will to Sea must look for (...),
rageing, and boisterous waves. One Poet call them Fluctus truces, cruel, and
terrible. Another calls them Latrantes undae, barking waves. Another calls them
Rapidas aquas.

That as the Lord has set times of chastning of those that go in the deeps
with dangerous storms, So has he also his set times for comforting of them
again. He makes the storm a calm. The Lord makes them amends after a rugged
storm.

How little should any that have this Quid timet hominem mare, homo in finu Dei
positus? What needs that man fear that lies under the protection of heaven?
be dismayed with, or in the dreadfullest Seas, and stormiest weather that
ever blew? He makes the storm a calm. It was a good saying of an Heathen,
Since God, quoth Socrates unto a sort of Heathen, is so careful for you,
wherefore need you be so careful for your selves? Numa Pompilius put so much
confidence in the Gods, that one day when it was told him that his enemies were
up in arms against him, his answer was, And I sacrifice.

That if God did not bridle the fury of

Verse. 30. Then are they glad because they be quiet.
THese words offer us two things.

1. The Sea-mans cheerfulness, Then are they glad.

2. The reason of it, Because they be quiet.

Before every drop seemed to fight one against another, but at the Lords
Commandment the Seas are still, as if they were of a congealed Ice; and this
administers matter of comfort to them that go down into the Seas.

That Gods saving, and delivering mercies from the jaws of death, in, and upon
the great, and dangerous Seas, are both very heart-affecting, delighting,
glorious, and wonderful joyous to behold. Then are they glad, etc. Now have
they cause to sing, Psalm. 126.3. The Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad.

That although Seamen be often put to mourning and unto prayer, it is but for
a time, the end and issue thereof frequently terminates in joy and praise. Then
are they glad, etc. When Bishop Jewel was in his banishment, he comforted
himself with this, Haec non dur^bunt aetatem. This will not last always.

That it is no small comfort and obligation that is put upon any soul in the
Sea, to have experience of Gods regarding of his Prayer, and granting of his
requests. Then are they glad, etc. This was David's resolution, (Oh let it be
yours, souls, that go in the Seas) Psalm. 116. I will love the Lord, why?
because he has heard my voice. If God did not hear your cries in stormy Seas,
I wonder what would have become of you ere this day.

That deliverances out of Sea-perils, administer matter of great joy to
gracious hearts, that God is pleased both to trust them, and to empley them
also in further service for his glory. Then are they glad, etc.

That the generality of men do affect In storms, Itur ad aethereas per magna
pericula seeds.
both at Sea and Land. Then are they glad, etc. When England in her late wars
was tossed like a ship in a storm, how gladly did all the good and honest
hearts of the Nation wish for peace, and a good harbor for her to ride in.

Horat. Od. 14. lib. 1. O navis referent in mare te novi Fluctus,
O quid agis? fortiter occupa portum, etc.
But alas, we have a great many of male-contented incendiaries in the land,
that play the Pazzians parts in Florence, of whom it is said, that to draw and
drive on a multitude to their conspiracy, in the marketplace they would cry
Liberty, Liberty, when indeed and in truth they intended to bring the people
into misery and thraldom.

It has been thus by the Anabaptists, and other Schismatics in the Land. But
these sort of cattle are like the Porphyrius, There be many low-fortuned
Pedanticks in England that would gladly be the Princes and the Governors of it.
May I not say of such (be they in authority or out of it) as one said of
Ventidius Bassus (when made of a Mule-driver a Consul at Rome) That they had
spoiled a good Mul^^er, and not made a good Consul?
which is a Serpent that is full of poison, but toothless. There is a Sect of
diverse forlorn creatures in England, that have a great deal of poison in their
bowels against the present Government, and indeed all civil order, but they are
toothless.

It is a very sad sight (may I speak of it) to think that an Italian Traveller
should say thus of England,
when he had been in it some late years ago.

There be a thousand villainous things to be seen in England, that former ages
would have blushed at, and been ashamed of England deals with good government,
as the great Student did with his wife, of whom it is said, that he studied so
much, that he neglected her, and chiding of him, she wished her self a book,
what book quoth he? I wish thou were an Almanac, then should I have a new one
every year.
1. That he saw a general contempt of the Worship, Word, and Ministers of God
in it.

2. A great deal of pride in apparel.

3. Covetousness and imperiousness in Superiors.

4. Sedition, and seditious practices against Magistracy.

5. A general supine carelessness.

6. An inundation of all iniquity.

7. An old man without Religion.

8. Young men without obedience and reverence.

9. Rich men without liberality and alms deeds.

10. Opinionative, contentious, and turbulent Christians.

11. A people that would neither have good laws, nor government.

I would it were enacted in England as it was amongst the Locrians (as
Demosthenes tells us,) Every Citizen that was desirous to bring in any new Law,
let him come and declare it in public, with an halter about his neck, to that
end that if it be not both meet and profitable for the Commonwealth, hands may
be laid hold on him to hang him. I would there were an halter about every
seditious man's neck in England. It is observed of the Lacedaemonians, that they
continued seven hundred years without any alteration of government, and that
the Venetians have lived in one form of government for the space of a thousand
years. We are so fickle in England, that we would have a new one every year.

That men after they are delivered out etc. This was Isreal's experience after
all, Psalm. 124.1. If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may
Israel say: What would have become of us, if God had not looked out of the
heavens into the deep and shelterless Seas for us?

[So he brings them unto their desired haven. Qui adversis ventis and undis
navigat, portam petit.


Whilst the Seaman is in the storm (it seems) he has an impetuous desire to
be delivered out of it. The wearied Traveller longs not with greater vehemence
to leave the road and take up at his Inn, or the laboring woman to be at her
journies end, than the Mariner does in a storm to be in some good Harbor.
Ships whilst out are liable to a thousand ominous contingencies. I am at Sea,
and not on Land, expect no curious division of the words. The notes are these:

That the Seaman does earnestly desire the Haven, when tossed in violent,
furious, and horrid storms. In angusto flumine tutiores istae naves quam quae
in pelagi natantes fluctibus.
So he brings them unto their desired Haven. When I have been in
heart-danting storms, the land has been as much in my thoughts, and as much
desired as ever Leucippe was, of whom the Poet speaks, Nihil praeter Leucippen
cerno, nihil praeter Leucippen cerno: Leucippe, Leucippe mihi perpetuo in
oculis, and animo versatur.

That every ships safe arrival at any Port or Harbor, whether far or near, at
home or abroad, is by, and through the special blessing, means, and good
providence of the Lord. So he brings them, etc. I wish I might not say of
Seamen, as it was once said of Epicurus, The Sailor at Sea, may fitly be
compared to the picture of the naked man in the Almanac, who is miserably
beset on all sides, the Ram pushes at the head, the Bull gores the neck, the
Lion tears the heart, the Scorpion tears the privy parts, another shoots at the
thighs, etc. yet does God bring them out of, and over all the pushing waves.
who was not afraid to deny that there was neither God, nor Providence, but
held that all things came to pass by chance and fate. Alas, such difficulty and
jeopardy is there in the Sea-mans employment by reason of storms, rocks,
shelves, and sands, that it is a mere wonder, that ever any one of them comes
back safely home into their Harbors. It is wonderful (or at leastwise should
be) to every one that either lives in Seaport Towns, or comes accidentally
into them, to see how many poor ships come home torn and tattered, some with
never a Mast standing, others with their Rudders struck off, others again with
never a Cable, nor Anchor on board, others with dangerous leaks, and laborious
pumping, and others again with so many manglements, that it is a very great
wonder to see the providence of God in the preserving of them, and returning of
them home.

One brings in the Seaman thus congratulating,

All good Havens and Harbors: Good Havens, and ship-sheltring Harbors.

Si nobis sint linguae centum, sint oraque centum, had we an hundred tongues a
piece, or were we all fluently Chrysostomized, Tullyized, or Demosthenized far
more thanks and praise should you have from our lips and mouths (quam in coelo
stellulae, aut mare guttulae) than there be stars in the Heavens, or drops in
the Ocean. In the interim you shall have all the grateful acknowledgements that
possibly can be for the many favors we receive from you (both in the Winter
and Summer season) and these shall be continued to you, Dum juga montis aper,
fluvios dum piscis amabit, as long as ever the wild Boar shall range the craggy
and bramble wilderness, or the great Leviathan sport her self amongst the scaly
inhabitants in an unfathomable Ocean. When we are far out at Sea, in rugged
and austere, and bitter storms, Adeste, Adeste.
you seem to shout out unto us (Voce Stentaterea, and Virgiliana lingua) in
that sweet candid tone of Virgils, Alas! If we should call down all the Nine
noble Muses out of the famous Mount of Helicon, or pray to be assistant the
three loving Graces, or great Apollo, god, Master, and chief Inventor of
Eloquence, or witty Mercury, with his dulce and sugared Rhetoric, with sweet
Suada goddess of all perfection, all would be little enough to express our
thankfulness unto good Harbors.
Hic tamen hac mecum poteris requiascere nocte,
Fronde super viridi^ sunt nobis mitia ponia,
Castaneae molles -- Eccl. 1.


Come take up your lodgings with us whilst the wind is so boisterous; and so
dangerously turbulent, and besides for your entertainment, here is a cup of
good Bear, Ale, and Wine to refresh you.

The Sea-mans thankful Reply.

Could we but catch those beamy rays,
Which Phoebus at high noon displayes,
We Would set them on a loom, and frame
Webs of praise for you, of the same.
Give me leave now after all to offer a word or two of good, savoury, and
wholesome counsel. The first will be unto all the Haven Towns in England. The
second is unto all our Inland Towns and Cities in and through the Nation.

1. You that are the Haven Towns of our Nation, Haven is an old Saxon word, and
comes of Have in to the Harbor o^ Town.
you dwell all of you as Zebulun, the Mariners Tribe did, at the Haven of the
Sea, Genesis 49.13. and are Havens for ships. Your seats, dwellings and
habitations are fair in the view and prospect of the great and formidable Seas,
where go all the Warring and Merchandising ships of this Nation, and not of
this only, The Sea-mans employment is as dangerous as the Snales going over
the stone wall bridge, on the out side of which, was nothing but deep water,
saying, Lent equidem, tamen attente gradior, morae nulla est, Si modo sat
bent, quo vis cito sat venies.
but of diverse others also; now the remote and Inland Towns of our Nation have
not that delectable aspect that you daily have, they are far from beholding the
mountainous Seas, the dreadful storms and shipwracks that are perpetually
happening and befalling that restless element, which you both see, and daily
hear of. Seamen tell you many a story how at such a time the winds blew, their
sails rent, their masts broke, and how at such a time they were shipwracked,
some got to shore upon this piece of plank, and another upon that, and at
another time how they were put to it by reason of the leakiness of their ship,
and a thousand more dangers besides these do they tell you of: All that I aim
at unto you is this, Be affected with your deliverances, Exodus 4.31. And when
they heard that the Lord had visited the children of Israel, and that he had
looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads, and worshipped. Oh
be melted at the goodness of God toward men in this employment, and when they
come into your Towns, persuade the poor Seamen to fear the Lord, and win them
if you can unto the liking of the good ways of God. One of the saddest plagues
that I know of this day in England, is in our Seaport Towns, the people in
them care not if they can but get their moneys, though they leave a thousand
Oaths behind them in their houses.

2. When you see great Fleets upon the Seas, or going out of your Harbors, or
from the other parts of our Nation, put up your prayers unto the Lord for them,
and in their behalf; perhaps your eyes may never see them more, The Sea-mans
life is not unlike to the roof of the great Temple in Jerusalem which (as
Villalpandus records out of Josephus) showed flowers growing amongst gilded
prickles. The best days of your lives have many a thorn in them.
nor they ever see the land or shore again, their employment has so many
thousand casualties attending it. Multa cadunt inter calicem supremaque labrae:
That comes in an hour, that happens not in a thousand. The Sea is not unlike to
Proteus, whom Homer tells of, A ship in the Sea is in as much danger of being
lost, as the Owl in the Emblem who had many fowls pecking at her to tear her in
pieces, Perfero, quid faciam? nequeo compe^cere multos.
Spumat aper, fluit unda, fremit Leo, sibilat anguis; It foams like a Boar,
flies like a flood, hisses like a Snake, and roars like a Lion. Did Inland
Towns but see and know of the staggering dangers that Seamen go through, they
would send out their prayers for them, that God would allay storms, moderate
Seas, halter the winds, and that God would prosper them to their desired Ports.
Ah Sirs! No grace resembles God so much as the promoting of the good of others,
as well as our own private and particular good. Every man looks upon his own
things, Phil. 2.21. Seaport Towns in this case, should resemble the Emblem of
the candle, pro vobis luceo and ardeo. I am willing to do all the good I can.
All mind themselves, says the Apostle, all comparatively in respect of the
paucity of those that do pray for the good of others. It was Tacitus's word of
that famous Roman Emperor, Sibi bonus, aliis malus. He that is too much for
himself, fails to be good to others. I may say of Haven Towns, as some
Ancients used to say of the Statues of their Princes, that they would have them
always placed by their fountains, intimating (that they were, or at leastwise
should be) Fountains of public good. Your dwellings are by the great Ocean
side, from whence you should learn to resemble it in the public good it does,
it admits every Bark, Ship, and Vessel, to come and sail in it, and upon it.
You should not be for your selves only, but for others. Seamen sit in the
waves of the Sea, as he in the Emblem did, of whom it is said, Dum clavum
rectum teneam navimque gubernem, Uni committam caetera cuncta Deo. Pray for
them.
Oh let ships that sail in the Seas have many prayers from you, be they our
Country, or any other Country shipping that you see, pray for them. Is not the
good of many to be preferred above, and before a private good? Matthew. 5.45.
God makes his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall upon the unjust, as well as
upon the just. You cannot resemble God in any thing more, than in being
publick-spirited for the good of others.

3. When you see the great ships of War that are the wooden walls of our land,
go out to Sea, pray for them, and for their good success and prosperity against
the enemies of Jesus Christ, to the end they may be preserved in those hot and
dreadful disputes that they are oftentimes called unto. You can salute them now
and then with your roaring Ordnance from off your Castles, and Seaports Town,
and make all fly in fire and smoke when they are taking their farewell of the
Land, The Sea is full of perils, not unlike to the English College at
Valladolid in Spain, which at ones very first entrance be terribiles visu
formas, terrible shapes and representations of men with knives at their
throats. Alas to the eye of reason death attends their employment in the Seas
every day they uprise.
or at their return home from some prolix voyage. Ah Sirs, salute them with
your prayers, that will do them most good. Can you see the Warlike Frigots of
this Land sailing, and crusing of it every day upon the Seas before your eyes,
which lie out night and day in an uncomfortable and restless Sea to secure your
Harbors, Towns, and Trading, and yet never be affected with their dangers,
fears, and sorrows? Can you go to your beds at an evening, and rise up in the
morning, and never think of them, who lie rocking, reeling, and staggering in
the roaring and raging waves? Let me argue the case with you, Is not the
Commonwealth of England a great first rate? And is not, or has not every one
in the Nation, their cabbins, houses, The Sea-mans habitation is -- Ubi nil est
nisi pontus and aer. But yours is upon firm land.
and habitations in it (our Nation is but an Island and stands in the Sea, and
so may very well be resembled to a ship) all of you are passengers and
partners in this ship, and if she prosper, miss, or hit upon the rocks and
sands, that be in the Seas, you are like to be sharers therein, so that in
seeking the public good, you most wisely seek your own good.

4. Certainly my friends, Praying people in Seaports are Englands best
(Bombardae bellicosissimae) Guns, either in Towns or Castles.
if that you that are the Seaports of our Nation were but a praying, pious,
and religious people, and that holiness, purity, equity and justice dwelt
amongst you, and were pregnantly in you, were these the fruits that the skirts
or branches of our Nation brought forth (for so I call you, because you are but
the feet of the Land, you are far from the head, and heart of the Nation) how
might you strengthen us that go in the Seas, and weaken our enemies against
whom we fight? Ah Sirs! if you live irreligiously in these Towns and Ports,
Many Seaport Towns are like to Rumny-marsh (Neque hyeme uque aestate,) good
neither Winter nor Summer. The very scum of the Land dwells in them.
all the Nation will smart by it (surely it would do better, that the best
people in England lived in Seaports, and not the worst) How many Seaports has
the Turk made havoc of, both of the Venetians, and also of the Spaniards? they
were well enough fortified, but sin being within (a filthy people living in
them) they were soon conquered, and made fire, faggot, and captives of?
Inland-Towns fare the worse for Godless Seaports, Ezekiel. 39.6. Ezekiel. 30.9. In
that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships, to make the careless
Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them, as in the day of Egypt:
lo it comes. Ezekiel. 28.7. That great trading City of Tyrus which was the fame
of the world for exporting, and importing of Commodities, If any one would ask
me the definition of a Sea-port-Town, I should tell him, I would draw the
Picture of the people speaking, they are given to gross railing, privy
defamations, and whisperings, to the prejudice of one another; hot scalding
words, and tongues set on fire in hell are the best fruits they bear. Jam. 3.6.
to whom resorted the Merchants of all Countries, for traffic, both of
Palestina, Syria, Egypt, Assyria, Judea, and Arabia, by reason of her
filthiness was brought down from all her pomp and pride. Alas! They that live
in Seaports, should be Moses's and Aaron's, to stand in the gap, and plead
with God, and not trash, and trumpery. When people live profanely and
irreligiously in Seaports, it makes all strangers think that people are no
better that live higher up in the Land; truly they will be apt to censure the
whole Nation, if it be not amended amongst you.

2 Word, is unto the Statesmen of our Land, and that is succinctly this, What
Claudian the Heathen Poet sang of Theodosius's good success, in the wars, the
like shall I sing of our English Warriors in the Seas, O nimium dilecte Deo,
cui militat ether, Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti.
That all their warlike Ships, and Boats, that are employed in the Seas derive
their felicitous arrivals, and good success abroad, whether unto, or from
Spain, and the West Indies, or off and from those many parts and corners of the
World, where now you send them, from the Lord Almighty, whose the the Sea is.
And he brings them to their desired haven. Italiam, Italiam laeto clamore
salutant. Virg. Good news is coming to you oftentimes from them, and that as
thick as the three luckie messengers, that were sent to King Philip of Macedon
at one time.

1. One came and told him that ^^e had won the game at Olympus, by the running
of his Chariots.

2. Another came and brought him word, that his Captain Parmenio had overthrown
the Dardanians.

3. Another came and told him that his wife Olympia had born him a son, which
was called Alexander, and he was very fair for a fourth.

It is not the Pagans Neptune, or the Papagans, S. Nicholas, and I know not
what, that delivers people in the Seas, and brings them home to their harbors,
as many ignorant Papists fancy.
3. Word, is unto the Merchant and Seaman. I would wrap you both together,
because you are sharers most commonly either in each others losses, or
successes; you have interests, and that of great worth and value, in several
and sundry bottoms, which cut their way through the Salt waters; and great
wisdom it is indeed, not to venture all in one bottom; for he said wittily,
that said He liked not that wealth that hung in ropes, meaning ships. There be
many dangers, not good to have all in one bottom; the Mouse will not trust to
one hole, therefore she has many, if in case she be assaulted. But that
which I aim at unto you Gentlemen, is this, when any of your ships come home,
and richly laden with the rich and wealthy Commodities of foreign parts, which
you are partakers and sharers in, Oh be affected with such mercies, and
consider how undeservedly the Lord throws in the world upon you, it flows in
upon you, and flies ^ay from others. Ah Sirs! when your ships come home, bless
the Lord for his goodness toward you and them, in bringing them home, both to
theirs, and also your desired Haven.

4. Word, is unto the Inland Towns, and Cities of the Nation. Gentlemen, I may
say to our Inland-Towns and Cities, what the Orator in another case once said
to his Auditory, Non timet mare, qui non navigat, non bellum, qui no^ bellat,
non terae motum, qui est in Galatia, non fulmen, qui est in Aethiopia. They
that sail not, know not what the roughness of the Seas are. Their condition in
the Sea, is like the man's in the Emblem, that runs through thick, and thin,
foul, and fair, saying, Culmen ad Aonidum recto contendere cursu, Fert animus
Pindi saxa p^^ and tribulos.
Friends, and Countrymen, you live far from the Sea, neither are you in the
sight of it at any time, nor in the hearing of its roaring, and ear-deafening
waves, yet is not this any excuse for you, to be unmindful of those that are
employed in it, and daily upon it. Seamen, which are the Nations servants, run
through a Million of hazzards, to fetch in the rich and costly Commodities of
foreign parts, viz. Silks, Spices, Oranges, Figs, and Lemmons, etc. The shipping
of the Land is not only (Sub Deo) instrumental to keep you in safety, but also
to afford you those Commodities that have not their growth nor entity in
England. David lived at Jerusalem, far from the Sea, as many of you do, yet was
not he ignorant of the many sorrows, and dangers, that those that use the Seas
do go through and meet withal. Whereupon you have him here composing of their
condition into a Psalm, and is much affected with it. He was sensible of the
blowing of the winds, of the raging and roaring of the Seas, of the Rocks, and
Sands; of the dangers, and shipwracks that men in those employments were liable
to. Ah Sirs! pity them that go in the Seas, and bestow a thousand prayers upon
them, for their condition calls for it, and requires it at your hands, if you
have any spark of pity, and Christianity in you. Virgils Hypotoposis of a
storm at Sea is their condition.

Tollimur in coelum curvato gurgite iidem
Subducta ad manes imos descendimus unda.
Consider but what a bustling the winds sometimes make and keep in a stormy day
upon your Houses, and Trees that are in your Orchards, insomuch that many times
trees are rent up by the roots and out-housing dismounted, and thrown down to
the very ground; Now if the wind have such an influence upon all high things at
Land, how much more upon the tall spired Masts and shipping that go in the
shelterless Seas?

5. Word, is unto the godly, and precious Ministry that is in great plenty in
this Nation. Gentlemen, you are by your profession (...), Rowers. 1 Cor. 4. And
believe it, rowing is a very hard labor, The Seas are as full of dangers to
them that go down into them, as Pandoras box was, whom the Poet reports of,
that Prometheus the Father of Deucalion would needs pry unto, out of which
Mill morborum and malorum genera ^rumpunt. A thousand evils was in it.
for men in the Thames go with their dublets off all day; their living is got
by the sweat of their brows. But your labor in the Lord's Vinyard is far
greater than theirs; many have killed themselves by hard working to get the
world, and I am sure there lies many a precious Preacher in the grave, that
might have lived longer, if he had not preached himself to death, and prayed
himself to death, though an unworthy world takes no notice of it. I beg of you
your public, and your private prayers for those that use the Seas. We have a
great number of ships frequently going to Sea, above a thousand sail every
year, both of Merchants, and Men of War, and stand not these in need of being
prayed for? I fear many of them perish, and find it to go harder with them,
than it otherwise would be, did you but pray more for them. Ah, they stagger
it in the Sea every day more then he that has a cask, a tankard, Alas the
Sea-mans life is a reeling to and fro, Nutant nautae and vacilla^t, cerebro,
and pedibus, may be their mott^.
or an hogshead of strong liquours in the belly of him. And are in daily
jeopardy of their lives. Good Sirs, bestow pulpit prayers, study prayers,
family prayers, and field-walking prayers upon them, all is little enough to
prosper Zebulun's Tribe in their goings forth, and commings in. But I proceed.

That God watches every opportunity, Very gladly would God have spared
Jerusalem, if there had but been one man in it that executed judgment, and
sought after the truth. Jer. 5.1. Run thee to and fro through the streets of
Jerusalem, etc. How compassionatly did the Lord affect any opportunity to cure
Babylon, Man's heart-daunting extremity, is Gods goldenest opportunity. Acts
27.23. For there stood by me this night, the Angel of God, whose I am, and
whom I serve. They all expected to be drowned, but God looked out for them to
preserve them. The Sea is no delightful place to carry in, for it is with them
that use it, as it is with travelers on Land, who speed their pace through
fields that afford no novelties, though sometimes they bait their beasts, and
rest themselves in places that are fruitful.
when he entreated her with the best argumentative Oratory that the Heavens
could compose, till she said, I will not be cured? Jer. 51.9. How did God
watch to spare Sodom for ten men's sakes? Genesis 18.32. Ah were but Seamen godly,
I durst undertake their safety in their well-going out to Sea, and returning
back from Sea. Insomuch that they might bid defiance to the Seas, and say unto
them, as Luther said of Henry the eighth's letters, Agant quicquid possunt
Henrici, Episcopi, atque adeo Turca, and ipse Satan, nos filii sumus Regni. So,
Agant venti, freta, etc. What History sets out Neptune in, in a statue of gold,
holding the two terrors of the Seas in his hands, the one called Scilla, the
other Charybdes (I may better say of the Lord) and these he has in chains, and
is feigned to call out aloud to the Mariners and ships that pass that way.

Pergite securae perfreta nostra rates.
Ships securely (...) on
Through our (...) Ocean.
That when ships have been long out of Italiam, Italiam laeto clamore salutat.
Virg.
and inexpressable pleasant to them. Then he brings them to their desired
Haven. It is said of Marcus Tullius, that when he was brought out of
banishment (it was with him, as if he had entered into a new world, and had
gotten Heaven for Earth) he broke out into this language, I am amazed to see
the beautifulness of Italy! Oh how fair are the Regions thereof? what goodly
fields? what pleasant fruits? what famous Towns? what sumptuous Cities? what
Gardens? what pleasures? what humanity amongst Citizens and Country people? It
is said of the Trojans, after they had been warring a long time in the
Mediterranean Seas (the like shall I say of our Warriors) that as soon as they
spied Land, they cried out with exulting joys. Oh Italy! Italy! It is thus
with our Seamen, Abigails bottles of Wine, and frayles of Raisins, were not
more welcome to David, in the hungry Wilderness of Paran; nor the shady
Juniper-tree, more delectable to the Prophet, when in the parching Sun; nor
Jacobs sat Kid more acceptable to his grave Father Isaac in his sickness, than
the Land is to the Mariner, when he has been long out of it.
when been a long tract of time out at Sea in the East, or West- Indies, Oh
England! England! poor Travelers that have been long out of their w^ (...) the
night time wandering here, and (...) and ring there, in a bewildered condition,
upon Hills, and Mountains, in vast and large Forests, far from any house,
destitute of moneys, and all comfortable refreshments, weather-beaten with rain
and wind, terrified with thunder, and lamentably starved with cold and hunger,
wearied with labor, and almost brought to despair with a multitude of
miseries; if this man, or those Travelers, should upon a sudden, in the
twinkling of an eye, I may write Epicharmes 's saying upon the Mariners
calling, (...). All good things are bought with labor.
be fetched and placed in some goodly, large, and rich Palace, that is
furnished with all kind of rich accommodations, warm fire, sweet odours, dainty
meat, downy beds, pleasant music, fine apparel, honorable and noble company,
and all this prepared for them, Oh how would they be transported and
over-joyed! As great contentment, and heart-ravishment as all this, is the
sight of England to the Mariner after a long voyage.

That every ships sinking, and miscarying in the sea, Storms are the Lords
surly Sergeants whom he claps upon men's backs in the Seas to arrest them,
which say unto them, that go in the Seas, as Greg, did to the Emperor
Anastatius, whom he took by the sleeve, and told him, Sir, this silken cassock,
and this scarlet co^t you shall not carry hence with you. This ship says a
storm shall never go to her Harbor.
is by, of, and from the Divine permission, and appointment of the Lord. God
out of wrath, and displeasure, suffers some to go to the pot, and perish. Many
ships have gone out with very famous names upon them, some called the Swallow,
some the Antelope, some the Laurel, and some again the Bonadventure, some the
Meer-maid, some the Swift-sure, and other some the Triumph, and one Rock, Sand,
Storm, or casualty or other, has in a short time given them the new name of a
Non-such. It is reported of a ship that had been a very long time out at Sea,
and having made a very good voyage of it, she was hard by, and very fair for
her Port, but before she could get into it, a storm arose and drove her back,
and she mourningly said, Per ware, and per procellas, tutissime huc usque
navigavi, ac portum juxta infelicissime mergor. I have hitherto gone clear, and
escaped all seas, and storms, and now my greatest misery is this, I must perish
in the sight of my harbor.

The Use that I would have all that go in the Seas to make of this Truth
praedelivered, will be this. Use. Nauf agium ad paucos, ut m^tus ad omnes
perveniat, some suffer shipwreck, that fear and terror may strike upon the
rest.


1. Look upon the shipwreck of others, with deep, solid, serious, and not with
flying and transient consultations, that they may sink into your hearts and
spirits, fix your eyes upon such, steep your thoughts in their sorrows, ponder
them in their certainty, causes, severity; it is not possible that posting
passengers can ever be any serious, or curious observers, of homeward or
foreign Countries. Ah Sirs, dwell upon the Sea-monuments of Divine Justice;
transient thoughts does not become such dreadful and permanent judgments, Quot
vulnera, tot ora. Other men's harms should be our warnings.
and Sea-standing spectacles. Misericordia and Judicium sunt duo pedes Domini,
are the two feet on which the Lord is oftentimes found walking upon with those
that use the Seas. I may say unto you that use the Seas, as the Prophet said
unto Israel in another case, Isa. 42.23, 24. Who among you will give ear to
this? Who will hearken and hear for the time to come?

2. Behold Gods Judgments in storms with particular application. Many, or
indeed the major part of Seamen, hearing of the Judgments of God upon the
Seas, say within themselves, and to the ships they are in, as Peter once said
to Christ, These things shall not be to us, or as proud Babylon said of her
self, Ah Sirs, me thinks many of your calling, run riot, swagger, swear,
drink, and whore, as if hell were broke loose, and God had dispensed with
Justice and Judgment, and granted you a general indulgence. Your destruction
in the Seas is never nearer than when you put it furthest from you. Baltazar
was tipl^ng, but he was surprised in his bowels. Dan. ^. Ah! you live as if you
had passed the day of Judgment over, and the very torments of Hell.
Isa. 47.8. I am, and none else besides me, I shall not sit as a widow, etc.
and though she put destruction far from her, yet was she laid in the dust;
there cry the Ostriches, and there dance the Satyrs, Isa. 13.21. Few places
have such prerogatives as Nineveh had, so much state had that famous City, says
Volateran, that it was eight years in building, and all that time no less than
ten thousand workmen upon it; and Diodorus Siculus says, that the height of the
walls were an hundred foot, the breadth able to receive three Carts in a breast;
it had one thousand five hundred Turrets; and yet none of these have any other
than paper walls to preserve their memories by. Sin turned the seven Churches
of Asia, Nice, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, who were famous for General Councils,
into rubbish and ruins, pastures for Oxen and Sheep.

Seamen, In the Emblem there is a naked sword, and an halter, about it.
Discite Justitiam: laqueus monet illud et ensis. Sirs, you should learn
goodness out of storms.
you are doing that your selves, which you may see God punishing in others, if
you will, but, if God be somewhat slack and loath to punish you, as he has
done others, by sending them into the bottom of the Seas, his patience should
lead you to repentance. Romans 2.4. Make you better and not the worse. Mark But
Gods severity toward others, and the same God that pays other men their
deserved punishment, will shortly pay you, without speedy and sound repentance.
What ever you see God punishing in others in the Seas, be sure you beware of
that in your selves; if God punish a sinning Cain by setting a brand upon him,
it is to teach others to keep their hands from blood; if God throw a Dives into
Hell, it is to teach others that they keep clear of the sin of covetousness; if
he set a fire on the Gates of Jerusalem for breaking the Sabbath, it is to
teach others to keep it holy; Plurimae intrant, pauciores perambulant,
paucissimae recedunt, may be the Motto of the Lords dealings with many ships,
and that justly, for their wretched and unsavory lives.
If he hurl ships and Seamen into the bottoms of the great deeps, it is to
teach others to take heed of swearing, and the graceless lives that they lived
and led whilst above water. When the Epitamizer of Trogus had to the full
described and set forth King Ptolomie's riot, as the chief and principal cause
of his ruin and destruction, he adds this, Tympanum, and Tripudium, It was
when he was fidling, and danceing. So should any ask me, when ships, or
wherefore such and such ships were cast away, I should say, it was when, and
because they were swearing.

3. Behold Gods Judgments in storms with an eye of prudent anticipation, and
prevention. Were such, and such swearers, and drunkards, cast away in the last
storm, I may say of such ships as are cast away, as one said of the fallen
Angels, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6. God hanged them up in Gibbets that others might hear,
see, and fear, and do no more so wickedly. So the Lord cast so many sail away
in a stormy night, or in a stormy day, that you might take warning to live
after another manner than they did.
Ah souls, fly you then from that wrath which you are at such times warned of;
is it not easier to keep out of the Sea, than to get out of it; I have often
times observed, that both birds and beasts will avoid those places, where they
have seen their fellow creatures to fall and miscarry in, and to avoid building
those places which they formerly built in, both in Towns and Cities in the time
of pestilent, and contagious years. When you hear of ship-wracks be afraid,
and bethink with your selves, why may not our turn be the next, if our lives
be not amended; whilst storms are a brewing in the skies, and are at hand to
come upon you, it is a special piece of wisdom to send out an Embassy of
prayer for conditions of peace, in a way of sincere turning unto the Lord. The
sins and punishments of others, should be your instructions, your afflictions,
your admonitions; their woes should be your warnings, there (...) should be
your (...), their sufferings your Schoolmasters, and remembrancers.

4. Look upon the shipwreck of others with an impartial and speedy enquiry and
examination into your own hearts, whether such upon whom the severe vengeance
of the Lord did so heavily fall upon, What was Jeroms observation of the wicked
upon Land, is mine upon the Sea, Bonus est Deus, domos ergo eorum qui erant
defixi in fecibus suis destruit, nec eos in leprosis domibus habitaere
permittit. God being God, cannot but destroy the dwellings of them that are bad.
were greater sinners than your selves; ask your consciences that question
which the Prophet once propounded and put forth unto the Israelites, Are there
not with me, even with me, the same sins against the Lord? Ransack your
hearts, and you will quickly find out the Jonah for which storms came down
upon you, therefore hide not your transgressions and abominations from the
Lord, which puts him, I am confident, upon the ruining and making so many
public examples as there be, and are to be seen at this day. A seeing eye
may soon spell out the language of God in the casting away of ships, Jer.
32.31. For this City bath been to me a provocation of mine anger, etc. So the
ships I have cast away. This is the language of a sunk ship; Oh man, thou see
what I now am, thou know what I have been, I know those that use the Seas
are as apt to say that to themselves which the Prophet complains of, as Israel
was to themselves, Isa. 28.15. We have made a Covenant with death, and with
hell are we at an agreement, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through,
it shall not come unto us.
how many voyages I have gone in safety hitherto over the Seas, now think with
thy self what thou may come to be.

5. Look upon the ships, you both know to be cast away in such and such
storms, and also upon those whose Topmasts you see at this day standing in the
Seas above the waters, with an humble thankfulness, not as rejoicing in those
public miseries, but as blessing the unwearied patience, and undeserved
sparing, and prolonging mercies of the Lord toward you. Ah Sirs, What an
hard-heartedness is there amongst many of you, for though you see wracks of
ships upon sands, and the Masts of sunk ships standing some in the East, some
in the West, some in the North, and other some in the South, you can sail by
them, and over the graves of the dead in the Seas, and never be affected with
them, nor as much as say, the Lord be thanked that I was not in that Vessel,
or that it fell not so out with me in those many voyages that I have made.
What was writ upon the Tomb of that great Assyrian Monarch punished by God for
his impieties, the same may well be writ upon every sunk ship in the Seas,
(...), Look upon me, and learn to be godlier.
What a mercy is it that you that equallize those in penalty of drowning, whom
you have far outstripped, and exceeded in sinning, should be preserved from
day to day.

6. Give your assent and faith to the truth of Gods judgments upon the ships
that are broke in storms, What is said in Exodus 15.10 may be well writ upon all
cast away ships, Thou did blow with thy wind, the Sea covered them, they sank
as lead in the mighty waters.
be sure that you make this construction of every ruined ship, that it was for
some deserved sin or other. It is, and ever has been the Devils policy, and
subtle contrivancy, both in this, and indeed in all ages, to strike out the
credulity of this truth out of the minds of men. I have read of Porphyry (in
what Author I cannot for the present well tell) one of Satan's fine spun
Sophisters, and cunning agents, that to overturn the miraculousness of the
Israelites passage through the Red Sea, would say that Moses took the advantage
of the low ebbing water, and so went through safely, which the Egyptians not
understanding, came in with the flood, and were drowned by the exuberancy of
the waters. Strabo also undertakes to weaken Gods raining down Hell out of
Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, by saying, that those Cities were situated on
sulphurious soils, which were full of holes, out of which fire breaking forth
consumed them, and thus he attributes the destruction of these Cities to
natural causes. It is a special act of mercy that God lets not all the Devils
out of hell upon those that use the Seas, as is supposed (some of them were) by
Origin, when the four corners of Jobs house in which his children was, was
thrown down to the ground. It is a wonder that one Devil runs not up into the
Main top, another into the Fore-top, another to the Helm, one into the
Mizon-top, and another on to the Boltsprit, and other some into the Howld to
pull the Ships you sail in into a thousand pieces for your wickedness.
And thus do many Seamen their lost ships unto the cause of this and that.
Commonwealths and Kingdoms have their falls and periods, let Athens, Sparta,
Babylon, Nineveh, and Carthage be witnesses, who have at this day no other
fences but Paper-walls to keep up their memories. Now what have been the causes
of these subversions, most men are ignorant, the Epicure will ascribe it to
Fortune, the Stoic to Destiny, Plato, Pythagoras, and Bodin to Number,
Aristotle to an asymmetry and disproportion in the members, Copernicus to the
motion of the Center of excentrick Circles; Cardanus, and the major part of
Astrologers to Stars and Planets, but the Oracles of the Lord speak in other
language, that sin is the grand cause both of ships, States, and Commonwealths
ruins.

You are apt to lay the blame of your miscarrying in the Seas upon the Pilot,
What one says of a Cities overthrow, the same will I say of castaway ships,
Civitatis eversio est morum, non murorum casus, A Cities overthrow is sooner
wrought by lewd lives, than weak walls.
upon the Master, upon the Commander of the ship, and not upon that abominable
weight of sin that is in ships. It is every way as easy to say who cast away
the brave ships that go in the salt waters, as it is to say such a man built
them, every plank that is broken by the dashing waves of the Seas, which are
many times to be seen swiming here, and floating there, has a tongue to
speak, and to accuse the villainy, profaneness, and impiety of the persons so
dealt with. Me thinks I see it written in fair, legible, and visible
characters, and capital letters upon all the sunk ships, and wracks that be,
and lie about the shores and Seacoasts in all Countries, whether East or West,
North or South, A fruitful land makes he barren for the iniquity of them that
dwell therein. Many a ship that is well rigged, tackled, trimmed, manned, and
gunned, with her top and Top-gallant, and her spread Sails proudly swelling
with a full Sail in a fair day, has gone to the pot before the evening.
Brave Merchant and warlike ships comes to ruin by, and through the wickedness
of those that live in them. Full little did the ship-builders, or the owners
think that the costly and brave warlike Fabrics should so soon violently end
in a desolate rubbish. It is not for us to be high-minded, but to fear, no
ship is so well cauked, so well decked, or planked, but may give way, and lay
all her passengers in the bottom. Surely Gentlemen, you that use the Seas, may
very well say with the Magicians in Scripture, when ships are cast away, Exodus
8.19. Then the Magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God.

Lachrymae ubi vos subtraxistis? Lachrymae ubi estis? and fontes lachrymarum
fluite super facies nostras, rigate maxillas.
7. Be filled with weeping tears, either at the hearing, or at your seeing of
ships sunk and cast away in the Seas. I confess those that dye in the waters,
are more to be lamented, than those that go to their graves by a timely death
at land, Lament. 4.9. They that be slain with the sword, are better than they
that be drowned. Homer brings in brave Ulysses in great despair, and disgustion
of a drowning death when laboring in a dismal tempest. I do not much wonder
(though the Lord knows it pities my heart) that ships are cast away many times,
because it is nothing else but the infinite patience of God that they are kept
up above water, there be so many oaths sworn in them, which far exceed either
the number of the stars in the heavens, or of the drops in the Ocean.
(...), wishing he had dyed among the Trojans, than dye ignobly in the Seas.
He abhorred to dye in the waters. Christ wept over Jerusalem, when he
foresaw her desolation, and so did he over Lazarus in his grave. Be affected
with the sufferings of those that miscarry in the Seas. Can you hear of Gods
judgments in the Seas, both against others and your selves, and not be
affected with it? Oh hardness of heart! Oh mores! Oh tempora! Let me tell you,
that I have seen a bird that has got loose from a stone, or stick, unto which
it has been tied, yet in flying with the string about its heels, it has been
entangled in the next bough or branch; it may be thus with you, you have
escaped in many a storm, but take heed that you go not to the pot in the next.
I have observed it, that there is a great deal of tenderness in the hearts of
those that live in Seaports upon this account, in respect there is much
weeping and wringing of their hands for the deaths of their friends and
acquaintance in such cases: John such a one, and Thomas such a one was cast
away in such a storm. I cannot blame them, I have read of Achilles that he
took such delight and pleasure in his dear friend Patroclus, En triftis rumor
nostras pervenit ad aures!
that upon a time in his long absence he was much dejected, because he feared
that he should never see him more; his mother Thetis to drive off his
melancholy thoughts, brought him an elaborate buckler made by Vulcan, Cubans in
facie, ^ox deinde supinus. One while he lay on his back, and another while upon
his face for grief.
which had imbost upon it, Sun, Moon, Stars, Planets, Sea, Land, Men fighting,
running, riding, hills, walls, Towns, Towers, Castles, Brooks, Rivers, Trees,
any thing, every thing his heart could desire, yet nothing could quiet him, for
his mind still ran upon his dear friend Patroclus; Errat and in nulla sede
moratur amor, may be the Motto of what is spoken of.
and so it must needs be with those that live in Seaports, who sometimes lose
dear husbands, other sometimes their children, sometimes their brethren, and
other sometimes their kindred.

8. Labor for a fruitful and profitable improvement both of your own, and also
of others sufferings in the Seas, humbly entreat the Lord, that no storm may
blow over without benefit to your souls. None sleep so soundly as they who
continue sleeping under the greatest joggings. Physic, if it works not, proves
hurtful to the Patient. If thou art so close nailed, and glewed to thy
swearing, drinking, whoring, and dabling in sin, that storms cannot part thee
and them, it is a provocation to God to leave thee, It was a good saying of one
after many storms and dangers upon the Seas, I have had, says her, Pedem
alterum in Cymba Charontis, alterum in ripa Acherontica, but I am the better
for it. It is good to be sometimes in this life, Inter Scyllam and Charybdim,
inter scopulos, et arenas.
Isa. 1.5. and an encouragement to Satan that he shall keep thee. God is never
more displeased, than when he takes away judgments in judgment, than when he
punishes you by delivering you out of storms, and leaving you to your own
hearts. Ah Sirs, beg of God, that the blessed opportunities of shipwracking
storms may never leave you as bad as they found you, and that no wind may go
down till it has driven you nearer unto your God. But I proceed to what
remains,

That God has power to do what he Lauda navigantem cum pervenerit ad portum.
There is much danger to be tugged with all, before the ship gets to her Port.
or can be made accountable, or responsible for what he does. Then he
brings, etc. How far then should every man be from expecting that he should
give them or any other an account of his actions and proceedings? It should
suffice them, that what ever befalls them in the Seas, is from the Lord, Job
1.21. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be his name. The Lord brings
us home, and other sometimes he cuts us short of coming home, blessed be his
name.

That those that fear God in their respective Gods people upon the Sea, even
the very meanest of them, may say, I never stir out, nor sail in the great
deeps, but my lifeguard goes along with me, and if they want for
preservation, there is never a creature in heaven or earth, Sea, or land, but
both will, and shall take their parts. What man is able to find out a danger
in which God could not, or the time when God did not help them? Ah Sirs, never
distrust God. Was it dangerous to be shut out of the Ark when the waters
increased upon the old world, or to be shut out of the City of Refuge when the
Avenger of blood pursued? or to want blood upon the door posts when the Angel
was destroying? and is it not as dangerous to those that go to Sea without the
fear of God? Consider but that. What has been said and recorded of Troys
Palladium (that whilst that image remained there, the City was impregnable (had
not the Greeks found out the stratagem to steal their Idol away, they could
never have conquered the City) I will say of the godly and religious that go in
the Seas, whilst they walk close with their God, It is reported, that the Seas
on a time being very rough and tempestuous, great waves and billows flying
mountain high, a great Vessel was sailing upon them, and every wave threatening
to drown her, the wicked wretches that were in her scared not the Seas, the
Waves asked them how it happened that they were no more fearful? quoth the
Mariners, Nos Nautae. We are Mariners. How much more may the godly say in time
of storms, Nos Christiani, et Deum Omnipotentem habemus?
the waves shall never hurt them, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while you
be with him, and if you seek him, he will be found of you: but if you
forsake him, he will forsake you.

That the Lords merciful dealings with

That when God will deliver a people out No powers in Heaven, Sea, or Land,
that God cannot overtop and make vail, and strike sail to him when he
pleases, Psalm. 114.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. What ailed thee, Oh thou Sea, that thou
fleddest, thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? Proud-vanting, This was
David's experience of Gods readiness to help him when in distress, Psalm.
18.10. And he rode upon a Cherub, and did fly; yea he did fly upon the
wings of the wind. The Lord is continually upon one Cherubs back or other,
over, and upon the great deeps, one while in the North, and another while in
the South, etc. for your deliverance.
and billow-bouncing Seas, soon lower their topsails at Gods rebuke.

Verse. 31. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.
IN the words we may soon espy two remarkable things:

1. A vehement desire, Oh that men would praise the Lord.

2. A duplicatory reason of this desire: 1: For his goodness. 2. For his
wonderful works to the children of men.


If the heavens were parchment the Seas I^ke, and every pile of grass in the
world a pen, all would be too little to set forth the high praises of the Lord
by.
This Verse seems to include the ardent earnestness of the Psalmists spirit that
Seamen would be much in thankfulness, and much and frequent in praising of
the Lord their deliverer out of all their distresses. Oh seems he to say, that
I could put men upon this duty, it would be more comfortable to me, seems the
Psalmist to say, to find such a principle in the hearts of those that are
employed in the great waters, Ah Sirs, you let the fresh running floods of
Jordan (I mean your Sea-deliverances) fall into the mare mortuum of your
forgetfulness.
than any one thing in the world again whatsoever. Oh is but a little word
consisting of two letters, but no word that ever a man utters with his tongue,
comes with that force and affection from the heart as this does. Oh is a word
of the highest expression, a word when a man can say no more. This Interjection
oftentimes starts out of the heart upon a sudden from some unexpected
conception, or admiration, or other. In the composure of these words, we have
two things only considerable.

1. The manner of it. 2. The matter of it.
Oh that men would praise the Lord.

But to open the words a little, Oh that men would praise the Lord, etc. Heb.
That they would confess it to the Lord, both in secret, and in society, this is
all the rent that God requires; he is contented, that those that use the Seas
should have the comfort of his blessings, so he may have the honor of them;
this was all the fee Christ looked for, for his cures, Go and tell what God
has done for thee, words seem to be a poor and slight compensation, but
Christ, says Nazianzen calls himself the Word.

That deliverances at Sea out of storms Lucan reports, that the Elephants that
come out of the Nabathaean Woods to wash themselves in the floods near unto
them (as if to purify) will fall down to adore the Moon, or otherwise their
Creator, and return into the woods again. And will nor you that use the Seas,
to your God that delivers you?
and undeserved kindness of the Lord, vouchsafed unto them. Oh that men would
praise the Lord. Shall I prove the point? I profess if Scripture were silent,
no man I should think, should be so audaciously impudent, as to deny the
verity thereof, 1 These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for that is the will
of God. If in every thing, then surely in, and for Sea-preservations. Men must
take heed that they be not thankless in this thing, lest the Heavens blush at
their ingratitude. Psalm. 119.62. At midnight will I rise to give thanks to
thee. Ah that our Seamen were as forward as they lie in their Cabbins, and
Hammocks. Ah Sirs, how many voyages make you to and again upon the Seas; one
while into the East Indies, So affected were the inthralled Greeks with their
liberty procured by Flaminius the Roman Generael, that out of thankfulness to
him, they would oftentimes lift up their voices in such shrill acclamations,
crying Soter, Soter, Savior, Savior, that the very birds would fall down from
the heavens astonished and amazed. And will not you Gentlemen be affected with
your Sea deliverances?
and another while into the West; one while into the North, and another while
into the South; but where are your thanksgivings all this time to God for your
safe goings our, and returnings home? Go but to the Planets and they will tell
you, that they will not deal so with the Sun, as you deal with your God; we
say they, receive much light from the Sun, and for a testimony of our
thankfulness we do not detain it, but reflect it back again upon the Sun. Go
to the Earth, Sailors, and she will tell you, that she will not deal so with
the Heavens, as you do with your God; she will tell you that she receives
much rain from the Heavens, and out of a testimony of much thankfulness she
detains it not, but returns it back in Vapor again; and after this manner may
you hear her speaking, Cessat decursus donorum, si cesset recursus gratiarum.
Mercies from above would soon cease, If my thanksgivings, and returnings from
below went not up. It is said of the Lark, that she praises the Lord seven
times a day with sweet melodious ditties.

Atque suum tiriletiriletiriletiriletirile cantat Alauda. Isa. 20. The beast of
the field shall honor me, the Dragons, and the Owls, because I give waters in
the Wilderness, and rivers in the Desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

1. Reason. Because your lives were at the stake, as Isaac's was upon the
Altar's, when the knife was at his throat, yet did the Lord call and look forth
very seasonably, The Romans used to stick and bedeck the bosom of their great
God Jupiter with Laurel, as if they had glad tidings of fresh victories, and
that out of a testimony of their thankfulness for what they had.
out of the Heavens for you, and spoke to the winds when they were up in a
rampant kind of hostility and rebellion against you, and bid them be quiet, and
do you no harm, otherwise you had perished in many a storm ere this day, and is
not this worthy a great many thanks? Who can be too thankful to that God, that
has been so careful, and tenderhearted over you when in the Seas, where there
was no eye to pity you?

2. Reason. Because in that storm, if God had given it commission, thou had
been shortly after either in Hell, I have met with a story of one, when being
risen from the dead (therefore you that live ungodlily in the Seas think of it)
he was asked in what condition he was in when he was there, he made answer, No
man will believe, no man will believe, no man will believe, They asked him what
he meant by that, he told them, no man will believe how exactly God examines,
how strictly God judges, and how severely he punishes.
(or Heaven) or may I not leave Heaven out? and thou had been in Hell, where
the Devils would have fallen upon thee, to tear thee to pieces.

Ah Sirs, your lives hang but upon small wyers, and what would become of you,
if God should not spare you? Be affected with this mercy.

3. Reason. Because had the storm but had license to have destroyed you, and
the ships you sailed in, which the Lord would not suffer, you had never come
home with your rich lading, nor never had that mercy granted you, of ever
seeing, or enjoying of your loving friends, wives, children, houses, lands, and
acquaintance again, and shall not all this move you unto thankfulness? If this
will not, I know nothing in the world that will prevail with you. I pray God
that Seamen do not with their deliverances at Sea, as Pharaoh did with the
miracles that were done before his face, Exodus 7.23. Of whom it is said, That
he would not set his heart to the miracle.

4 Reason. Because you have now at the present a still, quiet, and peaceable
Sea to sail in, and upon, which in the storm you had not, such was the proud
vantingness of it, that you durst not loose a knot of sail, nor keep your
Top-masts unlowred, and un-peaked, and the waves run mountain-high, rageing and
rolling on every hand you, in such a miserable manner, It seems strange to me,
that Seamen are not bettered by all the storms they meet with, and by all the
calms God bestows upon them. Iron is never cleaner than when it comes out of
the furnace, nor brighter than when it has been under the sharp file; the Sun
never shines clearer than when it comes from under a Cloud; the Coal that has
been covered with ashes is thereby the hotter, and the quicker; every thing
brightens, and betters, but the rusty Sailor, Gods mercies and judgments in the
Seas do not scour him.
as that you were at your wits-end, but Oh what sweet peace, and tranquil
weather have you now, insomuch that your Vessels go now upright, without that
nodding, staggering, and reeling which they were put to before? How still are
the waves, how clear above be the skies, and Heavens, how well escaped are you
from the shore, the Rocks, and sands, which you were so near to in the storm?
Are you not affected with this mercy? The Lord soften your hard hearts then.

Give me leave to present you with a few motives unto this duty of
thankfulness.

1. Consider, Soul, what an unspeakable mercy it is, that God should hear thy
Prayers in a storm, when thou wast almost overwhelmed; that God should hear
prayers, nay prating, and babbling rather than praying, which is but an
abomination unto the Lord; that God should hear the prayers of the righteous,
that is nothing strange, because he hears them always; but that God should
hear your prayers, Sirs, which are most sorry and sinful prayers, The Stork is
said to leave one of her young ones where she hatched them. The Elephant to
turn up the first sprig toward Heaven, when he comes to feed, and both out of
an instinct of gratitude to their Creator. Sailors, let not brute creatures
excel you.
for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin; this is wonderful. Ah will not you be
thankful unto the Lord Sirs?

I have red of a Lion, that had but got a thorn in his foot, as he was walking
and ranging in the Forest, for, and after his prey, and being exceedingly
pained with it, he made after a foot-Traveller which he spied in the Forest,
making signs to him that he was in distress, which the Traveller seeing, and
apprehending that his case was dangerous if he ran, he stood still to know
the Lions pleasure, to whom the Lion declared himself, and the poor man pulled
it forth; and the Lion to requite him followed him; as guarding of him from all
wrongs by other wild-beasts quite through the Forest. Ah Sirs, will not you
express your thankfulness to your good God?

2. Consider the particular dealings of God with you; he deals not so with
every one, Do you not see God in the winds? Mercavab Veloha^ocheb, how is he
to be seen in the Chariot which he rides in, though not the Rider, says a
Rabbi.
some goes down into the bottoms amongst the dead, whilst you do float above.
When the Lord would stir up David, and melt his heart, and bring it unto a
kindly sorrow for all his mercies, he takes this course, 2 Samuel 12.7. Did not
the Lord do thus, and thus? Did he not make thee King of Judah? and of Israel?
Did he not give to thee thy Masters wives, and houses into thy bosom? and if
this had not been enough, he would have done more for thee, therefore recount
the particular kindnesses, and Sea-deliverances, the Lord has bestowed upon
thee; does not the Lord seem to say, I delivered thee at such a time, and in
such a storm? did not I deliver thee from such a Rock, and from such a sand?
God keeps a reckoning Sirs of what he does, and also of all your deliverances,
it is but wisdom then to kiss the Son, lest he be angery, to kiss him with a
kiss of adoration and subjection all your days.

3. Consideration, That thankful hearts are evermore full of thankful thoughts,
and these are such as are evermore suitable unto the benefits that are
received, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits?
He has delivered me out of this and the other storm, from this and the other
shore, from many Rocks, and Sands, both in this and also in the other parts of
the world, I have met with a story of a Company of Sailors in Zara (called by
some Jadera) a Town in Sclavonia, that they consecrated a Church to St. John di
Malvatia, which they built out of their own wealth, and wages, to express their
thankfulness for their great deliverance out of a storm, in which they had like
every man of them to have gone to the pot. This they vowed when at Sea, and
when come on Land, they were as good as their words; where are your thanks
Sailors?
what shall I now bestow upon him? How has he preserved me when shot has
flown like hail? When dangers have been unfordable, and miseries innumerable,
then has the Lord stepped in to deliver me.

Ah Sirs, what cause have you that use the Seas, to fall down before the Lord
in all thankful acknowledgment to him for your deliverances at Sea, even as the
Wise men of the East did before Christ, and offer unto him Gold, Incense, and
Myrrh, aurum fidei, thus devotionis, aromata pietatis, mentes humiles, probos
mores, animos dignos Deo. The Gold of faith, the Frankincense of Devotion, the
Myrrh of Godliness, humble minds, good manners, souls worthy of God?
4. Consider, That thankful hearts are evermore full of admiring thoughts; I
wonder at the goodness of God, says a good, and an honest heart, that he
should come and step down so seasonably to deliver me, when I was in a Sea far
from any eye, or heart to pity me. Ah how has mercy taken the pains to come
and meet us? How has mercy as it were fallen into our mouths, and into our
laps, even very unexpectedly? Abraham's servant was very full of admiring
thoughts, when he saw providence so working for him ( Genesis 14.21.) as the
woman's coming to the well, and her willingness to give him and his Camels, as
much water as they pleased. Ah stand amazed at Gods deliverings of your souls
in the stormy, and tempestuous Seas!

5. Consider, That thankful hearts are evermore full of awful and trembbling
thoughts at the Judgments of God, both executed and threatened upon others in
the Seas, when they see themselves so threatened in storms, and others to be
cast away in them, and yet notwithstanding they themselves spared, this strikes
thoughts of fear into them, and upon them. Psalm. 119.20. My flesh trembles for
fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy righteous Judgments.

6. Consider, That thankful hearts are evermore full of viewing, and observing
thoughts, Oh how has the Lord delivered me in this late storm and Tempest? in
what danger was I in but now, our Sails rent, our Mast fell about our ears, we
pumped and toyled night and day for our lives, Cables broke, and at another
time our Anchors came home, and our ships drive? And thus such hearts cannot
but say, Exodus 15.13. Thou in thy Mercy have led forth the people which thou
have redeemed.

7. Solemnly consider; that thankful hearts after Sea-deliverances, are full of
improving thoughts, and will not you be so too Gentlemen? You that use the
Seas? Such a soul has his whole mind taken up with the mercies of the Lord, and
he plots, contrives, and designs how he may make a good use, and a good
improvement of all that he has done for him in the Seas, Pliny writes of Egypt,
It is well if it may not too truly be said of those that use the Seas, that
she was wont to boast how she owed nothing to the Clouds, or any foreign
streams for her fertility, being abundantly watered by the inundation of her
own River Nile. I am afraid that you think that you are not beholden to your
God.
and beheld with his eyes in the great deeps. Such a soul sets all his
Sea-deliverances in print, and lays them up in the wardrobe of his heart. The
holiness, goodness, mercifulness, and majesty of God is evermore much in such a
souls eye.

8. Consider, That all good men are for it, and that with tooth and nail, and
will you not then be thankful unto the Lord? I will tell you who be against
it, the Devil, and wicked men, but I pray God preserve you from such
Counselors. Psalm. 65. Praise waits for thee O God in Sion. Psalm. 29.2. Give
unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, Worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness.

9. Consider, That God himself is for it, Mal. 2.2. If ye will not hear, and
if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, says the Lord of
hosts, I will even send a curse upon you.

10. Consider, That God commands it. The shortest cut to ruin men is
unthankfulness. Trumpeters delight to sound when, and where they are answered
with an Echo.


11. Consider, That God expects it.

12. Consider, That God prizes it, and commends it.

13. Consider, That God is hereby much honored by it. Psalm. 50. ult.

14. Consider, That God will fully and freely reward it.

A word or two now of Use, and so I will leave the point, because it is so
painful to me to write, and lay down at large what I might, and what every
point would bear. I do acknowledge that Spices when they are pounded, and
beaten small; they do evermore smell the sweetest; and points of doctrine or
Scriptures, when they are branched forth, expounded, and broken up into parts,
are evermore the profitablest. For my part I know not what to say to the
generality of Seamen, because they put me to as great a stand, as the Turkey
Painter was once put to, when he was to set forth all the several Nations of
the world, according to their Country dress, and habit, he left one people
naked, and being asked the reason why, he said he could not tell what
apparel to put upon them. You are thankless to your God for your Sea mercies.
I must be forced to do as the Musitioner, who evermore strikes most and
oftenest upon the sweetest note in his song, the Paven, or Galliard; brevity is
the Card I must sail by in the Sea, unless I were in some warm study upon Land,
to write and expatiate my self in. The uses are two.

1. Of Reproof. 2. Of Exhortation.
1. Of Reproof. Is it thus then, that your great and many mercies do call for
thanksulness at your hands? then let me tell you, that this point looks sourely
upon you, even as Diana's image in Chios did upon all those that came into her
Temple, with a lowering and contracted countenance, but looked blithe, and
smiled on them when they went forth. Ah Sirs, consider what you do? you
withold Gods right from him? Will any Landlord bear with his Tennant that
shuffels him off from year to year, Mariners, like the fish Borchora, of whom
it is said, that she does devour many fish one after another, but at last is
met with, and taken; so do they their Sea-mercies, but God will meet with
them if they repent not of it.
and pays him never a farthing? Gentlemen consider this, God will not always
bear with your ingratitude. Pharaoh escaped many plagues and judgments (as you
do ship-wracks, storms, and Tempests) which the rest of the Egyptians smarted
under, and so may you many storms, whilst others perish, and are denied to be
saved, either by planks, or boats; but what was Pharaoh kept for? was he not
reserved for the Sea, to be made a prey on in the great deeps? so may you
(even thousands of you) for ought I know, out of all your deliverances out of
storms, be reserved for the next to be swallowed up in. The Sodomites were
rescued out of the hands of Chedorlaomer, but were after consumed with fire
from heaven; and thus the wicked have many deliverances which they had in a
manner as good be without, for they turn into curses, and not blessings when
they are not sanctified. Will not the Lord say to you when you come into
distresses, Jer. 22.21. I spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou said I
will not hear; this has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not
my voice. I will deliver you no more, for you have been unthankful under all.

2. Of Exhortation. What I speak to you good people, I speak to my own soul,
and the Lord speak it to us all; let me beg of you who have been delivered
even out of a little Million of perils by Sea, to express your thankfulness to
that God that has delivered you, even to his praise in all societies that you
either go amongst or converse with. Ah how near drowning have you been at such
a time? how near killing at another time? how near being lost, Your condition
has been, many and many a time like the tree the Poet fing^ of, which bore
golden boughs -- Quaquantum vertice ad auras Aethereas, tantum radice in
tartara tendit, Virg. whose root was just so much beneath the earth, as the top
was in height above it. Your ships were hard by drowning.
and of never being heard of more many a time? and is not all this worthy of
thanks to that God from whence you had his care over you to protect you.

That there is no duty that man is more dull and backward to, and in, than in
the praising, Si ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris, let me but hear of a man
accused for unthankfulness, and you need say no more. Senec.
and celebrating of the Name of the Lord. Oh that men would praise the Lord,
etc. Me thinks there is a great deal of dead-heartedness upon the Sea amongst
men, as to the performance of this very duty: Masters are dead, Captains are
dead, Lieutenants, Boatswains, Gunners, Carpenters, Seamen, Tarpowlings, and
all that use the Seas, are not so much affected with their deliverances as they
should be. He deserves to lose his Garden that will not afford his Landlord a
flower.
I have read of the heathen, that when they had escaped shipwracks at any time
they would hang up their votivas tabulas to Neptune, as a testimony of their
thankfulness. What will you do Sirs, for your God?

Sirs, If you would praise God, take these ensuing Directions along with you.

In some tenures people do not refuse to do their homage, though it be but the
rendering of a Red rose, or a Pepper-corn.
1. Labor for humility of heart, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of
all thy mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant.
A proud spirit cannot be thankful unto God, a haughty mind is never thankful
unto God for any mercy bestowed.

2. Labor for a due consideration of the greatness of the blessing: Will a
Picture continue that is drawn upon an Ice, will it not fade and melt away when
the Ice upon which it is drawn thaws?

3. Take all advantages of praising God, Jam. 5.13. when you are upon the merry
pin then praise the Lord, I mean cheerful. Praise God in public, Many of you
are as unthankful for your Sea-mercies, as Bajazet the great Turk was for his
being made so great a Monarch, who when asked if ever he had thanked God for
it, he said, that he never so much as once thought of it, in all his life time,
then but just you should smart for it, quoth Tamerlain.
and praise him in private.

4. Strive against all hindrances whatsoever, be it sluggishness, backwardness
or whatsoever.

5. If you would praise the Lord do it speedily.

6. Do it sincerely.

7. Largely.

8. Freely.

9. For the least mercy.

10. Constantly, not like the new Moon, which shines all the beginning part of
the night, and then leaves all the hinder part in darkness.

Motives to praise God are these.

1. Hereby you will honor God much.

2. It is a gainful kind of trading with God; the husbandman delights to sow
his seed in, and upon fruitful soils, where he knows his increase will yield
sixty, or an hundred fold. There be seven sorts of people that I would put upon
the praising of God for Sea-mens deliverances. 1. Their Wives. 2. Their
Parents. 3. Their Friends. 4. Their Brethren. 5. Their Sisters. 6. Their
Acquaintance. 7. Gods people. The meeting of Friends after a long Voyage at
Sea, should be like that of Joseph, Genesis 46. And he fell on his neck, and
wept, etc.
They are not lost praises that are given unto God.

3. It is a most noble act of Religion to praise God.

4. Giving of thanks to God is more than to pray.

5. If you will be much in the praising of the Lord, you will be under much
joy and comfort.

That the praising of the Name of the great and most high God for delivering
mercies, is not only a very acceptable duty with God, but also the readiest
way to obtain mercy in the like exigency and necessity again. Oh that men would
praise the Lord, Psalm. 50.23. Who so offers praise, glorifieth me, and then
it follows, He that orders his conversation aright, to him will I show the
salvation of God. Munera creed mihi placant hominesque Deosq.
This Scripture now proves it to be an acceptable performance in the sight of
God, and that such as give God the most and best of praises, they shall have
the greatest, and the sweetest salvations: Improve Neptunum accusat, iterum qui
naufragium fecit: He is very injurious to Neptune that complains of being
shipwracked when unthankfulness is the cause. Alexander the Great by burning
Frankincense frankly, and freely to the gods, gained by conquest the whole
Kingdom of Arabia, where all the sweet Aromatic trees do grow. Ah Sirs, you
do not know how you might prosper at Sea, would you but be liberal in your
praisings of God, and thanksgivings to him?
The people in the Low Countries by giving the Stork leave to build and nest it
in their houses, to requite the housekeepers she comes every year at her
appointed time. We read of small, or no rain, that falls many times in diverse
parts of Africa, and the grand cause is supposed to be the sandy nature of the
soil, from whence the Sun can draw no vapors or exhalations, which ascending
from other parts in great abundance, resolve themselves into kind benign
showers, refreshing and helping of the earth that yields none, and this is
the reason many times why God poures not down his blessings and benefits in
such an abundance as sometimes he has been wont to do, because your hearts
are as dry and barren, as the barren grounds and sands of Africa; for if
vapors of melting prayers, tears, praises, and thanksgivings go not up to
heaven, mercies will soon be stopped in their passage down. If Seamen were not
so much behind hand with God in the tribute of praise, and good life, God
would soon lay a charge upon all his creatures, both in heaven, and in earth,
that they should pay their tribute unto man, the Sun his heat, Ah Sirs, I am
afraid that many in the Sea, do vitam gentilem agere, sub nomine Christiano,
live even Turks under the name of Christians. The Sailor sometimes is like a
Rubric, or Sunday letter, very zealously red, and all the week after you may
write his deeds, and his unthankfulness unto his God for Sea deliverances in
black.
the Sea his calmness, the Winds their gentleness, the Moon her light, the
Stars their influences, the Clouds their moisture, the Sea and Rivers their
Fish, the Land her Fruits, the Mines their Treasures, etc. And when neglected,
God shuts up the windows of heaven, and locks up the treasuries of his bounty,
and so lets Winds and Seas rage, and roar, and the creatures gnash and grin
their teeth at a people for their ingratitude. Ingratitude is a sin (supposed)
to taint the very influences of the Stars, it dries up the Clouds, infects the
very Air, makes Winds terrible and boisterous, blasts the very fruits of the
earth. Cyprian attributes the great dearth in his time to the want of
thankfulness, and truly I shall attribute the many ships that are cast away unto
their unthankfulness unto their God, for had they been more thankful, more
holy, and humble for those storms God delivered them out of, they had never
gone so sadly to the pot as they have done. Here is quoth Cyprian a very great,
and general sterility, or barrenness of the fruits of the earth, and what is
the reason of it? because there is such a sterility of righteousness and
purity. Men complain now a days, that springs are not full, Seamen deal with
God, as the Heathen (who would) when they had served their torns upon their
gods, as Prometheus, etc. put them off with beasts skins stuffed with straw. If
they get but out of the storm, they never look behind them, who sat upon the
floods all the time to deliver them.
themselves not so healthful, nor the Seas so calm as formerly they have been,
nor the Winds so quiet and peaceable, nor the showers so frequent, the earth so
fruitful, nor the heavens so obsequious unto them as they have been, to serve
their pleasure and natural profit; to God the creatures are obedient, and on
his errands they go, Deu. 28.38. Thou shall carry much seed out into the field,
and shall gather but little in; for the locust shall consume it. It is sin that
makes the Sea so dangerous, and so dreadful, sin that makes the heavens as iron
over head, and the earth to grow so full of thorns and brambles. But to
proceed, I shall not adventure pluribus morari, but rather be tanquam Canis ad
Nilum, in a restless Sea where I can neither hold my pen in my hand, nor keep
my paper and ink upon board scarce. The Arguments why Seamen should praise God
are briefly these.

1. Because God had such a special

2. Because God did so much for

That when God has delivered men out Sceva told all his friends, that at the
siege of Dyrrachium where he so long resisted Pompeys Army, that he had two
hundred and twenty Darts sticking in his Shield -- Densamque tulit in pectore
Sylvam. Ah set your deliverances before people.
it is their duty, not only to praise God for his goodnesses toward them, but
also to set the fruit of those mercies before others to taste of. Oh that men
would praise the Lord, etc. Verse. 37. Let them exalt him in the Congregation.
Portus Olympiaca vocem acceptam septies reddit. If any knock or speak at the
Gate or Portal of Olympus, it returns a sevenfold Echo of the knock, or
speech. Your mercies should make you speak Sirs.

That although a man has nothing to speak of Gods wonderful deliverances in
the Seas, but what is known unto others, as well as to himself, yet is it a
part of Gods praise, and of his thankfulness, to make Gods works known, and the
continual matter of his talk and discourse. Oh that men would praise the Lord,
Psalm. 105.2. Talk ye of all his wonderful works. Talk not of one or two, of
some of them, but of all of them, which you have seen, and known done and
wrought for you in the Seas.

That freedom from perils in the Seas, and enjoyment of life, are two mercies
that call for many thanks at the hands of those that go down into them. He that
has but a subjects purse, may have a Kings heart. Oh praise the Lord.
Sirs, you usually pay people in foreign parts for your Anchorage in their
Harbors, for your Pilotage into them, for boyage in the Seas, and lightage
upon land, and will you return nothing unto your God? You are the Lords
Tenants, you sit on very great Rents, and great Rents you have to pay, surely
you had need to be stirring, do what you can, you will dye in Gods debt. Now
thankfulness stands not in words, and complements; if you would express your
thankfulness unto God Sirs, then do thus.

1. Labor to come out of all your storms, and Sea-dangers, as Job did out of
his affliction, Job 23.10. When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
It would be a brave thing, that every Sailor that goes into the Furnace of a
fiery, stormy, and raging Sea, Believe it Sirs, God looks for it at your hands.
What is said of the statue of Juno in the holy City near to Euphrates in
Assyria, that it will evermore look toward one let them sit where they will in
her Temple, she stares full upon them, and if you go by, she follows with her
eye; the same shall I say of the Lord, go where you will on Sea or Land, the
Lords eye follows you.
should come out of it as gold does out of the fire, when they come on land. Ah
who would not but take a turn at Sea then to be purified from their dross?

2. Offer unto God the ransom of your lives, as the Law runs, Exodus 31. leave
some seal or pawn of thankfulness behind you. The Gracians paint Jupiter in
their Temples, with his hands full of thunderbolts. Sirs, be afraid of
unthankfulness.
Heathens after a shipwreck, a storm, or a fit of sickness, will offer
something or other to their gods for every preservation. That thanksgiving is
to be suspected that lies in nothing but words. Give God your hearts, he
gives you his mercies; Give God your lives, he gave you them when you were in
danger.

3. Let God have soul-thankfulness from you; if we receive but any benefit, or
special kindness from our friends, our hearts acknowledge it, and our tongues
confess it, Sirs, Do what you can, you will dye in Gods debt.
and we cannot be at quiet till we some way or other requite it.

4. Let God also have mouth-thankfulness from you, let your tongues walk apace,
and speak at the highest rate you can to the praise of God, Psalm. 124.2, 3. If
it had not been the Lord who was on our side, -- then had the Seas at such and
such a time swallowed us up, and at another time drowned us.

5. Let God have life-thankfulness from you; this God had of, and from David in
full measure, Psalm. 145.2. Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy
name for ever and ever. I have known that those that have undertaken to buy and
redeem poor captives out of a Turkish bondage and slavery, they have vowed to
be their servants all the days of their lives. A certain Jew when traveling
over a deep River in the night where the bridge was broken down, saving only
that there was one narrow plank laid over to foot it on, he rid very safely
over, and being asked the next day how he got over, he knew nothing, and going
back through the peoples entreaty, swounded away, and dyed at the consideration
of his deliverance.
Ah Sirs, will not you be Gods servants all the days of your lives, who has
delivered you so often out of storms, and raging Seas, and inevitable dangers?

6. Let me entreat you to look back upon mercy, and then tell me if you can
be unthankful. Act. 27.1. And when they were escaped, then they knew that the
Island was called Melita. They viewed their mercy on every side.

7. Compare your selves with others; others have been denied to be delivered,
and lie ship and men in the bottom of the Sea, and you and your ships are
still floating and swimming, whilst others are drowned.

8. Are not others that have tasted of your deliverances in the Seas often and
many a time blessing and thanking of God, both in private and public, and will
you be unthankful?

9. Be resolute for the duty of thanksgiving unto God.

10. Consider what thou had been, and where thou had been if mercy had not
prevented, Psalm. 89.48.
and an hand been reached out of heaven as it were to have helped thee.

11. Certainly if thou were but changed from the state of a sinner, thou
would be oftener in the thanking of thy God than thou art.

12. Were but our Seamen a generation of people that were much and often in
godly sorrows, Now if you will not be thankful unto the Lord for all your
deliverances, take heed lest he say, Judge 10.13. Wherefore I will deliver you
no more.
they would be oftener in their thanksgivings unto the Lord.

13. Were but those that use the Seas filled with divine relishes of Gospel
graces, they would be thanking of their God oftener than they are. He that is
the fullest of the spirit of grace, is the only fittest man to be thankful
unto God.

14. Were but those that use the Seas much in minding of the mercies and
deliverances of the Lord bestowed upon them, they would be a far thankfuller
people than they are. I have read of one that was in very great debt, and yet
notwithstanding that, he slept as well as if he had had the greatest estate
that could be to pay it with; a great Gentleman in the Country observing it,
desired him that he would be pleased to sell him his bed. Ah Sirs, you are
much in debt to God.
Psalm. 5.15. I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt mercifully with
me.

15. Did but those that use the Seas, take up their joys, and delights in God,
they would be more thankful unto their God than they are. Ah may I not say,
Psalm. 78.42. They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them
from the enemy?

That the Lords creating of the Seas for the use of Navigation, to that end men
who can neither fly nor swim, might the more facilly and commodiously commerce
one with another, in all, and throughout all the foreign parts of the world, is
a point of Gods great praise. Oh that men would praise the Lord!

Heraclitus was such an admirer of the Sea, that he said, if we wanted the
Sun, we should be in perpetual darkness, if wanted the Sea, live like
barbarous people.
God has founded the Earth upon the Seas, and established it upon the floods.
Psalm. 24.2. Aristotle looked upon this, as one of the greatest wonders of
nature, and well he might, that God should set the solid Earth upon the back
of the waters, for man's convenience. Psalm. 104.6, 7. Jer. 5.22.

That the saving and delivering mercies Psalm. 105.5. Remember his mavelous
works that he has done: his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth. A
gracious heart files all the Lords dealings with his soul, either at Sea, or
Land, in his heart, and steers the same course the Seaman does in the great
deeps, who makes it his daily business in long Voyages to keep his Quotidian
reckonings for every elevation he makes, whereby he judges of his advancings,
and deviations. Men's memories should be deep boxes, or storehouses, to keep
their precious Sea-mercies in, and not like hour-glasses, which are no sooner
full, but are a running out. Bind all your sea-deliverances, and preservations
as fast upon your hearts, as ever the Heathen bound their Idol Gods in their
Cities, in the time of wars, siedges, and common calamities, which they
evermore bound fast with Iron chains, and strong guards, and sentinels, lest
they should leap over the walls, or run out of their Cities from them. Ah Sirs,
look to those things which Satan will be very prone to steal from you, who is
like unto a thief that breaks into an house, but will not trouble himself with
the lumber of earthen or wooden vessels, A gracious heart will resolve, that
the Orient shall sooner shake hands with the West, and the Stars decline the
azured Skies, than he will forget the Lords deliverances, out of gloomy,
stormy, tempestuous, and heart-daunting Seas. Sirs, you stand in need to be
called upon, for your hearts are not unlike to the leads, and plummets of a
Clock, that continually drive downwards, and so stand in need of winding up.
but falls foul on the plate and jewels. He does, and will steal away your
hearts, from minding the precious jewels of your Sea-deliverances.

I find in Scripture that the people of God of old were very careful, and
heedful to preserve the memory of their mercies. I wish all the States
Tarpowlings were of the like temper.

1. By repeating them often over in their own hearts, Psalm. 77.5, 6, 11. I will
remember, the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders of old.
Seamen should say of their Sea-deliverances, as Lypsius once did of the Book
he took so much delight in, pluris facio quum relego: semper and novum, and
quum repetivi, repetendum. The more I read, the more I am tilled on to read.
The more I think of what God has done for me, the more I still delight to
think of it.
Verse. 6. I call to remembrance my song in the night. Paul when he was amongst
the Mariners, writ down all their transactions in the time of their danger.
Acts 27.7. The wind not suffering us we sailed under Crete, over against
Salmone. Verse. 18. And being exceedingly tossed with a Tempest, the next day
they lightened the ship. Verse. 27. But when the fourteenth night was come, as
we were driven up and down in Adria, about midnight the ship-men deemed that
they drew near to some Country. Verse. 28. And sounded, and found it twenty
faothms, etc.

2. By composing and inditing of precious, pious, and melodious Psalms;
Remember the time of your inconsolabili dolor oppressi.
this was David's practice, Psalm. 38. which he titles, A Psalm of David to
bring to remembrance. Again in the 70. Psalm, We have the very same title, A
Psalm of David to bring to remembrance. In our late wars, many had such a
precious spirit breathing in them, that they have put the victories, and
battles of England into sweet composed meeter, to the end they might be
remembered. Ah Sirs; call all your deliverances in this, and in the other part
of the world, to remembrance.

3. By giving names to persons, times, and places, on purpose to remind them of
Gods mercies. This was Hannahs course, in the 1 Samuel 1.20. And called his name
Samuel, saying, The States ships resemble the tall Tree in Nebuchadnazzar's
dream, Dan. 4.20. Whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof
to all the earth. They go into all parts in the world, and as much admired are
they, as Venus was by the Gods, Who came flocking about her, when she went to
heaven.
because I have asked him of the Lord, to that very end she might for ever
perpetuate the Lords goodness toward her. Abraham to keep alive the goodness
of God toward him, in the sparing of his Son, would call the place where he
should have been sacrificed Jehovah-Iireth. i.e. God will provide, Genesis 22.14.
The Jews, that they might keep in remembrance the days of their deliverance
from bloody-minded Haman, they titled them Purim, i. e. Lots, Esth. 9.26. in
memory of Lots cast by Haman, which the Lord disappointed. And very commendable
is this Scriptural practice amongst us in England, for I have observed it, and
I like it very well, that our Military Grandees, to perpetuate their dreadful
Land and Sea Fights, do give their warlike ships, and battles, such titles. To
keep alive that great, and desperate engagement, which our Army had with the
Scots in Scotland, one of their warlike ships is called the Dunbar. Gentlemen
Captains, and Seamen, many of your Ships derive, and borrow their names from
the stour-charged and fought Battles of the Soldiery in England, to that end
you may imitate their valor at Sea, which they to the life performed on Land.
Some are called the Treddah, some the Naseby, and other some the Dunbar; some
the Plymouth, some the Gainsborough, and othersome the Massammore, etc. Be
valiant Sirs! the Soldiery fought apace when in those Battles.
To keep up the memory of Naseby great fight, they have another ship which they
call the Naseby. To keep up the memory of Worcester fight, they have a brave
warlike ship which they call the Worcester. To keep up the enemies defeating at
Wakefield in Yorkshire, they have a gallant warlike ship called the Wakefield,
To remember the fight at Nantwich, they have a warlike ship called the
Nantwich. To remember their victory at Plymouth against the enemy, they have a
ship which they call the Plymouth. To keep up the memory of that famous bout at
Massammore, when the three Nations lay at the stake, they have a ship called
the Massammore. To remember that great fight that was fought at Treddah, they
have a warlike Vessel called the Treddah. To perpetuate the memory of that
great and hot dispute that was once at Selby in Yorkshire, they have a famous
ship they call the Selby. To keep up the memory of that bout they had with the
enemy at Portsmouth, they have a warlike ship they call the Portsmouth. To keep
up the memory of their taking of Gainsborough, they have a brave Prince-like
ship called the Gainsborough. To keep up the Memory of the dispute that they
once had at Preston, Be valiant Sirs, (your ships have their names from
valiant Exploits on Land) and the States will deal as kindly with you, as the
Russians do by those they see behave themselves courageously, the Emperor
usually sends them a piece of gold, stamped with the Image of St. George upon
it. Who was valiant amongst you, had Medals in the Dutch wars.
they have a brave warlike ship which they call the Preston. To keep up the
memory of that dreadful Sea Fight which they had with the Dutch near Portland,
they call one of their warlike ships the Portland. To keep alive the memory of
their transactions against the enemy at Yarmouth, they have a gallant ship
which they call the Yarmouth. That their dealings with the enemy at Famouth
might be remembered, and celebrated to the praise of that God whom they serve,
they call one of their brave warlike Vessels the Famouth. To keep alive the
goodness of God in their helping them to overcome their enemies at Bristow,
they call one of their sumptuous ships the Bristow. To keep up the memory of
one sore bout they had with the enemy in Kent, they call one of their ships
(which they built afterward) the Kent. That they might not forget their
dispute with the enemy at Dartmouth, one of their ships is styled the
Dartmouth. To remember that bout they had with the enemy at Tarrington, they
call another ship the Tarrington. To remember the engaging of the enemy in
Essex, All these ships are called by the names of Englands Battles, and every
ship carrying the name of an English Battle upon her, cannot otherwise choose
(but under God) be heart daunting terrible to the proudest enemy that ever
strutted in the Seas. What is said of the Leviathan, I think I may say of our
ships, Job. 41.9. Shall not one be cast down even at the fight of them.
they call one of their ships the Essex. To keep up the memory of that bout
they had with the enemy at Basin-house in Hampshire, they call one of their
Friggots the Basin. To perpetuate their engaging the enemy in Pembrokeshire,
they call one Friggot the Pembroke. Another they call the Hamshire. Another the
Gloucester. Another the Non-such. And all these, besides several others (as the
Lime, etc.) have been built since, and after these disputes, and so named.
Paul, after his shipwreck, I find, to that end he might remember that
deliverance, calls it Melita, and the Maltezes's at this day, La scala di San
Paulo, St. Paul's shipwreck, or arrival. Seamen, have you no names for the
places where you have been shipwracked? what call you the places where you have
been in greatest danger? Call to mind the many places that you have been in,
and the many storms and perils that you have gone through. The States of
England, throw not their dear and costly purchased Victories at their heels,
Imitate the Tartars in valor, who go slightly armed into the Battle upon their
Backs, as scorning, and abhorring ever to turn their backs, when once the chief
Standard of the General is let fly in the field. A certain Prince would be
pictured with this Motto (which I give to you that use the Seas) Luctor, non
mergor; I was much endangered, but God has preserved me. Sibyllae mos erat in
palmarum foliis oracula scribere, in meliori metallo autem tenete naufragia
vestra.
which they have got in their late wars, but to keep them alive, they put them
upon their warlike Sea-boats.

4. By erecting Pillars to be standing memorials, and monuments of the Lords
undeserved goodness unto them. Samuel set up a stone, and called it Eben-Ezar,
1 Samuel 7.10, 12. Hitherto (quoth he, when the Philistines fought against them)
Has the Lord helped us. The States of England, to keep up the memory of their
Land-deliverances, laid out very costlily three thousand pound upon one ship,
Accipe, read, Cave, is a Motto that is writ upon all mercies. Upon Fire is
writ, take heat from me. Upon Apparel, take warmth from me. Upon bread, take
strength from me. Upon a piece of a plank in a storm, take safety from me. But
make a good improvement of these things, or else stand clear.
four thousand Pound upon another, and six thousand upon another. And will you
lay out nothing to perpetuate the memory of your deliverances?

Give me leave to hand to every soul in the Sea, this short, and sweet word of
advice.

1. Improve all your Sea-mercies for Gods glory.

2. For your own good.

3. For the good and benefit of others.

1. For Gods glory; esteem of God highly, look out for higher thoughts of God
than ever you have had in your souls, and labor daily to beat down your own
pride, loftiness, and haughtiness of mind, otherwise you will never be able to
maintain high thoughts of God, and to say of the Lord in all your
Sea-preservations, Exodus 15.11. Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the
Gods! who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders? 2 Chronicles. 6.14. There is no God like thee in the Heaven, nor in the
Earth.

2. To love God more dearly, that has done so much for you; David's heart began
to be on a burning glow within him, when he begun to consider of the Lords
hearing of his prayers, Psalm. 116.1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard
my voice, and my supplications. Ah Sirs, will not you that use the Seas love
your God no more than you do? Good Sirs, do not with your God, as the Heathens
did by theirs, of whom it is said, that they would put them off with slight
Sacrifices, when called for a man, they brought a candle. Hercules offered up a
painted man instead of a living one.
what had been become of you ere this day, if God had not heard your prayers in
your calamities?

3. To thank and praise God, Praecepta docent, at exempla movent.
more heartily for what he has done for you in all your straits at Sea; Psalm.
103.1, 2. Bless the Lord oh my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy
name. Tully calls gratitude, Maximam, imo matrem omnium virtutum reliquarum,
the greatest, and the mother of all virtues.

4. To obey God more cordially, Many Sailors are a mere tortile lignum. Too
much a kin to the Crab, Nunquam recte ingrediuntur Cancri. Very disobedient,
and crooked unto God.
and freely, this is to render again according to the mercies and favors God
did for you when in the great deeps (which Hezekiah, nay not only he, but
thousands of our Sailors fail in this very duty) 2 Chronicles. 32.25. But Hezekiah
rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him. The Elements are
obedient unto the Caelestial bodies, the Orbs, and Sphaeres to the moving
intelligence, and all the Intelligences, to the chiefest of all, which is the
Lord loved of all. Darius escaping a great danger in his return out of Scythia,
by the faithful counsel and assistance of Hysteus the Milesian, he was so
taken with this kindness, that to reward him, he sent for him to the Court, to
praefer him to one of his Privy Council, and gave him this commendation, Omnium
possessionum pretiosissimum, esse amicum fide, Corda bonorum aliquando
concussa, melius solidantur. The hearts of good men are best settled, after they
have been well shaken with a dreadful storm, the fitter to serve God.
and prudentia praestantem. Great kindnesses Sirs, are greatly to be regarded,
and serious things ought to be seriously minded. Ah Sirs, be affected with
what God does, and has done for you.

2. Make a profitable use of all your deliverances for your own good.

1. For Obedience. Sirs, I wish you all that use the Seas, when in violent, and
blustering storms, a bottle of the Queen of Thebes rich Nepenthe, which she upon
a time sent to a great Grecian beauty, and incomparable Lady of the world, by
name Helena, the virtue of which was such, that it would overpower all griefs,
sorrows, troubles, fears, cares, and dangers, and make one cheerful though
never so miserable. If you want this at Sea, you have a good God that is all
this, and much more.
2. For Comfort. 3. For Holiness.
1. For confidence in God, in the time of storms, and dangers. Former
Experiences of Gods deliverings of you, should sinnew, and strengthen future
confidence in God; it was so with David, 1 Samuel 17.37. The Lord that delivered
me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will
deliver me out of the hand of this Philistin. Conclude, He that preserved me
in the last storm, and carried me out of those perils that beset me about on
every side, will do so still. 2 Cor. 1.10. Who deliverd us from so great a
death, and does deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us.

2. For comfort in bitter storms, and heart-striking blasts, evermore compare
your present condition but with the former, and that will make it the more
comportable, and fordable unto thee; have thou not been in the same, or in the
like, or in as great, or greater, yet God comforted thee, and bore thee out of
it, and is not this God the same God still, yesterday, to day, and for ever?
his arm is not shortened. Can thou not? Nay, do thou not experience that
God has been with thee in six troubles, and also in seven? No better refuge in
the world, It was a good saving of one, when in a dreadful storm at Sea, quoth
he, I shall not certainly perish, there be so many eyes of Providence over my
head, meaning the Stars in the night.
than to fly to the strong Tower of a good old Experience, in the time of
distress. Psalm. 143.4, 5. When David was in a great storm in his Kingdom, he
flies to experience.

I remember the days of old, I remember what thou did formerly. And here he
cast anchor, and found much comfort.

3. For holiness, your daily, summerly, and winterly experiences of your
hardships and difficulties in the Seas, should be carefully spiritualized and
improved to the amendment of your hearts and lives.

3. And lastly, for the good of others, bring out your experiences, and
delivering-mercies upon the Seas, and set that savoury dish upon the table, for
pious, gracious, and tender hearts to feed on. It is reported that sorrow and
pleasure, and pleasure and sorrow were at strife and variance one with the
other, insomuch that Jupiter was sent for from Heaven to come and reconcile
them, and seeing that neither of them would yield to one another, in respect
they referred themselves to Jupiters arbitration, quoth he, since this is your
resolution, you shall for ever hereafter go together. You have not all honey in
your employments.
It is reported of a ship, that she spoke on this wise in the commendation of
one that had been instrumental to carry her well out of a dangerous place in
the Sea, which was full of rocks and sands, in a dark night, Nauta bonus qui
manum ad clavum, oculos ad astra habet. My Helmsman kept one eye upon the
Stars, and another upon the Card, and thereby I escaped. And will not you bring
forth your experiences? Ah Sirs! in this case you are too much like Joshuahs
Sun, that stood still, or Hezekias Sun, that went backward, whereas you should
be as David's Sun, that rejoices as a Giant to run his race, and turns not
again till he has finished it. I would have Seamen in this case to resemble
that sort of Fish in the Sea, that is called an Aspidochelon, which is a
Sea Monster, and when he opens his mouth, there issues out such an aromatic
savor, that all the by-standing spectators, are allured to swim near unto him,
whereupon he makes a prey of them. Ah Sirs, I would have your mouths to pour
out the sweet aromatic perfumes of the Lords deliverances of you in the Seas,
even in all companies, and societies you converse with. Ah! you might very much
ravish the hearts of all that should hear you, would you but undertake to bring
forth your Sea-experiences, how might you set your souls on a burning flame and
heat of love unto your God again? Your experiences at Sea are not like Numa
Pompilius's feast, where there were spectandae dapes, non gustandae. But every
one that has a gracious frame of spirit may relish them. Ah Sirs, May not you
say to all that know you. Deuteronomy. 3.24. Oh Lord, thou have began to show thy
servant thy greatness, and thy mighty hand, for what God is there in heaven, or
in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according to thy might?
you do not think what good you might do in this case. People that live on
land, will be glad to hear them.

4. I could wish that all our Seamen would put all their experiences of Gods
delivering-mercies into a method.

1. Consider the greatness of them, both for number and measure, how many
deliverances and mercies God has given, and does give unto you; he even gives
unto you whole loads, Psalm. 68.19. Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us
with his benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah. When God had done
great things for Israel (as he has done for you that go in the Seas) he bad
them, 1 Samuel 12.14. Consider what God had done for them. The word comes of Con
and Sydus, which signifies a company of Stars, and not one bare simple Stella,
denoting that many give more luster than one, showing thereby, that it is not a
transient view of Gods mercies that do affect the heart, I may say of your
perilous employment, as one says of Teneriff, they that will go to the top of
it, must go by night, and not by day, for as soon as the day begins once to
break, and come upon the world, it is high time to be gone, lest that the
tenuity of the air (as is supposed) should dissolve, suffocate, and stifle
their spirits. You get your living as if you stole it. This is your Proverb.
as a man that rides Post, cannot well make a true Map of a Country, but it is
an abiding, and a staying upon them, and turning of mercy upside down, and
looking first upon the one side, and then upon the other, that affects the
heart.

2. Take notice of the freeness of Gods dealings with you (in the Seas, if you
would be thankful to your God) it is out of mere mercy and goodness, without
any merit, or desert in you, and though there be much sinfulness amongst you,
swearing by the highest in Heaven, and by the vilest in Hell, Ah Sirs, I wish I
could get you to mind what God does for you, and that I could work upon you
(in what I have writ to you) as Antonius de Padua once did upon the hearts of a
people whom he once preached to, he thundered so out of the holy Law of God,
that they would go one in the streets smiting of their breasts, tears drilling
down their eyes, crying out, Misericordia domine, Misericordia. Mercy Lord,
Mercy!
and all the abominable oaths that you cast forth in storms, which is like to
the mire and dirt the Sea casts up, as the Prophet says, yet does God appear
for you in them. David was wonderfully affected with Gods dealings with him (
Genesis 32.10.) 2 Samuel 7.18, 19.

3. Eye the seasonableness of all your Sea-deliverances; God does, and ever did
take the fittest time to accomplish every thing in, Eccl. 3.1. To every thing
there is a season, Eccl. 3.1. And God makes every thing beautiful in his time,
verse. 11. The season of the mercy puts a beauty and luster upon it, even as the
Sun puts its beauty upon the Rainbow. Was it not a seasonable mercy to the man
that went from Jerusalem to Jericho, and falling among Thieves, had all that
ever he had taken from him, I, and more than that, wounded, and left for dead
upon the ground, and in that very juncture and extremity of time, the good
Samaritan comes providentially by, and takes compassion of him? Luke 10.33.
That King Ahasuerus could not sleep in the night, 1 King. 17.18, 19. (before
Mordecai should have been hanged) of all the nights in the year besides, and
that a book should be brought him, and instead of other books which were his
exercise, the book of the Chronicles, and of all places and passages in it that
should be turned to which had relation to Mordecaie's good service in
discovering the Treason of the two Chamberlains, which moved the King to save
him from the Gallows? Ah Sirs, I would have you to say to your God, what Luther
once said (before he was better informed) to the Pope Leo 10 An. 1518.
Prostratum pedibus me tibi offero cum omnibus quae sum and habeo -- vocem tuam
vocem Christi in te praefidentis and loquentis agnoscam. I humbly prostrate my
self, with all that I have, and am, at thy feet.
That when Peter was sinking, Christ should then put forth his hand, and still
the waves? Ah Sirs, eye the seasonableness of all Gods mercies with you. Me
thinks I hear many a gracious Seaman say, Ah we had been drowned at such, and
such a time, and cast away at such a time, if God in his mercy had not
prevented it.

4. Mind the unexpectedness of delivering mercies at Sea; I profess for my
part when we have been in storms, and run upon sands, I have thought it an
impossible, and a very unlikely thing to escape, insomuch that I have had
occasion to say, as Sarah did to Abraham, who would have thought it? Genesis 21.7.
Mercies come crouding in many times upon you that use the Seas, unlooked for.

5. Eye the mercies of God toward you in all those places that you either do,
or have traded into in the world; how many Voyages thou have made through, and
over the dangerous deeps, and how God has blessed thee, prospered thee, and
delivered thee abroad, gone out with thee, and come home with thee. Moses takes
special notice of what God had done for Israel, in bringing them out of Egypt,
and also of their journey through the wilderness of Canaan, and so sets them
all down in a local method, in the Red Sea, they passed through it on dry land,
Pharaoh and his host was drowned therein, and in Rhephidim God gave them water
out of the Rock, Exodus 17. and victory over Amalek in the Wilderness of Sin. At
night, and at morn, they had flesh and Manna. In Sinai God gave them his holy
Law, Exodus 16. Paul in a local method minds the converting grace of God (as to
the place) bestowed upon him at Damascus, They that will go into the Elysian
fields, says the Poet, must over Acharon, and Phlegeton and the several other
Rivers of Hell, before they can come into those pleasurable and delightful,
rich, and flowery Meadows, and so through many storms over the Seas, before
they can come at the beautiful and wealthy Countries in the foreign parts of the
world. Vbi definit humanum auxilium, ibi incupit divinum.
and his deliverance afterward when he was let down through the windows in a
basket, at Lystra, Derbe, and Iconium, Act. 14. at Philippi, Chap. 16. at
Thessalonica, Chap. 17. at Corinth, Chap. 18. at Ephesus, Chap. 19. etc.

But I proceed to a word of Application.

1. Of Exhortation. 2. Of Reproof.
Ah Sirs, be exhorted to lay up all your Sea-deliverances, let them lie the
nearest your hearts of any thing in the whole world besides, and let all your
new mercies be as goads, in your sides, and as spurs, to a better life.

Sirs, the Lord complains of you as he did of Israel, Jer. 3.8. When your
condition was as Lyricus said, (...), one wave after another passing over your
heads, then did the Lord appear for you, but you have not come off like men
with God in thankfulness.
Amos 4.6. to the 12. Thus, and thus did I for you, but you returned not to
me. What, shall not your escapes work upon you, and shall not the ruins of
others startle you? how many Vessels be there sunk in the Seas, and you
notwithstanding have come safe home out of them? Ezekiel. 16.56. Thy sister Sodom
was not mentioned, etc. the Chalde Paraphrast says, was not for instruction,
the word in the Hebrew, was not in thy mouth, they had quite forgot the
destruction of Sodom, insomuch that it was neither in their thoughts, nor
mouths. The ruins of others is little thought of by you, and your
Sea-deliverances are forgot by you.

That miraculous, eminent, and remarkable As if the Psalmist should say, they
have the greatest mercies of any people in the world bestowed upon them, but
they are neither affected with them, nor one jot the better for them. Believe
it, this is a foul blot in the Sailors Scutchion. Gods kindnesses, and your
amendment should always go together, yet I do confess that both the back and
also the bones may be broken in many a man, and yet the heart be too whole,
and unbroken. Ahaaz sinned the more he was punished, Plentiful showers leave
both Heaths, Forests, and wilderness places unfruitful.

The generality of Seamen are not unlike to Pharaohs seven ill favored Kine
which eat up the well-favoured, tag and rag, and although every one (in the
dream) eat up a whole Cow a piece, yet looked they still as leanly, and as ill
favouredly on it, as they did before. You devour the Lords mercies in the Seas,
and are not bettered by them, but look as ill favouredly on it as ever you did.
Nine Plagues would not prevail with Pharaoh. What do you think then, how many
storms will with Sailors?


2 Chronicles. 28.22. And Seamen swear and tear more when Gods judgments fall upon
them in the Seas, than they did before, insomuch that all good people that live
in the ships with them, may even say as the Voice that was heard in the Temple
of Jerusalem, a little before the destruction of it, Migremus hinc, Migremus
hinc, Migremus hinc; Let us be gone, or else we shall have the ships fired
from heaven about our ears, there is such swearing, and cursing in them. May I
not say of such, that they are able to scare all that are ought out of ships.
What Monica Austins mother said in one case, I may say to the godly that go to
Sea amongst profane wretches, Quid hic faciemus? cur non ocyus migramus? cur
non hinc avolamus? What do we here in the Sea? why depart we not out of it?
why make we no more haste from it?

A word or two to you Gentlemen, and that of Terror.

1. It is an argument of extreme hardness, and naughtiness of heart not to be
wrought on by storms.

2. When storms work not upon men, I pray God it be not a dreadful sign of
their reprobation, and of Gods utter renouncing of them. It is a black sign
certainly of Gods displeasure, when judgments better not a people.

3. Such as are not bettered by storms, they are very near to a curse,
Gentlemen, If you will abuse your Sea-deliverances to serve your lusts, swear,
whore, drab, and drink, God will rain hell out of heaven upon you, rather than
not visit you for such sins. Salvian.
Heb. 6.7, 8. What will become of you Sirs? you that have all means of
reformation, the Lords mercies and deliverances in the Seas, judgments strive
with you, and mercies have attempted to allure you; storms have called upon
you, and have been as Ambassadors sent from heaven to bid you amend, and turn
holy, and yet all will not do; do you think that God will strive with you long.
Is not that man in a sad and fearful case think you when all means leaves him?
meat nourishes not, physic works not, Ingentia beneficia, flagitia, supplicia,
good turns will aggravate the Sea-mans unkindnesses.
nor the Patient sleeps not, all give him up for a gone man. Let me tell you,
that if you grow not better, you are at the very next door to be cursed.
Abused Sea-mercies will bring upon you sure, certain, speedy, ponderous, and
inevitable judgments. Quaento gradus altior, tanto casus gravior, the higher
Seaman thou art in mercy, Nay others shall sport in hell when you shall fry in
it.
the more grievous will be thy fall and misery for thy abusing of it. If
Babylon be destroyed, she may thank her self for it, her pride. If Sodom be
destroyed and burned into ashes, she may thank her wantonness for it. If
Jerusalem be inhabited by Turks and Infidels, Deus noluit punire, ipsi
extorquent ut pereant. God takes no delight in the shipwracking of Sailors, but
they wrest judgments perforce out of his hands.
she may thank her infidelity and Idolatry for it. If woe be to Capernaum and
Bethsaida, they may thank their contempt of the Gospel. If ships be destroyed
in storms they may thank their abuse of Gods mercies to them in the Seas. Mutet
ergo vitam, qui vult accipere vitam. Let him turn to God betimes, that would
have God to favor him in the time of need. I know that many a Seaman will not
be born down, but that he is very godly, It is true, God in his judgments
upon the Seas oftentimes remembers mercy. But he will not do so always.
and he abuses not the Lords mercies, either to swearing or drinking, but
behold I have obeyed God, as Saul said, 1 Samuel 15.14. If thou have done so,
then what means this bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen in mine
ears? so that the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen, proclaimed
Saul a disobedient person. If you will say that you have given God thanks, and
that you fear him, and love him for all that he has done for you, then what
means the crying of the sands against you, after you escaped off them? And if
you will say that you have not abused your Sea-mercies, what then means the
crying of the Rocks which you escaped in the Seas, against you? And what means
the loud cries of the winds and Seas which God has delivered you from?

Give me leave to lay down a few serious considerations, and I will shortly
and succinctly wind up my discourse, and bid farewell unto you.

The Lord is merciful, as it is said of Octavius, Vtinam nescirem literas?
would I knew not my letters, when he was put upon the assigning of a man's
death. God will not always be so. When Bacchus turned himself into a Lion, he
made all the Mariners in the ship leap overboard. What think you of God then?
It was the language of a ship in a storm when ready to perish, O crudelem
Oceanum! O volucrem fortunam! O Caecos Nautas! O praeposteros viros! You may
bless God that it has not been so with you.
1. Consider, that you are mercied, so, as none are mercied, and will you that
live every day upon mercy, be no better for mercy?

2 Consider that none are so near to death every day as you are, there is but a
three or four Inch plank betwixt you and death, and will not you grow better?

3. Consider that your sins go nearer to the heart of God than others do.

4. Consider, that the sin of swearing is a very unbeseeming thing in Sea-mens
mouths, in respect they live upon mercy.

5. How unbeseeming Seamen is the sin of drunkenness, you live upon mercy, and
are Gods Hospitals in the Seas, he looks after you.

6. Consider, that more depends upon you, than does upon others, that lies upon
your backs (look how you will discharge your selves) than does upon others; The
Heathens were wont to say, Mutus sit oportet qui non laudaret Herculem. I may
say, Let that Sea-mans tongue be tied up forever, that is not always blessing
of the Lord for his mercies toward him. Vivat Dominus, vivat and regnet in
aternum, Deus in nobis, said Luther, say you so Saylors.
therefore there is great reason that you should live in a far higher way of
holiness than you do.

7. Consider, that you have been made acquainted with many and more precious
deliverances, than all the people under the whole heavens again, and will you
be no better for all, and after all?

8. Consider, that you have many eyes upon you out of the land, how you will
behave your selves after mercy. They expect you should be good.

9. Consider that you have many trials for faith, and alas who more faithless
than you?

10. Consider, that you might grow better, for of all the people in the world,
none are so much cast down as you your spirits are broken many times by storms,
and you are laid low upon the back of despair.

11. Consider that you are put to far harder shifts, shorter, and barer commons
than others are, and will not you be more humble, less proud and stomachful?
consider how ill it becomes you.

Ah Sirs, your lives are too much like to Le^^is 11. of France, who did write
in a letter to our Edward the 4. Cousen, if you will come over to Paris, we
will pamper our flesh, and you shall have the choysest beauties in the City to
sport with. Your delights are too strong when you go to Naples, Livorno and
Genoa.
12. Consider, that you are generally a people of a very low rise and fortune in
the land, both as to state and breeding, and will not you grow better sirs?

13. Consider, that none see so much of the Creation as you do, nor none so
much of the work of the Lord, and will you out-top the whole world in
profaneness, will you never behave your selves, as that the world may no
longer proverbialize you?

14. Consider that you go oftentimes safely out; and come safely back, and will
you be no better for all this mercy?

15. Consider, that you are oftentimes going to fight, and at that time your
Hamocks are cut down, your Chests stowed in the Hold, your Guns haled out, and
your Decks be-decked with all sorts of dismangling bullets, and will not you
be a more serious people? Holiness would well become you.

16. Consider, that the deep Seas upon which, and through which you sail,
Ulysses (says Homer) longed much to be near his own Country when been long cut
of it, -- Fumum de patriis posse videre focis, He saw the smoke of his own
Country chymneys.
shall one day, as well as the earth, surrender up her dead unto the Eternal,
and Almighty God, and as men dye, whether Swearers, Drunkards, or Adulterers,
so shall they rise; it is a folly for any to think, if they be drowned in the
Sea, God will never find them out more. They whose bones lie in the bottom,
God will find out.

Sirs, I am tired and spent with writing to you in a rolling restless element,
and therefore being almost at my desired Port, When Ovid was, and had been a
long time traveling of it in the world, he then thought much of home. Nescio
qua natale solum dulcediue cunctos Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse su^.
I will strike and lower down my Fore-top-sail, for a little sail commonly
carries the ship into the Harbor: And what Socrates used to say of, and to his
Scholars, I will say to you, the States Tarpowlings, if I can but provoke you
to learn, and to fear my God (whom I serve) which is the desire of my soul that
you might, that is as much as I desire, and as much as I can look for for from
you: therefore,

What Pasquillus said of Rome, I will say of you, and of the Sea, Roma vale,
vidi, satis est vidisse, revertar. Gran-mare vale, vidi, satis est vidisse,
revertar. Farewell thou angry Sea, farewell you Sailors all, I have seen both you
and it, it is enough, I will return. Qui in peregrinis locis ad patriam
aspirant.
If not, I hope I shall be able to sing with the Poet.

Far volo cunctos casus patienter acerbos,
Littora dum patriae lacrymans portusque relinquo.
FINIS.
A Table, directing to some of the principallest, and remarkablest things in
this Treatise.
A. ANselms penitent and humble expression. page 357 Ataliba, what that Indian
Prince said. page 349 Antisthenes's brave mind. page 396 Aristippus, what he
said to the Tarpowlings when at sea amongst you. page 358 Alexanders
Macedonians, how they sought the Emperors favor again. page 451 Alexanders
usual deportment in all Siedges. page 405 Answer that the stormy wind gave,
when demanded why cast away so many ships. page 487 Apis, an Idol in Egypt,
what it did. ibid. Ability of God to muster up the Winds to destroy men. page
386 Advice to Seamen, good. page 385 Advice to Merchants. page 383 Africa how
dangerous to be traveled, the Seas compared unto it. page 428 Athens, what it
did when the Plague was in it. page 480 Achilles, how cast down for the loss of
his precious friend Patroclus. page 557 Advice what to do when go to Sea.
page 394 Advice how to bear storms at Sea, in four things. page 399 Armies,
diverse that God has on foot. page 334 Alphonsus King of Spain, what he said to
one. page 5 Antonius, what good he did in his preaching. page 601 Agamemnons
brave instructions to his Soldiers before the Battle began. page 27 Austin,
how he begins his Sermon to young men. page 44 Athanasius's brave carriage,
what. page 63 Alipius how enticed. page 75 Aristippus, how willing to be
reconciled to his enemy. page 81 Aristotle's wisdom and patience. page 108
Antigonus, how he bore with bad tongues. ibid. Augustus, how studied to
overcome his passion. page 109 Anger has a bad name amongst the Hebrews. page
110 Alexanders Harper, how put metal into the Emperor. page 143 Aurclianus,
how careful of losing a day. page 166 Augustines judgment, why David put off
Saul's armor. page 176 Auroughscoun, what. page 250 Assa panick, what. page 250
Arbor Triste. page 66 Asp, what. page 259 Arabian Spider, what. page 299
Alexander, how kept Homers Iliads. page 512 Alligator. page 228
B. BErnards good exhortation to his Brother. page 389 Bias's counsel to the
Mariners when amongst them in a sad storm. page 353 Bellerophon, when went to
Heaven, was thrown neck-break out of it. page 415 Bernards humble expression.
page 118 Boat-Swains exhorted to call their men up to prayer. page 94
Boat-Swains, if irreligious, how harmful they are. ibid. Boat-Swains how
reproved, and for what. page 89 Bird, what sort breast themselves against the
Wind. page 3 Bruso, Zeno's Servant, what. page 15 Bernard, what said to his
friends. page 41 Bonosus, a Beast, how hurtful. page 75 Butterfly in the Fable,
what said to the Owl. page 499 Barnacle Geese, what. page 267 Breezes; how they
cool the hot parts of the world. page 273 Buft. page 253 Bear. page 252
C. CAto's brave Speech to his Soldiers, when they were all discouraged. page
400 Commanders reproved in four things. page 127 Chego, a Spanish Mountain.
page 130 Charles K. of Naples, what called. page 166 Cyneas, what said of that
brave Thessalian Orator. Corrupt men how poysonall round about them. page 112
Commanders wished to be of Livius Drusus's mind. page 17 Corpuzants, what they
are. page 270 Camelion, what. page 259 Cocus Tree. page 262 Clove. page 263
Cypress. ibid. Cynamond. page 265 Cedar. ibid. Calvin, what said of knowledge.
page 279 Caesar's Host how lived on one kind of Herb for a long time. page 303
Cranes, and Pygmies, how fight in the West Indies. page 242 Cahou. page 243
Cranes, what they do. page 237 Crocodile, what. page 227 Calvin, how he ran
into the fire that began in the State of Geneva, to put it out. page 187
Claudius Marcellus, how fought many Battles. page 185 Charles 5. what his
emblem was. page 519 Cable, how feigned to speak when it broke in a great
storm. page 505 Charles the Great, how pious he was. page 517 Canaan, what
breadth and length. page 269 Chrysostoms comfortable Speech to the people of
Antioch. page 402 Chaos of Ovid compared to storms. page 407 Courtier of King
Cyrus's, what he said when to marry his Daughter. page 400 Counsel to the
Statesmen of our Land. page 381 Complaint of a Ship when run upon the rocks.
page 419 Complaint of a Ship when ready to sink. page 418 Complaint of a Ship
when sinking. page 426 Cuckoe, how faulters in her note when the sweet Summer
fails her. page 478 Counsel to Statesmen to look for storms. page 380 Counsel
to Seamen, good to look for storms whilst at sea, page 378 Congratulatory
Speech of Seamen to all good Harbors. page 551 Character of a Seaport Town.
page 538 Comfort for the Statesmen of our Commonwealth. page 539 Counsel to
our Merchants. page 540 Cry of a Ship, when cast away within the sight of her
Harbor. page 547 Castaway Ships, how warnings unto others. page 550 Condition
of men at Sea, like his in the Emblem. page 541 Cherub God rides upon, over
the Seas, for the good of those that are in them. page 561 Considerations, nine
serious ones to stir Seamen up to thankfulness to their God, for their
deliverances. page 568 Cries in Seaport Towns when Ships are lost. page 557
Character of many profane Ships at sea, page 465 Considerations, five weighty
ones to put people that live on land, upon prayer for those that go to sea.
page 439 Considerations, four weighty ones to take off all our Seamen from the
Sin of Drunkenness. page 436 Charon in Lucian how served, when desired to see
heaven. page 412 Counsel to those that have a mind to go to sea. page 437
Countries Native, sweet to them that have been long out of them. page 545
Counsel presented by Xaverius to John the third King of Portugal. page 454
Comfortable Epistle of Plutarch to his wife. page 398 Calms, how devoured at
sea. page 356 Credit of Seamen how might be recovered, page 16 Commanders
should be men veyd of these five things. page 24 Captains Motto, what. page 26
Cowardliness of a Commander, when an Enemy came up with him. page 27 Captains
should throw out their Trash, Stones, Thorns, Briars, and Brambles out of their
ships. page 33 Characters, nineteen worth the observing, to man Warlike ships
by. page 35 Commanders should have an eye and an ear over the gestures, etc.
page 38 Chilo's sentence would do well upon all ships entring-ladders. page 39
Captains should keep up their command in ships. page 46 Captains should
endeavor the good of Seamen in five things. page 52 Captains should be of
Themistocles mind in prize. page 53 Captains should stand up many times, and
reprove their Seamen. page 56 Captains should not be silent when they see, and
hear evil in their men. page 58 Commanders should put out the fire of Swearing
every day, as well as the Cooks fire. page 59 Chrysostoms good Speech to young
men. page 60 Commanders should practice three things. page 63 Captains should
live in their Ships, as the Sun in the Firmament. page 67 Cato a great
discourager of evil. page 69 Commanders should hold up their dignity, ibid.
Colossus at Tarentum, what. page 63 Captains should labor to reclaim their
Seamen. page 71 Captains should have a great care of the young that be under
them. page 73 Captains Cabbins, what some of them are. page 71 Commanders
should have strong desires to have their Seamen converted. page 72
Cowardlinesse to be avoided, when faceing an enemy. page 78 Commanders should
be as faithful as Pontius Centurio was. page 83 Commanders advised how they
should deal with their Pursers. page 85 Carpenters reproved. page 89
Chrysostoms desire to have his Pulpit upon an high Mountain. page 101
Commanders should handle Liars as Artaxerxes did. page 105 Cato, how he bore
his injuries. page 108 Calvin, how wrongfully slandred. page 121 Caesar's
command commendable. page 127
D. DAngers great, will make people for to speak. page 452 Death comfortable to
one sort, uncomfortable to another. page 458 Drunkenness, what it brought Lot
to. page 436 Diagoras the Atheist made all the Mariners fare the worse for it
in a storm. page 344 Devil, what sign he dwells at in the world. page 468 Days
travel with Gods decrees. page 379 Demosthenes, what he said of an Orator
compared to men in storms. page 417 Dispute betwixt Doctor Philomusus, and
Learned Philosophus, why Seamen are the worst sort of people in the world.
page 487 Dogs that kept Vulcans Temple favored some, and not other some. page
377 Death no fit time for Seamen to make their peace with God in. page 389
Demosthenes, what he said of a drinking Prince. page 99 Directions how to live
peaceably on Shipboard be five. page 107 Drunken Saylors compared to
Tankard-lifting Zeno. page 100 Domitians course the only way to cure all
slanderers at sea. page 122 Duchess, how said to sound the sea. page 155
Diogenes, how little he set by his money. page 168 Diogenes would not be idle
in Athens when besiedged. page 181 Deliverances at Sea should be improved for
Gods glory. page 594 Deliverances should be eyed in their seasonablenesse.
page 601 Decree of Theodosius, what. page 33 Diana's Image in Chios what
feigned to do. page 37 Dolphin, what said of it. page 203 Deer, by their
out-lying what said of them. page 212 Doteril, what manner of Bird. page 243
Deliverances of Seamen, fifty one very remarkable. page 289 Devices many, to
kill and fetch off lives. page 293 Darius, how hard put to it in the Wars.
page 302 Drunkenness punished to some purpose.
E. ENglands Navy like to David's Army. page 446 England, how it has eleven ill
things it, that a late outlandish Traveller spied in it. page 528 Elephants,
how said to express their thankfulness unto God. page 593 England likened to
the Song of the Lacedaemonians three Dances. page 186 Epaminondas, how valiant
for his Country. page 87 Edward an English King, how challenged all France.
page 188 Eagle. page 231 Elephant, and what written upon his tongue. page 244
Ebone Tree. page 263 Egyptians, how set out inconsiderate men. page 283
English, how delivered, when set at by the Turks. page 292 Eumenes's silver
Shields, how betrayed him. page 520 Earl Ulster, how often driven back when
going for Ireland. page 511 Experimental deliverances. page 34 Ebbing and
flowing of Seas, what. page 163 Englands desire of three things to be
accomplished. page 169 England, what it has done against Spain. page 171
English should resemble Hanibal upon the Alps. page 172 England is not to be
meddled withal by a foreign enemy. page 140 Aesops Grasshopper, what it did. page
100 Elysian Fields hard to be come at. page 603 Examples, how Swearers have
been punished. page 103
F. FLying Fish, what. page 199 Fowls in Green-land, how said to leave it. page
232 Fire-flies. page 238 Fogo, a burning Mountain. page 273 Flies in the
Indies, how buzze, and hu^ in the Woods. page 268 Fox, in the Fable how
pleaded. page 314 Fire-lights on Seacoasts, what. page 10
G. GOld Mines how discovered. page 9 God, how said to be a Man of War. page
177 Greeks, how wonderfully affected with a temporal deliverance. page 564
Goose, in Aesop sadly dealt withal, page 405 God in the Winds. page 569
Ginger. page 264 Gregory's Fox, how cunning. page 312 Greenland, how supplied
with wood. page 276 Grasshoppers, what. page 239 Graecians, how affected with
their deliverance. page 502 Gauls, how would let no Vines grow in their
Country. page 78
H. HAven, the word what it comes of. page 533 Hermit, how carried away by an
Angel in the evening. page 490 Haven-towns, how exhorted to pray for Seamen.
page 533 Harbors, how feigned to speak, and call aloud to Seamen when in
storms. page 532 Hurtful qualities in all the four Winds. page 440 Heraclitus,
what an admirer of the Sea. page 586 Holland, in what advised. page 138 Heron,
and Falcon, how they fight. page 137 Harbors not to be tarried long in by
Commanders. page 78 Hold breaking up very unwarrantable. page 64 Heathen, how
said to deal with their gods. page 595 Hecla, and Helga, how said to burn. page
277 Hopfoy. page 238 Heron. page 237 Henry 5. K. England, how discouraged. page
186 Heliotrope. page 328
I. IEroms observation of the wicked on Land applied to the wicked at sea. page
551 Jews, how persuaded that the name Jehovah is written upon every Rainbow.
page 405 Jerusalem, how warned by a Star for a whole year together. page 404
Julius Caesar, how used to carry three things when followed the Wars. 1. His
Pen. 2. His Books. 3. His Laws. page 419 Jupiter, how said to have his hands
full of Thunderbolts. page 583 Jew, how affected with his deliverance over the
plank that was laid upon a bridge. page 584 Juno's Statue, how compared. page
583 James the just, a wonderful p^^ying soul. page 517 Jews, how deal with the
Book of Esther. page 507 John K. Portugal, his great love to his Country. page
230 Isidores observation, how infectious bad men be. page 112 Joseph, how
carried himself in Potiphars house. page 114 James Abbes, cried up to be saved
by a wicked. page 121 Jerome, what said of Asela. page 157 Joshua, what said of
him whilst young, and after when ancient. page 175 Italian Proverb, what. page
134 Island how wonderfully supplied with wood. page 276
K. KNowledge requisite to go to Sea withal. page 12
L. LOg that was hurled out of Heaven by Jupiter upon the Froggs, how compared.
page 426 Language of a storm. page 546 Land, how sweet and welcome it is to
them that have been long out of it. ibid. Locrian Law, what it was. page 529
Lions, when enter into choler, what they do. page 451 Lion, what he did for
the poor man that pulled the thorn out his foot. page 568 Lark, how often she
praises her Creator in a day. page 565 Locust. page 264 Lapland. page 275
Lucianus Timon, what said of him. page 223 Luther not discouraged at sad
tidings. page 515 Lacedemonian Law, what. page 35 Loadstone, how its use not
found out till the coming of Christ. page 9 Lying reproved at Sea. page 105
Luther, what said of prayer. page 177 Libbard, how pursues his prey. page 314
M. MOtto, or Language of all sunk ships. page 553 Mercy of God great, that he
lets not all the Devils in Hell loose upon the Saylors backs. page 554 Mercy of
God great, that any profane ships keep up above water. page 556 Motto of
Seamens employment. page 550 Merchants, how compared to the Nightingale in
their losses. page 401 Mercies of old, how preserved, in several particulars.
page 588 Masters, if godly, what good they may do in ships. page 94 Masters,
and all States Officers, should be of Clavigers mind. page 97 Menelaus, what
he said unto the Graecians when cowardly. page 145 Mahumet, how would not enter
into any City for fear of temptations. page 175 Mary, Queen of Scots, what she
said. page 176 Maps, what they say of England. page 139 Mariners how careful of
one another when in danger. page 134 Magistrates Commission, how sufficient for
Seamen to fight any enemy. page 124 Malestreamwell, what. page 271 Magellan
Streights, what storms lie in them. page 268 Murder, a Soul-damning sin. page
227 Mearmaid, what. page 228 Muscetos, what they do in the West Indies. page
238 Monkies. page 251 Muscat, what. page 251
N. NOva Zembla, what manner of place it is. page 275 Noddy, what said of her.
page 240 Numa's confidence in the gods. page 525 North Wind, what called by
one, page 441 Neptune, how feigned to hold the two terrors of the Seas in
chains. page 544 Nautical skill how requisite to go to Sea withal. page 7 Navy
of Solomon, how ordered when sent it out to Sea. page 8 Numa Pompilius, how
strict in Religion. page 31 Navigation how warrantable. page 159 Narsetes got
the victory at Sea by prayer. page 178
O. OLympus, what an high mountain it is. page 367 Orpheus's music what it
was. page 289 Ordinances of Heaven what. page 272 Ostrich what. page 234
Oculists, what they observe of the eye. page 197 Officers in States ships what
they should do. page 98 Octavius Augustus how he dealt with a rude young man.
page 312
P. PAris streets, how once swimmed with blood. page 143 Paphos Queen, how
thankful. page 501 Pelican. page 230 Passown what. page 249 Porcupine what.
page 250 Platonists, what said by. page 278 Palm tree what. page 261 Prayer, if
not used at Sea, endangers in four things. page 466 Plato's counsel to
Alcibiades, the same given to Seamen. page 475 Prayer wonderfully privileged.
page 470 Pliny never liked the East wind. page 440 Pope Gregory's fancy of the
English. page 435 Prayer, how should resemble the stars about the North Pole.
page 460 Prayer begged at the hands of all the godly and powerful Ministry in
England for poor Seamen. page 542 Pliny's expression of Rome given to men that
use the Seas. page 478 Pliny's judgment what the wind is. page 367 Prayer, how
prevalent with God. page 482 Perpetual life-danger of Seamen. page 420
Philostrates's life compared to Seamen. page 392 Profane Sea-mens Motto.
ibid. Prayer forced is never ought. page 486 Plutarchs report of men dejected,
what done withal. page 401 Paulinus, how he bore his great trial under the
savage Goths. page 352 Patience an excellent virtue, the heathen thought it so,
when. page 353 Praising of God in several directions. page 576 Pythagoras
scholars what their custom was. page 109 Plato how answered Socrates in his
rashness. page 25 Persons what should not be taken in into Navy ships. page 32
Physiognomer what he said of an Emperor. page 80 Plato's great desire to
convert Dionysius? page 61 Paul how desirous to have them saved that sailed
with him. page 52 Pepper-tree how it grows. page 263 Pemblico, a bird. page 242
Q. Question fifteen. page 150
R. REasons why Seamen should be thankful unto their God for their
deliverances, are five. page 565 Reasons laid down, are sixteen, why storms
arise upon the Seas. page 348 Reasons, two strong ones, why men are so fearful
in storms. page 455 Righteous man of what worth. page 36 Reasons five, why
young men should be looked after in the Sea. page 73 Roman Ambassadors, what
said of them. page 78 Romans highly esteem of faithfulness. page 84 Roman
General what a command he bore. page 30 Romans cannot endure any without a
calling. page 166 Rome, how once laid down to the ground. page 180 Rocks in the
Sea, what their language is. page 322 Richard the first how traveled to the
Holy Land. page 124
S. SEa compared to Plutarchs Moon. page 427 Sea summoned in by the Mariners
why it did drown so many of them as it did. page 427 Speech objurgatory to the
rest less Sea. ibid. Speech of Galienus the Emperor, when lost all that ever
he had. page 402 Seamen, how compared to all high pinacles. page 409 Seamen
too confident of going to heaven. page 410 Seneca's speech. page 401 Seamen in
storms are nearer heaven than any in the world besides. page 409 Ships when
cast away, may be concluded on that it was when the Mariners were swearing.
page 487 Several Reasons why Seamen are the worst people in the world. page
488 Sea-mans life and conversation. page 393 Sea, what it says to profane
men. ibid. Sea-mens lives very uncertain. page 388 Ships uncertainty of ever
returning whilst at Sea. page 383 Sailors Motto what. page 417 Sea-mans head
what compared to. page 416 Ships how rest less in the Sea. page 27 Sailors
Motto what. page 445 Seasons six in which Seamen are evermore out of their
wits. page 445 Sea has four ill things in it. page 446 Sea-mans Motto in a
storm. page 418 Sea-mans night-watching in time of storms. page 418 Ship-leak
springing, how terrible. page 426 Sea-mans day laboring in time of storms.
page 417 Seamen how seemingly good in time of danger. page 484 Shark, what
said of him. page 206 Sea-horses, what said of them. page 209 Seamen compared
to the Nightingale. page 191 Sea-swine, what said of them. page 222 Sea-calf.
page 224 Sea-turtle. ibid. Stork, what said of her. page 234 Strange-sheep in
Cusko. page 249 Sivet-cat, what she is. page 251 Scorpion, what. page 258
Strumbilo how it burns. page 273 Seamen too like the traveller that leaves all
things behind him. page 281 Sea like the Sea in Pauten. page 301 Ship-masters
how reproved, and for what. page 91 Ship-masters exhorted to imitate Tiberius
in his honest mind. page 90 Sabbath day how sweetly it is observed at Sea.
page 95 Swearing complained of, and exclaimed against at Sea. page 101 Subjects
that should be preached on at Sea, laid down. page 102 Swearing ships, but
unhealthful air to breathe in. page 103 Seamen, if ever they would be good
and Religious, must practice seven things. page 111 Socrates, how fearful of
Alcibiades. page 115 Spanish Proverb what. page 116 Seamen profane, how
compared to Pharaohs seven ill-favored Kine. page 118 Sun how said to shine,
and would not shine, were it not for the godly. page 119 Seamen must practice
six things, if ever they would have credit. ibid. Seamen exhorted to practice
nine very singular good things. page 123 Seamen counseled in three good
things. page 125 Seamen should rather dye than stain their credits. ibid.
Seamen profane, too like to those in Luthers time. page 126 Ships when
miscarry, may be said that they never sought God in their going out. page 132
Ships what order they observe in their going to Sea, in nine things. page 133
Seamen, how valiant they should be when they hear of an enemy. page 141
Spaniard, in what to be disgusted. page 141 Spaniard, how massacred many
English. page 144 Sea, or Land, a controversy whether be greater. page 153
Seamen when come out of the West Indies, how glad they are when they can once
see the North star. page 154 Seawater, how far it excels Land-water in
strength. page 156 Seas wonderful beneficial to all Countries, in five things.
page 161 Seamen exhorted to be of Themistocles temper. page 172 Sea separates
many Nations, a great mercy. page 162 Sorrow and pleasure how they fell out.
page 598 Seamen how wished a bottle of Nepenthe in storms. page 596 States
ships how said to resemble Nebuchadnezzars tree. page 589 Ships how said to
derive their names from the stout fought Battles in England. page 290 Ships
what several names they have to perpetuate the memory of Englands Battles. page
591 Ships, that carry the names of Englands Battles upon them, are terrible.
page 592 Sea what manner of place it is. page 4 Ship, how she commended the
Pilot that steered her well in a storm. page 598 Sea has no lanes, foot-paths,
nor highwayes to travel by. page 12 Seamen counseled to be of Fabritius's
mind. page 16 Seamen far more on stern in matters of good, than any in the
world besides. page 18 Scipio, how of a brave spirit. page 21 Sea-Captains some
how compared to Thales. page 22 Sin the only of Commanders being hurled out.
ibid. States, how little they set by men at Sea whose carriages are naught.
page 23 Ships carry famous Titles, and wherefore. page 26 Seamen too like the
Cypress tree. page 29 Seamen that are profane should be cast out of ships.
page 33 Ships have good names, but want of government in them. page 30 States
ships might prosper wonderfully, had they but these men in them. page 35 States
ships should be little Churches and Chapels. page 42 Seaman how defined.
page 46 Seamen how backward to all good in diverse particulars. page 48 Sabbath
day how sweetly it is observed at Sea. page 55 Sea Commanders, some too like
Harpocrates the Egyptian. ibid. Spots soon seen in the Ermin. page 64
Suspicious ships should not be neglected to he spoke withal. page 65 Song
that the poor bird sung when got out of the Fowlers hands. ibid. Suevians
estimation of peace. page 70 Ships, how they should be governed. ibid. Strong
drink should be kept out of ships. page 77 Sailors that are naught, too like
the unsavory Elder tree. ibid. Star the Mariner sails by, what. page 12
Sailors profane life like to King Eldreds Reign. page 413 Seamen, how they
will go forth in windy nights to see if they can espy any star in the heavens.
page 420 Seamen how fearful of Rocks, and Sands. page 430 Seamen, how
unkindly they deal with Prayer. page 483 Saylors in storms, how compared to the
Froggs in the Country-mans Pond. page 481 Saylors, how resemble the Siryphian
Froggs. page 478 Swearing ships worse habitations than the stinking Jakes, and
Channels about the City of London. page 490 Saylors like to the people in the
time that Juvenal lived in. page 489 Seas turbulent, and dangerous to
Passengers, because of profane men in ships. page 350 Security taken napping
at sea, as the old World was. page 364 Sea, how compared to lovely Paris, in
Hectors eye. page 376 Seamen exhorted in their employments, to imitate the
Nobilities of Rome. ibid. Storms as well as Calms come from the hand of God.
page 379 Signs of the coming of storms be fifteen. page 373 Ships at sea, how
resemble the Owl in the Emblem. page 535 Saylors employment, how compared to
the picture of the naked man in the Almanac. page 530 Seaports should
resemble the Emblem of the Candle. page 535 Seamen, how they sit in the Waves,
and upon the Floods, like him in the Emblem. page 536 Sea compared to the
English College at Valladolid in Spain, for danger. page 536 Seaport Towns if
naught, how they endanger, and threaten the whole Land with ruin. page 538
Sunk ships bespeak Seamen, to make seven good applicatory uses. page 550 Ships
that have fair names upon them, oftentimes very foulely miscarry. page 547
Sea-mans life, and conversation. page 548 Sea how compared to Pandora's Box,
for danger. page 542 Ships brought to ruin, by reason of sinful men that sail
in them. page 555 Seamen if godly need not fear the seas. page 544 Saylors
life, what it is. page 458 Sea compared to Proteus. page 454 Syracucian when in
a storm to save himself, threw his wife overboard. page 455 Sea, how compared
to the river Hypanis. page 438 Seas why turbulent, and Winds boisterous be
diverse, in respect of the profane wretches that go in them. ibid. Storms, how
the uttering of Gods voice in wrath against them that use the seas. page 340
Sea-mens large vows to their God when in storms. page 461 Seamen in want of
fear, how compared to Sigismund. page 475 Seamen, how they call upon God in
storms, and never in calms. page 476 Sea-mans employment as dangerous, as the
Snails going over the bridge. page 533 Story of one risen from the dead. page
566 Storms better not bad men. page 567 Stork, how she expresses her
thankfulness. page 568 Saylors of Zara, what they offered to their God for a
deliverance in a storm. page 570 Seamen deal with their God, as Egypt with the
Clouds. page 572 Seas upon a time how spoke to a pack of swearing Saylors, and
asked them why they was not afraid. page 560 Shipwreck many suffer, and why?
page 547 Saylors compared to Bees. page 452 Seamen how should prepare for
storms. page 394 Storms, what Gods aims are in them. page 395 Sceva, how he
told of all his deliverances to his friends. page 573 Seamen, what they should
say of their deliverances. page 588 Seamen, how they deal with God. page 580
Ship, how covered over with Celestial curtains. page 318 Storms, how dreadful
sometimes in Egypt. page 329 Sea-lights, when burn dim, make the Mariners
curse and rage. page 509 Seas as difficult to Navigate, as the Hircinian
Forests be to travel through. page 510 Sigismund Emperor, what used to say
of his enemy. page 514 Seas in storms run as high as the mountains in
Mirioneth-shire in Wales. page 514 Spaniard, how may be dealt withal. page 182
Spanish Ambassadors proud Embassage into England. page 185 Seamen exhorted to
be as valiant for England, as the two Scipio's were. page 185 Seamen exhorted
to charge the Spaniard stoutly. page 187 Seamen, how they see the riches,
honors, and beauties of Countries. page 191
T. TRojans, how glad after their long War, when came within the sight of
their own Country. page 545 Toledo the Archbishop, how he despaired of
Solomon. page 410 Thankfulness, how gainful it was to Alexander. page 578
Tiger, what. page 254 Toddy-tree, what. page 265 Terebinth-tree. page 266
Torrid Zone, how people live in it. page 273 Troy, how ruined when secure. page
298 Torpedo, what. page 226 Tumbler. page 441 Titus Vespasian, how sweetly
spoken. page 517 Travelers on Land, what course they take. page 11 Teneriff,
how difficult to go up to the top of it. page 600 Tree in Pliny, how
delightful. page 2 Theodore, how careful of his Childrens education. page 35
Turkycock how said to rage. page 106 Thistle in the Scottish coin, what it
said. page 139 Trumpet sounds England stand to thine Arms. page 143 Turks how
allow none to be idle. page 166 Thescus how guided by Ariadnes thread. page 500
Thresher, what said of him. page 222 Thrush, how brings evil upon her self.
page 205 Turk what said of England when looking for it in a Map. page 183
V. ULysses, what said of eloquence. page 45 Voluptuous Londoner how feasted
his five senses. page 100 Vines in India how compared. page 21 Virgils
observation of a storm. page 542 Ulysses how sadly he raged when like to be
drowned in a storm. page 556 Venice how lived a thousand years in one form of
Government. page 529 Use of comfort to those that use the Seas, that God is the
great Commander of them, and of the winds. page 360 Voyages are all to be
begun in the fear, and by the good leave of God. page 387 Vulcan so proud that
he would dwell no longer on earth, but etc. page 415 Uses of Information,
Circumspection, and Reproof. page 361 Unthankfulness reproved. page 576, 577
W. VVInd what it does. page 36^ Wars of old, what they did when they went into
them. page 388 Wonders the greatest in England, are her famous and stately
Fabrics of warlike ships. page 382 White Hall how a curb both to Sea and Land.
page 489 Winds how overthrow Sambelicus, and his Army whilst at dinner. page
338 Wind-Armies be four. page 331 Walnot tree how better for beating. page 504
Winds are allayed six several ways. page 522 Waves of the Sea what called by
some. page 524 World, if traveled, what to be done. page 194 Whale what said
of him. page 212 Wilde-Ass what. page 247 Water-spouts at Sea what. page 271
Wilde-Cows what. page 255 Wilde-Goat what. page 254 Wilde-Bore what. page 255
Waters of the Sea, why called great. page 152 Water in Sicily what. page 153
War how ought to begin, and be carried on. page 145 World how often it has
been fought for. page 170 World divided, how few Christians in it. page 271
Williams valor when went to Sea. page 124 West Indies, how tame Fowls are.
page 241 Weeping-tree. page 266
X. XErxes trusting in a multitude of men, how betrayed. page 520 Xerxes angered
at Helespont, how threw Irons into it. page 521
Y. YEars ago could not sail far at Sea, because wanted the use of the
Loadstone. page 9
Z. Zebra what. page 250


