Oxonii Lachrymae, Rachell weeping for her Children. Or, a Patheticall RELATION
OF The present Grievances of the late famous University of OXFORD.

Wherein you have Her unjust sufferings manifested. The Authors of Her
miseries Characterised. And. The ejected Loyalists nominated.


Presented in a Letter from an Oxford Scholar (not yet exiled) to his friend a
Gentleman of Grayes-Inne.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1649.

SIR,
When the Roman Senate held consultation how to rid their Country of the
subtle Carthaginian, that had fretted like a canker the beauty of Italy; Fabius
upon the motion to make war in Africa, thought it agreeable to nature, first to
defend their own, before they attempted other men's possessions; when Peace is
established in Italy, then let War be set on foot in Africa; First let us be
without fear our selves, ere we go about to terrify others: This sage advice
Scipio could by no means digest; but vigorously pursued those hot-brain
resolutions which vainglory and ambition had suggested unto him; ever opposing
his Motto to the Senators arguments; Plas animi est inferentiquam propulsants
injuriam. Such Scipio-like Hero's our Land affords, whose implacable malice to
their Neighours has over-topp'd the affection they owe unto themselves, and
made them neglect the procurement of their own safetye to effect the utter
ruin of their brethren. Of this sort those petty Nimrods, which style
themselves our Reformers, are not the meanest; who transported with fury
(mistaken by the vulgar for holy zeal) have lately endeavored to dis-inherit
the Muses, and brought an odium upon our chaste Mother, for that she sometimes
fostered such spurious Bratis. These like Erostratus, must needs have their
names recorded to posterity, though purchased by the destruction. of Church or
University. They measure every man's cloth by their own yard, and because the
Loyalists conscience is not so cheverill as to yield unto their cursed
Proposals, they have a Minando minnemur wherewith to curd him; and if he
remain obstinate (as they term it) a Resolved upon the Question to cashire
him; This is the Method wherein they have molded their hellish designs, and
proceeded without fear or wit, to the raising of what ever was Religious or
Learned amongst us: only this we see some few Pillars (by indulgence)
remaining, which yet are made useless for supportation, and stand as bewailed
Monuments of a once stately Fabric; nor can we think they will be of long
continuance, sithence their White Boys flock hither a pace with Spades and
Mattocks of silver to clear the Foundation. Oh what a glorious building are
they now erecting I Yes sure, another Babel for the honor of their Dignities,
wherein nothing but T^he and Bohu, is like to have its habitation.

I have not an expression adequate to their iniquity, nor can I refer you to a
Parralell of their villainy; for indeed, the honor of our Reformers depending
upon the Superlative degree, has sought out Projects beyond equality.

By what I have now hinted, you may partly guess at our desolations since your
departure, and how unanimously we have adhered to our just and well grounded
Principles you are not ignorant. The virtue we make use of in qualifying our
affliction, may happily one day serve to moderate our felicities. However, I am
most assured, we shall remain constant even amongst public ruins, and that
Fortune cannot bereave us, of what she never could bequeath unto us. But I have
detained you too long from what you were pleased to request of me: to wit, an
account of those which could not be frighted into Disloyalty, and have suffered
banishment for this their resolution. I shall therefore by the way point our
unto you the comicall Actors of our Tragedy, and in fine refer you to the
Catalogue.

First then, The Leader of this joviall Crew is Mr. Reynolds, the mock
Vice Chancellor, and in him you may behold into what extremities Ambition can
drive her thirsty Favorites, by suppressing the better faculties of the soul,
and setting such unbridled motions on foot as carry men headlong into most
desperate attempts. This is that (...) which not long since hung in aquilibrio,
and waited only for a grain of success to turn the scales. Loath he was to
nauseat his reputation by actions, so much repugnant to his professions, till
baited with Cheynell's execration of his detestable neutrality, and Pem-brook
his proffer of the Imperial Chair. So thus being centred, he rests in quiet,
and protests (if Episcopacy revive not) to remain immovable; herein much
resembling the Lion, which being found by hunters in a Cave, will rather dye in
the place then quit it, for shame that he was caught in so disgraceful a
Refuge, and therefore his property is thus expreft, Ingredieudo coecus, exeundo
protervus. Next him in dignity comes Sir Nathaniel Brent; a precious Gentleman
indeed, of incomparable valor, that would adventure to to lift the Moon out of
the sphere, if she should continue in it five weeks without changing. Me
thinks he acts his part like wavering Varro, transacting business for Pompey
in Spain, who quickly un-loaded himself of that fidelity he vowed unto
himself, so soon as he had Intelligence that Caesar was master of the field: Or
just like the Weathercock, whereof there is no other use, but indicare
regnantem. You may easily compute the rise of his Apostasy, by the downfall of
the High Commission Court, and his Great Master, and thus Ex corruptione (...)
pessimum generatur. His Crown, some think, is very well prepared to ma^^ (...)
Bowling-Alley; but for my part, (with submission to the judicious) I conceive,
it is much better fitted for a Kettle-Drum, to incite Captain Cheynell and his
Curasiers, when eminent designs do call them upon duty; For if we believe that
greatest sounds proceed from vacuity, I know no impediment why it may not be
super-excellent for this service. Not far behind him appears Dr. Wilkinson,
or the two legged Crow, A great Coxcomicall Ninny, as fit to regulate an
University, as able to rule his Wife. Yea, this is her principal
chamber-Clerk. who for surenesse ever duplicates his fiat, Amen Amen, Kare. And
no mervell he is so ready to perform double duty, sithence she rewards him so
fally with plumb-pottage, and Sugar-sops. You would think this Athenian Owl,
another Aristotle if you should face him; but Barba Philosophum is very
fallible, and many (you know) have more hair then wit. He was better employed
when he epitomized Zaharell at length, and taught him to contradict himself in
Manuscript. At this Gander's heels follows a Worthy of fewer years, but more
Hypocrisy, Mr. Harris of Hamwell. And in him you may see avarice accompanying
the covtteous to his grave. He holds Pluralities incompat^ble in another, but
has a trick to preserve them in himself. Benifi^es he possesses well nigh a
dozen, but alas! good man, (take his Apology to^) he receives not above half
the profits, which makes him envy Grim^^ool^ that Argus of Brasen-Nose) his
happiness, who tells him, it is true, he has title but to one Personage though
he enjoyes the benefits of many. After him comes hog-rubber Rogers creeping.
This is Golledge the Tub-man's Corporal, or the New-Inne Scar-crow, the very
man that was in F^e with his Physician for granting him a Dispensation from
preaching at St. Mary's. But oh the Soueraign operation of a Sanctified
Canon-ship, which has untied his tongue, and makes him (once a quarter) confute
Bellarmin with admirable Stoliditie. Yea, this is mine Host Gaius, the
spiritual Babboon, good for nothing we can discover, but to be baited, that
his Swoat may serve for Cundle-grease to light the black Junto in Sir
Nathaniel's Parlour. Hard at this Simpleton's heels marches a Zealot, (as you
may discern by his flaming nose,) the thrice noble Frank Cheynell. This, this
is the man of mettell, steel to the back, Dictator perpetuus the Chairman
virtually at every Session, whose (...) goes for canonical, and strikes his
Vice-Chancellour-ship as mute as a marble Niobe, A mad-sparke, indeed, who (not
long ago) was whipped into his wits, and therefore thinks to persecute the
honest party into obedience, to dance his Galliard. This is Michael Oldsworth,
elder brother pro tempore, which led the Lord Wise-acre by the bill ad
placitum, and read an Orthography Lecture to his unworthiness in Wadi^am
Celledge H^ll. He would fain be styled Malleus H^reticorum, the Orthodox Divine
(...) who for a while disorg'd whole Anathemat's against the Independent
Vermin, as he terms them* but now the Tortes retreats into his shell; Oh how
labors he to stay their hands, with a present, and stop the^r mouths with a
Capon-leg! But surely Mr. Kelsay and his Creatures are more spiritual then to
be allured with such carnal temptations. In brief, this is the grand
Archimedes, (who if success should second his designs) would show you in a
trice the Antipodes of Church and State. Of this holy San^drim Rabbi, Wilkinson
(now Vice ( alias vicious) Presidet of Magdalen College) brings up the Rear.
This is the quondum dormouse sneaking under Paul's, now Cheynell's stout second
in every Combat. He can willingly dispense with a cap or congey to gain a
Proselite, and affects treading softly to procure an opin^on of cordial
integrity: But, Antipater intus purpuratus, his tumors and ebullitions are
sound arguments of rottenness. Nor can we much admire that he is so viperous
to our common Mother, for that he was lately so unnatural to his dying Father;
who dehorting him from these unjust and malicious practices, had this answer
with indignation returned; Sir, alas, you are in your dotage and must be
pardoned. This is one amongst the six Apostles which presses our Academicks to
lay aside their parts and reason, where himself (in St. Mary's) afforded us a
pattern; who having provided a discourse upon this text (1 Timothy 2.4.) Who would
have all men be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth; for his more
methodicall proceeding, did thus divide it, viz. into an universal
Affirmative, and a particular Negative. A piece of Logic, which (I conceive)
would have sounded harshly, but that at present it is very much in fashion.

Now Sir, it being inconsistent with the honor of those Grandees to go without
Attendants, I shall therefore add their Appeadies or chief Gentlemen to the
train, and they are two; the one is Langley, a Novice, Oh w^^^ cannon move
whee^^ this (...) etc.
run so giddy in his wheels, that he usually stuffs his Pulpit-peece with rare
hyperbolicall Nonsense; and this, that we may the more admire him, and indeed
we do. But if further you should trace his steps into his haunts, and there
see him dance the Canaries, or cut his Capers amongst his Doxies, you would
straitwaies conclude him of the Pembrochian-line, or (which comes near it)
that most of what he is, has sunk into his heels. The other is Cornish, the
same that disturbed the memorable Disputations at the Scruple Office in St.
Peter's Oxon; and for this he is elected Cannon of Christ-Church, and
Probationer-Reformer. In truth, a worthy tautologicall Divine, witness his
remarkable expression of Sa^pson his destroying the Philistines. And he pulled
the House down upon all and some, and some and all, and all and some together.
I have some thing else to say concerning him, but I forbear, because I am
informed, Mrs. Carnish (to say no more) is a Christian.

Thus have I presented our Gallants to your view, It remains therefore that I
satisfy your desires in the last particular, which (in order) I have here set
down for your perusal.

Loyallists expelled out of Christ Church College. Magdalen College.
Dr. Fell, Deane, Dr. Hammond Canon. Dr. Pain Canon. Dr. Morley Canon. Dr.
Isles Canon. Dr. Gardener Canon. Dr. Main. Mr, Terrent. Mr. How Mr. Dorell Mr.
Townsan Mr. Alestree Mr. Carick Mr. Wareing, junior Mr. Staninough. Mr. Dolbin
Mr. Hill Mr Smith Mr Hilman Mr Hill jun. Mr Whitehall Mr Jackson M^ Lowther Mr
I. Luellin Mr Vnderood Mr Byans Mr Norgate Mr Conopeus Mr Weaver Mr Littleton
Mr Nicholas Mr Love Mr Caryll Mr Heath Dr Oliver President. Mr Foreman Mr Law
Mr Drope Mr Taylour Mr Clutterbook Mr Pierce Mr Holding Mr Chyles Mr Drake Mr
Brown Mr Nicholson Mr Serle Mr Yerbury Mr Exton Mr Horn Mr Alexander Mr
Duncomb Steward Mr Slade Cook Mr Stonehouse Mr Nurse Mr Worthington Mr
Coppinger Mr Philips Mr Bartlet Mr Jones Mr Drope jun. Mr Collis Mr Drury Mr
Sympson Mr Duston Mr Langton Mr Clay Mr Diggle Mr Harris Mr Flood Mr Dale Sen.
Mr Pennington Mr Cletherow Mr Palmer Mr Oats Mr Bayley Mr Web Mr Hobs Mr
Bowls Mr White Mr Eman Mr Heath Mr Jeanes Butler Mr Taylour Butler Mr Tonchin
Butler Mr Hearn Cook Mr Chibnall Mr Wake Mr Drope natu min.
Corpus Christi College.
Dr Newlin President. Mr Stratford Mr Sanderson Mr Clarkson Mr Shute Mr Deane
Mr Betts Mr Halsted Mr Kind Mr Jackson Mr Clarke Mr Teagle Mr Metford Mr
Stapleton Mr Glover Mr Stamp Mr Immings Mr Parker Mr Felman Mr Newlin Bible
Clerk. Mr Seamer Manciple. Mr Hill Cook. Mr Price Cook. Mr Parne Butler. Mr
Bowden Porter. Mr Speeding Mr Wrench Mr Barker Mr Dutton Mr Heywood Mr Samwayes
Mr Eales Mr Chidley Mr Sucton Mr Lydall
All Souls College:
Dr Sheldon Warden Mr Barker Mr Fisher Mr Midleton Mr Boham Mr Newman Mr Dorell
Mr George Mr Smith Mr Baldwin Mr James Mr Birkenhead Mr Napier Mr. Crofts Mr
Hollingsworth Butler. Mr Griffin Cook.
St. John's College.
Dr. Bayley President Mr. Croocher Mr. Creed Mr. Wallwyn Mr. Tilsley Mr. Goad
Mr. Winard Mr. Hitchins Mr. Slater Mr. Pemble Mr. Osbaston Mr. Tailor Butler.
Mr. Ray Butler. Dr. Edwards Dr. Wild Mr. Miller Mr. Jennings Mr. Aston Mr.
Jennings, jun. Mr. Mewes Mr. Buckeidge.
New College.
Mr. Gardener Mr. Lucas Mr. Barker Mr. Rowlondson. Mr. Beesley. Mr. Baynham Mr.
Dummer Mr. Holloway Mr. Blague Mr. Coals Mr. Hobbs Mr. Price Mr. Marshall Mr.
Gillingham Mr. Bowman Mr. Turpin Mr. Withers Mr. Complin Mr. Robinson Mr.
Alexander Mr. Aileworth.
Excester College.
Mr. Tozer Mr. Berry Mr. Bidgood Mr. Polewheele Mr. Poindexter Mr. Barbon Mr.
Teage Mr. Webber Mr. Handing. Cook:
Brazen Nose College.
Mr. Eaton Mr. Vde Mr. Rowson Mr. Burges Mr. King Mr. Roberts Mr. Byram Mr.
Church Mr. Panter.
Queens College.
Mr. Pearson. Mr. Gibson Mr. Pit Mr. Musgrave Mr. Buchanan. Mr. Tarne Mr.
Wilkinson, since Apostatiz^d. Mr. Fa^rer Mr. Brathwaite Mr. Grigg Mr. Fletcher.
University College.
Dr. Walker, Master. Mr. Walker Mr. Watkins Mr. Silvester Mr. Stone.
Oriell College.
Mr. Duncomh. Mr. Sanders. Mr. Chamberlane Mr. Shelden Mr Bonch.
Wadham College.
Dr. Pites Warden. Mr. Pyne Dr. Sugg Mr. Strangewayes Mr. Atkins Mr. Michaleson
Mr. Hues. Mr. Thomas Mr. Daker
Merton College.
Mr. Owen. Mr. Broad. Mr. Lee. Dr Turner Mr Graves
Trinity College.
Dr Potter President. Mr Radford Mr Skinner Mr Bainger Mr Poundell Mr Ettrick.
Jesus College
Dr Mansell Principal. Mr Flower Mr Hues Mr Evans Mr Wilkins Mr Price Mr Penry
Mr Basset
Balioll Coledge.
Dr Lawrence Master, banished himself by resignation, for fear of expulsion.
Mr Fielding Mr Clement
Pembroke College.
Mr Whittack Master. Mr Bowls
Lincoln College.
Mr Webberley
To conclude, since you are so desirous to understand the Occurrences amongst
us I shall take every opportunity to satisfy your request, and to this end
shall forthwith send you a Cutalogue of those whose policy (as they term it)
has shuffled out their Loyalty, and induced them to keep their nests by
detestable compliance, and in the interin subscribe my self

Yours to serve you. Philanax Anonononi*

FINIS.

