THE HISTORY OF THE French Academy, Erected at Paris by the late Famous
Cardinal de RICHELIEU, and consisting of the most refined Wits of that Nation.

Wherein is set down its Original and Establishment, its Statutes, Days,
Places, and manner of Assemblies, etc. With the Names of its Members, a
Character of their Persons, and a Catalogue of their Works.

Written in French, By Mr. PAUL PELLISON, Counselor and Secretary to the King
of France.

LONDON, Printed by J. Streater for Thomas Johnson at the Golden Key in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

To his very much Honored Friend and Kinsman, NEVILLE CATELINE Esquire.
My dearest Cosen,
I Ever looked upon that friendship which you have been pleased to afford me,
as a very considerable part of my Happiness, and have made it my business to
find out some way, whereby I might manifest my desire of expressing my
Obligations to you, which I cannot do more publicly than I do now. Hereby also
making as many, as shall vouchsafe to read this, Witnesses of that sincere and
unfeigned affection I bear you.

This is the only end of the present address, and not the least hopes I have
fancied to my self, that the Book will find a more candid reception; or any
desire to put you to the trouble of defending it where you come. No, these
Considerations are as far from my thoughts, as perhaps they are common to most
men, upon the like occasion.

For the first of these, give me leave to tell you what I have many times
thought of such, as promise to themselves from the high and splendid names they
prefix before their writings, to acquire I know not what honor, or at least
Protection: That they are like those silly people of Arcadia (I think) that
presumed if they could once attain the top of a certain high Mountain, they
might with ease touch the Moon; but when they had with a great deal of pains
reached the top of it, how much they fell short of their aim, is easy to
guess. For my part, I could never yet perceive, that any Book fared the better
for his sake, to whom it was Dedicated, no more then those ships that having
painted upon them the glorious Image and Inscription of some Deity, were
notwithstanding torn by common tempests, and made the sport of every ordinary
wave.

-- Et pictos verberat unda Deos. For the second, I should be very unjust, to
expect that at your hands, which I am so far from doing my self, that if I
should hear any vilify and condemn it as poor and low, I should, if no worse,
at leastwise readily assent to what they say; so mean a conceit have I of ought
that is mine. For, Translations at the best (as it is commonly, but well, said)
are but the wrong side of a suit of hangings, which, though the stuff be never
so rich, and the workmanship artificial, looks but untowardly. I do not
therefore invite any to read this Translation, but advise them rather, both for
their own sakes, and for the Authors, whom I do very much honor, to read it in
the French, as it came from the most accurate hand of the noble PELLISSON. But
if they can neither procure that, (as I think they will hardly), nor (if they
do) understand it, they may make use of this which I offer them. If
notwithstanding all this, any shall scorn it because a Translation, I shall
give them their liberty, so they will allow me mine, to say (which is all I am
likely to bring, in my own defense) that Volentibus, non nolentibus, transtuli.

For the Book it self, abstracting from it the coorse English habit I have
given it, I suppose it cannot be unacceptable to any, that care to know what is
done abroad in the world. I do not mean of the routing of Armies, and sacking
of Towns, which indeed look best at a distance, and when the Scene is laid in
foreign Countries, (for our own has more then satisfied us with such cruel
delights) but of Learning and Learned men; an enquiry after whom is a
pardonable, if not laudable curiosity. I am sure it is pleasant: For, to
instance in the present work, What greater contentment can be imagined then to
see the whole progress of so Famous a Company, even from its Infancy and
Budding in a few select Friends, unto its full growth and maturitie, when
established in a Body, to the number of forty, and those all eminent Persons,
either in Church or State, or at least in the Commonwealth of Learning? Can it
be otherwise then extremely delightful to know their Designs, to hear their
Debates, and in some degree to enjoy the conversation of so many ingenious
Spirits, such as Monsieur de Balzac de Gomberville, (the Author of Polexander)
and de Scudery: Whom I the rather mention for that their Names are so well
known among us, by their works that are done into English.

But I trespass too much, and am afraid, least this Pleasure, which so much
transports me, seem dull and flat to you, coming from my Pen. I therefore beg
your pardon, and beseech you to accept of this small testimony of the great
Love and Respect of

SIR, Your most affectionate friend and humble servant. H. S.

Carmen Gratulatorium, DE Translatione hujus Libri feliciter absoluta.
ERgo tibi patuit felici munere linguae
Paucorum domus, et Gallis adeunda Corinthus!
Sic fastiditae vitas contagia plebis
Antiquo satur eloquio, madidusque lepore
Natali curas volucres trans aequora mittis!
Et fecunda salis tellus, et matter aceti
Gallia grata tibi est: hic siquos protulit aetas
De me iore luto factos adsciscis amicos,
Celtarum proceres; quos inter jura secantes
Misceris, patriae decus, et novus advena luces.
Sic tamen, ut totum ne Sequama sorbeat, absis
(Hoc un^m icet invideam) pars optima secli;
Et cordis plus pa^te mei, cito redditus arts
Transfer, et externis populares dotibus orna.
Id statuis recte: faciunt sua secula doctum.
Vivitur hoc aevi. Ne me sibi postulet uni
Roma vetus, neu collapsae Pandionis arces,
Ingratum mea me si gens, si nesciat aetas,
Sunt Itali, Gallique, nec absunt forsitan Angli,
Quos redimam sanus qua vis mercede legendos.
Talis Virgilius, (Flacco rata vota ferente,)
Jam tum florentes petiit rediturus Athenas.
Haud secus Archytam per littora grata Tarenti
Quaesivit Plato praeclarus Samnitibus hospes;
Talis inis melius cultae sacraria linguae,
Sic penetras nemus, et reseras mirantibus Anglis
Laurigeros longo stantes ex ordine Bardos.
Sunt nimis ignari rerum, propriaque Seripho
Contenti, siqui Veneres mirantur inesse
Angligenis solis, claris bellique togaeque.
Creed mihi, sapiunt, et possunt dicere belle
Livones et trisles Lappi, et quas longius oras
Sol videt, aut subigunt protecti pelle coloni.
Haud adeo miseris laesit praecordia frigus,
Nusquam Barbaria est: ^ed gens sibi quaeque diserta
Et petit, et duros dictis exorat amores:
Nec solum molles Italos facundia mulcet.
Sed siquid balba de nare loquatur Hibernus
Orator, vel siquid ovantes gutture Cambri;
Stridulus aut voces elidat dente Polonus;
Aut suspiret Arabs expressam ventre loquelam;
Immitem flectit popularis Suada puellam.
Usque adeo nullis aut res aut verba negantur,
Et cunctis placuisse datum est, ignavia si non
Porrectam de monte vetet contingere palmam.
Ah nimium demens, limae qui parcit, et idem
Secula victuram molitur in omnia laudem!
Non exorandus veniet post funera lector,
Hac saltem metuat justos ex part nepotes:
Saepius exactam liber hic trutinatus ad aurem
Nec fidit sibi, nec molles nimis anxius ambit
Auriculas turbae, cui dicat, Candide Lector:
Dum properat patriam studiis accendere pubem,
Orandi dum jura docet, legesque severas:
Pagina quod retulit, non horruit ipsa, tribunal.
Sed quid ego has lauds, et nullo pondere carmen
Molior infelix? tum demum laud superbus
Incedes solida, nulli cessura triumpho
Bis tua vicenis si constet gloria punctis.
C. W.

The Reader is desired to correct these following Errata with his pen, they
being such as corrupt the sense.
PAge 2 line 12 Commonwealths. p. 3 l. 19. Mancini. l. 24 recite p. 4 l. 15
that great City. p. 5 l. 25 excused. p. 7 l. 5 entertained. p. 8 l. 20. scarce.
p. 11 l. 19 Servien. l. 29 three. p. 13 In the margin, after Fabriano, add,
the Filoponi of Fajence. p. 15 l. 13 art. p. 17 l. 11 at l. 25 impurities. p.
21 l. 20. this. p. 22 l. 27 writers. p. 23 l. 6. endeavor. l. 18 Academiciens.
l. 25 should. p. 27 l. 3 and that. l. 14 it is. p. 28. l. 3. advantages. p. 33 l
18 heads p. 42 Dubourg. p. 43 l. 28 years, yet when. p. 44 l. 3 vexation. l 29
about. l 33 being. p. 45 l. 2. childish, l 13 for France read far. p. 46 l,
15 strange. l. 20 Gazetier. l. 21 Bureau. p. 54 l. 2 two other. p. 55. l. 22
its. l. 23 which. p. 58 l. 7 here p 59 l. 16 Academies. p. 62 l. 10 Seguier. p.
63 l. 14 other more. p 72 l. 18. this, l 29 Naudaeus. p. 80 l. 12 his. p. 81
ult. only. p. 87 l. 12 your. p 92 l. 18 this. p. 93 l. 1 bounds. p. 94. 31
'twas. p. 100 l. 29 Bardin's p. 106. l. 6. works. p. 107 ult. apply. p. 110 l.
22 it self. p. 111 l. 14 Chambre's conjectures. l. 29 do you. p. 116 l. 1
sense. p. 123 l. 10 petty. l. 21. affectionez. p. 135 l 12 our. p. 139 l. 19
refuse. p. 144 l. 21. pen of. p. 145. l. 10. Bergen. p. 154 l. 11. at Paris. a
little after. for corrected read bound. p 155 l. 22 remained. p. 260 l. 25. l.
for Royal r. void. p. 166. in the margin, about the middle add, The last part
of his discourse was concerning the Actions of an Honest man. p. 167 l. 13
vertus. p. 168. l. ult. as, p. 169 l. 4 Count. p. 170 l. 8. Observations. l.
27. though. p. 173 antepenult. years old. his stature. p. 174 13 handsome. p.
177 l. 4 least. l. 10 this. p 179 l. 28. numbers. l. 31 Affliction. p. 180 l. 8
works. p. 181 l. 17 for have, r. am. p. 184 l. 6 vatum insanae mentes. l. 16.
may p 186 l. 1 by his first wife. l. 14 Cabaret. p. 188 l 9 dele which p 184 l.
4 a great. p. 204 l. 32 So with many p. 206 l. 15 into ^ashion. p. 209 8 newly
p. 210 l. 12 for Justice r. Justin. p 214 l. 3 this. p. 217 l. 28 JOHN 221 l. 7
Prince. p. 224 l. 1 these. l. 22 strange. p. 225 l. 32 Roumens.

A RELATION Containing The HISTORY OF THE French Academie.
To Monsieur, D.F.F.
I Resolve, since you will have it so, to write all that I have been able to
learn concerning the French Academie, which is a Company that many talk of, and
but few know, as it deserves to be known. For whether we look upon its end,
which was to advance the Tongue we speak, to its highest perfection, and to
chalk us out a way to attain the height of Eloquence; or whether we consider
the persons of whom it was composed, whose names are famous, and very likely
will be so hereafter; or whether we cast our eyes upon its Founder, the
Cardinal de Richelieu, that famous Minister of State, whose Genius and Fortune
has been alike extraordinary; I see nothing in all this, which deserves not to
be known, and to have the memory thereof carefully preserved.

Had any one particularly left us in writing, what passed betwixt Augustus,
Mecaenas, and the excellent wits of their age; I know not whether we should
read the History of it, with less curiosity and delight, than that of the
Wars, and State-affaires of those times; Nay I know not, to say something more,
whether we should read it with less advantage and profit; we I say to whom
fortune has given neither Armies to conduct, nor Commonwealth to govern,
where we might show what we are, and to whom she has bequeathed only study,
and conversation, and such private and domestique virtues.

I shall not fear then with all exactness on my subject to relate whatever I
have collected, either from the Registers, and large notes which have been
communicated to me, or from the long and particular discourse which I have had
to this purpose with those persons which were best able to instruct me: and I
shall not forget even many petty circumstances which an Histonian would
questionless omit; but which a friend me thinks may familiarly tell unto his
friend. I shall only abstain from following always, and step by step, the
Order of the Dates, which would taste a little too much of a Diary, and oblige
me too often to fall upon the same things. But nothing will escape me, if I be
not deceived. when I shall have handled, as I in tend, these five particulars.

1. Of the establishment of the French Academie. 2. Of its Statutes; and
withal of the days, places and manner of its Assemblies. 3. Of that which it
did after its Institution. 4. Of some remarkable things which passed there. 5.
And lastly of the Academiciens in particular.
The first part. Of the establishment of the Academie
THE FRENCH Academie was not established by the Kings edict, till the year
1635. But we may say that its origin was four or five years elder, Mr. Naude
in his Dialogue de mascurat, where he cites, Giou Bapt. Albertinel discorso
dill' Academia part secunda. p. 88.
and that it owes in a manner its institution to fortune.

They that have written of the Accademie of the Humorists of Rome, say that is
sprung up by chance at the wedding of Lorenzo Maucini, a Gentle man of Rome,
that diverse persons of quality among the guests, to give some divertisement to
the Ladies, and because it was the time of Carnaval, set themselves at first
extempore, and afterward with a little premeditation to receipt some sonnets,
comedies, and discourses, which gave them the name of Bellihumori: That
afterward taking an affection insensib^y to these exercises, they resolved to
form an Academie of good literature: That then they changed the name of Belli
humori into that of Humoristi, and chose for their devise, a Cloud, which being
formed of salt exhalations from the Sea, falls down again in a sweet and gentle
shoure, with that of the Poet Lucretius, for the Motto, Redit agmine dulci.

The French Academie did not arise indeed from an accidental meeting, as that
did. But certain it is, that those which began it scarce thought of any thing
less then that which happened afterward. About the year 1629. some Gentlemen
lodging in several places of Paris, and finding nothing more incommodious in
that City, then to go many times to seek one another and all in vain took a
resolution to meet together one day in a week, at some one of their lodgings.
They were all persons of Learning and of Extraordinary merit Monsieur God^au
now Bp of Grass, who then was not a Churchman, Mounsieur de Gombauld, Monsieur
Chapelain, Monsieur Conrart, Monsieur Giry, the late Monsieur Habert
Commissarie of the Artillery Monsieur the Abbot of Cerisy, his brother,
Monsieur de Serizay, and Monsieur de Malleville. They met at Monsieur
Conrarts, whose lodgings were the most commodious to receive them, and in the
heart of the City, from whence all the rest were almost equally distant. There
they entertained themselves very familiarly, as it is usual in an ordinary
visit, with all kind of things, affairs, news, and good learning. And if any of
the Company had composed any Work, as it often happened, he communicated it
voluntarily to the rest, who freely told him their opinions. Their conferences
were concluded sometimes, with a walk, and sometimes with a collation. Thus
they continued three or four years, and as I have heard diverse of them say,
with extreme pleasure, and incredible advantage. In so much as even at this day
when they talk of those times, and of the first age of the Academie, they
speak of it as of a golden age: during which, withal the innocence and all the
liberty of the primitive times, without noise and without pomp, and without any
other laws then those of Friendship; they enjoyed whatsoever an ingenious
Society and a Rational life has either sweet or charming.

They had made an order not to speak of it to any body, which was very exactly
observed for a time. The first that failed in it, was Monsieur de Malleville
(for it is no hurt to accuse him of a fault which the happiness of the event has
excursed) He had said something of it to Monsieur Faret, who had then newly
printed his Honeste-Homme; and who having obtained Leave to be at one of their
conferences, brought with him a Copy of his Book which he gave them. He
returned with very much Satifaction, as well with their judgments which they
gave of his book, as with all that passed in the rest of the conversation. But
as it is a hard matter, that a secret to which we have once given vent, should
not soon after become public, and that another should be more faithful to us
then we have been to our selves: Monsieur Desmarests and Monsieur de Boisrobert
knew of these meetings, by means of Mr. Faret, Mr. Desmarets came thither
several times, and read there the fifth Volume of Ariana, which he then
composed. Mr. de Boisrobert desired also to be present at them, and there was
no color in the world to deny him admittance, for besides that he was a friend
to most of these Gentlemen, even his fortune procured him some respect, and
rendered him the more considerable. He then was admitted, and when he observed
in what manner works were there examined, and that it was not a business of
complements and flattteries, where each one commends that he might be
commended, but that they did boldly and freely censure even the least faults,
he was filled with joy and admiration. He was then in his greatest favor with
the Cardinal de Richelieu, and his chiefest care was to recreare the spirits of
his Master, after the noise and perplexties of business, as well by pleasant
stories, at which he was the best of any man in the world, as in telling him
all the pretty news of the Court and Town: and this divertisement was so
useful to the Cardinal, that his Chief Physician Monsieur Citois, was wont to
say to him, My Lord, we will do all we can for your health; but all our drugs
are worth nothing, unless you add thereto a little of Boisrobert. Amongst
these familiar discourses, Mr. de Boisrobert, who entained him with all kind of
news, omitted not to make an advantageous recital to him of the little
Assembly he had seen, and of the persons which composed it: and the Cardinal
who had a soul naturally carried unto great things, and loved above all the
French tongue, in which he himself wrote exceeding well, after he had commended
the design, he asked Monsieur de Boisrobert, whether these Gentlemen would make
a society and assemble regularly and under public authority. Monsieur de
Boisrobert having answered that in his opinion this proposition would be
received with joy, he commanded him to make it, and to offer to these Gentlemen
his protection for their Company, which he would get established by Letters
Patents, and his affection to each of them in particular, which he would
manifest upon all opportunities.

When these offers had been made, and the question was to resolve in
particular, what answer they should return, there was scarce any of these
Gentlemen which witnessed not a displeasure, and a regret, that the honor
which was done them would disturb the sweetness, and the familiarity of their
conferences: nay some of them and especially, Monsieur de Sorisay, and Monsieur
de malleville were of opinion that they should excuse themselves to the
Cardinal the best they could: but these two, besides the general reasons that
were common to them with the rest, had a particular one which they had an eye
to. Monsieur de Serisay was Controller of the house of the Duke de la
Rochefoucant, and Monsieur de Malleville was Secretary to the Marshall de
Bassompierre; These two Lords were looked upon as Enemies to the Cardinal, The
first perceiving himself in no good condition at Court, had retired to his
Government of Poitou, and the other was already a Prisoner in the Bastille. Now
you know in what reputation the Cardinal then was. One might think, that seeing
himself in a place so envied, and so exposed to the plots of the Grandees,
there was scarce any place, where he had not his Scouts to give him notice of
all their designs.

These two Gentlemen then, feared lest that this commerce which they should
have with him by means of an Academie, which he was to be Founder and
Protector of, should give men occasion to talk, and render them suspected to
their Lords. They omitted not therefore any thing which might persuade the
company to be of their minds. However at last, the contrary opinion passed,
which was Monsieur Chapelain's: for as he had neither passion nor interest
against the Cardinal, who had taken notice of him, and, as a testimony of the
esteem he had of him, had given him a Pension; He represents unto them that it
must be confessed, they could have been contented that their conferences had not
been thus divulged, but that considering the condition things were in, it was
not free for them to take which of the two parts they liked best. That they had
to do with a Man, who is extreme eager in what he desires, and that is not
accustomed to meet with opposition; or, if he does, to suffer it unpunisht:
That he might take it for an affront, if they should refuse his protection and
might revenge himself for it, upon each of them in particular: That at least
since that by the Laws of the Realm, all kind of Assemblyes were forbidden
that are made without authority from the Prince, he might if he pleased with a
words speaking, put an end to this in spite of them and by this means break up
a Society, which there wa none of them, but wished might be eternal. Upon
these reasons it was resolved that Monsieur de Boisrobert should be desired to
return most humble thanks to the Cardinal for the honor he did them, and to
assure him that although they never had any such ambitious thoughts, and were
extremely surprised with his Eminence design, yet they were wholly resolved to
obey his Commands. The Cardinal received their answer with great satisfaction,
and giving diverse testimonies that he was very serious in this establishment,
he commanded Monsier de Boisrobert to tell them that they should meet together
as they were wont, and that they should augment their company as they should
think fit, and that they should advise among themselves what form and what
Laws it would be best to give it for the future.

Things passed thus in the beginning of the year 1634. At the same time
Monsieur Conrart, at whose house they had their meetings hitherto, was about to
marry; having then invited all these Gentlemen as his particular friends to be
at his wedding, they conceived that for the future his housewould not be so
proper for their conferences as before. Therefore they began to meet at
Monsieur Desmarests, and to think seriously, according to the intention of the
Cardinal, concerning the establishment of the Academie.

IF you remember that you have read in some one of the Poets, the description
of a young Commonwealth, where some are busied in making laws, and creating
Magistrates, others in setting out the ground, and drawing a platform of the
houses; these in getting together materials, and those in laying the
foundations for the Temples and Walls: Imagine that it was just so, in this
first Institution of the Academie, and that there passed diverse things almost
at the same time, which cannot be related but one after another.

One of the first was, that these Gentlemen increased their company with diverse
persons considerable for their merit, amongst whom there were some that were
otherwise so for their quality. For, as the Court does always zealously
imitate the inclinations of the grand Ministers and Favorites especially when
they are grounded upon reason and honesty; Those which were near the Cardinal,
and that were in any reputation of wit, thought it a piece of honor to be of
that body of which he was the Protector and Father. Not only Monsieur
Desmarests, and Monsieur Boisrobert, who were the first that knew of these
private assemblies; but also Monsieur de Montmer Master of requests Monsieur de
Chastelet Counselor of State, (who was in great favor) Monsieur Serrien then
Secretary of Estate, and Monsieur Seguier Keeper of the Seals, now Chancellor
of France, desired to be of this Company. But because I must in another place
speak of all the Academiciens in particular, I shall defer till then to let
you know, when and upon what occasion each of them was admitted.

And that they might give some order and form to their Assembly, they resolved
to create forthwith their Officers: A Director and a Chanceller that should be
changed from time to time, and a Secretary that should be perpetual; the two
first by lot, and the last by the suffrages of the Assembly. The Director was
Monsieur de Serizay, the Chancellor Monsieur Desmarests, the Secretary Monsieur
Conrart, to whom this Office was given in his absence by a common consent, all
agreeing herein, that no man could better fill this place. Then began he to set
down in writing what passed in the Assembly, and to keep those Registers,
from whence I have drawn the best and greatest part of this Relation. They
begin March 13. 1634.

Besides these three Officers, they created a Stationer to the Academie,
Register. 13. March. 1634.
who was also to serve as dorekeeper to it. This charge was given to Camusat,
who of all others was esteemed the most able, Register Apill. 10. 1634.
for besides that he was very well seen in his profession, he was a man of a
good judgment, and would not print any scurvy books, so that when you and I
came abroad into the world, and began first to read French Pieces, 'twas
almost an infallible mark of good ones, that he printed them.

They consulted likewise in these beginings, Reg. March 20 1634.
what name the Company should take and among others that were propounded that
of the FRENCH ACADEMIE, which had already been approved of by the Cardinal, was
liked best. Some have since called it the Academie of the beaux esprits, others
the Academie of Eloquence, as Monsieur de Boissat, who wrote to it from
Dauphine with this Title, erroneously, though he himself was one of it. Many
others have believed that it was called the eminent Academie, in allusion to
the quality of the Cardinal who was its Protector: And I confess that I my
self was heretofore deceived in the Epistle Dedicatorie of the first Book of
my Paraphrase of the Jnstitutes; See Monsier Naudaeus in his Dialogue de
Mascurat, where he names also the Offuscati of Cesene, the Disuniti of
Febriano, the Caliginosi of Ancona, the Adagiati of Rimini, the Assorditi of
Cita de Castello, the Insensati of Perouse, the Raffrontati of Ferme, the
Catenati of Macerata, the Ostinati of viterbe, the Immobili of Alessandrie, the
Occulti of Bresse, the Perseveranti of Trevise, the Filarmonici of Verona, the
Humorosi of Cortona, and the Oscari of Lucca
but in a word it never calls it self by any other name then that of the FRENCH
ACADEMIE.

In the choice of this name, which has nothing in it either of pride or
strangeness they have shown perhaps less gallantry; but perhaps too, more
judgment and solidity then the Academies beyond the Alps, who wrong themselves
in taking one either mysterious, or ambitious, or fantastical, such as we find
them in a carrousel or in a mascarade: as if these exercises of the mind were
rather debauches and sports, then serious occupations.

Thus their Academicks call themselves at Siena Intronati, at Florence dela
Crusca, at Rome Humoristi, Lincei, Fantastici, at Bolonia Ot^osi, at Genoa
Addormentati, at Padua Ricovirati and Orditi, at Vicenza Olimpici, at Parma
Innominati, at Millane Nascosti, at Naples Ardenti, at Mantua Invaghiti, at
Pavie Affidati, and I know none of them, but the Florentine Academie only which
is the most ancient of them all, which took a plain simple Name without any
affectation.

But perhaps I shall one day, elsewhere and in a discourse by it self, treat
of all these Academies, and their names; To return at present to that which I
began to speak of. At the same time that it chose its name, it deliberated also
concerning the Employment it would have, and the Laws it should establish. All
the Academiciens were ordered to think of it in private, Monsieur Faret was
charged in the mean time to make a discourse, which should contain as 'twere
the Project of the Academie, and which might serve for a preface to its
Statutes: and Monsieur de Serizay, to frame a letter to the Cardinal, to
beseech him to honor the company with his Protection. 'Twas by this Letter,
and by this Project, that they began. The letter which is of the 22th of
March, The Academies Letter March, 22, 1634
1634. contained in effect thus much, That if Monsieur the Cardinal had
published his writings, there would want nothing to the perfection of the
Tongue, and that questionless he would have done that which the Academie
propounds to it self to do: but that his modesty forbidding him to set forth
his own rare pieces, did not also hinder him from approving that others searched
after those treasures which he keeps locked up, and from authorizing their
search. That this was the most solid foundation of the Academies design, and
of its project, which should be presented to his eminence with this letter by
Messieurs de Bautru, du Chastelet, and de Boisrobert: That it would not receive
life but from him, and that the hope of his protection obliged it already to an
extreme resentment. The Project of the Academie
The Project was a discourse very large, full of many excellent passages, which
may be reduced in a lesser compass to these heads: That the Country we
inhabit has always bred most valiant men, but that their valor has been
without reputation in comparison with that of the Romans and Greeks, because
they never had the act of rendering it illustrious by their writings. That
nevertheless at this day the Greeks and the Romans being become slaves to
other Nations, and their very languages, though so rich and pleasant, being
reckoned amongst the dead; it fell out happily for France that we have
continued not only in possession of the valor of our Ancestors, but also in a
condition to raise again to life, Eloquence, which seemed to be buried with
those, that were the inventors and Masters of it: That after the great and
memorable actions of the King, 'twas a most happy accident, that there are
found at this day amongst his subjects so many men able to make that be read
with delight, which we have seen done with astonishment. That also 'twas none
of the least thoughts of that great Cardinal his prime Minister to take on him
as he does the protection of Learning, so necessary for the good and glory of
the State, and to cause it to flourish by his favor and approbation. That
there seemed to want nothing else to the felicity of the Kingdom, but to
separate from the number of barbarous languages that Tongue which we speak, and
which all our neighbors too will speak erelong, if our conquests continue as
they have begun: That for so brave a design, he thought fit to assemble a
certain number of persons able to second his Intentions. That these
Conferences are one of the most assured means to bring it about. That our
tongue which is already more perfect than any other that is spoken at this day,
may as well at length succeed the Latin, as the Latin did the Greek, if there
were more care taken then has been hitherto of Elocution, which is not indeed
the whole of eloquence, but makes a very considerable part thereof. After this
was added. That as for the order, practice, and laws, of his Assembly, 'twas
thought fit to reduce them into a Statute apart, and in this place to treat
only of two things, which would be too much forced and torturd in that brevity
which is proper to the style of Laws. The first, of the qualities requisite in
those who should be trusted in this business; and the second, What should be
their Functions, and what kind of matters they should handle.

1. For the first, That it is not enough to have a large and profound knowledge
in the Sciences, nor a facility to speak handsomely in conversation, nor a
lively and prompt imagination, good as invention: But that there must be at
'twere a particular Genius, and a natural light able to judge of that which is
most neat and profound in Eloquence: That lastly there is requisite a certain
mixture of all these other qualities in one equal temper subjected to the Laws
of the understanding, and to a solid judgment. As for their Functions, which
was the second thing they promised to treat of: That they should be, The
purifying of the language from the filth it has contracted, either in the
mouth of the vulgar, or in the crowd of Lawyers, or in the impunities of
wrangling, or by the ill use of ignorant Courtiers, or by the abuse of those
who corrupt it in writing, or of those that in the Pulpits speak indeed what
they ought, but not as they ought. That to this end 'twere good to settle a
certain constant use of words: That 'twere fit to retain some of those which
are now in use, so that they be referred to one of the three kinds of writings,
in which they might be used; that those, for instance, which are naught in a
lofty, might be borne with in a mean, and approved in the lowest and Comique
style. That one of the means which the Academiciens would make use of, to
attain unto perfection, should be the examination and correction of their own
writings. That they would severely examine the Subject and the manner of
handling it, the Arguments, the Style, the Numbers, and every word in
particular. That after so exact observations, they would give any one that
would take the pains, leave to add his, perhaps with as ridiculous a success,
as those that thought they had found spots in the Sun. That also the Academie
desired to please none but the wisest men, and not those fools that begin to
be dazeld with the glory which it receives from so great a protector. That if
these resolutions may not serve as rules for the future, they may at least
serve as advice, since it is not probable that so many men assembled together
should not be able to decide things, in which it cannot be denied but they have
manifested sufficient experience. That this Company has taken the name of the
FRENCH ACADEMIE, because it was the most modest and most proper to its Function.
That for the Seal it would use, and the Privileges it would enjoy, it
referred it self therein to its Founder, and to his Authority, who alone having
given form to this Institution was able to build it up upon foundation strongs
enough to continue as long as the Monarchy.

This Project accompanied with the Letter which I told you of, was presented to
the Cardinal by the 3. deputies of the Company. He caused the Letter to be
read to him twice, once by Cardinal de la Valette, who then was with him; and
the 2d. time by Monsieur de Boisrobert. He answered the Deputies in these very
terms, as I find them in the Register. Reg. March 27. 1634.
That he had a good esteem of the whole Company in general, and each member
thereof in particular. That he was very well pleased with their desiring his
Protection, and that he granted it to them with all his heart. He caused the
Project also to be read to him, and Marked in it some passages which he thought
were to be corrected, and promised to approve it, when 'twas mended; which
being told the Company, they gave in charge first to Monsieur Chapelain,
Godeau, Habert and Desmarests to Examine the discourse. Reg. May 1. 1634.
At last, since each of the Academiciens found fault with some thing or other
in it, it was resolved that every one of them should examine it by themselves,
and to this purpose that there should be thirty copies of it printed, Reg. May
8. 1634.
to be distributed amongst them, but that they should swear not to speak of
it, or show it to any body. I learnt afterward one thing which I account very
remarkable, it was, that to have these thirty Copies they took the way of
printing, not only because they judged it the most facile and ready way, but
also because according to the Common opinion, the lesser pains the Eyes take in
reading a book, the more liberty the mind has to judge of it. That one sees
more clearly and observes better the graces and the faults of a work, when it is
written in a good Character, then when in an ill; and better yet, when it is
printed then when it is written. That for Instance Cardinal Perron, who spared
neither pains, nor care, nor costs for his books, made them always be printed
twice: first to distribute only some Copies of them to his private friends, on
which they might make their observations: and Secondly, to publish them to the
world in that form which he resolved to set them forth in. And to the end that
none of this first sort should be divulged against his will, he caused them to
be wrought off at his own house at Bagnolet, where he had a Press on purpose.

Well, Reg: May 18 1634.
the thirty printed copies were brought back by the Academiciens with their
Notes, and which is considerable in so great a number, there was not one of
them that had divulged the secret. The discourse was examined afterward with
great care in several Assemblies, whereof many were extraordinary for this
very business. At last, Reg. June 19. July 17. October. 30. 1634.
Monsieur Faret made it ready to be presented a second time to the Cardinal;
which he and Monsieur de Biosrobert had charge to do. The Cardinal received
the Copy which they presented him, and having approved it for the matter, sent
it back soon after to the Company with his own marginall castigations, written
by the hand of Charpentier his Secretary, which related only to the form and
expressions of it. It Was ordered that he should be most humbly thanked for his
favor, Reg. November 15. 1634.
and that they would correct according to his desire, those passages which he
had taken notice of. Only assuming to themselves a laudable, liberty in a time
when all the Court Idolized the Cardinal, and when twould have been a crime to
contradict him; Reg. November. 27. 1634.
they ordered that upon two of those passages, He should be desired to tell
them, whether it were his absolute pleasure that they should alter them,
because his Note was conceived in dubious terms, and because the Expressions
seemed to the whole Company to be sufficiently noble, and French good enough.

I do not find that they changed these passages afterwar^s, which makes me
think the Cardinal did not urge them any more. Now the design o^ the Academy
was to print this Project, with their Statutes when they were fini^ht and that
they were agreed about them: But this was never done, whether it were that this
first ardour for the glory of the Company began in time to cool; or that, as I
am very prone to believe, it happened then to this judicious Society, as it
does every day to many brave men, not to satisfy themselves, though they
satisfy all men else. Perhaps the Academy approved all the parts of this
discourse, but still found some fault or other in the whole, as to the order
and carriage of it. I durst almost suspect it was thus not only because after
they had read it twice, and that with very much pleasure, they seem to me to
incline mo^e toward this defect then any other, but besides because in one of
the Conferences, wherein it was examined, (as I find in the Registers,) there was
a general Rule made for the future, which too in my opinion may serve as a
general lesson for all writers; Reg. July 17. 1634.
That none should hereafter read any discourse in the Company, unless at the
same time he bring the Analysis of it by it self, that so the Academy may judge
of the whole as well as of the parts.

They forgot not in the mean time, to deliberate about the principal employment
of the Academy, concerning its Statutes and the Letters it was to have for its
Establishment. Reg. March 20. 1634.
In the 2d. Assembly upon the question that was propounded concerning its
Function, Monsieur Chapelain declared that in his opinion it ought to be, To
endeavor the purify ng of our Language; and the rendering it capable of the
highest Eloquence (as you saw 'twas said in the Project): That to this purpose
they are in the first place to regulate the Terms and Phrases, by a large
Dictionary, and a very exact Grammar which might give it a part of those
Ornaments it wants, and that afterward it might acquire the rest by a
Rhetorique and a Poetique, which should be composed to serve as a rule to them
that would write in verse and in prose. This advice which was also the thoughts
of all the other Academies, was generally followed: and because Monsieur
Chapelain had enlarged himself upon the manner how they ought to proceed in the
Dictionary and Grammar, Reg. March 27. 1634.
he was desired to draw a platform of it, which was seen afterward by the
Company, and thereupon it was ordered he should confer with Messieurs de
Bourzey, de Gombauld and de Gomberville. But I shall have another occasion to
tell you more of this platform, and to give you an Abridgment of it, whereby
you may judge what esteem and commendations it deserved.

As for the Statutes of the Academy, Reg. March 27. 1634.
the first that travaild in this subject by order of the Company was Monsieur
de Chastelet Counselor of State. After they had seen his Papers, he was
ordered to confer about it with the same Messieurs de Bourzey, de Gombauld and
de Gomberville. Afterward it was agreed, that all the Academiciens should be
exhorted to give in their memojres in writing upon this subject. I have seen
nine of these memoires or advices of some particular Academiciens, which are
those of Messieurs Faret, de Gombauld, Chapelain, Conrart, Sirmond du
Chastelet, Bardin, Colleset, and Baudoin. I shall not stay to tell you the
contents of them; but I believe I may remark by the way two things, which have
not been followed in the Statutes. One which is in the memoire of Monsieur de
Gombald, and which I relate here as a Testimony of his piety and virtue. It Is,
that he propounded that each of the Academiciens should be bound to compose
every year a piece great or small, in the praise of God. The other, which seems
to me very strange, though it was desired by Monsieur Sirmond, a man otherwise
of a very solid judgment, It Was, that he would have all the Academiciens bound
by oath, to use those words which were approved by the Major part of voices in
the Assembly. So that if this Law had been received, whatsoever particular
aversion, one might have to a word, notwithstanding he must of necessity make
use of it and if any one should use it otherwise, he would commit not only a
fault, but a sin. All these memoires were put into the hand of 4. Commisioners
Messeurs du Chastelet Chaplain, Faret, and Gombauld, Reg. December 4. 1634.
to cul out of each what they liked best; and after their choice, Monsieur
Conrart, who in quality of Secretary had also assisted at all these particular
Conferences, digested and couched in writing the Articles of the Statutes. They
were read, examined, and approved by the Company. Reg. November. 15. 1634.


The same Monsieur Conrart had also in Charge to draw up the Letters Parents
for the Foundation of the Academie, which seemed to belong unto him upon a
double account, because he was both Secretary to the Academie, and Secretary to
the King. After that he had read them in the Assembly, Messieurs du Chastelet,
de Serizay and de Cerisy were ordered to receive them with him, Reg. January 2.
1635.
and to show them to the Lord keeper of the Seals; and Monsieur de Boisrobert,
to the Cardinal. I believe you will take it kindly, that I have here inserted
them at large, since that they serve for the foundation to all the rest, and
that besides they are conceived in very pure and Elegant terms, which not
omiting those clauses and forms of Speech usual to the Chancerie do
Nevertheless relish the politenesse of the Academy and the Court.

LEWIS, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF FRANCE AND NAVARRE, to all present and to
come GREETING. Since God has called us to the conduct of this State, it has
been our chiefest Aim, not only to remedy those disorders which the Civil
wars, (wherewith it has been so long afflicted,) have brought into it; but
also to enrich it with all the Ornaments, befitting the most illustrious and
most ancient of all Monarchies that are now in the World: and though we have
labored incessantly to execute this design, yet till now 'twas impossible for
us fully to accomplish it. The troubles raised so often in the greatest part of
our Provinces, and the assistance which we have been obliged to give to diverse
of our Allies, have diverted us from the enjoyment of that quiet, which we have
procured for others. But as all our intentions have been just, so have they
also succeeded prosperously. Those of our neighbors that were oppressed by
their enemies, do now live secure under our protection. The public
tranquillity makes our subjects forget all past miseries; and confusion has at
length given place to that good order, which we have revived amongst them, in
re-establishing trade, in causing military Disciplinie to be exactly observed
in our armies, in regulating our taxes, and in reforming luxury. It Is well
known to every one what share our dear and welbeloved Cousin the Cardinal,
Duke de Richelieu has had in all these things, and we should be thought to
wrong those abilities, and fidelity which he has manifested in all our affairs
ever since we chose him for our Principal Minister, if in what yet remains
for us to do, toward the glory and Embelishment of France, we should not
follow his advice, and commit the disposal and direction of those things which
are yet thereto necessary, unto his care. Wherefore having made known unto him
our Intention, he has represented unto us, that 'twas one of the most glorious
marks of the felicity of a State; that Arts and Sciences have flourisht in it,
and that as well learning as arms have been there in honor and esteem, since
that they are one of the principal instruments of Virtue. That having
atcheived so many memorable Exploits, it remains only that we add things
delightful, unto those that are necessary, and ornament unto pr^fit, and that
in his opinion we could not begin better the^ with the most Noble of all Arts,
Eloquence. That the French Tongue, which hitherto has but too much resented
the negligence of those which could have rendered it the most perfect of the
modernes, is more capable then ever to attain it, considering the number of
persons which have a particular knowledge of the advantage, that it is Mistress
of, and of those which may still be added to it. That to establish certain
Rules of it, he has ordained an Assembly, whose proposalls have satified him so
well, that to execute them, and to render the French Tongue not only Elegant,
but also capable to treat of all Arts and Sciences, there needs only the
continuance of these Conferences; which might be done with very much profit; if
We would be pleased to Authorize them, and to permit the making of some Laws
and Statutes, for the polity which is to be observed there, and to gratify
those, of whom it shall be composed, with some honorable Testimony of our
Favor. FOR THESE CAUSES; having respect to the advantages, which our Subjects
may receive from the abovesaid Conferences, and inclining to the request of our
said Cousin, WE HAVE of our special grace, full power, and Royal Authority,
permitted, approved, and Authorized, and by these presents, signed with our
hand, do permit, approve, and Authorize the said assemblies and conferences: We
will that they be continued from henceforth in our good City of Paris, under
the name of the FRENCH ACADEMIE. That our said Cousin have liberty to Style
himself, the head and protector of it: That the number thereof be limited to
40. persons: That he Authorize its Officers, Statutes and Orders, without
requiring any other of our Letters, besides these Presents, by which we do
confirm as well for the present, as for the future, whatsoever he shall do
upon this Account. We will also, that the said Academie have a seal with such a
mark and Jnscription as our said Cousin shall think fit, to seal all the Acts
which shall proceed from it. And for as much as the pains of those who shall
compose it, will be extremely advantageous to the public, and they must employ
therein a great part of their time, our said Cousin having represented unto us
that diverse of them can be but very seldom in the Assemblyes of the said
Academie, unless we exempt them from certain burdensome charges, which they
may be charged with, as well as our other subjects; and unless we grant them
power to avoid the trouble of going to solicit upon the place the processes
and Lawsuits which they may have in the Provinces remote from our good City of
Paris, where the said Assemblyes are to be: we have at the request of our said
Cousin, exempted, and by these presents do exempt from all Tutelles and
Curatelles, and from all Guets and Gards, the said members of THE FRENCH
ACADEMIE, to the said number of forty: for the time being and for the future,
and have granted and do grant unto them the right of Committimus of all the
causes personal, possessory and hypotequaires, as well when plaintiff as when
defendant, before our trusty and beloved Counselors the Masters of Requests in
Ordinary of our Hostel, or the Courts of Requests of our Palace at Paris, at
their own choice, in as ample manner as the domestic Officers and servants of
our House do enjoy it. WE THEREFORE charge and command our trusty and beloved
Counselors sitting in Court of Parliament at Paris, the Masters of Requests in
ordinary of our Hostel, and all other our Justices and Officers to whom it
shall appertain, that they cause these Presents to be read and registered, and
that they permit the enjoyment of all the things therein contained, and of
whatsoever shall be made and ordained by our said Cousin the Cardinal Duke de
Richelieu, in consequence and virtue hereof to all those who have already been
nominated by him, and which shall be hereafter to the the number of 40. and to
those also which shall succeed for the future, to be of the said FRENCH
ACADEMIE, causing to cease all troubles and obstacles which they shall meet
with. And for as much as there may be need of these Presents in several
places, we will that unto a Copy of them compared by one of our trusty and
beloved Counselors and Secretaries, credit be given as to the Original. And
we command our chief Huissier or Sergeant, hereupon to do all actions
necessary to the execution thereof, without requiring any other permission. FOR
SUCH IS OUR PLEASURE, notwithstanding any oppositions or appeals whatsoever,
for which we will that it be not differred, abrogating for this end all Edicts,
Declaratious, Arrests, Orders, and other Letters contrary to these presents.
And to the end that this may be for ever firm and stable, we have caused our
Seal to be put thereto, Saving our Right in other things, and the right of
others in all things. GIVEN at Paris in the month of January, in the year of
Grace, 1635. and of our Reign the twenty fifth. Signed, LEWIS. And on the fold,
By the King DELOMENIE. And sealed with the great Seal of green wax, upon
Strings of red and green silk.

There had been added to the other privileges, and it is likely it would have
been easily obtained, exemption from taxes; but because all the Academiciens
were already exempted from them, either by their Nobility, or otherwise; not
any one of them thought fit to desire it, lest he should be thought to stand in
need of it himself: and thus they preferred an imaginary honor, before the
solid and real interest of their successors.

It was no difficult matter to get these Letters sealed. The Lord keeper of the
Seals, had himself too great an inclination to these kind of exercises, Reg.
December. 4. 1634.
to be any hinderance therein, wherefore he used those deputies which spoke to
him of it, Reg. January ^. 1635.
with all the civility they could desire. Nay a little while after he sent to
tell the Company by Monsieur de Cerisy, that he desired to be comprised in the
Catalogue of the Academiciens, which was soon after done. You shall see anon,
how this Proposition was received; at present it shall suffice to tell you that
he sealed the Letters with all Speed, Reg. January 29. 1635.
and that they were brought back to the Academie, by Monsieur de Cerisy, the
29th. of January, 1635.

There wanted but two things for the entire establishment of this Body: the
one, to get their Statutes Authorized by the Cardinal, according to the power
given him thereto by the Kings Letters. The other to get those Letters ratified
in Parliament. The first was very easy, the second on the contrary accompanied
with difficulties and delays. To get the statutes Authorized by the Cardinal,
Reg. Feb. 5. 1635.
who was then at Ruel, they sent to him the 3. officers, with Monsieur de
Boisrobert. I have heard Monsieur Conrart say, who was of that deputation as an
officer, and whom I think you will acknowledge for a just judge in such
matters, that he never heard a man speak better then the Cardinal did in this
meeting, that he answered to the speech of Monsieur de Serizay, the director,
as if he had seen it a long time before hand, and had leisure enough to prepare
himself upon the the head of it, and even upon every word that was in it; that
he spoke first for the Academie, in general; then he addressed himself to the 4.
Deputies, and at last to each of them apart, but so apposite, with so much
grace, civility, majesty and sweetness, that he ravished all that heard him,
Reg. February 22. 1635.
with admiration. He caused them at last to leave the Statutes behind, that he
might view them, and sent them back some time after signed with his own hand,
and countersigned by Charpentier his Secretary and sealed with his arms En
placard. But I must not forget to tell you that this was after that he had
caused one thing only in it to be changed, which would have seemed to be too
much to his advantage, and to tax him of a little vanity. The fifth Article of
the Statutes was in substance, That every Academicien should promise to
reverence the virtue and memory of my Lord their Protector. He desired that
this article should be taken away, and the Company ordered it should be so, in
obedience to his Eminence; but that there should be mention of it made in the
Registers.

I should now questionles be very tedious, if I should go about to relate to
you exactly, how much time and pains was requisite on the other side, to get
these Letters Patens ratifyed in Parliament. Reg. January 19. and Febuary 5.
1635.
After that they were signed according to order, by Monsieur Delomenie
Secretary of state, who was then called Monsieur de Villeauclair, and is at
present Monsieur the Count of Brienne; with whom they found no difficulty; they
were delivered into the hand of Monsieur Hennequin of Bernay Counselor, in the
great Chamber to make a report of them. They sent several deputies as well to
him as to the Kings Advocates, and to Monsieur the chief President le Jay;
Reg. March 12. March 19. April 16. 1635.
but all were to no purpose. And although to give the more force to their
Solicitations, after the two first, they resolved to make no more in the name
of the Company; but of the Cardinal, who liked well it should be so; and
though in his name Messieurs Desmarests, Reg. July 23. 30. 1635,
de Bautru de Boisrobert had been to wait upon the Chief President: he gave
them but little hopes of obtaining what they desired. This was the reason, why
the Cardinal upon the Complaint that was made to him of it by Monsieur de
Boisrobert, in behalf of the Company, wrote to the Chief President the
following Letter.

SIR,
I do not take pen in hand to represent unto you the merit of those persons
which compose the FRENCH ACADEMIE lately established in Paris, because the most
part of them having the honor to be known to you, I think you cannot be
ignorant of it; but to conjure you that you would for this reason, and for the
affection which I bear to them in general, and in particular, contribute the
Power you have in your Parliament for the confirming those privileges, which
it has pleased h s Majesty to grant them, at my humble desire being profitable
and necessary to the public, and having quite another design then that which
you have hitherto been made believe. I do not doubt but you will in this
occasion bring, for their contentment, all the facility which you can possibly,
and which they have reason to promise to themselves upon my recommendation to
you; assuring you that besides the obligation which these Gentlemen will have
to you for this favor which you will show them in this affair, I shall
partake of their resentment, to witness to you mine own also, when ever I
shall have opportunity to do you service, and to let you know by my actions
that I am.

December. 1635. SIR, Your most affectionate servant, LE CARD. DE RICHELIEU.


A Copy of this Letter was read in the Academie, and because the Attorney
General expressed a desire of it, they obtained further of the King, three
Letters under the Privy Seal; One for him and the Advocates General: another
for the Parliament: and the third for the chief President le Jay: The Attorney
General at that time was that great man, to whom I am so infinitely obliged M.
Mole, now keeper of the Seals of France. These Letters were all written to the
same tenor and purpose and it will be sufficient to relate to you one of them,
that you may know the rest.

BY THE KING.
TRVSTY AND WEL-BELOVED, We have heretofore by our Letters Patents in form of
an Edict, in January last willed and ordained that there should be an
establishment of a FRENCH ACADEMIE in our good City of Paris, in the which
there being only persons of great worth and learning, it cannot be but very
advantageous to the public, and to the reputation of France. FOR THESE CAUSES,
we will and command that you proceed to the registring of the aforesaid
Letters, according to their form and tenor, and that you permit the said
Company to enjoy the privileges wherewith we have endowed them, without
giving thereto any delay, restriction, or difficulty: hereof fail ye not: FOR
such is our pleasure, GIVEN at S. Germain en Lay, the 30th day of December
1635. Signed LEWIS, and underneath DELOMENIE: and, on the backside, To our
trusty and welbeloved Counselors, holding our Court of Parliament at Paris.


Moreover the Cardinal signified to the Attorney General who came to visit him
at Conflans, that he absolutely desired this ratification, and that having set
his seal to the Statutes of the Academie, he judged them worthy the
privileges that were granted to them. He also let the chief President know,
that for fear there should yet be delays and obstacles in this affair, he
should cause the Letters to be presented and ratified in the grand Council.
They continued the sollicitings in his name, and those which did it, said from
him, that h had forbidden the Academie to trouble it self any more about it,
being resolved, it should receive this favor only from himself. At length the
Attorney General gave his favorable determination, and Monsieur Savarre,
Counselor in the great Chamber, in whose hands the Letters were, professed
also his great willingness, adding withal, That he did not believe, since he
was of the Parliament, he had received a greater honor then the contributing
something to the establishment of the Academie. Nevertheless he had not this
satisfaction, for he fell sick some few days after: and whether 'twere that
there were yet some other obstacles, or that his sickness which was long, and
of which he died at last, was the cause of it, so if was, that the Letters
returned into the hands of Monsieur de Bernay, and were not ratified, till a
year after or more, the 10th. of July 1637. with this clause, Provided that
those of the Assembly and Academie, take no cognizance but only of the ornament
embellishment and augmentation of the French Tongue; and of the books that
shall be made by themselves, and by others that shall desire it.

The Academie being assembled three days after, would have deputed some to go
thank the Cardinal; but he sent them word by Monsieur de Boisrobert, that he
desired it not, and that they should go only to thank Monsieur de Bernay the
reporter, Monsieur the Attorney General, and Monsieur the chief Peresident,
which was done by the three Officers. At last Monsieur du Tillet, Clark of the
Parliament, sent the Attest of the Ratification to the Academie then assembled
the last of July in the same year. His Secretary that had the charge of it,
was brought into the Assembly, and thanked in the name of the whole Body, by
the director.

Thus the FRENCH ACADEMIE, although they assembled all this while, and had the
same meetings which they have at this day, was nevertheless not absolutely
established, till three years and some months after that they began to labor
in it. For they spent from the month of February of the year, 1634. to that
of the year following, 1635, to give it the form it was to have, to make
ready its statutes, and to get the order of its Erection sealed, and from
February 1635. till July 1637. to get this order confirmed in Parliament.

WHEN YOU read this, I make no question but you will enquire with some
astonishment, for what reason and out of what Caprichio, so judicious a Body as
the Parliament of Paris, gave their consent with so much difficulty to a
design, I will not say so innocent, but so laudable. But that you may the
better understand what was the humor of the Parliament, it is requisite I let
you know, how all France at that time stood affected, where the Cardinal de
Richelieu having advanced the Regal authority much higher then ever any man had
done before, was loved and adored of some, envied of others, hated and detested
of many; feared, and redoubted of almost all. Besides then, that the Academie
was a new institution, which of it self would have divided men's opinions, and
at the same time have had enemies and approbatours, they looked upon it as a
work of the Cardinals, and judged either well or ill of it, acording to the
passion wherewith they were prepossessed of him. Those which were his friends,
spoke of it with excessive praises: Never had ages past, say they, so much
eloquence, as ours shall have, we shall surpass all that have gone before us,
and all that shall come after us, and the greatest share of this glory will be
due to the Academie and to the Cardinal. On the other side his Enemies, and
those which envyed him entertained this design with scoffs and jeeres. They
accused the Academie of coining new words, of endeavoring to impose laws upon
things that were not capable to receive them, and they ceased not to decry it
by railleries and satyrs. The people too, and those that were either less
quick-sighted, or more jealous, who suspect every thing that comes from the
Cardinal, were afraid lest that under these flowers there lay hid a serpent,
and apprehended at the least that this establishment would be a new support to
his domination, that they must be his pensioners, taking pay to do whatever he
please, and to observe the actions and thoughts of others. Nay they say he cut
off fourscore thousand livres of the money leavied for the cleansing of the
streets of Paris, to give to them 2000 livres pension a piece; and a hundred
reports of that nature.

And to this purpose, if you will give me leave to mingle a little mirth with
seriousness, and to forget a while the Parliament of Paris to which I will not
fail to return: I could tell you a couple of stories, which will serve not
only for a diversion, but also for a confirmation of what I told you even now
concerning the opinion which the vulgar had of the Academie. The first is of a
certain tradesman of Paris, who had, they say, lately hired a house very
commodious for him in Cinq-Diamans street, where Monsieur Chapelain dwelt, at
whose house the Academie then met. He observed that at certain days there
came a great number of Coaches thither, he enquired the reason of it, and
learning it, presently hebrok off his bargain without giving any other reason,
but that he would not dwell in a street, wherein there was every week a Cademy
of Monopolizers.

The other story is perhaps no less pleasant then the former. When my Brother,
and I went to schole, we had leave to go spend the time of the vacation in the
Country, at some of our friends houses, sometimes at Ondes that sweet dwelling,
whose name and delights I shall never forget; and sometimes in Gascogne at
Monsieur Dubourg s in his fair house of Chermont. This Gentleman, as you
doubtless knew, together with a great knowledge in good learning, and much
wit, was master of so gay and pleasant a humor, that he could almost in every
thing find matter of mirth, but so noble and gallant, as 'twas decent and
becoming a person of quality, as indeed he was, having the honor to reckon
amongst his ancestors the famous Anne Duboury Counselor in the Parliament of
Paris, and Antonie Duboury Chancellor of France, in the Reign of Francis the
first. We were then at his house, and Monsieur de Fontrailles, his next
neighbor, whom you know very well, and who since has borne so great a part in
one of the most important affairs of our times, was there also. There came
thither a young Gentleman newly arrived from Court; they asked him (as the
fashion is) what news there. He answered that there was nothing more
remarkable there, then an Academie established within these few years by my
Lord the Cardinal de Richelieu for the reformation of style. You shall see,
says Monsieur Duboury, who intended only to be merry, that this man will have
invented some new design against the Proctors and other Lawyers to force them
either to reform their style, or else fine. The young Gentleman, who perhaps
had heard of the false reports that had been given out in Paris of the
Academie, believed in good earnest that his Landlord might be in the like
error, and to disabuse him, labored all he could to demonstrate to him by very
good reasons that this reformation of style respected only Poets and Orators.
Monsieur Duboury, seeing the pleasant humor he was in, continued his discourse
and answered that the Cardinal was more crafty then 'twas believed, that
within these ten years all the designs, which we have seen, have had as
fair beginnings, and as honest pretenses but that they would infallibly come
from Orators to Lawyers, and lay a fine upon them for every fault they commit,
and to get themselves off, force them to pay vast sums of money; that one by
name * * * who was his Lawyer in the Parliament of Tholose, was ruined. For,
added he, it is impossible he should reform himself; he has belonged to the law
some thirty or forty years, when ever he thinks to make a Complement, still
there escapes him some wrangling Law Term or other. After all this, he appealed
to Monsieur de Fontrailles as judge, who approved and consented to all he had
said, nor was the young Gentleman ere the less obstinat on the other side, as
he continued that whole after-supper time, and with so much zeal in defense of
the truth, and relation to see such honest men in so strange an opinion, that
this story, which perhaps to you that read it, will seem frigid, never comes
into my mind even to this day, but it makes me ready o laugh.

But to return now to the Parliament of Paris, and the difficulty it made to
confirm the Edict of the Academie: You will not believe, and doubtless a man
would hardly imagine it, that they should apprehend it for the style of the
Lawyers. For my part, I Will tell you my opinion of it. This great body wherein
there are always some Extraordinary persons, amongst many others that are not
so, was divided, about the business of the Academie, and of the Cardinal de
Richelieu, with the very same passions and opinions that divided all the rest
of France, saving perhaps in this Company, there was less affection for him
then in others, and that for the most part they looked upon him as the enemy of
their liberty, and the infringer of of their privileges. I suppose then that
there might be three parties in the Parliament above their business. The first
and least, of those who judging of things sincerely, saw not any thing in this
design worthy to be blamed or despised. The 2d. of those, who bring animated
against the Cardinal, or else too much addicted to the sole study of the law,
and civil affairs, laughted at his Institution as a Childish thing; and of
this number there was one amongst them, (as I have heard,) who giving his voice
concerning the confirmation of the Letters, said, That this business brought
into his mind, what one of the Emperors sometimes did, who after he had taken
away from the Senate the cognizance of public affairs, desired to know their
opinions, what sauce he should make for a great Turbot that was brought him
from France. Finally, I believe there was a third and last party, which it may
be, was not the least powerful, of those that supected every thing, and
apprehended as well as the Vulgar, some dangerous Consequence of this
Institution. Of this I have two proofs in a manner convincing; Frist the
Cardinals Letter, wherein you see he assures the Chief President. That the
Academiciens had a Design wholly different from what he was made to believe.
Secondly, That Clause in the Order for the Confirmation, That the Academie
should take cognizance only of the French Tongue, and the Books which they
themselves made, or which were offered to their judgment: As if there had been
some danger, that it would have taken to it self other functions, and have
undertaken some greater matters. And this, as I think, is the cause of those
hindrances which for two years retarded the confirmation of these Lettrrs.

I SHOULD HERE put an end to the first part of my work, touching the birth and
foundation of the Academie, but that I remember I spoke, by the way, of some
Satyrs which at the first were made against it; and that, to omit nothing,
it is fit, I should now say something to you of them, as of some other
Circumstances of its Establishment.

The first that wrote against the Academie was the Abbot of St. Germain, who
was then at Brussels, accompanying the Queen Mother Mary de Medici in her
banishment. As he continually bayted by his writings, and that with a sharp
kind of animosity, all the actions of the Cardinal de Richelieu, so he omitted
not to speak very injuriously of the FRENCH ACADEMIE, which he Confounded with
that other Academie, which the Gazelier Reuandot had established at the Bereau
d'Adress; whether 'twere that he did purposely mistake so or that indeed he had
but ill intelligence how things went at Paris. The Academie would not answer to
it in a work on purpose; but Monsieur de Chastelet who was of it, and did then
in behalf of the Cardinal answer most of those Brussel-pamphlets, was desired,
after that he himself had propounded it in the Assembly, to add a few lines
about this business, which were afterward read and approved by the Company.
The Abbot of St. Germain, his pieces against the Cardinal de Richelieu have
been since printed at Paris in two Volumes, after the death of the late King
Lewis the 13th. The answers of Monsieur du Chastelet, were in a piece which he
finished not, being prevented by death, and which was never printed.

Of all the other things that have been made against this Company, I have not
above three of them which deserve to be mentioned. The first is that Comedy of
the Academie, which after it had past a long time in manuscript, was at length
printed in the year 1650. but with abundance of faults, and without either
Author or Printers name. Some are pleased to ascribe it to one of the
Academiciens themselves, because it does not ill resemble his Style, wit, and
humors, and because he is there spoken of as a man that makes no great
reckoning of these conferences. But some others have assured me, that it was a
Gentleman's of Normandy, by name Monsieur de St. Evermond. And truly if the
Author of it was of the Academie, I Would say he put many things into it, on
purpose to make it be believed that he was not of it: as when he makes Monsieur
Tristan an Academicien, who was not so yet, until 10: years after; also when
he brings in the Marquis of Brevale, deliberating whether he should go to the
war, or stay in the Academie: The Marquis of Brevale, I say, who was never of
it, and of whom I do not find any mention great or small in the Registers; nor
in the notes which have been communicated to me: This piece though artlesse and
irregular, and rather deserving the name of a Jig, then that of a Comedy, is
not without wit, and has some very pleasant passages.

The second which I am to tell you of, and which has been less seen then the
rest, is entitled, A Role of presentations made on the great days of the
French Eloquence. It Is as 'twere a register of some ridiculous requests for the
conservation, or suppression of certain words, together with as many imaginary
answers of the Academy. As for example, The Secretaries of St. Innocent
presented themselves, desiring, it might be declared that the word Secretary
might not signify in good French, the Clark of a Counselor. Answer,
Remonstrances shall be made concerning it to the Roy de la Bazoche. H. Fierbras
a cadet of Gascon presented himself, in behalf of all those of his Country,
requiring that none might take away the point from their honor, nor the
glittering from their sword. Answers, For what concerns the Point, it should be
communicated to the Mathematique professors; and for the Glittering, the
Fourbishers should be sent to. I have been told by some that this Role of
presentations was made by the Author of Francion, and of The Extravagant
sheapheard; it was presently printed, and it has been reprinted since in the
same Volume me with the Comedy; but very much mutilated, and altered several
ways.

The last of these three pieces is that ingenious Request of the Dictionaries,
which too was printed not long since in a little Volume with abundance of
faults, and was afterward printed far more correct in quarto. Every body
knows that this was made by Monsieur Menage, not only a very learned and
polite man, but also a man of honor and of a solid virtue. He himself had
always a very high esteem of the Academie, and has spoken honorably of it in
diverse of his works. He was a particular and intimate friend, as he is still,
of many of the Academiciens, whom he mentions in that Request, and he did not
do it, as he protests himself, out of any motion of hatred or envy, but only
for a diversion to himself, and that he might not lose some bons mots, that
came into his mind upon that subject. Besides he suppressed it after he had made
it, and it lay above ten years hid among his Papers, until a certain person
that had then all in custody, suffered himself to be robbed of that, by one that
you and I know, who presently after gave diverse Copies of it.

These three pieces and all the rest that have been made against the Academie,
go upon a false ground; and describe the Academiciens, as men that labor night
and day in nothing, but fantastically, forging new words, or else suppressing
others, more out of humor then reason; whereas they thought of nothing less,
and when any question was offered concerning language, they only enquired
after the use of the word, which is the chief master in such matters, and
resolved in favor of it. As for me, who have exactly veiw'd all their
Registers, I can give them this Testimony, that I have there met with many
handsome and rational decisions, whence M. Vaugelas has taken part of his
Remarques; but that I never found there, any footsteps of so much as one of
those silly Orders, which are attributed to them in these Satyrs. They made the
World then believe all those things; and, as you know, every man has many
times an averseness, of which he cannot give any reason, from some certain word
and phrases, which he does not love to use. If any one of this Body did
express such a kind of averseness in jest or otherwise, presently envy and
detraction made this pass for a decision of the Academie's. It Is known, for
instance, that Monsieur de Gombervile did not love to use the word for.
Car, which indeed is offensive if it be often repeated, and is fitter for a
disputation, then a Romance or a Poem. He bragged one day that he had rot at all
made use of this word in the 5. Volumes of Polexander (where yet I am told it
is thrice); they conclude presently from this discourse, that the Academie
would banish the word Car, and although it never had the least thought of it,
they made a thousand jests upon it, and this was the Subject of that handsome
Letter of Vo^ture's, which begins Mademoiselle Car es tant d'une si grand
consideration en nostre langue, etc.

The Academie showed its judgment, in that placing its self above calumny it
did not vouchsafe to be moved at all the writings which were made against it:
at the very beginning and before it saw any of them, it had as twere resolved,
not to make any answer to whatsoever should be said concerning it. And lest
that any particular person should undertake it of his own head, there was an
express article put into the Statutes, which forbids all of the Body to meddle
in it, without leave and without a public consultation about it.

The Academies of Italy seem to have gone much farther, and to have resolved
not only to contemn, but even to forestall and (as I may so say,) outbrave
Calumny, having given themselves most injurious names. Thus the Academie de gli
Intronati, if you search the original of the word, signifies the Academie of
Dullards or Blockheads, for intronato does properly signify a man whom the
noise of thunder has stunned and deprived of his wits: and many others of
those Academies that arose afterward, in imitation of that, took not to
themselves more honorable names.

THE SECOND PART, wherein is treated of the Statutes of the French Academie.
BUT it is time to come to my second part, which shall be much shorter then the
first, wherein I must entertain you with the Statutes of the FRENCH ACADEMIE,
and withal of the days, places, and form of its Assemblies.

I have read elsewhere with pleasure that the same Academie degl' Intronati of
Siena which I was but now speaking of, thought it enough at its birth to
establish these six fundamental Laws very short.

1. Orare. 1. To pray. 2. Studere. 2. To study. 3. Gaudere. 3. To be merry. 4.
Neminem laedere. 4. To wrong no body. 5. Non temere credere. 5. To believe
nothing rashly. 6. De mundo non curare. 6. Not to trouble themselves with the
world.

Perhaps afterward and in time, they added new Laws to these first, but
however very certain it is, that according as a Company increases, and is
composed of a greater number of persons, which have not all the same Genius or
inclination, and which must by death make room for others, 'twill have need of
a greater number of Statutes to avoid confusion and disorder.

Those of the FRENCH ACADEMIE, contained 5. Articles, written in such a Style
as Laws should be, perspicuous, brief and plain, without any affectation of
Argument.

I shall report only some of the principal passing by the rest, whereof there
have been many expressly changed, by a consultation of the whole Body or
tacitly abrogated by custom, as it always happens and will do continually,
in all humane Societies.

By these Statutes, the Academie was to have a Seal, to seal in blue wax all
the Acts made by its Order. Upon this Seal was to be graven the Image of its
Founder, with these words, ARMAND CARDINAL DUKE DE RICHELIEU, PROTECTOR OF THE
FRENCH ACADEMIE, ESTABLISHED IN THE YEAR. 1635.

It was also to have a Counter-seale, where was to be represented a crown of
Laurel, with these words, Al'immortalite. It was to have 3. Officers, a
Director, a Chancellor, a Secretary, and besides a Stationer.

The Office of the Director, is to preside in Assemblies, to see that good
order be kept there with all exactness and civility possible, and as it ought
to be amongst equals; it is the very expression in the Statutes.

He is to gather the Votes, according to the rank that the Academiciens chance
to sit in, beginning with his right hand man, and giving his own vote last,
after the two Officers, as they after the rest of the Assembly.

The Office of the Chancellor, is to keep the seals, and to seal all the Acts
made by the order of the Academie.

The Office of the Secretary is to write the resolutions and to register them,
to sign all the Acts, to keep all the evidences and all the papers of the
Academie, and to make Certificats for those of the Body, that have need of a
Testimony that they are of it. He is also to write the Academies Letters; and
here you must observe by the way that it wrote two sorts of Letters. Sometimes
the whole Company speaks in the Letters, and there its signed thus, for
example, Your most humble servants. CONRART, Secretary to the French Academie.
Sometimes the Secretary only speaks in the name of the whole In this or the
like form.

The Academie has appointed me to write to you.


Body, and then he subscribes his own name, as it 'twere his own private
business, saving that as he writes for a society, he is more reserved in the
terms of the Subscription of his Letters.

In the absence of the Director, the Chancellor presides at meetings, and in
both their absences, the Secretary.

The Secretary is perpetual and for life, but the Director and the Chancellor
are to be changed every two months, yet sometimes this term is prolonged by a
Common consent, upon diverse occasions. Monsieur de Serizay, and Monsieur
Desmarests, who were the two that bore those Offices, at the beginning of the
Academie, held them even to its complete e^tablishment, that is, near upon 4.
years, from the 13th. of March 1634. to the 11th. of January 1638. although
during this space of time they did very often beseech the Company to appoint
them successors. I do not find in the Registers any prolongations so large, but
many less, is for four months, six months, and a who^e year.

The Stationer of the Academie is also perpetual, though he be received upon
this condition so long as the Company shall think fit, which signifies only
that it shall be free to take another if it please. His charge is to be at the
Assemblies of the Academie as often as he can, to receive its Orders, and to
print its works, and those of particular Academiciens; which shall be examined
by it, and to whom it shall give a Certificat of it approbation. The Statute,
(with nevertheless they begin to dispense with, of late,) says, that it is to
those works only to which it is permitted to Subscribe, By such a one of the
French Academie. And that they may not be printed by any other Stationer but
he; who is bound to change nothing in it after the approbation of the Academie,
to which for this end he takes an oath at his first admission to his charge.

The Director and the Chancellor are to be chosen by lot after this manner.
They take as many white Balls as there be Academieciens in Paris: amongst which
there are two, whereof one is marked with two black specks, and the other with
one; all these Balls are put together into a box, each of the Academiciens
present take one; there are some also taken for all the rest that are at Paris,
although they be not then present in the Assembly: He that has the Ball marked
with one Black speck, is Director: he that has that which is marked with two
black specks is Chancellor. Reg. July 7. 1641. December. 1. 1642 Aug. 25. 1644.
And though the lot falls upon the Secretary for one of these Offices, he may
hold it, as I find in the Regi^^ers, and it is not Incompatible with his own.
It is observed as a Caprichio of fortune, that from the very beginning of the
Academie to this present, Monsieur Chapelain, who is without question one of
the most considerable persons of the Company, was never yet Director nor
Chancellor.

As for the Office of Secretary; No man can have it but by the suffrages of the
Academiciens, Assembled to the number of twenty at the least.

The same number of twenty is requisite for the Election or for the Ejection of
an Academicien. These Elections and Ejections are done by white and Black
balls: For an Election, the Number of the white must be four more then the
black: For an Ejection there must be 4. black ones more then the white. There
is an Article, by which no man can be chosen that is not approved by the
Protector. Wherefore when there is a place void in the Academie, they proceed
in this manner. The Director most commonly or some other of the Academiciens
propounds him that is presented to fill it; or if there be more of them, they
are all propounded together. Then they appoint some one of the Company to know
whether the Protector be pleased, that they consult about the reception of him
or them, and after that he has given his consent, to proceed to Election by
Balls, the next meeting. I find in the Register that the Academiciens which are
at Paris and are sick, Reg. May 10. 1652.
may send their Suffrages in writing, to the Company.

When an Academicien is admitted, the Statutes must be read to him, which he is
exhorted to keep; and the act of his admission must be Registered.

In all other things but these Elections, they must give their votes clara voce
aloud; and this must be done without interruption or jealousy, without
reproving in choler or contempt the opinion of any one, without saying any
thing more then necessary, and without repeating what has been said. The
determinations are referred to other succeeding meetings: I find in the
Registers that sometimes the decision has been referred to the Protector; as
for example, being troubled to know whether they should make a Funeral Oration
for the Cardinal de Richelieu in public or in private, and the Company being
not able to agree about it, they referred themselves concerning it to the Lord
Chancellor.

These Statutes contain many things touching the employment of the Academie,
of which I shall have occasion to speak elsewhere: only I observe there, that
matters of Religion are forbid, and that if they examine any Theological
writings, it must be only for the terms and form of them. That for Political
and moral matters, it is said that they shall not there be handled, but with
conformity to the Authority of the Prince, and to the State of Government, and
to the Laws of the Realm. Those which are not of the Academie, may not be
admitted into Assemblyes Ordinary or Extraordinary upon any pretense
whatsoever; and when any one desires to present a book to the Company, or give
it any other Complement, all the advantage he has, is, to be brought into the
place of the Assembly to be heard, and to receive the thanks which they return
him, without being present afterward at that days Conference. The
Academiciens, which cannot be present at the Assemblyes, are bound to send
their excuse, and this was exactly observed a while. Now if any one does
absolutely neglect to be present there, it is the custom, that if in case, he
want a Certificate that he is of the Academie, or any other the like act, it
may be denied him.

If any Academicien commit any fault unworthy a man of honor, he may be either
expelled, as I said before, or interdicted for some time, according to the
Importance of his fault.

This law will seem to you at first sight to presage ill, and you will say
perhaps, there was no need of one to this purpose in the Academie, no more then
in the Common wealth of Athens, against parricides; but that which hapen'd
since, which I will tell you elsewhere, will show you that this providence was
not altogether unprofitable.

To debate upon the publishing of any work of the Academiciens, there must be
twenty at the least, which number the Statutes require, in all affairs of any
great consequence. But to give approbation of any particular man's work it is
sufficient if there be twelve, under which number there can be nothing resolved
either in this, or any thing else. This approbation of the Academie must be
engrossed in parchment, signed by the Secretary, and sealed with the Academies
Seal; it must be plain and without commendation, according to a constant
form. It is forbidden to be printed before the book; but they may put this into
the Title, as I told you before; By such an one of the French Academie. There
are many good rules to this purpose, but the difficulties and delays, which
are met with in obtaining this kind of approbation, are the cause that the
Academiciens never look after them.

To conclude, I will add only two Articles of the Statutes. The first, by which
the Academie imposes this law upon it self, to judge only of the works of
those of its Body; With this clause, That if, for any Important reason it find
self obliged to examine any other, it shall plainly declare its opinion,
without either censure or approbation.

The other Article, is, that which I spoke to you of before, and which seems to
me so judicious: by which it is forbidden any private member to write any thing
of his own head in defense of the Academie, without having thereto obtained
leave of the Company assembled to the number of twenty at least.

SUCH ARE the Statutes of the FRENCH ACADEMIE: add we now one word of the
days, places, and form of their Assemblyes.

The days of these Assemblyes have changed very often, they were at first
every Monday after dinner, as it appears by one of the articles of the
Statutes. Article 17. Reg. December 21. 1637. Reg. March 20. 1638.
Afterward, I know not for what reason, they chose Tuesday instead of Monday,
to which nevertheless a while after they returned. And yet afterward when the
Lord Chancellor was made Protector of the Academie upon a desire of it in his
name, and to the end that he might be the more often present at the Assemblyes,
Reg. December 14. 1643. Reg. December 27. 1643.
they changed it to Saturday, and presently after to Tuesday. There have been
diverse other Changes of the day which it is of no Importance to observe, it is
sufficient that you know that the Academie must assemble regularly one
afternoon every week; and if the Ordinary-Day chance to be a Holy Day they take
another, and most commonly that which goes before or that which follows. But if
there be any thing extraordinary in hand, they meet extraordinarily, as when
'twas debated about making the Platform, or the Statutes of the Academie, and
the sentiments on the Cid. And when they desired to hasten the business of the
Dictionary, they meet several days and at several places, as you shall see
anon. Even now, when I write this, they assemble twice a week, Wednesday and
Saturday, on purpose to forward this work, and to repair the time that is lost.
The Academie has commonly its Vacations about the end of August, Reg. August
25. 16, 44. Reg. July 1638 and elsewhere
which last till St. Martin's day. But this has no certain rule, nor is there
any article in the Statutes concerning it.

THE PLACE of the Assemblyes has changed oftener then the Day. For to say
nothing of those which were at the beginning at Monsieur Conrarts house,
betwixt that small number of friends, I find that they have been since held in
several places. March 13. 1634. Octo 30. 1634. April the last 1635. July 9.
1635. December. 3. 1635 December. 24. 1635. June 16. 1636 May. 3. 1638. June 14. 1638
At Monsieur Desmarests in Clocheperce-Street, at the Hostel de Pelue, at M.
Chapelaine's, in Cinq Diamans-Street at M. de Montmor's in St. Avoye-Street,
after which they came again to M. Chapelains, and after that to M. Desmarests:
since all these, they met at M. de Gombervile's near St. Gervais Church: at M.
Conrart's in St. Martins Street, at M. de Cerisy's, at Sequire Hostel: at M.
the Abbot's de Boisrobert, at the Hostel de Mellusine.

These frequent changes of place proceeded sometimes from the sickness or
absence, and sometimes from the business of those Gentlemen, who had lent them
their houses. But at last, in the year 1643. Feb. Feb. 16. 1643.
16. after the death of Cardinal de Richelieu, The Lord Chancellor sent word
to the Company, that he desired they would for the time to come meet at his
house: as they have done ever since. And truly when I consider the various
retreats, which this Company had for almost ten years, sometimes at one end of
the City, sometimes at another, till the time of this new Protector: me thinks
I see the Poets Island, Delos, Errant and floting until the birth of its
Apollo. In earnest, it would make a man wonder that the Cardinal de Richelieu,
who founded it did not take a little more care to furnish it with a constant
place of meeting. If that be true which the Lawyers say, that Temples, Palaces,
Theaters, and in a word, all public places are as 'twere so many strong bonds
of civil society, which tie and unite us straightly to one another; he could
not doubt but that a certain place assigned to the Academie, and common to all
that were of it, would in some sort strengthen this sweet society, and
contribute much to its duration. And if otherwise he sought in all things the
greatness and immortality of his name, the very term Academie might seem to
hint to him, that the small expense in a business of this nature, would make
him more talked of hereafter, then a thousand other stately Edifices. For,
pardon me that I make this digression, how many Kings and great men have there
been, of whom we are Ignorant whether they ever had a being, who nevertheless
have founded Temples and magnifique places? Academus on the other side was
only a petty burgess of Athens, yet was pleased to bestow upon the
Philosophers of his time, a garden of some Acres of ground, in the suburbs of
that famous City; This place was called the Academie, from whence comes that
word so well known at this day over the whole world, which will make the name
and memory of this Hero live for ever; So the Greek History positively calls
him, though we do not find that he ever did any thing else that was remarkable.

All these things, which the Cardinal was not Ignorant of, would make one
believe what diverse have said, that having long intended to build in the
Horse-Market, near the gate of Saint Honor, a great Piazzo, which he would
have called Ducale or the Dukes place, in imitation of the Royal, which is at
the other end of the City, he would there have set apart some convenient
lodgings for the Academy, an^ that he would have endowed it with some revenues;
but that this design and many others which he reserved for more calm and quiet
times, was interrupted by his death.

AS for the form of the Academies meetings, it is thus. In winter they are in an
upper, in summer in a lower room of Seguier Hostel: and without much ceremony,
they sit round a table; the Director on that side next the Chimny: the
Chancellor and Secretary at each hand of him, and all the rest as fortune, or
Common civility ranks them. The Director presides. The Secretary keeps the
Register. This Register is at other times kept very exactly from day to day;
but at present, the business of the Dictionary being the sole employment of
the Academie, it is kept only in those meetings, where there happens any thing
extraordinary and important. When the Protector is present, he sits in the
place of the Director, who, with the other two officers, sit at his left hand.
He gathers the votes and pronounces the resolutions, as the Director uses to
do. The Cardinal was never there; but the Lord Chancellor is often present,
and does all what I told you but now. That which is most remarkable is, that he
honored this Company with his presence, not only at his leisure and when free
from business; as many others that never study but when they have nothing else
to do: but even when he was most in favor, and had the greatest Employments. I
find particularly in the Registers that he was present there the 19th. of
December 1643. Reg. December. 19. 1643. Reg. April 20. 1651.
after he was made Protector, and the 20th. of April 1651. a little after that
the Seals were delivered to him, which had been given to Monsieur de
Chasteauneuf. That even then he propounded to meet twice a week, to forward the
business of the Dictionarie, as I told you, which they do even to this day.
They give Him also this Testimony, that at these meetings it is not possible to
use one with more civility then he does all the Academiciens; and that he
presides with the same familiarity, that any one amongst them could do, even to
the taking pleasure in being stopped, and interrupted, and forbidding even those
very Gentlemen that are his Domestiques, to call him My Lord.

THE THIRD PART, what the Academie has done since its Institution.
I COME NOW to the Employments of the Academie since its Institution: You saw
in its project, that it intended to give not only rules but also examples and
to examine its own writings very strictly that it might first arrive at that
perfection, to which it desired to direct others. Therefore after the design o^
a Dictionary, Grammar, Rhetorique, and Poetique, on the second day of January
1635, even before the Letters of its Establishment were sealed, Reg. January 2.
1635.
they made by lot with Balls, a Catalogue of the Academiciens, and made an
order that each of them in his turn, should be bound to make a discourse upon
what subject and of what length he pleased; that there should be one of them
every week, beginning at the first of February next, that those which
distructed their memories, might read what they had made; that those which were
absent should be sent unto, to the end that if they could not come to pronounce
their own discourses themselves, they should send them. But the
fantasticalnesse of Fortune having cast the first places upon some that were
absent, or were not in a condition to apply themselves to these exercises, they
changed the order of the Catalogue and put into their places some other
Academiciens that were present, and seemed to have most inc ination to it. Thus
instead of Monsieur Maynard, who was the fit upon the roll they put Monsieur
du Chastelet; in the place of Monsieur de l'Estoile, who was se^ond Monsieur de
Bourzey; in the place of Monsieur Bardin, who was the third Monsieur Gode^u now
Bp of Grass; and in the place of Monsieur de Colomby, who was the sixth,
Monsieur de Gombaud. There were twenty of these discourses pronounced one after
another in the Academie.

The first was Monsieur du Chastelet's Concerning the French Eloquence. Feb. 5.
1635.


The second Monsieur de Bourzey's, Feb. 12. 1635.
Concerning the design of the Academie and the d^fferent Genius of languages.

It Is very this discourse, which our Common friend Monsieur de Saint-Alby, who
so long ago promised us a relation of what he has seen of the Academie della
Crusca, has for so many years had a Copy of, without knowing the Author of it,
who in my judgment is none of the least.

The third was Monsieur Godeau's against Eloquence. Feb. 22. 1635.


The fourth was Monsieur de Boisrobert's, In defense of Stage Plays. Feb. 26.
1635.


The fifth Monsieur de Montmor's Master of Requests, March. 5, 1635
Of the usefulness of conferences.

The sixth Monsieur Gomband, March 12. 1635 March 19. 1635.
upon I know not what.

The seventh was Monsieur de la Chamber. That the French are of all nations the
most capable of perfect Eloquence.

The Eighth Monsieur Porcheres Laugiers Panegyre in praise of the Academie,
April the last 1635.
its Protector and the members of it.

The ninth Monsieur de Gomberville's, May 7. 163^
That when ever any age has produced an excellent Hero, there have been also
found those that are able to commend him.

May 14. 1635.
The tenth was, Monsieur de l'Estoill'es, Of the excellence of Poetry, and the
scarcity of complete Poets. Where amongst other things he declaimes very
handsomely against the servilenesse of Ryme, and revenges himself of all the
mischief he suffered by it.

May 21. 1635.
The eleventh was, Monsieur Bardin's, Of a Philosophical Style where he
endeavored to show that Philosophy, according to its several subjects, is
capable of all sorts of Eloquence; and that especially there is no necessity of
those barbarous terms, with which the Schoolmen have perplexed it; and to
give an example of it, he explaines in very pure and natural language two of
the subtlest Problems in metaphysics: That there is something which is more
then all, and something that is less then nothing. By the first he means God:
and by the second, Sin. He pronounced this Discourse, which indeed is a very
fine one, eight days before his death.

July 9. 1635.
The twelfth was, Monsieur de Racan's Against the Sciences, which was printed a
little while since, with some of his Poems. Being absent, he sent it from his
house to the Academie: It was read by Monsieur de Serizay.

July 23. 1635
The thirteenth was, Monsieur de Porcheres Laugier's Of the differences and
conformities which are betwixt Love and Friendship.

The fourteenth was, Monsieur Chapelain's Against Love, where by ingenious
reasons, whose grounds are not without solidity, he labors to take away from
this passion, that Divinity which is attributed to it by the Poets.

The fifteenth, Monsieur Desmarests, Of the love of souls, where he undertakes
to show that if the love which Monsieur Chapelain spoke of, ought to be blamed
and condemned, this is not only to be esteemed, but besides, has something of
Divinity in it.

The sixteenth was, Monsieur de Boissat Of the love of Bodies, were by natural
reasons taken from Sympathies and Antipathies, and the conduct of the world, he
would show that the love of Bodies is no less Divine then that of Souls.

The seventeenth, was sent by the late Monsieur de Meziriac and read in the
Assembly by Monsieur de Vaugelas: The title of it is Of Translating. In this
discourse the Author who was esteemed very learned, and especially in the
Greek, after he had extolled the wit, pains and Style of Amiot in his
translation of Plutarch, and as it seems with a great deal of ingenuity,
pretends to show that in diverse passages which he had taken notice of even to
two thousand, this Grand Translator has committed very gross faults, of
diverse kinds, whereof he gives some examples. I have been told that all the
rest of his Observations, together with his own new Translation of Plutarch,
are in the hands of Madame de Meziriac his widow, and likely to be published
very shortly. When they are, we shall be better able to judge whether his
pretensions be true or no; but if it be so, I know not whether this example
ought more to deter or encourage those that addict themselves to translate: for
if on the one side, it is a sad case, that so excellent a man as Amiot, after
all the time and pains, which every one knows, he bestowed upon this work,
could not avoid slipping in two thousands places, on the other side, it is a
great Comfort, that maugre these 2000. faults, he has, by a greater number of
places in which he has hitt right, not failed of acquiring to himself an
immortal reputation. But I return to the Discourses pronounced in the
Academie. The three last, to make up twenty, are, that of Monsieur Colletet; Of
imitating the Ancients.

That of Monsieur the Abbot of Cerizy, Against the plurality of languages.

And that of Monsieur Porcheres d'Arbaud, Of the love of the Sciences.

These discourses were pronounced every week, unless those that were to make
them had a lawful excuse, or there intervened some other kind of business.
They delivered them afterward to two or three Academiciens appointed by the
Assembly, who were to make an exact report of them. But because this
examination took up too much time, and was the whole business of the
Conferences: 'twas resolved that these Commissioners might proceed further to
things in which they were agreed, without reporting to the Company any but the
most important, and such wherein they disagreed.

I find that three Academiciens failed to make these kind of discourses in
their turns, though they were very able to do it.

First Monsieur de Serizay, Reg. April ult. 1635.
who desired the Company to con^ent that Monsieur Porcheres Laugier might make
a speech in his steed and that is the reason you will find, in the Catalogue I
gave you two discourses of this Academicien's: The first in the place of
Monsieur de Serizay, and the second in his own.

Monsieur de Balzac, It Is at the of the second part, 4th. book and sixth Letter.
as it appears by one of his printed Letters, did only send to Monsieur du
Chastelet some of his works, desiring him to read them in the Academie, and to
accompany them with somewhat of his own which may serve (^ud he) both for the
thanks and speech which he owed it.

M. de S. Amant too de^red and had leave to be exempted, Reg. December 14. 1637.
on condition he should collect, as he himself offered, the Comicall part of
the Dictionary and the Grotesque terms, that is to say as we call them now a
days Burlesque; but the word Burlesque which has been a long time in Italy had
not yet past the mountains, and Monsieur Menage observes very well in his
Origines, that it was first used by Monsieur Sarrazin, a long while after. Then
we may say that it not only passed in France, but that it has overrun it, and
made strange havoc there. Is it not plain that for these last years we have
played at this game, where he that wins, loses? and is it not the opinion of
most men, that to write well in this kind, it is sufficient to speak things
that have neither sense nor reason. Every one thinks himself able enough for
it, of what sex soever, from the Ladies and Lords at Court to the Chambermaides
and Pages. This madness of Burlesque, which at last we begin to be cured of,
went so far, that the Stationers would meddle with nothing that had not his
name in the front; that whether out of ignorance, or the better to put off
their wares, they fixed it upon things that were the most serious, provided
only that they were short verses: whence it was that in the time of the war at
Paris in 1639. they printed a piece, bad enough in deed, but yet serious, with
this title, which struck with horror all those that read no more of it, The
Passion of our Lord in Burlesque verses, and the learned Monsieur Maudaeus, who
doubtless was of this number, reckons it amongst the Burlesque-books of our
times.

I beg your pardon for this digression, which a just anger against this
unsufferable abuse drew from me. To return to my subject; The Academie spent
all the time of its Conferences in hearing or examining these Discourses. This
employment was very well liked by some of the Academiciens, but most of
themwere not well pleased with an exercise, which when all is done, wa too like
the declamations of young boys: and the Cardinal also expressed that he looked
for something greater and of more solidity from such a Society. They began to
talk of the Dictionary and the Grammar, when Fortune threw another work upon
the Academie, which they little expected.

AS many times one man that is of great Eminence, is able to lead the Dance to
a whole Kingdom; that great love which the Cardinal bore to Dramatique Poems,
had at this time raised them amongst the French, to the highest pitch that they
ever were at. All, that found they had any Genius that way, failed not to
labor for the Stage. 'Twas the only means to get access to the Grandees,
and to be favored by the prime Minister of State, who scarce liked any of the
divertisments of the Court, but that. 'Twill not be amiss ere I pass farther
to let you know how much he was addicted to it. He was not only present with
much delight at all new Comedies, but took pleasure also to conferr with the
poets to see their design in its birth and to furnish them himself with plots.
And if he knew any good wit that of himself had no great inclination to
travail in this kind, He would insensibly engage him in it, with all manner of
care and good usage. Thus seeing that Monsieur Desmarests was very averse from
it, he desired he would at least invent a plot for a Comedy, which he would
get somebody else, he said, to make up. Monsieur Desmarests brought him four,
presently after; That of Aspasiae, which was one of them, pleased him
infinitely, but after he had given him a thousand Commendations, he added, That
he only that was able to invent it, would be able to handle it worthily. And
obliged Monsieur Desmarests to make him the like every year. And when he
thought to excuse himself with being employed about his Heroique Poem of
Clovis, of which he had already made two books, it aiming at the glory of
France, and even of the Cardinal himself; the Cardinal answered that he had
rather enjoy the fruits of his Poetry, as much as 'twas possible, and that
believing he should not live to see the end of so long a work, he conjured him
for his sake to busy himself in making Plays, wherewith he might refresh
himself with pleasure from the weariness of greater affairs. By this means
he got him to compose the inimitable Comedy Des Visionaeires [or the Fanaricks]
the Tragicomedie of Scipio, that of Roxana, Mirame, and Europa. It Is true
indeed that part of the plot and humors of Mirame were his own' and hence
'twas, that he expressed a Fatherly tenderness of this piece, the representation
whereof stood him in two or three thousand crowns, and for which he caused that
great Hall of his Palace to be built, which still serves for these Shows. And
no question but he himself invented the plots of the three other Comedies
namely, The Tuilleries, The blind man of Smyrna, and The Grand Pastoral. In
this last there were at least five hundred verses of his own making, but it was
not printed as the other two were: the reason was this. When he had a design to
publish it, he desired that Monsieur Chapelain should reveiw it, and make exact
observations upon it. These observations were brought to him by Monsieur de
Boisrobert, and though they were written with very much discretion and respect,
so vexed and nettled him, whether for their number, or for the knowledge they
gave him of his faults, that before he had read them through, he tore them in
pieces. But the night following as he was in bed, and all the house asleep,
having considered of the Choler he had betrayed, he did a thing incomparably
more to be esteemed then the best Comedy in the world, 'twas that he yielded
himself to reason, for he commanded the torn pieces of this paper to be
gathered up, and laid together again, and after he had read it from one end to
the other, and made deep reflection upon it, he sent to have Monsieur de
Boisrobert waked to tell him, that he preceived well that the Gentlemen of the
Academie understood these matters better then he, and he must talk no more of
having this printed. He caused to be made the verses of those pieces (which
were then called The pieces of the five Authors) by five several persons,
distributing to each an Act, and by this means finishing a Comedy in one
month. These five persons were M. de Boisrobert, Corneille, Colletet, de
l'Estoille, de Rotrou, on whom, besides the Ordinary pension he gave them, he
bestowed considerable gratuities, when they writ nobly according to his mind.
Thus M. Colletet has assured me, that when he carried to him, The Monologue of
the Tuilleries, he stopped particularly upon two verses of the description of the
square Fish Pond, at this passage.

La cane s'humecter de la bourbe de l'eau.
D'une voix enrovee, d'un battement d'aisle.
Animer le canard qui languit aupres d'elle.
And that after he had heard all the rest, he gave him with his own hand fifty
pistoles, with these obliging words, That 'twas only for these two verses
which he found so excellent; and that the King himself was not rich enough to
reward him for all the rest. M. Colletet told me one thing more which was very
pleasant. In that passage which I related to you just now, instead of La cane
sohumecter de la bourbe de l'eau, the Cardinal would persuade him to put in,
barbotter dans la bourbe de l'eau. He delired, to be excused, as conceiving
that word too low: and not content with what he then said, when he was returned
to his lodging, he wrote a Letter to him about it, perhaps that he might speak
of it with the more freedom. The Cardinal had newly read it, when there came
in some of his Courtiers, who complementing to him about some of his Majesty's
happy successes in the wars, told him, That nothing was able to withstand his
Eminence: You Are deceived, answers he laughing, for I find even here in Paris
those that withstand me. And when they asked him, who those were that durst be
so audacious, Colletet, says he, for having quarreled with me yesterday about
a word, he will not yield it, but has even now written me a large Letter here,
about it. He made afterward those Comedies of the five Authous, be acted
before the King and the whole Court, the Stage being very magnificently
adorned. These Gentlemen had a seat by themselves in one of the most convenient
places, they even named them sometimes with praise, as at the acting of the
Tuilleries, in a Prologue made in prose, where among other things the invention
of the plot was attributed to M. Chapelain, who yet did only mend it in some
places; but the Cardinal desired him to send him his name in this occasion;
adding, that in recompense he would lend him his purse in any other. It was
about this time that M. Corneille; who was looked upon till then, as one of the
chiefest in that kind of writing, having let his Cid be acted, was placed, at
least in the common opinion, infinitely above all others. It Is hardly imaginable
with what opprobation this piece was received by the Court, and by the
public. They were never weary with seeing it, they talked of nothing else in
Company, every body could say some part of it by heart, they made their
Children learn it, and in many places of France, it went for a proverb, to say,
It Is as brave as the Cid. It need not be asked, whether the glory of this Author
raised jealousy in his Concurents: many would persuade us, that the Cardinal
himself was not free from it, and that (though he esteemed M. Corneile very
much, and gave him a pension) he was vexed, to see, that other pieces of this
nature, and especially those wherein he had any hand, were quite discredited by
this. For my part, without examining, whether this Soul as great as it was,
were capable of this weakness, I shall faithfully report what passed in this
business, leaving every one to believe what he pleases of it, and to follow
his own conjectures.

Amongst those that could not endure the approbation that was given to The Cid
and that believed it did not deserve it, Monsieur de Scudery appeared the
first, in publishing his observations against it, whether for his own
satisfaction, or as some say, to please the Cardinal, or for both together.
Whatsoever the reason were, most certain it is, that in this difference which
divided the whole Court, the Cardinal seemed to incline to M. de Scudery's
side, and was well pleased that he dedicated it, as he did, to the French
Academie, to referr himself in it to their judgment. One may well enough
perceive the Cardinals desire, which was that it should declare in this
business. But the most judicious of this body expressed very much repugnance to
this design. They said, That the Academie, which was but newly born, ought not
by any means to ronder it self odious, by a judgment, which would perhaps
displease both parties, and could not choose but disoblige one of them at the
least, that is to say, a great part of France. That It was hardly borne with,
out of a mere imagination which they had, that it pretended to a kind of
Empire in the language; what would it be if it should manifest that it affected
it, and should go about to exercise it upon a work which has given content to a
great number, and gained the approbation of the people; That it would moreover
retard its principal design, the execution whereof must needs of it self be
but too slow. That lastly Monsieur Corneille, did not desire this judgment, and
that by the Statutes of the Academie, and by the Patent of its foundation, it
could not judge of any work without consent and approbation of the Author. But
the Cardinal had this design in his head, and these reasons seemed to him very
slight, saving the last, which might be taken away by the consent of M.
Corneille. For the effecting thereof, M. de Boisrobert, who was one of the
chief friends, writ to him diverse Letters, acquainting him with M. de Scudery's
proposal to the Academie. He, who saw well enough, that after the glory which
he had acquired, there was in all probability more to be lost then gotten by
him at this dispute, kept himself upon the complement, and answered. That this
Employment was too low for the Academie. That a Libel, which deserved no answer
at all, did not deserve its Judgment. That it would be of dangerous
consequence, because it would authorize and encourage others to importune these
Gentlemen, and that as soon as there should appear any thing handsome upon the
Stage, presently the lesser Poets would think they had ground to commence a
suit against the Author of it, before their Society. But at last, being pressed
by M. de Boisrobert, who gave him sufficiently to understand the desire of his
master, after he had said in a Letter of the 13th. of June 1637. the words
which I now related, he chance to add this, The Gentlemen of the Academie may
do what they please, since you tell me that my Lord will be well pleased to see
their judgment of it, and that it must serve for a diversion to his Eminence. I
have nothing to say against it. There wanted nothing else, at least in the
opinion of the Cardinal, to ground the Academies juridiction, who yet did
still excuse themselves from undertaking this business: but at last he
declared himself openly, saying to one of his domestiques, Let those Gentlemen
know that I desire it, and that I shall love them, according as they love me:
Then they perceived there was no way to avoid it; and the Academie being
assembled on the 16. of June 1637. Reg. June 16. 1637.
after that they had read M. de Scudery's Letter to the Company; those which he
had written to Monsieur Chapelain upon the same subject, and those which M. de
Boisrobert had received from M. Corneille; after too that the same M. de
Boisrobert had assured the company that the Cardinal was well pleased with
this design: it was ordered that three Commissioners should be nominated to
examine the Cid, and the Observations against the Cid; that this nomination
should be according to the major part of voices by Bals; which should be seen
by the Secretary only; which was done accordingly* and the three Commissioners
were Monsieur de Bourzey, M. Chapelain, and M. Desmarests. The task of these
three Gentlemen was one to examine the body of the work in gross; for as for
that of the verses, 'twas resolved that it should be done in the Company.
Monsieur de Cerisy, de Gombauld, Reg. Janu. 30. 1637.
Baro, and l'Estoile, were only charged to look upon them in private, and to
report their observations on which the Academie having deliberated in several
conferences, Ordinary and Extraordinary, Monsieur Desmarests had order to put
thereto the last hand. But for the examination of the work in gross, the
business was somewhat more difficult. M. Chapelain presented his notes first;
'twas ordered that M. Bourzy, and Desmarests should add theirs to them, and
whether they were performed or no, whereof I find nothing in the Registers, so
it is, that M. Chapelain made a Complete body which was presented to the
Cardinal in writing. I have with abundance of pl^asure seen this manuscript,
with Animadversions of the Cardinal in seven places, in Monsieur Citois's hand
his chief Physician. Yet there is one of these notes, whereof the first word is
with his own had, and there is another, which shows plainly, what his opinion
was of the the Cid. It Is at a passage where it is said, that Poetry would have
been now a great deal less perfect then it is, were it not for the contests
that are made about the works of the most famous Authors of the latter times,
The Jerusalem of Tasso and Pastor Fido. At this passage he puts in the margin,
The applause and the blaming of the Cid is only betwixt the Learned and the
Ignorant; whereas the Contests about the other two pieces have been betwixt men
of judgment. Which shows that he was persuaded of that which was reproched to
M. Corneille, that his work was not according to rule. The rest of these
animadversions are not considerable, for they are only some petty notes, as
this, whereof the first word is written with his own hand, Good, but it might
have heen expressed better, and that other, This example should be somewhat
smoother. Whence yet, we may gather, he examined this work with very much care
and attention. His judgment in brief was, that the substance of it was good,
But that there wanted, (for in these terms he expressed himself,) some handfuls
of flowers to be sprinkled here and there. But this was only as 'twere the
first draught, which they were willing to present to him, to know whether in
gross, he approved of their Sentiments. The work was then given to be polisht
according to his intention, and by the deliberation of the Academie, to M. de
Serizay, Reg. July 17. 1637.
de Cerizy, de Gombauld, and Sirmond. Monsieur de Cerizy, as I am told, couched
it in writting, and M. de Gombauld was nominated by the three others, and
confirmed by the Academie, to have the last reveiwing of the Style. The whole
was read and examined by the Company, in several Assemblies Ordinary and
Extraordinary, and given at last to the Printer. The Cardinal was then at
Charonne, Reg. July the last 1637.
whither they sent the first sheets to him; but they did not satisfy him in
the least; and whether 'twere that he judged rightly of it, or that they took
him in an ill humor, or that he was prejudiced against M. de Cerisy, he found
that they had past from one extreme to the other, that they had given it too
many ornaments and flowers, and sent away presently in all haste to tell them,
that they should stop the printing of it. He sent then to have M. de Serizay,
Chapelain and Sirmond come to him, that he might the better explain his meaning
to them. M. de Serisay excused himself, for that he was ready to take horse to
go into Poictou. The two others went. To hear them, he was pleased to be alone
in his Chamber, except M. de Bautru whom he called for, as being of the
Academie. He talked with them a long time, with all civility, standing, and
uncovered. M. de Chapelain as he told me himself, endeavored to excuse M. de
Cerisy the best he could, but he soon found that this man would not be
contradicted. For he saw him grow hot and active, in so much that coming to him
he took him by the bandstrings and held him so, a good while, as a man will do,
not thinking of it, when he would speak home to another, whom he would convince
of something. The conclusion was, that after he had explained to them in what
manner he thought this work should have been written, he gave it in charge to
M. Sirmond, who had indeed a very good Style, and that far from all affection:
But neither did M. Sirmond satifie him at all. Mon. Chapelain was therefore to
resume all that had been done both by himself and others, out of which he
compos d the work such as now it is, which being approved by the company and
the Cardinal, was published soon after, very little different from what it was
at first, when 'twas p^esented to him in writing, saving that the matter here
is a little more amplified, and some ornaments added.

Thus after about 5. months travail, came forth THE SENTIMENTS OF THE FRENCH
ACADEMIE UPON THE CID. Reg. Novem. 23. 1637.
In all which time this Grand Minister that had all the affairs of the Kingdom
in his hands, and all those of Europe in his head, was not weary of this
Design, nor gave any respit to his care for this work. It was diversely received
by Monsieur de Scudery, Mon ieur Corneille, and the Public As for M. Scudery,
though his Adversary were not condemned in all things and had received very
great praises in many, he thought that he had gained the day, and writ a Letter
of thanks to the Company with this title. To the Gentlemen of the I^lustrious
Academie, where he returned them thanks with a great deal of submission, both
for what they had approved in his writings, and for what they had taught him in
correcting him, and professed in conclusion, that he was entirely satisfied with
the justice they had done him. The Secretary was commanded to write him an
answer. The sense of it was, that he assured him, That the Academie had made it
their Principal care to hold the balance right, and not to make a matter of
Complement or Civility of a serious business. But that their greatest care
after this was, to express themselves with moderation, and to tell their
reasons, without wronging any one. That they were well pleased with the justice
he had done them, in acknowledging them just, that they would hereafter requite
his equity; and that on all occasions, where it would be permitted them to be
obliging, he should not fail of it. As for M. Corneille, though he would
hardly have summitted to this judgment, yet being resolved to comply with the
Cardinal herein, he expressed at the beginning that he attended the event of it
with a great deal of deference. To this purpose he writ to Monsieur de
Boisrobert in a Letter of the 15th. of November 1637. I expect with a great
deal of impatience the Sentiments of the Academie, that I may learn from hence
forward what I must follow; till then, I cannot write but with distrust, nor
dare I confidently make use of any word. And in another, of the third of
December; I prepare my self not to have any thing to answer to the Academie,
but thanks. But when the sentiments upon the Cid, were almost quite printed,
having understood by some means that this judgment would not be so favorable
to him, as he hoped; he could not refrain from expressing some resentment of
it, writing in another Letter of which I have seen only a Copy without date
or Subscription, I am resolved, since you will have it so, to suffer my self to
be condemned by our Illustrious Academie, if it meddles only with one half of
the Cid, the other will remain unto me whole and entire. But I beseech you to
consider that it proceeds against me with so much violence, and that it makes
use of so soveregin an Authority, to shut my mouth, that those who shall know
its proceedings, will have reason to think that I should never have been found
guilty if I might have been permitted to show my Innocence.

He complains afterward as if they had denied to hear the defense he would
have made of his book viva voce and in the presence of his judges; whereof yet
I have not found any footsteps, either in the Registers or in the memory of the
Academiciens whom I have consulted.

He adds to this. After all, behold what is my satisfaction! I assure my self
this famous work, which so many gallant wits have been these six months ^^
travail with, may well be esteemed, the Sentiments or opinion of the French
Academie, but perhaps 'twill never be the opinion of the rest of Paris; at
least I have my sentence before them, and I know not whether they can expect
theirs. I made the CID to divert my self, and for the divertisment of honest
people that delight in Comedies. It Is a suficient Testimony to me of the
Excellency of my piece, that it has been so often acted, that there has been
such an extraordinary concourse of people to see it, and such general
acclamations given it. All the favor the Sentiment of the Academie can hope
for, is to go as far; I do not fear it will out go me, etc. And a little
after, The Cid will always be handsome, and will keep its reputation of being
the best piece, that 'has appeared upon the Stage, until there comes another,
which will not tire the Spectators, even at the 30th. time. etc.

At last, when he had seen the Sentiments of the Academie, I find that he writ
a Letter to Monsieur de Boisrobert, December. 22. 1637. in which after he had
thanked him, for the care he had taken to let him taste the Cardinals bounty
namely in getting him his pension paid, and after he had given him some orders
to have this money kept for him at Roan, he said, Moreover, I beseech you to
believe that I am not at all angry that you have showen, nay given, my Letter
to the Gentlemen of the Academie. If I had desired it of you, I could blam
only my self; but if my memory fail me not, I think, I only desired you in
that Letter, to assure them of my most humble service, as I desire you would do
still, notwithstanding their sentiments. All that troubles me, is that the
Gentlemen of the Academie, having resolved to be judges in this Controversy,
before they knew whether I would consent to it or no, and their sentiments
being already in the press, as you write me word, before you received that
Testimony of mine, they have endeavored to build their judgment thereupon, and
make it be believed, that what they have done therein, was only to oblige me,
and at my entreaty, etc. And a little after; I was resolved to answer them,
because Ordinarily the silence of an Author that is written against, is taken
for a sign that he sleights his censurers: I have thus used it toward Monsieur
de Scudery; but I did not believe it would become me to do the same toward the
Gentlemen of the Academie, and I was persuaded that so Illustrious a Body did
well deserve, that I should render them an account of the reasons upon which I
built the conduct and choice of my design, and therefore I should extremely
force my humor, which is not to write in this kind, and to divulge the secrets
of my Art. I was confirmed in this resolution, by the assurance which you gave
me, that my Lord would be well pleased with it, and I resolved in my self to
address the epistle Dediatory to his Eminence, after I had first asked his
leave. But now that you advise me not to answer any thing considering the
persons that are engaged in it, I want no Interpreter to understand it, I am
somewhat more a man of this world then Heliodore, who chose rather to lose his
Bishopric then his book, and do more prize the favor of my Master, then all
the reputation upon earth: I will hold my Peace then, not out of contempt, but
respect, etc. This Letter contained very much more to the same purpose, and at
the bottom he added by way of postscript, I conjure you, not to show my Letter
to my Lord, if you think there has escaped me any word which may be ill taken
by his Eminence.

But as to that which is implied by this Letter, that the Academie had begun to
make their Sentiments and even to print them, before they had the consent of
Monsieur Corneille, as M. de Boisrobert had write him word; I cannot tell what
past between them, only this that M. de Boisrobert might have told him, to
oblige him perhaps with the less difficulty to consent to this judgment, as to
a thing already resolved on, and begun, that his resistance could not hinder
it. But I know very well by the Registers of the Academie, which are very
faithful and very exact at that time, that they began not to speak of the Cid
till the 16. of June 1637. that this was after that they had there read a
Letter of Monsieur Corneille's. That the first which I spoke of, wherein he
said, The Gentlemen of the Academie may do what they please, etc. is dated at
Roan the 13th. of the same month. That thus it might have come to Paris and
been shown to the Academie the 16th, and that lastly this work was not given to
the Printer till about 5. Months after. Monsieur Corneille who has since heen
received into the Academie as well as Monsieur Seudery, with whom he is fully
reconciled, did always believe, that the Cardinal and another person of great
quality raised this persecution against the Cid, witness these words which he
writ to a friend of his and mine, at that time, when having published his Horace
(another Tragedy) 'twas reported that they would make more observations and a
new judgment upon this piece. Horace, says he, was condemned by the Duumviri,
but he was absolved by the People. Witness also those 4. verses which he made
after the death of the Cardinal, whom he looked upon in one respect as his
Benefactor, and in another as his Enemy.

Qu'on parle mal ou bien du fameux Cardinal,
Ma prose ni mes verse n'en diront jamais rien.
Il m' a fait trop de bien pour en d're du mal.
Il m' a fait trop de mal pour en dire du bien.
that is,

Talk well or ill of the famous Cardinal,
But neither, from my prose or verse, shall fall.
He did me too much good to speak him ill:
He did me too much harm to speak him well.
Such were the thoughts of the parties most interessed, touching the work of
the French Academie. The Public received it with very much approbation and
esteem. Even those that were of a contrary opinion, ceased not to commend it;
and envy it self, that expected all this while when something of this Companies
would come forth that it might tear it in pieces, never meddled with this. For
my part, I know not whether the famous Academies of Italy, ever produced any
thing better, or so good, upon the like occasion. I make account in the first
place, it is very much that without exceeding the bonds of justice, these
Gentlemen could satisfy a prime Favorite, that had the whole power of France
at his command, and he too, their Protector; who for certain, what ever were
the cause of it, was incensed against the Cid. For I am sure he would have
desired, that they should treat it more hardly, if they had not let him know,
in their address, That a Judge ought not to speak as a Party, and that a man
loses so much of his Authority as he betrays Passion. Again if you examine this
book seriously you will find in it a very solid judgmemt, with which it is
propable Posterity will rest satisfied, much learning and much wit without any
affectation either of the one or the other; and from the beginning of it to the
end, so much liberty and moderation both together, as can never be sufficiently
commended. Moreover those that fancied to themselves that the Academie was a
Company of strange Dispositions, that would do nothing but quarrel about
syllables, and bring-in some new words and banish others, and in plain terms,
weaken and wound the French Tongue, under pretense of reforming and polishing
it: Those I say, to disabuse themselves, need only read this piece where
they will find a masculine and vigorous Style, the Elegance whereof has nothing
forced or strained; the terms choice, but without scruple and swelling; the
word Car and many others which they accused the Academie of intending to
banish, very frequently used. Nay they will see that it is so far from bringing
in new words, that it has retained some which seemed to be Antiquated, and
which perhaps many men would have scrupled to use. Thus has it used the word
dautant for parce que and aucunement instead of en quelque sort, which are now
a days very rarely used in that sense. p. 185. Dautant que les unes out este
fait es, devant les regles, etc. p. 14. speaking of the Academie, and s'est
aucunement conso lee, etc. p. 89. nous serious aucunement satisfaits p. 113.
Rodrique return chez Chimene non plus de nuict, que les tenebres favorisoient
aucunement sa temerite, etc.

AFTER that the Academie had done with the Cid they deliberated anew, what
employment they should take. 'Twas resolved The Discourses should be continued,
and that Monsieur Sirmond who was the first in order should be desired to bring
his, which yet he did not till 6. months after, Reg. December. 7. 1637. Reg. May
3. 1638. Reg. December. 14. 1637.
I never saw this discourse, nor could I learn the subject of it, which is not
expressed in the Register. But the principal thoughts of the Academie at that
time, were The design of the Dictionary, which was propounded to fall seriously
upon. Monsieur de Vaugelas, who long ago had made many rare and curious
observations upon the Tongue, offered them to the Company, Reg. December. 14. 1637.
which accepted them and ordered that he should conferr about them with
Monsieur Chapelain, and that they two together should bring in some notes for
the platform, Reg. Janu. 18. 1638.
and carrying on of this work. Monsieur de Vaugelas gave in his, which were
very brief, and respected only the body of the design, whereto he offered
farther to contribute his Remarques, and he divided these Remarques into three
sorts. The first, which belonged properly to the Dictionary, regarding only
simple words. The second for Construction, which belonged to the Grammar. The
third consisting in certain Rules which could not properly be referred either
to Dictionary or Grammar, because they respected neither Barbarism nor
Solecisme, the matters upon which Grammar and Dictionary employ the whole
extent of their jurisdiction, which nevertheless, said he, were most necessary
for the purity, ornament, grace, elegance, and politenesse of Style, and by so
much the more necessary, as there are fewer persons that know how to write
without Barbarisms, and Solecisms from which a Style may be free, and yet be
extremely imperfect.

As for Monsieur Chapelain; at the first establishment of the Academy, he had
made a large project for a Dictionarie, which had been seen by the Company. He
presented it to them again, and because it descends much to particulars and for
that it is upon this very platform that even to this day they proceed in this
work, perhaps it will not be besides the purpose, to relate here briefly the
contents of it, as I promised elsewhere. This Project then said,

That the design of the Academie being to render the Language capable of the
highest Eloquence, it would be needful to make two large Treatises, the one of
Rhetoric, the other of Poetry. But that to follow the order of nature, there
should precede them a Grammar, which should furnish out the body of the
Language, whereon are built ornaments of Oratory and the figures of Poetry.
That the Grammar should comprehend either the simple terms or the received
phrases, or the constructions of words one to another. That so, in the first
place, it would be necessary to make a Dictionarie, which should be as 'twere
the Treasury, and Magazine of simple Terms, and received Phrases; after which
for finishing the Grammar, there would remain only an exact Treatise to be made
of all the Parts of speech, and of all the Constructions regular and irregular,
with the resolution of doubts that might occurr upon that subject. That for the
design of the Dictionarie, there should be made a selection of all deceased
Authors, that have written the purest in our language, and a distribution of
them to all the Academiciens, to the end that each of them read with care,
those which shall be allotted to him; and that in several papers, he set down in
an alphabetical order, the words and phrases which he shall believe to be the
best French, quoting the passage from whence he takes them. That these Papers
be brought back to the Company, who judging of these phrases and words, may
collect in a little time, the whole body of the Language, and insert into a
Dictionary the passages of these Authors, acknowledging them for Originals in
the things that shall be cited from them, yet without acknowledging them for
such in others, which are tacitly disapproved of, if they be not in the
Dictionary. And because there may be phrases and words in use, whereof
exsamples may not be found in good Authors, that in case the Academy approve of
them, they may have a mark set upon them, to show that Use has authorized
them. That the Dictionary be in one volume, but in two several parts, First, in
an alphabetical order, the simple words, whether Nouns or Verbs, or others that
deserve the name of roots, which may have produced compounds, derivatives,
diminutives, and which otherwise may have phrases that are grounded upon them.
That in this part, after having put down each simple word with some mark, to
signify what part of speech it is, there follow in order the compounds,
derivatives, diminutives, and the phrases depending on them, with the
authorities, which yet may be omitted for the simple words, as being out of
doubt, and sufficiently known to every one. That thereto be added afterward,
the Latin interpretation for the good of Strangers. That the Masculine,
Feminine, or Common gender of each word, be marked with some note. That there
may be others to distinguish Poetical terms from those of Prose: and others to
signify those of the lofty, yea mean, and the lowest kind of speech. That
there be observed also the accents upon long syllables. That they mark also the
differences of e when open, and when close for the pronuntiation. That they
keep themselves to the received orthography, not to molest the common reading,
nor hinder, but that Books which have been printed formerly, may be read with
facility. That they should nevertheless endeavor to take away all
superfluities that may be cut off without any harm. That in the second part all
simple words or others, be set down without any distinction in an alphabetical
Order, with a reference only to the Page of the great Dictionary; where they
are explained, and where also may be marked also all the words and phrases out
of use, with their explication, for the understanding of old Books, where they
are found, with this notice, That these words or phrases belong to the
Language, but must not be used any more. That, in conclusion, for the good of
Strangers, one may yet, if one will, add a third part, only of simple Latin
words, with a reference to the pages of the great Dictionary, where they may
explain the French words. That they may, lest the volume be too big, leave out
of the Dictionary all proper names of Seas, Rivers, Cities, Mountains, which
are alike in all Languages, as also private terms, which enter not into common
traffic, and are only invented for the necessity of Trades and Professions,
leaving to those that have a mind to it, the liberty to make distinct
Dictionaries, for the profit of those that addict themselves to those
particular Knowledges. This was the Project of the Dictionary, which Monsieur
Chapelain made, and was approved of by the Academie. It Is true, that some time
after, Monsieur Silhon, who was then Director, propounded whether it would not
be better, that they might make an end of it quickly, to follow the Common
Dictionaries, only adding thereto what they should judge meet. But I do not find,
that this Proposition, which was then put off to the next Assembly, was either
received or so much as taken into consideration again. It Is true too, they have
not punctually observed whatever is in this Project, as may be seen in that
which respects the quotations. Yet 'twas resolved at first to follow the
Project in that, and they began a Catalogue of the best reputed Books in our
Tongue, to which they at several times added more according as they thought
good. For Prose, Amiot, Montagne, du Vair, Desportes, Charron, Bertaud, Marion,
de la Guesle, Pibrac, d'Espeisses, Arnauld le Catholicon, d'Espagne, The
memoires of Queen Margaret, Coiffeteau, du Perron de Sales Bishop of Geneva,
d'Vrfe, de Molieres, Malherbe, du Plessis Mornay, what ever is extant of
Monsieur Baudin's, and of Monsieur du Chastelet, two Academiciens that were
lately dead, Cardinal d'Ossat de la Noue, de Dammartin, de Refuge and
Audiguier; to which doubtless they would have added others, as Bodin and
Steven Pasquier, which deserved not to be forgotten. For verse, they put into
the Catalogue Marot S. Gelais, Ronsard, du Bellay Belleau du Bartas, Desportes,
Bertaud, Cardinal Perron, Garnier, Regnier, Malherbe, Deslingendes, Motin,
Touvant, Monfuron, Theophile, Passerat, Rapin, Saint Marthe. The Bookseller
to the Academy, was charged to bring to the Director, a note of all the
principal Authors of the Tongue, and of their several works. But a while after
the Acadamie began to apprehend the pains and the length of the citations, and
having consulted many times about it, 'twas resolved by the advice even of M.
Chapelain, who was the first that put them upon these thoughts, not to set down
the Authorities in the Dictionarie, unless in the making of it, they thought
good for phrases that were dubious, to cite some approved Author that had used
them. 'Twas also resolved for the furthering of this work, that the Cardinal
should be given to understand, that it would be very fit to choose out of the
Company, one or two persons, that should wholly apply themselves to it, and
have the principal charge of it; Monsieur de Boisrobert was desired to mention
it, and to propose to him M. de Vaugelas, and M. Faret, as fittest for this
employment and best able to discharge it worthily, if they were acquitted from
the cares of their fortune, and could bestow their whole time upon it. The
Cardinal, as I find by the answer that M. de Boisrobert returned to the
Academie, gave no answer to this propos tion, whether 'twere that he did not
like it, or that his thoughts were taken up with something else. In the mean
time, there was not any one in the Academie that offered himself voluntarily to
take upon him the performance of this work, every one had his own affairs, and
his own private thoughts, from which he was not willing to be taken off. Thus
this design, for which they even now expressed so much zeal, began to cool; and
for eight or ten months, there was no talk of the Dictionary, the Academy all
this while amusing it self about other things, which I shall tell you o^, by
and by. At ^ast, the Cardinal having often complained, that they did nothing
that was profitable to the Public, and being vexed at it, so far as to say,
that he would abandon them; these Gentlemen resolved to make once more, the
same Proposition to him. M. de Boisrobert then, being thereto exhorted by all
the Academiciens, and in particular by Monsieur Chapelain, and some others of
his most familiar friends, acquainted the Cardinal, that the only means
speedily to finish the Dictionary, was to give the principal charge of it to M.
de Vaugelas; and for this end, to get reestablisht upon him by the King, a
Pension of two thousand Livres, which was no longer paid him^ extolling highly
his abilities as to this business, his noble birth and his merit, which has a
long time been known to the whole Court. The Cardinal at that time received
favorably this overture, and answered, That he would, if need were, give the
Pension out of his own purse. But he desired to see, after what manner, M. de
Vaugelas would proceed in it. They presented him the two Projects, he liked
well the larger, of which I related to you almost all. Reg. June ult. 1639.
The Pension of 2000 Livres was re-establisht upon M. de Vaugelas; who went to
thank the Cardinal for it, and as he had a very ready wit, and very polite
through long practice at Court, and in the choicest company; 'twas then that he
made that happy reply which questionless you have heard of. For they say, that
the Cardinal seeing him come into his chamber, arose with that sweet and
pleasant Majesty, which almost always accompanied him, and coming toward him,
Well, Monsieur, (says he) you will not forget I hope in your Dictionary the
word Pension. Whereupon Monsieur de Vaugelas making a low reverence to him,
answered, No, my Lord, and less that of Gratitude. From that time, Reg. Febr.
7. 1639.
began M. de Vaugelas to write some sheets of the Dictionary, which he brought
afterward to the Company; and 'twas Ordered, Reg. Feb. ult 1639.
that at the end of every Assembly, those words should be read, which were to
be examined the next time to the end they might have time to consider of them.
They propounded once more a distribution of the best Authors to all the
Academiciens, to collect out of them the phrases and the elegancies of the
Language, but 'twas never performed. They began to examine the letter A; Reg.
Apr. 11 1639.
where, to to take notice of it by the by, there happens a pleasant passage,
it is that the word Academie was omitted in its place, no body observing it,
till a while after. 'Twas resolved since, Reg. July 11. 1639.
that besides the ordinary Assemblies, there should be extraordinary ones, for
this very business, on Wednesdaies, at two boards, which should be at the same
time; one at the Lord Chancellors, the other at Monsieur d'Ablancourt's, in
whose absence they removed it afterward to M. Sirmonds. Notwithstanding all
this, the work went on extreme slow; For the letter A, that was begun Febr. 7.
1639. was not finished till the 17th of October, about 9 months after. They
thought then, that besides these two boardes, they must establish two more;
Reg. May. 19. 1642.
one on Fridays at M. de Bourzey's, the other on Wednesdays at M. Conrart's,
and allot certain Academiciens to sit at each of them. But this care has been
almost useless; For as they traveled not in these four places, neither with
the same assiduity, nor with the like Genius, and force; they were necessitated
to repasse many things, which these lesser boards had decided, in which they
were then employed when I wrote this Relation. The death of two persons has
happened since' which has much retarded the design of the Dictionary. First,
that of Cardinal de Richelieu, which, notwithstanding the care and diligence of
the new Protector, has taken off much of that zeal, with which they went on at
first. The other is that of Monsieur de Vaugelas, who had, as I told you
before, the management of this work; not but that they have given the same
charge to Monsieur de Mezeray, who acquits himself very worthily. But M. de
Vaugelas, having a meaner fortune than he deserved; after his death, the papers
of the Dictionary, with the rest of his writings were seized among other things
by his creditors, who thought to get a considerable sum of money for them of
some Printer, so that the Academy could not recover what belonged unto it, but
by a Suit at Law, and a Decree du Chastelet of the 17th of May 1651. Presently
all were delivered into the hands of the Secretary of the Company, upon his
demanding of them: but the Company Ordered there should be a Copy of them taken
to remain always at the Lord Chancellors. They met twice a week to go on with
the Dictionary, but to omit that, they were forced to go over again part of
that which had been done at those lesser boards, it has hitherto advanced no
farther then the Letter I: and this slowness together with the uncertainty what
fortune may befall the Academy hereafter, is enough to make it doubted whether
it will ever be finished.

Many do very much wonder, that so many men, famous for their worth, and
capable of the greatest things, as their particular worths do sufficiently
manifest, should amuse themselves so long about a work, which seems to have
nothing of Noble in it, and of which perhaps not one of them hopes to see an
end. For my part I shall not defend the French Academy by the common exsample
of that other Della Crusca, which s^ent nigh 40 years in its Vocabularie, from
which at last it reaped very much glory, and the Italian Tongue very much
profit. But I shall be bold to say, that, if we look a little nearer into
things, this design, and their constancy in the execution of it, deserve
nothing less then high commendations. I know very well, that in this I exceed
the bounds of History, which contenting it self to make a faithful relation,
ought to leave the judgment to the Reader, and always continue Neuter between
contrary parties; but if I fail herein, you will pardon this fault I am
confident, for the desire which I have to let you know, what have been my
thoughts many times concerning this business, and to clear a truth, which
seems not to me to be sufficiently known. First then, it will not be denied me,
I think, but that the Project of a Rhetoric and a Poetic, which I formerly
told you of, was most worthy of this Company. 'Twill also be granted me, I
conceive that to do this, a Dictionary and a Grammar, are two things, either
necessary or at least very useful, according as I have above related. But,
suppose these four works a Dictionary, a Grammar, a Rhetoric and a Poetic,
should be finished, I say not in 4 years, but even in 20 or 30, who is there
that would not speak of it to the advantage of the Academie? Now if you will
commend this design, and blame the delay of its execution, you commend that which
properly belongs unto it, and blame that which does not, and so ought not to be
imputed to it. For if the Cardinal that founded it, had had more care to put it
forward, and had made this employment the most important and principal
business of all, or most, of the Academiciens; I do not doubt but these four
works would have been printed long ago, and followed also with many others. And
if in other things, as I always say, true glory consists in doing good service
to the Public, in what manner soever it be; Such a Dictionary, whether you
look upon', as a means to attain to Rhetoric and Poetry, or consider it barely
in it self, it cannot but make very much to the honor of its Authors. If any
one that is big with high conceits shall here pretend, proudly to contemn this
whole study of words and language, I shall not dispure the case, but willingly
suffer him to follow his own inclinations, and employ himself wholly, either to
the affairs of the world, or to more sublime studies; but let him beware lest
that pursuing, it may be, a false good, or entertaining Opinions for Verities,
and Conjectures for Demonstrations, even when he thinks he applys himself wholly
to solid matters, he embrace a cloud as well as others. I speak now to them,
who to those knowledges that are indeed the most important, do add also that of
good literature, making it one of their greatest pleasures, who would be weary
of the world, were it not for this delightful amusement, who find in it
wherewith to comfort themselves in afflictions, and recreate themselves in
prosperity, whereby to entertain themselves with their friends and content
themselves in their privacies. In a word, wherewith to render themselves fit
for what ever the Public, or a private society can require of them. I make no
question but these men would receive the Academies Dictionary with joy, and
prize it highly, and receive by it a wonderful benefit. What comfort must it
needs be to those that write, when in the heat of composing, they are perplexed
with some one of those tedious and irksome scruples in the language, of those
petty remora's that on a sudden arrest the greatest Vessels in the main Sea,
even when they go with full sail: what comfort, I say, must it needs be to be
delivered from them, presently to pass on to other things of more importance,
and to have the Warrant of so famous a Company for what they shall write? I
know well that the spirits of the French are not willing to be enslaved; nor
would I desire, to forbid such as find in themselves a certain particular
Genius, from yiedling any thing to their own Palates, when it is not absolutely
extravagant, nor directly contrary to that of the Public; but when all is done,
in things of indifferency, and which merely depend upon institution, the
testimony of forty persons the most understanding in such matters, has very
much weight and authority, and all men that are any thing rational, would, were
it only for quietness sake, choose much rather to yield than to contend. The
Remarques of Monsieur de Vaugelas, may furnish us with an example hereof; they
were encountered by many, scarce any one but found somewhat or other in them,
contrary to his own judgment: And yet it is well known, they do by little and
little take with the wits, and daily gain credit amongst them. This is but the
work of one Academicien; if that of the Academie were published, it would not
only resolve us an infinite number of doubts; but besides, it is very likely it
would confirm and in some sort six the Body of the Language, and hinder it, not
from changing at all, (for that can never be hoped in any of the living
Languages) but at least from changing so often and so suddenly as it does. All
other Nations reproach ours with this inconstancy; Our elegantest and most
polite Authors, in a few years become barbarous, 'twould make one sick to read
the best and most solid of them, when they begin to grow old; and if ever we
can be cured of the evil, in my opinion it must be only by this remedy. Nor
must we pass by, as matter of no concernment, the advantage we shall reap by
this Dictionary, to find at once the roots of all derivative words; a judicious
advice, whether they are low or high, proper for prose or for verse; in what
kind of writing they may be used most aptly, an almost indubitable decision of
the length or shortness of syllables, for pronunciation, and of e open or
close, which are the rocks that not only all strangers, but even all that are
not of the Isle of France, do so rudely dash against. Well, let the present age
say what it please, Posterity, if it sees this Dictionary, either it will not
stand to enquire how long it was making; or if it does, will so much the more
extol the Authors of it, and account it so much the more indebted to the
Academy. I shall go a little farther, and add, that though this Dictionary be
never finished, since that after all, they have incessantly labored in it, who
can doubt, but that this exercise of exactly considering words in their
Original, of observing their several acceptions, of remarquing all the phrases
that may be made of them, was most proper for a Body, that propounded to it
self the embellishment of the Language as its end; and most profitable to
particular Academiciens for their instructions; and consequently advantageous
to the public, to whom they daily publish part of their Works?

I HAVE spoken of three principal employments of the Academy since its
Institution: The Discourses or Harangves^ the Sentinents on the Cid, and the
Dictionary: But during all this time, and in diverse intervals, they were often
busied with examining the Pieces that were presented them by those of the
Company. I find that there were read at several times, The Poems of Monsieur de
Gombauld, and de l'Estoile; Reg. Janu. 14. 1636. Reg. Apr. 14 and 15. 1636.
Reg. Apr. 28 1636.
the Preface of Monsieur de la Cambre's; Conjectures about digestion, part of
Monsieur de Balzac's Prince, which he then called, The Minister of State; a
Political discourse of M. Silhon's to justify the administration of Cardinal
de Richelieu, Reg. May 3. 1638. Reg. Jan. ult. 1639. Reg. May 15. 1652.
another of Monsieur de Sirmond, in justification of the War against the
Spaniards; The Prologue of M. Desmarest's Europa; the verses of M. de Racan,
and many other things of less importance. Whatever was presented to them after
this manner, was examined with so much care and rigor, that the Cardinal
thought himself obliged many times, to exhort the Academy, to remit somewhat of
it. Perhaps I shall do a pleasure, to insert here what I find to this purpose
in the Register of Monday the 12th of Nov. 1634. Reg. Nov. 12. 1634.
which will also let you see the manner of these Registers.

Upon that which M. de Boisrobert said to the Company, that the Cardinal
desired them not to affect too great a severity, to the end that those whose
works shall be examined, might not be discouraged by a too long and painful
curiosity, from writing any more; and that the Academy might bring forth the
fruit which his Eminence promised himself from it for the embellishment and
perfection of our Tongue: After the Votes were gathered, 'Twas ordered, that
the Cardinal should be most humbly desired to be pleased that the Company
might not remit any of that severity which is necessary to bring those things
which must bear its name or receive its approbation, the nearest that may be to
perfection. And in explaining the nature of this severity 'twas said that it
should have nothing of affectation or sowreness, but only be sincere, solid,
and judicious, that the examination of works should be done exactly by those
that shall be named Commissioners, and by the whole Company when it judges of
their Observations. That the Authors of the pieces examined, should be bound to
correct the places shown them, according to the resolution of the Company.
Monsieur de Gombauld having beseeched the Assembly to deliberate, whether an
Academicien, bringing a work to be examined, should be bound always to follow
the judgment of the Company in all its corrections. though not wholly
conformable to his own It was resolved, that no man should be bound to labor
beyond his strength, and that those which have made their works as good as they
were able, might receive approbation of them, provided that the Academy were
satisfied of the order of the piece in general, of the justness of its parts,
and purity of its Language. In reading these works, the Academy very often gave
decisions upon the Language, of which its Registers are full, it did the like
also many times upon the mere proposal of some one Academicien; and if at
Court, as it often happens, a word had been the subject of some long dispute,
they seldom failed to speak of it in the Assembly. Such was, for instance,
that merry contest, that arose at Rambouillet Hostel, whether one should say
Muscardins, or Muscadins, which was decided by the Academy in favor of the
last, which I the rather mention, Reg. Feb. 1. 1638.
because it serves to explain a piece of raillerie, made by Monsieur de
Voiture, against them that will have it to be Muscardins, which was never
printed.

Au siecle des vieux Palardins,
Soit Courtisans, soit Citardins,
Femmes de Cour, ou Citardines,
Prononsoient troujours Muscardins,
Et Balardins et Balard nes,
Mesme l'on dit qu'en ce temps la
Chacun disoit rose muscarde,
J'en dirois bien plus que cela,
Mais par mafoy je suis malarde,
Et mesme en ce momeut voila
Qu'l'on m'apporte une panarde.
So in the year 1651. Monsieur Naud^ consulted this Company about the word
Rabougri which signifies properly a Plant that is not come to its perfection
and just bigness, in which sense we read in the old Statutes Des arbres
rabougris. He made use of it in a trial, which he had in Parliament upon an
answer made him by two of these Gentlemen, who had asked the opinion of the
whole Body concerning it, and he printed their Letters at the end of a little
Book, which he then published against his adversaries. Strangers also, amongst
whom our Tongue is insensibly spread, have sometimes acknowledged the authority
of the Academy in the like occasions. Thus in the year 1652, it was obliged to
pronounce upon a wager of consequence, which had been laid in Holland,
concerning the word Temperature; but as it gave these decisions only by the by,
I think I ought not to stay any longer upon them.

SOMETIMES also, when the Academy had nothing else to do, Reg. Jaly 16. 1638.
they read and examined some French Book, and to this purpose 'twas ordered,
that there should be always some Book in the place of the Assembly. I took
delight to read in the Registers the examination of Malherbe's Stanza's upon
the Kings going to Limosin: for if there be any thing that makes appear, that
which is so commonly said, that his verses were never finished, certainly it is
this reading of them. There is scarce one Stanza, wherein, without being too
severe a Critic, one meets not with one or more things which one could wish
were changed if 'twere possible, without destroying that rare sense, that
mavelous elegance, and that inimitable smoothness of the verses, which is
found throughout those excellent works. I said without being too severe a
Critic; for to give you some Examples of them, in that first Stanza; O Dieu!
don't les bontez de nos larmes touchees
Ont aux veins fureurs, les arms arrachees,
Et range l'innocence aux pieds de la raison,
Puisqa' a rien d'imparfait ta louange n' aspire,
Acheue ton ouvrage au bien de cet Empire,
Et nous rends l'embonpoint comme la guerison.


These Gentlemen observed well, Reg. April 19. 1638.
that La bonte touchee de nos larmes, was better then Les bontez; that the
third verse Et range l'innocence aux pieds de la raison, was not good since;
that in the fourth verse, Ta louange n' aspire a rien d'imparfait, was not good
French, but they did not observe, as a fault, what he says at the end. Et nom
rend, embonpoint comme la guerison; though to look a little more narrowly into
it, methinkes, and in our Ordinary discourse, a man may say well enough in our
Language, render la sante, and render la vie, but not render la guerison. But
as for that verse, Et range l'innocence aux pieds de la raison, The Academie
was not at all satisfied with it, and it is true, there cannot be picked out of
it any reasonable sense; but it proceeds from a fault in the printing, which
has been committed in all the Editions that ever I saw of Malherbes works, and
which no man that I know of, has hitherto perceived; instead of l'innocence, it
should be l'insolence. I thought of it first by Conjecture, but I now make no
question of it, since I saw the verse printed after this manner in three
Collections of French Poems, which are those of 1615, 1621, and 1627. Ranger
l'insolence aux pieds de la raison, is not only good sense, but also very neat
and very poetical.

There is one Stanza which is the 16. upon which I do not find any thing in the
Registers, unless that it was admired by every one, and that there was no
fault found with it.

Quand un Roy faineant, la vergogne des Princes.
Laissant a ses flateurs le soin de ses Provinces,
Enter les voluptez indignement s' endort,
Quoy que l'on dissimule on n' en fa^t d'estime,
Et si la verite se peut dire sans crime,
C' est avecque plaisir qu' on survit a sa mort.
Yet in this Stanza certainly admirable, he has the word vergogne, which many
now a days would be very loath to use, and which the meanest judges would not
fail to condemn. I might add many other things like these, did not I fear to
be too long. But there are two passages which I think it not amiss to mention,
because the Academie, Reg. April 26. 1638.
observed that in them Malherbe himself fell short of his own rules. The first
is, in the third Stanza.

Certes quinconque a vu pleuvoir dessus nos testes,
Les funestes eclats des plus grands tempests:
Qu' exciterent jamais deux contraires partis.
Et n' en voit aujourd'huy nulle marque paroistre.
En ce miracle seul, il peut asses connoistre.
Quelle force a la main qui nous a garantis.
Malherbe was of opinion that Stanza's of six ought to have a rest at the end
of the third verse. And here yet he goes to the end of the fourth e're he
rests; but you will not wonder at it when you know, what I believe the Academie
it self at that time was ignorant of, and which I learned very lately out of
some notes that Monsieur de Racan gave me of the life of that excellent Poet.
It Is that he made these Stanzas, and many other of his pieces, before that he
imposed this law upon himself. And hence it is that there are some of his
works where it is not exactly observed, as for example, in the Consolation to
Caritee in this Stanza.

Pourquoy done si peu Sagement.
Dementant Vostre jugement.
Passez-veus en cette amertume.
Le meilleur de vostre saison.
Aimant mieux pleurer par coustume.
Que vous consoler par raison.
But I shall say more hereafter of this rule when I speak of Monsieur Maynard,
who was the first Author of it.

I told you there was another passage, where, in the Judgment of the Academie,
Malherbe transgrest his own Maxims. Reg. July. 16. 1638.
It Is in the seventh Stanza, in these verses.

L' infaillible refuge, and l'asseure secours Here you see he says asseure
secours instead of secours asseure, as I remember he does also in another place.

De combien de Tragedies
Sans ton asseure secours.
Yet he held it for a Maxim, that those adjectives, that have their
termination, in e masculine, should never be placed before the Substantive, but
after: whereas others that have the feminine termination, may be placed before
or after, according as shall be thought fit. That one may say, for instance, ce
redoutable Monarque, or ce Monarque redoutable; and on the contrary, that we
may say ce Monarque redonte but not ce redout Monraque. I took not this example
without reason, and at adventures, for I have often heard Monsieur de Gombauld
say, that before ever any one had made this reflection, Monsieur de Malherbe
and he walking together one day, and talking of certain verses of Mademoiselle
Anne de Rohan's, where there was,

Quoy faut il-que Henry ce redoute Monarque. Monsieur de Malherbe assured him
several times that this end displeased him, and yet he could not tell any
reason why: that this made him himself consider of it attentively, and that
having presently discovered the reason, he told it to M. de Malherbe, who was
as much pleased with it, as if he had found a treasure, and afterward made of
it that general rule.

The Academie spent almost three months in examining these Stanza's, From April
9. to July 6. 1638.
and yet they made not an end of them, for they never touched the four last,
because they had other thoughts, and that year's vacation came very soon after.

Some of them, and amongst others Monsieur de Gombauld, and M. de Gomberville,
were very impatient that the Company did thus censure the works of a great
personage after his death, which they thought somewhat cruel and inhumane. But
the moderation which it used in this examination (which I have already remarkt)
seems sufficiently to show, that its intention was altogether innocent. And if
I may Judge of others by my self, I am fully persuaded of it; for, for my part,
if being so far from suppressing this whole Article, I have enlarged my self
upon it somewhat beyond my custom, I am sure that neither a youthful desire to
find fault with every thing, nor any other unworthy inclination, has engaged me
in this discourse: but on the contrary if I had had less esteem and respect
for Malherbe, I should not have spoken of his faults; and that lastly I have
reported them only (if I may compare things sacred with profane) as the
Scripture does those of the Saints, to Comfort them that are too much troubled
at their failings, and to keep them from despair.

Reg. Dec. 3. 1635. Reg. March 15. 1638.
Such were the employments of the Academie. I find too, that 'twas propounded
severa^l times to make two Collections, one of the Verses and to'ther of the
Letters of those of the Company, but it was never performed.

THE FOURTH PART: Of Some Remarquables that past in the Academie.
I WILL add now according to my promise, some considerable passages that
happened in the Academie, which I could not handsomely bring in any where else.

That which offers its self first, according to the order of time, (which I
observe as much as I can, in each Particular) is the generositie which the
Academie expressed after the death of Camusat, its Stationer, having in favor of
his widow and Children, opposed, as I may so say, the will of the Cardinal,
its Protector. Presently after his death, Monsieur de Boisrobert, who was then
with the Cardinal at Abbeville, wrote to the Academie, That his Eminence
having heard the news, though he thought there was not any man in Paris, more
capable to fill this place then Cramoisy, his own Stationer, whom he esteemed
and loved, nevertheless would not make use of that Authority which he had, as
their Head, to command them to receive him, but only desired, that he should
propound him to them, with this condition, that if they knew of any other, that
would be fitter for them, they might take him, not desiring in the least
manner, either in this or any thing else to violate their choice. By way of
postscript 'twas added. Since the writing of my Letter, my Lord sent for me
before much noble Company, to tell me, that you would do him a kindness to
take the said Cramoisy; I see plainly he is very earnest in this business,
having done me the honor to speak to me thrice about it. For all this
Camusat's Widdoe being desirous to continue her trade, and having with her for
this purpose one du Chesne, a kinsman of her Husbands, and a Scholar, who now
is a Dr. in Physic; the Academie desired to continue that honor to her
family, and answered M. de Boisrobert in such a manner, as not forgetting the
respect which it owed the Cardinal, and submitting it self always to obey his
will, it let him plainly know, that it was but justice to do so. This Letter
had the effect which was desired, Reg. July 15. 1639.
and M. de Bosrobert wrote another presently after to the Secretary of the
Academie, containing the Cardinal's approbation and consent that du Chesne
should be admitted to exercise that charge in the name of the Widdoe. Thus
after they had ordered an answer to M. de Boisrobert, to thank him, and to
desire him also to present their most humble thanks to the Cardinal; du Chesne
was brought into the Assembly took the Oath in the name of the Widdoe, and was
exhorted to imitate the discretion, care, and diligence of the deceased. And
because at the death of Monsieur Bardin, 'twas resolved that at the death of
all those of the Body, there should be performed a service in les Carmes
Reformes called des Billettes. It was ordered there should be one also for
Camusat, and this was the honor which this Company did to the memory of its
Stationer. But concerning M. de Boisrobert's Letter to the Academie, me thinks
I ought not to forget this pretty Circumstance. It was signed Vostre
tres-humble and tres-obeissant Serviteur. The Academie that thought good to
answer from the whole Body, to the end that the Letter might be the more
effectual in favor of the Widdoe, was somewhat at a stand what to subscribe.
On the one side the whole body writing to one of its Members, ought not in
appearance to treat him as an equal, and on the other side merely to say, de
tres-affectioner serviteurs, according to the custom, seemed not civil enough,
and to be used only to persons very inferior. At last they took this mean,
Vos tros-passionnez servitevrs, CONRART, as being somewhat more civil then
tres-affectionnez, and less then tres-humbles.

I AM now to speak of the death of another Person more considerable, which I
know not how to pass by in silence, 'twas that of the Cardinal himself, the
Protector and Founder of this Body. Whether it were ill for the State, as I
ever thought it was, this is no place to dispute. But most certain it is, that
at least Scholars and the Academie in particular suffered therein an almost
irreparable loss. Reg. Dec. 9. 1642.
The ninth of the same month, the Company being met, Monsieur de l'Estoille,
who had been made Director eight days before, said; That he thought there was
not any one in the whole Body, but was most sensibly touched with this
dysaster, and was ready to express it, not only in ordaining a Service, and
in composing an Elogie for the Cardinal, as they were wont to do for the
Academiciens that dyed; but besides in founding an Anniversarie for him, with
the greatest solemnity that was possible. That nevertheless all this pomp
respecting more the satisfaction of the living, then the glory of the dead, he
thought that the Academie ought rather to give proof of its piety and
gratitude, by some speedy and zealous actions, then by any great preparations,
which must needs be retarded a long time. That he therefore desired the Company
to deliberate, what was to be done in this business. Upon this proposition it
was resolved there should be performed a Service for the Cardinal in the Carmes
des Billettes, at the charge of the Company, every one contributing thereto
what he pleased, to the end that the action might be done the more honorably,
and with the greater dignity: That Monsieur de la Chamber should make an
Elogie, for him M. de Serisay an Epitaph, and Monsieur the Abbot of Cerisy a
Funeral Oration, that each of the other Academiciens should compose something
in Verse or Prose in praise of him, as many had already done, and Monsieur Baro
amongst others; a Sonnet of whose upon the Church de Sorbonne (where the
Cardinal chose to be buried) was then read: But as to the Funeral Oration;
the votes were divided, in resolving whether it should be pronounced in
public, or no; and as I told you elsewhere, they referrd themselves to the
Chancellor, who thought good to have it pronounced only in the Academie; which
was done a while after. As for the Service, they judged afterward, that 'twas
fittest it should be only done decently and without pomp. Monsieur de
l'Estiolle the Director, desired that he might have leave to defray, the charge
of it alone, which was granted him, and the Service was celebrated on the
twentieth of the same Month at ten of the clock in the Morning.

But the thing of most importance for the Academie was, to choose a Protector
in the place of him, whom they had lately lost: many inclined to Card. Mazarin,
concerning whom envy and faction had not yet divided men's minds, every one
rejoicing to see him succeed in the Ministry of Card. de Richelieu. 'Twas
thought that this election would be so much the more acceptable to him, as not
being born a Frenchman, it would in some sort seem to him to be the more
glorious. Others thought of the Duke of Enguien now Prince of Conde; who had
not won^ any battles, nor done those things which have been since admired, in
the first years of the Regency; but in whom being very young there did even
then appear much spirit, and a great inclination to good literature. On the
Contrary all those of the Academie that were dependants or servants to the
Chancellor, were passionately desirous to gain Him this title, and no man
seemed to have more right to it then He. At the very beginning of the Academie,
when he desired to be admitted into it, they talked of making him Protector
with the Cardinal; but they went no farther for fear of displeasing that great
Minister, who had already shown some tokens, of jealousy thereupon. So that all
the honor they did him then, was to set his name first in the Catalogue, and
at a distance from the rest, whom they ranked by lot. The Academie
nevertheless had him always in a particular Veneration. They deputed some to
go thank him for the honor he was pleased to do them to be one of them: and
when from Lord Keeper of the Seals, he came to be Chancellor of France they
wrote a Letter to him to Testify their joy. They thought therefore they could
not with reason cast their eyes upon any but him, since that they were always
very sensible, that in the birth of the Academie, he expressed so much affection
to it: and that besides being raised to the prime dignity of the Robe, he was a
lover of those that make profession of learning, and favored them upon all
occasions. These reasons outweigh'd all the others in the minds of the
Academiciens, and in the same Assembly of Dec. 9. 'twas resolved that the
Officers with Monsieur de Priesac, Chapelain, and de Serisay, should go and
beseech him to honor the Company with his Protection. The Officers who are
ordinarily three, were then but two, for that Monsieur Conrart, perpetual
Secretary, had been made Chancellor, these two charges being not inconsistent,
as I told you. M. de l'Estoile, who was the Director spoke for them all, the
17th of the same month. His Complement was so short and so good that it may be
here inserted.

My Lord,
WE make it sufficiently appear, that all great griefs are not dumb, since,
that for the death of my Lord the Cardinal leaves us yet voice enough to
beseech you not to abandon us in this misfortune. And if there does still
remain to that great Genius any care of things here below, he will be well
pleased that you are the support of that Company which he loved as his own
work. He begs it of you, My Lord, both by that near affection which tide you to
him, aad by that which you bear to learning. You never denied him any thing,
and this makes us hope that the tempest will cast us from one Port into
another, and that we shall recover in you, what we have lost in him; that is, a
Protector not only illustrious, by his birth and dignity, but also by his
virtue. We might say more, and cannot say enough; but your modesty and our
grief permit us only to assure your Lordship, that a Protection so glorious as
yours, is the greatest of our desires, that we will make us Laws from your
will, and,, that we are all in general, and in particular,

Your etc.


They were received with great civility, and with many testimonies of joy. The
Lord Chancellor began then to be Protector, and they filled the place of
Academicien, which he formerly held, as I shall tell you in the Article of the
Academiciens in particular.

To make an end of this, I conceive I am obliged to relate what diverse persons
have dedicated, addressed, or written at several times to the Academy.

Monsieur de Espeisses Counselor of Estate, was the first that I know which
writ any thing in honor of it. Reg. June 19. 1634.
For June 19. 1634. He presented to it by Messieurs de Cerisy and Desmarests,
some French verses in its praise. These two Gentlemen had charge to thank him,
and to answer his verses with others.

'Twas about the same time that the eldest of the Messieurs de St. Marthe,
presented to the Academy, by Monsieur Colletet some excellent Latin verses upon
the same subject, which begin thus,

Salve perpetuis florens, Academia, Fastis: and were received with all the
esteem and civi^ity, as they deserved, though I do not find any thing of them
in the Registers.

Le Sieur de la Peyre in the year 1635. Reg. Dec. 3. 1635.
dedicated to this Company, his Book, De l'Esclaircissement des Temps, with
this Title To the Eminent, which makes many believe that it was called the
Eminent Academy. 'Twas ordered that Messieurs de Gomberville and de Malleville
should go and thank him for it at his house. 'Twas in this book that this good
man, who had many very pleasant fancies, caused to be set before his book, the
Portraicture of the Cardinal in Taille douce, with a Crown of rays about him,
in each of which was written the name of an Academicien. And which is best,
amongst these Academiciens, he put M. de Bautru Cherelles, who was none of
them; And he that made The state of France in the year 1652. being desirous to
insert there the Catalogue of the Academiciens, taking it perhaps from hence,
fell into the same error.

Le Sieur Belot, Advocat, dedicated also to the Academy at the same time, if I
be not deceived, a Book which I could never meet with, and whereof there is no
mention in the Registers, entitled, An Apology for the Latin Tongue, and 'twas
this which gave occasion to that handsome passage in the Request of the
Dictionaries.

Le pauvre Langue Latiale,
Alloit estre trousse en male,
Si le bell Advocat Belot, etc.
Reg. Feb. 1. 1638.
Monsieur Frenicle having caused his Paraphrase on 4 Psalms to be printed by
Camusat, commanded him by a Letter to present a Copy of his Book to each of the
Academiciens; which was done the first of Febr. 1638. And the Company ordered,
that thanks should be returned him in their names by the same Camusat.

Reg. June 28. 1638.
Le Sieur de les Fargues, a Tolosain, now Advocate to the Council, caused first
to be presented to the Company, A Paraphrase upon the second Psalm, by Camusat,
who printed it: and afterward he was brought into the Company assembled
together, to present to them his Translation of Seneca's Controversies, Jan.
ult. 1639.
which he dedicated to them. He caused a Copy thereof to be distributed to each
of them. The Prefatory Epistle was read in his presence, and he was thanked for
it by the mouth of the Director. 'Twas for this reason that in the same Request
of the Dictionaries it is said, Et le Seneque fa^soit nargue.
A vostre Cand dat les Fargue.


Reg. Nov. 26. 1641.
In the year 1641. Father du Bosc, a Franciscan, Chapelain to the King, known to
be the Author of The Honest Woman, and of many other works, having printed a
Panegyrique on Cardinal de Richelieu, presented himself at the beginning of one
of the Conferences of the Academy, and gave a Copy of his book to each of them
that were then present, for which he received commendations and thanks.

Le Sieur de Taneur, Anno 1650.
having published in the year 1650. a Treatise of Incommensurable quantities,
with a Translation of the tenth Book of Euclide, added thereto a very excellent
discourse to the Gentlemen of the French Academy, concerning a way to explain
the Sciences in French.

Those of the Body have often presented to the Academy their works, before or
after the printing of them. For example, Reg. Feb. 01. 1639.
I find that Febr. 21. 1639. Monsieur Giry presented to them by Camusat, his
Translation of the Orations of Symmachus and S. Ambrose concerning the Altar of
Victory, for which Camusat was charged to thank him.

Monsieur de Racan when he had composed his Holy Odes, which were published last
year 1651. sent them to the Academy, to desire their opinion of them, and writ
to them that Letter which he has put before his Book. The Academy sent him that
answer which he has there likewise printed, without asking their leave to do
it, nor the Secretaries that writ it, which yet was not ill taken by either of
them.

But of all that has been written or addressed to the Academy, there is nothing
whose memory deserves better to be preserved, than the Letters of Monsieur de
Boissat an Academicien, wherein he gives them an exact account, both of what
happened to him at the house of the Duke de Lesdiguieres, who was then only
Count de Sault and of the Agreement that was made between them by the mediation
of the Nobility of Dauphine, assembled in a Body.

I am not ignorant how delicate and ticklish things of this nature are amongst
the French; and that there may be found, those that will blame me for
mentioning this in a work where I have no design to diminish the glory of the
Academy, or the reputation of any particular member thereof. But I do not se
why I should suppress any remarkable occurrences, which I meet with in my
subject, that may serve for instruction, and for a precedent in the like
occasions, which may one day perhaps be published quite otherwise then indeed
they are, and where, all things consideted, there is not now any thing that may
be offensive either to this Illustrious Company, which had no part in this
difference, or to Monsieur de Boissat, a Gentleman, as every one knows, very
honorable and deserving. I will speak of it then, and which is more, knowing
well, that on the one side, a matter so curious cannot be unacceptable to you,
and on the other, that in these points of honor, they weigh even the least
Syllables, I will here insert at large, not only a Copy of the Agreement which
was sent to the Academy by M. de Boissat, but also the Letter which came with
it, and the answer which they made. And if I suppress the first Letter which
he writ to this Company, wherein was a particular relation of his misfortune,
and of the things which preceded: It is because that I have been told that he
himself endeavors to suppress it, out of a motion of true generosity, not to
l^a^e any mark of resentment or bitterness a^a^nst those persons with whom he
is wholly reconsiled, whose quality and birth I in my own particular, do as I
ought very much honor.

The second Letter of Monsieur DE BOISSAT without date, with this
superscrip^ion,
To the Gentlemen of the Academy of Eloquence, assembled in a Body.
Gentlemen,
AS I give you an account of the unheard of misfortune, which happened unto me
at the house of the Kings Leivtenant in Dauphine; so I impart to you an
Agreement yet more strange, which the nobility of this Province endeavored for
the space of three months, and for which they assembled themselves together
more solemnly then they were wont to do upon other occasions. This
extraordinary means which Providence has raised to put an end to a misfortune,
which my sentiments would have rendered immortal, has been able to bring me back
to quietness, though the opinions of my Master, my friends, and my kinsmen
carried me thither; and though, having sent no less then three Gentlemen to
Grenoble, I perceived the way of Arms was impossible, through the care that is
generally taken of the preservation of the Grandees. The principal reasons that
have obliged me hereto, besides the will of all my friends, you will soon know
if you remember, Gentlemen, that a part is indebted and cannot deny its self to
its whole, that the Nobility at first undertook the cause for me, and that
afterward desiring the entire cognizance of the business, those that were my
Enemies were both Party and Judge all at once; that a Body of a hundred on six
score Gentlemen, is a Warrant more proportionate to my honor then a Prince.
That I have as many cautions as there were heads then assembled; That moreover
to repair the honor of a private person, they might make new Laws in their own
Country, since that they are the very source of honor; That it is a thing
unheard of, in the Kingdom of France, that there should be such high
satisfaction made to a Gentleman. And lastly, that he who commands them wholly,
should submit himself unto them after a manner unknown to all Ages. See,
Gentlemen, the motives which obliged me to vanquish my own resistance, and
resign my will to that of your whole Province. To tell you now, in what manner
they have proceeded, this Copy, the Original whereof I have by me, will
testify and show unto you, That these true Gentlemen have had more regard to
my innocence, and their own honor, then to all the Grandeurs of the earth. All
I can add from my self is, that for the space of twelve days, they met
together morning and evening with invincible patience, and that all which
passed there, is great, memorable, and without example. I hope, Gentlemen, that
having known me always perfectly to revere your Body, and to cherish above all
things the honor which I have to be a member of it, you will be pleased that
Monsieur de Serisay may acquaint me with your judgments hereupon, that if this
affair do merit (as I make no question it will) your approbation, I may receive
a more perfect contentment, if it be possible, then that I which now have. This
I beg of you with all the respect I owe you, and that you would believe me to
be more then any person in the world,

Gentlemen, Your most humble, most obedient, and most passionate servant, P. DE
BOISSAT.


A COPY OF THE AGREEMENT MADE IN DAUPHINE, BY ORDER OF THE NOBILITY, ASSEMBLED
ON PURPOSE.
For the Gentlemen of the Academy: who are most humbly beseeched to hear it
read in a full Assembly.
MONSIEUR the Count de Sault, Chevalier of the Orders of the King, chief
Gentleman of his chamber, and Lieutenant General for his Majesty in Dauphine,
and Monsieur de Boissat, having remitted their difference to the judgment of
the Nobility of this Province, assembled on purpose, after they had known from
them the subject of it; they gave judgment for the satisfaction both of the
one, and of the other. That a Gentl man of the Assembly, accompanied with a
kinsman of M. de Boissat's, should go to the house of Madam the Countess of
Sault to deliver to her in the presence of those that she shall think fit to
call in, the Declaration which the Sieur de Boissat has made in the said
Assembly, That he never had in his thoughts an intent to offend her, and that
he did always highly esteem her for her birth, virtue, and all those excellent
qualities that are in her; and that, if he did but suspect in the least that he
had so reproached and offended her, as she believed, he would not only beg her
pardon for it, but should also think himself unworthy to obtain it, and should
not forgive himself.

After which, Monsieur the Court de Sault accompanied with his Guards and
Domestics, shall come into the place where the Nobility shall be assembled,
when he knows that Monsieur de Boissat is sent for thither, and shall say to
him: Sir, you know the cause that has made me to confess the wrong that has
been done you, which makes me hope you will the more easily grant me the pardon
which I beg of you for it: Acknowledging that I was carried to that excess with
too much heat, having therein employed my Guards, and that if you had had a
sword, you would have used it, as long as you had any life: For which I am
extreme sorry, and wish that I had lost some of my blood rather then this had
happened. I beseech you to believe it, and that I take you for a Gentleman of
worth and courage, which you have witnessed upon all occasions, and might have
given proof of, by ways which would have been more satisfactory to you, had
not the Nobility taken the pains to compose the business. I will add to this a
second favor which I desire of you, and shall account, if it be possible, a
greater obligation; it is Sir, that you would grant the pardon which I beg of
you for Monsieur de Vaucluse, since that I know with how much submission he
will wait upon you at your house, to testify how sorry we are, for your having
been so outragiously abused. And that you may the better perceive how much it
affects me; I bring those by whom you received this injury, to submit them to
whatever the Nobility shall appoint, and you can desire for your satisfaction.
I assure my self that you rightly judge by what I have said, and what I do,
that you have reason to forget what has offended you. You will extremely oblige
me to be satisfied with it, and to be my friend, as I desire it of you with all
my heart.

After that Monsieur the Count of Sault shall have said thus, he that is
President in the Assembly, addressing himself to Monsieur de Boissat, shall say
to him, Sir, You have sufficiently seen by the discourse which Monsieur the
Count of Sault has made unto you, with what grief he resents the wrong that
has been done you, and with what passion he desires you would remain
satisfied. This Company believes, that you cannot defuse what he desires of
you, and does with him beg of you, to cast away the remembrance of what is
past, and to receive the offers which he makes you of his affection. Whereupon
Monsieur de Boissat shall say to M. the Count of Sault, Sir, I give to the
repentancewhich you manifest, and to the prayer of these Gentlemen, that which
you desire of me, And at the same time M. the Count of Sault shall desire to
embrace him, which being done, when he with draws from the Assembly, he shall
leave behind him those of his Guards and Domestics, which he is to submit, and
then he that is President of the Assembly, shall command the Guard to present
themselves without Arms, and to fall on their knees before the Sieur de
Boissat, and say to him, Sir, This Company has condemned t^ese of the Guard
that have stricken you to as long imprisonment as you shall think fit. And
after that the Sieur de Boissat has Declared his pleasure, the President shall
send them away, and cause the servants to be brought in; who falling on their
knees the Sieur de Boissat shall take a cudgel from the hand of the President
and use it, as he shall think fit.

The same day the Sieur de Vaucluse, in the company of three or four Gentlemen
of the Assembly, shall go to the Sieur de Boissat at his own house and say to
him, Sir, I come hither to beg your pardon in the presence of these Gentlemen,
and to offer you all the submissions that a Gentleman can do, for your
satisfaction. Mine shall be perfect, if you believe me your servant, as I
beseech you to do. To which the Sieur de Boissat shall answer, Sir, I have
promised to M. the Count of Sault, and the Nobility to forget all that is
passed in this business.

And after this the Gentlemen that are present shall make them embrace.

The judgment of the Nobility contained in this writing was punctually
observed, saving that M. de Boissat made no use of the judgment which they gave
him against the Guard, nor of the cudgel toward the servants, out of the
respect he was pleased to show to the Assembly, and out of his own generosity.
At Grenoble, the 15th of February 1638. Monsieur the Marquis of Bressieux,
nominated by by the Company President for the time, signed thus in the Original,

BRESSIEVX-MONTEILHER. MEYPIEU, LA MARCOUSSE, LA CHARFE, BOISSIEU DE SALVAIN,
L'ESTANG, CHATTE, EIDOCHE, S. JULLIEN, PARIS, MONTFERRIER, LES ADRESTS, LA
BASTIE, MONTFALCON, BOVIERES, MARCIEU, LORAS, CHAMANIEU, MOYRANS, DEAGEANT DE
VIRE, alias DEAGEANT DE BANNETTES, ROLLIGNY, LA PIERRE, MONTENARD, MIRIBEL, DE
ROCHEBLAVE, RALHANETTES, DE LA BLACHE, DE CALIGNON, ASPREMONT, DE LANGES,
BONREPOS, H. FERRAND, DE REPELLIN IANSAC, SERVIERE, S. ANDRE, S. ANDRE DEPORTE,
VALLAMBERT, LANGON, ASPRES ROMME DU PONT DES OLERES, CHAMBRIER, DELISLE, LA
PENE DE CHARYAYS, DE RUYNAC, C. ROMME, SOUGIER, DE LIONNE, BOFFIN, ARMAND, DE
VILLARS DE VILLIERS DE BENANIN, DU THAU, CLAVESON, DE MOTET, DE MONIERES, DE
LOVAT, GRESSE, DE LA MORTE: BARDONANCHE DE REVOL. A Copy compared with the
Original, Signed, DU FOUR DE LA REPARA Secretary to the Nobility.

The other Gentlemen, to the number of above sixty, being returned home, some
one, some two days after the Assembly, according to their affairs, it could
not in so short a time be Signed by a greater number then those sixty four, or
sixty five, which are there under written.




An Answer to the Letter written by Mounsieur du Boissat, to the Gentlemen of
the Academie.
SIR,
I was commanded by the Gentlemen of the Academy, to write this Letter to you,
to thank you in their name for that which M. de Serizay gave them from you; and
for the Copy of the act, which came along with it. They therein learnt with
contentment how your interests have been dear to the Nobility of Dauphine, and
with what care they procured you the satisfaction you have received; All the
Company found your complaints just, and your resentment lawful. But if the evil
were great, it must be confessed also, that the remedy which was brought thereto,
is extraordinary; and they think you could not have refused it, without doing
wrong to your self, and offending those who provided it for you with so much
wisdom, and judgment. They believe then that you had reason to yield to the
advice and prudence of those Gentlemen, and that you could not have more sure,
nor more illustrious Cautions of the reparation of your honor, then so many
persons to whom it is more precious then their own lives, who perfectly
understand the Laws of it, and are, to use your own terms the most able to make
new ones, as they have manifested upon this occasion. In a word, Sir, they
think a Gentleman cannot be treated more gloriously then you have been by all
those of your profession, Who in this Agreement, appeared no less your
Protectors then your Judges; and they do promise themselves a particular
advantage by it, namely, to see you here very shortly, where they will
themselves testify to you, how much they praise God that this affair is so
happily ended; but in the interim whilst they expect you, they thought fit to
give you this testimony, which you desired, of their judgment, and affection,
by the pen

Sir, Your most humble and most affectionate servant, CONRART.


This is all, if I be not decieved, that has been written hitherto to the
French Academie, or done in its honor. But as I was in this part of my
Relation, there happened one thing, which deserves to be added, and will show
you in what esteem this Company is at this day in foreign Countries. The
Intronati of Sienna vaunt that a learned man, by name Thomas, of the City of
Bergve in Norway, sent by his Prince to search out the greatest rarities of
Italy; came on purpose into their City, with Letters of Recommendations from
the famous Vicenzo Pinells of Padua, to see their Company, and to have a Copy
of their Statutes. The French Academie received some few days since an honor
that may be accounted far greater. The Baron Spar, a great Lord of Swedland,
signified to them by Monsieur Tristan, that he desired to salute them, and
being brought in, he made his Complement to them, (as I find it in the
Registers,) in terms not only pure, Reg. May 15. 1652.
and very good French; but also very elegant. He assured them, both of the
extreme desire that he had to see their Assembly, as one of the most remarkable
things in Paris, and the Kingdom; and of the particular esteem which the Queen
his Mistress had of their Body, concerning whom she never failed to ask what
news of all those that return from France into Swedland. The Director answered
for them all, as the Civility of this Baron deserved, and the rare qualities of
that most Noble Princess, whom we may justly Style the Ornament of our age,
and the principal glory of learning. The Ba^on, whom they made to sit at the
left hand of the Director, in the Secretaries place then ab^ent, was present
also at the reading an Ode of Horace translated by Monsieur Tristan. After
which he withdrew, and was reconducted by the Officers, together with the other
Academiciens, to the gate, where were M. de Racan and de Boisrobert to receive
him with Monsieur Tristan.

THE FIFTH PART. OF the Academiciens in Particular.
I am come at length to the last part of my work, which re pects the
Academiciens in particular. In it, I will observe this Order. First, I will
tell you when and upon what occasion each Academicien was received into the
Company, since its first Establishment: then I Will speak of those that are
already dead: and lastly I will add something of those that are living.

I call them Academiciens, because they themselves chose this name in the
Assembly of the 12th. of Feb. 1635; Reg. Feb. 12. 1635.
that of Academists, which was also propounded having bin rejected because of
other Significations which it o^dinarily has.

I told you in the beginning, that those which gave birth to the Academie by
their private and familiar meetings, were M. Godeau, now Bishop of Grass M. de
Gombauld, M. Giry, M. Chapelain, Messeiurs Habert, M. Conrart, M. de Serisay
and M. de Maleville. To these were joined M. Faret, M. Desmarests, and M. de
Bo^srobert. After that the Cardinal would make a Body of them, there were
added many persons at several times, as M. de Bautru, M. S^lhon, M. de Sirmond,
Monsieur the Abbot de Bourzey, M. de Meziriac, M. Maynard, M. Colletet, M. de
Gomberville, M. de S. Amant, M. de Colomby, M. Baudoin, M. de l'Esto^le, and M.
de Porcheres d'Arband, saving that the absence of some of these Gent^emen
hindered them from receiving this honor. Then began they to make orderly
meetings, and to keep a Register, which shows at what time each of the other
Academiciens were admitted.

The first was Monsieur Servien, M. Servien Reg. Mrrch 13. 1634.
then Secretary of Estate, afterward Plen^potentiarie and Ambassador for the
peace at Munster, and Minister of Estate of whom it is said thus in the Register
of March the 13. 1634. The Academie thinking it self honored with the entreaty
of M. Servien, Secretary of Estate, to be admitted into it, ordered that he
should be thanked for it, and assured that he should be admitted when ever he
pleases. He comes thither afterward on the tenth of April, Reg. April 10.
1634.
excuses himself for not having bin present sooner, by reason of some important
affairs in which he was employed, makes his complement to the Academie, and
receives an answer from the mouth of the Director; But I pass over in two
words all these things, that I may not be excessive long.

M. de Bardin Reg. March 13. 634.
The same day, March 13. 1634. in which M. Servien was propounded, M. de
Bo^srobert showed a Letter which he wrote of his own head to M. de Balzac.
Wherein he advertised him of the Cardinal's design for the establishment of the
Academie, adding, That if he desired to be admitted into it, he might signify
so much to the Company by his Letters, and that he doubted not but they would
willingly grant it to him, in consideration of his worth. This was done to
execute a resolution which was lately made, not to admit any one that did not
desire it, which is still observed. What followed, appears not in the
Registers, but infallibly M. de Balzac upon his answer was received soon after
into the Academie, and I find that in the year 1636. he read there some part of
his Prince; which he then called, the Minister of Estate.

M. Bardin. Reg. March 27. Apr^l 3. 1634.
Monsieur Bardin, who was of the number of those, which they cast their eyes
upon at first, was received next; after that he had excused himself of some
coldness which he was said to have shown in the business, and assured the
Company of the displeasure he took at that false report which had bin raised of
him.

Those which were admited; next after him, M. de Vagelas, Vo ture, Porcheres
Laugier. Reg. Nov. 6. 27. and Dec. 4. 1634. Reg. Ybid. Reg. Jau. 12. 1635.
are M. de Boissat M. de Vagel is M. de Vo^ture and M. de Porcheres Laugier.
But at the reception of this last, who was propounded by M. de Malleville,
there were two orders made, which I must not omit. The first, that for the
future they should give their votes at Elections, by balls and not by word of
mouth, as they had done hitherto. The second that they should not admit any
Academicien, that had not bin presented to the cardinal, and received his
approbation. I have bin told since, that he did not love M. de Porcheces
Laugier, looking upon him as a man that had bin intimate with his greatest
enemies, that therefore he was very much troubled at this election: that they
offered him to revoke it, and that he had so much moderation as to be satisfied
with an order for the future. This rule has bin observed hitherto, both for
him, and for the Chancellor, since he was Protector, upon the propounding of
it by Monsieur de la Chamber. Nov. 27. 1646. It was, Reg. Nov. 27, 1646.
if I be not deceived to appease the Cardinal that M. de Porcheres Laugier
made such haste to make his speech before his own turn came, in the place of M.
de Serizay, and took for the subject of his discourse the praises of the
Academie and its Protector, as you saw before.

M. de Montmor and M. de la Chamber. Reg. Jan. 2. 1635.
Monsieur Habert de Montmor, Master of Requests, and M. de la Chamber were
received a little while after, and both at once. And I find that January 2.
1635. M. de la Chamber came thither first, and that M. de Cor^sy speaking for
his Cousin M. de Montmor, gave thanks to the Company for the favor they di^ him
the last Sitting, and assured them he would come and take h s place there as
soon as he returned from a voyage he was to make to S. Germain.

'Twas on the same day, Jan. 2. 1635. that they propounded the making of the
Discourses, and that to this purpose they drew a Catalogue of the Academiciens,
which I told you of before. They would be ranked in it by lot without having
any regard to the difference of their qualities. And for my part, I assure you
also, that when I happen to name many of them together in this relation, I
place them likewise by lot, that is, according as their names come into my mind
by chance, so that from thence you must not make any consequence.

This Catalogue which was of thirty six persons being shown to the Lord Keeper
of the Seals now Chancellor of France, M. the Chancellou^. Reg Jan. 8. 1635.
he sent word to the Company by M. de Cerisy, that he desired to be comprised
in it. 'Twas ordered that his name should be written in the front, as I told
you elsewhere. And that M. de Montmor, du Chastelet, and the three Officers
should go and give him most humble thanks for the honor he did the whole
Company* In this occasion, M. de Serisay, who was the Director, was speaker,
and they say, discharged it wonderful well. His speech was read eight days
after in the Assembly. 'Twas said he gave a Copy of it, to be kept amongst the
works of the Academie, but whatever were the cause of it, neither this peech,
nor many others which he made upon several occasions, during that long time he
was Director, wherein he satisfied a^l men to the utmost, are to be sound nor
saw I so much as one of them amongst the papers that were communicated to me.

They received next, M. The Abbot de Chambon. Reg. Feb. 26. 1635. M. Granier
Reg. Sept. 3. 1635.
Monsieur the Abbot de Chambon, Brother to M. du Chastelet: and six months
after or thereabouts, M. Granier. He was elected by balls, which were all for
him, except three. The event showed that the three which would have excluded
him were not to blame; for I find in the Registers that on the 14th. of May
following, upon the Proposition that was made thereof by the Director, in the
name of the Cardinal, he was depo^ed for some ill action by a Common consent,
and without hope to be restored. It would have in it perhaps somewhat of
inhumanity to dwell any longer upon this matter, he being still alive, and as
they say, wholly given to devotion, although the book entitled, The Estate of
France in the year 1652, has put him amongst the Academiciens that are dead. It
shall suffice me to tell you, not to return to him again, that he was an
Ecclesiastical person; a Native, as I am to d of the County of Bresse, a man
of a handsome aspect, good wit and pleasant conversati n together with much
knowledge and good Learning. That he might settle Paris, he associated himself
with a stationer, named Chapelain, and afterward with another named
Bouillerot: and having been curious of good Manuscripts, he set forth some of
them that were very rare; To him we owe The memoires of Queen Margaret, and
those of Monsieur de Villeroy, the Letters of Cardinal d'Ossat, and of
Monsieur de Foix. He caused these Books to be printed, and corrected, with the
greatest care that was possible, made many presents of them, was very neat in
his house, very civil and officious toward ingenious and learned persons, who
for this reason were very willingly at his house, where he had as 'twere a kind
of Academie. All these things brought him into repute, and made him known,
first to the Chancellor, who gave him a pension and afterward to the Cardinal,
who was plea^ed that M. de Boisrobert should propound him to be of the Academie.

M. Giry. Reg. Jan. 14. 1636.
The first that was received after him was Monsieur Giry. For though he were of
those Assemblyes of friends at M. Conrarts, he had retired himself, and was not
called when they began to make a body of the Academie. I find in the Registers
that he was propounded then by M. de Bo^srobert in the name of the Cardinal,
who judged him worthy to be of it, upon the reading of his Translation of
Tertullians Apologetick. The number of forty was not not yet full. In the
interim, Monsient Bardin and Monsieur Chastelet dyed almost at the same time,
and left two new places void.

They repaired this double loss by receiving M. Bourbon, and M. d'Ablancourt.
M. Bourbon and M. d'Ablancourt. Reg. Sept. 23. 1637. Reg. March 25. 1638. M.
Esprit and M. de la Mothe le Vayer. Reg. Feb. 14. 1639. M. de Priezac. M.
Patru. Reg. Sept. 3. 1640. M. de Besons. Reg. Jan. 26. 1643.
There dyed besides, about the same time two other Academiciens, M. Habert
Commissarie of the wars and M. de Meziriac.

They received then and on the same day Monsieur Esprit and M. de la Mothe le
Vayer; Fortune placed them as I name them. And at last to fill up the sole
place that remainder of the number of forty, they propounded, in the same
Assembly, M. de Priezac Coun^ellor of Estate, who was admitted eight days after.

Those which have been received since, are M. Patru in the place of M. de
Porcheres d Arbaud.

Mousieur de Besons, then chief Advocat General in the Grand Counsel, now
Counselor of Estate in Ordinary, in the place of the Chancellor, when he was
made Protector after the Cardinal's death.

M. de Solomon. Reg. Aug. 12 1644.
Monsieur de Solomon, then also advocat General in the Grand Coun^ell, in the
place of M. Bourbon. He was preferred before M. Corneille who had desired the
same place. The Protector ^ent the Academie word, that he eft them their
Liberty of choi^e; and you will judge by the sequel that they determined thus,
because M. Corneille making his abode at Province, could scarce ever be present
at Assemblyes, and discharge the function of an Academicien.

M. du Ryer Reg. Nov. 21. 1646.
I say you will judge by the sequel, for since, M. Faret being dead they propounded
on the one side the same M. Corneille and on the other M. du Ryer, and the last
was preferred. Now the Register in this place mentions a resolution the
Academie had taken; Of two persons, where both of them are sufficiently
qualified, always to prefer him that makes his residence at Paris.

M. Corneille.
M. Corneille was nevertheless received at last, in the place of M. Maynard for
that he sent word to the Academie that he had so Ordered his affairs, that he
might spend one part of the year at Paris. M. de Balesdens was propounded also:
and as he had the honor to belong to the Chancellor, the Academie had this
respect for their Protector, to send five Academiciens to him, to know whether
these two proposalls were equally acceptable to him. The Chancellor answered
that he would leave the Company to their absolute Liberty. But when they began
to deliberate about this business; M. the Abbot of Cerisy, presented them a
Letter of M. Balesdens full of very many, civilities to them and to M.
Corneille whom he desired the Company would be pleased to prefer before him
protesting that he gave him this honor as being his due in all respects. M.
Balesdens
The Letter was read and commended by the Assemb^y and afterward he was
received in the first vacant place, which was that of M. de Malleville, but I
find not on what day: or from that time the long and frequent indispositions of
the Secretary to the Academie, have left a great vacuum in the Registers. So
that I have not seen any thing of this reception, Messieurs de Mezeray,
Montereul, Tristan, Scudery, Doujat.
no more then of the five following, namely of Messieurs de Mezeray, de
Monterul, de Tristan, de Scudery and Doujat: All that I could learn of them, is
that they succeeded Messieurs de Voiture, de Sirmond, de Colomby, de Vaugelus,
and Baro.

Afterward M. Charpentier was received in the place of M. Baudo^n, M.
Charpentier. Reg. Jan. 7. 1651.
after that they had read a Letter of the Chancellor's then absent, by which he
signified to M. de Balesdens that he approved this Election, upon the knowledge
that was given him of the merit of him that was propounded, and upon reading
the book which was sent him. 'Twas The life of Socrates, and the memorable
passages of that Philosopher, translated out of Xenophon's Greek.

M. the Abbot Taleman.
Monsieur the Abbot Taleman, Almoner to the King, succeeded also afterward M.
de Montereul.

Reg. May 10. 1651. M. the Marquess of Coastin. Reg. 18. and 21. May, and June
1. 1652.
Lastly, as I was writing this Relation, Monsieur de l'Estoile being lately
dead, the Chancellor sent to desire the vacant place for the Marquess of
Coaslin, his grandchild, thinking he could not better cultivate the
inclination, and the great hopes which this young Lord gave for all excellencies
befitting him. Yet he sent word to the Company with a great deal of civility,
that he desired it as a favor, and that he did not intend this reception
should be a precedent, nor that it should be done in any other manner then the
former. And indeed the Company having gladly received this Proposition, the
election was made eight days after by balls, which were all for him: and 'twas
ordered, that the Academy should go in a Body to thank the Chancellor for the
honor he had done them, which was performed presently, and received by him
with extreme civility.

I have now told you all that have been received into the Academy since its
Institution. You observe doubtless that the number of forty, whereof 'twas to
be composed, was not full till the reception of Monsieur de Priezac, in the
year 1639. 5. or 6, years after its first establishment, M. Patru, who was the
first received afterward, at his entrance into the Company, made there a very
excellent Oration of thanks, which gave so good satisfaction, that it obliged
all that were received afterward, to do the like. There are amongst the Papers
of the Academy thirteen of these gratulatory Orations, namely those of
Messieurs Patru, de Bezons, de Solomon, Corneille, Balesdens, de Mezeray, de
Montereul, Tristan, Scudery, Doujat, Charpentier, the Abbot Taleman, and the
Marquess of Coastin. But of this great number of Academiciens, not to speak of
the Chancellor who of an Academicien, is become Protector of the Company,
whose Elogies shall be seen in Histories more important, and more famous then
this; seventeen are dead: concerning each of whom I think it not amiss to
speak somewhat in particular. And if I should follow mine own inclination, this
part of my work would be excessive long; for I confess, I have an extreme and
insatiable curiosity for every thing that can let me know the manners, Genius,
and fortune of extraordinary persons; and that I am even guilty of so much
weakness as to study many times in Books, the spirit of the Author far more
then the matter which he treats of. But I will not forget that I write more for
others, then for my self, and that this is the History of the Academy, and not
of the Academiciens, of whom, to say the truth, I ought not to speak any more
then is necessary for you to judge of the whole Body by some of its members.
Monsieur Colletet, who is one of them himself, will one day supply this defect,
and without question will not forget his friends and brethren in the Lives of
the French Poets, in which he has already far advanced.

The seventeen that art dead, are; Bardin. Du Chastelet. Ha^ert, Commissary of
the wars. De Meziriac. Porcheres d'Arbaud. Bourbon. Faret. Maynard. De
Malleville. De Voiture. de Sirmond. De Colomby. De Vaugelas. Baro. Baudoin.
Monte^eul. De l'Estoile.


MONSIEUR BARDIN.
When Monsieur Bardin left the first place royal in the Academy, the Company
ordered, that there should be performed for him a Service in the Church des
Billettes, and that there should be also composed for him an Elogie succinct
and without affectation of praises, which should be as 'twere an abridgment of
his life. Some days after 'twas added that there should be a^^o made for him
two Epitaphs one in Prose, the other in Verse, and that the same should be
observed at the death of every Academicien. Monsieur de Grass was appointed to
make the Elogie, M. Chapelain the Epitaph in prose, and M. the Abbot de Cerisy
that in verse. Methinks I cannot do better than relate to you here these three
pieces, which are neither so long, nor of such a style as to displease you. And
if rthat general rule which was then made, had been afterward as exactly
executed, as 'twas judiciously established it would have been no hard matter
for me to speak of the Academiciens that are dead. Those Elogies would have
either made my labor needless, or have furnished me with excellent good
memoires. But it is the Genius of the French to make very good Rules and keep
them very ill. They have scarce put in practice anything of it; but what
respects the Service; the rest, which might have instructed Posterity, and have
contributed to the glory, as well of the particular members, as of the whole
Body, has been left undone; through a negligence worthy of blame, and
altogether mis-beseeming this illustrious Society.

THE ELOGIE OF M. BARDIN
THE French Academy thought of nothing but composing Songs of triumph, for his
Majesty's victories, when it was forced to go into mourning and bewail the
loss of PETER BARDIN, one of its most illustrious Ornaments. He was born in
the year 1590. in the chief City of Normandy, of Parents, that left him a more
advantageous portion of the goods of the mind, than of those of fortune. He
received from them a life which he has lost, and he returned them a glory which
shall never he extinguished. He took the first tincture of piety, and good
letters amongst the Fathers the Jesuits. Even then his Masters judged, he would
prove a man more than ordinary: But as the fruits of the Autumn do many times
surpass the promises of the Spring: so his actions and his writings taught
them since, that they did not conceive hopes high enough of him. He would not
study to become learned, but to be more good, and he took less care to enrich
his memory, than to polish his reason, and regulate his manners. He was fit for
all kind of Learning, but he addicted himself particularly to Philosophy and
the Mathematics, with so good success as kindled jealousy in the most able.
The love of soverain Truth casting him upon the study of Divinity, he stopped not
but at the clear and wholesome springs, from whence he drew those beams which
did enlighten and yet not dazzle him. After he had collected much treasure from
Authors both sacred and profane; he believed he should commit a piece of
theft, if he were not liberal therewith. The first fruits of his pen were
consecrated to the glory of God by the Paraphrase of Ecclesiastes which he
composed and entitled PENSEES MORALES. In this work the dignity of the subject
is maintained with an Elocution strong without rudeness; rich, without
ornament; curious and handsome, without affectation. It was generally received
with extraordinary applause. Envy it self spoke not a syllable against him, or
if it did, it was in secret. This encouraged him to make another Present to
posterity, which was the first and second parts of his LYCEE, in which
describing an Honest man, he drew his own picture ere he was aware. He was in
travel of the third, when an unexpected accident snacht him from France, in the
two and fortieth year of his age, and deprived posterity of the fruits of his
studies. He had the conduct of Monsieur d'Humieres in his youth, and afterward
dwelt with him, to assist him with his Counsel in his most important affairs,
which he embraced as his own. He gave a very good testimony that he loved him
passionatly; for seeing him in danger to be drowned, be ran to his succor, not
considering that in such encounters charity is commonly dangerous. Fear of the
danger wherein he saw a person that was so dear to him, confounding him, he
lost both his strength and breath; so that he was not able to resist the
impetuosity of the waters, which turning in the place where he was lost, made a
whirlepool in the midst of one of the most calm, and gentle Rivers of the
world. This misfortune would have disquieted his friends for the state of his
soul, had not the integrity of his life assured them that he was always
prepared for death; there could not be a more lamentable kind of death, nor a
more glorious cause. He was of a most sweet conversation, and he knew so well
to temper the severity of his Virtue, that it was not offensive to any one.
Although his estate were less then he deserved, yet he thought it high enough,
and to make it better, would not stoop to any of those servile diligences which
custom has rendered almost honorable. Eight days before his death, he spoke
in the Academy, and his soul was elevated to so high a pitch, that one might
judge from thence that he began to untack himself from matter, and that he drew
nigh his Center. His stature was moderate, the color of his hair and visage
showed a just temperament of that melancholy, which Philosophers call wise and
ingenious. The Academy did solemnly perform their devoirs to him, which Piety
obliged them to, and 'twas a long time ere they could dry their tears. The
regret which he begat even in those that knew him not, was a consolation to his
friends; and the public sadness, was a remedy to their private grief. For a
stately Monument, they preserved the memory of his name in their souls,
endeavoring to follow his example, and had no thoughts sweeter then those
which represented to them his Virtue.

The Epitaph on Monsieur BARDIN.
STAY Passenger, and weep. Who e're thou art, thou have lost a friend, if thou
be one to knowledge and to virtue. It Is PETER BARDIN, worthy of all other
honor but that of a grave; Nevertheless comfort thy self, thou have not lost
him quite, the better part of him remains, I might say, all, if thou had all
his HONEST MAN which he had begun to frame in his LYCEE. Thou want nothing
of him, but what is wanting of that Book; yet thou may finish it, if thou
know his life. Alas! he was taken away in the two and fourtyeth year of his
age; I dare not say, unhappily, since it was with glory. Seeing his Benefactor
ready to be drowned, he threw himself in, to help him. He dyed, and he for whom
he was afraid, dyed not. The danger was innocent, and the fear was mortal.
This accident surprises thee, it did not surprise him. He was always ready and
his sudden death did only shorten his griefs and hasten his felicity. But I am
injurious in staying you, to teach you his praises: pass on, go wither thou will, there are few places upon earth, where you will not hear them.

The other Epitaph.
Bardin repose en paix au creux de ce tombean,
Un trespass avanoc le ravit a la torre,
Le liquide element luy declara la guerre
Et de ses plus beaux jours eteignit le flambean,
Mais son esprit exempt des outrages de l'onde,
S' envola glorieux loing des peines du monde,
Au palais immortel de la felicite.
Il eut pour but l'honneur, le savoir pour partage,
Et quand au fond des eaux, il fut precipite,
Les verus avec luy firent toutes naufrage.
That is, Bardin does rest in peace within this Tomb,
A too too sudden death snatched him away.
The liquid Element his Foe become,
And quenched, alas! the torch of his bright day,
But his brave soul free from the outrages
O'th waves, is fled unto the^ Court of bliss.
'Twas Honor that he made his mark and Crown,
Knowledge the portion that his Parents left,
And when to th'water's bottom he sunk down,
Each Virtue was with him of life bereft.


I scarce know what to add to this Elogie and these Epitaphs. Those that knew
this Gentleman, say he was really such as you see him there de^cribed, and do
give very honorable Testimony of his virtue. His writings sufficiently manifest
all the rest, and the beauty of his mind appears in that of his expressions,
and Sty e, which perhaps has no other fault but that it is a little too
diffuse. I have bin told of some other works of his, which I have not seen, nor
are they mentioned in the Elogy. They are, The great Chamberlain of France,
dedicated to the Duke de Chevreuse, and printed at Paris by du Val in the year
1623. A book dedicated to the King, and a reasonable long Letter concerning the
possession of the Nuns of Londun. He had resolved to entitle his Lycee, THE
HONEST MAN, and was troubled that Monsieur Faret to whom he communicated his
design, had prevented him, and made use of that title himself.

MONSIEUR DU CHASTELET.
Paul Hay in Sieur du Chastelet, was of the ancient house of Hay in Bretagne;
which glories that it sprung six hundred years ago from that of the Earls of
Carlisle, one of the most illustrious families of Scotland. He was at first
advocate General to the Parliament of Rennes, and afterward Counselor of
Estate in ordinary. He had likewise very honorable employment, at the
Commission to establish the Parliament at Pau; and in the year 1635. the
Intendance of justice in the Kings Army, where the late King, Louis 13. the
Court of Soissons, and the Cardinal de Richelieu, were in person. He was
nominated to be one of the Commissioners in the trial of the Marshall de
Marillae; but the Marshall excepted against him, as his Capital Enemy, and
one that had made a Latin Satyr in riming prose as well against him, as against
his Brother the Lord Keeper of the Seals. It has bin reported of him since,
that he denied before the King, and that with an Oath, that he was the Author
of that piece that yet afterward when the same exception was made against him
another time, he owned what he had formerly denied. Whereupon the King in
choler caused him to be Clapped up. As for his own part, in the Observations
which he had made upon the trial of Marillac, he only protests, that he never
made any Oath before the King, without saying any thing more of that business.
But I know very well what he has said of it to his most familiar friends, and I
have had very private memoires concerning it, which in a word may be reduced to
this; that being desirous to withdraw himself out of the number of the judges,
he himself caused that Petition of the Marshals excepting against him to be
suggested, and that his artifice being discovered, by some potent persons that
were his Enemies, raised the Kings displeasure. Most certain it is, that after
the last petition of exception, which was presented against him at Ruel, where
the trial was, he was committed by the King who was then at S. Germain, and
carried the same day to Villepreux: and that during his imprisonment, to make
his peace at Court, he wrote those Obervations I spoke of, which got him his
Liberty. Afterward he collected diverse pieces of several Authors in defense
of the King and his Officers, and printed them with this title. A Collection of
pieces useful for a History, and put before it that long Preface, which is as
'twere an Apology for the Cardinal de Richelieu. He was a man of a good aspect,
of a hot Spirit, and very resolute; he spoke and writ very well, and did
infinitely love the excercises of the Academie. And it is said they were not
unprofitable to him, and that there appears a vast difference between those
pieces he wrote before, and those he wrote after the establishment of this
Body. 'Twas he that read, there, the first discourse of the twenty, which I
formerly mentioned: I say, that read there; for through having gone through many
Offices, and in particular that of advocate General, he was always accustomed
to speak in public, he protested that never any Assembly appeared more awful
to him then this, and therefore he made use of the Liberty which the Statute
gives to all the Academiciens, to read their Orations, if they please, instead
of speaking them, I have heard some sayings which are said to be his, that me
thinks deserve to be related. When Monsieur de Bouteville's trial was, he made
a Factum for him, which was as eloquent as bold, and the Cardinal having
objected to him, that it was to condemn the justice of the King, Pardon me,
said he to him, it is to justify his mercy, if he be so good as to make use of
it toward one of the valiantest men in his Kingdom. One day, as he accompanied
Monsieur de Saint Preuil, who solicited the Duke of Montmorency's pardon, and
expressed much zeal for it, the King said to him, I believe that Monsieur du
Chastelet would have lost an arm to save M. de Montmorency. I would Sir, have
lost them both; answered he, (for they are unable to do you service,) and have
saved one, that has won you battaills, and might yet win you more. At his
coming out of prison, the Cardinal making some excuse for his confinement, I
make a great difference, answered he, between the evil your Eminence does, and
that which it permits; and shall be never the less obliged to serve you. And a
little while after being carried to the Kings Chapel, who did not look upon
him, nay it seems did on purpose turn his head another way, as if out of a kind
of shame, to see a man whom he had lately treated in that manner; He stepped to
Monsieur de S. Simon, and said to him, I beseech you, Sir, tell the King I
forgive him with all my heart, and do desire he would do me the honor to look
on me. Monsieur de S. Simon told the King, who laughed at it, and afterward
was very kind to him. He dyed being forty three years and five months old,
April 6. 1636. of a quartan ague, and as I have heard some say, through the
Physicians fault, and for having bin too much blooded. He left works both in
Verse and Prose. That which I have seen in Verse, is the Advice to the absent,
against those that were then at Brussells with the Queen Mother, Mary de
Medicis, and Monsieur, the Kings only Brother; A pretty long Satyr, Against
the Court-life, which begins, Sous un calm trompeur, etc. which has bin falsely
attributed to Theophile; Another cruel and bloody Satyr, against a Magistrate,
under the name of * * *. His works in Prose are Prose rimee, or Prose in rhyme,
in Latin, against the Marillacs. Observations on the trial of the Marshal de
Marillac: The preface to The Collection of pieces, useful to a History. His
Style especially in this preface is magnifick and stately, perhaps even to
excess. He had begun another piece in answer to the Abbot of S. German, as I
said elsewhere; but he dyed before he had finished it, and what he did, was
never seen,

MONSIEUR HABERT.
PHILIP HABERT was of a very ancient fami^ie in Paris, of which there are at
this day some in the greatest offices belonging to the Robe, and it has had
very honorable alliances. Of five Brothers that were of them, this was the
second, and the Abbot of Cerisy the third. In his Childhood he gave tokens of
very much Genius for Learning but after he had finished his studies the
employments into which he entered, insensibly engaged him in the profession of
arms. The last, in which he dyed, was that of Commissarie of the Artillery,
which had bin given him by Monsieur de Mesteraie of whom he was extraordinarily
beloved. He was present at the most remarkable transactions of those times, at
the battle of Avein, at the passage of Bray, at the seiges of la Motte,
Nancy, and Landrecy. But in the year 1637. some troops of the French Army
having received order to besiege the Castle of Emery, betwixt Monts and
Valenciennes, as he was amongst the ammunition of war, which he had the conduit
of, a Soldiers march falling into a great barrel of powder, b^ew up a wall,
under whose ruins he was or'ewhelm'd. He was not then above two and thirty
pears old, his stature was indifferent, his hair flaxen, his eyes blue, his
visage pale, and pitted with the small pox. His aspect and conversation were
cold and serious; but he had a high fancy, great courage, and ardent passions
in so much, that I have bin assured, he was like to have dyed in good earnest,
for love of one of his Mistresses. He was courteous, discreet and judicious, a
person of honor and honesty; and all that knew him, speak of him as of a man
not only very amiable, but also worthy of a most particular esteem. The only
work that he has in print, is, The Temple of death, which is one of the most
handsomest pieces of our French Poetry. He made it for Monsieur de la
Mesteraie, on the death of his first wife, which was Daughter to Marshal
d'Effiat. He has left other verses in a Manuscript, but I have heard that they
are not altogether of the same strength, whether it be that a man cannot write
always with the like happiness, or that he had not leisure to correct, and
polish them, as he did the others, which he changed and rechang'd for the space
of three years, to bring them to that perfection in which we see them. He made
also a Relation in prose of the passages in Italy under the Marquis d'Uxelles,
General of the army which King Lewis the 13. sent to the succor of the Duke of
Mantua. The Academie caused an Elogie to be made on him by Monsieur de
Gombauld, and an Epitaph in verse by Monsieur Chapelain, which will hereafter
be seen with the rest of their works.

Monsieur DE MEZIRIAC.
CLAUDIUS CASPAR BACHET, Sieur de Meziriac was of Bresse, of a noble and
ancient Family. He was well made and of a handsome stature, had black eyes and
hair, a pleasant countenance, and conversation very sweet. He was learned in
the Languages and particularly in the Greek, he had a deep insight in
Mythologie, in Algebra, in the Mathematics, and other curious sciences. In his
youth he spent very much time at Paris and at Rome: in the latter of which, he
made many Italian verses, in emulation of Monsieur de Vaugelas, who was there
also, Afterward he retired to his house at Bourg in Bresse, and if we may
believe a common friend of ours that was very intimately acquainted with him,
he there led a life the most Charming that one can imagine. He was already
known, and accounted in France one of the prime men of his time, whether for
wit or learning, which was sufficient to satisfy a reasonable ambition, as his
was. As for his estate, it was at the first worth five or six thousand livres
rent, and at last eight or ten by the death of William Bachet his elder
Brother. He never troubled himself to get more, nay on the contrary he avoided
all public offices and employments, which others sought after with so much
care. Whilst he was yet at Paris, they talked of making him Tutor to the late
King Lewis 13. this was the reason that he made such have to quit the Court;
and he has said since, that he was never in so much pain, for he thought he had
already the heavy burden of a whole kingdom upon his shoulders. After he was
thus retired, he married, and though he might pretend to a very rich fortune,
he cho^e rather to take a wife without any Portion, but one of a good family,
handsome, and of very sweet conditions, and perfect^y agreeing with his own. He
never repented himself of this choice, and often took delight to talk of it
with his friends, as of the best choice that he ever made. Health, that
precious blessing which renders all others infinitely more acceptable, was not
wanting to him, and the only inconvenience was, that he had now and then some
light touches of the gout. But the principal part of his happiness consisted
in his disposition, for 'twas naturally facile, discreet, and moderate; always
merry, and displeas^d with nothing. There was not any Science, which he had not
applied himself to for some time, as I told you before; No handsome art, but he
understood, and could labor in it with his own hands; No person of what
quality soever, and even of his own domestiques, that he would not freely
discourse with. One might see him do all kind of exercises, according to the
season of the year, or the Company he was with, playing at cards, dice, and all
other games, in which he was skillfull even to the best niceties; dancing
amongst a Company of Ladies, and that with so much Liberty that he would often
have his Table Book carried after him, to write when he had a mind to it,
without leaving the Room where the Company was. With his free and familiar
humor, added to his merit, birth, and estate; he was not only beloved, but also
respected and revered of every one, and possessed a kind of Empire in his
Country. Nevertheless he abused it not, nor made use of it but for the good
and delight of those that gave it him. He diligently studied their inclinations
and their geniuses, and according as he judged them fit for any science or art,
he would put them upon it with all his power; and took delight to instruct them
in it, and conferr with them about it. And sometimes he would allot them parts
in plays. And to this purpose I remember I have often heard a friend of ours
relate at large, how he caused The shepearddesses, a Pastoral of Monsieur de
Racan's who was his intimate friend, to be acted by persons of quality, that
he himself picked out. First he altered it in some places, that the scene might
be the Country about Bourg in Bresse; then for the acting of it, he took a
dining room, where the windows being open on both sides, the spectators might
see the very places that were presented in little upon the Stage. The Engines,
which were of necessity to be in this play, to represent the Charms of a
Magician, were contrived and ordered with an extreme deal of care; And when a
certain fiery dragon began to appear, one of the actors fell into a swoun, and
most part of the Company trembled for fear lest the fire (as it often happens
in the like encounters,) should exceed its Commission. But the thing most to be
admired at, was, that he had chosen all the Actors fit for the parts he gave
them; and that almost all of them, having the same passions which they were to
represent, or at least being not far from them; they were as twere possessed
after an extraordinary manner. There was among the rest, a young man that
personated an afflicted Lover, and was himself an afflicted Lover, who upon
this occasion far surpassed all the Rosciusses, Aesops, and Montdories, and
weeping himself first, made the whole assembly weep. This then was the life of
this Academicien, which was not long: for he was scarce five and forty years
old when he dyed. He left Children and many works of all sorts.

There is of his a little book of Italian Poems, where there are imitations of
the best Comparisons, that are in the eight first books of the Aenieds.

Another Book of Lat^n Poems.

Many Poems in French. They are in the Collection of 1621. which is called The
delights of the French Poesy, and in that of the year 1627.

One Volume which contains part of Ovids Epistles, translated into French
Verse, with very learned Commentaries. There is one of them which he says was
translated twenty years before, by his Elder Brother William Bachet.

The true life of Aesop in French: I say, the true life, because that by
Planudes is by the learned accounted fabulous.

Diophantes translated out of the Greek into Latin, with Commentaries, which
our friend Monsieur de Fermat, and all that understand the Algebra, highly
esteem. He said himself, that he wondered how he was able to do it, and that he
should never have finished it, had it not bin for that Melancholy and obstinate
humor, which was brought upon him by a quartan ague he then had.

A Book of Arithmeticall Recreations dedicated to Monsieur de Tournon, wherein
he teaches all the tricks that may be done in play by number; and out of this
they have taken part of the Mathematical Recreations.

A treatise of Affection, translated out of Cacciaguerra's Italian.

His great work was the translation of Plutarch, which he undertook in
emulation of Amiot's, in which he pretended as I told you before, that he had
found an infinite number of faults. This work was almost finished, when he dyed,
and it is hoped we shall one day see it published. He cites often in his work. A
Commentary on Apollodorus which appears not, and very likely it is also amongst
his papers.

Of all the things he was skilled in, there was nothing he knew more thoroughly
and absolutely, then the Fabulous History, in which he was accounted amongst
the learned, the prime man of his age.

M. de PORCHERES D'ARBAUD.
If I have been too long in the life M. de Meziriac, I shall be very brief in
this, whereof I know but very little. FRANCIS DE PORCHERES D'ARBAUD was of
Provence, and was said to be descended of that ancient house of PORCHERES,
which Monsieur de Porcheres Laugier was also said to be of, although they never
acknowledged one another for kinsmen. He had been the disciple and follower of
Malherbe, and imitated him very much in his manner of Versifying. He was
Governor of a Son of Monsieur de Chenoise's; and since that, of a Son of the
Count of S. Heran's. Monsieur de Boisrobert, (of whom every one gives this
Testimony, that never any man that was in favor, delighted more in doing
good,) procured him a pension of six hundred Livers from the Cardinal de
Richelieu. He retired himself into Bourgogne, where he married and dyed. He made
many verses which have never been printed; some are, as The Psalms of degrees
and some others, which never came to my hands.

Monsieur BOURBON.
NICOLAS BOURBON, famous in this age for Latin Poetry, was a Native of Bar upon
Aube, the Son of a Physician and grand nephew of another Nicolas Bourbon, a
Latin Poet in the days of our Fathers, whose Elogie is to be seen in Paulus
Jovius, and Sanmarthanus; and who, being a smiths Son, among his other works
made a description of a Smiths forge, in a Book which he calls Nugae, and, by
the way, it is this Book, on which du Bellay made this merry Epigram.

Paul tuum inscribis Nugarum nomine librum.
In toto Libro nil melius Titulo.
This, of whom I have to speak, was in his youth instructed in human Learning
by Passeratius. His first public employment was to teach Rhetorique in the
College des Grassins, and afterward in that de Calvy, and then in that de
Harcour. But as he withdrew himse^f from this last, to live privately: Card. du
Perron, who was grand Almoner of France, having seen some verses of his making,
upon the death of Henry the great, nominated him to the place of Professor of
Greek eloquence in the Kings College in Critton's room. He was also Canon of
Langres, and in his old age, finding himself no longer able to take pains by
reason of his sickliness and particularly of an almost perpetual want of
sleep, which he was troubled with, he retired himself to the Company of the
Fathers of the Oratorie, but he would not be obliged to any of the duties, nor
so much as permit them to call him Father. Yet he wore the same habit as the
rest did, only he went alone with a secular servant. Whilst he belonged to one
of the Colleges, he was imprisoned, for having made a Latin Satyr, entitled
Indignatio Valeriana, against an Arrest of Parliament, which had suppressed a
certain piece of money called Droit de landy, which Professors took of their
Scholars. You may see this more at large in the Origines of Monsieur Menage
upon the word Landy. He earnestly desired to be of the Academie, and was
constantly there; although he made as 'twere another Academie at his own house,
through the concourse of several persons of all sorts, which his Learning and
worth drew thither. The Cardinal de Richelieu gave him a pension, and toward
the end of his days the last Bishop of Beauvais, of the House of Potier, who
had bin his Scholar, and was an Attendant of the Queen Regent's, Anne of
Austria, settled another pension on him. But he enjoyed it not long, for he dyed
very shortly after. I have heard him accused by many, of being a little too
much addicted to money; and that although he had forty or fifty thousand Livers
of ready money, which they found in a Chest of his after his death, yet he
seemed to be afraid of nothing so much as poverty, which was caused perhaps,
either from his old age, or from some considerable losses he had sustained. He
was in his youth a great friend of Regnier. He is commended for an excellent
memory, and it is said among other things, that he could say almost by heart all
Thuanus his History, and all the Elogies of Paulus Jovius. He was very
courteous, a great approver of other men's works, in the presence of the
Authors; but sometimes too, as I am told, a little pettish and omething too
sensible of injuries, which he imagined had bin done him. He was at odds with
Monsieur de Balzac, and wrote against him a Latin Letter, Andradae, that is, to
Monsieur Guyet, Prior of S. Andrade near Bourdeaux M. de Balzac answered him in
another Letter in French, addressed to the same M. Guyet, and printed in one of
his Volums: There it is that he makes this pretty allusion upon the quality of
his adversatie, who was accounted one of the Fathers of the Oratorie, and the
great Poet.

Heu vatem insanae mentis! quid vota furentem,
Quid delubra juvant?
Monsieur Chapelain reconciles them, upon which there are Latin Verses both of
the one and others making. He dyed at the age of about threescore and ten,
August 6. 1644.

There is of his a volume of works in Latin, with which there is a Collection
of Elogies made on him, which you make see. He was esteemed by the public, the
best Latin Poet of his time: and his Prose, though it has made less noise,
deserves perhaps no less praise then his Verse.

MONSIEUR FARET.
NICOLAS FARET was of Bresse, of a family little known. He came to Paris very
young with Letters of recommendation from M. de Merziriac to several ingenions
persons; amongst others, to Monsieur de Vangelas, and de Boisrobert. He applied
himself to these two, and to Monsieur Coeffetean, to whom he dedicates his
translation of Eutropius. He continued ar Paris a long time without getting any
employment. At length, Monsieur de Boisrobert and some others of his friends
preferred him to be Secretary to the Count of Harcour. 'Twas a place in
appearance little advantageous; for this Prince had not as yet an allowance
answerable to his birth, and the whole House of Lorrain was at that time out of
favor. However it happened that Faret contributed to the good fortune of his
master, and therein to his own. For as he often saw M. de Boisrobert, he
persuaded him that the Cardinal, to divide the the House of Lorraine, which
was an enemy to him, could not do better, then to draw to his side this
Prince, who was already upon no good terms both with his Elder Brother Monsieur
d'Elboeuf, and his mother; and who in the condition wherein he stood, would the
more easily be brought to be at the commands of the Court. The Cardinal
embraced this counsel, took into his alliance the Count of Harcour, and
afterward bestowed on him great employments. Faret who had always lived with
him with very much familiarity, and more like a friend then a domestique,
shared in this prosperity. He married twice very richly, especially the last
time. They say, he dyed very well to pass, though out of a laudable gratitude,
he diverse times engaged himself to help Monsieur de Vaugelas in his wants;
which had well nigh made him ruin his own estate. He dyed aged about fifty
years, of a Malignant fever, after he had endured very much. He left one Son by
his wife, and other Children by his second. He was a man of a good Complexion,
somewhat fat and gross, of a Chestnut colored hair, and high colored visage.
He was a great friend of Mol^ere's, the Author of Polyxena, and of Monsieur de
S. Am^nt, who has commended him in his ver^es, as a brave good fellow. However
he was nothing near so much, as a man would guess from thence, although he did
nor hate good cheer and mirth; and he ^aies himself somewhere in his works,
that the fitness of his name to time with Cabaset [which signifies a
tipling-house] was partly the cause of this report, which M. de S. Amant had
rai^ed of him. A man may perceive by reading his writings that he had an
excellent wit, very much of purity and cleanness in his Sty^e and a good genius
for Language and eloquence. His principal work is The honest man, which he
made about the year 1633. It has been translated into Spanish. This book
deserves to have its A^thor es^eemed, for that being judiciously assisted by
the writings of such as were before him and particularly the Count Balihasar
Cast^glio; he has collected in a little room, and explained in very elegant
terms, a great deal of good counsel for all sorts of persons, and especially
Courtiers.

He has left also his Translations of Eutropius, dedicated, as I told you but
now, to Monsieur Coeffeteau, who ever since highly esteemed him for his
Language. He collected two Volumes of Letters of several Authors, amongst
which there are many of his own.

He made but few verses, neither am I certain that he has any more then an Ode
to Cardinal de Richelieu, which is in The sacrifice of the Muses; and a sonnet
which is to be seen in Nostre-Dame Church; with a Picture for a vow which he
made in Piemont at the Combat de la Route, where he was with his Master.

MONSIEUR MAYNARD.
FRANCIS MAYNARD, a Tolosain, was of a very good family. His Grandfather John
Maynard, a Native of S. Cere, though born in an age when Learning but began to
revive in France, in the reign of Francis the first, was in esteem for his
Learning, and wrote Commentaries on the Psalms, which are still extant.

From him issued Gerard Maynard, Counselor in the Parliament of Tolose, a great
Lawyer. His is commended for continuing faithful in the Kings service; in a
time when civil wars had divided all the Soverain Courts of the Realm. He was
one of those that retreated to Chastel-Sarrasy, when the Company was wholly
oppressed by the Power of the Duke of Ioyeuse. At length, to withdraw himself
yet farther from the troubles, he quitted his employment, and returned to dwell
at S. Cere. In this retirement he collected that great Volume of Arrests,
wherein is contained almost all the Law of our Province. This book, which my
late Father afterward took the pains to abridge, for his own private use, with
what success you are not ignorant, which was very well received of the
public, even in the Authors life time, and translated, as I hear, into diverse
languages.

Gerard had John his eldest Son, who was also Counselor in the Parliament of
Tolose, but did not long exercise this charge, dying being very young; and
Francis Maynard, of whom we speak, who for his wit and verses is become more
famous then any of his Ancestors. He was President in the Presidiall Court of
Aurillac, and had also the honor before his death to be Counselor of State.
In his youth he came to Court, and was Secretary to Queen Margaret, beloved of
Desportes, and camarade to Regnier. He then writ a large Poem in Stanza's,
which he entitled Philander, after the manner of that of Monsieur d'Urfe's,
and The transformation of the Shepherdess Iris of Destingendes. In the year
1634, he went to Rome, where he was in the attendance of Monsieur de Noailles
Ambassador for the King. There he was intimately acquainted with and beloved
of Cardinal Bentivoglio, the rarest Wit and best writer that Italia has
brought forth in our age. And so he was of Pope Urban the 8th. who often
delighted to discourse with him about ingenious matters, and gave him with his
own hand a Copy of his Latin Poems. Nor was he less known and esteemed in
France by the greatest: but his fortune was not any thing bettered by them, as
the continual and perhaps too excessive complaints, which he makes of it in
his writings, do but too much manifest. He was nominated at the first (as you
saw before,) to be of the Academie. But the Cardinal de Richelieu never did
any thing for him, and 'twas partly, as I have heard by some, because he loved
not to be asked for any thing, but that they should leave him the glory, of
giving of his own accord. And therefore it was that he rejected that handsome
Epigram of his, which begins with, Armand, l'aage affoiblit mes yeux, and that
too, as is said, in a great rage, contrary to his custom. For having heard the
conclusion of it, which says, Mais s'il demand en quel employ;
Eu n^' as tenu dedans le monde,
Et quel bieu j'ay receu de toy;
Que veux-tu que je luy reponde?


That is, But if he ask what use of me
You made whilst here on earth I stayed,
Or what good from you I have had,
What will you have my answer be?
He answered in choler, Nothing. This was the cause of tho e verses which
Maynard made against him after his death. He made yet another voyage to the
Court in the Regency of Queen Anne of Austria, and there 'twas that I ^aw and
came acquainted with him. But succeeding then no better than formerly, he
returned to his house, where he dyed at the age of 64 years, Dec. 28. 1646.
Some time before, he set up this Inscription over his Study, which expressed his
disgust of the Court, and of his Age.

Las d'esperer, et de me plaindre,
Des Muses des Grands, and du Sort.
C'est icy que i'attends la mort
Sans la desirer ni la craindre.
That is, With hoping and complaining tired
Against the Muses, Grandees, and my Fate,
It Is here that I will death awaite,
Which is nor feared, nor desired.
He left amongst other children one Son named Charles whom he often mentions in
his ver^es and of him I received some notes concerning his life, written very
neatly and in handsome terms. He lost another son which was his eldest, and of
whom he had great hopes. As for himself, he was a man of a good aspect, such
almost as you see him in his picture before his Poems. To this purpose,
Monsieur de Balzac said of him.

Consule Fabricio dignusque numismate vultus. His stature was none of the
tallest, and toward the end of his life he grew somewhat corpulent. He was of
a pleasant humor in his Conversation, and extraordinarily delighted with mirth
and good cheer: nevertheless he was a person of honor, and a true friend.
Besides that French Poem which I mentioned, and some Latin ones not printed,
there are two volums of his, one of verses, which he set forth at his last
going to the Court: the other of Letters, which an intimate friend of his
published after his death; and in my opinion, he never made them to have them
printed. However we may say, they have done him no discredit; for there appears
almost throughout, the purity of his wit, and that plain and familiar style
which is proper to this kind of writing. But it is from his verses he has
gotten his greatest credit, as he himself also acknowledged: and truly it must
needs be confessed, that they have that facility clearness, elegancy, and a
certain roundnesse or smoothness which few can imitate. Two things, if I be
not deceived, have been the principal cause hereof. First, as he himself
confesses, in the 17th of his Epistles, he affects to have his Verses not tread
upon the heels of one another; whence it is that you shall see very often 5 or 6
of them, every one having its perfect and complete sense in it self.

Nos beaux soleils vont achever leur tour.
Liurons not coeurs a la mercy d'Amour.
Le temps qui fuit, Cloris, nous be conseille.
Mes cheveux gris me fout deja fremir.
Dessous la tomb il faut toujours dormir.
Elle est un liet ou jamais on me veille.
In the second place he observes every where in his expressions a simple,
natural construction, in which there is no transposition nor violence; so that,
although he took incredible pains about it, one would think that all his words
came into his mind by chance while he was writing, and that he could hardly
have placed them otherwise; though he would. I remember to this purpose, that
one day when I went to see him. I found him hearing some verses of his Son's,
who read them to him. He came to a place where there was some word or other out
of its natural place, which made the sense somewhat dubious for it might be
referred both to that which followed, and to that which went before. But yet the
sense of the place took away the difficulty, and the passage was clear enough.
He bid him read it to him three times, making as if he could not understand it,
and at last turning to his Son: Ah Son, said he, here you are not a right
Maynard; for they do not use to place their words thus.

I think it will not be amiss to relate also to this purpose three pretty
passages, which speak somewhat of him, and of his Genius for verse, in the
memoires which Monsieur de Racan has written of the life of Malherbe.

He had (says M. de Racan speaking of Malherbe) for his Shollars Mounsieur
Touvant, Colomby, Maynard, and de Racan; of whom he gave different judgments,
and said in general terms, that Touvant made verses rarely well, without
telling us wherein he excelled; That Colomby had an excellent wit, but that he
had no Genius for Poetry; That Maynard made the best verses, but that he wanted
strength; and that he gave himself to a kind of writing, which he was not fit
for, meaning Epigrams; and that he never came cleanly off with them, because he
had not sting enough. And for Racan, that he had strength, but did not take
pains enough about his verses; that most commonly to save a good conceit, he
took too much license; and that these two last, put together would make one
excellent Poet

In another place: He strove earnestly (he speaks always of Malherbe) wi^h one
Monsieur de Laleu to make Sonnets with a great deal of liberty, whereof two
quatrains should not rhyme alike. Colomby would never make any of them, nor
could he approve them. Racan made one or two of them, but he was the first that
disliked them. At length also M. de Malherbe was weary of them, and there was
only Maynard of all his Scholars that continued to make them as long as he
lived.

I Will add one word to this passage, that it is true that Maynard not only made
of these kind of Sonnets to his death; but that also in his latter years,
wherein I was acquainted with him, he was altogether for them, and cried out
against the tyranny of those that opposed them. And that he would be very angry
when some to defend his opinion alleged the example of M. Malherbe, saying, he
wanted it not, being strong enough by reason and his own authority; and lastly,
that no man could hinder him from making Epigrams of fourteen verses.

The last passage of the three, is this:

When M. de Malherbe came first to Court, which was in 1605. as we said before,
he did not as yet observe the making a pause at the third verse in Stanza's of
six, as may be seen in the prayer which he made for the King going to Limousin,
where there are two or three Stanza's in which the sense is continued; and in
the Psalm Domine Dominus noster, in this Stanza, and perhaps in some others,
which I do not remember at present.

Si tossed que le besoin excite son desir, etc. He continued always in this
negligence, during the life of Henry the Great, as you may see yet in that
Piece which begins with Que n' estes-vouz lassees. And in the second Stanza
whose first verse is, Que ne cessent mes larmes, etc. which he made for Madam
the Princess, and I know not whether he continued not the same negligence even
in 1612. in the Verses he made for the Place Royale. Certain it is that Maynard
was the first that took notice that this observation was necessary for the
perfection of Stanza's of six, and this perhaps was the reason why Monsieur de
Malnerbe accounted him the only man in I r^nce that knew best how to make
verses. Racan who could play a little upon the Lute, and was a lo er of music,
grew soon into credit with the Musicians, who could not make their stops in
Stanza's of six if there were not a rest at the third part: But when M. de
Malnerbe and Maynard would have in S anz 's o^en, besides the stop at the
fourth e s^, another at the seventh, Racan opp^^ he^^, and scarce ever observed
is. His reason was because Stanza's of ren^ce^ scarce ever sung, and though
they were, a man could not sing them in thre^ breaths; and therefore it
suffices to make ^e ^^^^e fourth. This was the (...) that happened betwixt M.
d^ Mal erbe, and his Scholars, and the re son wh^ ^hey were almost ready to
dect^ (...) F^e^ ick in Poetry.

The judgment which Malherbe gave of Maynard in the first of the e passages is
conformable enough to that o very many understanding men. Yet it must be
confessed, that he has done wonderful well in many of his Epigrams, especially in
those which he has imitated, of the Ancients: and our illustrion President de
Caminade, who gave him every year a Martial for a new years gift, was
que^^ionlesse of this opinion. Thephile, whose wit nevertheless I acknowledge
is much more to be valued than his judgment, said that his Epigrams seemed to
have a kind of Magic in them; but in a word, be it now it will, no man can
doubt but that Maynard whether for this kind of writing or for others de erves
to be counted amongst the prime Poets of France. The Judges of the Floral Games
of Tolose, of whom the same Monsieur de Caminade was then P esident, admitted
him into their Body, although he had not di puted for, and gained the three
Flowers, according to the Custom. And as they had formerly given to Ronsard an
Apollo, and to Baif a David of silver, they Ordered that there should be given
to Maynard a Claud. Binet in the Life of Ronsard says It was a Minerva: but
two persons of quality of Tolose, that were Judges of the Floral Games, h ve
assured me, that they fi^d in their Registers it was an Apollo
Minerva of the same ma ter; but to the shame of our age, the Capitouls, that
are the sole executors of these determinations, either out of covetousness or
neglect, never accomplished it, as may be seen by that Epigram in his works with
this title, On a Minerva of silver promised, but not given.

Mr. DE MALLEVILLE.
CLAUDIUS DE MALLEVILLE was a Parisien. His Father had been an Officer in the
house of Retz, and his Mother was of a good family in Paris. He studied very
hard at College, and had a very delicate wit. They sent him to be instructed in
affairs to one of the Kings secretaries, named Potiers, who was of the
Finances, but he tarried not long there; through the inclination he had to
Learning. He grew acquainted with M. Porcheres Laugier, who presented him to
the Marshal de Bassompierre. He was a long time with this Lord in quality of
Secretary, but had very little employment there; and being a man of great
ambition, he was much troubled at it, and desired him to consent that he might
leave him, to dwell with the Cardinal de Berule, who was then in favor. But
finding no better success there, he returned to his first Master, to whom he
did many services, in the time of his imprisonment, who having gotten his
liberty and a re-establishment in his charge of Colonel of the Suisses, gave
him the Secretaries place which is annexed thereto. This employment was worth a
great deal to him, and in a little time he got twenty thousand Crowns by it.
Part whereof he laid out in a Secretaries place to the King, which he sought
after: upon which there are in his works some verses to Monsieur the
Chancellor. He accompanied M. de Bassompierre, in his voyage to England; but
not in that to Suisserland. He dyed at a little above fifty years of age. He
was of a low stature, very slender, his hair was black and so were his eyes,
which were somewhat weak. That which he was most esteemed for, was his wit, and
the Genius he had for Poetry. There is a Volume of his Poems printed since his
death, which have all of them wit, life, a rare exactness of the verse, much
of delicacy and sweetness, and show a very rich vein; but methinks there are
but few of them that are quite finished. In his youth he made some Epistles in
prose, in imitation of Ovids, but he has since disclaimed them. 'Twas never yet
my fortune to meet with them.

In the year 1641. he caused to be printed by Courbe, a Collection of
Love Letters, of several Authors not naming them. There are many of them his
own, and, as they say, some of Desportes, and I observed among them some of
Voiture's. He has made also Latin verses, some of which against Mamurra I have
seen. It Is said, he was the Author of the Translation of Stratonice, the
Italian Romance, but that he gave it to d'Audiguier, who was one of his best
friends, and nephew to that other d'Audiguier, who be ^des oath r works writ The
loves of Lysander and Cal^sta.

MONSIEUR DE VOITURE.
VINCENT VOITURE, born at Amiens, but bred at Paris and at the Court, wou d
furnish me with many things to say of him, but that they may be had elsewhere.
Most of the works which he has left, are such wherein the Author makes known
himself whether he will or no; and paints forth, if I may so say, his own
humor, and the circumstances of his life. That piece which was printed under
the name of his Funeral Pomp, has also a good part of his ^ortune^. And lastly
his Genius, and the Character of his wit is, as they say, most live^y and
naturally expres^ in the third Vo ^m o Cyrus in the person of Callicrates.
Though his birth were not high, yet his worth made him live familiarly with
persons of the highest qua ity. His Father was a Merchant of Wines by the
great, and being a follower of the Court, was a man that loved good cheer, and
was well acquainted with the Great ones. He had three Sons, his eldest which
d^ed young. This, that was the second whom he never loved, and of whom he was
wont to say that they had changed him at Nurse, becau e he drunk nothing but
water, being o^ a very weak ^omplexion: And lastly, the youngest which he loved
most tenderly, because he was a good companion tke himself. He dyed in the wars
in the King of Swedens service, having behaved himself very nobly. As the Court
is the Theater of Envy, the birth of Voiture was often objected to him, both
in jest and in earnest. Thus they say one day at the Duke of Orleans's, coming
by chance into a room, where some Officers were drinking, one of them with the
glass in his hand, said these verses to him.

Quoy Voiture tu degenere,
Horse d'ici magrebi de toy,
Tu ne vaudras jamais ton pere,
Tu ne vens du vin ni n'en boy.
Another time they made this Epigram, for that 'twas thought he was a suitor to
one of the Kings Pourveyers daughters, and reported that they were to be
married.

O que ce beau couple d'Amans,
Va gouster de contentemens,
Que leurs delices seront grandes!
Il^ seront tousiours en f^stin,
Car si la Prou fourn^t les viandes,
Voiture fournira le vin.
Madame Destoges playing at Proverbs with him, and having a mind to reject one
of his, That Is naught says she, p^erce another of them. They a^tribute also to
Monsieur de Bassompierre this jest on Volture. It Is pity he was not of his
Fathers trade, for loving sweet things as he does, he would have made us drink
nothing but Hypocras. And this too, Wine that fetches others to life, makes him
swoun, meaning that he apprehended he was jeered for it. For my part I have
made no scruple to relate his Original, because, in my judgment, if those that
are born Nob e are most happy, those which deserve to be Noble are most praise
worthy. They say he was brought into the Court at first partly by the means of
Monsieur d'Avaux with whom he had been a fellow-student in the College de
Boncour who was also of the same age and had the same inclinations with him.
Monsieur de Chaudebonne was the first that carried him to Rambouillet Hostel,
that is, to the Rande-vous of all the gallant wits and prime persons of the
Court, where the Chamber of the Illustrious Artenice was always full of them.
He dwelt afterward with the Duke of Orleans, then the Kings only Brother,
whom during the Broiles of this Kingdom being retired into Languedoc, he
followed thither. From thence he was sent by him into Spain, whence out of
curiosity he passed in Africa, as may be seen in his Letters. He was highly
esteemed at Madrid, and 'twas there he made those Spanish Verses, which every
body tool to be Lopez de Vega's: the phrase and language of them was so pure.
The Count Duke d'Olivares expressed much affection to him, and took pleasure to
discourse with him very often. And he desired him to write to him when he
should be returned into France, saying to him twice at his departure, no dexe
V. M. de escrivir me aunque no fuera de negocios, nos escriveremos aforismos.
As if he had said, fail not to write, if there be no business, yet some fine
things or other. I found these words in some notes written by Voiture's own
hand, in the time of his voyage. There were some other particularities of the
Count Duke, pretty remarkable, and amongst the rest these two which I remember.
First that he bragged to him in private, that in all the time he was in favor,
he never gave any man an offensive word. The other was, that he judged commonly
of men very right, and rather by the ill, then by the good that was spoken of
them, that is, if he saw they spoke but little ill of a man, or with but little
certainty, he conceived a good opinion of him. I have seen also some fragments
of a piece in prose which Voiture being in France, intended to make in praise
of this Minister of State, wherein he expressed much of esteem and veneration for
him. He made two voyages to Rome, and was sent to Florence to carry the news of
the birth of K. Lewis 14. that now reigns. He had diverse offices at Court, as
Master of the Hostel to the King and Introductor of Ambassadors to the Duke of
Orleans. He had also many pensions: and received diverse favors from Monsieur
d'Avaux, who being Sur-Intendant of the F^nances, made him his Commissarie,
only that he should receive the profits of it without performing the duty. He
would have dyed very rich had it not been, for his extreme love to gaming. It
had such power over him, that he would engage himself insens^bly to losses far
above his condition, as was that of 15. hundred pistoles which he lost in one
night, which was then all the talk of the Town, when I made my first voyage to
Paris. In this at least he was like to his Father, who was a very great
Gamester at Piquet, and was wont to say that he counted the Set won when he
could get up to the Quarre, that is to say 66. with they set up with four
counters in a square, whence it comes that to this day amongst Gamesters they
call this point, Voitures Quarre.

Voiture was also of a very amorous complexion, or at least made as if he were
so, and though they accused him of having never been really in love, he bragged
that he had been thought to be so with all sorts of persons from the highest
quality to the lowest, or as 'twas said of him from the Scepter to the
Sheephook, and from the Crown to the Coyf. He was well pleased that it should
be believed he was in favor with all his several Mistresses, and indeed he was
with so many who were deeply in love with him. He was never married, and left
only a natural Daughter. He dyed at the age of fifty years or thereabout of
an ague which he caught, as they say, to purge himself having the gout. He was
o^ a low stature, had b ack eyes and hair, his visage somewhat simple, but yet
pleasant. He drew his own picture himse f in one of his Letters to an unknown
M^stresse, and that which is cut in Brass at the beginning of his works is, as
they say, very like him. He spoke things after a quite peculiar manner; with an
ingenious livelynesse. Although he never printed any thing, yet was he in great
repute, not only in France, but also in foreign Countries for the excellency of
his wit; and the Academy of the Humor^sts at Rome, sent him Letters whereby
they made him one of their Academy. His works were published after his death in
one Volume, which was received by the pub^icke with so much approbation, that
they were forced to make two Editions of it in six Months. His Prose is more
correct and exact, it has a certain Air of gallantry, which is not found any
where else, and something so natural and so exact both together, that the
reading thereof is infinitely taking. His Verses perhaps are no less curious,
although more neglected. He many times slighted Rules, but like a Master, as a
man that thought himself far above them, and that scorned to bind himself to
observe them. That which is most to be commended in all his writings is, that
they are not Copies but Originals; and that by reading the ancients and the
moderns, Cicero, Terence, Ariosto, Marot, and many others: he made a certain
new Character wherein he imitated no man, and scarce any man can imitate him.
He had written the beginning of a Romance in prose, which he called Alcidalis,
the subject whereof was given him by Madame the Marquis of Montausieur, who was
then Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, Julie d'Angenes. But since his death, this
beginning having fallen into the hands of this Lady, was never seen, and
perhaps never shall. To conclude, 'twas he that brought again into the fashion
in our age, the Rondeaux or sonnets that end as they begin, which have bin
quite out of use ever since Marot's time. I have amongst my papers one thing
which justifies what I now said. It Is a Letter of his, which was never printed,
written to Monsieur de la Jonquiere, Father to Monsieur de Paillerols, my
Cousin. It Is dated January 8. 1638. and has this Postscript.

I doubt whether you know what Rondeaux are. I have of late made three or four
of them, which have put the Wits in the humor of making them. It Is a kind of
writing which is proper for jeasting and raillerie. I know not whether you are
grown more grave now, then you were when you were a Boy; I for my part am
always in the same humor I was in, when we stole the drake. If then you love
my follies, read them, but by no means let the Ladies see them, whose hands I
kiss.

Rondeau.

Cinq ou six fois Cette nuit en dormant, etc.
Ou vous savez tromper bien finement, etc.
MONSIEUR SIRMOND.
JOHN SIRMOND was a native of Rion in Auvergne, of a good family of the Robe,
he was nephew to Father Sirmond the Jesuit, Confessor to K. Lewis 13. and one
of the most knowing men of our age. He came to Court, and by the favor of
Cardinal de Richelieu, who esteemed him one of the best writters in those
days, was made Historiographer to the King with a pension of 1200. crowns. He
wrote diverse pieces for the Cardinal, on the affairs of the times, but almost
all of them under assumed names. The Abbot of S. Germain, who was the writer
one the adverse part, treats him extreme ill in the Tract which he called The
Chimerique Ambassador. He made an answer to it which is in the Collection of
Monsieur du Chastelet. The Abbot of S. Germain replied, and handled him yet
more injuriously, whereby he was obliged to write again in his own defense. But
Card. de Richelieu and King Lewis 13. dyed in the interim, and he could never
obtain under the Regency a privilege to print this Book. Hereat he was very
much troubled, and seeing besides that his Enemy was upon his return to Court,
and that favor would be no longer on his side, he retired into Auvergne, where
he dyed, being about threescore yeats Old. He left a Son, who, as they say,
will print some of his works, particularly his Latin verses. His Prose shows
that he had an excellent Genius for Eloquence; his Style is strong and Mascu
ine, and wants no adornment. The pieces which I have seen of his, are these
whereof the greatest pa t are in the Collect^on of Monsieur du Chastelet: The
Pourtraicture of the King, made of the times of the Constable of Luynes. The
tr^ck of State of K. Lewis 13. writ in favor of Cardinal de Richelieu; The
Letter decifred: An Advertisement to the Provinces by the Sieur de Cleonville,
which I have heard accounted his Masterpiece. L' Homme du Pape and du Roy, in
answer to the Count de la Rocque, Spanish Ambassador at Venice, who had written
a Book against France under the name of Zambeccari. The Chimera defeated by
Sulpice de Mandrini, Sieur de Gazonval, The Relation of the Peace of Querasque,
taken out of a Treatise written by Monsieur Servien. He has made also some
Latin verses as I said; and that Epigram against Mamurra, wherein this Parasite
is called Pamphagus, is his. I will add here by way of acknowlegment, that one
of his Books was one of the first things that made me relish our Language. I
was but newly come from College when I met with I know not how many Romances,
and other new pieces: which, though I was very young and a mere child, I could
not endure; but run back to my Tully and Terence, which I found more rational.
At last, there came to my hands almost at the same time four Books, which were,
The eight Orations of Tully, The trick of State of Monsieur Sirmond, The fourth
Volume of the Letters of M. de Balzac, which were wholly printed, and The
Memoires of Queen Margaret, which I read over twice from the beginning to the
end, in one and the same night. After that I began not only no longer to
contemn the French Language, but even passionatly to love it, to study it with
some care, and to believe, as I do still even to this day, that with a Genius,
some Time and, Pains a man may render it capable of all things.

MONSIEUR DE COLOMBY.
FRANCIS DE CAVVIGNY, Sieur DE COLOMBY, was of Caen in Normandy a kinsman to
Malherbe, whose Disciple and follower he was. He was also of kin to Monsieur
Morant Treasurer de l'Espargne, who procured him a pension, and saw it paid
him. He had an office at Court which never any had before or since him; for he
was Styled Orator to the King in affairs of State, and 'twas upon this account
that he received 1200. crowns a year, he received also other favors from the
Court, and was indeed proud that they were thought to be much greater then they
were. Toward his latter end, he took upon him a religious habit, but he was no
Priest. He dyed at the age of threescore years. He was of a great stature and
very strong of an ambitious humor, and resolute in all his actions. He did not
at all value M. Coeffeteau, and found fault with almost every thing he saw of
his. He has verses in many of the printed Collections, and Letters in the
Collection of the year 1637. His principal work, is the Translation of justice,
printed 1627. which he has dedicated after a new and strange manner To the
King, and to the Queen his mother, in two dedicatory Epistles. There is also of
his doing a piece of the first book of Tacitus in French with observations
which he printed in the year 1613. I have seen besides, a discoursin writing to
the Duke of Orleans to persuade him to return into France, when he had
withdrawn himself in discontent, and here it is that he subscribes himself Your
most humble servant and Orator. I have heard also of a piece which he writ
against Judicial Astrology, and a Treatise of Soveragnity and no doubt he had
many others upon the affairs of the times, as Letters, Apologies, etc. But in
general, I here give you notice, that I pretend not, to forget nothing of what
the persons I treat of, have written. In such a Country as France, where they
have almost always neglected this kind of Memorialls, it is sufficient that you
may take for truth what I say, without rejecting as false what I do not say.
And, if I be not deceived; we should use the same discretion in reading all
sort of writers, even the most exact, for when all is done, it is impossible, but
that many things must escape them.

MONSIEUR DE VAUGELAS.
CLAVDIUS FAVRE, Sieur DE VAUGELAS, Baron of Peroges, was of Chanberry, and
son of the Illustrious President Favre, Author of the Volume which we call
Code Fabrien, which is of great use in those our Province which are governed by
the Civil Law. He was the sixth Son, and had no more portion, then the Baronie
of Peroges which was in Bresse, and worth but little: together with an ill paid
pension of two thousand Livres, which Henry 4. granted to his Father for him
and his heirs, for the services he had done the State in the Marriage of Madame
of Savoye. 'Twas this pension which the Cardinal got re-establish upon him,
when he undertook the Dictionary. He came to Court very young, and there spent
the remainder of his life. He was Gentleman in Ordinary, and afterward
Chamberlain to the Duke of Orleans, whom he followed constantly in all his
retreats out of the kingdom. He was also toward the end of his days Governor
of the Children of Prince Thomas. But although he neglected nothing which might
advance his fortune, though he were in esteem and reputation at Court, and was
no way given to debauchery; the many voyages he took in following his Master,
and other troubles, made him dye poor, so that his estate was not sufficient to
satisfy his Creditors. He dyed aged about 65. years of an Imposthume in the
Stomach, which was many years growing upon him, and often times brought upon
him a pain in his side, which they attributed to the spleen. At last in the
year 1649. having bin extraordinarily afflicted with this grief for the space
of five or six weeks, he found some ease, and believing he was almost cured, he
would needs walk abroad to take the Air in the Garden of the Hostel de
Soiffons where he had lodgings. But the next Morning his pain took him again
with more violence. Of two servants which he had, he sent him that was at hand,
to call for help; but before he returned, the other coming in, found that he
had vomited up the Imposthume, and all in amazement asking him how he did, You
see, my friend, (replyde he coldly and without motion) what a poor thing man
is. After these words he spoke no more, and lived but some few minutes. He was
a comely man, well made in body and mind, of a good stature; his eyes and hair
were black, his visage full, and well-colored. He was very devout, civil, and
respectfull even to excess; particularly toward Ladies, for whom he had an
extreme veneration. He always feared to offend any one, and upon this account,
he scarce ever durst take part in any controversies or disputes. He was very
frequent at Rambouillet Hostel. His most intimate friends were M. Faret (who
had bin as 'twere his Scholar,) M. de Chaudebonne, M. Voiture, and, toward his
latter end, M. Chapelain, and M. Conrart. But above all he had contracted a
most strict acquaintance with the Baron de For As, who is still alive, and did
also, as well as he, belong to the Duke of Orleans. They called Brothers, and
were companions in their devotions, in which, as in their friendship, they
persevered constantly. From his childhood he had very much studied the French
Tongue. He chiefly imitated Monsieur Coeffetedu and had so great an esteem of
his writings, and above all of his History of Rome, that he could scarce allow
of any phrase or expression, which was not used there. To this purpose Monsieur
de Balzac said, That in the judgment, of Monsieur de Vaugelas there was no
salvation out of the History of Rome, no more then out of the Church of Rome.
His chief excellency was for Prose. As for Poetry, he had made some Italian
verses, which were very well esteemed. But he never made any in French, unless
'twere extempore, upon a frolic. As for example, it happened that one day
passing through Nevers, where Princess Mary, now Queen of Poland, then was,
some of her Gentlewomen who were then making a purse for some poor man, came
into the Inn where he was; he could not see them, because he had taken
Physic; but he sent two pistoles with his Epigram.

Empesche d'un empeschement
Don't le nom n'est pas fort honneste,
Ie n'ay pu d'un seul compliment
Honorer au moins vostre queste:
Pour en obtenir le pardon,
Vous direz que je fais un don
Aussi honteux que mon remede:
Mais rien ne paroist precieux
Aupres de l'Ange qui possede
Toutes les richesses des Cieux.
'Twas the Princess he meant. I have also another Epigram of his made in
promptu, upon the mistake of a word which a Porter of Rambouillet-Hostel had
committed, when he delivered a message to him from the Lady Marquisse.

Tout a ce moment Maistre Isaac,
Un pen moins disert que Balzac,
Enter dans ma Chamber, and m'annonce
Que Madame me derenonce:
Me derenonce, Maistre Isaac?
Ouy, Madame, vous derenonce.
Elle m'avoit done renonce,
Luy dis-je d'un sourcil fronce?
Porter luy pour toute reponce,
Maistre Isaac, que qui derenonce
Se repent d'avoir renonce:
Mais avez-voue lien prononce?
These Epigrams might have bin spared, but that the least things of great men
are precious. He had a present wit, and made many times very excellent replies
such as that I spoke of before, which he made to Cardinal Richelieu. He left
behind him but two works considerable, one whereof is printed, the other not
yet, when I wrote this. The first is his Book of Remarques on the French
Tongue, against which Monsieur de la Mothe le Vayer has made some observations,
and it has since bin written, against by le Sieur Dupleix: but in the public
opinion it merits a most particular esteem. For not only the matter of it, is
very good for the most part and the style excellent and admirable; but besides,
there is in the whole Body of the work, something of an honest man, so much
ingenuitie, and so much freedom, that one can scarce choose but love the Author
of it. And I would to God that the Memoires which he had long since ready to
make a second Volume, could be found; and that we had not cause to bewail the
loss of them which happened after his death, in the hands of those that seized
upon his papers. The other Considerable work and as yet unprinted, is The
Translation of Quintus Curtius, upon which he had bin thirty years, changing
and correcting it continually. Nay they say that after he had seen some
Translations of M. d'Ablancourt, he was so taken with the Style of them, (which
is a little less diffuse then his own) that he began afresh all his labor,
and made quite a new translatior. I have seen the sheets which remain of this
last sort, where for the most part, every period is translated in the margin
five or six several ways, almost all of them very good. Monsieur Chapelain
and Monsieur Conrart, who take the pains to review this work with all
exactness, to print it, are many times hard put to it to judge which is best.
And, which I count most remarkable, commonly that which be set down first, is
that which they like best. This is the piece of which Monsieur Balzac said, The
Alexander of Quintus Curtius is invincible, and that of Vaugelas is inimitable.
Monsieur de Voiture who was much his friend, used to jeare him for that excess
of pains and time which he bestowed on it. He told him he would never have
done, that whilst he was polishing one part of it our language would alter, and
oblige him to new-make all the others: Whereto he merrily applied what is said
in Martial, of the Barber that was so long in shaving a man's beard, that
before he made an end, it began to grow again.

Eutrapelus tonsor dum circuit or a Luperci
Expungitq genas altera barba subit.
so, said he, altera lingua subit,

MONSIEUR BARO.
BALTHAZAR BARO was of Valence in Dauphine. In his youth he was Secretary to
Monsieur d'Urfe, one of the most rare and admirable wits that France ever bore:
who dying just as he had finished the fourth part of Astrea, Baro caused it to
be printed and composed the fifth part out of his papers. He came to Paris and
there married a widow, his Land-laday's Sister. He had great access to the
Duchess of Chevreuse, for which reason the Cardinal de Richelieu was hardly
brought to consent he should be of the Academie. He was also gentleman usher to
Mademoiselle. Toward the end of his life he obtained two Offices of a new
Creation; one of Kings-Atturney in the Prestdiall Court established not long
since at Valence: The other of Treasurer of France, at Montpellier. He dyed
aged about 50. years, and left Children. He made many Plays, diverse others
Poems, but his greatest and principal work is, The Conclusion of Astrea, where
he seems to have bin inspired with the Genius of his Master.

MONSIEUR BAUDOIN.
JOAN BAUDOIN, was of Pradelle in Vivarets; but after he had made diverse
voyages in his youth, he passed the rest of his life at Paris, with the fortune
of most learned men, that is, without getting any great good. He was Reader to
Queen Margaret, and afterward also to the Marshall de Marillac.
Notwithstanding the gout and other Maladies with which he was afflicted in his
old age; he never gave over writing even to his end; and we are beholding to
him for translating into our Tongue a very great number of good Books. His
Masterpiece is The Translation of Davila; but he has done likewise many others
which are not to be contemned, as Sueton, Tacitus, Lucian, Salust, Dion Cassius
the History of the Ynca's by an Ynca, Tasso's Jerusalem, The d^scourses of the
same Author, Those of Ammirato on Tacitus, many pieces of the Lord Chancellor
Bacon, Monsieur de Priezac's Vindiciae Gallicae, Suger's Epistles, Aesops
Fables, and the Iconologie of Ripa. He took a voyage on purpose into England by
order of the Queen Mary de Medicis, to translate the Countess of Pembrokes
Arcadia, and was assisted in the work, as they say, by a French Gentlewoman,
who had bin a long time there, and whom he afterward married. In all these
works his Style is facil natural, and French. And if perhaps in many places, he
has not done things so well as they might have bin, it must be attributed to
his fortune which would not permit him to employ upon his writings so much time
and care as they required: He dyed at the age of above sixty years. He was of
small Stature, had Chesnut-colour'd hair, and a lively Complexion. He left a
Daughter and one Son which is since dead in the wars.

MONSIEUR DE MONTEREUL.
JOHN DE MONTEREUL a Parifien, and Son of an Advocate in Parliament, after he
had bin a very hard Student, he began to plead at the Bar; but at the age of
18. or 19. years he was in Italy, with Monsieur de Believre, who presented him
to Cardinal Antonio, nephew to Pope Urban the 8. This Cardinal made him
Chanon of Thoul which obliged him to return into France and from that time he
was retained to be Secretary to the Prince of Conty; This Prince was then at
College, and had not any reed of his service. Therefore he omitted not in the
mean time to take some other employment. He was at Rome, with the Marquis de
Fontenay Mareuil, Ambassador of France, in the quality of his second Secretary;
but at last, Monsieur Bovard, who was the first, having bin withdrawn, by
reason of the disgrace of Monsieur du Thou, whose kinsman he was, Montereul
became the first, and even before that, he had the chief hand in businesses. At
his return from Rome, he was in the same quality of Secretary to the Embasse,
in England with Monsieur de Believere; and at last was left as Resident in
Scotland, where he did very good service; for he was most proper for
negotiation, of a souple Spirit, quick, and resolute, and one that scarce ever
did any thing without design. 'Twas he that gave the advice that the Elector
Palatine should pass incognito in France, to go and command the troops of the
Duke of Weimar, and possess himself of Brisac; which was the cause that they
provided for him, and that the Elector was stopped in his passage. 'Twas he
also that, thinking thereby to do some good Office to the King of England,
negotiated that he might be put into the hands of the Scots. This unfortunate
Prince (of whom he has since given this Testimony, that he never saw a man of
a greater Spirit and more virtue) delighted often to discourse with him, and
expressed a great deal of affection to him. After he had bin sometime in
Scotland, he settled in his place one of his Brothers, who was the third. He
returned into France to take possession of the Charge of Secretary to the
prince of Conty, who sent him to Rome in 1648. to solicit for a Cardinals
Hat. This absence injured him, for in the mean time Monsieur Sarazin, was
likewise made the Princes Secretary, and shared his employment, or, to say
better, kept to himself the best and most profitable part of it. This sets them
at variance, and wrought him much vexation even to his death. His Master being
clapped up with the Prince of Conde, and the Duke de Lougueville, it is incredible
what service he did them during their imprisonment, for he found out means to
win the Soldiers of the Gaurd to deliver them letters, who writ a world of them
continually for their deliverance, and in a word, as it is reported, he alone
labored as much as all their other servants together. The Princes after his
coming forth, said publicly. That they were more endebted to him for their
liberty, then to any man. I learned from a friend of mine, to whom he told it
himself, that for to write to them, he made use of a secret, which the King of
England had taught him, in the long conferences which they sometimes had
together. 'Twas a certain powder, very rare, which being cast on the paper,
made that which was before hand written there with a white Liquor, to appear;
which, without that, was wholly imperceptible. There were many drugs sent to
the Prince of Conty, who feigned himself very sick; they were wrapped up in white
papers, and every paper was a Letter, yet so that nothing could be seen, though
it were never so narrowly looked upon, unless they made use of that powder
which the Princes had. It lay commonly over the Chimnies of their Chamber, and
to the eyes of the Guard, passed for powder to dry their hair. By this artifice
and several others, there was scarce a day, wherein he sent not news, and
heard not from them; and he showed no less then 300. Letters of the Prince of
Conde's writing. After their coming forth, it is very like they rewarded him
according to his desert; and since that, he had bestowed on him in the court of
Rome, to the value of ten thousand Livres, all the benefices of the Prince of
Conty, who 'twas then believed was very speedily to marry Mademoiselle de
Chevreuse. But he was wanting to his fortune, and dyed at that time, being
about seven or eight and thirty years old. He seemed not to be above twenty, or
five and twenty, for he was naturally very fair, and retained even then the
complexion and flower of his first youth. He was of a middle Stature, flaxen
haired, of a visage very white, and mixed with an handsome rednes. They found
upon his lungs a strange protuberancy, in form of a mushrom, which by little
and little choked him. There is nothing of his in print, but he left diverse
pieces both in Verse and Prose, which perhaps will one day come forth.

MONSIEUR DE L' ESTOILE.
CLADIUS DE L' ESTOILE Sieur de Sassay, was a Parisien, a Gentleman and of a
very ancient family, so as to reckon a Chancellor of France amongst his
Ancestors. His Father who was Audiencier to the Chancery of Paris, collected
diverse Memoires of the affairs of his time, out of which a friend of his, to
whom he lent them, extracted the book entitled, A diarie of what passet under
Henry the third. His Children would never suffer the rest of these Memoires to
be seen, which now perhaps are lost. There were three Brothers of them, the
eldest which dyed young, the second which was Secretary to the Cardinal de
Lion: and this, who was the third, and had no other employment but Learning,
and Poetry, wherein he is become very famous. He had more of parts then study
and learning. He particularly addicted himself to making of Verses, which he
did rarely well, and according to the rules of the Stage, which he ptofessed to
have learnt of M. de Gombauld, and M. Chapelain. One of his private friends
told me; then when he had a mind to study, if it happened to be in the day
time, he would have the windows of his Chamber shut, and a Candle brought; and
that, when he had composed any thing, he would read it to his servant, (as it is
also said of Malherbe) to know whether he had done it well, believing that
Verses have not their entire perfection, unless they be filled with a certain
beauty, which is perceivable even to the most rude and clownish. He was a great
admirer of the Verses of Monsieur de Serisay, and Monsieur de Gombauld: of the
latter of these, going one day with him to the Hostel de Burgogne, I heard him
say very seriously, that he had rather be the Author of that Scene of the
Danaides, where the act of those cruel Sisters is described, then of all the
best Plays that have been made there 20 years. He was of a very amorous
complexion, and 'twas this passion that was the cause of almost all the
troubles and afflictions of his life. In his latter days he married, for love,
a woman of a mean estate. He kept his marriage private a longtime, and being
not so rich, as was requisite to live handsomely at Paris with a family, he
retired to a Country house, where he spent most of the remainder of his life.
He dyed about fifty years old. He was of a middle stature and very slender. His
hair and eyes were black, his visage very pale and meager, scarr'd, and without
beard in some places, by reason that being a child he fell into the fire. He
was a person of very much virtue and honor, and bore his ill fortune without
making any complaint of it, and without being troublesome or importunate to any
one. He would reprehend boldly and smartly, and with a strong severity, what he
disliked in things wherein his judgment was required. They charge him to have
been the cause that a young man dyed of grief and vexation, who came out of
Languedoc, with a Comedy which he thought was a Masterpiece, wherein he showed
him manifestly a thousand faults.

A friend of mine who had never seen him, was carried one day to his house to
ask his opinion concerning a piece of the same nature. He heard the first and
second Scene of it read without speaking a word, but at the third, in which
there was a King, that spoke not to his humor, starting up, This King is
drunk, said he, else he would never talk thus. He wrote with extraordinary
care, and reviewed the same things a hundred times, which is the reason we have
so few things of his. He left two Plays, The fair slave, and I Inc^igne des
F^^^u^, and had almost finished a third when he dyed, which he called, The
Secretary of Saint Innocent. He had a part, as I told you, in that of the five
Authors. There are diverse Odes and Stanza's of his very excellent in the last
printed Collections.

THIS is all I have to say of the Academiciens that are dead. I wish I might
speak of those that are living, with the same liberty, and render to every one
of them, that I am more intimatly acquainted with, that testimony which their
wit and virtue deserves. But there are many reasons which hinder me, and one
which makes me glad that I am hindered. It Is, that if I regard the public,
their Images will questionless be seen elsewhere in a more noble place, and by
some better hand; and if I consider you in particular, you know my mind well
enough, and have not forgotten what I have so often said to you of them in our
long walks at Roumers, where there were only trees and fountains that heard us.
Be contented therefore to see them here named among^t the rest, according as
they are in the Catalogue of the Academy: I shall add only a word or two, to
let you know the Christen name, and quality of each, his Country, and the
title of his works, by which he is known.

A Catalogue of the Gentlemen of the French Academy.
THE ABBOT DE BOURZEYZ Amable de Bourzeys, Abbot of Saint Martin de Cores, born
in Auvergne. There is nothing of his printed under his own name, but one Letter
to Prince Edward Palatine, which is a Treatise of Religion.

THE BISHOP OF GRASS. Anthony Godeau Bishop of Grass and Vence, born at
Dreux. His works that are hitherto printed, according to the Catalogue that was
given me of them, are these; The Preface to the Dialogue of the causes of the
corruption of eloquence, translated by M. Giry. That, before Malherbe's works.
The Paraphrase on the Epistles of S. Paul, and the Canonical Epistles. The life
of S. Paul. Christian Instructions and Prayers for all sorts of persons.
Synodical Ordinances and Instructions. Meditations on the Lords Prayer. A
Funeral Oration on K. Lewis 13. Another on the Bishop of Bazas. The Idea of a
good Magistrate in the life and death of Monsieur de Cords. A Treatise of the
Ecclesiastical Tonsure. Another of the Ecclesiastical Vocation. Elevations to
Jesus Christ after the manner of Meditations, and, A new Paraphrase on the
epistle to the Hebrews. A Remonstrance made to the King against the Parliament
of Tolose. An exhortation to the Parisiens, touching Alms and Charity to the
poor of Picardy and Champagne. Advice to the Parisiens, concerning the
Procession made in the year 1652. for the bringing forth of the shrine of S.
Geneviefue under the name of a Curate of Paris. The life of S. Augustine in
quarto, An Ecclesiastical History of the four first ages, in two Volums, in
folio. His Poems in print are: One Volume of Christian Poems. The Paraphrase of
all the Psalms in French verse, which have been set to music by Sieur Govy. An
Ode for King Lewis 13. The institution of a Christian Prince for K. Lewis 14.
La grande Chartreuse. La Sorbonne. A Hymn of S. Charles Borromee. A Hymn of S.
Geneviefue. He has made a Poem on S. Paul in five Canto's, which is not yet
published, as also several other Hymns, Discourses, and Epistles in verse
addressed to his private friends.

THE ABBOT DE BOISROBERT. Francis de Metel, Sieur de Boisrobert, Abbot of
Chastillon upon Selne, Consellor of State, and Almoner to the King, born at
Caen in Normandy. He has composed (besides some Letters in Prose, and some
Poems which we see of his in several Collections,) A book of Epistles or
Discourses in verse after the manner of Horace, Many Dramatick Poems. A Tragedy
entitled, The chaste Dido, or The loves of Hyarbas. Two Tragi-Comedies, which
are The Coronation of D^rius and Palene. Three Comedies, the first of his own
invention, entitled The three Ororta's, and the two others, The self jealous
one; and The foolish Wager, taken from Lopez de Vega.

DE MONTMOR. Henry Lewis Habert, Counselor to the King in his Counsels, and
Master of Requests of his Hostel, born at Paris.

DE GOMBAULD. John Ogier de Gombauld born in Xantonge at S. Just de Lussac near
Brovage. His works in print are Endimion, Amaranthe a Pastoral, a volume of
Poems, a volume of Letters. These following are not yet printed, The Danaides,
a Tragedy; Cidippe, a Tragicomedy; Three Books of Epigrams, several other
Poems, Letters, and Discourses in Prose.

DE LA CHAMBER. Marin Cureau de la Chamber, Counselor to the King in his
Counsels, and his Physician in ordinary, born at Man's. His works in print are,
New Conjectures about digestion. New Conjectures concerning the causes of
Light, The overflowing of Nile, And the love of inclination, The Characters of
the Passions, in two volums. A Treatise of the understanding of Beasts. New
Observations and Conjectures about the Rainbow. If he perfects what he has
begun we shall have, A continuation of the Characters of the Passions, A
Treat^se of human beauty, Another of the nature and D^sposit^ons of Nations,
and The Art of knowing men. He has translated into French, The eight Books of
Aristotle's Physics, which is not printed, and gives us hopes ere long of A
Commentary on Hippocrates's Aphorisms, which he calls, Usus Aphorismorum, where
his design is, after he has set down Hippocrates's meaning in each Aphorism,
to apply, it to other subjects, and show all the uses that may be made of it.

DE GOMBERVILLE. Marin Le Roy, Sieur de Gomberville, a Parisien. The printed
works which I have seen of his, are the Romances of Polexander in five Volums,
of Cytherea in four volumes. The young Alcidiana, which is not yet finished.
The Preface to Maynards Poems.

DE SERISAY. James de Serisay, born at Paris, Intendant of the House to the
Duke de la Rochefoucault. There is not any thing of his in print; but he has
many Poems, and other works in prose, to print.

DE. S. AMANT. Mark Anthony Gerard, Sieur de S. Amant, born at Rouen. There are
of his Three volums of Poems. He is making an Heroic Poem, called Moses.

DE PORCHERES LAUGIER. Honorat Laugier Sieur de Porcheres, of Provence. They
have printed several Poems of his, in the Collections. And a hundred love
Letters under the name of Erander. He has many pieces both in verse and prose
not printed, and amongst others, A Treatise of Devises.

THE ABBOT DE CERESY. Germain Habert, Abbot of de la Roche, and Abbot and Earl
of Nostre-Dame de Ceresy, a Parisien. He set forth The Life of Cardinal de
Berule in prose. There are diverse Poems of his in some of the Collections of
verses. Some Paraphrases of the Psalms, and The Metamorphosis of Philis's eyes
into Stars. He has made many other verses not printed.

DES MARESTS. John Desmarests a Parasien, Counselor to the King, Controller
General in extraordinary in the wars, and Secretary General of the Levant
Company. His works printed for matter of Prose, are Ariana, a Romance in two
parts. Rosane another Romance, not yet finished; whereof there is but one
Volume. The Truth of Fables in two Volums. Erigone, a Comedy in Prose. The
Games of Cards of the Kings of France, of famous Queens, of Geography, and of
Fables, which he invented, by Cardinal Richelieu's order, for instruction of K.
Lewis 14. in his childhood, and when he was Dauphin. An Answer to the Ladies of
Rennes for his game of the famous Queens. A book of prayers and Christian
Meditations. And for Verse, one Volume of Poetical works, which among other
things contain his Plays Aspasia, Roxana, Sc^pio, Les Visionnaires, Mirame and
Europa. A book of prayers in verse. The Poem of the Christian virtues, in 8.
Canto's. He had almost done two other Plays which the death of the Cardinal
made him leave off, entitled Annibal, and The Charmer charmed. There is
another of his quite finished, which is altogether Comical in short verses,
called The Deaf man, he has not yet published it, The Insciption on the Kings
Statue in brass in the Place Royal is his, He is making an Heroic Poem of the
Baptism of Clovis, whereof there are nine Canto's finished. He was also, by his
Master, the Duke de Richelieu's order, about a considerable work in p^ose,
which he calls The abridgment of universal Knowledge, which contains, in near a
thousand Chapters the summarie knowledge of most things that fall into ordinary
discourse.

DE RACAN. Honorat de Beuil Knight Marquis of Racan, son of a Knight of the
Orders du Roy, born at la Roche Racan in Touraine. His printed works are, The
Shepherdesses a Pastoral, several copies of Verses, in the Collection of the
year 1627. The 7. Penitential Psalms. His sacred Odes upon the Psalms, which he
continues, having already made 65. of them. His Oration to the Academy, Against
the Sciences.

DE BALZAC. John Lewis Guez, Sieur de Balzac, Counselor to the King in his
Counsels, born at Angoulesm. His works hitherto printed are, Six volums of
Letters. One of several works. One of verses and Letters in Latin. The Prince.
The Christian Socrates, with which are, many other small Tractat's or
Dissertations in one volum in octavo. He has made a Political work entitled
Aristippus, which he is about to publish.

THE COUNT DE SERVIEN. Abel Servien, Minister of State, and Keeper of the Seals
of the Order, having been heretofore Procurator General in the Parliament of
Grenoble, Master of Requests, chief President in the Parliament of Bourdeaux,
Secretary of State, Ambassador extraordinary in Savoy, Plenipotentiary and
Ambassador for the Peace at Munster. He was born at Grenoble. He has not
printed any thing in his own name, but several of his works about important
matters have been seen with general approbation.

CHAPELAIN. John Chapelain, a Parisien, Counselor to the King in his Counsels.
His Poetical works printed, are, Odes for the Cardinal de Richelieu. For the
birth of the Count de Dunois. For Duke d'Anguien. For Cardinal de Mazarin. A
Paraphrase on Miserere. D^vers Sonnets on several subjects particularly for
Tombs: and some other Poems. He has made also, The last words of Cardinal
Richelieu. An Ode for the Prince of Conde, upon the taking of Dunkerk: and
another for the return of the Duke of Orleans, which are not printed. He is
making an Heroic Poem, Of the Pucelle of Orleans, which is to have 24 Canto's,
13 of which he has already done. In Prose, he has The Preface to Cavalier
Marino's Adonis. He had also made A Dialogue of reading the ancient Romans,
which is not printed.

DE BAUTRU. William de Bautru, native of Angers, Count of Serran, Counselor of
State in ordinary, heretofore Introductor of Ambassadors to the King.
Ambassador to the Archduke in Flanders. The Kings Envoy into Spain, England,
and Savoy.

COLLTET. William Colletet, a Parisien. Advocate to the Parliament and Counsel.
His printed works are, Verses in the Collection, called The delights of the
French Poesy. Amorous despair. The duty of a Christian Prince, translated out
of Cardinal Bellarmin, printed under the name of Lanel. The adventures of
Ismenes and Ismenia, translated out of the Greek of Eustathius. Divertisments,
which is a Collection of Poems divided into six parts. The Blessed Virgin's
lying in, translated into prose, out of Sannazarius his Latin. S. Augustin's
Christian Doctrine, and Manual to Laurentius. The translation of a Book,
written in Latin by the Lord Peter Seguier, President in the Parliament, and
entitled, Elements of the Knowledge of God and of our selves. Diverse Homilies
in French, amongst others, all those of Lent, taken out of the Latin Breviary.
Several Odes, Stanza's, Sonnets, and other Poems made and published on several
occasions, upon the affairs of the times. Many discourses in prose, upon the
like occasions. A Collection of Poems in 1642. Cyminde, a Tragi-comedy. Elogies
on the famous Learned men, that flourished the last age in France, translated
out of the Latin of Scevola Sammarthanus. The Translation of two Latin Letters
of Mrs. Anne Marie Schurman, upon the Question, Whether it be fit for young
maids to be bred Scholars. The Banquet of Poets, with diverse other verses in
Burlesque. The translation of a Treatise of Monsignior de la Casa, concerning
the mutual duty of great Lords, and those that serve them. The life of Raimond
Lullie. That of Nicholas Vignier Historiographer of France. That of Friar John
de Housset a Hermit, at mount Valerien. He has translated four Books of
Herodotus, and Polydore Virgil de inventoribus rerum. But these two are not
printed. He is writing The lives of the French Poets and other Famous men.

BOISSAT. Peter de Boissat, of Dauphine. He has printed, A volume of Poems, and
A Christian Ethics.

SILHON: John Silhon, Counselor of State, in ordinary; a native of Sos, in
Gascogne. His printed works are, One volume in quarto, of the Immortality of
the Soul, which is as 'twere a Natural Theology. Two parts of the Minister of
State. A small Book of the requisites of a History. Another whose Title is, A
clearing of some difficulties concerning the administration of Cardinal
Mazarin. The Preface to Monsieur de Rohan's Perfect Captain. There are also
some of his Letters in the printed Collections.

CONRART. Valentine Conrart, Counselor and Secretary to the King, House, and
Crown of France, a Parsien.

THE ABBOT OF CHAMBON. Daniel Hay Abbot of Chambon, born in Bretagne.

GIRY. Lewis Giry, a Parisien, Advocate to the Parliament and Counsel. His
printed works are, the Translations following. The touchstone, out of the
Italian of Boccalino. The Dialogue of the causes of the corruption of
eloquence. Tertullians Apologetick. The fourth Catilinarie, which is one of the
8. Orations of Cicero, translated by several Authors, and printed in the same
volume. The Orations of Symmachus and S. Ambrose, concerning the Altar of
Victory. Isocrates's Praise of Helen. Plato's Apology of Socrates, and Dialogue
called Crito. Salpitius Severus's Holy History, Cicero's Dialogue called
Brutus, or, of the famous Orators. He has also translated Some select Epistles
of S. Augustine, which are not yet printed.

D'ABLANCOURT. Nicholas Perrot Si^ur d'A^lancourt, born in Champagne, His works
in print are, The Preface to the Honest woman, and the following Translations:
Minutius Felix's Octavius. Four of the eight Orations of C^cero, which are
those for Quintius, for the Manilian Law, for Marce^us, for Ligarius. Arrian of
the wars of Alexander. The retreat of ten thousand Grecians, by Xenophon. All
Tacitus's works. Caesar's Commentaries. He now translates Lucian.

ESPRIT. James Esprit, born at Beziers, There is nothing of his printed, but
The Paraphrase of some Psalms.

DE LA MOTHE LE VAYER. Francis de la Mothe le Vayer a Parsien Counselor of
State in ordinary. Tutor to M. the Duke of Anjou, as he was also to the King
for the space of a year. His works in print are, A Discourse printed under the
name of A Translation of Fabricio Campolini a Veronois, of the contrariety of
humors that are between certain Nations, and in particular between the French
and Spanish; with two Political Discourses. A brief Christian Discourse of the
Immortality of the Soul, with a Corrollarie, and a Skeptical Discourse of
Music. A Discourse of History. Considerations on the French eloquence of these
times. Of the Instruction of my Sord the Dauphin. Of Liberty and Servitude. Of
the virtues of Pagans with the proofs of the quotations. Four volumes in Octavo
of small Treatises. Brief Skeptical Discourses on that usual form of speech, He
has not common sense. Judgment on the Ancient and principal Historians Greek
and Latin, of whom there is any thing extant. Letters concerning the late
Remarques on the French Tongue. One volume in quarto of small Treatises, by way
of Letters written to diverse learned persons. Another volume of the same not
yet printed. A Princes Geographie, a Princes Ethics, a Princes Rhetoric, for
Monsieur the Duke of Anjou. A Princes Oeconomicks, Politics, and Logic, for
the King. These three last, are not yet printed.

PRIEZAC. Daniel de Priezac, Counselor of State in ordinary, born at
Priezac-Castle in Limosin. His printed works are, Observations against the
Abbot of Melrose's book entitled, Philip the Prudent. Vindiciae Gallicae. Three
volums of the privileges of the Virgin. D^sceptatio legitima, in controversia
mota inter Apostolicae Camerae cognitorem, Actorem: and Eminentissimos
Cardinales Barberinos, excellentissimumque urbis Romae praefectum; Defensores.
One volume in quarto of Politic Discourses. He is now composing a second.

PATRU. Oliver Patru, a Parisien, Advocate in Parliament. There is of his, A
Translation of the Oration pro Archia, which is one of the eight, translated by
several Authors. A Prefatory Epistle to Cardinal de Richelieu, under the name
of the Elzivirs before de Laets New world. Another to President la Mesme, for
the widow and children of Camusat, before The Imitation of Jesus Christ,
translated by Father Antonie Girard, Jesuit. He has Several Pleadings and
other works to print. And it is from him that Monsieur de Vaugelas in the
Preface to his Remarques, gives us some hopes of a French Rhetoric.

DE BEZONS. Claudius Basin, Seigneur de Bezons, a Parisien, Counselor of State
in ordinary, heretofore Advocate General to the Grand Counsel. There is of his,
A Translation of a Treatise of the Prague peace, to which he has not put his
name.

SOLOMON. Francis Solomon a Bordelois. Counselor of State, formerly Advocate
General to the Grand Counsel. There is of his, A Discourse of Estate to
Monsieur Grotius, and A Paraphrase of a Psalm in verse.

CORNEILLE. Peter Corneille, Advocate General to the Table de Marbre at Rouen,
where he was born. He has composed already two and twenty Plays, which are
Melite, Clitander, The Widow, La Galerie du Palais, La Suivante, La Place
Royale, Medea, The Comic Illusion, The Cid, Horace, Cinna, Polyeucte, The
death of Pompey, The Liar first and second parts. Rodogune, Theodore,
Heraclius, Don Sancho of Arragon, Andromeda Nicomedes, Pertharite. He has also
printed two Books of the Imitation of Jesus Christ, and intends two more.

DU RYER. Peter du Ryer, a Parasien. His works in print are: For prose, the
following Translations. The Oration of Cicero for King Deiotarus, and that
which is ascribed to him, For Peace; which are two of those eight I formerly
mentioned. The three Catilinaries, all the Philippicks, and the rest of the
Orations of Cicero. The Paradoxes, Offices, and Tusculanes of the same Author,
the rest of whose works he intends to Translate. Isocrates's praise of Busiris,
Two Tomes of the History of Flanders by Strada. Herodotus, All Seneca, except
that which Malherbe has Translated of him. Livie entire, with the Supplement of
Freinshemius. The Supplement of the same Author to join to the Quintus Curtius
of Monsieur de Vaugelas. The life of S. Martyn, by Sulpitius Severus. The King
of Portugal's Psalms. Berenice a Tragi-comedy in prose. And for verse he made
eighteen Plays, namely, Lisander and Caliste, Argenis the first and second
parts, The revenge of Surene, Alcimedon, Cleomedon, Lucrece, Clarigene,
Alcinoee, Saul, Esther, Scevola, Themistocles, Nitocris, Dinamis, Amaryllis,
which was formerly printed without his consent. Two others which are not
printed, Aretaphile, and Clitophon and Leucippe. He is finishing the 19th.
which he calls Anaxander.

BALLESDENS. John Balesdens, a Parisien, Advocate in Parliament and Counsel. He
has translated the book called, The Mirror of a penitent sinner, and has
published the following Manuscripts, out of many more which he has collected,
Cartiludium Logicae, seu Logica Memorativa, vel Poetica, R. Patris Thomae
Murner, cum notis et conjecturis, Rudimenta cognitionis Dei and Sui. Petri
Seguierii Praesidis infulati. Elogia clarorum virorum Joannis Popyrii Massonii,
in volumes. The Deeds of Conveyance of Dauphine to the Crown of France. A
Treatise of Aqua-vitae, by M. John Bronant, Physician to the King. He also
reprinted Aesopes Fables in French of his own correction, for the instruction
of the King, with Political and Moral Maxims.

MEZERAY. Francis de Mezeray, a native of the Vicounty of Argentan, in the
Diocese of Sees. He has set forth A Continuation of the Turkish History from
the year 1612. to the year 1648. And 3. volums in folio, of the History of
France, from the beginning of the Monarchy to the Peace of Vervins, and intends
to continue it to our times.

TRISTAN. Francis Tristan l'Hermite, Gentleman in ordinary to the Duke of
Orleans, born at Souliers Castle in the Province of la March. His works in
print are, diverse Plays, Mariana, Panthea, The death of Seneca, of Crispus, of
the Great Osmar, the folly of the wise. Three Volums of Poems, entitled, Les
Amors, La Lire, and les verse Herioques. In prose, one Volume of Letters, and
some other small Treatises. He is making a Romance of many volums which he
calls, Coromene, an Oriental History. He has also made The Office of the
Virgin, in French, which contains diverse spiritual pieces, in verse and prose.

DE SCUDERY. George de Scudery, Governor of Nostre-Dame de la Guard, born at
Havre de Grace. He has made 16. Dramatick Poems. L^gdamon. The Deceiver
punished. The generous Slave. The Comedy of Comedians in verse and in prose.
Orante. The Bastard. The disguised Prince. The death of Caesar. D^d^. The
liberal Lover. Tyrannical Love. Eudoxa. The illustrious Bassa a Tragicomedy.
Andromira, Axiana, Arminius* Many miscellaneous Poems, printed at the end of
his Prays, to the number of ten or twelve thousand verses. The Cabinet which
is a Collection of Poems upon Pictures. One volume of several Poems, in quarto.
He made The Cardinal de Richelieu's Epitaph, which was printed and afterward
cut in brass, to set upon his Tomb. He is making an Heroic Poem, which he
calls, Rome vanquished. His works in prose are; An Apology for the Stage^
Observations on the Cid. Two Letters to the Academy, and one to Monsieur de
Balzac, upon the same subject. The Translation of Manzini's works. The
illustrious Bassa, a Romance in four parts. Two Volumes of Orations of
Illustrious women. Politic Discourses of Kings. The Grand Cyrus, a Romance,
which will be ten volums.

DOUIAT. John Doujat, a Tolosain, Advocate in Parliament, the Kings sole Reader
and Professor of the Canon Law in the College Royal of France. He has diverse
large works, and in a good forwardness, in several Sciences; and particularly
two upon the Law, which he calls Praenotiones Canonicae and Civiles. He has
published upon occasions several pieces in Latin or French verses. There is a
little Spanish Grammar of his, to which he has not put his name, nor to his
Dictionary of Gascon words on Goudelin. He is Author of the Preface to
Comenius's Vestibulum the Copy of which was given him, and of one of the
Epitaphs upon Thuanus, which was printed without his knowledge very faulty, in
Vittorio Siri, it begins thus, Lege Viator etc.

CHARPENTIER. Francis Charpentier, a Parisien. He has printed The life of
Socrates, and the Translation of the memorable things of that Philosopher out
of Xenophon's Greek. He has translated likewise all the Cyropaedia; and some
pieces of the Emperor Julian; but this is not yet printed. For verse, he has
made A Paraphrase of the Psalm, Confitemini Domino, which is in print; and many
other Poems, which are not.

THE ABBOT TALEMANT. Francis Talemant, born at Rochelle, Almoner to the King.
He has Translated some Treatises and some Lives of Plutarch, which he has not
printed.

THE MARQUIS OF COASLIN. Armand du Cambout Marquis of Coaslin, Baron of
Pontchasteau, and of Roche-Bernard, Lieutenant for the King, in Low Bretagne,
born at Paris.

THUS I have related to you the birth, establishment, and progress of the
French Academy to this present time. You do not expect I should proceed any
farther, and imitate that excellent Historian, who judging of the future from
the knowledge of what was past, has so well made the Horoscope of the
Commonwealth of Rome. The fortune of the Academy it is very likely will follow
that of the State: and be good or bad according to the Kings and grand
Ministers which it shall please God to give us. It is impossible to foresee all
that may happen from without, for its destruction or for its glory: but I Will
tell you betwixt you and me, that if there be any thing from within whereby it
may fail, it is perhaps a certain Custom or unwritten Law, which it observes
more exactly then any of its Statutes. For I beseech you, do you not think that
the advantage of getting into this Body, must needs be looked upon as a reward
to all the Pens of France, and to all those that find in themselves any Genius
extraordinary? If these Gentlemen, when they are to choose themselves a
Colleague, were bound always to name the most worthy, whoever he be, be
confident none would refuse this honor, or if any one should be so mad, all
the shame and discredit would fall upon himself. Nevertheless they preserve
inviolably this Maxim, not to admit any man of what merit otherwise soever he
be, that does not ask it. I know very well, what may be said in favor of this
Order, and make no question but those who were the first Authors of it, did it
then upon very considerable grounds: but I doubt much whether the evil that it
may produce now a days, be not greater then the good which may be expected
from it. For, if I may speak my mind freely, there proceeds from it one thing
of most dangerous consequence. That scarce any one Petitions to be admitted,
who before he propounds it in public, does not make sure to himself suffrages
in private, where common civility hardly suffers one to deny the request of a
friend. I am well satisfied that all vacant places hitherto have been fitted as
well as a man could wish; Nay, I see some amongst the last comers, which this
Company reckons amongst her prime and greatest ornaments. But who shall assure
us that it will be so hereafter, and who knows not that corruption creeps every
day, and too fast, into all humane Institutions, even when nothing has been
forgot that may keep it out? Those that will be least capable of this
employment will be perhaps most eager to look after it, and will obtain it
easily, in a Country and Age where men know not how to deny any thing but what
respects money and private interest. On the contrary many others whom the
Academy ought to desire for its members, will keep themselves out of the way
through natural modesty, or that honest pride which ordinarily accompanies
virtue and merit. 'Twill be answered perhaps, that they are not such, because
they do not trouble themselves for it. Posterity will not admit of this excuse:
and if it sees small or mean Actions appear upon the Stage, whilst others, that
were ab^e to have acted the chief parts, continue hid behind; it will without
doubt blame the judgment that shall have made so ill a choice.

But if this Company subsist long, and with the same honor it has done
hitherto, although it produce not those works which are expected from it, yet
it is impossible, but that France should receive much advantage by it.

So many men of parts and learning cannot meet together every week, without
stirring up one another to industry and the study of good Letters, without
reaping much profit from these conversations, and without spreading insensibly
the profit they shall have gained to themselves, over all Paris, and over all
the re^t of the Kingdom.

For my part, such as I am; I profess and acknowledge that from my childhood, I
have formed my self, either by the writings or conversation of some of this
Society, which have been my chief Masters. What you find most tolerable in the
Style, and in the manner of this work, you owe it to the Academy. But if the
Academy it self be not displeased, that I have taken upon me this employment,
it shall know that it is endebted for it to you, and that, had it not been for
our friendship, and your laudable curiosity, I had never written its History.

FINIS.
THE FRENCH ACADEMY having desired to hear this Book which was as yet only a
Manuscript, read in a full Assembly; Some days after, it ordered of it own
Inclination, in favor of the Author; That the first place that should be
vacant in the Body, should be set a part for him, and that in the interim, it
should be lawful for him to assist at meetings, and vote there as an
Academicien: with this clause, That the like favor should never be granted to
another, upon any consideration whatsoever. This is the subject of the ensuing
Oration.

An Oration of thanks to the Gentlemen of the French Academie, pronounced in
their Assembly. Dec. 30. 1652.
GENTLEMEN,
IF you expect from me thanks answerable to the greatness of your benefit or to
the dignity of this Assembly: I make no doubt but you will soon repent, that
you have so generously obliged me. But if we may speak of the favors which you
do, as it has been sometimes said of those of Heaven, that a man then deserves
them, when he perfectly understands the value of them; never man deserved them
better then I, and you never made a more judicious election.

I know how glorious it is to be a member of so noble a Body, what profit is
joined to this honor, what pleasure accompanies this profit; how many
obstacles in the thing it self might forbid you to bestow it upon me.

These several considerations are continually present before me. There Is not
one of them but does arrest me, but does sensibly affect me, but does raise in
me toward you, Gentlemen, some particular motion of gratitude.

Shall I begin with the glory which is heaped on me by so rare a favor? Kings
and Conquerors, and even some of those Heroes of whom the Ancients made their
gods, have sometimes taken it for a great honor, to be made Burgesses of
certain Commonwealths. And yet, Gentlemen, if we consider, as we ought, a
State never so flourishing, and as illustrious as it is possible; what is it
else but a mass of people, whom only interest and necessity join together;
where things are carried sometimes by riches, sometimes by force and violence,
sometimes by cheating and couzening, and very rarely by virtue and merit?
Certainly, if we be not dazzled with outward pomp, and judge more by the eye
then by reason; as much as wisdom is above the multitude, the soul above the
body, and the desire of knowledge above that of living: so much is the Academy
above the Commonwealth, so much does the honor which you have done me,
surpass that which heretofore those Kings, and those Conquerours, and even
those very gods of Antiquity, gloryed in. And when from these general
reflections I descend to those that are more particular, when I cast my eyes
upon this famous Society, established in the chiefest City of the chiefest
Kingdom in the world, founded by the greatest Statesman that ever was, and
protected even at this day by another, who, in a word, is most worthy to
succeed him; when I look upon it, composed of so many excellent men, known,
esteemed and admired of all Europe: When I consider that for the future, I
shall have a place amongst them, that I shall see my name in the midst of
theirs, carried through the whole Universe, and partake of those immortal
praises which are due unto them: shall I be bold to say it, Gentlemen? I
question whether I am awake or asleep, and whether this be not one of those
pleasant dreams, which without taking us from the earth, make us believe we are
in Heaven.

But Gentlemen, those pleasant dreams leave nothing behind them, whereas the
glory to which you call me, must soon be followed by a solid and real
advantage. To what purpose should I dissemble it? If from my infancy good
Letters have been my delight, if I have always looked upon the Art of writing
well, as the end and scope of all my endeavors; It was neither easy nor
possible for me to attain it, but by the favor which you do me. There is
indeed a small number of extraordinary persons whom Nature took pleasure in
forming, who find all things in themselves, who know what they were never
taught, who follow no rules, but make and give them to others. Such are you in
our days, Gentlemen: Such in former Ages were some great Personages of Rome
and Athens. But as for us that are of an inferior rank, if we have only our own
strength, and if we borrow nothing from others; which way should we, with one
only judgment and one only wit, and that too, but ordinary and mean, content
so many different wits, so many several judgments, to which we expose our
writings? Which way should we of our selves get together so many qualities,
whose principles seem contrary? That our writings should be at the same time
subtle and solid, strong and delicate, profound and polite. That we should
always join together Art and Nature, sweetness and majesty, perspicuity and
brevity, liberty and exactness, boldness and modesty, nay sometimes even
madness and reason? It Is very much if our birth gives us a part of that which
is necessary for these great things, we must receive all the rest from our
breeding; we must have recourse to precepts, examples, friends and masters; and
these precepts, these examples, these friends, these masters, it is amongst you
Gentlemen that I look to find them. What shall I say now of the sweetness which
I fancy to my self of your Conferences? Those whom you admit unto them may
perhaps express in some sort both the honor and the profit which they expect
thence; but as for that pleasure, which doubtless the sweet commerce of good
things affords you, that pleasure, which virtue joined to friendship, which the
union of spirits, and the conformity of laudable desires, do infuse into all
your conversations, one must, if I be not deceived, taste it for to comprehend
it; it is felt and cannot be expressed. I call to witness your selves, Gentlemen,
I call to witness these hours which slide away so fast, and that importune
darkness, which most commonly comes sooner then you desire, to part you, and to
break up these Assemblies.

But I dwell too long, Gentlemen, on that which is least peculiar in your
benefit. It would have been my duty to have thanked you thus, if you had
granted this honor to my merit, to my earnest supplications, to the necessity
of filling your company, and obeying your Statutes. But now that you shut your
eyes upon all my defects, that you prevent both my endeavors and my hopes, that
for me you forget your customs and your Laws, that there is no obstacle so
great, but your goodness surmounts it; With what words, with what eloquence,
although 'twere even your own, can I sufficiently thank you? I will not here
examine those defects, which you have been pleased not to consider, and which
should have hindered you from casting your thoughts on me; and I would to God I
could either wholly amend them, or hide them from you as long as I live. But I
know not how to be silent of this excess, this profuseness of your favors,
this manner of obliging me, contrary to all precedents. I am afraid, Gentlemen,
I speak too boldly of it; you have done, methinks, in this action, both more
then you ought, and more then you could; you have in some sort, preferred my
glory before your own, the interest of a private person without desert, before
that of all your most noble Body, I thought, Gentlemen; and perhaps you thought
so too, that this should have been the principal matter of my Discourse: But
how can I enlarge any farther on a subject, where if I would commend your
bounty, I see my self almost constrained to blame your indulgence, where all my
thanks would be reproaches, where I can neither defend you without pride, nor
accuse you without ingratitude? Of a truth if the Academy never did so much
honor to any man, never had any man so firm and so true a design to honor it;
if for my sake it has violated its own Laws, it shall never complain that I
violate them. But yet I fear that all my good resolutions cannot excuse hers.
What am I, Gentlemen, that in favor of me those foundations should be shaken
which were laid with so much judgment, and strengthened by the practice of so
many years? What am I that to give me entrance into this sacred place, it
should be necessary, not to open the gates thereof; but, if I may be bold to
say it, to beat down the ramparts, and the walls, as they are wont to do for a
triumphant victorious King. I shall be carried away with vanity if I proceed
any farther. I feel that sweet confusion thoughts, which proceeds from joy and
gratitude, and all those other delightful passions when they are at the highest
pitch: and in this disorder of my soul; all I can do is to resume my own words,
to make an end just as I began, and to shut up all with this conclusion: If you
expected from me thanks that should have been answerable to the greatness of
your benefit, or to the dignity of this Assembly; I make no question but you
have already repented you of all the favors you have done me: But if to
deserve them be nothing else but perfectly to understand the value of them,
never man deserved them better then I, and you never made a more judicious
election.

FINIS.

