official seal of Bristol, England
EBEN EZER, As a Thankful Remembrance of Gods great goodness unto the City
of BRISTOLL, in preserving them from the Forces of Prince Rupert without, and a
Treacherous plot within, to betray the City to them the seventh day of March
1642.
T. P. dedicates this.
Exodus 12. 14. And this day shall be unto you for a memorial., ver. 42. It is
a night to be much observed unto the Lord. Judge. 5. 11. They that are delivered
from the noise of Archers in the places of drawing water, there shall they
rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord, even the righteous acts toward the
inhabitants of his Villages in Israel.
O Thou who do excel the highest praise,
Thou wonder-worker, life and length of days,
Thou never-failer in the mount to thine,
Only wise, present, in each place and time,
What Brazen Colume, or what Marble stone,
Shall we ingrave thy noble Acts upon?
This act, thy strange act, counterplotting those
Blood-thirsting (Foraine and Domesticke) foes?
O native City how can thou be still?
What would have more thy mouth with praise to fill?
Is health, or wealth, or plenty worth the having?
Or seed immortal, sent thee for soule-saving?
Or Life, that blessings make the rest to thee
Matters of praise? then sing a part with me.
Septembers seventh was thankful for the Scots,
And we not for our selves, whose lives by lots
Like Hamans bloody prodigy was cast
This present March? it might have been our last,
The rising Sun might warm our frozen breast,
More then a falling. Scots then, now we had rest.
Startle the Muses, rattle up the Quires,
Of sweetest Music, Citizens Bonfires,
Let Bells, and Cannons roar, your joys expressing;
Young Men and Virgins, in your comely dressing,
A way to Church in flocks, the touling Bell
Toules now for Heaven, is not for death or Hell:
Each street is echoing praise, the sword is staid,
The horned Rams in Isaaks place are laid:
So let them perish and endure disgrace,
That Traitors prove unto their native place.
The King of heaven our gracious King preserv,
But those that do his Grace pretend to serve,
I wish they may prove upright, faithful, good,
But for to plot to shed their Neighbors blood,
As some have done, and in this plot would do,
They prove no less then King and Kingdoms foe.
O Prince of Peace, let it not seem too great,
That Prince and Peers, and Peoples hearts may meet,
And all in unity and peace as one,
Build Zions walls, and down with Babylon,
Till when, for mercies let us thankful be,
And until then, never unbend our knee.
So praise, and pray, and Fast and pray again,
Until the God of Peace shall say Amen.
Printed at London for Michael Spark senior, 1643.


