THE Lovv Dutch charactered THEIR BUTTER-BOX OPENED, And their JUGGLES
Apprehended and Reproved.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Francis Cossinet at the
Anchor and Mariner in Tower-street. 1658.

The Low Dutch Charactered, their Butter-box opened, and their Juggles
apprehended and reproved.
LOw Dutch, that to Religion do pretend, A little Religion, and as little Zeal
serves their turns.

Your Wits, your Studies and Endeavors bend
To cheat, connive, play Bo-peep, and defraud, Plentifully, readily.

Yea, for your profit, you will turn a Bawd
To all the world, They keep their fashions, alter not their manners.
but lately to England
Your Juggles have appeared at command.
You, you Trunk-breeches, you great Butter-boxes, Any thing for gelt.

We did not think you would been such crafty Foxes; Give him his great belly full
and make him sat, he will feed the worms and manure the earth the better.

Sometimes you will strike us, then again you will stroke us,
And for your gain you will be like Hocus Pocus.
You that for earths great globe do naught but gape,
Can Proteus like appear in any shape:
Your selves you do invelope in each State, A welcome gift. Their golden chain
and silver engine, reaches over the seas and works strange effects on land.

And by your tricks fill Europe with debate;
You Will have a hand in Councels, you an Oar
In every boat, you will have a trick in store,
Neatly to cozen under specious shows,
To Enrich your kinders and your Bumkin vrows, Take a Chamber, and procure one
to own a small adventure, and become a Burger, their ship and goods free of the
place.

Your fast and loose, your craft who can abide
When you appear a Jack of every side?
Sometimes Hamburgians, sometimes Norwaigens;
Sometimes Osterlins, Swead, Pruise, Breamingens,
Sometimes English, French, Flandern and Hollander, In these countries they
have great trade, and vend their commodities here.

Thus for your Gelt you will become a Pander.
The Seas and Coasts you range for your advance,
To Italy, Spain, to Portugal and France,
To Norway, Island, Russia, Greenland fly
For every sort of their Commodity;
But you, fat Hanses, when you sometimes lurk
Within the Territories of the Turk,
You then come home by sad and weeping cross,
And often are forced to lament your Loss.
Your Mennists will not fight, they are so dismayed, Their Annaba ptists.

And all the rest are often much afraid;
Thus with your Avarice you have increast at length, Those Shipping that most
anoy most Dutch ships, taken from them for lack of defense or force and
resistancee:

Together with your faintness, their great strength:
Your Ships, your Men, your Ammunition taken,
By which so many Christians have been shaken.
Your Ships, your Guns, your Ammunition serve
The Turk and Indian Confines to preserve. Witness their great Trade and
Commerce where ought of worth is to be found.

The Coasts of Africa, and the Indians all,
And every part within this Earthly Ball
You Would sail about for your own private gain,
Though you're not loved where ere you do remain: The Indians, Europians,
Africans and Turks loves them not.

Let the whole world declare the truth, you will find
That they will unrip the baseness of your mind:
You are so greedy, They will do any thing to prefer their own inter est:
Observe this English men. -- Not long since the Poor distressed States, now The
High and Mighty Lords, the States General, etc.
and so avaricious,
So jealous, so colloguing, so suspicious,
And generally so naught you still are found,
I wonder much you live above the ground.
Learn once to know, and mind from whence you came,
You late were low, and shortly may the same,
Although you cannot change your Belgic faces,
Nor in the least alter your rustic paces, Their ships and goods fraudently
owned and colored by others, and their names and places from whence they came,
changed.

Nor put into new form your Giant-breeches,
And always are betrayed by your Speeches;
Yet are you pleased to re-baptize your Ships,
And give them new names with your cheating lips:
And with a Bribe or Pudding in your sleeve, The Dutch Masters and men
frequently sail our English ships contrary to Law.

Sometimes your pleased to make us here believe
Your Ships are English, or else some other Nation
That foreign is, to color with persuasion
Some Goods prohibited, or do belong
To some Dutch English Merchant, though it be wrong:
A thousand slights more which I Will not rehearse, This may appear by a thousand
witnesses.

Lest it should mount the score, and wiredraw my verse. Plenty of English Gold
in Holland, etc.

From us you do receive our richest Gold,
And in your arms the same you do enfold;
Our Wool, Cloth, Stuff, Fulling, Earth, They have more privileges here, then
our selves can obtain.
Lead and Tin
From us to enrich your selves, you daily win.
These and an hundred Advantages more,
Arrives with you from our most fertile Shore. Our own faults and neglects.

It Is known so to you all, without all doubt, Their Agents here get great
Estates, drive great Trades, and by their purses and favors do what they please.

Who comes to dwell here, they will hardly out:
But in exchange, what have you to command?
Not the tenth of that which grows in our Land:
For our rich Goods you bring us Cickshaws, Toys,
Cheese, Butter, Phrigmiticks, they are all your joys, What consideralbe does
the United Provinces of their own growth yield us: Quere.

Your wealth, your treasure, naught else does appear
But what you forced are to fetch elsewhere:
You're sensible we lately made you stoop,
And brought your Button to our English Loop, The late Wars testimony.

Your men, your ships, your strength could not prevail, The men of War then
fired, sunk, and run for it, the Merchant, men and Fishers to a great number
taken, as by the List appears.

Though you did answer us with tooth and nayl;
And at the last it was the Lords good pleasure
That you for rashness should repent at leisure:
We brought you to our lock, now be not proud,
Least that our Canons roar again more loud. They seek Peace, and sign Articles
in haste, the Articles well drawn, but not so well kept, and since have
recovered their Losses upon us, to the ruin of our Nation and Trade, many know
to their cost with a witness.

Neptune has worsted you, The many great wrongs and injuries offered formerly
contain too large here to particularize, and is left to the judgment of them
that know.
if Mars appear
Upon your land, he will give you cause to fear
Your horrid murders and outrageous acts,
Innumerable Juggles and Contracts,
To root out Nations, and their Rights destroy,
India's and Europe speaks to their annoy,
And Neptunes witness on record still stands
And speaks the cruel actings of your hands;
Ambyona, and twice more, England remember,
And keep in mind as fifth day of November.
Know, This we are confident, and they are fearful of, otherwise they would not
so frequently compound for their offenses and breach of, etc.
know that English hearts were nere so low,
But able were to give a fatal blow
To up-start Holland, therefore don't provoke
Our English Nation, lest we do you choke
With such a Pear you never well shall relish,
Which shall our English Nation much imbellish.
Tremble and fear, We are compelled to conform, if not willing, much more
should they. Let them go on or stop their sail, ere they have left us empty and
bare of shipping, trade, and all.
we will make you stand in awe,
And be afraid to break our Britain Law,
And if you will to final ruin run,
And act like Jugglers as you have begun,
And go about to spoil our whole Commerce,
You soon may feel that Steel that shall you pierce.
And as you have appeared to Spain a friend, It Is known how their ships and men
assisted Flanders and Spain against us, besides they are the carriers of all
between, etc.

And covert in this Contest aid them lend;
So for a certain, treacherous Dutchman, know,
Our greatest strength upon you we will show.
If humane justice reach you not, be sure
That Divine Justice stroke you must endure.
Let this for aye remain within your breast,
That to eternity you may be blessed. If all their faults provoke not our
patience to requite them, they will be met with --

Deal justly, heartily, let honesty appear,
That so you may be freed from Pannick fear.
Look on Religion, Conscience play good parts, Their gross feeding and clownish
breeding, bath quite spoiled them from being nobly minded.

And though not noble, show your selves true hearts;
Do not equivocate, do righteous things,
Give due respect to Nations, Laws and Kings;
Leave of your former juggles, upright be, If they minded this as well as they
do their copehandle, they were admirable men. We must all appear.

And for the future all base actions flee:
Remember that a dreadful day does come,
A day of Judgment, day of saddest doom,
Wherein you will stand to render an account
Before a Judge, whose justice does surmount
The Scripture, heavens, seasons, Be ready.
changes show
The time is near that we to Judgment go.
Compiled and published in the year of Expectation of the amendment of their
Manners and Lives, by T.P. a true friend of the English interest, dwelling in
Plain-dealing-street within two doors of the sign of the Dutch Juggling-box,
being in the year of our Lord God, 1658.
FINIS.

