A TRUE INVENTORY OF THE Goods and Chattels OF SVPERSTITION.

Late of the Parish of Ignorance, in the County of Blind-Devotion, and in the
Kingdom of Idolatry, deceased: Taken and apprised, this nineteenth of February
Anno Domini 1642.

AS ALSO, A Relation of the Popes being in a swoun, at the News of the
abolishment of Superstition in the Kingdom of England.

In the Clymactericall year of the Bishops, Anno Dom. 1642.

By R. P.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LEE. 1642.

A true Inventory of the Goods and Chattels of Superstition, late of the Parish
of Ignorance in the County of Blind-Devotion, and in the Kingdom of Idolatry,
deceased: Taken and apprised, Febr. 19. 1642.
IMprimis, In the Hall 14. pictures: viz. of his Holiness the Pope Pius 5. of
the Virgin Mary, of Saint Peter, and the rest of the Apostles. 300. li. Item,
the Tapestry which hangs about the said Hall, wherein is wrought and woven the
Pictures of diverse Saints departed, holy Fathers, Patriarchs, Cardinal,
Bishops, Priests, Jesuits, and Friars. 100. li. Item, in the said Hall, the
Table, Carpets, Chaires, Cushions, and other implements of household stuff, all
of them curiously wrought and enameled with pictures of Crosses, ancient
Fathers of the Church of Rome, and the like. 30. li.
In the Parlour.
Item, two Images of the Virgin Mary, and of Christ her Son. 20. li. Item,
behind the Hangings in this Parlour, Images of most of the Popes that have been
since Saint Peter left Rome, who I believe was never there. 100. li. Item, the
Images of diverse ghostly Fathers. 10. li. Item, a rich enameled close
Cup-boord, wherein is kept holy-Bread, Holy Water, and fragments of their
Eucharist. 30. li. Item, other ceremonious Implements in the said Parlour; as
Prayer-books to Saints, Masse-books, and the like. 10. li.
In the Chamber over the Hall.
Item, diverse Pictures and Images of several Kings and Queens of the Romish
Religion. 1000. li. Item, a canopy-Bed, on which is engraven in gold and silver
set with precious stones and jewels, sent as tokens from his Holiness that now
is, with the Bedding, Curtains, and Vallans, and other things thereunto
appertaining, diverse Relics of Saints, as of Saint Peter and others. 2000. li
Item, a pair of Andirons gilded, wherein is engraven the images of his
Holiness the Pope and S. Peter. 20 li.
In the Chamber over the Parlour.
Item, diverse Pictures and Images of her Ancestors and Progenitors of her
Brothers, Sisters, Children, and Kindred departed. 100. li. Item, a pair of
Andirons, wherein is engraven the Images of the Virgin Mary, and her Son
Christ, commanding him to hear the Prayers of Saints on her behalf, whom she
daily prays unto. 10 li. Item, in the Library or Study in this Chamber, a Book
called Pope Gregory the ninth his opinions of the Religion of Rome, a Book of
Traditions and holy Ordinances of diverse other holy Popes; a Book of Apocrypha,
valued above Canonical Scripture; a Book against the Apocalypse of Saint John
the Evangelist; the Old Testament after their Translation; a Book of Ave
Mary's; a Book of Imprecations and Prayers to Saints and holy men departed; all
which are in the Latin tongue: and diverse other learned Books, in all
amounting to 1000. li.
In the Chapel of Ease adjoining to the House.
Item, all the Pictures, Images, and Relics of Saints, of Popes, holy
Fathers, and others of the order of holy Priest hood. 1000. li. Item, Tombs of
Saints, with the images of them intombed; with Prayers and Crosses upon the
same for their coming out of Purgatory. 1000. li. Item, the Ornaments of
divine Worship lying in the Vestry, as Copes, Hoods, Lawn sleeves, Surplices,
Caps for Cardinals, Miters, three-corned Caps, two-cornerd Caps, and the like
implements to the same appertaining. 500. li. Item, at the celebration of the
Eucharist, no Wine, bowing, creeping, crawling, cringing, whipping, slashing,
beating, thumping, sighing, howling, and the like. 1000. li. Item, the garments
for the Priests, lesuites, Friars, white, gray, and black; plasters for their
bald Crowns, and the like. 100. li. Item, Bowing to the East, and at the name
of JESUS, creeping to the Altar, standing up at Gloria Patri, and the like, as
Tapers, Wax-candles, Dirges, Masses, and Trentals. 10000. li. Item, her own
wearing apparel, and her Beads, Red Crosses, and signing her with the Cross,
sprinkling her self with Holy Water, which she daily uses. 1000. li
Summa total. 16730.

A Relation of the Popes being in a Swoun at the News of Abolishment of
Superstition in the Kingdom of England, in the Clymactericall year of the
Bishops, 1642.
THere being diverse Intelligencers, as it is generally conceived, now resident
in the Kingdom of England, that hold private correspondency with his Holiness
the Pope of Rome; that have certified his Holiness of the present estate,
this, and other his Majesty's Kingdoms stands now in; and the great affairs
in Agitation by the great and high Court of Parliament therein now assembled,
and congregated for the settling of the peace and quiet of the same; the
rectifying, and regulating of the corruptions innovated into Religion, and for
the making of good and wholesome Laws, for the Government of his Majesty's good
People, and Loyal Subjects, in purity and righteousness; and to suppress,
and punish Vice and enormous offenses, practiced, and agitated by all such
persons disaffected to the welfare and prosperity thereof, of what dignity, or
degree soever they be, whether Spiritual, or Temporal. His Holiness, at
those tidings, grew much Malcontent, fearing the effect thereof might prove
dangerous, and destructive to the peace and prosperity of the Kingdom of
Idolatry; whereof he has been the principal defender and preserver. To
prevent and avoid which dangers, threatened by the calling of this Parliament:
He endeavored what in his power lay, by his Spirits, Priests, and Jesuits,
infused into the body of that State, to work and agitate with the Bishops, and
Prelaticall faction, that were in subjection and obedience, or well-wishers,
and great favorers to that Kingdom of Idolatry, and the pious intentions of
his Holiness to defend and preserve the same, to hinder their proceedings and
intentions in settling and establishing true Religion in that Kingdom: the
effects whereof have a long time succeeded according to their desires; but the
Policy and Wisdom of that State perceiving the same, they then endeavored to
prevent, and annihilate their designs.

First, by accusing and impeaching the Grand Instrument of practicing and
agitating their hinderance in the same, his little grace, and less gracious,
the Archbishop, or intended Patriarch of Lambeth and Canterbury; and confining
him to his private lodging in his strong Castle, and secure place of residence,
the Tower; whereby he became useless to the rest in perfecting their designs
concerning that business.

Secondly, the accusation and impeachment of diverse Prelates, Adherents; and
Allyances to that faction; the little Wren, and the Bishop of Bathe and Wells,
and many others, of great and enormous crimes, confining them likewise to
several places, under the like Jurisdiction of the Black Rod, of security and
safety.

Thirdly, the Grand Impeachment and accusation of no less then twelve of the
greatest Competitors of that saction, of no less crimes then High Treason, for
their perverse and wicked practices; upon which they were always confined to
the seventh days society of their Grand Patron, and Master Little Laud, in his
Princely Palace the Tower; there to have residence for their security, during
the pleasure of the Prince of that Kingdom, and the whole State now assembled
in Parliament.

Fourthly, the putting down the votes of Prelates, and their sitting in
Parliament, as a party in the House of Peers, and taking from them all
Temporal Jurisdiction in any affairs of State, or Civil Government,

Fifthly, their endeavors to take away the Votes, and sitting in Parliament, of
Popish Lords, Alliances, and favorers of that faction.

Sixthly, their proceedings against scandalous and disaffected persons of the
Inferior Clergy, well minded toward that Religion, and great defenders
privately of the same.

Seventhly, the disarming of all Popish Recusants, whereby they are left
destitute of all hopes to defend and preserve themselves and their Religion.

Eighthly, and lastly, the putting of the Laws of that Kingdom in execution
against his Holiness, the Spirits, Priests, and Jesuits: whereby all hopes of
inducement of his Majesty's good Subjects to side with them, and favor their
cause, is quite taken away.

His Holiness having received certain intelligence of these proceedings by
the Parliament in England; at the receipt whereof, his Holiness fell
immediately into a deadly swoun; but by the help of his Magicians, Physicians,
I would have said: being recovered again to his senses, they then fell into
consultation, what means were best to be used to prevent a dangerous
sickness, and general plague that might fall by this misfortune, not only on
the person of his Holiness, but on the whole Kingdom of Idolatry; and at last
concluded these remedies were best to be used for the stopping, and prevention
of these future dangers threatened.

First, to raise Rebellion in his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, of all that
faction, against Protestants, and all that shall seek the ruin and
destruction of his Holinesses Kingdom in that State.

Secondly, to send instruments of mischief privately into England, to stir
up all Catholics in that Kingdom to raise the like sedition and Rebellion,
to put into combustion and trouble that State also; whereby the Parliament
being busily employed in appeasing such mutinies, may neglect their proceedings
in settling true Religion, and abolishing Superstition.

And lastly, to practice privately by treacherous Stratagems to bring to
destruction diverse worthy Peers of that Kingdom, and Members of the Commons
House, that do most labor and endeavor the extirpation of Popery, and all
Popish and superstitious Ceremonies, and corrupt Tenants in Doctrine and
Discipline, innovated, and introduced into the Religion established and settled
in that Kingdom.

FINIS.

