POEMS, Written by the RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF PEMBROKE, Lord Steward
of his Majesty's Household.

WHEREOF Many of which are answered by way of Repartee, BY Sr BENJAMIN RVDDIER,
KNIGHT.

With several Distinct POEMS, Written by them Occasionally, and Apart.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Inman, and are to be sold by James Magnes, in
Russel Street, near the Piazza, in Covent Garden, 1660.

To the Right Honorable CRISTIANA, COUNTESS of DEVONSHIRE, DOWAGER.
MADAM,
IT will be no small addition to all your great Titles and other Excellencies,
that you have been so careful to preserve, and now command to be published,
these elegant Poems; Neither could your Ladyship have employed one that would
bave more willingly obeyed your Commands, I having been obliged to that
Honorable Family, not only by descent, but am by many favors now bound to that
Person, who is Heir to all their Virtues as well as Fortunes. The Church that
covers his sacred ashes, must submit to time, and at last lie buried with him;
But this Monument that your Ladyship has erected to his memory, will out-last
the Calculation of all Astrologers; who though they could foretell the time
that he should leave us, could set no Date to the Fame that he should leave
behind him; which, though it have lain aslecp in all this noise of Drums and
Trumpets, when all the Muses seemed to be fled, and to have left nothing behind
them, but a few lame Iambicks, canting at the corners of our desolate streets;
yet they are now content to be awakened by your Ladyships command, and under
your Patronage to come abroad, and meet, and salute that peace that gave them
their first being, and to tell the World, that whatever was excellently said
to any Lady in all these Poems, was meant of you; and that the Poet himself
being inspired by your Ladyship, you only that are extracted from an ancient
and Royal Family, have the Right and power to give life and perpetuity to so
noble a person.

MADAM, Your most humble and obedient Servant,

TO THE READER.
IN the collecting of these Poemes (which were chiefly preserved by the
greatest Masters of Music, all the Sonnets being set by them) I was fain first
to send to Mr. Henry Laws, who furnishing me with some, directed me for the
rest, to send into Germany to Mr. Laneere, who by his great skill gave a life
and harmony to all that he set; so that if by their wandering some be
surreptitiously got into their company; or, if (the Author leaving no other
issue but these of his brain) some of these Nymphs seem a little more wanton
then the rest, of which there are but two or three Copies can be suspected,
they desire that they may not make their retreat, until the next Impression;
and then you will find many more ready to supply their room, which were not
come unto my hands when I published these.

EARL OF PEMBROKE, Lord Steward: SONNET.
CAn you suspect a change in me,
And value your own constancy?
O! no; you found that doubt in your own heart:
Where Love his images but kissed,
Not engraved; fearing that dainty flesh would smart,
And so his painful Sculpture would refist;
But wrought in mine without remorse,
Till he of it thy perfect Statue made
As full of sweetness as of force.
Only unkindness may the work invade,
And so it may defaced remain
But never can another form retain.
While we dispute our liberty
I have lost mine;
And which is worse, incline
To love that slavery:
Not the great Charter, nor King's Bench can free
Me from the Chain, wherein my thoughts she tied:
For our dull Earth what care is had we see,
Yet easily let our mind
Into more thraldom slide.
O that she were but kind!
To give for that a pledge;
There were my Law, and there my Privilege.
Dear, can you take my soul from me,
And yet have no belief
That I have grief?
Oh did your fair eyes ever see
(Without a painful force)
That sad divorce!
The Soul and Body love like me,
Not you; the Evening kind,
The morning of another mind,
And every several hour
Slack, and increase that power.
They are by Love made perfect One:
No less then Death makes them become Alone.
When the resistless flames of my desire
Make Aetna of my heart,
And I enraged, impart
The torments unto you, and press
For pity in this violent distress;
You sing, and think I feign this fire.
Because one frown of yours can all control,
Wrong not my pains; you are the true
Higher part of my soul,
The lower tyrant is to me, and slave to you.
Why do you give me leave to sip,
And pull the cup from my so thirsty lip
Before I drink?
Desire has left my heart to think,
And is dispersed in every outward part;
My hands, lips, eyes,
That all restraint despise.
While it was in my heart
It did your will, in chains of slavish fears,
But these have all no ears.
P.
IF her disdain least change in you can move,
you do not love;
For while your hopes give fuel to your fire,
you sell desire.
Love is not love, but given free;
And so is mine, so should yours be,
Her heart that melts to hear of others moan,
to mine is stone;
And eyes that weep a strangers hurt to see,
joy to wound me.
Yet I so much affect each part
As caused by them, I love my smart.
Think her unkindness justly must be graced
with Name of chaste;
And that the frowns least longing should exceed,
and raging preed.
So can her rigor never offend
Except self-love seek private end.
It Is Love breeds Love in me, and cold disdain
kills it again:
As water makes fire to fret and fume,
till all consume:
None can of Love more free gift make,
Then to Loves self for Loves own sake.
I Will never digg in Quarry of an heart
to have, nor part,
Nor roast in those fierce eyes which always are
Canicular.
Who this way would a Lover prove,
Does show his patience, not his love.
A frown may be sometimes for Physic good,
but not for food:
And for that raging humor there is sure
a gentler cure.
Why bar you Love of private end,
Which never should to public tend.
P.
I.
DIsdain me still, that I may ever love,
For who his love enjoyes, can love no more
The War once past, with Peace men Cowards prove,
And ships returned, do rot upon the shore.
Then though thou frown, I Will say thou art most fair,
And still I Will love, though still I must despair.
II.
As heat's to life, so is desire to love,
For these once quenched, both life and love are don;
Let not my sighs, nor tears, thy Virtue move,
Like basest Mettle, do not melt too soon:
Laughed at my woes, although I ever mourn;
Love surfeits with reward, his Nurse is scorn.
Shall Love that gave Latona's heir the foil,
(Proud of his Archery, and Pythons spoil)
And so enthralled him to a Nymphs disdain,
As when his hopes were dead, he full of pain,
Made him above all trees the Laurel grace,
An Emblem of Loves glory; his disgrace.
Shall he, I say, be termed a Footboy now,
That made all powers in heaven and earth to bow:
Or is it a fancy which themselves do frame,
And therefore dare baptize by any name,
A flaming straw, which one spark kindles bright,
And first hard breath out of it self does fright;
Whose father was a smile, and death a frown,
Soon proud of little, and for less cast down;
It Is so, and this a Lackey term you may,
For it runs often, and makes but shortest stay.
But thou, O Love, free from times eating rust
That set'st a limit unto boundless Lust,
Making desire grow infinitely strong,
And yet to one chaste subject does belong;
Bridling self-love, that flatters us in ease,
Quickening our wits to strive that they may please.
Fixing the wandering thoughts of straying youth;
The firmest band of Faith, the knot of Truth:
Thou that did never lodge in worthless heart,
Thou art a Master wheresoever thou art.
Thou make food loathsome, sleep to be unrest;
Lost labor easeful, scornful looks a feast.
And when thou will thy joies as far excel
All else, as when thou punishest thy Hell:
O make that Rebel feel thy matchless power,
Thou that made Jove a Bull, a Swan, a Shower;
Give him a love as tyrannous as fair,
That his desire go yoaked with despair.
Live in her eyes, but in her frozen heart
Let no thaw come, that may have sense of smart.
Let her a constant silence never break,
Till he do wish repulse to hear her speak.
And last, such sense of error let him have,
As he may never dare for mercy crave.
Then none will more capitulate with thee,
But of their hearts will yield the Empire free.
R.
NO praise it is that him who Python slew,
Love at his own tried weapon did subdue;
To all clear minds it does most clearly prove,
The greatest Monster of the two was Love.
O What a wretched power is tha^ and strange
To be invok't, which has such power to change
Our heavenly part into a Beast, a Tree,
Things which sensual still, or senseless be,
He that so well is read in Loves brave story,
And is so jealous of his wayning glory;
How could he omit (like a young beginner)
Hercule the strong, Loves valiant Spinner.
But what boots it his famous acts to name,
When in them lies concea'ld, his greater shame:
For this declares that (at his cheapest rate)
He always makes a man effeminate.
And whosoever Loves, he down does bring
From that he was, into some meaner thing,
Shows him ridiculous to standers by,
And quite bereaves him of perceiving why.
N^w why should Love a Foot-boys place despise,
When higher then the Earth he does not rise?
And I have often seen his Greatness trudge
In little Errands, like a worthless Drudge:
I will send him at any time a mile,
To fetch me thence the meaning of a smile,
A look, a not-look, a silence, a frown,
For Privatives he will lacky up and down;
Yet let no man believe what he does say,
Fa^se answers still he coyneth by the way:
It Is well if he this title high can keep;
For where love cannot go, it is known he will creep:
And fit it is the Rule which he has got
From Reason, by a base usurping P^ot,
By under-means; should likewise be maintained,
Power evermore is held as it is gained.
Base Love, the stain of Youth, the scorn of Age,
The folly of a Man, a Woman's rage,
Order's Consounder, Secret's light discloser,
Disturber of all sorts, a King's deposer;
The canker of a froward Wit, thou art,
The business of an idle empty heart;
The rack of jealousy and sad Mistrust,
The smooth and justified Excuse of Lust;
The thief which wastes the taper of our life,
The quiet Name of restless jarres and strife;
The F^ye which does corrupt and quite distaste
All happiness, if thou therein becast;
The greatest and the most concealed Imposter
That ever vain Credulity did foster:
A Mountebank, extolling trifles small;
A jugler, playing loose (not fast) with all.
An Alchimist whose Promises are Gold,
Payment but Dross, and Hope at highest sold.
This, this is Love, and worse then I can say,
Where he a Master is, and bears the sway,
He guides like Phaeton, burns and destroys,
Parches and stifles what else would be joys.
But when clear Reason sits in the throne,
Governs his beams (which otherwise are none
But darts and mischief) then sun like he
Does actnate produce, ripen and free
From grossness those good seeds which in us lie,
Till then (as in a grave) and there would dye.
All high Perfections in a perfect Lover,
His warmth does cherish, and his light discover:
He gives an even temper of delight
Without a minutes loss; no fears affright,
Nor interrupt the joys such love does bring,
Nor no enjoying can dry up the spring.
Unto another he lends out our pleasure,
That (with the use) it may come home a treasure.
Pure lynk of bodies, where no lust controuls
The fatness and security of souls;
Sweetest path of life, Virtue in full sail,
Fresh budding hope, whose fruit does never fail.
To this, dear Love, I do not Rebel stand,
Though not employed, yet ready at command.
But as for him who in his fit did curse
And rave at me, I cannot wish him worse
Then he already does appear to be,
Full of distemper in extreme degree:
In this hard state he rather needs prayer,
His strong deluded fancy to repair.
Wherefore O Reason high, thou who art King
Of the worlds King, and do in order bring
The wild affections which so often swerve
From thy just Rule, and Rebel Passion serve.
Thou, without whose light Loves fire is smoke,
Puts out eyes and mind, all true sense does choke;
Restore this man unto himself again,
Send him a lively feeling of his pain;
Give him a healthy and discerning taste
Of food, and rest, that he may rise at last
By strength of thee, from this strange strong Disease,
Wherein the danger is, that it does please.
What help for him who takes his sickness part?
It must be only thy great work, and art.
Provide him also of thy sober hand,
A thrifty course of breath, which long may stand:
Least he in sighs do prodigally spend,
Before one loving Moon do change and end,
More then would find him life for many years,
If he were rid of these false-seeming fears.
Grant this, O Reason, at his deep request,
Who never loved to see thy power suppressed.
And now to you, Sir Love, your love I crave;
Of you no Mast'ry I desire to have:
But that we may like honest friends agree,
Let us to Reason fellow servants be.
P.
IT is enough, a Master you grant Love
At one weapon, 'twas all I sought to prove:
For worth, not weakness, makes him use but one;
While that subdues all strength, all Are alone.
I studied not examples in this kind,
They were far harder to avoid, then find:
And that to worthless forms Love changes us,
Makes not him blush, not his ridiculous.
For in his Wars Love diversely proceeds,
Sometime by force, sometime by sleight he speeds.
When he will force, then arms he his to fight
In strength of merit, riches of delight.
But when by stratagems he means surprise,
His men in forms more mean he will disguise:
Not bearing to the forms themselves respect,
But careful to avoid his foes suspect:
And when as this with jests their wits are worn,
Do Lovers or the Laughers bear the scorn?
But O! how finely with your self you play,
When with this quick conceit you run away;
That you make love to Lacky up and down,
To fetch the meaning of a smile, or frown:
Alas, in these slight Errand; he sends you,
Wherein your Powers trudge as if they flew,
Making the least which to his pleasure tends,
A thing wherein your weal or woe depends.
Nor Plots he to dissolve by feigned delight,
Over the Senses Reasons Sovereign right;
But Reason finding Love to rule more fit,
She does that Government to him commit;
And so 'twixt these there is no factious strife,
Love here the husband is, Reason the wife;
Not grudging at her husband's active sway,
But thinks she rules so just laws to obey:
And Love this title high thus got may keep,
A threadbare Proverb cannot make him creep.
And for that rabble of confused Names,
Which to Love's charge you lay, as bitter blames,
They touch not him, he in himself divine,
To falsehood nor to weakness can incline;
If not disfigured by our fleshly mask,
As Wine corrupted by a faulty eask.
He is no Mountebanck, his wares do reach
Beyond the setting forth of any speech,
Nor Alchimist, but that Elixar old,
Which turns Lust's Mercury to friendship's Gold.
And so the rest wherewith you stain his Name,
Will turn considered rightly to his fame.
I do not sever Love from Reason's law,
But say that they in one sweet yoke do draw;
Nor let your wit dissension strive to make,
When they in joint command such pleasure take.
As for the joys which from these joined do flow,
To be beyond expression I do know;
So may they fall on you from Love's large hand,
If to this Love you do not Rebel stand,
And we in one Opinion shall agree,
If both, to both, may fellow servants be.
For me if Skeptic like you will dispute,
And what I feel in heart, with words refute,
Go on, and laugh at Loves commanding fire,
Till you cannot your scorched self retire.
My Curse a Blessing was, your Prayer a Curse,
For not to love, then scorn in love is worse.
O let sighs prodigally spend my breath,
My sufferings doubled be, until my death;
So but in one kind look they her engage,
One hour so lived, is longer then an age.
R.
NOt like a Skeptic equally distract,
Nor like a Sophister of sleights compact,
Nor to vie Wit (a vanity of youth)
Nor for the love of Victory, but Truth,
The lists again I enter, bold assured,
Within my Causes right, strongly immured.
Man unto man both Text and Comment is,
They that best read this Character of his,
His body, and they that most understand
The sense thereof (his soul) do both command.
This as a firm rule infallibly true,
Not to be changed for one more weak, more new;
That Reason holds the head, and highest part;
The Affections lower are placed in the heart,
To show that they must serve and still obey;
Reason must Ruler be, and bear the sway.
From this pure fountain see how pure the streams
Do run, from this bright Sun how fair the beams.
Anger w^^lst he a servant true persisteth,
Whetteth mild just^ce sword, Valor assisteth:
But when his power to himself he takes,
He naught but brauls and wars and slaughters makes;
Furthereth revenge, injustice, wrong, and hate;
Nothing but blood his sury can abate:
And that but for a while, for hot and dry,
He thirsts often, as often for blood does cry.
And so of all the affections of the mind,
When them we do in due obedience find,
Great helps they are, and ministers of good,
But else to vice a fierce and headlong brood.
What privilege beyond the rest has Love;
Show his exemption, and his freedom prove:
Is he no Affection? then is he worse:
A Passion, the bodies waster, minds curse.
As long as he to Reason yields subjection,
He is the best and principal affection;
Effects most good, the cement, band and tie
Of humane fellowship, wherein does lie
All the dear comforts which makes life a life:
Without whose influence, nothing but strife
Would bring us together, or we should live
Straggling alone, and no account could give
That e're we had been here; with us would die
(Summed in our deaths) life of posterity.
When best things are corrupt, they most are so;
Love once defected does most Traitor grow,
And works against Reason with more violence
Then all the rest, and with more smooth pretense:
I need not here repeat, will not enlarge
His faults, I lothly take against Love that charge;
I only say, that Reason is his King.
And Love at highest, is his underling.
You do confess, or truth does it extort,
That Reason sovereign is, in dearest sort;
Committing unto Love the senses state,
Which shows Love's Power is but subordinate:
But then again, where you would end the strife,
Making Love the Husband, Reason the Wife,
You begin anew; Error has no stay,
Runs infinitely on, but not one way;
Crosses it self, finds no resting place;
Appears always with another face;
Increases faster, and does multiply
Beyond the breed of any spawned fry.
Truth is still one, it is one center and end
Still like it self, and to it self a friend.
Who gave the soul's Abstract, Intelligences,
Bodies and Sex (nearer to bring the senses
Acquainted with them, and their high enjoy)
Made love a lasting and perpetual Boy;
Still in minority, never of age,
Because to govern he is most unfit,
By Nonage fair excuse they him acquit.
Nature's best observers, the wise Egyptians
In their abstruse and mystical descriptions,
Did of each Element two Sexes frame,
Which yet (for Marriage sake) had but one name:
Of Fire the Mast'ring heat, they made the Male;
The Female, what was flaming, weak and pale:
Of Air, the Man was active, busling wind,
The rainy weeping Clouds of Womankind;
The deep and boundless Sea was Masculine,
The shallow slender Rivers Feminine;
Of Earth the constant Rocky part was he,
The gentle yiedling tilled vein a she.
So in the Soul, Understanding, and Will,
Betwixt themselves hold such proportion still,
As Male and Female: He strongly imprints
Upon her easiness, she never stints,
But straight pursues with ready inclination,
Or quickly shuns with shrinking aversation,
As is the object he begets on her,
So her desires do duly move and stir.
What else is reason (to be more exact)
But the redoubled and reflected act
Of Understanding? what the affections?
But the agitations and ejections
Of Will where love is one; as all may see
To Reason born a servant by degree.
If you in ought conformity had held
With Natures course, and not against all rebelled,
But Reason Husband, Love for Wife had meant,
I straight to be at peace had given consent;
Not thought it strange, but should been well apaid,
That Reason now had married her Handmaid,
In hope that she in duty for that honor
Which he in grace had thus bestowed upon her,
Would strive by all obedience to appear
More lovely in his eyes, and still more clear.
Thus having made it safe, That every way
Love must as a servant, or as a wife obey,
I here might rest against Truth's brazen wall,
And not regard the drops which on it fall.
Yet will I wipe away, as they do lie,
Some spots, which you have dashed in passing by;
And first, That Love does hurt and overthrow,
Does him no Master make, but Monster show;
A Master's strength preserves, a Monsters spoils,
It is the use that Force from Vice assoyles:
Strange things of wars and stratagems you tell,
And little business with great words does swell:
What helps 'twixt truth and me this grave formality,
Love is a sneaking corner-seeking quality,
Which hates the light, chooses false times and shapes,
To make his drifts to cover his escapes;
And when he is discryed, his vizard torn,
He proves a lucky jest, a fertile scorn.
Love sends rot me, nor need I vainly go
To fetch the meanings which I always know,
Her single heart is one, and one to me
Dares show it self, it is so clean, so free;
From thence such warrant have I of her smiles,
That I mistrust them not for glittering wiles;
But know when the deep channel of her heart
With joy is over-fill'd, it does impart
Some to the banks, and flows into her face,
Which leaves thereon a fresh and springing grace.
Her frowns I know not what, nor that they are,
When Reason rules, Love feasts on no such fare;
Tastes naught but what is pure, and truly sweer,
Then bodies do but bring the souls to meet.
Who light shines through, and all within discovers,
No thought lies hid 'twixt such beloved Lovers;
Sly reservations, shuffling excuses,
Minced favors, made frowns, welcome abuses
Lose then their use, and have at all no place,
When Love is Master, they have only grace.
A Proverbs proof is not so soon put off
By slight neglect, or by a mighty scoff;
Whose truth his life has hitherto maintained,
And through so many ages credit gained;
They are the Quintessence of Truths, extract
From vulgar use, and of such strength compact,
That they have lived (indeed) in living men,
Since many volumns writ by mortal pen
Are dead and gone, and more to ruin tend,
Whilst these from Sire to Son do still descend,
Nor needs it as a fault be here excused,
That I expressed a Nature most confused,
In terms so like it self, for Love once gone
From Reason, has no hold to rest upon.
But our unseas'ned flesh you rather blame,
Which unto me does just appear the same,
As if you should condemn the Mice, not Swine,
Who love to wallow there, and think it fine.
Likewise the friendship which such love does breed,
Does end in hate both of themselves, and deed:
When ever you can Love to Reason marry,
I will not from that happy wedding tarry;
So that you sex them right by natures law,
But yield them all the service, fear, and awe,
Which unto such a King and Queen belong,
Whose force will so united grow more strong.
I mean not to deny, had rather cure
The pangs your heart infected does endure;
And for Love's scorching fits I fear them nor,
Reason or Love shall be my antidote,
But not to love, then scorn in love is worse:
This baseness is to man, the greatest curse,
A scorn no being has, cannot proceed
From an inferior in word or deed:
How can we so unman our selves, and fall
Beneath that creature which was made of all
Next under us, to be more evident,
Who stands as he was born, cannot consent.
Bad usage soon would force my heart to turn,
And made the fire of Love to anger burr;
But you do all so willingly abide,
As that your ease would be the sicker side.
A small reward will you contentment give,
When but a Phoenix death you wish to live,
Where may you burn in flames both short and sweet,
Thus since our wills will not our Prayers meet.
P.
MEn sad and settled, love not to contend,
Dispute my wounds may vex, but never mend;
If Love had pleased I might have tasted joy
In as full measure as I prove annoy:
But Princes show on some their Power, their Grace
On some, and both without control do place.
Me for the first, O me Love kept in store,
When to that cruel Fair he gave me over,
In whom all worth so eminent appears,
As her disdain the style of justice bears;
And thus with me Love played a Master-part,
When with one choice he hurt and pleased my heart.
For then I am, let me more wretched prove,
If her (however unkind) I leave to love;
Thus to be fond of scorn, you sickness call,
In truth it is I, to love my Lord am thrall;
It Is he that makes me find these wonders true,
And he may work the same as well in you;
For even in your sound health I find this strife,
Love late was Reasons Lackey, now his wife:
But to conclude debate, whilst you are free,
You may make Love even what you list to be,
As those that will describe an unknown Land,
Place Cities, Rivers, Hills where none do stand;
Even so you deal with Love, and straight will know
How far he shoots, that never felt his bow;
One day you may, and then confess with me,
You love his Fetrers more then to be free.
R.
NOr will I now your wound exulcerate,
But rather grieve at your deplored estate;
Yet must I not my self so much forsake,
As not to show wherein you me mistake.
For Peace and you I was content to find,
How Love and Reason might be near combined,
But not their natures alter or confound,
Nor I remove at all from my first ground
Of due obedience which just Love does owe
To Reason, thought it should to highest grow.
'Twas not well done of you thus to object,
That which I did for you in your respect;
Beside, your argument is drawn amiss,
From that which may be, unto that which is.
I did not Love for Reasons wife avow,
But only gave it possible, and how
That I am dis-engag'd, untoucht, and free,
Makes me of Love the fitter judge to be;
Self-interest does so corrupt and blind
The clearness quite, and sadness of the mind,
That Justice still to it has born a grudge,
Nor Law allows a party to be Judge;
In what we earnest are, our selves we leese,
A loo^er on more then a gamester sees.
To say my heart was maym'd in Cupid's Wars,
And pity beg by showing of my skars,
Or tell what losses I have had by fire,
Does sure a weaker heart then mine require*
Yet have I loved, and may do so again,
A strong lynk I have been in that fair chain
Which you a fetter call, and rightly too,
But that a breaking lynk did me undo;
You pierce me deep to say I never loved,
When it by so much truth has been approved;
Yet for all this we will not disagree,
Each lover thinks none ever loved but he.
Sonnet. P.
I.
Can thou love me, and yet doubt
So much falsehood in my heart,
That a way I should find out
To impart
Fragments of a broken love to you,
More then all, being less then due:
O no! Love must clear distrust,
Or be eaten with that rust:
Short love liking may find jarres,
The love that is lasting knows no wars.
II.
This belief begets delight,
And so satisfies desire,
And in them it shines a light,
No more fire;
All the burning Qualities appeased
Each in others joining pleased;
Not a whisper, not a thought,
But 'twixt both in common's brought;
Even to seem two they are loath,
Love being but one soul in both.
Song. P.
I.
SOul's joy when I am gone,
and you alone,
which cannot be,
Since I must leave my self with thee,
and carry thee with me;
oh give no way to grief,
but let belief
of mutual love,
This wonder to the vulgar prove,
Our bodies not we move.
II.
Yet when unto our eyes
absence denies
each others sight,
And makes to us a constant night;
when oaths change to delight,
Fools have no way to meet
but by their feet;
Why should our Day
Over our spirits so much sway,
To tie us to that way.
P. I left you, and now the gain of you is to me a double Gain.
DEar, when I think upon my first sad fall
From thy fair eyes, I needs must feel withal
The many widowed hours I since have numbered,
Which in wished shades I might have safely slumbred,
Rock't into endless heavenly Trances, by
Thy soul inchanting-Graces harmony,
Whilst I enjoyed not what I did possess,
But like an unthrift of my happiness,
Did not my loss (till 'twas too late) espy
As Children kill their birds, and after cry?
But since those Clouds that so eclip'st thy Light
(And gave my every day so many a night,
As my life had but a dead Winter been,
Had I no better after sunshine seen)
Are fled, let us (thou best of me) redeem
Those hours we fondly did so dis-esteem:
And since past joys are but bewailed in vain,
Come and we will prove them over all again,
That small division so will come the meeter,
To make the Music of our bliss the sweeter.
R. On the Countess of Pembrokes Picture.
HEre (though the luster of her youth be spent)
Are curious steps to see where beauty went;
And for the wonders in her mind that dwell,
It lies not in the power of Pens to tell.
But could she but bequeath them when she dies,
She might enrich her Sex by Legacies.
P. That she is only Fair.
DO not reject those titles of your due,
Which Natures Art has styled on your face;
The Name of Fair only belongs to you,
None else that title justly can embrace:
You Beauties heir, her Coat sole spotless wear,
Where others all, some mark abatement bear.
It Is not their Cheeks touched with Vermilion Ord,
Stained with the tincture of enchanting skill,
Nor yet the curled devices of their head,
Their breasts displayed, their looks framed to their will;
Their quick-turn'd-eye, nor all their proud attire,
Can make me their Perfections to admire.
All this done without Natures consent,
Thy beauty needs not Art's enticing aid;
Thine nature gave, theirs nature only lent;
Thine shall endure, when theirs are quite decayed:
Thy beauty others does as much excel,
As Heaven base Earth, or Earth accursed Hell.
Others are fair if not compared to thee,
Compared to them, thy beauty does exceed:
So lesser Stars give light, and shine we see
Till glorious Phoebus lifts up his head;
And then as things ashamed of their might,
They hide themselves, and with themselves their light
Since Natures skill has given you your right,
Do not kind Nature and your self such wrong,
You are as fair as any earthly wight,
You wrong your self if you correct my tongue:
Though you deny (her and) your self your due,
Yet duty bids me Fair entitle you.
P.
MUse get thee to a Cell; and wont to sing,
Now mourn, nay now thy hands, thy heart now wring;
And if perhaps thine eyes did ever weep,
Now bleed, and in eternal sorrow sleep;
O, she that was, and only was, is gone,
And I that was but one, am left alone.
Who says that I for things never mine am sad?
That was all mine which others never had:
No sighs, no tears, no blood but mine was shed
For her that now must bless another bed:
As fate bound me, had Fortune made me free,
None had had her but I, she none but me.
O had not I been swallowed up with night,
Before I saw your sun, that glorious light,
Whose beams alone do only comfort bring,
Where I still weep, had ever made me sing;
Now on a strange Horizon it does rise
Where all do live, or else where each thing dies.
P. A Sonnet.
HE that his mirth has lost
When comfort is dismayed,
Whose hopes in vain, whose faith is scorned,
Whose trust is all betrayed.
If he has held them dear,
And cannot cease to moan;
Come let him take his place by me,
He shall not grieve alone.
But if his smallest sweet
Be mixed with all his sower;
If in the day, the month, the year
He feel one happy hour:
Then rest he with himself,
He is no Mate for me:
Whose cheer is fallen, whose succor void,
Whose hurt his death must be;
Yet not the wished death
That has ne plaint, ne lack,
Which making free the better part,
Is only Natures wrack:
Oh no! that were too well,
My death is of that kind,
That always yields extremest pains,
And keeps the worst behind,
As one that lives in show,
But inwardly does dye,
Whose knowledge is a bloody field
Where all helps slain do lie:
Whose heart the altar is,
Whose spirit the sacrifice
Unto the Powers whom to appease,
No sorrows can suffice.
My fancies are like thorns,
On which I go by night;
My arguments are like an Host
That force has put to flight.
My sense like passions spy,
My thoughts like ruins old
Of famous Carthage, and of Troy,
That Synon bought and sold.
My Corn to Nettles, now
My field is turned to flint,
Where sitting in the Cypres shade,
I read this Hyacinth.
The peace, the rest, the life
Which I enjoyed of yore,
Came to that lot that by the loss
They might me sting the more.
So to unhappy men
The best frames to the worst;
O time, O place, O words, O looks
Deer then, but now accursed.
In Was, stands my delight,
In Is (and Shall) my woe,
My sorrows fastened in the Yea's,
My hopes hang in the No.
I look for no relief,
Relief would come too late;
Too late I find, I find too well,
Too well stood my estate.
Then Love where is thy favor,
That makes thy tyrements sweet?
Where is the Cause that men have thought
Their death through thee, but meet?
The stately chaste disdain,
The secret thankfulness,
The Grace reserved, the common light
That shines through worthiness.
O that it were not so,
Or I it could excuse!
Oh that the wrath of jealousy
My judgment might abuse!
O frail unconstant Sex!
O Faith and trust in none!
No women Angels are, but lo,
My Mistress is a woman.
Yet hate I but the fault,
And not the faulty one,
Ne can I rid me of the bands
I which I lie alone.
I love, I like, whose like
By love was never yet,
The Prince, the Poor, the old, the young,
The fond, or full of wit.
Here still remain, must I,
By wrong, by death, by shame;
I cannot blot out of my breast,
That Love wrought in her name:
I cannot set at naught
That I have held so dear;
I cannot make it seem so far,
That is indeed so near.
I do not mean henceforth
Such strange will to profess,
As one that could betray such troth
To build on sickleness:
But it shall never fail
That my Faith bare in hand;
I gave my word, my word gave me,
Both word and gift shall stand:
Since then it must be thus,
And this is all too ill,
I yield me Captive to my course
My hard fate to fulfill.
The solitary woods
My City shall become;
The darkest Dens shall be my lodge,
In which I rest or run.
Of Hebon black, my board,
The worm my feast shall be,
Wherewith my body shall be fed,
Till they do feed on me:
Of N^^be my wine,
My bed of craggy Rock,
The Serpents hiss my harmony,
The screeching Owl my Clock.
My exercise naught else
But raging agonies,
My Books of spightful Fortunes foils
And doleful tragedies.
My walks the Parks of Plaints,
My prospect into hell,
Where Sisiphus and all his Peers
In endless pains do dwell.
My Muse if any ask,
Whose wrathful state is such,
Dye ere thou let his Name be known,
His folly shows so much.
P. That Lust is not his Aim.
OH do not tax me with a brutish Love,
Impute not Lust alone to my desire,
No such profane aspersions ought to me
From you the sacred Author of my fire.
I seek your love, and if you that deny.
All joys that you and all the world can give,
My lovesick soul would little satisfy;
Which wants your Grace, not food to make it live,
It is your better part I would enjoy,
Your fair affections I would call mine own;
It Is but a prostitute, and bestial joye
Which seeks the gross material use alone:
The towns not ours, the market place vnwon,
Nor do I her enjoy, whose heart's not mine,
Heart's Conquest is the worthy ambition:
Seal of our worth, as ravishment Divine,
Invincible to strength of humane hand,
Union Divine of mutual burning hearts,
Which both subdued, triumphing, both command
Sovereign delights, which God to man imparts.
Oh let me in this true joy happy be,
Or never may you be enjoyed by me.
Verses made by Sir B. R,
OH faithless world, and thy most faithless part,
A woman's heart:
The true shop of variety, where sits
Nothing but fits
And fevers of desire, and pangs of Love,
Which toys remove:
Why was she born to please, or I to trust
Words writ in dust.
Suffering her looks to govern my despair,
My pain for air;
And fruit of time rewarded with untruth,
the food of youth.
Untrue she was, yet I believed her eyes,
instructed spies:
Till I was taught that Love is but a school
to breed a fool:
Or was it absence that did make her strange,
base flower of change?
Or sought she more then triumphs of denial,
to see a trial,
How far her smiles commanded on my weakness,
yield and confess:
Excuse not now thy folly, nor her nature,
blush and endure
As well thy shame, as passions that were vain;
and think thy gain,
To know that love lodged in a woman's breast,
is but a guest:
Sonnet. P.
WRong not dear Empress of my heart,
The merits of true passion,
With thinking that he feels no smart
That sues for no compassion;
Since if my plaints seem not to prove
The Conquest of thy Beauty,
It comes not from defect of Love,
But from excess of duty.
For knowing that I sue to serve,
A Saint of such perfection,
As all Divine, but none deserve
A place in her affection.
I rather choose to want relief
Then venture the revealing,
Where glory recommends the grief,
Despair destroys the healing.
Thus those desires that climb too high
For any mortal Lover,
When Reason cannot make them dye,
Discretion does them cover:
Yet when Discretion does bereave
the plaints which I should utter,
Then thy Discretion may perceive
that silence is a suitor.
Silence in Love bewraies more woe
then words though never so witty;
The beggar that is dumb you know
may challenge double pity.
Then wrong not dear heart of my heart,
my true, though secret passion,
He smarteth most that hides his smart,
and sues for no compassion.
P. That he will still persevere in his Love.
NAy, I must love thee still;
Be it for those good deeds thou have done,
That thou have loved me once, has won,
And made me ever thine;
Though I am tempted and provoked with scorn,
My Love cannot decline.
Though I with hopes, doubts, and despairs am torn,
Nay should I fret, think, grieve and dye
For thee, and know not why;
Yet I must love thee still.
Nothing removes my heart,
Ages that changes, and (slow things) move,
May wear my body, not my Love,
So fixed I am on thee,
That all thy spite cannot devise
A wrong to trouble me.
Alas I dote in all thy injuries,
Though all thy looks were feigned, and thy sighs wind,
Though thy free vows thou should unbind,
Nothing could move my heart.
Nay I must love thee, still
Love that wears, and into ashes goes, in thee
Raises new bodies up in me:
I am Love's wildfire right,
Whose powerful tempered flames being rightly bred,
Burns by his opposite.
Hopes kill, and violent despairs have fed
My passions, I have power to live and dye;
Nay, should it opposed destiny,
Yet I must love thee still:
P. A Sonnet.
DEar leave thy home and come with me,
That scorn the world for love of thee:
Here we will live within this Park,
A Court of joy and pleasures Ark.
Here we will hunt, here we will range,
Constant in Love, our sports we will change:
Of hearts if any change we make,
I will have thine, thou mine shall take.
Here we will walk upon the Lawns,
And see the tripping of the Fawns;
And all the Deer shall wait on thee,
Thou shall command both them and me.
The Leaves a whispering noise shall make,
Their Mufick-notes the birds shall take,
And while thou art in quiet sleep,
And the green wood shall silence keep.
And while my herds about thee feed,
Love's lessons in thy face I Will read,
And feed upon thy lovely look,
For beauty has no fairer book.
It Is not the weather, nor the air,
It is thy self that is so fair;
Nor does it rain when heaven lowers,
But when you frown, then fall the showers.
One Sun alone moves in the sky,
Two Suns thou have, one in each eye;
Only by day that sun gives light,
Where thine does rise, there is no night.
Fair starry twins, scorn not to shine
Upon my Lambs, upon my Kine;
My grass does grow, my Corn and wheat,
My fruit, my vines thrive by their heat.
Thou shall have wool, thou shall have silk,
Thou shall have honey, wine and milk;
Thou shall have all, for all is due,
Where thoughts are free, and love is true.
P. A Sonnet,
DORON the sad Shepherds swain,
Who abroad had long time been,
Coming to those Fields again,
Where he Cloris often had seen.
With love and sorrow waxes faint,
None but his poor Curre and he,
As he on his sheep-hook't lean't,
It was his chance that bank to see.
Near a little pearling Brook,
Where the Mistress of his heart,
Leave of faithful Doron took,
From her presence to depart.
He quickly found the ancient flame
Which had often bereaved his rest;
When back now to that place he came,
Where her eyes first pierced his breast.
Looking on the Mead and Grove
Where her Herds are wont to brouze,
Faithful witness of his Love,
Which so often had heard his vows.
Where he had seen his Cloris merry,
VValking in the pleasant spring,
Tended by the Frisking Fairy,
Dancing many a wanton Ring.
VVoods (quoth he) I saw you woo her,
And as through your shades she past,
Humbly bowed your lops unto her,
With each little trembling blast.
I have seen this wandring-Will
Often the silent murmur break,
And from the natural course stand still,
Ravished to hear her speak.
In these Meadows richly dight,
Gathering strowing for her bowers,
The bees are dazzled in her sight,
Taking her blew veins for Flowers.
Stingless on her temples stuck,
Famine could not threaten death,
But their labor quite forsook,
For the sweetness of her breath.
I have seen the gentle wind
His most speedy course forbear,
And it wondr'ous sport to find,
In dallying with her braided hair.
Never did the morn awake her
If her self but once she showd,
But the birds would Music make her,
Still to welcome her abroad.
Then poor shepherd Swain quoth he,
Let thy thoughts of her suffice,
It is to high a task for thee
To tell the wonders of her eyes.
O dear Cloris then come to us,
Bless the Summer with thy sight;
Or thy absence will undo us,
For the world will half be night.
P. On one heart made of two.
IF that you must needs go,
What shall our one heart do?
This one made of our two.
Madam, two hearts we brake,
And from them both did take
The best, one heart to make.
It told me in your breast,
Where it might hope to rest;
For if it were my guest,
For certainly it knew,
That I would still anew
Be sending it to you.
Half this is of your heart,
Mine in the other part,
Joined by our equal art.
Were it cemented, or sown
By shreds or pieces known,
We each might find our own.
Never I think had two
Such work, so much to do
An Unity to woo;
Yours was so cold and chaste,
Whilst mine with Zeal did waste,
Like fire with water placed.
But it is dissolved, and fixed
So curiously, and mixed,
No difference is betwixt;
But shall we agree
By whom it kept shall be,
Whether by you or me?
How my heart did entreat,
How pant, how it did beat,
Till it could give yours heat;
Till to that temper brought,
With either's mixture wrought,
That blessing eithers thought.
It cannot two breasts fill,
One must be heartless still
Until the other will.
It was with me to day,
When I willed it to say
With whether it would stay.
In such a height it lies
From this base world's dull eyes,
That heaven it not envies.
All that this Earth can show,
Our hearts shall not once know,
For it too vile and low.
P. That he would not be beloved.
DIsdain me still, that I may ever love,
For who his Love enjoyes, can love no more,
The war once past, with peace men Cowards prove,
And Ships returned, do rot upon the shore:
Then though thou frown, I Will say thou art most fair,
And still I Will love, though still I must despair.
As heat's to life, so is desire to love,
For these once quenched, both life and love are done;
Let not my sighs nor tears thy virtue move,
Like basest mettles, do not melt too soon.
Laugh at my woes, although I ever mourn,
Love surfeits with rewards, his Nurse is scorn.
Benj. Rudier of Tears.
WHo would have thought there could have been
Such joy in Tears wept for our sin!
Mine eye has seen, my heart has proved
The most and best of earthly joys,
The sweet of love, and being loved,
Masks, Feasts, and Plays, and such like toys.
Yet this one tear which now does fall,
In true delight exceeds them all.
Indeed mine eyes at first let in
Those guests that did these woes begin:
Therefore mine eyes in tears and grief
Are justly drowned, but that these tears
Should comfort bring, it is past belief.
O God, in this thy Grace appears;
Thou that make light from darkness spring,
Make joys to weep, and sadness sing.
O where am I! what may I think!
Help, help, alas my heart does sink:
Thus tossed in seas of woe,
Thus laden with my sin,
Waves of despair dash in,
And threat mine overthrow.
What heart oppressed with such a weight,
Can choose but sink and perish straight.
Yet as at sea in storms, men choose
The ship to save, their goods to loose.
So in this fearful storm,
This danger to prevent,
Before all hopes be spent,
I Will choose the lesser harm.
My tears to seas I will convert,
And drown mine eyes to save my heart.
R.
O God! my God! what shall I give
To thee in thanks? I am and live
In thee; and thou do safe preserve
My health, my fame, my goods, my rent:
Thou make me eat, whilst others starve,
And sing, whilst others do lament.
Such unto me thy blessings are,
As though I were thine only care.
But oh my God, thou art more kind,
When I look inward on my mind,
Thou fill'st my heart with humble joy,
With patience, meek, and fervent love,
(All other loves which does destroy)
With Faith which nothing can remove,
And hope assured of Heavens bliss:
This is my state, thy Grace is this.
Of Friendship.
FRiendship on earth we may as easily find,
As he the North-East Passage, that is blind;
It Is not unlike the imaginary stone,
That tattered Chemists long have doted on:
Sophisticate affection is the best
This age affords, no friend abides the test;
They make a glorious show, a little space,
But tarnish in the rain, like Copper-lace.
Or nealled in affliction but one day,
They smoke, and stink, and vapor quite away.
We miss the true materials, choosing Friends,
On virtue we project not, but our ends.
So by degrees when we embrace so many,
We courted are like whores, not loved of any:
Good turns ill placed, that we on all men heap,
Are seeds of that ingratitude we reap.
And he that is so sweet, he none denies,
Was made of honey for the nimble flies.
Choose one of two Companions of thy life,
Then be as true as thou would have thy wife.
Though he live joyless that enjoys no friend,
He that has many, pays for it in the end.
P. A Sonnet.
SAint did never yet object
Former knowledges defect
Against those whose zealous vows,
True devotion avows:
If my merit yet be small
To procure your love withal,
Time alone to you must prove,
How well I will deserve your love.
Grace in Saints ought to abound,
Grace never grows on merit's ground.
Be then gracious, as I true,
Constant and faithful unto you;
And my Fortunes that have crowned
Me happy on that Relics ground,
Shall be all ascribed to serve
You that do all praise deserve.
P. To his Mistress, of his Friends Opinion of her, and his answer to his
Friend's Objections, with his constancy toward her.
ONe with admiration told me,
He did wonder much and marvel,
(As by chance he did behold ye)
How I could become so servile
To thy beauty, which he swears
Evry Ale house Lettice wears.
Then he frames a second notion
From thy revoluting eyes,
Saying, such a wanton motion
From their luster did arise,
That of force thou could not be
From the shame of women free.
Then he blames the work of Nature,
'Cause she framed thy body tall,
Alleging that so high a stature
Was most subject to a fall:
Still detracting from thy worth,
That which most does set thee forth.
So the Buzzard Phoebus flies,
When the Eagle's piercing eye
See those noble mysteries
Which adorn the azur'd sky;
Bravest objects so we find,
Strike the weaker judgments blind.
For I know thy native beauty,
Teaching Art her imitation;
Ows no mortal Power a duty,
But as free from alteration
(If not whiter) as the skin
Of the spotless Ermylin.
And those Love-alluring Darts
Shot from thy tralucent eye,
To the knowing man imparts
Such an awful Majesty,
That each man may read the mirror
Of thy mind, and he his error.
If thy curious body's frame,
To thy making add no splendour,
Why adore we Cynthia's Name,
And our Poets most commend her
When amongst her Nymphs she crushes,
Cedar-like amongst lower bushes.
But my Julia I am sure,
Be thou low or high of stature,
Thou from blemish art, and as pure
As the yester-night-born creature;
And though blind men talk of light,
None can judge that wants his sight.
P. To his Mistress on his Death.
OH let me groan one word into thine ear,
And with that groan break all my vital strings;
Thou that would never, now vouchsafe to hear
How Leda's bird on sweet Meander sings:
So dying tapers lend their fiery flashes,
And deadest Cinders have some burning ashes.
Those were the looks that once maintained my strength,
Those were the words that all my parts did cherish;
And what (Unkindest) will thou gain at length,
If by the same, I miserably perish:
This, that a frown did in a minute starve,
That which a smile did many years preserve.
B. R. his Ballet.
SInce every man I come among,
Sings praises of his choice,
I Will make my Love some pretty song,
She Will fit it for a voice.
As for descent and birth in her,
You see before you seek;
The house of York and Lancaster
United in her Cheek.
I have a Bracelet of her hair.
I have a ribon too;
The Fleece and Garter never were
Such Orders as these two.
My mind unto her once I broke,
And whispered in her ear
A tale of Love, an easy yoke,
Which far her betters bear.
And told her, if she lost that hour;
Her blossom would be dead;
She said she meant to keep that flower
To deck her wedding-bed.
I gave her homely Country Gloves,
She took 'um as the were meant;
For those as well can show men's Loves,
As can a Spanish scent.
I told her that poor modesty
Was out of fashion quite;
She said that proof looked like a lie,
And did my Reason slight.
I said the thing for which I woo,
Is pain and not desire;
She said 'twas work each man would do,
And take it for his hite.
So when those ways I hoped would wean
Her from her fond intent,
The fool replied, she did not mean
To sin by president.
When mine eyes, first admiring your rare beauty,
Secretly stole the Picture of your face;
They, fearing they might err, with humble duty,
Through unknown paths, conveyed it to that place,
Where Reason and true Judgment hand in hand
Sat, and each workmanship of senses stand.
Reason could find no Reason but to love it,
So rich of beauty was it, full of Grace:
True Judgment scanned each part, and did approve it
To be the model of some heavenly face;
And both agreed to place it in my heart,
Whence they decreed it never should depart.
Then, since I was not born to be so blessed,
Your real self fair Mistress to obtain,
Yet must your image dwell within my breast,
And in that secret Closet still remain:
Where all alone retired, I Will sit and view
Your Picture, Mistress, since I may not you.
R.
WHy do we love these things which we call Women,
Which are like Feathers blown with every wind,
Regarding least those which do most esteem them,
And most deceitful when they seem most kind;
And all the virtue that their beauty graces,
It is but painted like unto their faces.
Their greatest glory is in rich attire,
Which is extracted from some hopeful livers,
Whose wits and wealth are bent to their desire,
When they regard the gift more then the givers.
And to increase their hopes of future bliss,
They Will sometimes stretch their conscience for a kiss.
Some love the winds that bring in golden flowers,
And some are merely won with commendation;
Some love and hate, and all within two hours,
And that is a fault amongst them most in fashion:
But put them all within a scale together,
Their worth in weight will scarce pull down a feather.
And yet I would not discommend them all,
If I did know some worth to be in any:
It Is strange, that since the time of Adam's fall,
That God did make none good, and made so many;
And if he did, for those I truly mourn,
Because they dyed before that I was born.
Why with unkindest swiftness do thou turn
From me, whose absence thou did truly mourn;
Of which thou made me such a seeming view,
As Unbelievers would have thought it true.
We have been private, and thou know of mine,
(Which is even all) as much as I of thine:
Do thou remember? Let me callt' account
Thy pleasant Garden, and that leavy Mount,
Whose top is with an open Arbor crowned.
Do thou remember (O securest beauty)
Where of thy own free motion (more then duty)
And unrequir'd, thou solemnly did swear,
(Of which avenging heaven can witness bear)
That from the time thou gav'st thy spoils to me,
Thou would maintain a spotless chastity,
And unprophan'd by any second hand,
From sport and Loves delight removed stand,
Till I (whose absence seemingly was mourned)
Should from a foreign Kingdom be returned:
Of this thou made Religion, and an oath.
But see the frailty of a woman's troth;
Scarce had the sun (to many rooms assigned).
Been thrice within the changeful waves confined,
And I scarce three days journey from thine eyes,
When thou new love in thy heart did devise,
And gav'st the Relics of thy Virgin-head,
Upon the easiest prayer that could be said.
It Is true, I left thee to a dangerous age,
Where vice in Angels shape does title wage
With ancient virtue, both disguising so,
That hardly weaker eyes can either know:
Besides, I left thee in the hour of fears,
And in the covetous spring of all thy years,
what time a beauty that has well begun,
Asks other then the solace of a Nun.
But since thy wanton soul so deer did prize
The game, that thou for it did underprize
Thy faith, and all that to good fame belongs;
Could thou not cover it from common tongues.
But cheapest eyes must see thee do amiss?
My Rhimes that won thee, never taught thee this:
Thou might have wandered in the paths of love,
And neither leaf-less hill, nor shady grove
Have been unpressed by thy wanton weight,
Yet thou thought honest, had thou used slight.
Much care and business has the chastest Dame
To guard her self from undeserved blame;
What artifice and cunning then must serve
To color them that just reproof deserve?
It Is not a work for every woman's wit,
And the less marvel thou neglectedst it.
That which amazes me the most, is this,
That having never trodden but amiss,
And done me wrongs, that do as much deny
To suffer measure, as infinity:
When I approach, thou turn'st thy head awry,
As if sore eyes and scorn could satisfy,
Can second wrongs the former expiate,
And work them out of memory and date;
Or teach me ill in humane Precepts durst,
That second wrongs can expiate the first?
Thou art malicious, as incontinent,
And might have met with such a Patient,
Whose wronged virtue to just rage invited,
Would have revenged, and in thy dust delighted.
But I that have no gall, when once I love,
And whom no great thing under heaven can move,
Am well secured from Fortunes weak alarms,
And free from apprehension, as from harms.
Thus do I leave thee to the multitude,
That on my leaving hastily intrude.
Enjoy thou many, or rejoice in one,
I was before them, and before me none.
A DIALOGUE.
MAN. P. BE not proud, 'cause fair and trim,
But let those lips be basted,
Those eyes will hollow prove, and dim,
That lip and brow be wasted.
And to love, who will be persuaded,
Sullyed Flowers, or beauty faded?

WOMAN. R. Could Rose or Lilly purer be,
'Cause they smelt, or looked like me?
Yet pride should never reach my mind,
But beauty though it useless lie,
Is kept from stains by being laid by:
So'ts better to be chaste then kind.

MAN. P. Oh thou art soft as is the air,
Or the words that court thee fair.
Then let those flames by Lovers felt,
That scorcht my heart, make thine to melt.

WOMAN. R. Thy words are sweet as is deceit,
Sugared as the Lovers bait,
And do whisper in mine ear,
Love makes bargains sweet, but dear.

MAN. P. Thou know not then that all the fair,
Give youth to Love, and age to Prayer*

WOMAN. R. It Is a Doctrine cannot be
Sound in you, or safe in me.

R. On black Hair and Eyes.
IF shadows be the Pictures Excellence,
And make them seem more lively to the sense;
If stars in the bright day are lost from sight,
And seem most glorious in the mask of Night;
Why would you think (rare Creature) that you lack
Perfection, cause your hair and eyes are black;
Or that your heavenly beauty that exceeds
The new-sprung Lillies in their Maiden-heads.
The damask color of your cheeks and lips,
Should suffer by their darkness an Eclips:
Rich Diamonds shine brightest being set,
And compassed within a Foil of Jet:
Nor was it fit that Nature should have made
So bright a sun to shine without some shade:
It seems that Nature when she first did fancy
Your rare Composure, studied Negromancy,
That when to you this gift she did impart,
She used altogether the black Art;
By which infused Power from Magic took,
You do command all spirits with a look;
She drew those Magic Circles in your eyes,
And made your hair the Chain wherewith she ties
Rebelling hearts; those blew veins which appear,
Winding Meanders about either Sphere
Mysterious Figures are; and when you list
Your voice commands as the Exorcist.
Oh if in Magic you have power so far,
Vouchsafe me to be your Familiar.
Nor has Dame Nature her black Art revealed
To outward parts alone, some lie concealed:
For as by heads of Springs men often know
The nature of the streams that run below;
So your black hair and eyes do give direction,
To think the rest to be of that complexion;
That rest where all rest lies that blesses man,
That Indian Mine, that Straight of Magilon;
That world-dividing Gulf, where he that venters
With swelling sails, and ravished senses, enters
To a new world of bliss. Pardon I pray,
If my rude Muse presumes to display
Secrets unknown, or has her bounds o're-past
In praising sweetness, which I never did taste:
Starved men do know there is meat, and blind men may
Though hid from light, presume there is a day.
The Rover in the mark his arrow sticks
Sometimes, as well as he that shoots at pricks:
And if that I might aim my shaft aright,
The black mark I would hit, and not the white.
BENJ. RVDIER TO THE PRINCE At his Return from SPAIN.
SIR, such my fate was, that I had no store
T'erect a goodly Pile before my door;
Nor were my Flagons tired by being taught
Their several stages up and down the Vault,
Upon the great blessed Day of your return,
Wherein nothing at all was seen to mourn,
Except it were the Heavens, and well they might,
Fearing our triumphs should outshine their light:
So open hearted men were, as 't'had been
No point of faith to think excess a sin.
The poor man trickt himself with wine that day,
And did not fear to make his Landlord stay;
The Tradesman shut his shop and did not care
For the retailing his neglected ware;
For well he knew there landed on the shore,
A prize that him and all the Isle might store.
The Inland liver that could never find
The east from west, but by a Church, nor wind
In his lives compass ever yet did know,
But that which to his Summer-fruit's a foe,
Was better learnt; and now he knew by art
What filled your sails, and what wind filled his heart:
I that have sense of blessings cannot show
In outward things, the joy that I do owe;
And thanks to heaven for your safe return,
Yet have a fire within them that do burn
As bright as theirs, which never shall decay
Till fate assign to me a further day.
R. Of deformity in a Man.
WHat if rude Nature has less care expressed
About thy shape, or wantonly in jest
Composed thee? or maliciously in despite?
Or lame with her left hand, or without light?
Be but as bold, thou may as well find Grace,
As one that has the most corrected face,
Or levelled trunck, whose neatness to beget
A Tailor, and a Barbers virtue met
Upon a Semster; for a woman's eye
Seldom betrays her heart to Cemetry:
But some ill-favored thought, that bears more sway
To foulest hope, often times prepares a way,
Either that beauty fairest does appear
When some deformed obect's planted near:
Or Sovereignty (at which they chiefly aim)
Is then most absolute when men can claim
Least favor, he who hopes, or strives to approve
His person, does submit, and yield to Love
Upon conditions; but that man whose state,
Himself considered, seems quite desperate,
Stoops to all usage, and will live, or dye
To serve, or suffer under tyranny.
Some of these Reasons, or some else unknown,
It may be more, or it may be none.
An Epitaph on the Countess of Pembroke.
Underneath this sable Hearse,
Lies the subject of all Verse;
Syan^y's Sister, Pembroke's Mother:
Death, ere thou have killed another,
Learned, fair, and good as she,
Time shall throw a dart at thee.
Marble Giles let no man raise
To her Name for after-dayes;
Some kind woman born as she,
Reading this (like Niobe)
Shall turn Marble, and become
Both her Mourner, and her Tomb.
Sonnet. P.
BLind beauty! If it be a loss
To loose so poor a man,
As neither multiply nor cross
good or bad fortune can;
Then are you poorer then you were,
for I am gotten free;
Unwilling to acquaint your ear
with what your eye might see.
What needed words, when from mine eyes
such sparks of Love flew out,
That you might easily surmise
his fires were there about.
Though I forsook the beaten way,
the path in which I trod,
Such as know all Love's Country, say
was nearer then the Road.
The tongue did great exploits at first,
so did the Canon too;
But both those now have done their worst,
and no such wonders do:
As Engines of a naughty sort
for Love to use in fight,
After to make a loud report,
then carry to the white*
I was a Lanthorn all of Love,
though of the closer kind,
Directing you which way to move,
When it did others blind:
And you might always undescri'd
have walked from place to place;
Had you not turned the shining side
backwards upon your face:
So since not want of light in me,
but that ill governed light;
Both made your self unapt to see,
And taught the blind their sight:
Henceforth I Will close the Lanthorn quite,
To expiate that sin;
And seem without as dark as night,
though bright as day within.
Mark how you Eddie steals a way,
From the rude stream into the Bay:
There locked up safe, she does divorce
Her waters from the Channels course,
And scorns the torrent that did bring
Her headlong from her native spring.
Now does she with her new Love play,
Whilst he runs murmuring away.
Mark how she courts the banks, whilst they
As amorously their arms display
TO embrace, and clip her silver waves;
See how she strokes their sides, and craves
An entrance there, which they deny;
Whereat she frowns, threatening to fly
Home to her stream, and 'gins to swim
Backward, but from the Channells brim
Smiling returns into the Creek,
With thousand dimples on her cheek.
Be thou this Eddie, and I Will make
My breast thy shore, where thou shall take
Secure repose, and never dream
Of the quite forsaken stream;
Let him to the wyld Ocean haste,
There loose his Color, name, and taste:
Thou shall save all, and safe from him
Within these arms for ever swim.
Of Jealousy.
Qu. FRom whence was first this Fury hurled,
This Jealousy ino the world?
Came she from hell? No, there does reign
Eternal hatred with disdain;
But she the daughter is of Love,
Sister of beauty. Resp. Then above
She must derive from the third sphere
Her heavenly offspring.
Ans. Neither there,
From those immortal flames could she
Draw her cold frozen pedigree.
Qu. If not in heaven, nor hell, where then
Had she her birth?
An: In The hearts of men:
Beauty and Fear did her create
Younger then Love, elder then Hate;
Sister to both, by Beauties side
To Love, by Fear to Hate allied:
Despair her issue is, whose race
Of frightful issues, drowns the space
Of the wide Earth, in a swollen flood
Of wrath, revenge, spite, rage and blood.
Qu. Oh how can such a spurious Line
Proceed from Parents so divine?
Ans. As streams which from the Crystal spring
Do sweet, and dear, their waters bring:
Yet mingling with the brackish Main,
Nor taste, nor color they retain.
Qu. Yet Rivers 'twixt their own bancks flow
Still fresh; Can Jealousy do so?
Ans. Yes; while she keeps the steadfast ground
O hope, and fear, her equal bound:
Hope sprung from favor, worth, or chance,
Toward the fair Object does advance;
Whilst fear as watchful Sentinel,
Does the invading foe repel;
And Jealousy (thus mixed) does prove
The season, and the salt of Love.
But when fear takes a larger scope,
Stifling the child of Reason, Hope
Then sitting in the usurped throne,
She like a tyrant rules alone;
As the wild Ocean unconfined,
And raging as the Northern wind.
P. Sonnet.
LAdies flee from Loves sweet tale,
Oaths steept in tears do often prevail,
Grief is infectious, and the air
Inflamed with sighs, will blast the Fair;
Then stop your ears when Lovers cry,
Least your self weeping with soft eye,
Shall with a sorrowing tear repay
That pity which you cast away.
Young men flee when beauty darts
Amorous glances at your hearts;
A quick eye gives the surer aim,
And Ladies lips have power to maim:
Now in her lips, now in her eyes,
Lap't in a kiss, or smile, Love lies:
Then flee betimes; for only they
Do conquer Love, that run away.
Sonnet.
Fie that men should so complain
Of women for unkindness,
And accuse them of disdain,
when it is but their own blindness.
For though at first they do seem coy,
and use a faint denial;
It is not fit they should enjoy,
that can abide no trial:
Constant Love is like to Fire,
that being oppressed, burns clearer,
And women know when they retire,
It makes true Love love dearer:
How many favors should they miss,
what wooing and protesting,
Were not they use some art in this,
and feed them with contesting.
Women therefore wisely seem
at first the more disdainful,
Because they think that men esteem
that sweet, that is somewhat painful.
But henceforth learn, although they swear
And vow they cannot love you,
Do not believe them, never fear,
It Is but their art to prove you.
P. SONG.
SAy pretty wanton, tell me why
Thou can not love so well as I;
Sit thee down, and thou shall see
That I delight in none but thee.
Say pretty wanton, be not coy,
For thou alone art all my joy:
If a smile thou will not lend,
Yet let thy gentle ears attend.
If thou stop those gentle ears,
Then look upon these brinish tears;
Which do force me still to cry,
Pity me now, or else I dye.
Fairest fair, my Love, my Jewel,
Will thou never cease to grieve me?
Look and pity, be not cruel,
Let thy love at length relieve me;
Stay and hear my tongue's sad speaking,
Words must keep my heart from breaking.
Long and deerly have I loved thee,
Love by right should be rewarded:
Words and Vows could never move thee,
Tears and sighs were not regarded.
Oh let Love cause some relenting,
Death succeeds thy not consenting.
P. A Sonnet.
SO glides a long the wanton Brook
With gentle pace into the main,
Courting the banks with amorous look,
He never means to see again.
And so does Fortune use to smile
Upon the short lived favorite's face,
Whose swelling hopes she does beguile,
And always casts him in the race;
And so does the Fantastic boy,
The god of the ill-manag'd flames,
Who never kept word in promised joy
To Lover, nor to to loving Dames:
So all alike will constant prove,
Both Fortune, running streams, and Love.
P. Of a fair Gentlewoman scarce Marriageable.
WHy should Passion lead thee blind,
Cause thy Lydia proves unkind:
She is too young to know delight,
And is not plumed for Cupid's flight:
She cannot yet in height of pleasure,
Pay her Love with equal measure;
But like a Rose new blown, does feed
The Eye alone, but yields no Seed.
She is yet but in her Spring,
And bears no Fruit till Cupid bring
A hotter season with his Fire,
Which soon will ripen her desire:
Autumn will shortly come and greet her,
Making her taste and color sweeter;
And then her ripeness will be such,
That she will fall e'ne with a touch.
P. A Paradox, that Beauty lies not in Women's faces, but in their Lovers Eyes.
WHy should thy look requite so ill
all other Eyes,
Making them Prisoners to thy will,
Where alone thy Beauty lies:
When men's Eyes first looked upon thee,
They bestowed thy Beauty on thee.
When thy Colors first were seen
By judging sight,
Had men's Eyes praised Black or Green,
Then thy Face had not been Bright:
He that loved thee, then would find
Thee as little fair as kind.
If all others had been blind,
Fair had not been;
None thy Red and White could find
Fleeting, if thou were unseen.
To touch white Skins is not Divine,
Ethiops Lips are soft as thine.
P. A Lover to his Mistress.
THe purest piece of Nature is my choice,
this days breath,
and to morrow's death,
Have several dooms from her all-charming voice,
So beyond fair, that no glass can her flatter;
so sweetly mild,
that tongues defiled,
Dare not on her their envious stories scatter.
The witty forms of beauty that are shed
in flaming streams,
from Poets theams,
Like shadows when her self appears, are fled.
O let me live in the heaven of her bright eye*
Great Love, I Will be thy constant Votary.
Description of a wished Mistress.
NOt that I wish my Mistress,
Or more or less then what she is,
Write I these lines; for it is too late,
Rules to prescribe unto my fate.
But yet as tender stomachs call
For some choice meats that bear not all;
So a queazie Lover may impart
What Mistress it is must take his heart.
First, I must have her richly sped
With Natures blossoms, white and red;
For flaming hearts will quickly dye,
That have no fuel from the eye.
Yet this alone will never win,
Except some treasure lie within;
For where the spoyl's not worth the stay,
Men raise the siege, and march away.
I Would have her wise enough to know
When, and to whom a Grace to show;
For she that does at random choose,
She will her choice as soon refuse.
And yet methinks I Would have her mind
TO a flowing courtesy inclined,
And tenderhearted as a Maid,
Yet pity only when I prayed.
And I could wish her true to be,
(Mistake me not) I mean to me;
She that loves me, and loves one more
Will love the Kingdom over and over.
And I would have her full of wit,
So she know how to huswife it;
But she whose insolence makes her dare
To cry her wit, will sell more ware.
Some other things delight will bring,
As if she dance, or play, or sing;
If hers be safe, what though her parts
Catch ten thousand foreign hearts.
But let me see, should she be proud,
A little pride must be allowed:
Each amorous Boy will sport and prate
Too freely, where he sees no state.
I cared not much if I let down
Sometimes a chiding or a frown;
But if she wholly quench desire,
It Is hard to kindle a new fire,
To smile, to toy, it is not amiss
Sometimes to interpose a kiss,
But do not cloy; Sweet things are good
And pleasant, but are naught for food.
But stay! Nature has over-writ my Art
In her, to whom I offer up my heart:
And Evening-Passengers shall sooner trace
The wanton beams that dance on Thames smooth face;
And find the track where once the foot did stray
On the moist Sands, which tides have washed away;
Then men shall know my heart, or find her spot,
If a revolt of hers procure it not.
R, One that was a Suitor to a Gentlewoman more virtuous then fair, wrote these
to a friend of his that disliked her.
WHy slights thou her whom I approve,
Thou art no Peer to try my Love,
Nor can discern where her form lies,
Unless thou saw her with my eyes;
Say she were foul, or blacker than
The Night, or Sunburned Indian,
Yet rated in my fancy, she
Is so as she appears to me:
It is not Feature, nor a Face,
That does my free Election grace;
Nor is my fancy only led
By a well tempered white and red;
Could I enamored be on those,
The Lilly and the blushing Rose
United in one stock, might be
As dear unto my thoughts as she.
But I search farther, and do find
A richer Treasure in her mind,
Where something is so lasting fair,
That Art nor Age cannot impair.
Had thou a Perspective so clear,
That thou could view my object there;
When thou her virtue shall espy,
Then wonder and confess, that I
Had cause to like her; and learn thence,
To love by Judgment, not by sense.
The EPICURES Paradox.
NO, worldling, no; it is not thy Gold,
Which thou do use but to behold;
Nor Fortune, Honor, nor long Lise,
Nor large Possession, without strife,
That makes thee happy, these things be
But shadows of felicity.
Give me a Virgin of Fifteen,
Already voted to the Queen
Of Lust and Lovers, whose soft Hair
Fanned with the breath of gentle Air,
O*respreads her shoulders like a Tent,
And is her Veil and Ornament,
whose tender touch would make the blood
Wyld in the Aged, and the Good;
Whose Kisses fastened to the mouth
Of threescore years, and longer sloth,
Renews the Age, and whose bright eye,
Obscures those lesser lights of Sky;
Whose snowy Breasts (if we may call
That Snow which never melts at all)
Make Jove invent a new disguise,
In spite of Juno's Jealousies;
Whose every part does re-invite
The old decayed Appetite;
And in whose sweet embraces I
Might melt my self to lust, and dye.
This is true belief, and I confess
There is no other happiness.
Opporiunity neglected.
YEt was her Beauty as the blushing Rose,
And greedy passionate was my desire,
And Time, and Place, my reconciled Foes,
Did with my wish, and her consent conspire:
Why then o're-reachless of my Loves fruition,
So eagerly pursued with rough intent,
So dearly purchased with performed condition,
Kept I my rude Virginity unspent?
Did she not sweetly kiss? and sweetly sing?
And sweetly play? and all to move my pleasure?
And every dalliance use, and every thing,
And show my sullen Eyes her naked Treasure?
All this she did, I wilfully forbore;
And why? Because me thought she was an whore.
P. A Lover's Dedication of his Service to a Virtuous GENTLEWOMAN.
WHat I in Woman long have wished to see,
Rarest of thousands, I have found in thee;
Goodness, with Beauty: O! that crowns ye all,
That makes thee perfect and Celestial.
Beauty has time to wither, we know;
But Goodness after death has time to grow.
Let then those Rarities in you remain,
To show that Earth from Heaven so much can gain,
That you a Pattern should to others be;
But such as aftertimes shall never see.
Believe (sweet Lady) that all this is true,
And these few Lines belong to none but you.
P. Sonnet.
A Restless Lover I espied
That went from place to place,
Lay down and turned from side to side,
And sometimes on his face.
And when that Medicines were applied
In hope of intermission;
As one that felt no ease, he cried,
Has Cupid no Physician?
What do the Ladies with their looks,
Their kisses, and their smiles?
Can no Receipts in those fair Books,
Repair their former spoils?
But they complain as well as we,
Their pains have no remission,
And when both Sexes wounded be,
Has Cupid no Physician?
Have we such Palsies, and such pains,
Such Fevers, and such fits,
No Quintessential Chimick Grains,
No Esculapian wits;
No Creature can (beneath the Sun)
Prevail in opposition;
And when all wonders can be done,
Has Cupid no Physician?
Into what Poison do they dip
Their Arrows and their Darts,
That touching but an Eye or Lip,
The pain goes to our hearts.
But now I see before I get
Into their Inquisition,
That Death had never Surgeon yet,
Nor Cupid a Physician.
A Pastoral.
LOVER. P.
SHepherd, gentle Shepherd hark,
As one that can call rightest,
Birds by their Name,
Both wild and tame,
And in their Notes delightest:
What Voice is this, I prithee mark,
with so much Music in it?
Too sweet methinks to be a Lark,
too loud to be a Linnet?
Nightingales are more confused,
And discant more at random,
Whose warbling throats,
(To hold out Notes)
Their airy tunes abandon.
Angels stoop not now adays,
Such Quirresters forsake us;
Yet Sirens may
Our Loves betray,
And wretched Prisoners make us;
Yet they must use some other way,
Then singing to deprive us
Of our poor lives, since such sweet lays
As these would soon revive us.
SHEPHERD. R.
It Is not Siren we discry,
Nor Bird in Grove residing,
Nor Angel's Voice,
Although as choice,
Fond Boy thou hear'st dividing;
But one if either thou or I
Should face to face resemble her,
To any of these would blushing cry,
Away, away Dissembler.
P. A straggling Lover reclaimed.
TIll now I never did believe,
A man could love for Virtue's sake,
Nor thought the absence of one Love could grieve
That man that freely might another take.
But since mine Eyes betrothed my heart to you,
I find both true.
Thy Innocence has so my Love refined,
I mourn thy Bodies absence for thy Mind.
Till now I never made an Oath,
But with a purpose to forswear;
For to be fixed upon one Face, were sloth,
When every Ladies Eye is Cupid's Sphere:
But if she merit Faith from every Breast,
Who is the best
Of Women-kind; how can I then be free
To love another, having once loved thee.
Such is the great and happy power
Of Goodness, that it can dilate
It self, to make him virtuous in an hour,
Who lived before perhaps a Reprobate.
But since on me those wonders thou have done,
In truth work on
Upon thy self, thy Sex does want that Grace,
To love my Truth more then a better Face.
P. To a LADY weeping.
DRY those fair, those Crystal Eyes,
Which like growing Fountains rise,
To drown their Banks; Griefs sullen Brooks,
Would better flow from furrowed looks:
Thy lovely Face was never meant
To be the Seat of Discontent:
Then clear those watrish stars again,
That else portend a lasting Rain,
Least the Clouds which settle there,
Prolong my Winter all the year;
And thy Example others make,
In Love with sorrow, for thy sake.
P. A Complement to his Mistress.
ASk me no more whither do stray
The Golden Atoms of the Day;
For in pure Love, Heavens did prepare
This Powder to enrich your Hair.
Ask me no more whither does have
The Nightingale when May is past;
For in your sweet dividing throat,
She winters, and keeps warm her Note.
Ask me no more where Jove bestows
(When June is past) the fading Rose;
For in your Beauties Orient deep,
All Flowers as in their Causes sleep.
Ask me no more where stars so bright,
Do downward stoop in dark of Night;
For in your Eyes they sit, and there
Fixed become, as in their Sphere.
Nor ask me whether East or West,
The Phoenix builds her spiced Nest,
For unto you at last she flies,
And in your fragrant bosom dies.
A Paradox in praise of a painted WOMAN.
NOt kiss? by Love I must, and make impression
As long as Cupid dares to hold his session
Upon my flesh of blood, our kisses shall
Out-minute time, and without number fall.
Do not I know those Balls of blushing read,
Which on thy Cheeks thus am'rously be spread;
Thy sinewy neck, those veins upon thy brow,
Which with their azure winckles sweetly bow;
Are artsull borrowed, and no more thine own
Then Chains which on saint Georges day are shown
Are proper to the wearer; yet for this
I Idol thee, and beg a luscious kiss:
The Fucus, and Ceruse, which on thy face
Thy cunning hand lays on to add new grace,
Deceive me with such pleasing fraud, that I
Find in thy Art what can in nature lie.
Much like a Painter that upon some wall
On which the splendent sunbeams use to fall;
Paints with such art a gilded Butterfly,
That silly maids with slow moved fingers try
To catch it, and then blush at their mistake;
Yet of this painted Fly much reckoning make:
Such is our state, since that we look upon
Is naught but color, and proportion
Take me a face as full of fraud and lies
As Gypsies, or your running Lotteries;
That is more false, or more sophisticate
Then are saints relics, or a man of state;
Yet such being glazed by the sleight of art
Gains admiration, wins in many a heart;
Put case there be a difference in the mould,
Yet may thy Venus be more choice, and hold
A dearer treasure; oftentimes we see
Rich Candian wines in wooden boles to be.
The odoriferous Civet does not lie
Within the Musk-cats nose, or ear, or eye;
But in a baser place, for prudent nature
In drawing up of various forms and stature,
Gives from the curious shop of her rich treasure
To fair parts comeliness, to baser pleasure.
The fairest flowers which in Spring do grow
Are not so much for use, as for the show;
As Lillies, Hyacinth, and Gorgeous birth
Of all py'd flowers which diaper the earth,
Please more with their discoulored purple train,
Then wholesome pot herbs which for use remain.
Shall I a gaudy speckled serpent kiss?
Because the color that he wears is his?
A perfumed Cordavant who will wear?
For that his sent is borrowed otherwhere.
The robes and vestiments which grace us all
Are not our own, but adventitial.
Time rifles Natures Beauty, but sly Art
Repairs by cunning this decaying part.
Fills here a wrinkle, and there purles a Vein,
And with her cunning hand runs over again
The Breaches dented in the Arm of Time,
And makes deformity to be no crime;
As when great men are gript with sickness hand,
Industrious Physic pregnantly does stand
To patch up foul Diseases, and does strive
To keep their tottering Carcasses alive:
Beauty a candle is, which every puff
Blows out, and leaves naught but a stinking snuff
To fill our Nostrills with this boldly think,
Your cleerest candle yields the greatest stink;
As your pure food, and choicest nutriment,
Yields the most hot, and nose-strong excrement:
Why hang we then on things so apt to vary,
So fleeting, brittle, and so temporary?
That agues, coughs, tooth-aches, and catarre,
Slight touches of diseases, spoil or mar:
But when old age their beauty has in chase,
And ploughs up furrows in their own smooth face,
Then they become forsaken, and do show
Like stately Abbeys ruined long ago.
Nature but gives the model and first draught
Of fair Complexion, which by art is taught
To speak it self a complete form and birth,
So stands a Copy to the shapes on earth.
Love grants me then a reparable face,
Which whilst that colors are, can want no grace.
Pigmalions painted statues I could love,
So it were warm, and soft, and could but move.
Sonnet. P.
NOw being caught in Cupid's Net,
And no way forth that I can get;
My heart being fixed, I cannot move,
Where I settle, I must love:
My Love must still with you remain,
Although my hoping be in vain.
By Vows and Oaths now am I sure;
But misery my heart must endure:
So fickle are the Female kind,
Which troubles much my grieved mind;
Missing the Corpse I should enjoy,
Brings me to ruin and annoy.
But let them not then so false prove,
But likewise join their Love for Love;
Or else come Cupid with thy dart,
And quickly pierce my wounded heart.
Seeing with her I cannot remain,
Let me be rid out of my pain.
Being I am thus crossed in Love,
I needs must play the Turtle-Dove.
For seeing that I have lost my Mate,
My Joy is turned into hate.
Therefore abroad then must I fly,
And seek me out a place to dye.
Well Captain, now thou have my heart,
For thy sake now sore does it smart;
With sobs and tears then do I cry,
To think on thy false treachery.
Thy sight to me even now is death,
Come gentle Cupid stop my breath,
P. On a Strawberry.
HOw like a Virgin, white and red,
A young Rose party-colored,
Blusheth these Berries; or like the Sun,
Whose days journey's new begun,
Look here it is white, and on this side
It Is like the Lilly in her pride,
Or new-falne Snow, or like fresh May,
Which was blown but yesterday;
Both which Colors making one,
Imitate perfection,
Making it to seem as fair
As a beauty past compere;
Or the Apple cast from Jove
To those of the Hesperian Grove:
Yet not jealous where it grows,
Every where they march in rows;
Fields, and Bancks, and Roots of trees
Are often spangled over with these;
Which though good themselves, yet be
The better by Community.
Taken how it hangs the head
Like a Virgin ravished;
Bowing down, as if afraid,
Like Daphne when she cried for aid;
Or like Calisto, that had been
Tempted by great Jove to sin,
And seeing that Diana spied it,
Strait held down the head to hide it.
I would a Mistress just like thee,
Thou pattern of humility;
As fair, fresh, patient, and free
Of any thing but Chastity;
As silent, and which best would please,
No less willing to increase.
P. on VENNS and ADONIS.
VEnus that fair loving Queen,
Was sporting in the fairest Green,
There fair Adonis did she see,
As he was sleeping by a tree;
Swift as thought to him she hies,
When she pursues, then still he flies;
O stay, stay, stay, sweet Boy quoth she,
And come sit down, down, down by me:
O stay, said she, my only joy;
Then in her arms she clipped the Boy.
To speak, said she, let pity move;
But he said, No, I cannot love.
Yet still she moved him for a kiss,
Sweet, scant not that which plenty is.
Into his arms her self she flung,
But he cried, Fie, I am too young.
Her Robes as fair, as fair might be,
The Goddess plucked above her Knee;
In her fair twine she held him fast,
And made him yield to love at last:
Was ever Lady thus disgraced?
Art thou a God, and yet shame, faced?
Then blushing, down his head he hung,
And still cried, Fie, I am too young:
Though he was young, yet stubborn. hearted,
Away he flung, and so they parted.
Her Rosy Cheek, fair Lady than,
With sorrow looked pale and wan.
Now for thy sake, wild Boy, quoth she,
Lov's God is blind, and still shall be.
Then sigh she did, with many a groan,
And still sat weeping all alone.
R, APOSIE for a Neck-Lace.
LO, on my Neck whilst this I bind,
For to hang him that steals my mind;
Unless he hang alive in Chains,
I hang and dye in lingering pains.
Those threads enjoy a double grace,
Both by the Gemm, and by the place.
P. For an EARRING.
It Is vain to add a Ring or Gemm,
Your Ear it self out-passeth them;
When idle Words are passing here,
I warn, and pull you by the Ear,
This Silken Chain stands waiting here
For Golden Tongues to tie on there.
Here silence twine their locks, you see,
Now tell me which the softer be.
P. SONG.
COme saddest thoughts possess my heart,
And in my grief come bear a part;
Let all my words be turned to groans,
Those sounds do best befit my moans;
Each breath I take a sigh must be
To make up sorrows harmony:
Mine eyes once glutted with delight,
Are now eclipsed from that sight,
From whose pure light and influence
I borrowed both life and sense:
Whilst then I draw this tedious breath,
I shall but lead a liveing death:
In sable weeds I Will clothed be,
And put on sorrows livery;
Then to some desert will I go,
The fittest place to harbor woe;
Where Owls and Ravens horrid cries
Shall Echo forth my miseries:
My meat shall be of troubled cares,
My drink shall be of brinish tears;
My house shall be of the dark Cell,
Where no house is, there will I dwell;
The hardest rock shall be my bed
Whereon to rest my troubled head;
In stead of man's society,
Wild beasts shall keep me company;
I will converse without all fear
With Lion, Tiger, Woolf, or Bear;
No Music but their roaring cries
Each night shall close my wretched eyes;
Death's living Tomb thus will I be,
And living dye continually.
To Birds and Worms I Will it expose,
That on my body when I dye
They may engrave this Elegy:
No solemn burial will I crave,
My Cell shall be my Tomb and Grave;
And ere I breath my last thereon,
I Will write this sad Inscription;
Here lies enclosed in this Tomb,
He that endured Loves Martyrdom.
Amyntas. P.
CLoris sat, and sitting slept,
Sleeping figh'd, and sighing wept;
Sat, slept, and sighed, and wept again
For Ami tas that was slain:
Oh! had you seen his face, said she;
How fair, how full of Majesty.
And there she stopped,
And there she cried,
Amyntas, Amyntas,
And so she died.
Sonnet. P.
GO Soul, the Bodies Guest,
Upon a thankless Errand;
Fear not to teach the best,
The truth shall be thy warrant.
Go since thou must needs dye,
And tell them all they lie.
Say to the Court it glows,
and shines like rotten wood;
Say to the Church it shows
what is good, but does not good
If Court and Church reply
Then give them all the lie.
Tell Protestants they live
acting but others actions,
Not loved unless they give;
not strong but by their factions.
It Protestants reply,
Give Protestants the lie.
Tell men of high Condition,
that rule affairs of State,
Their purpose is ambition,
their practice only hate:
And if they once reply,
Then give them all the lie.
Tell Wit it wants Devotion,
tell Love it is bur Lust;
Tell time it is but motion,
tell Flesh it is but Dust,
And wish them not reply,
For thou must give the lie.
Tell those that brave it most,
They beg for more by spending,
And in their greatest cost,
seek nothing but commending,
And if they once reply,
Then give them all the lie.
Tell Age it daily wastes,
tell Honor how it alters,
Tell Beauty how she blasteth,
tell favor that she falters:
And as they do reply,
Give every one the lie.
Tell Wit how it wrangles,
in tricks and points of niceness;
Tell Wisdom she entangles
her self in others wiseness;
And as they do reply,
So give them all the lie.
Tell Physic of her boldness,
tell Skill it is perversion,
Tell Charity of her coldness,
tell Law it is contention;
And if they do reply,
Then give them all the lie.
Tell Fortune of her blindness,
tell Nature of decay;
Tell Friendship of unkindness,
tell Justice of delay,
And if they do reply,
Then give them all the lie.
P. On a Fountain.
THE Dolphins trifling each on others side,
For joy lept up, and gazing there abide:
And whereas other Waters fish do bring,
Lo here from Fishes do the Waters spring;
Who think it is more glorious to give,
Then to receive the Juice by which they live;
And by this Milk-white Basin learn they may,
That pure hands you should bring, or bear away:
For which each Basin wants no Furniture,
Each Dolphin wailing, makes his Mouth an Ewre.
You're welcome then, you well may understand,
When Fish themselves give Water to your hand.
To a Friend. P.
LIke to a hand which has been used to play
One Lesson long, still runs the usual way,
And waits not what the Hearers bids it strike,
But does presume by Custom this will like.
So run my thoughts, which are so perfect grown,
So well acquainted with my passion,
That now they dare prevent me with their have,
And ere I think to sigh, my sigh is past;
It Is past, and flown to you; for you alone
Are all the Objects that I think upon.
And did not you supply my soul with thought,
For want of action they would muse of naught:
What though our absent hands may not infold
Real ^mbraces; yet we firmly hold
Each other in Possession; thus we see
The Lord enjoys his Lands where'ere be.
If Kings possessed no more then where they sat,
How were theirs greater then a mean Estate?
This makes me firmly yours, you firmly mine,
That something more then bodies us combine.
P. On his Mistress.
KEep on your Mask, and hide your Eye,
For with beholding you I dye:
Your fatal Beauty, Gorgon-like,
Dead with astonishment will strike:
Your piercing Eyes, if them I see,
Are worse then Basilisks to me:
Shut from my sight those Hills of Snow,
Their melting Valleys do not show;
Those Azure paths lead to despair,
O! vex me not, forbear, forbear:
For whilst I thus in torments dwell,
The sight of Heaven is worse then Hell.
Your dainty Voice, and warbling-breath,
Sounds like a Sentence past for death;
Your dandling Tresses are become,
Like Instruments of Final Doom,
O! if an Angel torture so
When Life is done, where shall I go.
P. In praise of his Mistress IRONICE.
MY Mistress has a precious Eye,
But that alas, it looks awry;
And like the Silver is her Hair,
But it is Nitty every where;
And for a Brow, as black as Jet,
But it is greasy all with swet:
As for her Nose, O dainty Bill!
But it is ever dropping still:
And for her Lips, both fair and smooth,
But slavers like a Landress Booth;
And not a Tooth within her head,
But like a Pearl unpolished:
As for her Tongue, without compare,
It never talks but out of square.
And for her Chin, O pretty chap,
But that it has a woolly Nap!
As for her Neck, both fair and white,
But carries not the head aright.
And for her Breasts, both full and soft,
But that it has been milcht too often.
As for her belly, and her back,
Acquainted how to bear a pack.
And for the best, that is untold,
Alas, it has been bought and sold.
As for her Thighs, good flesh and fat,
But rough and furred like a Cat.
And for her Feet, and for her Toes,
If that you do not stop your Nose,
The scent will teach your patience,
She is all sweet, Sir-reverence.
Translated out of FRENCH.
LOVE the great Workman, a new World has made,
The Earth's my Faith, with steady firmness Crowned;
The Earth's of the Universe for Center laid,
So is my Faith of this fair World the Ground.
If any motion of a jealous War
Shakes my heart's Faith, and lead it into error,
It Is as when Winds that in the Earth pris'ned are,
Make Earthquakes that affect the earth with terror.
My tears are the Ocean; for to draw them dry,
Were no less work then to suck up the Sea:
The storms that raise these billows in mine eye,
Are (dear) the fears of you not loving me.
The Sea is salt, although his Waters be
Assembled Rivers first, and sweet enough;
Much Salter are my tears, and far to me,
Sweeter their Sources since they spring from you.
The Air's my will, that in its own Power free,
Restless about my Faith has his repair.
The Winds are like desires that rage in me,
And move my will, as the Wind moves the Air.
The Fire invisible, that this Air unfolds,
Is the dear Flame wherein for you I languish;
And as no Lie that subtle Fire beholds,
So from the whole world hidden is my anguish.
The Moon is Hope, which still does wax and wane,
Borrowing the Light it has, from you alone;
When the Moon's clouded, it is then when in vain
My thoughts err after you, and cause my moan.
The Sun's your Eye (the fairest Light we see)
Fair Sun of Love, light and life of our hours;
For if the other Sun the world's light be,
What Lover but derives his Light from yours.
The Summer is your smile that quickens me,
Winter, my fears, benumming all my powers;
But what boot's fear, if my Loves Autumn be,
As void of fruit, as was his Spring of flowers.
P. A DREAM.
WHen as the cheerful Light was overspread
With misty darkness, and the Sun was fled
Unto the Western Island; who to rest,
It called from toylsome labor man and beast.
Methought within a shady blooming Grove,
Where I was walking sad, perplexed with Love:
Not far I spied a Damsel passing fair,
Which might for Beauty with the Nymphs compare:
She laid her down upon the Grass to rest
Her tired Limbs, with weariness oppressed:
Her pretty Fingers there I did behold,
How cunningly her Tresses did unfold;
I saw her Lilly Arm, her tender thigh,
Her little waste, yet durst I not come nigh
For fear she should descry me by her light
Of horned Luna, which even then in sight
Was seen to come from old Endymions Bed,
Scarce 'woke, still shaking of his drowsy head.
I lay down still, at length I did espy
Her eyes with sleep fast shut, then presently
I roused my spirits without fear of shame;
And to the place whereas I lay, she came.
How fitly there her Legs abroad she laid,
Betwixt, Dame Natures Privity bewrai'd
It self; how fit she lay for to be pressed:
Still was I cheerful, till at length possessed
With more inflaming Lust, I softly fell
Upon her Body; Judge you that can tell
The rest: So having finished without pain,
From whence I came, I did return again.
P. To a Lady residing at the Court.
EAch greedy hand does catch and pluck the flowr
When none regards the stock it grows upon.
Each Nature loves the fruit still to devour,
But leaves the Tree to fall, or stand alone:
Then this advice fair Cteature take from me,
Let none pluck fruit, unless he take the Tree.
Believe no Vows, nor much-protesting-men,
Credit no Oaths, nor no bewailing Song;
Let Courtiers swear, forswear, and swear again,
Their hearts lie ten Regions from their Tongue:
And when with Oaths thy heart is made to tremble,
Believe them least, for then they most dissemble.
No; Let not Caesar's self corrupt thy heart,
Nor fond Ambition scale thy modesty;
Say to the King, Thou only constant art,
He cannot pardon thine impurity:
For if with one, with thousands thou wilt turn Whore;
Break Ice in one place, and it cracks in more.
APOLLO'S Oath.
When Phoebus first did Daphne love,
And could no way her fancy move,
He craved the Cause: the Cause, quoth she,
Is, I have vowed Virginity.
Then Phoebus raging, swore, and said,
Past Fifteen none should die a Maid.
If Maidens then perchance are sped
Ere they can scarcely dress their head,
Yet pardon them, for they are loath
To make Apollo break his Oath;
And better it is a Child were born,
Then that a God should be forsworn.
Yet silly they, when all is done,
Complain our wits their hearts have won;
When it is for fear that they should be
Like Daphne, turned into a Tree:
And who her self would so abuse,
To be a Tree, if she could choose.
P. ASONG.
DRaw not too near,
Unless you drop a tear
On the Stone
Where I groan,
And will weep
Until the eternal sleep
Shall charm my wearied eyes.
Cloris lies here
Embalmed with many a tear,
Which the Swain
From the Plain
Here has paid,
And many a Vestal Maid
Has mourned her Obsequies;
Their snowy breasts they tear,
And rent their golden hair;
Casting cries
To celestial Deities,
To return
Her beauty from the Urn,
To remain
Unparalled on earth again,
When straight a sound
From the ground
Piercing the Air;
Cried, she is dead,
Her soul is fled
Unto a place more rare.
You Spirits that do keep
The dust of those that sleep
Under ground,
Hear the sound
Of a Swain,
That folds his arms all in vain
To the Ashes he adores;
For pity do not fright
Him wandering in the night,
When he laves
Virgins graves
From his eyes,
Contributing sad laments
Unto their memories;
And when my name is read
In number of the Dead,
Some one may
In charity repay
My soul the tribute that I gave;
And howl some Requiem on my grave,
Then weep no more, weep no more,
Souls rest from care;
Since she is dead,
Her soul is fled
Unto a place more rare.
A Prognostication upon Cards and Dice.
BEfore the sixth day of the next New-year
Strange wonders in this Kingdom shall appear;
Four Kings shall be assembled in this Isle,
Where they shall raise great tumults for a while;
Many men then shall have an end of crosses,
And many likewise shall sustein great losses:
Many that are now joiful, and full glad,
Shall at that time be sorrowful and sad:
Full many a Christians heart shall quake for fear,
The dreadful sound of Trump when he shall hear.
Dead Bones then shall be tumbled up and down
In every City, and in every Town;
By day and night this tumult shall not cease,
Until a Herald shall proclaim a Peace;
A Herald strange, whose like was never born,
Whose mouth is flesh, and very beard is horn.
FINIS.

