A WORD FOR THE COMMON WEAL TENDING Toward the Begetting and Continuing, a
right Understanding and good Opinion between the PARLIAMENT and the PEOPLE.

AND Toward the laying a firm foundation of constant Peace and good will
toward each other.

By Isaac Penington, Esquire.

O how pleasant and profitable might a new kind of War be (after this bitter
old-fashioned one) between Parliament and People, if each would contest by
stratagems of love tenderness, sweetness, and righteousness, to conquer the
hearts of each other, wherein both their strengths lie, more then in any
outward visible force or power, that either can lay hold on.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Sumptner Anno Dom. 1650.

To the PRESENT PARLIAMENT
MIserable must the state of this Creation needs be, while calamities are daily
growing on every part of it, and the remedies desired and sought for, to
redress them, are so far from true and sound curing, that they also come to be
reckoned among the number of calamities.

This Nation was very sick; a Parliament much desired to cure it, many hopes
and expectations fastened upon their endeavors, but now most men are grown
sick both of the Physician and the cure.

How far there is just occasion hereof given concerns you nearly to consider,
who are not to mind your own wills or ends, but the desires and welfares of
those who have entrusted you: How far there is unjust offense taken, behooves
them thoroughly to scan who are severe Judges of your actions, lest they
themselves prove guilty of that toward you which they charge you with, and
obstruct you in the prosecution of that, which if once effected, might be both
for their own and others good.

It is no delight to me to open my mouth against any much less against those
who should deserve, and have honor. I could please my self rather in
apologizing for; then in accusing, though generally I find the state of man to
be such, that much may be said against him little for him.

But I may not use many words; There are only two considerations I would at
present propose to your view, the one whereof is of somewhat a large nature the
other referres to your late erected Government.

That which referres to your Government is this.

Ye have made a change in the form of Government, putting a new image and
superscription upon it, which is like to be of great concernment one way or
other, but which way it will be, is yet somewhat doubtful; and it may not be
unworthy of you, to bethink your selves, what security ye can give the people
(who cannot but desire it) that this new mold of Government shall not be found
as burdensome and oppressive to them as the foregoeing was complained to be.

If ye can demonstrate that it is more capable of bounds, and that ye also are
more careful to provide due bounds for it, this may yield some satisfaction to
that reason which makes the enquiry: But if ye lay the stresse upon the
goodness of the Persons ye employ, this may neither prove so satisfactory at
present, nor so safe for the future, as some perhaps expect it should and will.

The other relates to afear which has lain long upon my spirit concerning
some things which to my observation seemed likely to eat out the benefit of
this present Parliament, and to swallow up its credit with the people.

The things I have been jealous of in this respect are chiefly these three.

Multitude of affairs, Prolixity in your motions, and want of an orderly
Government of your own body, which may occasion both the former: want of a
right rule to square and order your selves in your proceedings may easily draw
many things upon you which might be better managed by other hands, and may
likewise retard your dispatch in what ye set about.

Ye have fallen into that calamity which Iethro forewarned Moses of, namely of
tiring out both your selves and the People: ye complain of your work, and they
still complain of their burdens: your work still grows upon you and their
burdens still lie upon them: the cost, the attendance the seeking, the waiting
for releife will eat out the sweetness of it, if it should come at last. How
can the People be pleased, while things are thus? How can ye be pleased with
your selves while ye act thus? How can it but pierce your Ears and hearts to
hear Persons groan and complain under those afflictions, which your
consciences cannot but tell you, ye ought to ease them of?

Give me leave to speak plainly, I cannot but think that if ye had been in a
right way, your work had been done long before now; but in the way ye have
been in, and (as far as I can see) yet are in, there appears no likelihood
of a desired end.

How long will it be ere ye can come to particular businesses? how long must
ye needs be in dispatching them? And how fast will both they, and more
public business grow upon you?

I leave these things to your consideration, longing to see the time that the
people may have just cause to be satisfied with your transactions, and that
they may be satisfied with that cause.

This is the present (though faint) desire of him who would rejoice to serve
you or his Country in such a way, as he might be free from any snare or
temptation to serve himself.

ISAAC PENNINGTON.

To the People of this rent and tattered NATION.
Dear Countrymen,
IF my well-wishes toward you might take effect, ye should soon be happy: if
I might but have my will, there should neither will nor power be left any where
to hurt you. I delight not to see cause of complaining, or to hear complaints,
whether justly or unjustly uttered: joy, peace, rest, content within in every
spirit, and good will toward all abroad, would make the prospect of affairs
somewhat more pleasant to me, then as yet it is.

We are now entangled in misery: after all our running from it we are become
involved in it. We can neither endure our sickness nor our cure. We are so
divided into parties, that the whole is only liable to ruin, but cannot be
saved. one sort cannot be pleased unless an other be crushed. Our desires
hopes, endeavors ends, are various and contrary, and so are our welfares; so
that which way so ever you turn the scale a considerable part sinkes, groans,
and complains of oppression and hardship which it suffers by the ease and
exaltation of other parts [What is there no common good wherein I and others
may meet? can I not be happy unless I sit on a throne and others lie as slaves
underneath me? must my reason be every ones rule, or I become their enemy?
surely methinks both that variety and contrariety that is amongst us, might be
better ordered: true wisdom could so dispose of it, as it should no longer
thus harshly jarre, but make up a sweet harmony.

But this is the great unrighteousness in man, he thinks himself can never be
dealt gently enough with but he would have force used toward others; he may be
led by reason, but others that dissent from his reason, are obstinate, and
necessity requires the use of compulsion toward such: and oh how just is it,
that every man, in his turn and season, should meet with that force, with that
oppression, which he in his desire reason, and judgment, has measured out to
others?

Thou complainest of unrighteousness abroad, but how little do thou think of
that root of unrighteousness that is in thy self which if it had the same
dunging and watering in thee, as it has in others would soon be as fertile if
not more, yea does already bear too much fruit in thee?

Tell me truly, Art not thou unrighteous in judging others for
unrighteousness? art not thou unwilling to give them their due allowances, to
hear what might be spoken in their just defense? do thou not deal thus with
the present powers? would thou be content to be dealt so with, if thou were
in their stead? Art not thou too forward to accuse, to prosecute, to condemn,
but to backward to entertain what may be spoken by way of justification or
excuse? Thou perhaps expectest to see the judgment of God overtake them for
their unrighteousness, and do thou think to escape judgment thy self, who
judge them so unrighteously? How can thou expect God should make them just
toward thee in their actings when thou art so unjust toward them in thy
interpretation of their actings?

Oh how vain is man become, sowing the seeds of misery to himself and others,
and yet complaining if he miss of happiness: every man desires happiness,
and thinks the way he walks in leads to it, and wonders if he meet not with it
so soon as his expectations persuade him he shall, and is ready to blame others
for the protraction or diversion of that good he expected: but little does man
think when he reaps misery, that it was wrapped up and lay hid in that seed which
he himself did sow! what will be the issue of these things?

Me thinks I see man undermining himself, and a power bove him, wearying him
out of his old sanctuary, under which he has still been sheltring himself,
which is, the honesty the integrity of his own heart, which when it is opened
he will find to be some other geuss thing* then he took it for; and then he
will become more shie of justifying himself, and condemning others, then
hitherto he has been. A thorough sight of the strength and power of that
within in himself, whereof it is but some appearances abroad in others that he
is so feirce and vehement against, will quickly silence him, and make him
tender toward others for his own sake; and yet when he is brought to his low
ebb, he may be nearer that happiness he longs for, then he is aware of: which
that we may all meet with, after all these calamities and miseries, which we
have felt, and still fear, is the desire of him, who would feign become love
to all, and enjoy love in all.

ISAAC PENNINGTON.

A WORD FOR THE COMMON WEAL TENDING Toward the Begetting and Continuing, a
right Understanding and good Opinion between the PARLIAMENT and the PEOPLE.
I Suppose it cannot be unknown to any, who have taken the least notice of the
late transactions in this shattered Nation, what a sharp and bitter conflict
there has been in the bowels of it, for the recovery of those rights and
liberties, which were bleeding to death, and had almost given up the Ghost. And
it concerns every one; after all this cost and travail, through so many
storms and tempests, to contribute his utmost vigilance and industry, for
bringing the ship with its burden into a safe Harbor, that every one may at
length be fully possessed of that, which he has run through so many hazards
and difficulties to attain. This lies much upon all, though most upon those
who have most power and advantages in their hands to effect it. That which will
accomplish all, is a righteous administration of Government; whereby our rights
and privileges are both preserved and increased, where need is; and whatsoever
any man in reason can desire, this will supply him with.

For the effecting of this, these three things are requisite. Good Laws,
proper hands duly to execute them, and an exact Rule or way, whereby those
hands may be guided unto a due and speedy execution of those Laws.

The Laws are the proper bounds of right and liberty, whereby every man is
determined what he shall enjoy for his own particular, and what he shall be
engaged to act for the public welfare. These must be certain and suited to
the state of the Nation, else there is a foundation of injustice, slavery, and
misery laid at the bottom of all, which it will be very hard to build
righteousness and liberty upon. And these Laws should be clear and easy to
be known, else any man may easily be prone to run into dangers unawares, or to
miss of that remedy which is by the Law provided for him, in case of injury
done him: for want of this, Laws may easily become snares to them whom they
should preserve from being ensnared, and advantages to the crafty to perplex
and crush the more simple and plaine-hearted, whom they should be a fence to,
against the crafty.

Execution is the life of the Law. It is not the Law barely that affrights or
encourages, but the execution of it: and our defect and complaint has been
more concerning the Non-execution of the Laws we had, then of the Non-addition
of the Laws we wanted.

Therefore so soon as we are fitted with laws, it is in the next place to be
thoroughly weighed what hands are most fit and proper for the due and faithful
execution of these laws, without which, the framing of the best laws that can
be imagined, is to little purpose.

Now that which will make the execution most certain, is a clear Rule
prescribed to them who are to execute, whereby they may be rightly guided in
the administration, and left, as little as may be, to determine or order things
according to their own present apprehensions and judgments, lest at that
backdore, arbitrary Government (which is the foundation of Tyranny) on a sudden
creep in.

This would be carefully looked to at the beginning, while things are in
constitution, and may more easily be molded, then afie: things are settled. For
how can it be expected, but man who has the same corruption in him with others
to draw him aside, temptations above others unto it, and advantages of security
beyond others (as authority, power and greatness do always afford) I say how
can it be expected, but man in this state should step out of the way, unless
he have firm and fixed bounds to keep him in his proper compass. Surely the
people are bound, in respect to their own safty, and the good of those they
employ in so great a matter as government is, not only to provide good laws
for themselves to be governed by but also due bounds for them to keep within,
who are to act in the execution of the Laws.

And it may be worthy the consideration, whether the late King were
sufficiently furnished in this respect and if he were left too much to his own
liberty, and thereby somewhat occasioned to miscarry, what may free us from
this danger for the future.

There is no such great matter in the change of Government, as many conceive
(who pierce not into the true causes of things, but are ready to fly out upon
that which stands most in their eye) every Government having its advantage as
well as its disadvantage; but the goodness and safety of every government lies
in that well ordering and well bounding of it for speedy and due administration
of the Laws.

And upon this ground it seems to me improper for Parliaments to intermeddle
with matters of Government, further then to settle it in fit hands, and within
just bounds: because they are entrusted with an arbitrary power, which is
absolutely necessary to the work whereunto they are called; they are to
redress things at present for which there is as yet no Law, and to provide
future remedies for things amiss, which the Law did not foresee.

Now this is exceeding useful to the People, and necessary for the People in
such cases; but if this power shall be drawn out into acts of Government; so
far as it is so drawn out, the people are governed arbitrarily by an Arbitrary
power, which power the people did put into their hands, not to make use of to
this end, but to enable them to prevent in any whatsoever.

The power they are entrusted with, is an extraordinary power for extraordinary
ends and purposes, to which safely and swiftly applied, it will produce
excellent effects; but if extended too far, and to cases for which it was not
appointed nor is proper, it will prove as great a mischeife as it was hoped to
be a remedy; for the greatest power being misapplyed, having nothing to check
it* must needs be the greatest oppression.

A Parliament may far more easily err in Government, then a King or ordinary
Council; for they have, or should have their rule to act by; but a Parliament
act, by mere supremacy, by power paramount, and from their determinations,
there is no orderly appeal: what they do but Vote is so, or shall be so, they
expect the people are bound to stand to; therefore if they keep not within a
clear circumference, within the bounds of clear reason and justice, they do
unadvoidably make the people slaves. Remedies of this nature should be very
warily used, and very carefully applied to the disease; for as the advantage is
great in the right and skillful application, so the danger is as great in the
misapplication.

Now since I have thus lighted upon so needful a subject, wherewith my mind
has been long full; both for mine own ease, and for public benefit, I
intend to vent my self a little further about it.

The safety of the People lies in government, for whose welfare it was erected.

The safety of Government consists much in the limits set unto it, and the
strict observation of those limits; which if it fall short of, it is defective;
and cannot attain its end; if it exceed, it proves burdensome and Tyrannous.

Take into consideration what Government you will; if it have not limits, or be
not well bounded; those who are under it, must needs smart by it, and be
entangled in those miseries which Government is appointed to prevent.

Now this is it I have much bewailed in mine own thoughts concerning
Parliaments (whether justly or no; let the Reader well consider) that they are
not well bounded, that the trust which is reposed in them, is not clearly
known, either by the People, or perhaps by themselves: but they are left unto,
and take unto themselves so much scope, as it is very easy for them to err,
almost impossible for them to act aright. Every man that is to do any work,
must thoroughly know his work, his rule whereby he is to do it, and be careful
to eye the conformity of the one with the other; if he know not his work, how
can he set about it at all? if he know not his rule, how can he set about it a
right? how apt will he be to slip into by-actions at least? and this great
mischeife accompanyes it too; he will be apt to think he does every thing a
right, and so to justify himself in the most apparent injustice and
oppression, as the wit of man is very subtle to do; for though he have a rule,
he can bend the rule and make it suit with his own miscarriages, how much more
when he thinks himself left at liberty? It is ill trusting unbounded Power any
where; it is hard keeping Power upright, though never so well bounded, but
unbounded, it is a very sharp tool, and will quickly eat out all, but its own
Sovereignty.

Man is very brutish in this respect, not searching into the root and ground of
things; but according to sense, flying out upon that which is most obious. If
he find himself oppressed, remove but the hand that laid the burden upon him,
he presently thinks he is eased for ever; when alas poor fool, he finds by
after experience, that the succeeding finger is heavier then the foregoing
loins. And how can this be otherwise? you must still set up a greater power to
remove a less, else it will not avail to do it; and the greater it is, the
weightier strokes can it give, the weightier burdens can it impose; and the
more unlimited it is the sooner is it tempted so to do; and the more
unsuspicious others are of it, or it is of it self, the more likely is it to
do it. So that there is no trusting any man, or any sort of men; they are all
of the same make, they have all the same principle to mislead them, the same
by-ends and interests (the same at bottom, though they appear not the same) to
work upon them, one as well as another: and though man, under the sense of
fear and danger, may act warily and somewhat righteously; yet let those
obstacles be a little removed, you shall see what command self has over him;
it has the chief command in his heart, and will quickly appear at his
fingers ends: He that knows not this by himself, knows little of himself;
and he that knows this by himself, and is not willing to be chained up (as a
man would chain up a Lion, or a Wolf from doing harm) nourishes in himself
a desire tp be a Tyrant: And people by calling persons to any office, putting
them in any trust, investing them with any power in a dark confused way,
without clear and distinct limitations, do sow the seed-plors of Tyranny,
which by this means they too carelessly sow, and may too soon reap.

And if the People of this Nation, have been too negligent of their own
security in this respect; let such as are able, and truly love them, not take
advantage hereof, but help them out of the mire, by putting them into a way
whereby they may do it now, or by doing it to their hand so clearly, so justly,
as they may not choose but own it.

Yet further.
There is great need of some fixed bounds and limits, to be a square or
standard to measure the actions of the Parliament by, whereunto the People
might have recourse in matters of controversy, between them and the
Parliament, or in case of jealousy that they were nor dealt faithfully with.

It is a great trust the people have committed to the Parliament, upon the
faithful discharge whereof their welfare does much depend, by whose care they
may be set into and preserved in a free and flourishing condition, by whose
negligence or devotion, they may easily be impoverished and enslaved.

Now in equity, the people are not only allowed, but it behooves them in point
of wisdom, and by that duty of selfe-preservation, which nature teaches all,
to look after the managing of this their trust, to expect an account of it from
those who are entrusted by them, to have full satisfaction that it is managed
with the best care, speed, and fidelity to their advantage.

But how shall the People know this? how shall the People be thus satisfied? is
it not fit they should be? If any controversy arise about it, that the people
think or say they are not well dealt with, their trust is abused; Power not
made use of to preserve them and their liberties, but to enslave them; that the
Privileges of Parliament swallow up their Rights and Liberties, which they
were ordained to defend.

How shall this be decided? how shall it be truly and clearly known whether
these things be so, or whether they be unjust reproaches, unless there were
some standing Privileges of reason or rules of Law extant, whereto any person
doubting might address himself for satisfaction, and whereto their actions
should so clearly answer; that it should not need any great depth of reason to
discern the justness, plainness, and integrity of them?

And it might not be much out of the way to search and inquire, whether this
has not been the bottom root of all our disturbances, the want of some clear
and settled Principles for the Parliament to proceed by, or at least the not
divulging and making common these Principles?

The Parliament were at first looked upon with a loving aspect generally by the
people: within a while the Kings party falls of, conceiving his trust and
interest entrenched upon by them, and still calling for the discovery of those
privileges and fundamental Laws; which were pleaded in the behalf of the
Parliament. Afterward the Parliament looses more and more, and grows too
sudainly to a very low ebb in the eyes of the people: and though occurrences
help to raise it again, yet not to its former loveliness; nor so, but that it
sinks afterward again, and its very friends are often divided amongst
themselves. How can it be otherwise? how can men but fall out, when occasions
of difference are continually arising, and every man is left to his own
(perhaps misbyassed) reason and judgment to determine, and has no clear Rule
before him, to guide his eye and thoughts by?

This made the case between the late King and them, somewhat more difficult,
then some have thought. He had a trust committed to him, so had they also: but
the bounds of either were not fully cleared, and so they clashed (as powers are
very apt to do) and in their clashing, their charge against one another was one
and the same. They charged him with violating the Laws, with extending his
prerogatives to the hurt of the people, with ruling according to will, etc. He
likewise charged them with overturning the Laws, with assuming privileges
prejudicial both to him and the People, with entering into an Arbitrary
government. So these two great Powers fall out, having no standard to determine
these things by, whereby it might appear which were truly guilty, but each
justify themselves and condemn the other, according to the ordinary course of
man, who is very sensible of the injuries he receives but very insensible of
those he does: Nor had the people any standard neither, and so they fell in
with either, as their minds lead them, to the ruining and destroying of one
another. Now the same case may hapen between the people and the Parliament, as
has done between the Parliament and the late King. The people may vote it in
their thoughts and minds, that the Parliament do not discharge their trust,
that they meddle with that which the people has not entrusted them with,
neglect the doing of that which the people have entrvsted them to do, that they
elevate their privileges, not in circumstances, but in substantial things, to
the prejudice of the people. The Parliament on the contrary, may contend, that
they have been faithful, have run great hazards, through their love and
faithfulness to the people, have denied themselves more then ever any
Parliament has done, that the people owe them a better requital, and ought to
allow them power and privileges answerable to the work they employ them about,
which in equity would arise far higher then any they make use of. How may this
be fairly endod? what shall be done in this case? is there no way of
determining this, but by strength and power? shall the people make use of their
power (taking their accusation for granted) and rush upon the, Parliament to
seek its destruction? or shall the Parliament (being clear in their own eyes,
and looked upon with an evil eye by the people) make use of an Army to stop
the peoples mouths, that they may not dare to mutter any thing against them?
were it not better, that some clear Principles of Reason, whereby Parliaments
were first founded, might be produced and brought to light, both to square
their actions by, and to square men's judgments in the consideration of their
actions.

So that this might be useful, both in respect of the Parliament and people;
for want whereof, the Parliament may have been drawn to do many things, which
otherwise they would not have done, if they had clearly seen, they had not
been entrusted with them: and the people may have been ensnared to entertain
and retain hard thoughts of the Parliament about actions which were regular by
undertaken and faithfully managed for the peace and safety of the people.

Upon these and such like considerations, I cannot but wish that some such
thing might be speedily and effectually done, with equal respect both to the
people on the one hand, whose safety and prosperity is mainly to be minded and
to the Parliamen-on the other hand, who are so far to be honored and furnished
with power and privileges, as they may best effect and not deviate from the
good and prosperity of the people. In order whereunto I am constrained to
propound and desire these three ensuing particulars.

1. That a true measure of the Parliaments trust from clear Principles of
Reason or Law, or both, may be published to open view; whereby every
Parliament Man may see what he is to do, what not; and whereby any of the
people may see what they are to expect, what not: and these not to be wrested
in favor to any party, but according to the state and nature of the thing it
self. This might be a foundation of peace and security between them and the
People, whereas now they lie under a double blame, both of not having don that
they were entrusted to perform and of having set about that they were not
entrusted with: the foundation of this controversy between them and the people
is deeply laid, however it is suppressed at present from breaking forth.

2 That in the mean time till this can be done, there may be free liberty given
to any sort of men (whose spirits are sensible of fundamental dangers, are
ready to improve their utmost abilities for public good) to discover any
substantial matters amiss in the present proceedings, and that a select
Committee may be appointed at certain times to hear and consider thereof, in
such a way as the persons who shall offer their service herein, may not be
tired out with seeking up and down after them, which is a thing much complained
of.

And I cannot say less of it then that it is a very unkind and injurious
dealing with the people, which I should be glad to see regularly amended, for I
look upon that kind of amending only as lasting. And if the Parliament would
please to think of rectifying things disorderly among themselves, by a
righteous rule prescribed unto themselves (which is the way of rectifying
things amiss in the great body of the Commonweal, and why should it not be
also in the less) they might perhaps act far more speedily and safely, then
otherwise it is possible for them to do.

3. Thas there may be some way thought of, how the work of Parliaments may be
dispatched with more speed, and thigns left in an ordinary way of government,
that the people may not any longer be frighted with the long continuance of an
extraordinary power. Surely Nature does not only prescribe ends, and suit means
to them, but does wisely order direct, and guide the means unto the end, which
if there be a neglect in, the dictate of nature is not understood, or not
hearkened unto. Nature will not appoint a Parliament to be a remedy against
greevances, oppressions, etc. and prescribe them to act in such a way, as the
work must necessarily grow faster upon them, then it can be dispatched by them.

This is all I intend to express at present, only I should entreat those, who
now sit at stern, to be wondrous watchful over themselves, and wary about
the managing of affairs, for there is a very severe eye upon them. It is not
for nothing that so great ones have been thrown down before them, and they
exalted so high, the step is not so vast between the people and them, as was
between them and their Predecessors. All the power they have is from the
people, and for the people: if they have blamed others for unfaithfullnesse
(and have seen as they say the judgment of God follow it) let them take heed
of being unfaithful themselves, if they assume more power or privilege then
is committed to them, and allowed them, if they do any other work then what
they are entrusted with, they cannot excuse themselves of unfaithfulness: if
they throw down one government because of arbitrarinesse (for that was the
original quarrel) and settle another in an arbitrarie way, this is not only
unfaithfulness, but injustce. Oh when shall this poor oppressed enthralled
people be made free! When shall the true foundations of freedom and
righteousness be laid! Oh consider what opportunities* and advantages ye uow
have above any that ever went before you. Do your work thoroughly, go to the
bottom: let not the interest of any sort of men divert you from minding of the
good and welfare of the people, whom ye are singly to eye, and not particular
persons or interests. If I could speak as I would, I should speak more, not
only for the peoples sake, but also for yours, who stand on so ticle a point,
either to be instruments of woe or welfare, and are very likely to meet with
either large blessings, or a swift and sharp visitation.

Reader,
Notwithstanding the care of the Author, yet the carlesnesse of the Printer
has committed some Erratta's which thou art desired to correct thy self and
heartily to interpret.

FINIS.

