TRACTATVS De Simplicium Medicamentorum facultatibus.

A TREATISE OF THE Nature and Qualities of such Simples as are most frequently
used in MEDICINES, Both Purging, and others.

Methodically handled, for the benefit of those that understand not the Latin
Tongue.

To which is added: Many Compound Medicines for most Diseases incident to
Mankind: As also two Alphabeticall Tables, very necessary for the Reader.

Together with, The Explanation of all hard words or Terms of Art, whereby the
Vulgar may the better understand it.

By ROBERT PEMEL, Practitioner in Physic, at Cranebrooke in Kent.

Turpis est calamitas Medicamento purgante dato hominem occidere. Hippoc. de
med. purg. fol. 98 Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by M. Simmons, for Philemon Stephens, at the gilded Lion in
St Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

REader, most, if not all the faults here mentioned, an intelligent Reader
would amend without any direction: Those which are as easily mended as
discerned, with literal faults, such as [doth, for both] [tumors for tumours]
[small for smell] are omitted -- as also. 2. or 3. mistakes in the Latin and
Hebrew names, which as only the learned will discern, so their ingenuity will
pardon.

Chap. Line. Errata. Correction. 3 64 Diagnieium Diagredium. 16 4 Pine Syrup
Pine-spurge. 39 86 Gum Elmne Gum elemne. 46 68 Storchados. Staechados. 50 45
Lorage Lovage. 66 2 Hepatoxium Hepatorium. 86 42 Potion. Lotion. 90 15 By
Decoction The Decoction. 94 16 Purflow Purslan^ 95 15 Rodes Nodes. 106 7
Outward use Inward use. Id. 16 Inward use Outward use, 115 6 Keep long Not keep
long. 117 16 Heart of. Heat of. 119 29 Rodes, Nodes. Id. 32 Oil of Sarin Oil
of Savin. 124 13 Swimmings Swounings. Id. 23 A Candle A Caudle. 127 22 Into the
cotton Into the ears with cotton. 131 18 Inflations Inflammations 137 13
Provokes Profits. 146 21 The First See the 66 Chap. 156 29 Sage and Hyssop
Sage and Hyssop water. Id. 50 Foin Allomo Some Allom. 157 6 Outward use Inward
use. Cap. 24. last line, for seu, read see. Chap. 35. l. 73. before salt put
out black. Chap. 136. The Title of it is mistaken, for Lavender r. Cammock. In
the Table of Compound Medicines in B. Breast to clease r. Breast to cleanse. In
the Table of hard words, for Orrosive Corrosive. Viscious Viscous. The word
[Note] in the Preface should have followed these words, [many Diseases.]

To the kind READER.
COurteous Reader, as the knowledge of Diseases is most necessary and useful
for such as take upon them the Noble art of Physic; so no less profitable is
the knowledge of simple medicines and their nature: For it is most true;
Medicus tantum been curat, quantum recte cognoscat, he only cures well that
rightly knows; he that rightly knows diseases and their causes, as also the
virtue of simple Medicines, he cures best. Hippoc. Aph. sect. 4.3.
Thus much witnesses Hippocrates Si qualia oportet purgari, purgentur,
confert, and facile ferunt. Contraria vero difficulter If those things be
purged as should be, it does good, and the Patient does easily endure it:
Medicamentorum purgantium res non ita se habet, quemedmodum vulgo putatur. Hip.
de med. pur. fol. 98.
but if otherwise it be done, the Patient does endure it painfully. Now how
shall we know when seasonably to purge the body, if we have not exact knowledge
of those Medicines we give. Therefore we are to fit our Medicines according to
the nature of the sick; And most certain is that of Hippoc. Oportet igitur
biliofis dare quod bilem purgat. Hip. de med. purg. 16.
Pituitosis quod pituitam. Hydropicis quod aquam. Atrabiliariis quod bilem
atram. We ought to give to Choleric persons those things which purge Choler,
to Phlegmatic bodies those things which purge Phlegm, to Hydropicall that which
purges water, and to Melancholy persons that which purges black Choler or
Melancholy. I have here collected (for the benefit of such as are not expert
in the Latin Tongue.) This Tract of the nature of simple Medicines, both
purging and others that are most in use, and easy to be got; Also in most
Chapters you have variety of compound medicines for many Diseases. [Note]
I have not given particular examples in every Chapter of Decoctions, that
being needless; for if it be an herb, you have an example thereof in the
Chapter of Mugwort, as also in some other Chapters, by which you may make a
Decoction of any other herb; if it be a root, you have an example thereof in
the Chapter of Eringo-roots. Also Note that a seruple is twenty grains, a dram
three scruples, an ounce eight drams. Now my hearty desire is that it may be
useful unto all that shall read it. What I have done herein and how
methodicall, I have been, I leave to others to judge, for now it is Coram
Judice, and surely not without error, Errare Aliquando accidit omnibur ante me
hominibus, and procul dubio omnibus post me accidet.
for humanum est errare, it is incident to the best to err; some have lapsed
herein before me, and others will after me, however let my good will be
accepted, which if I find, I shall be encouraged (God assisting me with life
and strength) to publish some other Tracts useful for the vulgar capacity, as
also for young Practitioners.

September. 16. 1651. Robert Pemel. Medicus.

AVTHORS Made use of in this TREATISE.
ACtuarius, printed 1556 Amatus Lusitanus, printed 1556 Constantius Affricanus,
printed 1539 Jo: Carolus Rosenbergius, printed 1624 Ant: Benivenius Jo: Carolus
Amatus, printed 1623 Joan: Rodulp. Camerarius, printed 1624 Dorstenius, printed
1540 Dioscorides. Dodonaeus, Doringius, printed 1620 Fernelius, printed 1610
Fragosus, printed 1600 Freitagius, Aur. med. printed 1630 Freitagius, de Opio,
printed 1632 Galenus, printed 1549 Gartias ab Horto, printed 1574 Gorraeus,
printed 1583 Gerrarde. Hartmannus, printed 1635 Grulingius, printed 1644
Heurnius, printed 1594 Hippocrates, printed 1546 Greg. Horstius, printed 1631
Joubertus, printed 1567 Lemnius, printed 1581 Massaria, printed 1634
Matthiolus, printed 1565 Melichius, printed 16^1 Monardus Anglice, printed 1596
Had. a Mynsicht, printed 1645 Oribasius, Parkinson, Pet. Paulus, printed 1587
Pliny, printed 1634 Piso, printed 1580 Ranzovius, printed 1585 Renodaeus,
printed 1645 Riverius, printed 1649 Rondeletius, printed 1628 Sadlerus, printed
1637 Schroderus, printed 1644 Schyronius, printed 1623 Stocherus, printed 1634
Sennertus instit. printed 1628 Sennertus pract. med. printed 1632 Thonerus
observat. printed 1649 Trallianus, printed 1560 Weckerus, printed 1576
Weikardus, printed 1628
Note, That Freitagius his Aurora Medicorum, is false printed in the pages,
from page 104. to 494. so that you must mend them, and then you will find the
quotations right.

AN Alphabeticall Table OF ALL THE SIMPLE MEDICINES IN THIS TREATISE.
A AGarick Chap. 2 Agrimonie, see Egrimonie Alchoofe Chap. 112 Almonds Chap. 5
Aloes Chap. 3 Alum Chap. 70 Amber Chap. 62 Ambergris Chap. 72 Ammoniacum
Chap. 4 Angelica Chap. 74 Anniseed Chap. 76 Antimonie Chap. 75 Armen Stone
Chap. 42 Aromatic Reed Chap. 84 Assa Fetida Chap. 7 Asarabacca Chap. 8 Asure
Stone Chap. 42
B Basil Chap. 133 Baulme Chap. 124 Bastard Saffron Chap. 13 Beetes Chap. 79
Betony Chap. 80 Bezar Stone Chap. 81 Bdellium Chap. 9 Birthworth Chap. 6
Bistort Chap. 10 Bitter Vetch, see Orobus Bole Armoniack Chap. 82 Borrage Chap.
83 Brimstone Chap. 164 Broom Chap. 32 Bryonie Chap. 11 Burnet Chap. 142
C CAmbogia Chap. 35 Cammocke Chap. 136 Camomill Chap. 86 Camphor Chap. 12
Carrot wild, see Dancus Chap. 99 Cardamomes Chap. 89 Carduus Benedictus Chap.
90 Carthamus, see Bastard Saffron Chap. 13 Castor Chap. 92 Caslia lignea Chap.
14 Cassia Fistula Chap. 15 Centory Chap. 93 Ceterach Chap. 94 Chaste tree Chap.
67 China Root Chap. 95 Cinnamon Chap. 14 Cinke Foil Chap. 141 Cloves Chap. 91
Coloquintida Chap. 17 Comlrey Chap. 97 Coral Chap. 18 Coralline Chap. 98
Costus Chap. 20
D DAnewort Chap. 56 Dates Chap. 24 Daucus Chap. 99 Dill Chap. 73 Dittany Chap.
25 Dodder Chap. 27
E EGrimonie Chap. 66 Elaterium Chap. 26 Elecampane Chap. 101 Elder Chap. 56
Endive Chap. 100 Epithymum Chap. 27 Eringo Roots Chap. 102 Eupho^bium Chap. 28
Eye bright Chap. 103
F Fennel Chap. 105 Fenugreeke Chap. 106 Figs Chap. 104 Fleawort Chap. 52
Flower de Luce Chap. 41 French Barley Chap. 113 Fumiterrie Chap. 29
G GAlbanum Chap. 31 Galingall Chap. 30 Garlic Chap. 69 Gentian Chap. 33
Germander Chap. 96 Ginger Chap. 170 Grapes Chap. 168 G^^e Chap. 109 G^omell
Seed Chap. 126 Guajacum, see Pockwood Chap. 110 Gutta gummi, see Cambogia Chap.
35
H Hearts Horn Chap. 19 Herb of Grace, see Rue Chap. 153 Hedge Hyssope Chap.
34 Hellebor white Chap. 36 Hellebor black Chap. 36 Hermodactyles Chap. 37 Honey
Chap. 122 Honey Suckle Chap. 88 Horehound Chap. 146
I JAcap Chap. 40 Ivy Chap. 111 Ivory Chap. 19 Jujubes Chap. 115 Juniper Chap.
114
K KNee-Holme Chap. 152
L LAvender Chap. 118 Lettuce Chap. 117 Licoris Chap. 108 Lignum vitae, see
Pockwood Chap. 110 Lungwort Chap. 147 Lupines Chap. 149
M MAce, see Nutmeg Chap. 132 Madder Chap. 54 Maidenhaire Chap. 87 Mallows
Chap. 121 Manna Chap. 44 Marjerome Chap. 120 Marigolds Chap. 85 Marsh Mallows
Chap. 71 Mastich Chap. 45 Mechoacan Chap. 46 Melilot Chap. 123 Milk Chap. 116
Mints Chap. 125 Misselto Chap. 166 Mugwort Chap. 78 Mummie Chap. 128 Musk
Chap. 127 Mustard Chap. 161 Myrrh Chap. 48 Myrobalans Chap. 47
N NEttles Chap. 167 Nigella, or Gith Chap. 130 Nitre Chap. 131 Nutmeg and Mace
Chap. 132
O OLibanum Chap. 135 Opium Chap. 49 Opopanax Chap. 50 Organy Chap. 137 Orobus
Chap. 138 Orris Chap. 41
P PArmasitty, or Sperma Ceti. Chap. 162 Pepper Chap. 143 Piony Chap. 140 Pine
Spurge Chap. 16 Plantaine Chap. 144 Pockwood Chap. 110 Polypodie Chap. 51
Purslaine Chap. 145
Q QUicksilver Chap. 77
R RAddish Chap. 148 Raisons Chap. 139 Rest Harrow, see Cammooke Chap. 136
Rosemary Chap. 151 Roses Chap. 150 Rubarbe Chap. 53 Rue, or Herb of Grace Chap.
153
S SAge Chap. 156 Saffron Chap. 21 Sagapenum Chap. 55 Salt Chap. 155 Sanders
Chap. 57 Sarcoc^ll Chap. 58 Sarsaparilla Chap. 158 Sassafras Chap. 157 Scammony
Chap. 59 Sea bind weed Chap. 61 Sea Moss, see Coralline Chap. 98 Sebestens
Chap. 160 Seen Chap. 60 Setwall Chap. 169 Sowbread Chap. 23 Spikenard Chap. 129
Saint John's wort Chap. 39 Spurge Garden, see Pine Spurge Chap. 16 Stechado
Chap. 163 Strawberries Chap. 107 Sugar Chap. 154
T TAmarinds Chap. 63 Tormentill Chap. 64 Turbith Chap. 65 Turmerick Chap. 22
Turnips Chap. 149
U VAlerian Chap. 165 Vardigrease Chap. 68
W WAllwort Chap. 56 Water Germander Chap. 159 Water Lilly Chap. 134 Wild
Gourd, see Coloquintida Chap. 17 Wood Aloes Chap. 43 Wormwood Chap. 1
Z ZEdoarie, see Setwall Chap. 169

AN EXPLANATION OF All such hard Words, or Terms of Art, that are to be found
in this Treatise of Simples used in MEDICINES, Whereby the Vulgar may the
better understand it.
A ABdomen, that part of the belly that covers the Entrals or Bowels.
Abortion, miscarrying of Women. Absterfive, cleansing or scouring Access, a
fit either of an Ague, falling Sickness, or the like. Acrimonie, sharpness.
Adjacent, near. Adstrictive, binding. Adulterate, corrupt, counterfeit. Adust,
burnt. Agarick trochiscated. Agarick in Trosses, or small Cakes. Alacrity,
chearfullnesse. Alexipharmacall, against poison and venom. Animosity, courage,
stoutnesse. Anthonies fire, wild fire, or the Shingles. Aromaticall, smelling
sweet, like Spice. Arthritick, Pains of the Joint. Arthriticall pains, Pains
of the Joint. Asthma shortness of breath. Astringent, binding. Attenuate, to
make thin. Attractive, drawing.
B Bole, a lump or medicine given upon the point of a knife, to the quantity of
a Nutmeg, till the whole be taken.
C Cachecticall, of ill constitution. Cachochymie Such a body wherein there is
abundance of ill humors. Cacochymicall Such a body wherein there is abundance
of ill humors. Callous knots, hard bunches. Cardiack passion, the passion of
the heart. Cardiacall, proper for the heart. Catarrhe, Rheum. Chronicall, of
long continuance. Cicatrice, to heal up into a skar. Citrine, yellow.
Coagulated, thickened like curd, or curdded. Colature, straining. Collyri^s,
Medicines for the eyes in a liquid form, Condensed, thickened. Consolidate, to
knit or unite, and to make sound again that which was broken or bruised.
Contusions, bruises. Corroborate, to strengthen. Corroding, gnawing, eating.
Coronall futuro, the seame or future on the forepart of the head Corpulent,
fat, gross. ^orrosive, fretting. Crude, raw. Crudities, rawnesse.
D Decocting, Boiling. Decoction, Boiling. Debility, weakness, feebleness.
Defluxions, flowings down of humors. Dentifrice, a Medicine to make the teeth
white by rubbing them. Detriment, hurt or damage. Diaphoreticall, provoking
sweat. Discuss, to expel, dissolve, or break. Diureticall, provoking Urine.
Diuturnall, of long continuance. Dulcediny, sweetness. Dysentery, the Bloody
Flux.
E Ebullition, boiling bubling. Emulsion, a Medicine like Milk. Entralls,
Bowels. Epitheme, a Medicine compounded of distilled waters, wine, vinegar, and
powders, in which a cloth is dipped, and so applied to the Liver, Heart, etc.
Evacuate, to empty or cleanse. Evaporate, to consume away in smoke, or like
smoke. Excoriate, fretting, or going of the skin. Expectorate, to cause phlegm
to be easily spit forth Expectoration, the same with the former. Eruginous,
green like Vardigrease. Eruptions, breakings out. Extenuate, to make thin or
diminish.
F Filme, a thin skin. Faecula, dregs. Fluent, flowing or abounding.
Fomentation, when liquour is laid upon a part or member with a sponge or clout.
Fragrant, smelling sweet. F^iable, easy to be broken. Frigitidy, coldness.
Fumigation, a perfume.
G Gargle, to wash the mouth. Gargarisme, a water to wash the mouth and throat.
Genitalls, the privy Members. Geniture, generati^n conception. Glutinous, thick
like glue. Glutinative, glewing together. Gonorrhaea, running of the reins.
H Hectic, Consuming Fever. Hecticall, Consuming Fever. Hepaticall, proper
for the Liver. Hydromell, honied water, or water and honey mixed together.
Hydropical, having the Dropsy. Hypochondriack wind, Melancholy wind.
Hystericall fits, fits of the Mother.
I Impinguating, faming, or making fat. Impurity, foulness. Incarn, to breed
flesh in a Wound. Incorporate, to mix into a body. Inflammabilious, of a fiery,
flaming, or burning nature. Infusion, a liquor wherein certain drugs are
steeped for a time, without boiling. Injection, a casting in. Insolation, a
setting in the Sun. Inspissated, thickened. Inveterate, old, of long
continuance.
L Lenifie, to make smooth. Local, belong to a place, Lotion, a washing.
Luxation, a bone out of Joint.
M Macerate, to steep or infuse. Macerating, steeping. Maturity, r^penesse.
Menses, the courses of Women, because they come every month. Mesentery, a part
in the middle of the bowels full of veins. Mollify, to soften. Muscilage, the
seeds or roots of slimie plants laid a steep in water, boiled, and drawn
through a Sive. Mundi^^e, to cleanse.
N Nauseous, Inclining to vomit. Nauseousnesse, Inclining to vomit.
Neph^^ticall, pains of the reins by reason of gravel or stone. Nodes, hard
bunches on the Joints. Nuke, the hinder part of the neck.
O Obnoxious, hurtful, dangerous. Obstructions, stoppings. Obstructed, stopped.
Occult, hidden, secret. Orifice, the mouth of a wound, Fistula, or such like.
Oxymel, a syrup made of honey, vinegar, and water.
P Palpitation, beating of the heart or brain. Peccant, offensive or faulty.
Pectorall, good for the breast. Penetrate, to pierce. Pessary, a Medicine made
like a finger, or suppository, to be put up into the secret parts of Women.
Phlegmon, a hot swelling. Plethorick, full of blood and humors. Potently,
strongly, powerfully. Pregnant women, women with Child. Primarily, chiefly, or
in the first place. Ponderous, weighty. Porous substance, full of small holes.
Putrid Fevers, rotten Fevers.
R Ratify, to make thin. Rancid, stinking, rank, or moldy. Recreate, to
refresh. Remiss, flacke, more easy. Remote, far off, far distant. Repress,
to keep back, to keep down. Retentive, reteining, or having power to keep.
Robustick, strong.
S Scirrhus, a hard swelling. Serous humors, watery humors. Speci^ck remedy,
a remedy that helps by its special and particular virtue. Sperme, seed.
Spermaticall Flux, Flux of seed. Spongious flesh proud flesh. Stomachicall
belonging to the stomach. Strangulatory Medicine, a Medicine that does soon
strangle or choke one. Stupefaction, a making dull or senseless. Suffocation
of the Mother, a rising or choking of the Mother. Strumous swelling, the Kings
Evil. Sulphurous, of the nature of Brimstone. Suppression, stopping staying.
T Tabulat's, small Cakes made round or square. Tenuity, thinness. Terms,
Courses of women. Torrifyed, dried. Tortions, gripings. Transparent, clear
that one may see through. Tremulation, trembling or quaking. Trosses, round
Cakes. Tumors, swellings. Tunicle, a skin.
V Virulent, filthy, stinking, or poisonous. Viscerous parts, the bowels or
inward parts. Viscid, Tough. Viscious, Tough. Unctious, fatty, oily, Uritories,
the passages of urine. Uterine parts, parts belonging to the womb. Vulnerary,
good for wounds.

The Books following are to be sold by Philemon Stephens at the Gilded Lion in
Paul's Churchyard.
TWo Treatises formerly published by Robert Pemel, the Author of the foregoing
Book.

Viz. 1. Of the chief internal Diseases of the Head.

2. Help for the Poor, A collection of Medicines to be easily obtained, with an
Appendix concerning letting blood in the Small Pox.

A seasonable Treatise written by Sir Hen. Spelman, Knight. deceased, wherein all
Questions concerning Tithes, are learnedly discussed.

An Exposition on four Psalms, Viz. 27.84.85. and 87. by that Faithful
Servant of Christ, Mr Thomas Peirson, deceased.

Milk for Babes, a Treatise expounding and applying the Principles of
Religion, with three Sermons on these Texts, Psalm. 119.12. Mark 3.45, 46. Psalm.
81.5. Likewise four Sermons on these Texts, Judges 11.27. Matthew. 7.12. 1 Timothy
1.19.

A Dictionary in Latin and English, containing near ten thousand Primitive
words, besides thrice that number derived from, or known by them; with an
Interpretation of Scholasticall words, often used in Sermons: by Tho. Willis,
M. A.

Wisdoms Conquest, exemplified in a Grammatical Translation of the 13th Book
of Ovids Metamorphosis, Containing the Curious and Rhetorical contest between
Ajax, Ulysses, for Achilles Armor, exhibiting The power of Valor, and
prevalence of Eloquence, by Tho. Hall.

The exemplary life and death of Mr Samuel Crook, late Pastor of Wrington in
Somersetshire.

A Treatise opening the Promises and Threatenings of Scripture, by F. Bridges.

A Grammar for Children, in English, being a Synopsis, containing the Rudiments
of the Latin Tongue 12^

The sum of three Sermons on Ephesians. 1.22, 23. wherei^ (...) showed that the
Church is the proper subject of the New Covenant, together with several other
Practical Propositions, necessary to be considered in reference to the debates
now on foot, by W. Sambrooke, LL. B. Ox.

Sabatto dominica, Four Propositions tending to reconcile the seeming
difference between the letter of the Law, and Christian Liberty, in the
Doctrine of the Sabboath, and the Lords Day.

Mr Joseph Medes Exposition on the Revelation of Saint John, both in Latin and
English.

A Treatise to direct Christians for receiving the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, with profit and comfort; whereunto is annexed Meditations fit to be
used in the time of preparation, and others in the action of receiving, by John
Downame, B. D.

Directions for the private reading of the Scriptures, wherein the order and
the drift of the whole Scripture is Methodically set down, with choice rules
which show how to read with profit, first composed by Mr Nich. Bifield,
deceased, enlarged by Mr John Geere, late Pastor of Saint Faith's, London, to
which is added, Pithy directions to reconcile places of Scripture, seeming
repugnant.

An Examination of the chief points of Antinomianisme, collated out of diverse
Sermons, and now drawn together into a body, and published for all that love
the holy truth of God, with an Examination of the Pamphlet entitled, the
Compassionate Samaritan, handling the Power of the Magistrate, in the
Compulsion of Conscience, by Tho. Bedford, B. D.

Arithmaticke made easy in two Books.

1. A perfect Method for knowledge and practice of natural Arithmaticke,
according to the Vulgar way, without dependence upon any other Author for the
grounds thereof.

2. A perfect Method for knowledge and practice of Artificial Arithmaticke,
performed by Logurithmes, resolving all Arithmeticall Questions, by Addition
and Substraction.

Together with the use of the line of proportion, exhibiting the Logarithmes of
any number under 100000. Also an Appendix resolving all questions concerning
interest of money, valuation of Leases, and the like, by Edmond Wingale,
Esquire.

Two Tables of Logarithmes, the first containing the Logarithmes of all numbers
from 1. to 100000. The other the Logarithmes of the right Signs and Tangents
of all the degrees and Minutes of the Quadrant, each degree being divided into
100. Minutes, and the Logarithme of the Radim or Semidiamiter, being
10,00000,00000. with their admirable use for the resolution of Problemes in
Geometry, Astronomy, Geographie, and Nugation, by Edmond Wingale, Esquire.

The Construction and use of the rule of Proportion, in Arithmaticke, and
Geomitry, Astronomy, Dialling, Geography, Navigation, Gaging of Vessels,
Military Orders, Interests, and Annuities.

A Discourse touching the true notion of the Lords Supper, also the union of
Christ and the Church, in a shadow, by R. Cudworth, D. D. now Master of
Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

The Christian Conflict, showing the difficulties and duties of the Christian
Warfare, with the Armor and graces of Christian Soldiers, partially applied
to Magistrates and Ministers, Husbands and Wives. Together with the case of
Usury, Depopulation, and the errors of Antinomonists, occasionally discussed
by John Bentham.

A Remonstrance of the holy life and happy death of John Bruen, Esquire,
exhibiting vanity of memorialls and exemplary passages, useful to all sorts of
people, as a path and president of piety and charity, written by W. Hind, late
of Bunbury in Cheshire.

THE NATURE OF Simple Medicines.
CHAP. I. De Absynthio. Of Wormwood.
COmmon Wormwood is so well known, that it needs no description.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Absynthium, because of its bitterness, Beasts will
not feed on it, neither do most like the taste of it.

The Temperament.
It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, very bitter and
cleansing, yet binding and strengthening.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The Inward Use.
Wormwood draws from the Tunicles of the Stomach, and Intestines, first
choler, then phlegm, and also does strengthen the Stomach like Alois. It
purges choler likewise from the Reins and Liver, and purges by Urin. It
does much prevail in the Green-sicknesse, Jaundise, and Dropsy. It helps
such as have obstructed Livers and Stomachs, the Collicke, and gripings in the
Belly; cleanses the womb and uterine parts, help Crudities, dryveth away the
Hicket, stays vomiting, brings a good appetite, expels wind, and
prevails in intermittent Agues, and obstructions of the Entralls. It
preserves the blood from putrefaction, and is useful in the Pestilence. It
prevents and resists Drunkenness, vomiting at Sea, and kills worms. The
Vinegar wherein Wormwood is boiled, helps a stinking breath that comes from
the teeth or gums, or from the corruption in the Stomach. It provokes the
terms in women. The wine made hereof is good for all the forementioned
purposes, except in such as have Fevers.

The Seeds of Wormwood help the Bloody Flux, and other Fluxes of the Belly.
Wormwood being steeped in Vinegar, and drunken, helps such as have taken
Mushromes, or To^d stools.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, in decoction, or the juice is taken by it self; it is
also infused in wine.

Against an Ague.
Take of Wormwood in powder, two drams; Give it in White Wind or Posset Drink,
one hour or two before the fit comes.

Against a Quartaine Ague.
Take of the juice of Wormwood, half an ounce, Venice Treacle, half a dram,
Treacle water a spoonful, mingle them together. Give this before the fit
comes. Do this for three or four fits together, and it will prevail,
especially at the beginning, the body being first well purged.

A Decoction of Wormwood against Melancholy, wind in the Stomach, etc.
Take Wormwood, Fumiterry, of each a handful, Raisons of the Sun, two ounces,
make an infusion, and a gentle decoction in three Pints of Posset drink to two
Pints, or two and a half; strain it, and drink every morning a good draught
thereof. It is good against Melancholy, a cold Stomach, as also to expel
wind, and to take away obstructions, or stopping.

Wormwood-Wine.
Take of dry Wormwood a handful, put it into a gallon of wine, stop the vessel
close, and let it stand to infuse. This helps cold and crude stomachs,
expels wind, eases the Colic coming of wind, strengthens the stomach,
avails in the Jandise, and kills worms.

Wormwood-Wine purging Water.
Take Wormwood a handful and a half, Cardus one handful, Agrimony a
handful, Spleenwort, Vervaine, of each half a handful, Oris-root, one ounce
and a half, Fennell-root one ounce, Parsly-root half an ounce, Capar bark,
Asarum, Polypodium, roots of Succory, of each half an ounce, or take one ounce
and a half of Succory roots, Fennell-seed, Smallage-seed, Parsly-seed, and
Anni-seed, of each one dram, Calamus, Aromaticus, Cinnamon, of each two drams,
Seen one ounce and a half, Soldanella, or Sea bind weed, three handfulls: Cut
and bruise those things that are to be cut and bruised, then put to them
sixteen or eighteen pints of White Wind, wherein Steel has been quenched, let
them stand together, after a week drink of it, a good draught in the morning,
or about ten of the clock in the forenoone, every day or every second day. You
may make but half the receipt.

The juice of Wormwood is commended against Melancholy, if two or three drams
thereof, be taken in a morning. Heurn. Meth. ad prax cap. 9. f. 200.

Against the Jandise.
Take the flowers of Wormwood, or the tops thereof, Rosemary and Black-thorne,
of each a like quantity, of Saffron half so much; boil them gently in
Renish-wine, let it be given after the body is prepared by purging.

The external or outward Use.
Wormwood being outwardly applied kills worms in the belly or stomach; the
juice with Honey helps dim eyes, and mingled with Niter, it helps the
Quinsie, being anointed therewith. It takes away black and blew spots in the
skin, that come after falls or bruises, if it be mingled with Honey, and
anointed. It helps soar and running ears, and cease the pain of them, if
the hot vapors of the decoction be taken in thereat, by a Funnell or
otherwise: It eases the toothache. Being bruised and applied with Rose Water
to the stomach, it gives much ease and comfort to such as have been long sick.
It avails against the hardness of the Spleen, or where there is a hot sharp
water running between the flesh and the skin, if it be used with Figs, Vinegar,
and M^ale of Darnell. A decoction thereof being made, and the Temples bathed
therewith, it helps the pains of the head that come of a cold cause. Also
being boiled in Vinegar, and the mouth washed therewith, it helps a stinking
breath. Being put into Chests or Presses where Clothes are, it preserves from
worms and Moths. If the skin be rubbed with the juice or with the oil, it
drives away Fleas or Gnats. If Children before they be three months old, be
bathed with a decoction thereof, or their temples, feet, and hands be nointed
with the juice thereof, and well rubbed in, they shall not be troubled nor
molested with heat or cold all their life time. It is so commended being used
as before, that the body shall not be infected with Scab, Leprosy, French
Disease, Lice, or such like malady, Nisi Deus eos velit punire, except God will
punish such for sin. Joan. Rudolp. Camerar. Memorabil. med. and mirab. Not.
arcan. cent. 3. partic. 70. fol. 189.

Against the Worms.
Take Wormwood, Horehound, and Lupines, of each a handful; boil them in water
or honey, or, strong wine, apply it hot to the Navell.

A Plaster against the Worms.
Take of Mithridate two drams, Aloes in powder, a dram, with the juice of
Wormwood, make a Plaster, and lay it to the belly.

The hurtful Quality.
The juice offends the Stomach, being too much used, and also offends the head
by raising up vapors which cause drowsinesse and sleepiness. Absinthium
ingratum suum saporem deponit, si prius per ferventem aqua^ trahatur; radix
ejus dulcis and pene insipida, cum exigna quadam salfedine. Camerarius in Horto.
It is not safe to use it in the Consumption of the Lungs, Falling Sickness,
Arthritick pains, Apoplexy, Lethargy, and continual Fevers. Where the
Stomach is hot, forbear the use of it, especially being inflamed.

Of such things as are made of Wormwood.
There are many Medicines made of Wormwood; as, 1. Wormwood-water, both hot and
cold. 2. Juice of Wormwood. 3. Spirit of Wormwood. 4. Wormwood-wine. 5. Extract
of Wormwood. 6. Conserve of Wormwood. [This is excellent against the Dropsy,
and Green-sicknesse.] 7. Syrup of Wormwood. 8. Trosses of Wormwood. 9. Salt of
Wormwood. [Good in malignant and Pestilent Fevers.] 10. Chymicall Oil. 11.
Oil of Wormwood, by infusion.

The Dose.
The powder is given from a dram and a half, to two drams, or three drams. The
juice from two drams to half an ounce. The decoction from four ounces to six
ounces, or more.

CHAP. II. De Agarico. Of Agaricke.
AGaricke is a Mushrome, or spungeous substance, growing in the Larir-tree.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Agaricus, and Agaricum, either because it was first
used in Agaria, or because the best comes from thence. It is called by
Democratus, and others, Medicamentum familiae, because it is useful and
profitable in a Family. Massaria, fol. 479. Freitag. aur. med. c. 28. fol. 313.
Renodaeus dispens. f. 355.

The Temperament.
Agaricke is hot in the first-degree, and dry in the second or third degree.

The Kinds.
There are two kinds of Agaricke; one called Male, the other Female: the Male
is rejected, and the Female only in use. The best Agaricke is that which is
very white, light, friable, or easy to be broken, very loose and spungie, in
taste at the first, sweet, hard, and well compact: but that which is heavy,
blackish, close, clammie, and containing in it little threads, as it were
sinews, is counted venomous and deadly.

The Duration.
Agaricke will keep good three or four years.

The Inward Use.
Agaricke purges primarily Phlegm, and Viscuous humors from the breast,
mesentery and stomach; and also from remote parts, as from the Brain, Nerves,
Muscles, Purga^ pitui^am tennem and aquosam, non autem viscosam and Lentam: sed
exhaustis tenuioribus partibus hanc difficiliorem reddit. Heurn. prax. med.
fol. 262.
Liver, Spleen, Reins, Womb, and Joints. It provokes the courses in Women,
kills Worms, is profitable against the Jaundise, Arthriticall pains, Falling
sickness, Quartaine Ague, Stopping of the Vrin, and Diuturnall, or long
continued Agues, by purging away the offensive matter. It is good against
venom, and all phlegmatic Diseases, and takes away the pale color in women,
caused by the staying of their courses. It helps to cure the Dropsy,
Hip-Gout, Cough, Shortness of breath, and Consumption of the Lungs, Spitting
of blood, the pains of the Mother; as also such as have fallen, or are bruised,
and have Ruptures. Some commend it in the Collicke, and pain of the belly, but
it causes gripings rather then eases such.

The manner of Administering it.
It is in Potions, in Pills, in Boles, in infusion and decoction, though by
reason of its light substance, it will not endure any long decocting or
boiling. It is rarely given by it self.

A purging Potion that cleanses the Breast.
Take of Raisons of the Sun stoned, half an ounce; Figs, ten in number,
Agarick cut in thin slices, two drams, Ginger bruised, half a scruple; boil
them in fair water gently, strain it, and take thereof four ounces, hot, in
which dissolve of the best Manna, one ounce, and as much syrup of Roses: make
a Potion, and take it.

Pills to purge Phlegm.
Take Agaricke in powder, one dram, Salgem in powder, one scruple, Cinnamon half
a scruple, with syrup of Roses, make Pills, and take them in a morning.

A Bole to purge Phlegm and Choler.
Take of Cassia that is new drawn, one ounce, Trosses of Agaricke in powder, a
dram and a half, mix them, and make a Bole; take it in the morning.

A Potion that purges Choler and Phlegm.
Take of Manna, Honey of Roses Laxative, of each a dram and a half, Trosses of
Agarick two drams, in powder; dissolve the Manna in two ounces of
Succory-water, and make a Potion.

Or thus:
Take Trosses of Agarick one dram and a half, of Succory-water three ounces,
infuse or steep it all night in the water, then add one ounce of syrup of
Roses, and make a potion, adding thereto Diaphoenicon, two drams.

Against shortness of Breath, and Worms.
Take Trosses of Agaricke, two drams, Oxymel simplex, two ounces, mix them well
together, and take it.

Massaria observes, that Agaricke being infused or steeped, does little or
nothing purge. Massar. fol. 479.

The External Use.
It is used outwardly against the blackness of the skin, Figs in the
Fundament, and against Fistulaes, also against the biting of venomous beasts.
which hurt with cold poison; A lie made thereof, and with other herbs cures
the Dandraffe, or Scurfe, if the head be washed therewith, also boiled with
herbs convenient, it comfort the brain and memory, stays Rheumes and
Catarrhes.

Against the Toothache.
Take a piece of Agarick and wet it in Oil of Cloves, or Oil of Camphor, and
put it into a hollow tooth; this will ease the pain thereof.

Against the Fig in the Fundament.
Take of Agaricke in powder, two drams, mix it with the juice of Sow-bread, and
a little Oil; Apply it.

Against Fistulaes.
Take of Salt burnt, Tartar, Agaricke, in powder, of each a like quantity, mix
them with Honey, and apply it to Fistulaes.

The hurtful Quality, with the Correcting help.
Agaricke is offensive to the Stomach, and many times causes vomiting;
therefore that it offend not the Stomach, the third part of Cloves, Nutmeg,
Ginger, Hyssop, Galingall, and Mastich, may be put to it: or that it may better
purge, Salgem and Ginger may be mixed with it. It may also be given with
Oxymell, Scilliticum, or Simplex. Agarick is not to be given without it be well
corrected, except you give it to cause vomiting. In all Burning Fevers, and
Inflammations Agaricke is very hurtful, as also in the Collicke.

The Compound Medicines made of Agaricke.
1. Syrup of Roses solutive with Agaricke. 2. Pills of Agaricke. 3. Pil.
Hierae cum Agarico. 4. Trosses of Agaricke. 5. Extract of Agaricke.

The Dose.
The Dose in substance is from two scruples, to a dram and a half. In
decoction from a dram to half an ounce.

CHAP. III. De Aloe. Of Alloes. Or Aloe succotrina.
ALoe is the juice of an Herb like the Sea Onion, which after it is pressed
out, is dried, and kept for to use, as need requires.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Aloes succotrina, in English Aloes, Herb Aloes, and
Sea Housteeke.

The Temperament.
Alces is hot in the first or second degree, and dry in the third, and very
bitter.

The Kinds.
Constantinus Affricanus mentions three kinds of Aloes; one reddish, which
grows in an Island called Scheta; another sort which is black, and is found
in Persia; a third kind yellow, which is found in Arabia. Constant. Affric. de
grad. fol. 355. Schroderus says there are four sorts in use now. First, A
blackish sort, called Aloe caballina, because it is fit only for Horses.
Secondly, Another sort more purer, in color like the Liver, called Aloe
Hepatica. Thirdly, A sort called Aloe succotrina, because the powder thereof is
of a citrine, or yellow color, or because there is great plenty of it in the
Island Socotra. Fourthly, The fourth kind is the purest part of the juice, and
is called Aloe lucida, because being held up against the beams of the Sun, it
shows very clear, like a kind of red glass. Schroder. Parmac. med. Chym. l.
4. fol. 240. The best is that which is most clear and transparent, of a reddish
or yellow color, being easy to break, and very bitter.

The Duration.
It will keep good nine or ten years, being kept dry, and from the wind and Sun.

The Inward Use.
Aloes purges first Choler, then Phlegm, not from all parts, but chiefly from
the stomach and belly; therefore says Gallen, Est eustomachicum plus omnibus
catharticis. Gal. Alter. de dinamid. fol. 76. It is more proper for the Stomach
then all other purging Medicines. And by its adstrictive faculty, it
strengthens the stomach. It much helps a crude, moist, and nauseous stomach.
It is profitable in these Diseases, in the Headache, when vapors arise from
the stomach, in the Nightmare, in the Scorbute, or Scurvy, in the Falling
sickness, in Rheumes: It resists putrefaction, kills worms of all sorts,
whether in the belly or stomach; nay it is a special Antidote against Worms.
It preventeth Arthriticall pains, or pains of the Joints; it quickneth the
senses by purging obnoxious humors from the brain. It provokes women's
courses, and the Hemrods or Piles. The use of Aloes does preserve the body from
many dangerous Diseases: it helps those that have a pale color, and is used
against the Jaundise: Aloe does hardly draw humors from any part above the
Liver. Fernel. Meth. medend. fol. 112.

The manner of administering it, and the time.
Aloes is given in powder, in the pap of an Apple, which is very frequent, or
in pills. It is most convenient for Phlegmatic persons, and may be given before
meat, or after meat, and in the morning fasting. It is better to give it before
meat, then after meat. Aloe is the basis of most pills, for there are but few
purgative pills which have it not as one chief ingredient.

Pills excellent for the Stomach.
Take of Aloes three ounces, of Rubarbe in powder, three drams, mix them, and
infuse or steep them in a sufficient quantity of Endive-water, let it stand a
night and a day, then strain it out, and boil away the crudity of it, and
make a mass for Pills. The Dose is half a dram, or two scruples.

Pills to purge Choler.
Take of Rubarbe in powder, one scruple, Aloes and Mastich, of each half a
scruple, Diagnieium six grains, Spikneard and Nutmeg of each three grains,
with syrup of Roses, Laxative, make Pills and take them all in a morning
fasting, with Physical observation that is fasting, and then to take some warm
Broth, and to keep your self warm, but you must fast two or three hours first.

De Aloe Lota and Rosata.
Aloes being washed loses part of its purgative faculty, and does more
strengthen then purge. Gallen says it may be given in Fevers, so that the
Fever be gentle, as in a Quotidian Fever. Gal. de compos. pharmac. fol. 710.

Aloe Rosata is a Medicine very safe and gentle, it may be given to all sorts
of persons, before or after meat. It purges the stomach of Choler and other
offensive humors, opens stoppings, is good in the Jaundise, and strengthens
the stomach, and is thus made.

Take of pure Aloes in powder four ounces, of the juice of Damuske Roses
clarified, one pound, mix them together, and digest in the Sun, or in a Bath,
till all the moisture be exhaled or taken away; then infuse it again in so much
more of the juice, and evaporate away the juice again: do thus four times,
then keep the mass or lump for your use.

The (...) ^all Use.
Aloes being outwardly applied has a consolidating faculty to heal green
Wounds, and dries, as also mundifieth or cleanses, and takes away all
putrefaction in Wounds. It heals Wounds of the Testicles and Privities; it
cures the redness of the eyes, and consumes spots growing therein. It is good
in inflammations of the Eyes, and Apostumes of the Lips, Nose, and Eyes. It
heals Ulcers that are hardly brought to cicatrize and especially those in the
Fundament and privy members. Being mixed with Oxe-Gall, or the juice of
Wormwood, it kills Worms. If it be dissolved with wine and used, it helps
the falling or shedding of the hair. Being made in powder, and put on the
Hemroids it stays the bleeding thereof: mixed with honey and used, it takes
away blackness and spots. Aloes in powder being mixed with Myrrh and Dragons
blood, and cast into putrified Wounds or Ulcers, eats out spungious flesh
without pain.

A Plaster for Worms.
Take of Aloes in fine powder a dram and a half, of Mithridate three drams,
Oil of Savin, or Oil of Wormwood, two or three drams, mix them together, make
a Plaster, lay it on the Belly.

The Hurtful Quality.
The daily and too frequent use of Aloes, is much forbidden; for being much and
often taken, it does fret and excoriat the stomach and bowels. Constant.
Affric. de grad. fol. 355. Aloes is hurtful to old men. Gal. de sanitat.
tuend. fol. 365. Massaria, fol. 72. Freitag. aur. med. fol. 215. Fernel. meth.
med. fol. 112. Aloe opens the Orifices, or mouths of the Veins, therefore it
is hurtful to such as have the Hemroids, or Piles, Flux of the Womb, Belly, or
any other Bloody Flux; as also to Women with Child, to those that have the
Hectic Fever, Burning Fever, and to all hot, and dry, and macerated, or lean
bodies. It is very hurtful to those that have hot Livers, especially given in
a large quantity; which though some deny, yet experience makes it good. And
Scaliger Exercitat. 160. Sect. 3. says, they which deny Aloe to offend the
Liver, Experientiae scutica digni sunt, hoc per annos quadraginta compertum
habemus. It Is not to be given often to Children, especially such as are of a
hot and dry Constitution. When the season is extreme hot, or very cold, it is
not so safe to give Aloes, for then it will cause one to void blood. Antonius
Musa, says, that after the taking of Aloes (in the depth of Winter) he was so
troubled that he could not sit for the space of a week. A. Musa exam. simpl:
med. 4o. 355. Wecher. Antid. spec. 4o. 222.

Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mastich, and Gum Tragacanth, are the best
correctors of Aloes, and may be mixed with it. If Aloes be taken a little
before supper, it does so much the less hurt and offend the stomach.

Whether the use of Aloes be profitable to preserve health?
Gallen does much commend Aloes, and also Hiera pigra, and says it is a very
profitable Medicament, and grateful to the stomach; and many praise it, for
that it takes away viscuous and corrupt humors that are contained in the
Tunicles of the Stomach. Mesue counts it one of the best and wholesomest
Medicaments, which has a prerogative above all Medicines. For when other
purging Medicines do weaken the stomach, and hurt the members or parts, the
taking of Aloes does not only not hurt, but does much comfort the stomach; yea,
he thinks if it be often taken, it makes all the parts and members sound. But
Cardanus and others are of a contrary mind, and condemn Gallen for that ( De
tuend. san. lib. 1. c. 45.) he says, Aloes is a friend to the Stomach:
Further, they say, being bitter and loathsome, it is offensive to the Stomach,
because the Stomach is much delighted with sweet things: Moreover they say,
Hierapigra, although it be corrected and sometimes not unprofitable to take it,
yet it is hurtful to the Stomach, and prejudicial to the life. But I conceive
that the use of Aloes does much prevail to preserve health, seeing it does not
only purge away the excrements in the bowels, but also it purges crude
humors, as also Phlegmatic and Chollerick humors from the Stomach, and does
resist putrefaction, being also somewhat astringent: Only note, That it must be
given but in a small quantity, and not too often; for if it be given often, and
in a great quantity, so that it come to the Liver, it does much hurt,
especially to those that have dry bodies and hot Livers.

Whether Aloes does open the mouths of the veins, and provoke the Hemroids?
There is some controversy among Physicians concerning this; Mesne, Serapio,
and most of the Arabians conclude, Aloen ora venarum aperire atque sanguinem
ciere, that Aloes does open the mouths of the veins, and open the Hemroide
veins, Manardus, Fuchsius, and others on the contrary, altogether refute this
opinion of theirs, and by strong and firm reasons out of Gallen, Diascorides,
and Pliny demonstrate, Aloen potius ora venarum occludere, atque sanguinem
undicunque fluentem sistere, That Aloes does rather shut or close the mouths of
the veins, and stop blood flowing from any part. But this controversy may be
thus decided or reconciled; if we say that Aloes being outwardly applied does
shut the mouths of the veins, and so does stay any Flux of the Blood; but being
inwardly taken, so that it pierce or penetrate to the veins, it causes blood
to flow. For being outwardly applied it has a certain binding, astringent,
and glewing faculty: As for Diascorides and Pliny, they write not of the
Hemroids or Piles, but of spetting blood, which comes when some vein or
vessel is opened; now in such a case Aloes being taken inwardly, has the same
virtue of closing or shutting the veins, as it has being outwardly applied to
a bleeding wound. For this is most certain, if Aloes be taken inwardly it
opens the Hemroid veins, and causes blood to be evacuated, especially in
those that are subject to the Hemroids or Piles, and in such as are subject to
have their blood much heated. And this faculty it has not from its acrimony,
or sharpness, or bitterness, but ex quadam insita virtute, from some inherent
or natural virtue.

The Compound Medicines made of Aloes.
These following are made of Aloes, 1. Aloe Depurata, or washed Aloes. 2. Aloe
Violata. 3. Aloe Rosata. 4. Extractum Aloes, or Extracts of Aloes. 5. Pilulae
de Aloes. 6. Pil. de Aloe Lota. 7. Hiera Picra. 8. Pil. de Hiera cum Agarico.

The Dose.
Aloes in substance is given from a dram to two drams; in infusion from a dram
and a half to three drams. Aloes Rosata is given from half a dram to a dram
and a half. The same Dose may be given of washed Aloes.

CHAP. IV. De Ammoniaco. Of Gum Ammoniacum.
GVm Ammoniacum is the juice of a Firula growing in Cyrene of Africa, nigh to
the Oracle Jovis Ammomis, from whence (as some think) it took its name.
Renodaeus dispens. med. fol. 547.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Ammoniacum, Ammoniacum, and Gummi Armoniacum; in
English, Gum Ammoniacum.

The Temperament.
Ammoniacum is hot in the second degree, and dry in the beginning of the same;
or hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.

The best kind.
The best Ammoniacum is that which is of a good color, yellow, without and
within like the best Frankincense, pure, firm or close, without sticks,
stones, or any other filth, of a bitter taste, and has almost the savor of
Castoreum.

The inward Use.
Ammoniacum purges thick Phlegm from the Head, Nerves, Stomach, Mesenterie,
and also from the Joints. It much prevails in Asthma, and Orthropnaea, that
is, in shortness of the breath, and in Diseases coming of Phlegm. It is good
in old pains of the head, and against stoppings of the Liver: it provokes the
terms in Women, and Urin, and is good in any kind of Gout, whether Sciatica,
or Joint- Gout, as also in the Falling Sickness. It kills Worms called
Ascarides, and is excellent against the hardness of the Liver or Spleen. It
brings away the dead Child.

The manner of administering it.
Sometimes it is given with a pectorall decoction, and with Oxymel simplex, or
Squilliticum; sometimes with other ingredients, in a Lohoch, or with an Egg.
But most usually it is taken in Pills.

Pills excellent in shortness of breath.
Take of Gum Ammoniacum the purest, two drams, of Venice Turpentine seven
drams, extract of Saffron, half a dram, Spicies Diahyssopi, Diambrae, of each
ten grains, mix them together, and make a mass or lump for Pills. The Dose is
a dram at a time, or more. Freitag. aur. med. fol. 300.

Pills against the obstructions and hardness of the Liver, and Spleen.
Take Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, two drams; Trosses of
Eupotorium, Trosses of Rubarbe, Trosses of Capers, of each a dram, Extract of
Centary, the lesser, two scruples, Extract of Gentian, one scruple, Steel
prepared, half an ounce, Species Diarxhodon Abbatis, a dram, Species Diambrae
half a dram, with a sufficient quantity of syrup of Succory, with Rubarbe,
make a mass for Pills.

Pills against the Sciatica or Hip-Gout.
Take of Ammoniacum thirty grains, of Sagapinum two scruples, or forty
grains, Gutta gummi seven or eight grains; dissolve the Gums in the juice of
Elecampane, or in the juice of Ivy, and make Pills thereof. If the body be
strong you may give them all, but if weak then give but half of them.

The external Use.
Ammoniacum being outwardly applied is of a dissolving nature, it consumes
spungeous or proud flesh, and breeds sound flesh, it softneth Corns, and the
hard swellings of the Joints, which come by reason of the Gout, and draws
forth Thorns, Splinter, or the like, if it be dissolved with Vinegar; but it
is more effectual if it be mixed with Honey, Birthworth, and Saffron. It
consumes Strumas, or swellings called the Kings Evil, and ripeneth all kind of
Imposthumes, being applied on Wool that is not greasy. Being applied to
tumors of the Breast of Women, it dissolveth them, and brings them to maturity
or ripeness; and mixed with Vinegar it decreaseth the Milk, and keeps it
from coagulating or curdling in the Breast, being thereunto applied. Being
mixed with Honey, and applied to the Throat, it helps the Quinsie, and
swelling in the Neck, or Throat. It takes away spots of the eyes, being mixed
with Woman's Milk, and it cleanses the sight being mixed in Medicines for the
eyes. Ammoniacum and Frankincense dissolved in Vinegar, and applied, helps
Ringwormes.

A Plaster for the hardness of the Spleen.
Take of Gum Ammoniacum one ounce, Myrrh, Frankincense, Bdellium, of each
half an ounce; dissolve them in Vinegar of Rue, and add thereunto of the
flowers of Camomill in powder, a dram; make a Plaster thereof, and lay it
warm to the Spleen. Weichardus, These. pharmacent. fol. 243.

Or,
Take Garden mints, Rue and Melilot in powder, of each half an ounce, Niter,
Salgem, of each three drams, Ammoniacum dissolved in wine, one ounce, with a
little Wax and Oil of Capers, make a Plaster.

Or,
Take of Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, half an ounce, Vnguenium dialtheae
compositum, or Ointment of Marsh-mallowes, compound two ounces with a
sufficient quantity of Wax, make a Plaster.

Heurnius does much commend this Plaster following, against hardness of the
Spleen.
Take of Hemlocke four handfulls, of Ammoniacum half a pound; infuse them
together eight days, adding thereto three or four ounces of strong Wine
Vinegar, or more; the Hemlocke also must be bruised. Then having stood eight
days, dissolve the Gum by boiling it gently, strain it forth, boil the
strained liqour again, till the moisture be well consumed, then with some Wax
and Oil of sweet Almonds, make a Plaster or Ointment.

A Cerot to dissolve all manner of hard knots and ganglious tumors.
Take of Ammoniacum six ounces, Marsh mallow-roote, and white Bryonie-root in
powder, of each an ounce, of Turbith mineral half an ounce, of fresh Butter
one ounce and a half; dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and mix them all together,
and with one ounce of Wax make a Cerot.

Against Worms.
Take of Ammoniacum one ounce, dissolve it in Vinegar, and add of the juice of
Wormwood half an ounce, boil them a little, and make a Plaster thereof: warm
it, and lap it to the Navill.

The hurtful quality.
Ammoniacum may not safely be given to pregnant Women, or Women with Child, for
it will cause them to miscarry: And though it provoke Urin, yet if too great a
quantity thereof be given, it will cause one to piss blood.

These things following are made of Ammoniacum.
1. Pills of Ammoniacum. 2. Syrup of Ammoniacum. 3. Extract of Ammoniacum. 4.
Chymicall Oil of Ammoniacum. 5. A Plaster of Ammoniacum. 6. Emplast. ex cicuta
cum Ammoniaco. 7. Ceratum ex Ammoniaco.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a dram to four scruples.

CHAP. V. De Amygdalis. Of Almonds.
ALmonds are of two sorts; bitter, and sweet: of sweet, some are bigger, called
Jordan Almonds, others less, called Valence Almonds, and Barbary Almonds.

The Names.
The Almond-tree (says Pliny) is the first that blossometh in the month of
January, and by March the Almond is ripe. Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 16. cap. 25.
In Latin Amygdalum, and Amygdala.

The Temperament.
Sweet Almonds are hot and moist in the first degree, but the bitter are hot
and dry in the second degree.

The best sort.
The best are such as are yellow, full and sound, not broken, nor rotten, but
hard and dry, white within, of a good smell and taste.

The Duration.
They will keep good two or three years.

The inward Use.
The sweet Almonds are most pleasing to the taste, and they yield good and
plentiful nourishment to the body, therefore they are good for weak and
macerated persons, or such as are lean. They open and cleanse the breast,
provoke spitting, and are good in the Pleurisy and shortness of breath; they
open the passages of Urin, cleanse the Kidneyes, and provoke sleep. They
increase geniture or seed both in men and women, open the stoppings of the
Liver, and Spleen, and help the sight. Being blanched and dried that they may
be made into powder, and so taken by it self, or with other things, stays the
loosnesse of the belly. The Oil of sweet Almonds cleanses the Reins, and is
good for such as are troubled with the Stone, eases the pain by opening and
making slippery the passages thereof: it is good for Women that are newly
delivered, for it helps throws and after pains. Being mingled with
Sugar Candy, and taken, it helps the Cough and Hoarsnesse. If you give two or
three drams of it to Children that are newly borne, that are troubled with
Gripings, and mingle Sugar Pellets, or white candy therewith, it will much
prevail.

Bitter Almonds open the stoppings of the Liver, and Spleen, cleanse the Lungs
from gross and tough phlegm, cleanse the Kidneyes, and provoke Urine. They
take away flatulent or windy humors in the body, and provoke the courses in
Women. Being taken with Amylum, or Starch and Mints, they are good against
spitting of blood, and taken with water, they are good for pains in the back,
and the inflammation of the Lungs. They preserve from Drunkenness, if five or
six be eaten in a morning fasting. The Oil of bitter Almonds being taken,
kills Worms, helps the pains, suffocations, and tortions of the womb.
Being drunken with wine, it mittigateth the Cough, and brings away the stone or
gravel in the Kidneyes. It is reported, that if bitter Almonds be given to a
Fox, he dies thereof.

The manner of administering them.
Almonds are eaten alone, or made into milk or emulsion, lohoch, or March panes.

An Emulsion for the Diseases of the Breast or Lungs.
Take of sweet Almonds one ounce, of Pine-kernell half an ounce, of the seeds
of Citrull, Gourds, Melon, and Bombar-seed, or Cotten-tree, of each a dram;
blanch the Almonds, and prepare the Seeds. Beat them in a Mortar, with a pound
of the decoction of Jujubes, and Raisons of the Sun; beating them first, and
putting the water in by degrees; then add four ounces of Sugar: make an
emulsion for four or five Doses. Renodaeus, dispens. med. fol 226.

An Emulsion to extinguish the heat of the Reins, and to help the sharpness
of the Vrin.
Take Gourd, Citrull, Melon, and Cucumer-seeds, of each half an ounce;
Lettice, and white Poppy-seed, of each two drams. Beat them in a Mortar, with a
pint of Violet-water, then add syrup of Water Lillies, three ounces; make an
Emulsion for three Doses, or three times taking.

Almond-Milk much in use by Practitioners, and others.
Take of sweet Almonds blanched (which is soon done by casting them into warm
water) two ounces, of Gourd, Cutrub, Cucumer, and Melon-seeds cleansed, of each
two drams; Lettice, and white Poppy-seed, of each a dram; make it according to
art, into an Emulsion or milk, with a pint of Rose Water, or Barly-water.
Heurnius, prax. med. fol. 21.

A March-pane against leanness, or also for the Diseases of the Breast and
Lungs.
Take of sweet Almonds blanched three drams, of Pine-kernels (steeped in
Scabious water 9 or 10 hours) half an ounce, of Pistack-kernells (steeped in
Scabious-water, a whole day) one ounce, Gum Tragacanth, and Arabicke, of each
half a dram, of white Starch in powder as much; the pulp of Dates, and
Sebestens, of each half an ounce, of the whitest Sugar dissolved in
Rose Water, so much as is sufficient to make it up into a March-pane. Make it
into small Cakes or Trosses, and eat of them at any time. Gorraeus, form.
remed. cap. 15. fol. 445.

For the Stone and Gravel.
Take of Oil of sweet Almonds fresh, two ounces, syrup of Marsh mallows, one
ounce, mingle them together. Give it in a morning fasting.

The outward Use.
The Oil both of bitter and sweet Almonds is good to cleanse the skin from
roughness and spots, but the bitter is most effectual. Being mixed with Oil
of Roses, and Oil of Capers, and the Spleen anointed therewith, it helps
the hardness thereof. It cures deafness and noise in the ears, if it be
dropped into the ears; and helps the skurfinesse of the head, and sores
thereof. If the Temples be anointed therewith, it eases the pains of the
head, and brings rest; or boil bitter Almonds with Vinegar of Roses, and
Rose-leaves, apply it to the Temples. Being bruised with Honey, they are good
against the biting of a mad Dog. The powder of the Almond Cakes, after the Oil
is pressed from them, does cleanse the hands or skin in any place, far better
then Soap; and to supple the parts, as also to make them smooth. If the Oil be
mixed with Honey, powder of Licoris, Oil of Roses, and white Wax, and the eyes
therewith anointed, it clears them, and helps dimnesse thereof.

To cleanse the skin, and to beautify the Face.
Take of Oil of Tartar, one ounce, Oil of sweet Almonds, and of bitter
Almonds, one ounce and a half, mix them together, wash the face often
therewith.

The hurtful Quality.
It is not safe to give them to those that have hot chollerick stomachs, and
that have hot chollerick Fevers, least they turn into heat and choler. They
also cause headache, and fill the head with fumes and vapors.

Of such things as are made of Almonds.
1. Confectio Amygdal. dule. 2. Oil of sweet Almonds. 3. Oil of bitter
Almonds. 4. Lohoch de Papavere. 5. Lohoch de Pino. 6. Lohoch sanum and expertum.

The Dose.
The Oil of sweet Almonds is given from two drams to three ounces. The Almonds
themselves are eaten ad libitum, or as men please, at any time.

CHAP. VI. De Aristolochia longa, and rotunda. Of long rooted Birth-wort, and
round rooted Birth-wort.
THese are long and round roots, whitish within, and rugged without, well known
to those that are Artists.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Aristolochia longa and rotunda. In English, Round
rooted Birthwort, and Long rooted Birthwort, or Hartworth.

The Temperament.
These roots are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third degree: or they
are hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. The round has less
earthly substance, and more tenuity of parts in it; the long has less tenuity
of parts in it. The round is most effectual in all Diseases.

The Duration.
It will keep good two or three years.

The inward Use.
Although all mention not the purging faculty that is in Aristolochia, or
Birthwort, yet the Arabians and other Physicians say, they purge first Phlegm,
and then Choler, and that without trouble or commotion to the body; and
strengthen the inward parts, and are void of any malign quality: which is
chiefly to be found in the round root. Now because it does attenuate and purge
phlegm, and discuss windiness, it avails in the affects of the Brain, Nerves,
Breast, Stomach, intestine Spleen, and womb. It is good in the Falling
Sickness, Cramp, Convulsion, Ruptures, shortness of Breath, pain of the
Side, Hicket, gnawing of the Stomach, Collicke, (and especially coming of
Phlegm or wind) swelling of the Spleen. It brings down the Afterbirth, and
provokes the courses, and helps the impurity of the Womb. It is used with
profit in the Joint- Gout, against venom and poison, against cold Agues, and
against stoppings and rebellious humors that are the cause of long Agues. It
is excellent for Women that are near their time, or especially in Travel, for
it causes a speedy and easy delivery, and clears the uterine parts of what is
offensive to nature; also it brings away the dead Child. It kills Worms, and
resists putrefaction. It is given with Oxymel or Hydromel, against the
contusions of the Nerves, and Muscles. The long roots infused and taken, help
to dry up Scab and Itch.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in substance, or in decoction.

A Powder against the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness.
Take of round Aristolochia, or Birthwort, six drams, of Piony-seed, two drams,
make them in powder, and add one ounce of fine Sugar. The Dose is a dram at a
time in Blackcherry-water.

A Powder against the Joynt-Gout.
Take Germander, Ground Pine, Centory, the lesser, Sage, Betony, Gentian, round
Birth-wort, of each half an ounce, of the wood called Lignum vitae, or
Guajacum, seven ounces, make them into powder. Give hereof a dram every day in
water of Honey, for certain months together, if need require. Freitag. aur.
med. fol. 286.

A Potion against wind in the Stomach, and pain thereof.
Take of round Birthwort half an ounce, Anni-seed and Carraway-seed, of each
five drams, Agaricke trochiscated two drams and a half, Camomill flowers,
Centory the lesser, of each two handfulls, of Saffron ten grains; boil them in
broth made with meat, and make a drink for diverse Doses, taking a draught
thereof morning and evening, adding a little Sugar thereunto.

Or,
Take of Treacle of Andromachus, two scruples, of Mithridate a scruple, of
round Birth-wort half a dram: make the Birthwort in powder, and dissolve it
with the rest in Sack, and give it.

Pills having a cleansing and deterging faculty, good against the
Falling Sickness, Palsy, Shortness of Breath, Old Cough, Hardness of the
Liver beginning, and in the stopping of the Courses, bringing away the Birth,
and Afterbirth: being most convenient in the winter season, for such as are of
moist Constitutions, and to be used after the Body is purged.
Take of round Birthwort one ounce, Gentian-root, Myrrh, of each three drams,
Aloes and Cinnamon of each half an ounce; Ginger a dram, make them all into fine
Powder, and with Oil of sweet Almonds make it into a mass or lump for Pills.
The Dose is a dram and a half, taking Broth presently after them. Fervel.
meth. med. lib. 7. fol. 192.

Against pain of the side.
Take of Birthwort root a dram, Myrrh in powder, ten grains, make the other
in powder, and with water of Honey, or Carduus water, make a Potion, and give
it.

Against the swelling of the Spleen.
Take of round Birthwort in powder, a dram, or of the Extract of round
Birthwort, half a dram. Give it with Oxymel, Acoratum, or Carduus water,

Against the impurity of the Womb, to provoke the courses, expel the
Afterbirth, and to bring away the dead Child.
Take of round Birthwort in powder, a dram, Myrrh in powder, twenty grains,
white Pepper in powder, ten grains, mix them together, and give them in Savine
water.

In Decoction.
Take of round Birthwort bruised, two drams, boil it in Posset Drink, and
being strained give it.

Against Botium gulae, or strumous swellings about the Throat.
Take round Birthwort, Radish-root, and stinking Gladwin, of each a dram,
Pimpinell, or Burnet, Mouseare, Rue, of each two drams; Figwort, Droppewort, of
each half an ounce; Anni seed two drams, Ginger a dram, Turbith and Seen, of
each three drams; make them all into a fine powder, and add thereto of white
Sugar, four ounces. The Dose is one spoonful every morning, in White Wind, or
Broom-water.

The outward Use.
It is used in old rotten and malign Ulcers, and Fistulaes, especially being
mixed with Oris powder, and Honey; for thus used, it cleanses and incarneth.
It cures Ulcers of the secret parts, if you wash them with the decoction
thereof. The powder hereof does cleanse the teeth, and make them white, being
rubbed therewith. It eases the Gout, being mingled with Honey and Salt, and
applied. It draws forth Thorns and Splinters of bones that are broken, being
applied with Terpintine. It helps the biting of venomous Beasts, being boiled
in Wine, and laid on; or let the powder thereof be mixed with the juice of Rue,
and so applied to the Wound. Being mingled with the powder of Aloes, Lime, or
Chalk and Honey, into an Ointment; adding a little Wine it cures the Cancer in
the Nose, and Polypus, if tents be made thereof, and put up: and make an
Ointment for the said purpose, with the powder of round Birthwort, Cypress,
and Honey, and use it as the former. The powder thereof tempered with Honey,
cures the Ulcers of the mouth and gums. A Pessary made hereof, and with Myrrh,
provokes the terms in Women. It heals all Wounds in the Head; the fume
thereof, or the powder in a quilted Cap, stays all Fluxes, and distillations
of thin Rheum from the head.

An Ointment to procure flesh in Ulcers.
Take the powder of round Birthwort and Oris, of each a dram; roots of Reeds
and Peucedanum, or Hoggs Fennel in powder, of each a dram and a half;
Francumsence, Mastich, and Myrrh in powder, of each two drams; of the Ointment
called Vnguentum Comitissae, three ounces, Honey of Roses so much as is
sufficent; make all into an Ointment.

An Oil useful in the Palsy, and Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness.
Take of round Birthworth, two ounces, bruise it; Euphorbium and Castor, of
each a dram and a half: boil these in Oil Olive, twelve ounces, strain it,
and anoint the spina dorsi, from the Neck to the Buttocks, or shutting of the
Hips; do thus for the space of a fortnight, or three weeks.

The hurtful Quality.
It is not to be given to Women with Child, because it brings Abortion, or
causes miscarrying.

Of such things as are made of Birthwort, long and round.
1. The Distilled Water. [Usefull against creeping Ulcers, and Pustules of the
Genitalls, both in men and women, being therewith washed, or linen clothes
dipped in the same, and laid on the place all night.] 2. Pills of Aristolochia
Fernel. 3. Extract thereof. 4. Diatessaron, or Theriaca Diatessaron.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to a dram. In decoction from a dram to
two drams or three drams.

CHAP. VII. De Assa Foetida. Of Assa Fetida.
ASsa Fetida is a Gum coming from the Plant called Laser, or Sylphyum, growing
in Media, Libia, and Syria; (and not of Laserpitium of Diascorides, the juice
of which is unknown to Modern Writers) Johan. Schroder. pharmac. med. chym.
lib. 4. fol. 180. Others will have it to come from Laserpitium.

The Names.
In Latin, Laser medicum, foetidum, and Assa Foetida, or Asa foetida. It is so
ill sented, that the Germans call it Teuffelz drech, that is, Diaboli stercus,
Devils dirt, or dung.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best sort.
The best is that which is clear, smelling somewhat like Garlic, tough, and
not dry or foul with sticks, in color like the best Myrrh.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

It is adulterated by mixing Meal, Bran, and the Gum Sagapenum together.

The Inward use.
It is profitable for Women that are troubled with the rising of the Mother,
and Diseases of the Womb; It brings down the courses in Women, and expells
the secundine, or Afterbirth, being taken with Pepper and Myrrh. It is
useful in Diseases of the Breast, Nerves, and Brain; and being taken in an
Egg that is soft, it helps Hoarsnesse, and given with Oxymel it helps the
Cough, Jaundise, and Dropsy. Given with Vinegar of Squills or Mulsa, that is,
Wine and Honey boiled together, it helps the Falling Sickness. Being given in
Wine or Angelica water, it helps against Venom and Poison of venomous
Beasts, where any are stung therewith. It cures the Quartaine Ague, and Fevers
of long continuance. Taken with Oxymel it dissolveth coagulated milk in the
breast; it kills Worms and expels wind: it is used also to take away the
loathing of the stomach to meat by the Indians, and to strengthen the weakness
of it also, and is much in use by them to provoke unto Venery.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Pills, or in powder, but hardly made into powder, because of its
moistness; or it is given in wine or other liquor, being first dissolved in
the same.

A powder against the Quartaine Ague.
Take Assa Fetida, Rue, long Pepper, of each two drams, make them into powder,
and mix it with a little Honey. Give a dram, or a dram and a half of it in any
convenient liquor before the fit comes. Wecher. syntax. fol. 248. 348. Note
here, that except the Assa Fetida be very dry, you cannot make it into powder;
therefore you may dissolve it in honey or wine, and so take it. There is an
Electuary made of Assa Fetida, Pepper, Ginger, Rue, Salniter, and Honey, which
is commended against the Quartaine Ague, and Chronicall Fevers, or Agues of
long continuance. It is so much commended against wind, that Mr Parkinson in
his Herball, tells a Story (from Gartias) of a Portugal that tried it upon a
Horse whom the King of Bisnager would have bought, but that he was over subject
to break wind, but after the Portugal had cured him thereof, the King bought
him, and asking how he cured him, he answered, with Assa Fetida given in his
Provender: no marvel, said the King, if he were cured with the Gods me^t; yea
rather with the Devils, said the Portugal, but softly, and in his own
language, for fear of being overheard.

The outward use.
If it be mingled with Rue, Salniter, and Honey, it breaks Carbuncles, and
Pestilentiall sores, being thereto applied; and in the same manner used, it
helps Corns, and draws them forth. Being applied with Garlic and the
white of an egg, it helps Felons and white flaes of the fingers. It clears the
fight, and helps suffusions or spots in the eyes, being mixed with Honey, and
dropped in. It cures the stinging of venomous Beasts, being applied, and the
swelling of the Spleen, being laid on as a Plaster. A perfume thereof is good
for the rising of the Mother; also a fume thereof, and of Goats horn, prevents
or much mitigates the fit of the Falling Sickness, if the party hold his head
over it, when he feels the fit come upon him. It helps the Toothache, being
put into a hollow tooth. Pliny, lib. 22. cap. 23. forbids it thus to be
used, and says, he knew one that tried it in the same manner, threw himself
headlong from an high loft, and brake his neck: but surely this was by
accident, the party having a cachecticall or plethorick body, and so it stirred
up the humors.

The hurtful quality.
Give it not to women with Child, nor to such as have very hot and dry bodies.

These things following are made of Assa Fetida.
1. Pills of Assa Fetida. 2. Extract of Assa Fetida.

The Dose.
The Dose is from half a scruple to a dram.

CHAP. VIII. De Asaro. Of Asarabacca.
ASarum, or Asarabacca, is an herb that has a round leaf like Ivy, but more
round, and tenderer: the roots are many, small and slender, of a sweet and
pleasing smell, and a little biting the tongue. It grows in many Gardens.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Asarum, in English, Asarabacca, Asarobacca, and
Folefoot.

The temperament.
Asarum is hot and dry in the second degree, or as some, in the third degree.
The roots are hotter then the leaves.

The duration.
The roots will keep a year or two. The leaves are best green, which may be had
almost all the year.

The inward use.
Asarum purges strongly by vomit, and sometimes by stool. It draws away
thick Phlegm, and Choler, both yellow and cruginous, or green. It is
profitable for them that have the Dropsy, Jaundise, and that have Tertian and
Quartaine Agues, as also the Green-sicknesse, Pain of the head, arising of
vapors from the Stomach. It provokes sweat, the Courses in Women, and Urine;
therefore it is good in the Strangury, and stopping of the Urine, and also in
the Hip-Gout, and in Asthmatick persons, or such as are short-winded. It
helps stoppings of the Liver, Gall, and Spleen. The roots are effectual
against the biting of Serpents, and therefore is put with other simples, both
into Mithridate and Treacle, of Andromachus (says Mr Parkinson in his Herball)
but I find it only put into Mithridate. It helps Chronicall, or long
continued Agues, upon a double ground. First, Because it purges away thick
Phlegm and Choler, of all sorts, from the Stomach, and parts adjacent, as also
whatsoever is of long continuance in the viscerous parts, which is the cause of
these Diuturnall or long-continued Agues, now by vomit, the humors aforesaid
are taken away. Secondly, Because it provokes sweat, and so expels
obnoxious humous from those parts, by the ports of the skin.

The manner of administering it.
The leaves and roots are given by infusion, decoction, and in substance. The
green leaves are most effectual to provoke one to vomit; the roots more
effectual to purge by siege, by Urine, and to provoke sweat. Neither the
leaves nor roots will abide any long boiling, for thereby the chiefest strength
thereof vanishes, and is lost. If you give it in fine powder, it does provoke
vomit and Urine. If you give it in course powder, it purges downwards.

Before the fit of an Ague.
Take of the roots of Asarum, or Asarabacca in powder, a dram, of white wind
four ounces, mingle them together, and give it before the fit comes. This
takes away the shaking fit, and causes the hot fit to be more remiss or
gentle.

Or thus:
Take of Asarabacca-root a dram, of Radish-root one ounce, of Orach-seed half
an ounce, boil them in Hydromel, or water and honey; strain it, and give six
ounces thereof as before.

Or,
Take of root of Asarabacca in powder, Broome-flowers, Broome-seeds, of each
half a dram in powder; give it in Barly-water.

Against the Green-sicknesse, Dropsy, Jaundise, etc.
Take of the green leaves of Asarabacca, five, six, or seven, bruise them, and
steep them in Hydromel, or Posset Drink, all night, in the morning strain it,
and give the clearest: when it works, take Posset Drink, and keep your self
warm.

To provoke the terms or courses in Women.
Take Myrrh, Cinnamon, of each a dram, Savin half a dram, Smalladge-seed, and
Parsly-seed, Spiknard, Asarum, Squinanth, or sweet Rush, of each a scruple;
make all into powder, and give hereof a dram, in the juice of Sea-Holly, or in
the juice of Rue. Freitag. ^ur. med. fol. 325.

Against the Quartaine Ague, and Agues of long continuance.
Take of the distilled water of Asarabacca, three or four ounces, give it in a
morning fasting, or before the fit comes. This may be given diverse times if
need be.

The external use.
The leaves bruised and applied outwardly, cure creeping and cancerous Ulcers,
as also the swelling thereof, and hinder their growth and increase. They
cleanse Wounds and sores. If the head be washed with a lie made thereof, it
strengthens the brain, being molested with cold, and quickneth the memory.
The juice and the water thereof with Pompholigos, helps the dimnesse of the
sight. The leaves bruised, and applied to the forehead and temples, do ease
the pain thereof, coming of cold. There is an Oil made thereof, with which if
the ridge of the back be nointed, it provokes sweat, and takes away the
shaking fits of Agues. The leaves also bruised and applied to Women's Breasts,
are good to dry up the milk; and is good to be laid to the Disease called the
Wild fire, especially at the beginning.

The hurtful Quality.
It is not safe to give it to weak and tender bodies, nor to Women with Child;
for though Fernelius says in his Method. medend. l. 5. 117. it be free from
any malignant quality, and therefore may safely be given to women with Child,
especially if it be not given in fine powder: yet Theodor. Dorstenius. Botanic.
fol. 14. says, that both the decoction and water thereof, drives forth the
Child, living or dead, and therefore may not safely be given to Women great
with Child.

Of such things as are made of Asarabacca.
These following are made of Asarum. 1. Diasarum Fernelij. 2. Extract of
Asarum, or Coagulum Asari. 3. Distilled Water of Asarum, both of the leaves and
roots. 4. Oil of Asarum.

The Dose.
The Dose in substance is from half a dram to two scruples, or a dram: in
infusion from two drams to half an ounce.

Brassica Marina, see Soldanella, or Sea bind weed.

CHAP. IX. De Bdellio. Of Gum Bdellium.
BDellium is a Gum flowing from a tree growing in Arabia, in India, and Media,
but it chiefly grows in Arabia.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Bdellium.

The Temperament.
Bdellium is hot in the second degree, and moist in the first; of a mollifying
and discussing nature.

The best kind.
The best (say Authors) is clear like glue, fat on the inside, easily melting
or dissolving, pure or clear from dross, sweet in the burning, and bitter in
taste; but that we have is not to be found so, for we find little bitterness in
any, and less sweetness in the burning of it, but strong and unpleasant
rather, neither is it easy to be dissolved without warmth; and ours is of a
sad brown color, somewhat like Glue, and much like unto Myrrh, in color;
insomuch, that some erroneously judge the purer part of this Gum to be
Bdellium, and the grosser to be Myrrh.

The Duration.
It will keep good ten or twelve years.

The inward Use.
It provokes Urine, and the courses in Women, breaks the Stone: it is good for
those that have the Cough, and are bitten by Serpents, or venomous Beasts. It
helps to discuss the windiness of the Spleen, and pains of the side: it
helps Ruptures, mollifieth the hardness of the Mother, and dries up the
moisture thereof, and draws forth the dead Child. It provokes sweat, stops
the overflowing of the menses or courses in Women, and also of the womb, as
some affirm, which if it do both, surely it is by its Arcanum, or hidden
property. It is given against a super-purgation, after the taking of a sharp
Medicine, that is, when a Purge works more then is meet.

The manner of administering it.
It is chiefly used in Pills, but it may be dissolved in wine, or any other
liquour, and so taken.

Pills of Bdellium, that are good against the Hemroids, or Piles, and the
overflowing of the courses.
Take of Bdellium one ounce and a half, Myrobalans, Chebuls, Black Myrobalans,
Bellericks, and Emblicks, Concha, Venerea burnt, (which is a Sea-shell) of each
two drams and a half; Ammios-seed, three drams, Amber two drams and a half;
make those things in powder that are to be powdered, then macerate and dissolve
the Bdellium in juice of Leeks, and with a sufficient quantity of syrup made
of the juice of Leeks, make it into a mass or lump for Pills. The Dose is from
half a dram to four scruples.

Pills against the Hemroids.
Take of the former Pills, two drams, of Seen, Rubarbe, Agarick trochiscated in
powder, of each a dram, with a sufficient quantity of syrup of Roses, make a
mass for Pills, of which take a dram at a time, in the morning for diverse
days together, if need require. Riverius observat. med. cent. 3. fol. 236.

The External Use.
It is outwardly used against Convulsions and Ruptures, against swellings of
the Throat; it dissolveth hard tumors and nodes of the Joints, it opens
obstructions of the Womb, mollifieth the hardness thereof, and dries up its
moistness, either applied or a fume thereof received: the same is good against
swellings, and apostumes of the genitalls, or privy members.

A Plaster dissolving hard tumors.
Take of Bdellium one ounce, of Sagapenum four ounces, of Ammoniacum, three
ounces, Galbanum, Euphorbium, of each two drams. Dissolve the Gums in Sack,
then add thereto Oil of white Lillies, and Oil of sweet Almonds, of each an
ounce, Propolis (which is found in Be hives) four ounces and a half: make
them into a Plaster.

A Plaster against Nodes, and glandulous tumors.
Take of Bdellium and Lupines, of each two drams, of Cow Dung two ounces, of
Colewort-root, Capar bark, Sea Onion, pulp of Figs, of each half an ounce:
make those in powder that are to be powdered, dissolve the Bdellium in Wine,
and with a sufficient quantity of Honey, Vinegar, Hogs-greace, and Old Oil,
make a Plaster: apply it as need requires.

The Hurtful Quality.
It is not to be given to Women with Child.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a dram to two drams.

These following are made of Bdellium.
1. Pills of Bdellium. 2. Ointment of Bdellium. 3. Vnguentum Apostolorum.

CHAP. X. De Bistorta. Of Bistort-root.
BIstort is a thick short knobbed root, blackish without, and somewhat reddish
within, a little crooked or turned together, of a harsh or binding taste, with
diverse blackish fibers, or hairie threads growing thereat, and has leaves like
Dock's but smaller.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Bistorta, because the root is writhed in the likeness
of a Serpent, in English, Bistort, or Snake-weede.

The Temperament.
It does cool and dry in the third degree, and is very astringent, or binding.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year or two.

The inward Use.
Bistort-root is excellent to resist all poison and venom: A dram of it in
powder, taken in Wine or Angelica-water, expels the venom of the Plague or
Pestilence, the Small Pox, Measles, Purples, or any other infectious Disease;
the same in powder, or the decoction in Wine, being drunk, stays all manner
of inward bleeding, or spitting of blood; as also any Fluxes of the body, and
moreover, such as are troubled with vomiting. The powder or the decoction being
drunk, helps Ruptures, and is available against all bruises or falls, and
dissolveth the congealed blood, and eases the pains that happen thereupon:
the same helps the Jaundise, and hinders Abortion, or miscarrying in Women,
kills Worms, and is profitable for such as cannot hold their water,
especially if the juice of Plantaine be added thereto. A dram of the powder
taken in the water thereof, wherein some Iron or Steel being red hot has been
quenched, is an admirable help in the Gonorrhaea, or running of the Reins, so
that the body be first purged. It is very useful in decoctions for Wounds,
being taken into the body: the same stays the flowing of the courses in Women.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, in electuary, and in decoction.

An Electuary against Women's Flux, or the overflowing of their Courses.
Take of old Conserve of red Roses, one ounce and a half; Bole Armenick in
powder, two scruples; red Coral in powder, a scruple; Bistort root in powder,
a dram, with a sufficient quantity of syrup of Mirtles, or syrup of Quinces,
make an Electuary. Take often of it, especially a little before meat, the
quantity of a Nutmeg, and after meat, as much.

An Electuary against the Pestilence.
Take of LONDON Treacle, half an ounce, Mithridate 3. drams, Angelica root,
and Bistort root, in powder, of each half a scruple; Cardamoms five grains,
Camphor four grains, Cinnamon in powder, half a scruple: Let the Camphor be
dissolved in a little syrup of Lemons, and the rest being in powder, make it
into an Electuary.

The Dose is a dram or more, morning and evening by it self; or in
Carduus-water.

In Decoction.
Take of Bistort root bruised, two drams, boil it in half a pint of
Posset Drink, till about half be consumed, strain it, and give the clearest in
a morning, against the Diseases forementioned.

The outward Use.
Being used in Fumigations, it dries up Rheumes, and stays Women's Fluxes, or
the bleeding of Wounds: the fibers or fungous substance of the root, does
wonderfully stop the bleeding of Wounds, or bleeding of the Nose. A decoction
thereof helps sore mouths, and inflammations of the Almonds and Throat, if
they be washed therewith: the decoction of the roots in water, whereunto some
Pomegranet pills, or flowers are added, serves for an injection into the
matrice, as well to stay the access or flowing of humors, and to cure Ulcers
thereof, as also to bring it to the place being fallen down, and to help stay
the abundance of their courses. The water distilled from both leaves and roots,
is a good remedy to wash any place bitten or stung by any venomous creature;
and is very good to wash any running sores or Ulcers, as also Cancers in the
Nose, and Polypus (which is a Disease in the Nose) if the powder of the root be
applied afterward. A decoction of the root fastneth the loose teeth, and
helps the soreness of the Gums, being washed therewith. The powder of the
root, strewed upon any cut, or bleeding Wound, stays the bleeding thereof.
The powder mixed with a little Oil of Roses, and Wax, helps the running of
the Reins, if the back be noynted therewith.

An Ointment to hinder Abortion, or miscarrying of Women.
Take Oil of Roses, Oil of Quinces, of each three ounces, Cerusse washed in
Rose Water, half an ounce, Bistort root, and red Coral, of each two drams,
Barbery-seeds, a dram, of white Wax a sufficient quantity: powder those things
that are to be powdered, and make hereof an Ointment, with which annoint the
back warm, morning and evening, laying a warm cloth thereon. Rondelet. meth.
cur. morb. cap. 63. fol. 168.

Against the Toothache.
Take Bistort root in powder, Pellitory of Spain, burnt Alum in powder, of
each two drams, make it into a paist with Honey: Put a little piece thereof
into a hollow Tooth, or between the Teeth, and it will ease the pain thereof,
and draw away much offensive matter, from the head and parts adjacent.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to a dram; in decoction, from a dram to
two drams, or three drams.

Of such things as are made of Bistort.
1. The distilled water thereof. 2. Diascordium. 3. Emplastrum Coe saris. 4.
Emp. Hystericum. Nic.

CHAP. XI. De Bryonia alba. Of White Brionie.
WHite Brionie is somewhat like unto the common Vine in his leaves and
branches, but something rougher, and whiter: The root is sometimes very great,
long, and bitter.

The Names.
In Latin, Vitis alba, Bryonia, and Bryonia alba: in English, Brionie, and
Tetterberries.

The Temperament.
Briony is hot in the second degree, and dry in the third.

The Duration.
The Root will keep good a year or more, if it be gathered in a dry season and
carefully dried.

The inward use.
The root of White Briony purges strongly, Choler, Phlegm, and Water from the
Brain, Nerves, Womb, and Joints; it opens obstructions or stoppings of the
Liver, Spleen, and Womb, therefore it avails much in Hystericall fits, or fits
of the Mother, in the Falling Sickness, Palsy, Apoplexy, and Vertigo, or
swimming of the head, as also in the Gout, or Shortness of breath. It provokes
the courses in Women, and cleanses the Womb, provokes Urine, and is excellent
in the Dropsy, for it draws away water abundantly, both by vomit and stool.
It dissolveth congealed blood in the body, by reason of falls or bruises. The
root is good against the biting of Vipers, or Adders, and kills Worms in the
body. It is good in the Kings Evil, the juice being taken with equal parts of
Wine and Honey. The foecula, or dregs thereof, are used for the aforesaid
Diseases; you may give five or ten grains of it.

The manner of administering it.
The root of White Brionie is given in powder, in juice, in decoction, in
syrup, and in electuary, though every way not pleasing to the palate.

An Electuary of white Brionie purging the body.
Take of White Brionie root, four ounces, Turbith three ounces, Agaricke cut in
thin slices, one ounce; Ginger in powder, Mastich, Lonage seed bruised, of each
three drams; macerate or steep them three days in two pints of Aquavitae, then
boil them to the consumption of one pint; strain it, to which add clarified
Honey, the pulp of Prunes, of each a pound, Sugar a pound and a half. Boil
them to the thickness of Honey, then being cold, let these things following be
put in; Gum Gutta in powder, one ounce, Diagredium six drams, Anni-seed,
Fennell-seed in powder, of each two drams, Cloves in powder, half an ounce,
mix them well together, and make an Electuary. The Dose is from half an ounce
to six drams, in white Wine, or Posset drink. This Electuary is excellent in
the Dropsy, and Gout.

Syrup of Brionie simple.
Take of the juice of White Brionie-root in May, a pound, of pure Honey
clarified, two pound; boil them gently to the thickness of a syrup, by often
scumming it.

The Compound Syrup of Brionie.
Take of the juice of White Brionie-root, five ounces, Vinegar of Squills, a
pound, of the decoction made with Origanum, dry Hyssope, Lonage, Seseleos,
Cardamomes, Stoechados half a pound, of good Honey, two pound; boil them
gently to the thickness of a syrup. Freitag. aur. med. fol. 355, 356. Both
these foregoing syrupes are good in the Falling Sickness, Swimming of the
Head, and for Shortness of breath.

An Electuary for an old Cough, and shortness of breath.
Take of White Brionie root in powder, a dram, of clarified Honey three ounces,
of the Lohoch or Electuary of Fox-Lungs, half an ounce, Spirit of Sulpher
eight drops, make all into an Electuary. Take of it chiefly in the morning and
evening, as much as a small Nutmeg.

Against the Pestilence.
Take of White Brionie-root in powder, a dram, Diagredium one grain, take it
in the juice of Celandine, and let the party sweat upon it. Theod. Dorsten.
Botanic. fol. 52.

For such as have broken a Bone.
Take of the juice of White Brionie-root, two drams, or three drams, of
Comfry-water, three ounces, mingle them together, and give it. Continue it for
a weeks space, if need require.

The external Use.
A decoction of the root, or the juice thereof, takes away Freckles, or
Sun-burning, and all kind of Spots and Scarres. So does the Oil wherein the
roots of Brionie has been boiled. It dissolveth black Blood, and blew Marks,
by reason of bruises, or falls, and dissolveth new swellings. It brings to
maturity, and breaks old Imposthumes. It draws forth splinters, and broken
bones, and helps filthy Ulcers and white Flaes that grow up about the roots
of the Nails. The leaves, fruit, and roots, do cleanse old and filthy sores,
and are good against fretting and running Cankers, Gangrenes, and Tetters;
therefore the be^ries are usually called by the Countrey-people,
Tetter-berries, may with good success be applied to them. The root cleanses
the skin from the Morphew, Leprosy, all running Scabs and Manginesse, if a
Bath be made thereof, or the juice applied thereunto. A Pessary made of the
root, brings down the courses in Women, and brings forth the Afterbirth
and dead Child. A Bath made hereof, cleanses the Womb from filthiness and
uncleanness. The root hung about the Neck is good against the Falling
Sickness, and Convulsion. The root bruised and boiled in Vinegar, being
applied to the swollen Genitalls of men, helps the same. A decoction of the
leaves or roots mingled with Honey, and the mouth and throat washed therewith,
cures Ulcers, and soreness thereof. The distilled water of the root works
the same effect, but more weakly, yet the water is used for freckles and spots
in the face.

Against hardness and stopping of the Spleen.
Take what quantity you will of the green root of Brionie, bruise it with Figs,
and apply it to the Spleen, adding thereunto a little Oil of Capers.

Or,
Take Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, Ointment Dialtheae, or of Marshmallows,
Plaster of Melilot, of each half an ounce, Brionie root, and Orris in powder,
of each half an ounce; Ducks-grease, Goose grease, and Hens-grease, of each
three drams, Bdellium and Galbanum, of each a dram and a half; Oil of
Orris-root, one ounce and a half, of the Mussilage of Linseede, and
Fenugreeke, a sufficient quantity of each; dissolve the gums, and boil them
gently together, and add thereto of Wax four ounces, of Turpintine and Rosin,
of each one ounce and a half: make all into a Cerat, according to art.

Against corrupt and fretting sores in the Legs.
Take the leaves or root of White Brionie, bruise them with Salt and Vinegar,
and apply it.

Against the Gout and Sciatica.
Take of Brionie-root, green, bruise it, and apply it with Hog's Grease.

The hurtful Quality, with the correcting means.
The root of White Brionie does much trouble the Stomach, head, and other
parts: therefore it must not be given to delicate bodies, nor where the spirits
are low: for though it have a specific virtue for the Diseases of the Brain
before mentioned, yet it offends the weak. The hurtful Quality hereof is taken
away in part by adding to it Ginger, Cinnamon, Quince, or such like. The same is
also very dangerous for Women with Child, however it be given, for it causes
Abortion, or miscarrying.

These things are made of Brionie.
1. The Extract thereof. 2. Faeces vel Faculae Brioniae. 3. Water of Brionie.
4. Ointment of Brionie. 5. Vnguentum Agrippae.

The Dose.
The Dose of the root in substance, is from a scruple to a dram; in infusion,
from two drams to half an ounce. The juice of the root is given from a dram to
two drams, or more, in strong bodies. The faeces, or dregs thereof, are given
from five grains to twenty.

Cambogia, see Gutta Gummi.

CHAP. XII. De Camphora. Of Camphor, or Campher.
CAmphor is a Gum or liquor of a Tree growing in India, and other places,
partly distilling forth of its own accord, but chiefly by incision, and
comes forth clear and white, without any spot therein; of a very strong sent,
and of thin parts, so that being but a while exposed to the air, both sent and
substance vanishes away.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Camphora, and Caphura; in English, Camphire, Camfire,
Camphor, and Campher.

The temperament.
Some will have it to be cold and dry in the third degree, others esteem it to
be hot; but of this more hereafter.

The best kind.
The best is white, shining, clear as Crystal, not full of spots, easy to be
broken, and brittle; also being set on fire, it burns, and is not easily
quenched, and has also a strong sent.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years, some say forty years; but it must be kept from
the air, and in Flax-seed, or Fleawort-seed, otherwise it will evaporate, and
consume to nothing.

The inward Use.
It resists putrefaction, and venom, therefore it is frequently used in the
Pestilence, contagious diseases, and in Fevers. It extinguisheth venery or the
lust of the body, Camphora venenis strenue resistit, and cardiacon est. Joubert
de peste f. 72 Vide, Thoner. observat. l. 3. observat. 8. fol. 187.
and is good for the running of the Reins, as also against the Whites in Women,
and for the rising of the Mother, being dissolved in Balm-water, and so taken.
It cools the heat of the Liver, Back, and all hot inflammations in the body.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Electuaries, in Powders, Potions, etc.

An Electuary against the Pestilence.
Take Myrrh, Saffron, the bone of a Stags heart, or Harts-horne, in powder, of
each two scruples and a half, of Dittany in powder, two drams, of white Ginger
in powder, half an ounce, of Zedorie in powder, two drams and a half, of
Tormentill-roots in powder a dram, of Campher in powder, or dissolved in Aqua
vitae, two drams, Mithridate, and London Treacle, of each three ounces; with a
little Aqua vitae, make an Electuary. Take thereof morning and evening as much
as a small Nut.

A powder for the Pestilence.
Take of Zedoary, White Dittany root, Gentian-root, Scordium, Carduus, Sorrel,
of each two drams, make them into powder. The Dose is a dram in a morning in
Carduus-water, or in the winter let it be given in White Wind. This is a good
preservative in times of infection.

Or,
Take of white Sugar Candy, a dram, white Ginger two scruples, Camphor half a
scruple; make them in powder, and give it in two or three ounces of
Scabious-water, or Angelica-water.

Or,
Take Angelica-root, Bay Berries, of each half an ounce, round Aristolochia,
or Birthwort, two drams, Gentian-root, Nutmeg, of each a dram, Camphor half a
scruple; make all into powder. The Dose is a dram or more in Carduus-water.

A Potion against the Pestilence.
Take of Treacle called Diatessaron, a dram, Angelica-root, in powder half a
dram, or a dram, of Rose-Vineger, a dram, Campher three grains, Carduus-water,
two ounces. Dissolve the Campher, and the rest that is to be dissolved, in the
water, and make a potion; give it, and let the party sweat after it. This may
be given diverse times, if need be.

Note, That Campher will not be made into powder alone, without a blanched
Almond, or some other such like unctious thing, which hereby will be brought
into fine powder: neither will it easily dissolve in cold water, but by warmth
it will, or with any syrup it will soon dissolve.

The outward Use.
It helps pain of the head, and heat thereof, if it be mixed with yellow
Sanders, and red Rose Water, and the Temples and Forehead bathed therewith. It
stops blood that flows out of the nostrills, if it be smelled to, and
refreshes the brain. It is used against Phlegmous and Erysipelas, or
Wilde-fire, also against heat or inflammations of the eyes; it is good in Wounds
and Ulcers, to abate the heat thereof, and is of much use among Women to
beautify their face: therefore it is much used against heat, and pimpels of the
face. It extinguisheth Venery being applied to the Reins or Testicles, with the
juice of Nightshade. Being put into a hollow Tooth that aketh, it eases the
pain thereof; also put into a piece of fine Linen or Taffety, and hanged about
the neck, it cures Agues, especially in Children, and that by a specific
virtue. Also it is good to smell to, for such as have lost their smelling, and
to preserve from infection in times of contagion.

Against redness of the eyes, and to cool and dry.
Take of Sumach bruised, two drams, steep it in two ounces of red Rose Water,
strain it, and add to the liquor of Campher, four grains, dissolve the
Campher, and keep it for your use.

Against Ophthalmia, or inflammation of the eyes, in its declination.
Take of Tutia or Tutty in powder, half an ounce; Lapis Calaminaris (quenched
often in White Wind, and in powder) a dram; Cloves in number (powdered) five,
of Honey, one ounce, White Wind two ounces, red Rose Water, four ounces,
Campher dissolved in the Rose Water, a dram. Mix them together, shake it often,
and wash the eyes therewith.

Against redness and running of the eyes.
Take of Tutty in powder, an ounce, of Aloes succotrine, powdered, half an
ounce, Campher a dram, Rose Water one pound and a half, of White Wind (wherein
some Pomegranat pill has been infused or steeped four and twenty hours) half
a pint, mix them together, and let them be boiled very gently, or rather warm
it in a Kettle of hot water, strain it, and reserve it to use.

Against spots in the eyes.
Take of Campher a dram, dissolve it in the juice of Fennel, and add some Rose
water to it; drop some of it into the eyes.

Against the heat of the Liver.
Take of Campher half an ounce; dissolve it in the juice of Nightshade, dip
linen clothes therein, and lay them to the region of the Liver.

The hurtful Quality.
It is not safe to give it to such as have weak heads, or infirm Stomachs, or
to such as abhor the smell thereof: for in great pains of the head and stomach
it is dangerous to use it, for it exciteth watchfullnesse, and causes head
ach: neither is it safe to give it in chollerick Diseases. Dan. Sennert. med.
pract. l. 1. c. 1. fol. 12. and f. 66. Rudolph. Camerar. memor. med. cent. 4.
fol. 254.

The Dose.
The Dose (according to some) is from half a scruple to a scruple; but I
conceive if it be given alone, it is not safe to give above five or six grains
at the most, except it be in the Pestilence, or such like Diseases.

Of such things as are made with Campher.
1. Essence of Campher. 2. Oil of Campher. [Excellent in the Toothache.] 3.
Tross^s of Campher. 4. Vnguentum Camphoratum album.

Whether Campher be cold or hot, and whether it extinguish Venery or lust?
There is some controversy among Physicians, about the nature of Campher, most
agree that Campher is cold, and that without doubt, because it is used in
external heats and inflammations, that comes by being in the Sun too long;
and because it helps pain of the head, and cures inflammations of the eyes,
as also extinguisheth Venery. Others especially, late Writers say, Campher is
hot, and that upon these grounds. First, Because of its inflamability, for it
does not only burn easily, but being set on fire, and cast into the water it
will burn there: But this Argument Scaliger exercit: 104. sect. 8. does reject
and deride, but without just cause. For nothing does thus burn, except it be
of a sulphurous and butuminous nature, as some conceive: Now all inflamabilious
things, or such as are of burning and fiery nature are hot, from whence it
appears that Campher is hot; although on the contrary we may not conclude, that
all things that are hot, are of a burning nature. Secondly, Campher seems to be
hot by it is taste, being bitter, how we say, quod amarum calidum, that which is
bitter is hot. Thirdly, the strong smell or sent thereof does demonstrate it to
be hot. Fourthly, the tenuity or thinness of parts, and it is great penetrating
faculty does manifest it to be hot; for such properties are not to be found in
cold things. Now that Campher does extinguish heat, heals inflammations, and
mitigates pain of the head, proceeding from a hot cause, this it does by
accident, in drawing hot vapors and humors away, and so discussing them in
the same manner as Linseed-oyle, Vernix and such like does cure burning. Others
would reconcile the difference thus; by saying, Campher does consist of a
double faculty or substance, as is in Veniger, Rubarbe, etc. one hot which
causes the penetrating, sharp and burning faculty, the other cold, which
extinguisheth lust, and helps inflammations of the eyes: But surely Campher is
altogether hot; for though it be affirmed to be cold, yet it is not easily
proved: Neither can the double substance, in Campher be separated, as in
Rubarbe and Roses, for the whole substance thereof is hot, and of a fiery
nature, and nothing at all cold; for though it do cool, yet it is not per se,
of it is proper nature, but by accident, as it is before showed. Now concerning
it is faculty in extinguishing Venery, it is denied by Scaliger, exercit. 104.
sect. 8. For he thus writes, extingui venerem ea non esse verum, pro certo
habemus. We have certain experience that Campher does not extinguish Venery,
for says he, a young man did the feat strongly, although he had a piece
thereof in his hand: Also he tried it upon a proud Bitch, by giving it
inwardly, and using it outward, but all in vain; Coivit, concepit, peperit. But
this experience is not sufficient; for when it is said, Campher does extinguish
Lust, it is not so to be understood, as if by one act, or by using it outwardly
once or twice, it should prevail, but if it be often used does inwardly and
outwardly. Dan. Sennert. de morb. mulier. lib. 4. part 2. sect. 3. c. 6. fol.
250. and Paralipom. fol. 156, 157, 158. Schroder. Pharm. med. chym. l. 4. f.
185. Pet. Paul de cur. morb. l. 1. c. 30. f. 87. Fragos. med. ind. histor. c.
7. f. 106. Greg. Host. Epistol. med. lib. 2. sect. 9. f. 491, 492, etc.

CHAP. XIII. De Carthami semine, Of seed of Bastard Saffron.
CArthamus seed is a white and long cornered seed, somewhat like French-barley,
but a little bigger, and more picked at the one end then at the other.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Knicus, Knecus, and Knecum, also Carthamus, and the seed
semen Carthami, in English, Bastard- Saffron.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree, although Galen says it is hot and dry
in the third degree, which might be in respect of the region or place where it
did grow.

The best sort.
The best is the whitest, and cornered, with a light and hard skin or bark,
full of Pulpe unctious, and fatty not ranced: being put into water if it swim
it is to be cast away.

The Duration.
The seeds will keep good three years.

The inward use.
The seeds purge Phlegm and watery humors by vomit and siege: It is a specific
remedy against the Colic; It helps also the diseases of the breast and
hypoconders, opens the obstructions of the viscerous parts, and avails in the
Dropsy and Jaundies: Being made into a Loloch or licking Electuary, with Sugar
and Honey, a few Almonds, and Pine Kernels, it cleanses the lungs of Phlegm,
sticking therein wonderfully, causing it to be easily spit forth, it also
clears the voice, and increases sperme by the often use of it. With Honey it
is excellent against the Cough. Being bruised and strained into Milk it makes
it to curdle, and is useful to open and loosen the belly. Parrots do eat of
this seed, yet it does not loosen them at all.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Emulsions, in Tabulats, in Electuaries in Pulpe, etc.

An Emulsion or milk purging safely and gently.
Take of Mechoaehan, white Turbith, of each one ounce, Anni-seed, Fennel-seed,
Cinnamon, of each a dram, bruise them, and make a Decoction thereof. Take of
this Decoction eleven ounces, of sweet Almonds blanched half an ounce, of
Cinamon-water half an ounce, or five drams; make it into an Emulsion, or milkie
substance.

Tabulats purging, or square Cakes.
Take of Diagredium, Turbith, of each one ounce, of the Pulpe of Carthamus-seed
half a dram, Cinnamon, Ginger, species of Diatragacanthum frigidum, of each two
drams, Citron Pill, the Pulpe of preserved Quinces, of each a dram; of Sugar
nine ounces, of white Sugar Candy one ounce. Powder what is to be powdered, and
make Tabulats, or Cakes thereof, and dry them. The Dose is from a dram and a
half to three drams. Freitag. Aur. med. fol. 282.

Against the Jaundies.
Take of the Pulpe of Carthamus seeds a dram, Syrup of Wormwood an ounce, of
Succory water an ounce, mix them together and give it.

For the same.
Take of the flowers of Carthamus in powder a dram, give it in Hydromel, or
Water and Honey, or in Barley water.

The outward use.
The water of Carthamus is commended against wilde-fire, if clouts be dipped
therein and applied.

The hurtful quality.
There are two hurtful properties in Carthamus, the one, that it offends the
stomach, and provokes to vomit; to help this it must be given with Anni-seed,
Fennel-seed, Galingal, Cinnamon, Ginger, Mastick or such like. The other is that
it works but slowly, and stirs up the humors; to help this it may be given
with Cardamoms, Salgem and such like.

The Dose.
The Dose of the Pulpe is from a dram to two drams (though it be rarely given
by it self, because of its viscosity, or sliminesse.) In infusion from three
drams to six drams or more.

Of those Medicines that are made of Carthamus.
First, extract of Carthamus, 2 Syrup of Carthamus, 3 Electuary Diacarthamum, 4
Species of Carthamus, 5 The distilled water, 6 Olium e enico expressum [which
being taken with Muskadel is excellent against the Collick] 7 Oil of the seed
of Carthamus [three drams of which being taken with powder of Anniseed and
Cinnamon does purge phlegm as says Brassarolus.]

CHAP. XIV. De Cassia lignea, and Cinamomo.
Of Cassia Lignea and Cinnamon.
BEcause these are so little differing from each other, I shall join them
together, yet speak severally of their virtues: They are both barks of trees
brought to us from the East Indies.

The Names.
Cinnamon is called in Latin Cinnamomum and Cinamomum, in English, Cinnamome
and Cinnamon. I know no other names (in use) for the other but Cassia Lignea.

The Temperament.
Cinnamon is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the third-degree and dry
in the second.

Cassia lignea is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best sort.
The best Cinnamon is that which is of a reddish color, smelling fragrantly,
and of a sharp and biting taste; usually the thin barks or rindes are the best.

The difference between Cassia lignea and Cinnamon.
The Cinnamon rind is much bigger, the Cassia lignea is in very small rindes or
barks: besides there is a manifest difference in the taste, for the Cinnamon
has a rough taste, but the Cassia lignea is very slippery upon the tongue.

The Duration.
They will keep good eight or ten years, as some report, which I somewhat doubt
of, especially of Cinnamon.

The inward Use.
Cinnamon is of subtle parts, and very Aromaticall, it comfort the heart and
vital parts, corroborateth and strengthens the stomach, brain, nerves, and
other cold parts of the body: it eases the pains of the Wind Colic, provokes
the Courses and Urine, hastneth the birth: it preventeth and corrects
putrefaction of humors, resists poison, stays vomiting, and helps
nauseousnesse of the stomach: it is frequently used in Cardiack passions, or
passions of the heart, faintings of the spirits, and in trembling of the heart;
it causes sweetness of the breath, and brings a good color in the face; it
strengthens the retentive faculty of all the parts by drying up and consuming
the moisture thereof. It is used in the Dropsy and Cough proceeding from
moisture. In brief, it avails in all cold diseases of the head, stomach and
womb, and is most convenient for cold and moist bodies, and is much used in
Lasks, or Loosnesse of the body.

Note, That Cinnamon is most fragrant about the full of the Moon, and has the
best taste, and is then fittest for any medicine, especially for oil.

Cassia lignea comfort the Stomach, Liver, and all the principal parts,
opens obstructions or stoppings, disperseth gross humor, repelleth wind,
provokes urine, brings down the menses or terms in women, and does much
facilitate or hasten the birth.

The Use of Oil and Water of Cinnamon.
There is a Chymicall Oil drawn from Cinnamon, which is most excellent for
these Diseases. It comfort the Stomach, Brain, Heart, and all the principal
parts; it helps a stinking Breath, resists putrefaction, provokes the
menses, and helps Women in hard labors, eases the Cough arising from cold,
and all cold pains of the head: it is a singular help in fainting of the
spirits, and stays too much vomiting after the taking of Antimony, if two or
three drops thereof be taken in Mint-water. Good Cinamon-water has the same
virtues.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in Powder, in Potions, Electuaries, and in Pills.

A Powder to hasten the Birth.
Take of Cinnamon a dram, Saffron half a dram, Cassia lignea, two scruples,
make them all in powder.

Or,
Take Cinnamon, Saffron, of each a scruple, of Borax four scruples, make them in
powder, and give it in a little Mugwort-water.

A Potion to hasten the Birth.
Take of Cassia lignea, in powder, a dram, Saffron in powder, a scruple, syrup
of Mugwort half an ounce, Savin-water three ounces, mingle them together, and
give it.

Pills to hasten the Birth.
Take of Cassia lignea, or Cinnamon a dram, Castor six grains, Storax calamita,
half a scruple, Myrrh ten grains; make them into powder (adding of Savin in
powder a dram and a half) and with a little Honey, make a mass or lump for
Pills. Give them as need requires.

An Electuary against Fluxes of the Belly.
Take of Cinnamon in powder, two drams, old conserve of red Roses two ounces,
red Coral in powder, two scruples, with syrup of Quinces, make an Electuary,
of which take morning, evening, and before dinner, the quantity of a small Nut.

Note, That it is best to make Cinnamon in powder, only when you use it, and not
to keep it powdered.

The outward Use.
Cinnamon being mixed in Collyries (that is, Medicines for the eyes) quickens
the sight, and dries up the moisture thereof; mingled with Honey and Vinegar,
and the place noynted therewith, it helps Ring-Wormes, or Tetters, and takes
away spots or freckles. The powder is commended against clefts of the lips, and
other sores being put therein.

Oil of Cinnamon is commended for all green Wounds and Ulcers, if it be dropped
therein, and does much corroborate and warm cold parts of the body, being
noynted therewith, and mixed with Honey, it takes away spots from the face,
being therewith anointed.

Cassia lignea being cast on coals, and the smoke taken at the Nose, dries up
Rheumes and Catarrhes, that proceed from cold and moist humors. Also a
Suffumigation thereof, helps the pain of the Womb, and the stoppings
thereof. Being mixed with Honey, and applied, it dissolveth swellings and hard
tumors. A decoction of Cassia lignea, made with White Wind and Rose Water, is
commended against the stinking of the Arm holes, if the place be bathed
therewith, and the same is good to wash soar mouths and Gums.

The hurtful quality.
Cinnamon is hurtful to those that have hot and chollerick bodies, for in such
it inflames the Liver, and blood, and the inward parts: neither may such as
have Fevers be too busy with it, nor Women with Child. The same cautions are
to be used in taking of Cassia lignea. These best agree with cold and moist
bodies, and weak stomachs; and is more useful in Winter then in Summer.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder of either, is from a dram to a dram and a half. The Dose
of the Chymicall Oil, is two, three, or four drops, in any convenient liquor.
The Dose of the Cinamon-water is half a spoonful, or one spoonful at a time,
in Beer or such like.

Of those Medicines that are made of Cinnamon.
1. Cinnamon Water. 2. Tincture or Extract. 3. Elixir of Cinnamon. 4. Oil of
Cinnamon. 5. Salt of Cinnamon. 6. Balsum of Cinnamon. 7. Syrup of Cinnamon. 8.
Magister of Cinnamon 9. Species Diacinamomu.

Whether Cinnamon be rightly used to stay Women's Fluxes, or the Menstru s in
Women?
It is very common among many, that when Women are troubled with the
overflowing of the Menses or Courses, or any other Flux of the body, then to
prescribe Cinnamon; and they think it a great binder of the body. They usually
burn Claret Wine with Cinnamon, and give them Cinnamon in powder with Milk. Now
in that Flux of the body called Diarrhaea, and other Fluxes; I deny not but it
may be used, and that with good success, for it strengthens the stomach and
entralls, the imbecility or weakness whereof, is the cause of such Fluxes: but
to give it to Women to stay their Courses, is contrary to reason and
experience, for it will rather bring them down, and cause them more to flow,
as is before manifested. Therefore I would advise Women to leave this
inveterate custom.

CHAP. XV. De Cassia Fistula, Of Cassia in Canes.
CAssia Fistula is a black Cane, having a black substance therein, with seeds
like Peony-seeds. It was unknown to former Writers, or not regarded and
esteemed by them.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Cassia solutiva, Cassia, or Cassia Fistula: now it is
called Cassia as some think, from the Greek word (...), Quod coriaceum vocant,
because the Cods or Canes are like Leather; or as others conceive, from the
sweetness of the flowers, like unto Cassia aromatica, or Odorata. In English
it is called Pudding-pipe, because the Cod is like a Pudding.

The temperament.
Cassia is hot and moist in the first degree.

The b st kind.
The best sort of Cassia is that which is taken out of the most heavy Canes,
and that are fullest, and shine without; but such Canes as are light, and make
a sound or rattle, are not to be chosen, but to be rejected.

The Duration.
It will keep good in the Canes two or three years.

The inward use.
Cassia purges first choler, then Phlegmatic humors. It is profitable for
such as are troubled with hot Fevers, Pleurisy, Jaundise, or heat of the
Liver, mixed with convenient liquours. It is good for the heat of the Reins and
Kidneyes; it brings forth Gravel and the Stone; and is a good preservative
against the Stone, taken with a decoction of Licoris, or Parsley roots. It
profits in inflammations of the Lungs, Breast, and Trachea artery, or rough
artery, easing those parts very much. It tempers the heat of the blood, and
takes away the acrimony or sharpness of the blood and choler; and quenches
thirst in Fevers. It profits in the Quinsie, and in the running of the Reins,
with Licoris, Rubarbe, and Anni-seed, as also in sharp Rheumes and
distillations. It is a safe Medicine, and may be given to Women with Child, and
that at any time, either in the morning, before dinner, supper, Non diu ante
cibum exhibere debet, alias in nutrimentum ea abutitur natura. Sennert. instit.
f. 953.
or at night.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Boles, or in Potions, but the best way to take it is in a Bole.

A Bole.
Take of Cassia newly drawn, ten drams, Anni-seed, or Fennel-seed, in powder,
half a dram, with a little Sugar, make a Bole.

Or,
Take of Cassia newly drawn, one ounce, of the species of Hiera picra, a dram,
or two drams, mix them together, and make a Bole. Take it in the morning, and
within an hour after, take a mess of Broth, or some Posset Drink.

A Bole to purge Choler.
Take of the pulp of new Cassia, one ounce, of the pulp of Tamarinds, half an
ounce, mix them together, and take it as before.

A Bole purging Choler from the head.
Take of the pulp of Cassia new drawn, seven drams, of Electuary of the juice
of Roses, two drams, mix them together, and make a Bole.

A Bole purging Phlegm from the head.
Take of Agarick trochiscated, a dram and a half, Stoechados in powder, a
scruple, of Cassia newly drawn, an ounce, mix them together for a Bole.

A Potion.
Take of Cassia newly drawn, ten drams, of the decoction of Succory, and
Anni-seed three ounces, dissolve the Cassia, and make a Potion.

Or,
Take of Tamarinds one ounce and a half, or two ounces; infuse or steep it
eight or ten hours in Whey or Posset Drink, then strain it, and add to it of
Cassia newly drawn, seven drams.

The outward Use.
Cassia being outwardly applied to those that have the Gout, eases the pains
thereof: Also it is good to gargle with Cassia, to assuage and mitigate the
tumors and swellings of the Throat. It is used in Plasters, or Ointments,
against hot pimpels, and other eruptions, or breakings out of the skin, and to
take away the roughness of the skin.

A Liniment against the Gout, and arthriticall pains of Joynt-Gout.
Take of new Cassia two ounces, Ointment called Populeon, one ounce, with a
little Plantaine-water, make a Liniment, or thin Ointment. This is good in a
hot Gout.

The hurtful quality, with the correcting means.
Cassia is not to be given to such as have weak stomachs, nor windy bodies, nor
to such as are loose in their bodies: Therefore it is not safe to give it to
those that have their Hypochonders much troubled, or their Spleen swollen; nor
to such as have Iliack, and colic passion, nor to such as have Ulcers in
their Kidneyes or Bladder. It is also forbidden in the Palsy, because of its
moistness, and in the Gout. If the Belly be loose it may be given with a
little Rubarbe, or Myrobalanes. In weakness of the stomach mingle with it
Cinnamon or Mastich. In flatulent or windy bodies, give it with Anni-seed, or
sweet Fennel-seed. If the body be bound, you may give it with Oil of sweet
Almonds. The best and safest way to give it, is with some of the foregoing
correctors, or the like, and not alone by it self.

These things following are made of Cassia Fistula.
1. Cassiae flos, or the pulp of Cassia, or Cassia extracted. 2. Cassia
extracted for Glysters. 3. Cassia extracted with Seen. 4. Cassia extracted
without Seen. 5. Dia Cassia with Manna. 6. Extract of Cassia. 7. Diacatholicon.
8. Electuary Lenitive.

The Dose.
The Dose is from one ounce to an ounce and a half.

Whether Cassia be convenient in hot Fevers.
There are some that condemn the use of Cassia in Fevers, especially in
Burning Fevers, as in Tertians, and also in Malignant Fevers, and that by
reason of its dulcedinie and moisture, it may soon turn into Choler, and also
increase putrefaction: But seeing that most Authors Write, that it purges
Choler, and hot humors, I see no reason to condemn the use of it in hot
Fevers, nor in Malignant Fevers, for it is not given to alter, but to
evacuate humors, and especially if Tamarinds (or the like) be given with it.

Cinnamon, see Cassia lignea.

CHAP. XVI. De Cataputia minore, and de esula minore, seu Tithymalo pineo.
Of Garden-Spurge, and of Pine-Spurge, or Small esula.
GArden Spurge has one hollow whitish stalk as big as a finger; the leaves be
long and narrow, like the leaves of Willow, yielding milk, the Flowers are of a
pale yellow color. Pine syrup, or Small esula, has weak and tender stalks,
half a yard long, whereon grow many small, long and narrow pointed leaves, very
like the leaves of Tode-flax; at the top of the stalks grow yellow flowers.

The Names.
Pine spurge is called in Latin, Tithymalus pineus, esula, ezula and esula
minor.

Garden spurge is called in Latin, Cataputia minor.

The Temperament.
They are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Duration.
The Bark will keep a year or two, though it be best to have it fresh every
year.

The inward use.
The liquor or juice, the leaves, seeds, and roots, or barks, are in use.

All sorts of Spurge are of a hot, biting, and inflaming nature; the strongest
kind of Tithymale, or Spurge, is that of the Sea, for the least drop of it
being taken into the mouth, will so burn, heat, and inflame, that without
present remedy, it will endanger death. The milky juice of them is the
strongest worker; the seeds and leaves are next in quality thereto, and the
roots or barks are of most, of the same operation, but not so strong.

The juice of any Tithymale is a strong Medicine to purge the belly, and to
cause vomiting, and brings away tough phlegm, and chollerick humors. The
root is good for the Dropsy, being rightly prepared. The seeds of Garden
spurge are most in use. If you give five, seven, nine, or ten grains thereof,
at a time, they purge by stool and vomit, tough Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy,
and water; and is useful in the Jaundise, Iliack-passion, Palsy, and
Quotidian-Ague: And usually they swollow the seeds whole without breaking
either husk or kernel, for then they wo^k the more gently and weakly; but if
the husk be broken, and the kernells swallowed down whole, or chewed, or
bruised, and mixed with drink or Broth, they work more violently. The Milk
hereof is more violent then the Seeds or Kernells. The leaves being boiled in
fat Broth, work more safely, and somewhat more weakly: Three or four of the
leaves may be taken, being boiled in broth.

Small Esula purges strongly downward, both Choler and Phlegm, and eases the
hardness and pains of the belly, and swellings of the Breast. The seed and
root prepared helps the Dropsy, being carefully taken, and with good advise.
The leaves steeped a while in Vinegar, and afterward dried and made into
powder (which is the preparation of them) may be given to the weight of three
drams, says Diascorides, which is thought too much. The root (prepared as
aforesaid) is given likewise to the weight of two drams, says Diascorides, in
Mead, or Honeyed-water: but one dram must not be given without caution. The
seeds (says the former Author) may be taken to the weight of a dram, but seeing
nine or ten seeds of the Garden spurge, is a sufficient strong Medicine, it is
not safe to give so many of these: And of the juice or Milk, Diascorides
appoints a spoonful, being made into pills with flower, which is the
strongest of them all. The extract hereof purges more safely.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, Pills, Electuary, etc.

A Powder against the Dropsy.
Take of Esula prepared, as above written, five scruples; Cinnamon, Fennel-seed,
Anni-seed, Mastich, of each six grains; make them into powder, and give it, as
need requires.

Pills against the Dropsy.
Take of the bark of Ezula prepared as before, Myrobalan^ citrine, or yellow,
of each four parts, of Aloes five parts, make them in powder, or with the juice
of Fennel, or Endive, make a mass or lump for pills. The Dose is from a dram
to two drams and a half. Freitag. Aur med. fol. 413.

A Potion against the Dropsy.
Take of the essence of Esula, fifteen grains, Oil of Anni-seed, Oil of
Citron-pill, Oil of Cinnamon, of each one drop, of syrup of Citron-pill, and
Mint-water, of each half an ounce: mix them together, and make a Potion.

Or,
Take of the bark of Pine spurge, prepared, and in powder, half a dram; of the
juice of Fennel well clarified, one ounce, or two ounces, of White Wind, or
Posset Drink, three ounces; add a little Sugar, and make a Potion.

The external Use.
Esula minor, or small Tithymall, has a virtue to heal the bitings or
stingings of venomous Beasts, and Serpents. The milkie juice takes away Warts,
Corns, and Callous knobs in the flesh, (being first pared and cut away, and
then applied,) it is used also in running Scabs, and Sores, and to blemished
scars, and spots of the skin. The same mixed with Honey, causes the hair to
fall away, being applied, but it must not lie on long; and when you thus use
it, it is good to mix some Oil with it, for hereby it does less burn and heat:
being put into a hollow Tooth it takes away the pain thereof, but take heed it
touch not any other of the Teeth or Gums; it is not amiss to cover the parts
about with Wax to keep them from the said juice. It helps Fistulaes, and
corrupt and fretting Ulcers, and is good against hot swellings and Carbuncles,
and takes away the Disease in the Fundament, called a Fig, being a fleshy
substance growing there. The milk made up into Trosses or little Balls, with
the Meal of Beans or Pease, and kept dry, does serve all the year to use (as
occasion is offered) for the purposes aforesaid. It kills Fish if it be mixed
with such things as they will eat: but the seeds and milk being rightly used in
Baits, only amazeth Fishes, so that you may take them with your hands; and so
does the leaves of broad leaved Spurge, being cast into the water, causes the
Fish therein to rise up to the top thereof, where lying a while as half dead,
may be taken with ones hand.

The Water of Garden spurge takes away Corns on the Feet, being often washed
therewith; but first let them be cut, then dip linen clothes in the same, and
wash the place three or four times in a day: the same does cleanse the skin
from Freckles, Morphew, or any other discoloring, either used by it self, or
mixed with water of Bean-flowers, and Bastard Dittany: it helps the Itch
being gently washed therewith, and also foul Ulcers and sores.

The hurtful quality and correction.
All sorts of Spurges are heating and burning, being but outwardly used or
applied, they exulcerate the skin, and inwardly taken, they are excoriating
purgers, and very offensive to the heart, Liver, and stomach; they break the
Veins, excoriate the Guts, and inflame the whole body, whereby many times
Fevers are caused. To help that the heart and stomach be not hurt with the
same, we are to use therewith such things as are cordial, and comfort the
stomach; as Spikenard, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Mastich. To help the burning
quality thereof, we are to mix therewith such things as are of a glutinous
nature, as Gum Tragacanth, Bdellium, juice of Purslaine, and the muccilage of
the seeds of Fleawort. To prevent inflaming of the Guts, and that it cause not
Fevers, we are to mix with it such things as are cold and moist, as the juice
of Sowthistle, Nightshade, Endive, Purslaine, or seeds of Quince, infused and
boiled gently in Vinegar. These are not to be given but in very strong and
rustic bodies, and with good caution; it is safer to use them only outwardly,
and not to give them into the body, especially seeing we have so many other good
and safe Medicines. The lesser or smaller Esula is the best to use, but bad is
the best, as you have heard. In the gathering of the juice, great care must be
taken, that they touch not their face nor eyes with their hands.

The Dose.
The milkie juice is given (being well prepared) from three grains to six or
eight: the root or bark from five grains to ten, or twenty, in a strong body.

These things following are made of Esula.
First Extract of Esula, 2 Pills of Esula 3. The distilled water thereof.

CHAP. XVII. De Colocynthide, Of Coloquintida Apple.
COloquintida is the fruit of wild gourd, round like an apple, and white
having white seeds within.

The Names.
It is called in Hebrew (...) and (...) Pekaynim,, or Pekaim, and Pakkunoth.
Therefore in the 2 Kings 4.39. it is said And he found (...) gephen, vitem agri,
a wild Vine, and he gathered thereof (...) Pakkugnoth, i. e. Coloquintidas. It
is called in Arabic, (...) Handal, Handaal, and Chandel; from whence we have
Trochisci Alhandal, quasi ex Colocynthide. In Greek (...) and that because
(...) Alvum^novet. In Latin, Colocynthis, Coloquintida, Cucurbita Sylvestris,
a Cucumer ob affinitatem tum in forma, tum in qualitate; Also Fell terrae; and
mors plantarum, because it imbitters all herbs growing near it, or kills
them. In English, Apple of Coloquintida, and the bitter Gourd.

The Temperament.
Coloquintida is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best sort.
The best Apples are white and full ripe, well compacted, very bitter and
light, yea the lighter the better.

The Duration.
The Apples of Coloquintida may be kept four or five years.

The inward Use.
Coloquintida purges first Phlegm and viscous humors, then Choler both green
and yellow, as also yellow-water, and that with great violence from remote
parts, as from the brain, and the membranes thereof, from the nerves, musles,
joints, lungs and breast: therefore it is profitable for any kind of headache,
whether Cephalalgia, Cephalaea or Hemicrania, in the Epilepsie or
Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Swimming of the head, and in Fluxes of Rheum
flowing to the Eyes; Also in the Sciatica or Hip-gout, and in other diseases of
the Nerves and Joints. Also in Asthma and Dispnaea, a shortness of breath, and
old Coughs. Moreover it is much commended in the Colic, whether it proceed
from Phlegm or Wind, as also in the Dropsy, and kills worms. The seeds may
be used in the Yellow-Jaundies.

The inner white, soft, spungie substance, under the outward shell or rind, is
that only without any seed which is used.

The manner of administering it.
It is given chiefly in Pills and Trosses, rarely by decoction or infusion, yet
it is usual with the Vulgar to buy a ball of Coloquint (as they call it) and
boil it in Beer or Water, and brag how good a purge they can make for
themselves or friends, and that for the value of two pence or three pence, but
how dear they pay for it in the end daily experience does manifest.

Pills.
Take of species Hiera simplex a dram, Trosses Alhandal twelve grains, with a
little Syrup of Roses, make seven Pills, and take them in a morning fasting.

Pills against the Iliack passion.
Take of Coloquintida, Sagapenum of each ten drams, Scamony three drams,
dissolve the gums, and make the other in powder, then make them into a mass or
lump; if need require you may take a little honey to make them up.

An extract of the seeds of Coloquintida.
Take of the seeds of Coloquintida bruised, four ounces, Aquavitae a pint,
Aloes two ounces Scammony one ounce: Macerate or steep the seeds in the
Aqua-vitae three days, and strain it hard, and set it on the fire to
evaporate, which being done, add the rest in powder, stirring them well
together, till it become a fit mass for pills. The Dose is from ten grains to
fifteen. Freitag. Aur. Med. f. 337.

The external use.
A decoction of Coloquintida, made with Veniger, eases the pain of the Teeth,
if they be washed therewith. The powder thereof with Honey applied to the
Navill, kills worms. Being infused in Vinegar it cures the Morphew,
Leprosy, Elephansie, dry scurfe and scabs, if the places be often rubbed
therewith. A bath made of Coloquintida,, and the feet and other parts fomented
therewith brings down the Courses in Women. The juice boiled with
Hogs-greese and applied to the hip eases the Sciatica. An oil made of
Coloquintida and dropped into the ear, take's away the noise and singing
thereof, and is good against baldnes and falling of the hair.

Coloquintida is used in Glisters and Suppositories.

A Glister.
Take of the Pulpe of Coloquintida, two drams, Camomel flowers a handful,
Anniseed, Cuminseed, of each half an ounce: Make a decoction in fair water,
strain it, and in a pint of the decoction desolve honey of Roses oil of
Camomel, of each three or four ounces, and make a Glister.

A Suppository.
Take of Coloquintida in powder, a scruple species Hiera simplex half a dram,
Salgem half a scruple, with a sufficient quantity of Honey, make a Suppository.

A Ball made of Coloquintida, which purges only by smelling to it.
Take of Colocynthis and Esula, or pine spurge in powder, Aloes and Myrrh in
powder, of each a dram, with the juice of Coriander make two bals, to hold in
each hand one, and being warmed therewith, smell often to them.

The hurtful quality with the correcting means.
Coloquintida hurts the heart, liver and stomach by its strong operation: it
opens the mouths of the veins, whereby many times after the taking of it,
blood is voided both upward and downward; It also excoriats the bowels and
passages of the Urine, and brings great gripings and tearing pains. Therefore
it must not be given to women with child (for being but applied to the womb,
it kills the child) nor to children, aged persons, or such as are weak,
neither to any that have the Plurisie, Hectich Fever, or any inflammation. It
is not safe to give it alone, but being well corrected it may be given to
strong and rustic bodies. It is corrected with Hepaticall, Cardiacall,
Stomachicall, and other gentle means, as Tragacanth, oil of sweet Almonds,
Ginger or Mastich: Some add Bdellium, and other astringent things. But surely
those things that bind make the operation of the Medicine, afterward more
strong; for though the binding faculty of such things may hinder the operation
for a time, yet it will at length bring forth and work more violently.
Sagapenum is counted a good corrector of Coloquintida, because of it is clammy
faculty, whereby it preserves the bowels from gripings

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from five grains to ten, or fifteen.

These things following are made of Coloquintida.
First Pills of Coloquintida. 2 Pilulae Alhandal. 3 Extract of Coloquintida 4
Trosses of Alhandal. 5 Chimicall oil of Coloquintida. 6 Oil (by infusion) of
Coloquintida. 7 Wine and Vinegar of Coloquintida.

CHAP. XVIII. De Corallio Rubro, Of red Coral.
REd Coral is a hard stony substance, growing on the Rocks in the Sea.

The Names.
Coral is called in Latin, Corallium, Coralium, and Coralium, this Corallium
rubrum, in English, Red Coral.

The temperament.
Red Coral is cold and dry in the second degree.

The best kind.
The best is that which is smooth, clear and red, for the redder it is, the
better it is.

The Duration.
It will keep good ten or twenty years.

The inward Use.
Red Coral does dry, cool and bind, it strengthens the heart, stomach and
liver, purifieth the blood, and is therefore very useful in the Pestilence,
against venom, and all pestilent Fevers, and malignant diseases, it cheares
the heart, and is good against Melancholy, helps such as spit blood, or that
bleed at the mouth or the nose, as also stops the Flux of blood in man or
woman, and being taken in wine or other liquor frequ^ntly, it takes away the
hardness and stopping of the Spleen: it stays the Gonorrhaea, or running of
the reins in men, and the whites in women, helps conception by its binding
faculty, and is good for the stopping of of the Urine, and pains of the Stone
in the bladder, if the powder (when it is burnt) be taken in Whitewine or
Posset drink: the powder taken in Wine, o^ distilled Water brings rest to such
as have an Ague, and is good for such as have Cramps. It is much commended in
the falling sickness, or to prevent it, if a Child so soon as it is borne,
take ten grains thereof in black-Cherry-water, or in the Mothers mi^ke. Some
affirm that it causes an easy delivery of the birth; which fit do, it is by
a specific virtue, for experience does manifest it to be of a binding nature.

The Chymicall oil of Coral is commended against the Falling Sickness in
children and others, as also in all Fluxes of the belly, and spitting of blood.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Electuary powder, etc.

An Electuary against the Flux of the belly.
Take of red Coral in powder, three drams of Marme^^^de of Quinces two ounces
and a half, species Diamargariton frigidum two drams, with a sufficient
quantity of Syrup of Quinces, make an Electuary, take of it a little before
meat.

An Electuary against vomiting of blood, by reason of a bruise or fall.
Take of red Coral in powder a dram, conserve of red Roses, conserve of Comfry,
of each one ounce, B^le Armoniack washed in Rose water and in powder, Blood
stone in powder, of each a dram, Acacia, Myrtle-Berries, of each a dram, Sugar
Pellets half an ounce, with an ounce of Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, make an
Electuary. The Dose is three drams, or half an ounce, with red Wine in the
morning and before meat.

A Powder against Ruptures.
Take of Myrtle-berries, Cinnamon and Nutmeg, of each two drams, of Knot-grasse
dry, half an ounce, seeds of Plantaine and Purslaine, of each three drams, and
the seeds of Garden Cresses, a dram, of red Coral a dram and a half; make all
into powder, adding so much Sugar as will make it sweet. The Dose is from half
a dram to a dram in red Wine, every morning or, second morning for a Months
space if need require.

A Powder against the Flux of the belly.
Take of red Coral a scruple, roots of Tormentil two scruples, Mirrhe a
scruple, Gum Tragacanth a dram, Plantaine-seeds half a dram, Dragons blood a
dram, trosses of Spodium a dram, Bole Armoniack and Harts-horne burnt, of each
a dram; make them into powder. The Dose is a dram in Plantaine-water.

The outward Use.
It helps sore Gums and Ulcers in the mouth, and heals up soul hollow
Ulcers in other parts, and fills with flesh, and is used in medicines for the
eyes, to stay the Flux of Rheum, and takes away the heat and redness thereof,
by cooling and drying up the moisture thereof: it fastneth loose teeth, and
makes them white, and helps to breed teeth in Children, the gums being rubbed
therewith, and some hang it about their neck of such as have the
Falling Sickness.

A Powder to white the Teeth.
Take red Coral, Brick, of each half an ounce, make them into powder, and take
some of it, lay it on a course linen cloth, and rub your teeth therewith.

For bleeding at the Nose.
Take of red Coral in powder half an ounce of Bole Arminick, in powder an
ounce; with the juice of Sheapherds purse and lint or tow make Tents, and put
them up into the nostrils.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given too often, where the body is very costive or hound.

Of those things that are made of red Coral.
First, Estence, of Tincture of Coral, 2 Chymicall oil or liquor of Coral. 3
Flores Coralliorum. 4 Olium Coralliorum succinatum [good in the
Falling Sickness and Apoplexy, if three or four drops be given in any
convenient liquor.] 5 Syrup of Coral simple and compound. 6 Magister of Coral.
7. Salt of Coral. 8 Diacorallion.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a scruple to a dram.

CHAP. XIX. De Cornu cervin, et Ebore, Of Harts-horne and Ivory.
THese being of some affinity, I shall speak of them in one Chapter.

Ivory is the Elephants tooth, and Hartshorn is generally known.

The Names.
Harts-horne is called in Latin Cornu-eervi, or Cornucervinum. Ivory is called
in Latin, Ebor and Ebur.

The Temperament.
They are cold and dry in the first degree.

The best kind.
The best sort is the whitest.

The Duration.
They will keep good many years.

The inward use.
Hartshorn resists putrefaction, provokes sweat, and is very cordial; It
is chiefly used in the small Pox, Measles, putrid and Malignant Fevers, and in
such like diseases where sweating is needful. It is good in Fluxes of the
belly, spitting of blood, Jaundies and pain of the bladder, taken with Gum
Tragacanth, it stays the flowing of the womb.

Burnt Harts-horne kills worms, resists putrefaction, helps the Colic,
stops the Flux of the belly, and provokes sweat.

Ivory does strengthen the vicerous parts, stays the Whites in Women, is
useful in the Jaundies, drives away Worms, eases pains of the Stomach, and
does wonderfully open obstructions or stoppings.

Some commend it against barrenness, and say it makes Women fruitful, but it
rather hinders fecundity and conception then helps it.

The manner of administering them,
They are given in Powder, in Electuary, in Decoction, etc.

A Powder against the Jaundies.
Take Parsley-seed, Nettle-seed, Nutmeg, shavings of Ivory, Harts-horne burnt,
of each half a dram, make all into powder. Give half a dram of it at a time,
in White Wind, or Posset drink, for a week or more if need be.

A Powder to expel worms.
Take of Worm-seed an ounce, Lupines half an ounce, Worme-wood dry, two drams,
Hearts horn burnt, a dram and a half. Make them into powder, and give it from
a Scruple to a dram.

Take of Purslane-seed, and Lettuce-seed, of each two drams, Seen three drams
and a half, Hearts horn burnt, half an ounce of Dittany five drams, make a
powder thereof. The Dose is from half a dram to a dram. Note that the Seen is
to be infused in strong Wine Vinegar, one night, and afterward to be dried.

An Electuary against the Flux of the Belly.
Take of conserve of red Roses, two ounces, species of Aromaticum Rosatum, a
dram, Bole Armonack in powder, and red Coral in powder, of each a dram, Hearts
horn burnt in powder, two scruples, with syrup of Quinces, make an Electuary;
Give of it as much as a small Nut, in the morning, before dinner, and at night.

An Electuary against the Pestilence.
Take shavings of Harts-horne, Bole Armoniacke, Sorrell-seeds of each two
drams; yellow Sanders half a dram, Saffron in powder, a scruple; Conserve of
red Roses, Conserve of Wood-Sorrell of each two ounces, Conserve of Borage and
Sage-flowers, of each six drams, with Syrup of Wood-sorrell, make a moist
Electuary, and take so much as a Chestnut at a time, once or twice a day, if
need be.

A Gellie to strengthen such as are weak.
Take Harts-horne and Ivory, of each one ounce, boil them in a quart of water,
till it come to a jelly (which you may soon know by setting some to cool) then
strein it, and add Sugar, Rose Water, and a little juice of Lymonds, and boil
it gently a while, then keep it for your use. Take often seven or eight
spoonfulls of it warm.

The outward use.
Harts-horne burnt, and mixed in Plantaine water, is a good Medicine for Ulcers
of the eyes, and to stay defluxions thereof. It makes the Teeth white, being
rubbed therewith.

The shavings of Harts-horne, being burnt, the smell thereof drives away
Serpents, and venomous Creatures. Being made warm in Vinegar, and the Gums
washed therewith, it eases Children that breed Teeth. The ashes of Harts-horne
burnt, applied to the head with Wine, is good against the Scurfe and Dandruffe
of the head, among the hairs, as Pliny says, Not. hist. lib. 28. fol. 324.

The shavings of Ivory in powder, being mixed with Honey, takes away the
duskish spots that appear in the Visage, if the face be therewith anointed.
Also the dust thereof which the File or Saw does make, in Filing or Sawing,
does cure the white Flawes or Impostumations breeding at the root of the Nails.
Plin. Not. Hist. fol. 130

The Dose.
Burnt Harts-horne is given from five grain^ to twenty; Magister of Harts-horne
is given from half a scruple in any convenient liquor.

Ivory is given from half a scruple to a scruple, or to a scruple and a half.

Of such things as are made of them.
Of Harts-horne are made, 1. Magister. [Which is an excellent Diaphoretick, for
it expels all obnoxious and filthy humors, by the pores, Grulingius.
Florileg. fol. 209.
and is useful in Fevers, Pestilence, Scab, Dysenterie, or Bloody Flux,
Dropsy, and Stone.] 2. Distilled Water. 3. Liquor, or Spirit. 4. Oil. 5.
Salt. 6. Burnt Harts-horne. 7. Extract thereof.

Of Ivory. 1. Ivory Burnt. 2. Magister of Ivory.

CHAP. XX. De Costo. Of Costus-root.
COstus is a root brought from India and Arabia, as Authors say, of a brownish
color, having a rind on the outside.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Costus, and in English Costus.

The temperament.
Costus is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Kinds.
Some make three sorts, others two sorts, bitter and sweet, but we have but one
sort that I have seen of late.

The best sort.
The best is that which has a good sent, whitish, light, bitter, and
aromatic, having a rind like Cinnamon, but thicker, not old, nor worm-eaten.

The Duration.
It will keep good five or six years.

The inward Use.
It hea^s the body potently, expels wind, helps slow concoction hinders
corruption of the meat, eases the Colic coming of Wind and Phlegm, kills
broad Worms of the belly, provokes the Courses, and Urine, helps to cleanse
the womb from impurity, and helps conception. It is good against the pain of
the breast, heals Ruptures, cures Convulsions, and pains of the side,
stirs up Venery, taken with Wine and Honey, cures venom, and the stinging
of venomous Beasts, therefore it is used in Antidotes. It is good in the
Dropsy, Gout, Palsy, and takes away the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, Electuary, Trosses, Pills, etc.

Trosses against the Hickop.
Take of Costus, Saffron, Roses, Mastich, Spikenard, in powder, of each half
an ounce, Asarum in powder, two drams, Aloes and Opium of each a dram; with the
juice of Fleawort, make little Trosses. Take a dram at a time. Stocher. prax.
cap. 32. fol. 166.

The outward use.
It is used with Oil to annoint the body, before the cold fit of Agues, to
warm it, as also against the coldness and weakness of the finews, and the
Sciatica, or Hip-Gout. Used with Water and Honey, it amendeth the discoloring
or blemishes of the skin; it helps the Mother, and cold Diseases of the Womb,
as well by bathing as suming. Being made into powder, and cast into moist
Wounds and Sores, it dries up the moisture thereof.

The hurtful quality.
Hot and dry bodies must not be too busy with Costus, for that is proper only
for cold and moist bodies.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a dram to a dram and a hal^e.

Compounds made of Costus.
1. Electuary Caryo ^ostinum. 2. Pilu^^e Mato costinae. 3. Oil if Costus.

CHAP. XXI. De Croco. Of Saffron.
SAffron is a Drug so common, that it is needless to describe it.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Crocus, and Crocum, in English Saffron.

The Temperament.
Saffron is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

The best kind.
The best is that which is new, well colored, and has the tops of it a little
white in the very end; long, tough, not soon brayed, of a most fragrant smell,
which being moistened dies the hand, and being tasted, it colors the
spittle, and staineth the teeth.

The Duration.
It will keep good (says Platearius) five years, if it be kept in a bag of
Leather, but Pliny says, it is best to keep it in a box of horn. Plin. Nut.
lib. 21. cap. 20.

The inward use.
Saffron is profitable for the Head, Stomach, Heart, Liver, Spleen, Bladder,
Womb, Animal, Vital, and Natural spirits. It is useful in cold Diseases of
the Brain and Nerves, quickens the memory and senses, does much comfort the
heart, and recreateth the spirits, and makes them cheerful that use it;
therefore it is called Corhominis, the heart of man; and when we see a man
over-merry, we have a Proverb, Dormivit in sacco croci, he has slept in a bag
of Saffron. It expells venomous vapors from the heart, and therefore is very
useful in the Plague, Pestilence, and Small Pox, strengthens the stomach,
preserves the entralls, helps concoction, and natural heat; it is very
profitable for the Lungs and Phthifis, or consumption of the Lungs and
shortness of the breath, therefore by some it is called Anima pulmonum, the
soul of the Lungs. It is good in the Pleurisy, opens the stoppings of the
Liver and Gall, therefore is useful in the Jaundise, and against Melancholy,
provokes Urine and Venus, hastneth Childbirth: is procures a good color to
them that use it, and drives away drunkenness, as Authors say; but I rather
believe it hasteneth drunkenness, by fuming up to the Brain; for it is apparent
that it provokes sleep and drowsinesse. It is profitable in fits of the Mother,
especially the tincture thereof. It is best for old persons, such as are
phlegmatic, and melancholic, and that in the winter season.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, Potions, etc.

A Powder to bring away the Birth or Afterbirth.
Take Saffron, Cinnamon, of each a dram, make them in Powder, and give it in
Posset Drink.

Or,
Take of Saffron a scruple, of Cassia lignea, a dram, make them into Powder,
and give it as before.

A Potion for the same.
Take of Saffron in powder, a dram, of Mithridate two scruples, or a dram,
dissolve them in sweet Wine, and give it.

Against shortness of breath.
Take of Saffron in powder, a scruple, of Musk in powder, a grain; give them
in Wine.

Against a Rheum that is ready to suffocate; and shortness of Breath.
Take of the juice of Ocymum, or Basil, half an ounce; of Saffron in powder,
a scruple; Musk a grain, mix them together, and take it.

To expel the Small Pox, or Measells.
Take of Saffron in powder, five grains, ten grains, or more, give it in
Posset Drink.

The outward Use.
It is outwardly used against the Gout, to ease the pain thereof, being mixed
with the yelk of an Egg, and Oil of Roses, and applied. A Cataplasme, or
Pultis, made of Saffron, Milk, and the crumbs of Bread, being applied,
mollifieth Tumors and Aposthumes. It eases soar eyes, and blood-shotten,
being used with red Roses, and the white of an Egg. Being mixed with red
Rose Water, and Woman's milk, it preserves the eyes from the Small Pox, and
Measles; it is used against Erysipelas, or Wildfire, and inflammations: it
helps deafness if it be mixed with Oil of bitter Almonds, and put into the
ear warm; or dip black Wool in some of it, and put it into the ears. It kills
the Itch, and is used in Pultisses, for the Matrix and Fundament, to ease the
pain thereof, and also for old Swellings, and Aches.

Against a vehement pain of the head.
Take Saffron, Gum Arabicke, Euphorbium, Myrrh, and Nutmeg, in powder, of each
two drams, mix them with the white of an Egg, and apply it to the Forehead
and Temples.

A Collyrie for the pains of the eyes, and to stay defluxion of humors.
Take of Saffron two drams, red Roses half an ounce, Gum Arabic three drams,
Opium and Spikenard, of each a dram, Rose Water, or Plantaine-water, half a
pint, or more; make a Collyrie, and wash the eyes often with it.

An Ointment against the Piles, and the Disease called a Fig in the Fundament.
Take the yelk of an Egg, and an ounce of Oil of Roses, beat them well
together, then add white Sugar, and white Sugar Candy in powder, half an
ounce, Saffron in powder, two scruples. Apply it to the Fundament, and if the
pain be more inward, dip a piece of linen cloth in it, and put it up.

The hurtful quality.
Saffron causes headache, offends the brain and senses, brings drowsinesse,
and hurts the fight: it causes a loathing of the stomach, and takes away the
appetite, and provokes laughter, especially being taken in too great a
quantity. Vid. Rudolph. Camerar. syllog. memorab. med. cent. 3. cap. 44. fol.
167.

Some write, that if two or three drams thereof be taken; it brings death. It
is not safe to give it to women with Child.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a scruple to a scruple and a half, but for Children the Dose
must be less.

Of such Medicines as are made of Saffron.
1. Tincture or Essence of Saffron. 2. Extract of Saffron. 3. Chymicall Oil.
4. Trosses of Saffron. 5. Crocomagma. 6. Species Diacrocuma. 7. Elect. de Ovo.
8. Oleum crocinum. 9. Emplastrum Oxycroceum.

CHAP. XXII. De Curcuma. Of Turmericke.
TVrmerick is a root like Ginger, but yellow like Saffron, within and without,
and not so flat as Ginger, but rounder, hot in the taste, and bitterish, but
nothing so bitter, being fresh by reason of the moisture in it, as when it is
dry.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Cyperus Indicus, Crocus Indicus, and Curcuma, in
English, Turmerick.

The temperament.
Turmericke is hot and dry in the second degree, or (as some say) in the third
degree.

The best sort.
The best roots are those that are yellowest and soundest, not worm-eaten.

The duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward Use.
It is very effectual to open the stoppings of the Stomach, Liver, Gall,
Bladder, and Womb, it is much used against the yellow Jaundise, and is very
good in the Dropsy, and Green-sicknesse, for it opens obstructions very
much, and helps to bring down the menses, or women's courses.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, Pills, Decoction, etc.

The outward use.
It is outwardly used to take away the hair, and is put into those Medicines
that are made for the eyes, and for the Itch, and Scab, if some juice of
Oranges, and the Oil of the Cocar, or Indian Nut, be mixed with it, as Gartias
says. Gart. ab horto, Aromat. hist. l. 1. cap, 39.

It is much used to color wooden dishes, cups, and such like, in stead of
Saffron. The Indians use it much both to color and season their meats and
broths, because it is cheaper then Saffron.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given to hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
In powder, the Dose is from a scruple to a dram, in decoction, from a dram to
two drams, or more.

Cuscutha,
see Epithymum;

CHAP. XXIII. De Cyclamine. Of Sow-Bread.
CYclamen or common Sow-bread is an herb that has leaves like Ivy, or
Asarabacco, only the upper part of the leaves have here and there white spots,
and that side of the leaf which is next the ground, is of a purple color; the
root is round like Turnep, black without, and white within, with many small
threads or strings.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Cyclaminus, Cyclamen, Arthanita, and Panis porcinus,
in English Sow-bread.

The temperament.
Sow-bread is hot and dry in the third degree.

The duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
Sow-bread purges tough phlegm and water, and is effectual to take away
obstructions or stoppings of all the inward parts, helps the Collicke coming
of thick phlegm. It is useful in any Headache, and in cold Diseases of the
Brain and Nerves: it is profitable in shortness of breath, in the Jaundise, and
expells choler by sweat, opens stopping of the Liver, Spleen, Reins,
Bladder, and Womb, also cleanses the impurity thereof, brings down the
courses violently, provokes Urine, opens the mouths of the vessels, and
provokes the Hemroids, helps the Dropsy, and any hard swelling of the Spleen
or Liver. Being drunk with wine it expels poison and venom. The wine
wherein Cyclamen has been boiled, does help the stopping of the Spleen. The
root (says Pliny) if it be put into a cup of wine, it makes as many drunk as
drink thereof. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 25. cap. 9. fol. 229.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, in powder, and in juice.

The outward use.
The root boiled in Oil of bitter Almonds, or Oil of Camomill, and dropped
into the ears, cures Deafness, and Noise in the ears: or the root bruised with
Peach-kernells, and bitter Almonds, and infused two or three days in a little
Aqua vitae, then press out the juice or creamy substance, and drop some of it
into the ears. It cures foul Ulcers and Fistulaes, and takes away the hardness
thereof, consumes proud flesh, dissolveth all cold swellings, and scrophulous
tumors. The juice put up with wool opens the Hemroids, and moves to the
stool strongly. The same helps the Pin and Web in the eye, being infused with
Honey, and put in: the juice snuffed up purges the brain from offensive
humors; but be not too busy with it, because it is a sharp Medicine. If the
belly be bathed with the juice, it will provoke to stool, and that strongly,
and also kills Worms. The root being applied provokes the courses: it
cleanses all deformities of the skin, as freckles, and spots, and the marks of
the Small Pox, and Measles. The juice or the decoction thereof with Vinegar,
takes away the falling of the hair, if the place be bathed therewith. Applied
to the region of the Spleen, it eases the hardness thereof: the juice mixed
with Honey, or Plantaine-water, helps all manner of fores in the Mouth, or
Throat, or the Toothache, being washed therewith. A decoction thereof heals
Wounds, the running sores in the head, bones, or members, out of joint, Kibes
or Chilblaines, and the Gout: the root bruised and applied with Honey, draws
forth splinters, thorns, and pieces of loose bones: the root in powder, mingled
with Honey, helps the fleshinesse that grows in the Nose, if it be
therewith anointed; but it is best to mix other things with it, because of its
sharpness. Bruised and applied to the biting of any venomous Beast, it helps
the same. Being burnt, and the ashes mixed with Vinegar, and applied to the
Hip, it helps the Hip-Gout. The leaves laid to the Navill, and secret parts,
does much help Women in Travel, or the root hanged about them in their
Travel. The distilled water from the root (says Matthiolus) snuffed up into
the Nostrills, stays the bleeding thereof wonderfully; and if you give six
ounces of the water to drink with an ounce of Sugar, it will stop the blood
that comes from the breast, stomach, or liver, or if any vein be broken in
them. Matthiol. in lib. 2. Diascor. 159. fol. 407. The juice mingled with
Vinegar helps the falling down of the fundament, if it be anointed
therewith. The juice of Sow-bread, and the juice of Plantaine (of each a like
quantity) mixed together, and Aloes, Myrrh and Olibanum added thereto,
stops the bleeding of the nose, if it be applied to the nostrils and
forehead.

An Errhine to purge the Head.
Take of the root of Sow-bread a dram, of Elaterium a Scruple, macerate or
steep them in four ounces of Water and Honey one night. Put up Tents (dipped in
the same) into the Nose, but beware of too frequent use thereof. The dry powder
is not safe to snuff up, without it be mingled with some other things.

The hurtful quality and correction.
Sow-bread by reasons of its acrimony and biting faculty, hurts the Liver, and
brings gnawing pains to the stomach, neither must it be used inwardly without
much caution. It is dangerous for pregnant women, or women with child to meddle
with this herb, least they miscarry, for it destroys the birth; but not so
dangerous (as some Authors fabulously report) for Women to stride over, or but
to touch it. It is not to be given without correcting help. Now the correcting
means are Mel Passulatum, or Honey of Raisons, Manna, Mastick, Syrup of
Quinces, or with species Diarrhodon Abbatis, or with Oxymel and Hydromel; or in
powder it may be given with Chicken broth, or Veale broth.

The Dose.
The Dose in substance is from a dram to a dram and a half. The juice is given
from a dram to two drams or three drams.

Of such Medicines as are made of Sowbread.
First, Vnguentum de Arthanita majus. 2 Vng. de Arthanita minus.

CHAP. XXIV. De Dactylis, Of Dates.
DAtes are long and round fruits growing in the East and West Indies, and in
other places, from whence we have them: They abound in Indiae, Syria, Egypt,
Arabia, and such hot places.

The Names.
They are called in English Dates The best are called Cariotae, and
Phaenicobalanis, which were also called Regiae, because they were fittest for
the diet of Kings.

The Temperament.
Dates are hot and dry almost in the second degree, and astringent, or binding,
especially when they are not through ripe; being through ripe they are hot and
moist in the second degree, some say hot and moist in the first degree.

The best sort.
The best Dates are such as are Yellowish in color, sweet, ripe within, new,
incorrupt, not worme-eaten, and having their caps on, therefore called Cap
Dates, for if the Caps fall off they soon decay.

The Duration.
Dates will not keep good long, especially in the Summer time, some will keep
half a year, or longer.

The inward Use.
Dates yield a gross and clammy and fatty, or impingnating nourishment,
therefore they are used against Consumptions, and wasting of the body: they
help the hoarsenesse and roughness of the throat, the sharp Cough by reason
of sharp rheum falling on the breast and lungs. The decoction of them taken
alayeth the force of hot Agues, and stays spitting of blood, the pain in the
stomach and bowels by reason of a Flux; and boiled in water and honey, and
taken does refresh the spirits: they somewhat provoke to Venery: the decoction
helps the weakness and pains in the back and bladder; they strengthen the
weakness of the Liver and Spleen, being mixed with other convenient medicines:
They are used in broth's against Consumptions, and pining diseases, and are
counted restorative, especially the sweet ones. Dry Dates being eaten do stop
the belly, and stay vomiting of women with child, and help against
miscarying: they stay women's courses, and the bleeding and falling down of the
Fundament and Piles, being taken in red Wine.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in brothes, Decoctions, and Electuaries.

A decoction against the Cough, shortness of breath, and the Plurisie.
Take of Dates, six in number, Figs four, French Barley an ounce, Raisons of
the Sun stoned, an ounce, Sebesten and Jujubes of each fifteen, Licoris half
an ounce, Maiden-haire, Hysop, Scabious, Coltsfoot, of each half a handful:
Cut the herbs and fruits, and bruise the Licoris, then boil them in three
pints of spring water to a quart, strain it, and drink of the clearest,
morning and evening, seven or eight spoonfulls warm.

The outward Use.
Dates made into a Poultis alone, or with other things, and applied to the
stomach and belly, stays the vomiting of Women with child: The Decoction of
Dates, or the leaves of the Date-tree makes the haireblack, being often used,
and stays fretting Ulcers. Being mixed with Wax and Saffron, they help the
black and blew marks remaining after stripes or blows, and reduces the skin
to its natural color. Date stones being burnt and washed serve instead of
Spodium to bind and restrain the fluent humors into the eyes, and to consume
the Pin and Web in them, and to dry up Pushes, being used with Spikenard, it it
stays the falling of the hair from the eye brows, being mingled with wine,
and used it helps any Excressences of the flesh, as Wens and such like, and
brings foul Ulcers to Cicatrising, and stays the spreading of Ulcers. A
Poultis made of them and applied helps any luxation or joints out of place,
and they are used in astringent, Cataplasmes, or Pultises.

The hurtful quality.
They breed ill and gross humors, and thick blood in the body, and are hard
of concoction (especially in such as are of a hot constitution) bring the
headache, obstruct the Liver, and breed wind, therefore they are not to be
used by such as are troubled with the headache, Colic or hot Livers.

These Medicines following are made of Dates.
First, the Electuary Diaphoenicon mesuae. 2 Diaphoenicon solidum. 3
Electuarium resumptivum. 4 Lohoch e Pino. 5 Lohoch sanum and experium.
Diagredium seu Scammonium.

CHAP. XXV. De Dictamno Cretico, Of Dittany of Creete or Candy.
DIttany of Crete is an herb much like unto Pennyroyal, but has greater
leaves and hoary, covered over with a soft down, and white woollen Cotton,
growing in Candy.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Dictamum and Dictamus, or Dictamnum creticum, also
Dictamnus creticus, and it is so called a dicte promontorio Cretae, because
plenty of it grows there in that mount, in English, Dittanie and Dittanie of
Candy.

The temperament.
Dittany is hot and dry in the third degree, of a biting nature, especially
being green.

The best kind.
The best is that which is newest, white, and not too full of strings.

The Duration.
It will keep a year or longer.

The inward Use.
Dittany provokes the Courses, hasteneth the birth, and brings away the dead
child and after birth. It profits those that have the Dropsy and Spleen
swollen. The juice drunken with wine is a present remedy for those that are
bitten or stung by any venomous creature; nay the herb is so effectual
against the poison of all beasts that are venomous, that the very smell drives
them away, or if they do but touch the herb. The powder being mixed with honey
and taken, eases the Cough an kills Worms, and a decoction thereof taken,
is profitable in the Jaundies. The distilled water is commended against the
Pestilence, if three ounces be drank morning and evening, and six ounces
thereof against Venom: also three ounces thereof taken in a morning is
profitable against the Stone.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder Electuary, etc.

Powder to bring away the dead Child.
Take of Dittany of Crete a dram, of Saffron five grains, make them in powder,
and give it in wine.

An Electuary against Venom.
Take Dittany of Candy, round Birth-worth in powder, of each half an ounce,
with six ounces of honey, make an Electuary. The Dose is from a scruple to a
dram in wine, or Carduus water.

The outward Use.
A Pessarie made of the juice and the powder brings away the dead child, and
after birth, being applied. A Bath or decoction made thereof and used all over,
cures the Jaundies. The juice mixed with the powder help's the Uvula fallen,
being nointed therewith, also the juice mixed with woman's milk takes away the
pain of the ears being put therein. The root of Dittany and Acorus root in
powder, being snuffed up into the nostrils purges the brain; The powder of
Ditanie and Castor mixed with the juice of Rue, and put up into the nose is
good for those that have the falling-sicknes. If a weak member be rubbed with
the juice thereof, it strengthens the same. It draws forth thorns or
splintes out of the feet or other parts being applied. It is reported that the
wild Goats in Candy being wounded by the hunters with arrows, do by eating
this herb drive them forth. The juice is a present remedy for all wounds made
with iron, beeng put therein, it does mundifie and cleanse the same, especially
it is commended for wounds made with venomous weapons. The juice has a purging
faculty being anointed or applied with Barley meal.

The hurtful quality.
Beware of giving it to Women with child, for it will soon cause them to
miscarry; it is not for hot chollerick and dry bodies, nor to be much used in
hot seasons.

The Dose.
The powder is given from a scruple to a dram.

Of such things as are made of Dittanie.
First, Distilled water of Dittanie. 2. Diadictamnum.

Ebor seu cornu cervinum. Ebulus, seu Sambucus.
CHAP. XXVI. De Elaterio, Of Elaterium or the juice of wild. Cucumber.
ELaterium is the juice of wild Cucumber dried.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Elaterium and Elacterium.

The Temperament.
Elaterium is hot and dry in the second degree, or (as some hold) in the third.

The best kind.
The best Elaterium is that which is whitish (...) gray, light and bitter in
taste.

The Duration.
Threophrastus. lib. 9. cap. 14. says, that a Physician kept some Elaterium
that was two hundred years old, which notwithstanding was of much virtue. I
have kept some seven years, and longer; and I conceive that (if it be well
prepared and kept close from the air,) it may keep ten years.

The inward use.
Elaterium purges Phlegm, Choler, but chiefly water from the Abdomen, or
belly, from the brain, joints, nerves and veins. It is profitable therefore
in the Dropsy, Green-sicknesse, and joint- Gout, in the headache, whether
Hemicrania or Cephalaea, in the Falling Sickness, Gout, Shortness of breath,
Jaundies, obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, stoppings of the Courses and
Hemrods, as also in the Palsy and Quinsey.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Pills, Powder, in Boles, and in Potions.

Pills against the Dropsy.
Take of Pills called Alephanginae a scruple, Elaterium three grains, or four
in a very strong body. Mix them together and make Pills; Give them with
Physical observation. Massaria, fol. 481.

Or,
Take of Pills of Rubarbe two scruples, Pills Aggregative a scruple and a half,
Elaterium three grains, with the juice of Ireos make pills.

Or,
Take Pills of Rubarbe Agarick trochiscated, and in powder of each a scruple,
Rubarbe in powder half a scruple, Elaterium three grains, with the juice of
Wormwood, make Pills, and take them as before.

Pills purging water and phlegm from the joints.
Take Pills Alephanginae half a scruple, Pills Aggregative, and Pills of
Hermodactyls of each a scruple, of Elaterium two or three grains, with a little
extract of Wormwood make pills thereof, give these only to strong bodies.

A Powder against the Dropsy.
Take of Mechoachan in powder two scruples and a half, speci^ of Diaturbith
(...) ^ubarbe half a scruple, Elaterium two or three grains, A^^^^^^ five
grains, Mastick three grains, make a Powder hereof.

Or,
Take of Elaterium 6 grains, of Soldanella or Sea-bindweed, Ginger of each a
scruple, Galangal, Cloves and Cinnamon, of each ten grains, make a powder hereof
for two Doses, give it in any convenient liquor.

A Bole.
Take of Elaterium two grains, Diagredium two grains, with a little conserve
of Roses make a Bole.

A Potion.
Take of Seen two drams, Polypodium of the Oak three drams, Damaask Prunes
fix, Anniseed, sweet Fennel-seed, Licoris bruised, of each a dram; bruise the
Polypodium, and make an infusion in strong Beer, strain it, and add of Syrup
of Roses laxative one one ounce of Elaterium two gains, make a Potion.

The external use.
Elaterium boiled with Barley-meal and the yolke of an Egg or Eggs, being
applied to Imposthumes, ripeneth them and brings them to maturity, and
applied with Terpentine it breaks them. Also being mingled with Honey and Goats
dung, it dissolveth white swellings, struma'es and other hard tumors, if it be
applied thereunto. Being mingled with Beane-flower and the juice of Fumitory,
it takes away spots and freckles of the face. Elaterium boiled with the oil of
Lillies and Linseed-oyle cures the Hemorrhoides that are much swollen. An oil
made thereof is profitable for the nerves, Palsy, and trembling of the hands,
and being put into the ears, it cures deafness. It brings down Women's
Courses that are stayed, and kills th the birth if it be applied to the
secret parts.

A Plaster against the Dropsy.
Take of the root of wild Cucumbers bruised a pound, macerate, or steep it in
a sufficient quantity of Vinegar of Squils for the space of four and twenty
hours, then add of Honey clarified two pound, boil them to the thickness of a
Cerote, then add of Cummin-seed in fine powder, four ounces, make a Plaster,
and apply it to the belly warm.

An Ointment for the Dropsy.
Take of the juice of wild Cucumber, and of the juice of Walwort, of each three
ounces, oil of Sesanum seeds, oil of Orris, of each two ounces, Wax an ounce
and two drams, make an ointment, according to art, with which annoint the belly
morning and evening warm.

The hurtful quality with the correcting means
Elaterium hurts the inward parts, provokes to vomit, opens the mouths of the
veins, brings great gripings and torments in the belly, kills the birth,
though but outwardly applied to the secret parts; therefore it must not be
given to women with child, weak persons, nor to such as have any inward
inflammation, or Ulcer in the bowels. The best correctors of it are things that
mitigate and allay the sharpness and acrimony of it, and not such as are
astringent; but such as are a little cooling and moistning, as Gum iragacanth,
Amylum, and water of Honey, sweet milk or Cream, or conserve of Roses,
Violets, juice of Licoris, and with posset drink, or with some cordial spices.
It is not fafe to give it alone, nor to any but such as have very strong and
able bodies.

Of such things as are made of the juice of wild Cucumber.
First an extract thereof. 2 Syrup of the root of wild Cucumber, [Freitag. aur.
med. f. 343.] 3 Oil. 4 Vnguentum Agrippae. 5. Vnguentum Aregon.

The Dose.
The Dose is from two grains to four grains, or five at the most.

CHAP. XXVII. De Epithimo and Cuscutha, Of Dodder of Time, and Dodder.
EPithymum and Dodder are plants like unto threads, very much snarled, or
wrapped together, confusedly winding themselves about herbs, the one growing
upon Time, the other upon Flax or Line.

The Names.
Epithymum is called Time, or laced Time. Cuscutha is called in Greek (...), in
Latin Cuscutha Cussutha, Cassutha, and Cassytha, in English Dodder.

The Temperament.
Epithymum is hot and dry in the third degree.

Dodder is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

The best.
The best is that which is fresh and new, not too old; the tops and flowers are
most effectual. The best is that which comes from Crete.

The Duration.
They will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
Epithymum purges Melancholy and adust Choler, as also Phlegm from the
brain, heart, spleen and hypochonders; It avails against Melancholy, old and
inveterate pains of the head, swimming of the head, madness,
falling sickness, faintings, Quartaine Ague, Hypochondriack passions,
Scirrhues, or hardness of the Spleen, and windiness thereof, stoppings of the
Kidneys, and is very useful in the Scab and Itch, Leprosy, Elephansie,
malignant Ulcers and Cancers, as also the French Pox: It cleanses the blood
very much, from Melancholy and adust humors. Avicen commends it against the
Cramp: It is profitable in the Jaundies, in opening stoppings of the Gall. It
has also a strengthening property besides its purging quality, as in Rubarbe,
and a very safe Medicine for the stoppings as well of the Liver, as Spleen,
purging the Veins of phlegmatic and chollerick humors, and helps Childrens
Agues, if a little Wormseed be put to it. Taken with Lapis lazul, it cures the
Quartaine Ague.

Note, That it will not endure any long decocting or boiling.

Cuscuthe, or Dodder, is very profitable in stoppings of the Liver, Gall, and
Spleen, cleanses the blood from Melancholy, and is useful in the Jaundise,
provokes Urine, and cleanses the Veins of Chollerick and Phlegmatic humors.
Being taken with Wormwood it purges Choler. If half a pint or less of the
decoction be taken, with half an ounce of Sugar, it cures Children of Agues.
Moreover, it has the same virtues as Epithymum has, though not so fully, only
some will have Cuscutha more proper for the Liver, and Epithymum for the
Spleen. But the Cuscutha is more or less effectual, according to the virtues
of those herbs on which it grows. For that which grows on Nettles and
Broom, provokes Urine, that which grows on Tares (which is the most common) is
not so good, for Tares are of hard digestion, and bind the belly, and breed
thick and Melancholy blood. The seeds drunk with Wine, and Sage, ease the
Hip-Gout. The distilled water of Cuscutha taken, helps the effects of the Liver
and Lungs, by cleansing and strengthening; also cures the Jaundise, expells the
stone of the Bladder, and eases gripings in the belly, helps to bring down
the Courses in Women, and swellings about the Navill, and cures Agues in
Children. The Dose is three or four ounces morning and evening; to Children
give less.

The manner of administering them.
They are chiefly given in Potions and Powders.

A Potion against Melancholy.
Take of Epithymum half an ounce, of Seen one ounce and a half, Anni-seed two
drams, Licoris a dram, Damask Prunes ten or twelve; Bruise the Licoris and
Anni-seed, and cut the Prunes, then infuse them on hot embers five or six
hours, with half a pint of Posset Drink; strain it, and give the clearest.

Or,
Take the flowers of Balm, Rosemary, Borrage, and Buglosse, of each half a
handful, of the outside of yellow Myrobalans, half an ounce, Epithymum, Time,
Seen, Polypodium, of each two drams, or half an ounce; boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, till about half be consumed, strain it, and add
syrup of Roses an ounce; make a Potion, and give it.

Or,
Take Epithymum, Cuscutha, Seen, Origanum, or Wild Marjoram, of each two drams,
of red Ciches a dram, make a decoction in a sufficient quantity of water,
strain it, and in the clearest, infuse or steep of Agarick trochiscated, a
dram, of Cinnamon half a dram, let them stand one night; then strain it, and to
the strained liquor add Confectio Hamech, two drams, or half an ounce, and
make all into a Potion.

The external use.
The distilled water of Cuscutha, or Dodder, clears the fight, if it be dropped
into the eyes; the leaves made into a Pultis, and applied to the Spleen, does
ease the pain thereof; also boiled with Oil and Wine, and applied to the
Flanks, helps the Strangury.

The hurtful quality.
They are not convenient for hot and dry bodies, neither is the use of them so
safe in Summer, as in Winter. The too frequent use of them offends the stomach,
and causes dry'th: And because they are weak in operation, use them with
Salgem, Ginger, or black Hellebor, and to mitigate the dryness of them, give
them with Posset-Ale, or with a decoction of Raisons, Violets, and Borrage.

The Dose.
The Dose in substance is from two drams to three drams, or half an ounce; in
infusion or decoction, from an ounce to an ounce and a half, or two ounces;
and let this be in the winter time, for in hot weather you must give less in
quantity.

Of such things as are made of them.
1. The distilled water of Epithymum and Dodder. 2. Syrup of Epithymum. 3.
Decoction of Epithymum. 4. Syrup of Apples Magistrall.

Esula minor, or Tithymall; see Cataputia minor.

CHAP. XXVIII. De Euphorbio, Of Gum Euphorbium.
EVphorbium is a Gum of a brown yellowish color, in small grains like Mastich,
and comes from a certain plant growing in Lybia, and in Barbary.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Euphorbium, from a famous Physician, whose name was
Euphorbius, (Brother to Antonius Musa) who was also Physician to Juba King of
the Mauritanians, or Moors, and first found out the virtue of this Gum. In
English it is called also Gum Euforbium, or the Gum Thistle; or the Gum of the
burning thorny plant.

The temperament.
Euphorbium is hot and dry in the fourth degree.

The best kind.
The best is the clearest, of a brown yellowish color, but whiter within, and
without filth. That which is pale is to be rejected.

The Duration.
It will keep good four or five years. Some affirm, that it will keep its
virtue forty years.

The inward use.
Euphorbium purges thick and tough phlegm, but chiefly and more strongly
watery humors from the Joints, and remote parts of the body: Therefore it
helps the Dropsy, and any kind of Gout. It purges phlegm and water from the
Brain and Nervous parts, and also thick phlegm from the stomach. It is
profitable in the Apoplexy, Palsly, Lethargy, and in all soporiferous or
sleepy Diseases, and cold Diseases of the Brain, and resolution of the Nerves,
in Convulsions and tremblings. And because it draws tough and thick humors
from the Joints, it is used in the French Pox; and by some it is counted
available in the Pestilence. Also it is esteemed a present help against
Apostumes, and painful Nodes or Bunches of the Joints. It speedily helps the
Colic proceeding from tough and glassie phlegm, especially when the tunicles
of the stomach and bowels have much tough phlegm cleaving to them.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, in Pills, and Electuary.

Pills against the Collicke.
Take of the Powder called Diagalanga, Aromaticum rosatum, of each two drams,
Castor in powder, half a dram, Euphorbium in powder, ten grains, Opium
dissolved in Muscadell, thirty grains of Pepper, Saffron, and Myrrh in powder,
of each half a scruple; make all into a mass or lump for pills. Of a dram make
ten pills, and give of them four or five, if the pain cease not give nine or
ten. Rondel. meth. cur. morb. c. 25. fol. 481. But I conceive half a dram will
be a sufficient Dose, and must be given with caution.

An Electuary against the Collicke.
Take of Opium two drams, Castor, Euphorbium, Storax, Myrrh, Pepper, long and
black, a scruple, of Parsly-seed, and Smallage-seed, Cummin-seed, Cinnamon, of
each two scruples, with a sufficient quantity of clarified Honey make an Opiat
Electuary. It must be kept six months before you use it. Rondelet. de med.
intern. fol. 1005.

The external use.
It is outwardly used in all cold Diseases of the Nerves, as in Convulsions,
Tremblings, Palsies, and in pains of the Joints, in the Sciatica, as also in
the French Pox, in sleepy Diseases of the Brain, if it be mixed with Oil of
Spike, and the neck anointed therewith, it avails much. Collyries made
thereof may be used in suffusions of the eyes, as also to take away the filmes
thereof: But in the use of it about the eyes, I advise Practitioners to be very
careful and wary, because of its burning faculty. In wounds and contusions of
the Nerves, it does much profit. Mingled with Oil of Bay, Bears grease, Wolves
grease, or such like, it cures the Foxmange, and Scurfe of the head. The Nape
of the Neck being anointed with the Oil of Euphorbium, recovereth the speech
of those that have lost it by reason of the Apoplexy, or any other casualty,
and takes away the Noise and pain of the ears, being put into them. Euphorbium
mingled with Vinegar, and applied, takes away the marks and scars of Wounds,
and all other foul spots and blemishes of the skin. It helps to scale bones
that are loose, and that suddenly. It is used with other means to provoke
sneezing, as also to draw Blisters.

An Ointment for the Headache, proceeding from a cold cause.
Take Oil of Dill, Oil of Camomill Oil of Marjerome, Oil of Wallflowers, of
each half an ounce; Oil of Nutmeg, two drams, Cloves in powder, half a dram,
white Pepper in powder, half a dram; Euphorbium powdered, ten grains, with a
little Wax make an Ointment, with which annoint the Temples, and the forepart
of the head, morning and evening warm. Weichard. these. pharm. fol. 18.

Or,
Take Oil of Dill, Oil of Orris, of each half an ounce; white Pepper, wild
Time, of each a scuple and a half; Castor a scruple, Euphorbium half a
scruple; powder what is to be powdered, and with a little Wax make an Ointment,
and use it as the former. Piso de morb. cognosc. and curar. l. 1. c. 8. f. 29.

A Liniment for the Palsy.
Take of common Oil two pound, of Camomill flowers a handful and a half;
Sage, Betony, Rosemary, of each a handful, Castor half an ounce, Euphorbium
two drams, Myrrh, Bdellium, Gum Hedera, of each two drams, white Pepper,
Mustard Seed, of each a dram, wine of Castor a pint, make those things (that
are to be powdered) into a gross powder, and boil them together with Cinnamon,
Mastich, Elecampane, and Acorus root, of each a dram, till the Wine be
consumed, then strain it, and add of Oil of Turpentine, three drams; make a
Liniment, with which annoint the Neck. Johan. Sadler. prax. med. f. 149.

The hurtful quality with the corrective means.
Euphorbium is of such a hot burning nature, that if it be taken alone it
inflames the mouth, and throat, as also the stomach, bowels, Liver, and all
the body, therefore with some it is counted among the venomous-Plants, rather
then among Medicines. It brings cold sweats, and causes many times faintings.
It is very dangerous to give it to Women with Child, to Children or weak
persons, or to any that have inward inflammations. Nunqu^ datur per os, nec cum
alijs, nisi raro and pa^ia quantitate. Renodaeus. dispensat. fol 566.
It is safest to give it only to strong persons, and such as have cold, windy,
and temperate bodies, and not to those that have hot and dry bodies. Till it be
a year old you may not use it. It is ^ever used alone without some good
corrective.

There are diverse ways and means prescribed to correct the malignity of
Euphorbium. Some conceive it the best way to make it into gross powder, and
not into fine powder, and so to give it, for hereby it does not cleave to the
bowels and inward parts. Others make it into a past with Oil of sweet Almonds,
and drying it in an Oven keep it for their use. Others dissolve the same in
Vinegar, and so strain it. Others take Euphorbium, Mastich, Tragacanth, of each
a like quantity, with which they make a paist, and dry it as before, and so
make pills thereof. Others infuse it in spirit of wine, and so make a kind of
extract thereof, which is to add fire to fire. Surely the best means to correct
it, are such things as do allay the heat and acrimony thereof, and such as are
lubricious or slippery, viz. Oil of Roses, Oil of sweet Almonds. We must not
forget the Anteuphorbium, which is an herb that grows near the Euphorbium,
and is somewhat like Purslaine, the juice whereof does so temper the heat of
Euphorbium, that being mixed therewith and given, it seldom or never fails to
give ease: But because this is a stranger with us, why may not the paist above
mentioned be infused or steeped in the juice of Purslaine, and then boiled to a
sufficient height, and Trosses or small round Cakes made thereof? Or else you
may mix Euphorbium with the juice of Purslaine, and so give it. Freitagius
says, he has known it given unprepared with Barley-water, and Syrup of
Violets, or with Broth, and that with good success; and that he has known a
scruple (in robustick bodies) has been given, and that without any danger.
This I believe, for being old it loses much of its burning and operative
faculty. I have kept some, ten or twelve years, and for ought I know it had as
much age before I had it, yet it has operated well, and also been useful
outwardly to draw Blisters, etc.

The Dose.
The Dose is from four grains to ten.

The Compounds following are made of Euphorbium.
1. Extract of Euphorbium. 2. Pills of Euphorbium. 3. Species Hierae logadij.
4. Philonium persicum and Romanum. 5. Emplast^^m de Ranis vigonis. 6. Oil of
Euphorbium simple and compound. 7. Chymicall Oil of Euphorbium.

CHAP. XXIX. De Fumaria. Of Fumiterrie.
FVmitterry is an Herb so well known, that I need not describe it.

The Names.
In Latin it is called Fumaria, and Fumus terrae; in English, Fumittery.

The temperament.
It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second, and not cold as the
Vulgar conceive, for its bitterness shows it to be hot.

The duration.
The Herb will keep good a year, and the juice may be kept a year with Oil of
Olives powered on it.

The inward use.
Fumiterry purges gently Melancholy and salt humors; it is opening,
cleansing, and strengthening, it purges the impurity of the blood, and is
useful in obstructions and stoppings of the Liver, Spleen, and Entrals, and
does corrobate or strengthen those parts: It purges Chollerick humors by
Urine, and avails in the Itch, Scab, Leprosy, Cancer, Fistulaes, and foul
Diseases of the skin, arising from adust humors; as also in the French
Disease. It is profitable in Fevers (arising from choler both yellow and
black) in the Jaundise, Quartaine Ague, Scorbute, or Scurvie, kills Worms,
and prevails in Chronicall Diseases arising from stoppings of the viscerous
parts, and in affects of the Hypochonders. The powder (says Brasavola) of the
dried Herb given for some time together, has cured a Melancholy person. The
distilled water cures the yellow Jaundise, if three or four ounces be drunk
morning and evening, for certain days together, and avails against the Scab,
Itch, and such like Diseases; and being constantly taken it preserves from the
Leprosy. Being taken with London Treacle, and Bole Armoniack, it is good in
the Pestilence, as a dram or two of Treacle, and a scruple of Bole Armoniack
mixed in two ounces of the water, and so taken. Also it dissolveth congealed
blood and tumors, and provokes the Terms or Courses in Women.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Potion, Decoction, in juice, and in Powder.

A Potion against Melancholy and Choler.
Take of Seen two drams, Fumiterry and Wormwood of each as much as you can hold
between two or three fingers; of Cinnamon bruised, a dram; infuse them in
Succory-water, and a little Wine, for a night, strain it, and in the strained
liquour infuse or steep of Rubarbe (cut in thin slices) half a dram, or a
dram, five or six hours, then strain it again, and add to it of the Electuary
called Diacatholicon, half an ounce; make a Potion.

A Potion against Melancholy.
Take of Fumiterry, tops of Hops of each half a handful, Raisons of the sun
stoned, half an ounce, Polypodium of the Oak, green, bruised, half an ounce,
Dodder, Epithymum, of each three drams, Anniseed and Licoris bruised, of each
half a dram. Make a decoction in a sufficient quantity of water, strain it,
and infuse or steep therein, of Seen two or three drams, strain it, and
dissolve in it Diacatholicon an ounce, and as much syrup of Violets.

A Potion against the Dropsy.
Take of the juice of Fumiterry two or three ounces, of the powder of the root
of Esula prepared, eight or ten grains; Elder-water* an ounce, with a little
Sugar make a Potion.

A delicate Potion to purge the blood.
Take of the decoction of Fumiterry, made with Whey or Posset Drink, five
ounces, steep therein (on hot embers a whole night) of Seen half an ounce,
Rubarbe a dram, strain it, and dissolve in it of syrup of Roses, Laxative, or
of Manna an ounce, make a Potion.

Against the Scorbute or Scurvy.
Take the juice of Fumiterry, and Scurvygrasse, of each two ounces; give it (in
the Spring time) in Goats Whey. A decoction of Fumiterry made with
Posset Drink, and four or five ounces thereof taken morning and evening, in the
Spring time, does much purify and cleanse the blood.

Against the Jaundise.
Take Fumiterry, Wormwood, of each a handful, boil it in Posset Drink, or
Whey, and being strained, drink of it, four ounces, morning and evening.

Or,
Take two or three ounces of the juice of Fumiterry, and give it in two ounces
of Ceterach-water.

Against the Joynt-Gout.
Take of the juice of Fumiterry, three ounces, of Hermodactilles in powder, two
scruples, mingle them together, and give it in a morning fasting.

Against the Scab, Itch, and Leprosy.
Take of the juice of Fumiterry, two ounces and a half, or three ounces, warm
it over the fire, and scum it; then add a little sugar, and half a dram of
Fennellseed to it, and give it in a morning.

The outward use.
The juice dropped into the eyes, does clear the eyes, and quicken the sight;
but at the first it will cause the eyes to water: the juice also mingled with
Gum Arabicke, and applied to the lids, will cause that the hair (that has
once been pulled off) shall not grow again. A decoction thereof made, and the
feet bathed therewith, cures the Gout; or boiled in Wine, and so applied, does
the like: the juice mixed with the juice of Docks, and Oxymel, or Vinegar,
cures the Morphew, being anointed therewith. Also a Bath made of the same,
with Mallows, Violets, and Dock roots, with Barley Bran, and Nep, cures the
Scab, and Itch. The juice mingled with Oil of Nuts, and Vinegar, cures malign
Scabs, and the Leprosy, being noynted therewith. The distilled water helps
sores and Ulcers of the mouth, being therewith washed and gargled, especially
if you take four ounces of the water, adding thereto one ounce of honey of
Roses, and wash the mouth therewith.

The hurtful quality.
It is somewhat flatulent or windy, therefore it is good to mix with the juice or
decoction, some Anniseed or Fennelseed, and infused in Whey, or given with
infusion of Seen, it does work the better.

The Dose.
The juice is given from half an ounce, to two or three ounces. The Powder
from two drams to four drams. The decoction from three ounces, to five or six
ounces.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The Water. The Juice. The Conserve. The Syrup, both simple and compound.
Pills of Fumiterry, and the Oil distilled from the dry herb.

CHAP. XXX. De Galanga, Of Galingall.
GAlingale is a small root of a reddish color, both within and without, and
smells somewhat sweet, and grows in China.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Galanga, in English Galingall.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second or third degree.

The sorts or kinds.
There are two sorts, the greater, and the lesser, but the lesser is most in
use.

The best kind.
The best is that which is of a reddish color, or brownish within and without,
heavy and aromaticall, or smelling sweet, especially being bruised, of a hot
taste; and full of small holes.

The Duration.
It will keep good three or four years.

The inward Use.
Galingal is profitable in all cold diseases of the stomach, brain and womb,
help's concoction, expels wind and crudities, and strengthens the stomach,
being boiled in wine, and taken morning and evening. It strengthens especially
a moist brain, helps the Vertigo, or swimming of the head, and avails against
the palpitation or beating of the heart, and is very useful in the gnawing of
the stomach, and eases the Colic, which proceeds of wind, and in the
diseases of the Mother, and stoppings of the Urine, and has a speedy operation
to cleanse the Uritories, or passages of Urine from slimy phlegm and stones
gathered therein, or the passages in the neck of the yard, and also to wast and
consume any fleshly excrescence in the neck of the bladder or yard. Galingal
conduces to Venery, and help conception, and is profitable for them that have
cold reins, and excellent for them that have cold and windy affects of the
womb. It helps a stinking breath, being boiled in wine and so taken. It is
chiefly good for cold and moist diseases.

The manner of administering them.
They are given chiefly in powder and decoction.

Against weakness and faintness of the heart.
Take the powder of Galingal, two scruples; of the juice of Borrage one ounce
and a half, mix them together, and give it with a little Sugar in the morning
fasting, or any other time.

Against a weak stomach, and wind.
Take Galingal, Pepper, and Parsley-seed in powder, of each half an ounce, of
Honey four or five ounces, mix them together, and add two ounces also of
conserve of Red Roses; Take the quantity of a Nut thereof morning and evening.

Or,
Take an ounce of Galingal and bruise it, of White Wind a pint and a half, or
a quart, boil it till about half a pint be consumed, strain it, and drink a
draught morning and evening.

The outward use.
It helps a stinking breath, being often chewed in the mouth, and also a
cold, moist brain, being snuffed up into the nose in powder, or chewed in the
mouth.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given in hot diseases, nor to hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given in powder, from a scruple to a dram, in decoction from a dram to
two drams or three.

Of such Medicines as are made of Galingall.
The chiefest species made thereof is Diagalangal which helps the cold effects
of the stomach and liver, and helps concoction, drives away sour belching,
expels wind and flatulent humors, and also helps a stinking breath. There are
many other species made thereof.

CHAP. XXXI. De Galbano, Of Gum-Galbanum.
GAlbanum is a Gum taken from one kind of Ferula, or Fennel-giant, of a very
strong and stinking savor.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Galbanum, in English Gum Galbanum.

The Temperament.
Galbanum is hot and dry in the second degree, or hot in the beginning of the
third degree, and dry in the second, or in the beginning of the second.

The best kind.
The best is clear, a little yellowish with white pieces amongst it, without
filth or sticks, neither too dry, nor too moist, of a strong savor, dissolving
chiefly with wine and vinegar.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward Use.
Galbanum is profitable for all cold diseases of the womb, for the rising or
falling of the Mother, and all stoppings thereof, it helps to bring away the
birth and dead child, and provokes the Courses in Women: it is useful in
Convulsions and Cramps, Falling Sickness, inward Ruptures, in pains and
tumors of the Spleen and Sirrhus, in shortness of breath Cough, in the pains
of the side, and in torments of the bowels: It resists poison, kills worms,
and is an Antidote against Venom, and all venomous Beasts, for says Pliny no
Serpents will come near to them that are besmeared with Galbanum. Being taken
in wine with Mirrhe, it brings away the dead child out of the womb and Mola,
or false conception: it is excellent in the Colic dissolved in wine, and
taken with oil of sweet-Almonds, and a little Saffron, and also for the
stopping of the Urine.

The manner of administering it.
It is given chiefly in Pills.

Pills against the suffocation of the Mother.
Take of Galbanum two scruples, Sagapenum a scruple, Assa fetida a scruple,
oil of Amber four drops, make Pills thereof and give them.

Against the pain and swelling of the Spleen and Sirrhus.
Take a dram of Galbanum, and dissolve it in a little Vinegar of Squils, or
Oxymel of Squils, and give it.

Against Worms.
Take a dram of Galbanum, dissolve it in a little Sack or Muskadel, give it
with Sugar Pellets.

The Outward Use.
It mollifieth, softneth, and dissolveth the hard tumors and swelling, as
Scirrhus, King's Evil, Aposthumes, hardness of the Spleen, hard nodes of the
joints and Biles, also eases pains in the side, especially being mixed with
oils, ointments and plasters for the same purpose. It takes away freckles
and spots in the face, or skin, being mixed with Vinegar and Niter, and so
applied. It takes away the pain of the ears, being used with the oil of Roses,
oil of Nardus, or such like. It cures the Toothache, if the hollow-tooth be
stopped therewith: it draws forth thorns, splinters and broken bones, being
spread on Leather, and applied, especially if you mix Terpintine with it.

It avails in the fits of the Mother or Falling Sickness, being but smelled
to, or a perfume thereof on Coals; also a Pessary hereof used brings away the
birth and dead child, and also provokes the Courses, it cures the bitings of
Scorpions, or other venomous beast being applied thereto: It helps the Sciatica
if a plaster thereof be applied. It cleanses wounds and ulcers, cures rifts
of the feet and ancles, especially being mixed with Gum-Tragacanth, Dears su^t
and oil of Violets. It cures scaled heads being dissolved with honey and so
applied.

Against fits of the Mother.
Make a Plaster of Galbanum on Leather about the bigness of the Palm of your
hand, and lay it to your navell.

The hurtful quality.
It is dangerous to give it to pregnant women, or women with child, least they
miscarry therewith: neither must it be given in hot diseases. Pliny says, it is
not good in difficulty of Urine, but Diascorides, and others say the contrary.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a scruple to a dram, or a dram and a half.

Of such things as are made of Galbanum.
Oil Chimicall of Galbanum, Galbanetum, i. e. Balsamum Galbanetum, seu
spiritus Terebinthinae Galbanetus. Cerot of Galbanum, or Ceratum matricale.

CHAP. XXXII. De Genista. Of Broom.
BRoom is better known for it is sweeping help, then for its Physical use,
therefore I shall give you the virtues thereof.

The Names.
It is called in Latin Genista and Genesta, and that because it helps the
pains of the knees, or quod facile generet, speciemque propagat.

The Temperament.
Broom is hot and dry in the second or beginning of the third degree.

The Duration.
The flowers and seeds will keep a year.

The inward use.
The flowers, seeds, stalks and roots are in use, but chiefly the seeds and the
flowers, they draw forth thick Phlegm and Choler, as also water by vomit and
stool, and that somewhat strongly in many bodies, The seeds and flowers are
Spleneticall, nephriticall and hepaticall, that is, good for the Spleen, Stone
and Liver.
and draws from the joints Phlegmatic and Waterish humors, whereby it
helps those that are troubled with the Dropsy, Gout, Sciatica, and pains in
the joints, helps the pains in the sides, and swellings of the Spleen,
cleanses also the reins, kidneys and bladder of the gravel and stone engendered
therein, and hinders the matter from growing and increasing to be a stone
again, and provokes Urine abundantly. The constant use of the powder of the
leaves and seeds does cure the black Jaundies, being taken in Wine. The seeds
purgelike Hellebor, say the ancient, but sure it is meant of Spartium of
Diascorides, or of Spanish-broom, for our ordinary Br^om does not work so, nay,
we pickle the flowers and seeds in Vinegar, calling them Broom-Capers, and eat
them with meat, finding no ill quality in them, but are excellent to stir up
appetite to meat, and help obstructions of the Spleen, and to provoke Urine,
as also opens the Uritory parts. The seeds and flowers being any way taken do
much preserve from the Gout and Stone. The flowers being made into a conserve,
or preserve with Honey or Sugar, and eaten off, do much consume the Kings
evil. The distilled water of the flowers is profitable for the aforesaid
purposes, and helps Surfets, also alters the fits of Agues, being taken
before the fit with some Centory water. It is most excellent for to help the
Kings evil if one ounce of the water be taken morning and evening for a months
space or longer if need require.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder and decoction, etc.

Against the Gout, and Arthriticall pains.
Take of Broom-seeds a dram and a half, of Mastick, Roses and Cinnamon, of
each a scruple, make them into powder, and take it in broth: this will draw
phlegmatic humors from remote parts, and cause them to be voided both up and
down.

Or,
Take of Broom-seeds three drams, Roses and Mastich of each a scruple, make
them into powder, and give a dram thereof in broth, or in Water and Honey.

The outward Use.
The tops or flowers of Broom bruised and mixed with Hog's Grease, cure the ach
or pains of the knee, as also the Gout, or bruise, or any swelling by reason of
humors falling down. The flowers also bruised and mixed with Honey and Roses,
or the white of an Egg beaten together and applied, consume the hard swelling
of the Kings evil. The juice of the young branches made into an ointment with
Hog's Grease, and anointed: or the young branches bruised, or flowers, and
heated in oil or Swines-grease, and laid to the sides that are pained, either
by the wind, as in stitches and the like, or in the Spleen, eases them in
once or twice using it. The same boiled in oil is a safe and sure medicine to
kill Lice, and other vermin breeding in the head or body. The juice boiled
with oil and applied helps the Sciatica or Hip-gout. The juice alone, or
mixed with Honey and applied, cures green wounds and putrified Ulcers. The
flowers and tops being bruised and applied, help the biting of Serpents and
venomous creatures. The Oil distilled from the root and seeds, is very useful
to take away spots, freckles and deformities of the skin, being applied.

A decoction of the tops of Broom, eases the Toothache being washed therewith.
Note that the flowers will not endure any long decocting or boiling.

The hurtful quality, and corrective means.
Because it does offend the stomach and heart, let it be given with Roses,
Mastich, Anniseed, Fennel-seed, or with Honey of Roses.

The Dose.
The seeds are given from a dram to a dram and a half, or two drams. The juice
of the flowers, from a dram to two drams, or three drams. The powder of the dry
flowers, from a dram to two drams. The powder of the dry root from two drams to
half an ounce, in broth or such like. The juice of the root from a dram to
half an ounce, with Hydromel, or water and honey.

Of those things that are made of Broom.
The distilled water of the branches and flowers Conserve of the flowers, Salt
of Broom, The flowers preserved with Sugar.

CHAP. 33. De Gentianae radice, of Gentian Root.
GEntian has leaves like with ribs like Plantain, but bigger and more like the
leaves of white Hellebore, the stalks are full of joints and hollow, the leaves
grow by couples at every joint, the flowers are yellow, the root is long and
thick, of the color of earth without, and yellowish within.

The names.
It is called in Latin Gentiana, and it is so called from Gentius King of the
Illyrians, who brought it first into use and credit, in English it is called
Gentian and Felwort.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the third degree, and dry in
the second.

The best sort.
The best is that which is yellow within, sound without holes, bitter, and not
easy to be broken. The best (says Pliny) is that which is found in Illyricum
or Sclavonia.

The duration.
It will keep good a year or two.

The inward use.
The root is chiefly in use. It is alexipharmacall, opening and attenuating,
and avails in the Pestilence and contageous diseases, against the stinging of
venomous beasts, and against the biting of mad dogs, and preserves from
putrefaction, also in stoppings of the liver and spleen, or for such as are
liver-grown as they call it, in the Dropsy and suffocation of the Mother, and
against Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Ruptures, pains of the side, bruises,
Worms, and debility or weakness of the stomach, dissolveth congealed blood,
and provokes the courses. It brings away the birth, afterbirth, and dead
child: it is useful in the cough, shortness of breath, and gripings of the
stomach and belly. Being steeped in wine and drunk, it refreshes those that
are over wearied with travel, and are by cold and ill lodging abroad, grown
lame in their joints. It is good against all Agues, a decoction thereof being
taken, or the powder thereof: also the decoction thereof helps the Stone and
stopping of Urine It repelleth wind very much in the body, and is profitable
in all cold diseases; for could we but like this and other bitter things it
would effect very much in curing of many desperate diseases. The Italians (not
undeservedly) do call the Croswort, Gentian. Petimborsa quasi mettere in bursa,
put it in your purse, either as Matthiolus says, that it was to be gathered
wheresoever it was found, and fit to be kept in our purse as ready to be used
upon all occasions, or that it did by curing of diseases, get store of crowns
to be put into the purse. The distilled water of the leaves, flowers and roots
has near the same virtue, and is excellent to cure Agues that proceed from
obstructions of humors, or blood, and kills Worms, consumes all viscuous
humors in the stomach, provokes the courses in women, and helps a stinking
breath: you may give two or three spoonfuls of the water morning and evening;
but before the fit of an Ague, you may give two or three ounces thereof.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, powder, etc.

Against the biting of a mad Dog.
Take of Gentian root bruised a dram, or two drams, boil it in about half a
pint of water and honey, til near half be consumed, strain it, and add of
Myrrh in powder two scruples or a dram, of Crab's-eyes burnt, and in powder two
drams, mix them together, and give it at four times morning and evening; wash
also the wound with vinegar and salt water, and apply Cupping-glasses thereto,
to draw out the venom.

Or
Take of the root in powder two scruples, or a dram, give it in Carduus water.

Or
Take of Gentian in powder thirty grains, of Rue in powder a scruple, of
Pepper powdered five grains, give it in Angelica-water.

The external use.
The juice or powder of the root heals fresh wounds, and is very effectual
for all sorts of foul, putrid, or rotten ulcers wheresoever, yea though hollow
or fistulous, cancrous, fretting or running, for it does very much cleanse, dry
and heal up: also the same applied to ulcers, knots or kernels of the neck or
throat which is called the Kings evil, heals them safely and speedily, as
also the painful swellings of the hemorrhoidall veins called the Piles, when
they are fallen down, and grow ulcerous or sore. The juice being put into the
eyes, takes away inflammations, and redness therein, and cleares them from
skins and films growing upon them. The root is in use among Chirurgions to
enlarge the orifice of any wound or sore. The fresh root or the dried made into
a Pessary, and put into the Matrix, expels the dead child and afterbirth,
for it thoroughly works upon those parts. The juice, root, or herb, or
decoction thereof is given to cattle to drink, to free them from Bottes and
Worms, and many other diseases as also when they begin to swell, being
poisoned by any venomous worm or ticke, which they often lick up with the
grass as also when they are bitten or stung by the udders or other tender
places, which presently thereupon swel, and put the cattle to much pain, making
them forbear their meat, which being perceived, the Countrey-people presently
bruise the leaves of any kind of Gentian, and take the juice thereof, and
stroke the udder or bitten place, which does soon help them. The distilled
water of Gentian, cleanses the face from freckles, morphew, or other spots,
and discolorings of the skin, being often lightly washed therewith.

Against Bruises.
Take of Gentian root in powder an ounce, mix with it a little Oil-olive, and
apply it warm.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given to women with child, for it will cause them to miscarry,
neither is it to be used in hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from a scruple to a dram, in decoction from a dram to
three drams.

Of those things that are made of Gentian.
The distilled water of the leaves and root; The extract of Gentian; The
thickened juice [a dram whereof is excellent against intermittent Agues, being
taken before the fit] Diatessaron.

CHAP. 34. De Gratiola, of Hedge-Hyssope.
GRatiola is an herb that has leaves like common Hyssope, but a little
shorter and broader.

The names.
It is called in Latin Gratiola, and Gratia Dei, in English Hedge-Hyssope. Now
it is called Gratiola per Antiphrasin, because it is in no wise grateful and
pleasant to those that take it, for it is very bitter and of violent operation.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree, or in the end of the
second, in taste very bitter, and somewhat astringent.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
It purges choler and phlegm, but especially waterish humors; Therefore it is
profitable in the Dropsy, Green-sicknesse, obstructions of the liver and
spleen, in the Hip-gowt, quartane Agues, and long continued Fevers, as also in
quotidian Agues. It prevails much against putrefaction, and kills Worms. It
works both by vomit and stool. Some commend it in the French Pox, Scorbute,
or Scurvy, and against the pestilence.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Potions, Powders, Pills, etc.

A Potion.
Take of Hedge Hyssope half a handful, Seen half an ounce, Raisons of the Sun
six drams, Anise-seed and Cynamon bruised, of each half a dram; boil them in a
pint of Renish wine to half a pint, then strain it, and being sweetened with
sugar, give it to drink in a morning fasting with physical observation.

A Powder.
Take of Hedge Hysop in powder two drams, Cynamon, Anise-seed in powder, of each
a scruple, of pure Sugar half an ounce, mix them well together: Give a dram, or
a dram and a half hereof in broth.

Pills excellent in the Dropsy.
Take extract of Hedge Hysop, extract of Mechoacan, of each a scruple, Salt of
Hedge Hysop six grains, mix them together, and make Pills thereof. Jo. Hartmanus
pract. Chym. f. 246.

Melichius mentions Saccharum Gratiolae magistrale in his Dispensatory, which
is not made with the flowers, but of the leaves with Sugar, not by boiling it,
but by setting it in the Sun and often stirring it together. The Dose is from
six drams to an ounce in strong bodies; He says, that it works without any
trouble, Melich. Dispensat. f. 119. He does not mention what quantity is to be
taken, but I conceive at least as much Sugar as leaves, or as much more.

The external use.
The powder of the herb, or the juice thereof cures green wounds, and
cleanses old and rotten sores. It may be put into Oiles and Ointments that are
made to cleanse and heal wounds and old ulcers.

The hurtful quality, and the correcting help.
It works churlishly, and troubles the stomach, therefore it must be given
with Cynamon, Anise-seed, Liquorish, Sugar, Honey, decoction of Cicers, or in
posset drink. Some macerate or steep it in vinegar, then dry it, afterward
they infuse or steep it in milk, and dry it again, then they give it in powder.

The Dose.
It is given in powder to a scruple, in decoction from half an ounce to an
ounce: but the extract thereof is more commodious then either the Dose, of
which is from a scruple to half a dram.

These compounds following are made of Gratiola, or Hedge Hysope.
The extract Salt of Hedge Hysop, Conserve of Hedge Hysop.

CHAP. 35. De Gutta gummi, of Gum gutta, or Cambogia.
GUtta gummi, or Cambogia is a concreted or hardened juice, rather then a gum,
made up into hard rolls, yellow both within and without, and being moistened it
gives a yellow color: What it is made of none has yet certainly determined;
some conceive it to be the juice of Spurge, condensed or dried, and mixed with
a little Saffron or Turmerick; others judge it to be made of Scammonie and
Tithymal: others judge it to be made of Rubarbe; others of Euphorbium; others
think it to be made of one kind of Aloes. But sure they are deceived that
judge it to be made up of Aloes, and that because it is not bitter as Aloes is;
moreover, it purges rather water than choler. Neither can it be made of
Euphorbium, for then it would burn and heat more in the mouth then it does; nor
is it likely to be made of Rubarbe, for it has neither the taste nor qualities
of Rubarbe; besides, Rubarbe is a stranger in those places from whence this is
brought. There are many other opinions about it, which I will not trouble the
Reader with. It is brought unto us here in England from the East Indies, and
some say from China.

The names.
Among all simples, minerals, or vegetables, I have not observed many to have
more names given it then this. It is called, Cambochia, Cambogia, Cambugio,
Gummi de Goa, Gummi gutta, Gummi Gith, and Gemon, Gummi Indicum, Gummi ad
Podagram, Gummi Peruanum, Gutta Geman, Gemu, Gutta Gamandra, Gutta Munda,
Chattajemon, Ghittajemon, Ghittajaman, Catta Ganma, Succus Gambici, Succus
Crambici, crocuspurgans.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the first degree,

The best kind.
The best sort is that which looks yellow, being pure without any filth or
mixture, and being wet with water or spittle looks of a yellow color, and
makes the water or spittle very yellow.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
It purges chiefly water and ferous humors, and that without any great
violence, therefore it is useful in the Dropsy and any kind of Gout, as also
in the yellow Jaundise, and obstructions of the liver and spleen. Many time it
provokes to vomit, sometimes it works up and down. It is used also against
scab, itch and such like.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in diverse forms, as in Pills, Potions, Powders, Boles, etc.

Pills.
Take of Gutta Gummi fifteen grains, Species Diambrae three grains, oil of
Fennel three drops, with a little Syrup of Roses, make six or seven Pills.

Pills against the Jaundise.
Take of the best Rubarbe in powder a dram, of Cambogia six grains, with syrup
of Succory, make Pills.

A Potion against the tertian Ague.
Take of Cambogia eight grains, syrup of Roses solutive one ounce and a half,
Endive-water two or three ounces, make a Potion, and give it before the third
fit with physical observation.

A Powder against Arthriticall pains.
Take of cream of Tartar two scruples and a half, or a dram, Gutta Gummi
four grains, Galingall and Cynamon, of each four grains, make all into
powder, and give it in any convenient liquour.

A Bole useful in the Yellow Jaundise.
Take of Gutta gummi ten or twelve grains, Conserve of Red Roses two drams,
make a Bole and give it in a morning fasting, drinking a draught of
posset drink after it. This I have used with good success.

Tabulats, or Rolls.
Take of Gutta gummi seven grains, Trosses Ahandale four grains, Oil of
Anise-seeds two drops, with Sugar dissolved in Cynamon-water, make Rolls or
little Cakes.

It may be given in broth, or other convenient liquour.

As
Take of Cambogia twelve or sixteen grains, Cream of Tartar a scruple; give it
in broth with a little Sugar.

Against shortness of Breath in a Child.
Take of Gutta gummi three or four grains, Oxymel of Squils half an ounce, or
an ounce, mingle them together, and give it.

If you mix it with salt of Wormwood, or with black salt of Ash, and give it in
the Dropsy, you will find it to work effectually.

The external use.
It was in use with Painters and Picture-drawers before Physicians used it. It
is useful in Ointments and liniment for the Dropsy.

The hurtful qualities, with the means to help it.
It works many times very churlishly, and does much trouble the stomach;
therefore it is given with Oil of Mace Chymicall, or with Oil of Cynamon,
with species Diambrae, with Conserve of Roses, etc. Also you may give it with
Cream of Tartar, or Tartar vitriolated in broth, as is declared above. It must
be given with caution in hot and choleric bodies.

These things are made of Gutta gummi.
Extract, or Magister of gum Gutta, Ghitta Jemu corrected by spirit of Vitriol,
or Tartar Minderi.

The Dose.
The Dose is from five grains to twelve, or to a scruple.

CHAP. 36. De Helleboro albo, of white Hellebore.
WHite Hellebore has broad leaves with ribs or sinews like unto great Plantain
leaves, or Gentian, the root being dry is black without, and white within, some
as long as ones finger, and some shorter.

The Names.
It is called in Arabic (...) Charic, from (...) Charac, rupit, corrupit, and
well it may, for it is a tearing Medicine, and soon breaks the veins in a man's
body. In Greek (...) Copa^, quod esu perimat: In Latin Helleborus albus,
Helleborum, and veratrum album, now it is called veratrum a verando, unde
veratores and veraculi: and because such Prophets were counted mad, and out of
their wits, therefore it was so called, for that it cures such; or quod mentem
vertat, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 25. c. 5. f. 218, In English, it is called white
Hellebore, or Neese-wort.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best kind.
The best is the whitest, not too hot and biting in taste, nor provoking
spittle, for such does sooner suffocate, and being broken, it seems to smoke
or send dust from it: the best part is that which is toward the nether end,
for the uppermost part of the root which is thickest and bulbous like to an
Onion-head is good only for Dogs.

The duration.
It will keep good many years, some say thirty years.

The inward use.
The roots are only in use. They are useful against madness and melancholy,
also against the swimming of the head, Falling Sickness, Leprosy, Cancer,
Elephancie and foul diseases of the skin, as also the quartan Ague. It brings
down the courses, and kills the child in the womb: it helps the old Cough,
Dropsy, Sciatica, Gowt, Cramp, pains of the joints and sinews. It kills Mice
or Rats being boiled in milk, or mingled with flower and Honey, or Butter. or
boiled in milk, and set where Flies, Wasps, Gnats, etc. do much resort, it kills
as many as touch it.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, in infusion, and in substance; take one example in
substance.

Take of white Hellebore in powder a scruple, give it in broth, milk, or
Grewell, but you were better let it alone. Heurnius mentions an Electuary made
of white Hellebore, which you may find in his Praxis Medicin. f. 242.

The outward use.
It is used to provoke sneesing, being put into the nostrils, and purges the
head of superfluous humors, and is good in the Lethargy, and such like sleepy
diseases, especially if Marjoram be put to it, and made in powder, and so
snuffed up into the nose: it cures the Leprosy, Scab, Itch, and such like foul
diseases of the skin, being used with Hog's Grease, or mixed in ointments. The
juice of the root dropped into the ears, helps the noise and singing thereof,
and the root mixed with other things helps the dimnesse of the sight. Being
boiled in lie, and the head washed therewith, it kills Lice, and helps the
running scabs and sores thereof. Boiled in vinegar, and the mouth washed
therewith, eases the toothach; the same decoction helps also itch and scab
in the hands, and cleanses foul sores and ulcers in the legs and other parts,
and put into Fistulaes, it takes away the hardness of them. A Pessary made
thereof and put up, brings down the Courses and dead child.

The hurtful quality.
White Hellebore is a vehement and strangulatory medicine, and induces most
terrible symptoms: and causes strong vomiting, brings Convulsion, Cramp,
Hicop, and fainting of the spirits, and ofttimes suddenly suffocateth the
party; therefore I advise the vulgar not to meddle with it, but to leave it as
a dangerous and deadly medicine. But if any will venture to give it, let it be
with good advise, and in very strong bodies. Give it with Mead or honied water
and sal-niter The safest way is to give it by infusion, or decoction and not in
substance: let it be infused in juice of Quinces, or given with the syrup of
Quinces, or give the decoction with Anise-seed and Cynamon, adding a little
Sugar thereto. Pliny advises not to give it in close weather, or upon a dark
and cloudy day. It must not be given to such as have long necks, or are crooked
and short-breathed, or to women with child, old persons, or such as have any
vein broken in their breast, or lungs, or spit blood, or to such as have any
ulcer in their lungs. If any desire to read more of white Hellebore, let them
consult with these following Authors; Hippocrat. Epist. lib. de veratri usu f.
532. Oribas. lib. 8. c. 2. c. 4 c. 5, 6. etc. Matthiolus Com. in lib. Diascor.
146. fol. 754, 755. Paul. Aeginet. lib. 7. c. 10. f. 433. Plin. Not. Hist. lib.
25 cap. 5. fol. 217, 218, 219. Pet. Salius diverse. de affect. partic. de Rabie,
c. 19. f. 370, 371, 372, 373. Heurn Prax. med. l. 2. f. 240, 241, 242.
Valleriol. Observat. Med. lib. 3. Observat. 9. f. 107, 108, 109. Marold. Pract.
Med. f. 378. Forced. de Venenis l. XXX. Observat. 9.

Antonius Benivenius de abditis morb. causis cap. 51, 52. relates of two that
died after the taking of white Hellebore, the one had a quartane Ague, and took
it, who died within six hours after he was called to the party; the other who
was troubled with a pain of his stomach two years, and could not be cured
thereof by any Medicines, at length white Hellebore was given him, which cured
him of all diseases, for he died within a short time after the taking of it.

The Dose.
It is given in substance from ten grains to a scruple or more, in decoction,
or infusion from a dram to two drams.

Of such things as are made of white Hellebore.
There are made thereof Oxymel Helleboratum, Vomitorium Heurnii.

CHAP. 37. De Helleboro nigro, of black Hellebore.
TRue black Hellebore has sundry fair green leaves rising from the root, each
of them standing on a thick round stiff green stalk about an hand-breadth high
from the ground, divided into seven, eight, or nine parts, or leaves, and each
of them dented from the middle of the leaf to the pointward, on both sides,
abiding green all the Winter, etc. The roots are a number of brownish black
strings, which run down deep into the ground, and are fastened to a thick head,
of the bigness of ones finger. There are other bastard kinds that are used in
stead thereof,

The names.
It is called in Latin Helleborus niger, veratrum nigrum, also Melampodium,
and that because it was found by Melampos a Shepherd, or Southsayer, who was
first thought to bring it in use, and cured the daughters of Praetus therewith,
which were mad and foolish, but by the use of this were brought to their right
senses again. In English it is called Black Hellebore and Christmasse-Flower,
because it flourishes about that time, especially when the Winter is mild.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best sort.
The best is that which is not too new, nor too old, Heurnius will have it to
be laid in leaven twenty days before it be used.

The duration.
It will keep good two or three years.

The inward use.
The roots are most in use, especially the bark. Black Hellebore purges
Melancholy and burnt choler, as also thick and viscuous phlegm, from the blood
(whereby that is infected) and entrails, and from remote parts; therefore it is
very usefu^l in pains of the head, swimming and giddines thereof, in the
Apoplexy, in Melancholy, Madness, Falling Sickness, Hypochondriack affects,
hardness of the spleen, quartane Ague, and erratick fevers, also against the
Dropsy, Scab, Leprosy, Cancer, scald Head or scurf, Elephancie and such like
foul diseases of the skin. It is profitable against pain and noise of the
ears, and against stubborn and contumacious diseases. It is counted as an
Antidote against the Leprosy, Scab, Tetter, etc. hardness and swelling of the
Spleen, old quartane Agues, pains of the joints, Aposthumes and the Kings Evil.
It quickneth the brain and senses, provokes urine, and brings down the Courses
in women. It has an excellent faculty to draw away whatsoever is mixed with
the blood, and causes it to corrupt, and is profitable in a long continued
Jaundise. Some say it will cause the Devil to be cast out, being taken by such
as are possessed. Thus we may say, that although the Devil cannot be cast out
by humane art or physical means, yet by taking black Hellebore, the melancholy
humor is drawn away (which is Balneum and seeds Diaboli, the bath and seat of
the Devil, and so the Devil is more easily cast out, from whence it may
rightly (say some) be called, fuga Daemonum. But I think the white Hellebore,
rather deserves this name then the black. It is useful in pains of the belly,
in the Gowt, Sciatica, Cramp, or Convulsion, pains and aches of the joints or
sinews. It kills Worms, especially the leaves of the bastard kind called
Beares-foot. Some commend it in Consumptions of the Lungs and of the whole
body. The extract of black Hellebore is very safe for the Diseases before
mentioned.

The distilled water of the root (says Dorstenius) purges Melancholy and
glutinous humors out of the body, if a dram thereof be given with three ounces
of white wine; and if half an ounce or one ounce of the water of the leaves be
taken in a morning fasting, it stays the flux of the body. Dorsten. Botanic.
fol. 111.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, in infusion, or in substance.

In decoction:
Take of the bark of black Hellebore bruised two drams, Anise-seed,
Fennell-seed, of each a dram, make a decoction in water; strain it, of which
take four ounces, of syrup of Roses an ounce, make a Potion.

In infusion.
Take of the bark of black Hellebore two drams, Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, of
each a dram, Cynamon, Cloves, of each three grains, make an infusion in water
or white wine, according to art; of which (being streined) give three ounces.

In substance.
Take of black Hellebore-root prepared, and in powder; give it in Oxymel.

Or
Take a dram of black Hellebore-root, of Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, Cynamon,
Mastick, of each ten grain, make them into powder, and give it in broth.

The external use.
It is outwardly used against the Leprosy, Morphew, Scab, Itch, Warts, and
Pushes of the skin, being boiled with vinegar, and bathed therewith. The powder
put into Fistulaes, or hollow Ulcers; does soon heal them, and if there be
callons, or hard flesh grown in the Fistula, the root left in it for two or
three days, will consume it quite, and put into a wound where dead or
spongious flesh is, it consumes it, and preserves the flesh from putrefaction.
A decoction thereof helps the toothache, and the sores of the mouth, being
gargled; and being put into the ears, it helps the noise thereof. A Pessary
made of the root, and put up, prevails wonderfully to bring down the terms or
courses in women. A Cataplasme or Poultis made of the root, with Barley-meale,
and wine, is good to be applied to the bellies of such as have the Dropsy. In
time of the Pestilence it is usefully applied to, or in any sores, either in
the groine, or under the arm; or an issue made, and a piece of the root put in
to keep it open, does much avail to draw sorth corrupt humors out of the body.
The root is in use to rowell cattle withal, and to help them of the cough.
Being put upon the swollen Hemorrhoides, it cleanses them.

Against the Gowt.
Boil the herb or root in salt water, and bath with it; also lay the herb or
root boiled to the affected part.

For worms in the ears.
Take of the powder of black Hellebore-root half an ounce, of the juice of Rue,
or Assmart four ounces, mix them together, and put thereof into the ears.

For the scurffe of the head.
Boil the roots of Lupines in vinegar, and add to it powder of black
Hellebore, and anoint with it, wash the head after with warm water.

The hurtful quality, with its corrective help.
The ancient Writers counted it very dangerous, though not so dangerous as the
white; yet that it works not without trouble and difficulty; therefore it is
not to be given but to robustick and strong bodies, because it brings
convulsions, which happily may be spoken concerning Hellebore in substance, of
such as did grow in hotter clymates then ours is, or of some other kind then
we now use: for we do not find any such great danger in any of that which is
now in use with us; yet it is not safe to give it to children, women with
child, or weak persons. It is corrected with Mastick, Cynamon, Anise-seed,
Origanum, etc. to a dram of Hellebore add half a scruple of any of these. It
is given more safely in decoction or in infusion then in substance. The
Ancients did infuse the root a day and night in vinegar, and then used it.
Macerate or steep the bark (casting away the middle) three days in
Quince-wine, or Muskadell, dry it, and keep it for your use. It may be given
also in broth with some seeds as before mentioned. Also you may give it in wine
of Raisons, Oxymel, syrup of Quinces, or with juice of Quinces. Some give it
with Scammonie to quicken its virtue. Note that all preparations of Hellebore
which are made by sharp and acute liquours, such as are spirit of wine,
Anise-seed-water, or spirit of Anise-seed, Aromatickes, or oil of such, also
the putting Hellebore into Radish-root, and so to take it, (except you desire a
vomiting or turbatory medicine to be made of white or black Hellebore) are to
be rejected.

The Dose.
The dose in substance is from a scruple to two scruples, in infusion or
decoction from a dram to two drams, or more.

Such Medicines as are made of black Hellebore.
The distilled water of black Hellebore both of the leaves and roots. The
extract thereof Syrup of Roses solutive with Hellebore, Oxymel Helleboratum.

CHAP. 38. De Hermodactylis, of Hermodactiles.
HErmodactyles, are whitish roots about the bigness of a Chestnut, smooth,
flattish, and sharp at the one end, but somewhat fuller at the other, growing
upon I know not what plant, coming from I know not what place, and truly may
be called, opprobrium medicorum, the shame or disgrace of Physicians.

The names.
This root is called in Latin Hermodactylus, in English Hermodactyle, and
Hermodactyles.

The temperament.
They are hot and dry in the second degree.

The best kind.
The best are such as are white both within and without, of some good bigness,
which being lightly bruised and made in powder, look like wheat flour, and of
a pleasant and sweet taste. Such as are worm-eaten are to be rejected.

The duration.
They will keep good three or four years.

The inward use.
They purge chiefly thick and tough phlegm from the joints, therefore they
profit in any kind of Gowt, yea, they are so available in the Gowt, that this
root is called Theriaca Arthritidis, Treacle for the Gowt. It is used also in
the French Pox

The manner of administering.
They are given in potions, drinks, Pills, etc.

A Potion.
Take of Hermodactyles, cut in thin slices, or bruised Seen, Epithymum, of each
two drams, Raisons of the Sun stoned half an ounce, licorish bruised a dram,
Ginger bruised half a dram; make an infusion in a sufficient quantity of water
upon hot embers all night, strain it, to which add of syrup of Roses one ounce.

A purging Drink against watery humors.
Take of Hermodactyles, of Lignum vitae, of each three ounces, Mechoacan four
ounces, Ginger two drams, Sarsaparilla, Licorish, of each two ounces, of
Nutmegs two drams, of Seabind-weed one ounce and a half: cut and bruise those
those things that are to be cut and bruised; put them all in a vessel with
three gallons of new Beer (in a bag) adding thereto of Seue an ounce. After six
days take a draught of it in the morning, and before supper D. Sadlerus Prax.
Med. f. 205,

The external use.
They are outerwardly used in the Gowt, to ease pain: they are also good to
cleanse wounds, and to consume proud flesh therein, as also to heal old wounds
and Ulcers.

A Poultes to ease the Gowt.
Take of new milk a quart, Barley-meal a pint or more, Harmodactyles in powder
three ounces, the yolks of four Eggs, Saffron in powder two drams, crumbs of
bread so much as is sufficient to make a poultes, apply it warm.

Or
Take new Cow Dung a pound and a half, Hog's Grease half a pound, or twelve
ounces, Hermodactyles in powder two ounces and a half, make a poultes and apply
it.

The hurtful quality, and the corrective means.
There are two things in the use of Hermodactyles to be minded. First, that the
hurtful quality may be taken away; for it troubles the stomach, and causes
windiness; now to help this, let it be mixed with Cummin-seed, Mastick,
Ginger, Long-pepper, Mint, Cynamon, Cloves, or Mace. Secondly, that means be
used to quicken its slow operation, and (for of it self it works but slowly) by
sharp means. Mesue commends Sea-onion for this purpose, if Trosses be made of
the juice thereof with the powder of Hermodactyle., Ginger, and Sal gem.
Neither is it unprofitable to this purpose, if you make Trosses or little cakes
thereof with Ginger, and the juice of Radish. In purging from the joints, it
will be proper to mix with it a little Eupherbium well corrected. Also if the
essence thereof be drawn forth with spirit of wine or the like, it will be very
useful for the forenamed diseases. They are rarely given alone, but by
decoction, infusion, or mixed with something to correct the noxious, or
hurtful quality thereof.

These compounds are made of Hermodactyles.
Pills of Hermodactyles, Pills Arthriticall, Electuary Caryocostinum, Electuary
benedicta laxativa, extract thereof, Pulvis Arthriticus.

The Dose.
They are given in substance from two scruples to a dram and a half, in
infusion or decoction from two drams to three drams.

CHAP. 39. De Hyperico, of Saint John's Wort.
SAint Johnswort is an herb that has brownish, upright, hard, round stalks,
two foot high, having two small leaves set one against another at every place,
which are of a deep green color, somewhat like the leaves of lesser Centory,
but narrower, and full of small holes in every leaf, which are easily perceived
being held up against the light, the flowers are yellow, which being bruised
yield a reddish juice, the root is hard and woody, with diverse strings, and of
a brownish color.

The names.
It is called in Latin Hypericon, and Hypericum, also of some, Fuga Demonum,
quia Demon inde fugere creditur, because they superstitiously imagine that it
drove away the Devil. Some call it Perforata, because of the small holes in the
leaves that seem to be bored through. In English it is called Saint John's Wort,
and Saint Johns-grasse.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of subtle parts.

The duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
It is diuretical and vulnerary. A dram of the seeds being taken, does purge
choler, causes the stone to come away, kills Worms, resists venom, and
helps the biting of venomous creatures, also provokes urine, and the courses
in Women, and helps the Falling sickness, Palsy, and Sciatica, being drunk
forty days together. A decoction thereof cures tertian and quartane Agues: it
is most excellent for all inward wounds in any place, and for congealed blood,
or spitting of blood, or vomiting blood, by reason of a vein broken in any
place; it is very useful in all vulnerary potions, for it resolves, opens,
consolidates, and is of a glutinous nature, and truly I know not a better wound
herb. Being made into powder and taken in Wine, it cures the Gowt, and is much
commended against the Jaundise. The Salt of S. John's Wort helps the Plurisey,
and expels the Stone, you may give a dram- thereof in any convenient liquor.
The distilled water of S. John's Wort profits such as have the Falling
sickness, (especially taken with the root, or seeds of Pyony) as also the
Apoplexy and Palsy; the dose is two or three ounces every day. It also
stays the Flux of the belly being taken with Red Wine, and cures inward
wounds.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction or in powder.

Against the Jaundise.
Take of the herb and flowers of St. John's Wort two handfulls, boil them in a
pint and a half of Wine or water, strain it, and give of it with Sugar for
diverse mornings together; This ^to^herus does much commend, and further
advises to put the herb in your Shoes, bosom, and to wear it about your
head. Stocher. prax. aur. f. 185.

Against spitting or vomiting of blood.
Take of the seeds of ^t. John's Wort in powder half a dram, or a dram, of the
juice of Knot-grasse one ounce, or of Plantaine-water two ounces, of syrup of
Quinces half an ounce, mix them together, and take it.

The outward use.
The leaves cure all green wounds, (except such as are in the head) as also
burns and scalds. The herb dried and made into powder is effectual to cure
wounds and sores, and rotten festered Ulcers, being strewed thereon. The
distilled water cures also wounds being washed therewith. The Oil of St.
John's Wort either simple or compound is good for all green wounds, and old
sores and Ulcers in the legs, or else where that are hard to be cured, and is
effectual for all Cramps and aches in the joints, and pains in the Reins,
but the compound Oil is much better. The simple Oil is made thus.

Take four ounces of the flowers of St. John's Wort, infuse them in a pint of
Sallet-Oile, and three ounces of white Wine, set them in the Sun for ten or
twelve days, then boil them in a Balneo, or Kettle of seething water, strain
it, and put in new flowers, and let it stand so long again, then strain it as
before, and renew it a third time, and strain it again, which being hot, put
two ounces of pure Turpentine to it, and keep it for green wounds, or sinevvs
that are pricked, or any vvound made with a venomous vveapon.

Gerard has a compound Oil made thus.
Take white Wine two pintes, oile-Olive four pounds, oil of Turpentine two
pounds, the leaves, flovvers and seeds of St. John's vvort two great handfulls,
gently bruised, put them altogether into a great double Glass, and set it in
the Sun 8 or 10 days, then boil them in the same Glass, per balneum Mariae,
that is in a kettle of water with some straw in the bottom, wherein the
Glass must stand to boil: which done, strain the liquor from the herbs, and
do as you did before, putting in the like quantity of herbs, flovvers, and
seeds, but not any more Wine.

Another Oil of St. John's Wort excellent against wounds.
Take of Sallet-Oile two pound, of earth worms vvashed and flit five ounces,
of the flovvers and tops of St. Johns-vvort half a pound, of small
Centory-flovvers, and of the tops of svveet Trefoile, of each two drams, Gum
Elmne one ounce; let them stand in the Sun certain days, then strain it, and
keep it for your use, you may add some Turpentine if you will.

The Dose.
The seeds are given from a dram to two drams.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water, Salt, Tincture thereof, Oil.

CHAP. 40. De Jalapio, of Jalap.
JAlap is a root like Mechoacan, but covered with a black bark, and grayish
within, being put to the fire a gumminesse will arise, and sometimes flame.
It is brought to us in thin slices, some bigger, some lesser. In taste it is
pleasant, but gummie, whereby it sticks to the teeth being chevved.

The Names.
It is called Bryonia mechoacan nigricans, Chelopa, Celopa, Celapa, Gelapum,
Gelapo, Jalapium, Jalapa, Jalappa, Jalappium, Gialapa, Mechoacanna nigra,
Salapa, Xalapa, Zaqualtipan, Rhabarbarum nigrum; In English it is called, Black
Mechoacan, or Jalap.

The temperament.
It seems to be like Mechoacan in quality.

The best sort.
The best is that which is hard and solid, not too old.

The duration.
It will keep good two or three years.

The inward use.
It purges Phlegmatic, Choleric, and Melancholic humors, but chiefly watery
humors: Therefore it is profitable in the Dropsy and cachecticall diseases,
that is, such as are subject to the Green sickness. It strengthens the
Liver, Spleen and stomach.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, in Pills, in Boles, and in Potions.

In Powder.
Take of Jalap in powder two scruples, or a dram, cream of Tartar a scruple,
Oil of Cynamon and Anise-seed, of each a drop, mix them together, and give it
in Succorie-water.

Or
Take Jalap and Cream, of Tartar, of each two scruples, make them in powder,
and give it as before.

In Pills.
Take of Jalap in powder two scruples, of Scammonie three or four grains, Oil
of Cynamon a drop, with syrup of Roses, make Pills and give them.

In a Bole or lump.
Take of Jalap in powder two scruples, Cream of Tartar in powder a scruple,
Oil of Anise-seed two drops, Conserve of Roses half an ounce, make a Bole,
and give it.

In a Potion.
Take Seen, Polipodium of the Oak bruised, of each two drams, Jalap cut in thin
slices a dram and a half, Anise-seed and Fennell-seed bruised, of each a
drame, make an infusion in half a pint of strong beer, upon Embers all
night, then strain it, and add to the clear of the electuary Diaphoenicon two
drams, syrup of Roses half an ounce; make a Potion and give it.

The hurtful quality.
It many times troubles the stomach, and causes a Nauseousnes thereof, or
inclination to vomit; therefore the safest way is to give it with some Oil of
Anise-seed, Cynamon, Mint, or with Anise-seed and Ginger. It works well in
white Wine. To quicken it, you may mix therewith a few grains of Scammonie,
or the extract of Scammonie.

Of those compounds made of Jalap.
There are made thereof, extract of Jalap, Magister of Jalap.

The Dose.
The dose in powder is from a scruple to a dram; in infusion from a dram and a
half to two drams and a half.

CHAP. 41. De Jride, of Flower de Luce, or Orris.
IRis is a root long and knobbie, with many strings hanging at the end; but
being dry it is without them and white.

The names.
It is called in Latin Jris and Jreos, now it is called Jris a Coelestis arcus
similitudine, from the Raine-bowe, whose various colors the flower thereof
does represent; In English it is called, Flower de Luce.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, but the root being green is hotter,
then when it is dry, and hot in the mouth and Throat.

The duration.
The roots dry will keep good a year or two.

The inward Use.
The fresh jucie of the root of Flower de Luce' purges Choler, Phlegm, and
watery humors, and works both upward and downevvard. It is chiefly useful
in the Dropsey, Jaundise and quotidian Agues. Being boiled in water and
vinegar, and drunken, it helps the stinging and biting of venomous creatures.
If it be boiled in Wine and drunk, it provokes urine, helps the Colic, and
brings down the courses in women. It is much commended in the Cough and
shortness of breath, and to help expectoration, or spitting. It helps the
diseases of the Liver and Spleen the worms in the belly, and eases gripings
and stitches of the side, as also the shakings of Agues: it is good in Cramps
and convulsions that arise from cold humors, for it vvarmeth and comfort
the parts. Some say it helps those whose sperme passes from them unavvares;
others conceive it consumes and vvastes the sperm.

The manner of administering it
It is given in Potions, in Pills, etc. But the fresh juice is most in use.

Take the juice of Ireos three drams or half an ounce syrup of Roses, Solutive
an ounce, Cynamon in powder a scruple, mix them together: make a potion, and
give it.

Or
Take of the juice of Ireos three drams, Elaterium six grains (or rather but
three) mingle them together and take it in the morning fasting. D. Sadler.
prax. mea. f. 203.

The external use.
The juice being put up into the nostrils, provokes neesing, and thereby
purges the head of phlegm. It gives ease to such as have the Piles; and eases
the pain of the head, and procures rest if it be applied with Rose-cake and
vinegar, it cleanses spots in the eyes, and helps vvatery eyes by cleansing
them. It helps the pain and swelling of the Cods being thus used.

Take of the roots in powder half an ounce, Cynamon, and Dill, of each two
drams, Saffron a scruple, mix them well together, lay them on a scarlet-cloth,
moistened in white Wine, and apply it vvarme to the Cods. The roots are
effectual to vvarme and comfort all cold joints and sinevvs, as also to ease
the Gowt and Sciatica, and mollifieth, dissolveth and consumes all scrophulous
rumors and svvellings, especially made into an Oil called Oleum Irinum,
which Oil also helps the Cramp and Convulsion, the rheum that is cold and
distilling from the head, and being nointed on the breast, it helps to
extenuate, or make thin tough and cold phlegm, making it more easy to spit
out: it he peth the stench of the nostrils, the pain and noise in the ears,
and much eases the painful Piles. The root it self green or in powder does
cleanse, heal, and incarnate wounds, and covers with flesh the naked bones
that Ulcers have made bare, and is also good to cleanse and hea^e up Fistulaes
and Cancers that are hard to be cured.

The green roots bruised and applied to black and blew marks in the skin,
takes them away and all other discolorings of the skin, whether morphew or
the like; but it is better to apply it with red-Rose-water, and a little
Lin-seed-oile, or oil of Parmacity (as the vulgar call it) in manner of a
poultes. A decoction of the roo^s gargled in the mouth, eases the Tooth ach,
and helps a strong or stinking breath.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
Jreos offends the stomach, and causes blood to be voided, if given in too
great a dose, and to weak persons. It is not safe to give it to women with
child, because it brings down the courses, yea, a Pessary made of the juice
with Honey, and put up into the body, brings away the birth; therefore it is
not safe to give it alone, but with good correctives. In gripings of the bowels
give it with Mastick: in the joynt-gowt with Castor: in the Dropsy give it
with Honey of Roses. That it offend not the Liver, give it with Rubarbe, juice
of Agrimony, Species Diarrhodon, etc. It may be given with a little Wine and
Cynamon, adding thereto a little Manna, or Honey of Roses, or the juice may be
given with a decoction of Raisons of the Sun, or with Posset Drink. The juice
may be boiled (for by boiling it loses of its strong operation) and given with
Sugar, syrup of Violets, or in an Egg to sup up, but let the pure juice only be
given, after it has stood a while to clear.

The Dose.
The juice of the root is given from six drams to an ounce and a half, or two
ounces. The powder of the root is given from a dram to two drams,

Note that the roots of Ireos do not all work alike, for in some climate they
work stronger then in another.

These following are made with Ireos.
An extract, A wine, Species Diaireos simpl. Diaireos Solomonis, Trechisci
bechisi albi, Oil of Orris.

CHAP. 42. De Lapide Lazuli, and Armeno of Azure-stone, or Lazul-stone, and of
Armene-stone.
LApis Lazuli, or Azure-stone, is a stone of a sky color, with certain veins
of gold or silver in it.

Armene-stone differs little from the other, only having some greenish spots in
it. They are both found in the same place, or dug out of the same Mine, only
the Lapis Lazuli is found more frequently in the Golden Mines, and Lapis
Armenus in the Silver Mines, also the Lapis Lazuli has more maturity then the
other.

The names.
Azure-stone is called in Latin Lapis caeruleus, Lapis Lazuli, Lapis Cyaneus,
in English Azure-stone, and Lazul-stone.

The other is called in Latin, Lapis Armenius and Armenus, because it was
brought from Armenia, but now it is found in Germany; in English Armeniack, and
Armene-stone.

The Temperament.
Lapis Lazuli is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the second degree,
and dry in the third.

Lapis Armenus is hot and dry in the beginning of the first degree, or hot in
the first degree, and dry in the second.

The difference between them.
Lapis Armenus is more skie-coloured, and has green spots, as also sometimes
black spots in it, and is more brittle, and sooner dissolveth.

Lapis Lazuli is sometimes with Golden and sometimes with Silver veins, and is
not easily broken.

The duration.
They will keep good many years without any corruption.

The inward use.
Lapis Armenius purges black Choler effectually from the brain, and is useful
in melancholy diseases, as against madness, melancholy, giddiness of the
head, pains of the head, Falling sickness, Nightmare; against diseases arising
from fear and grief, etc. against the Leprosy, Obstructions of the Spleen,
Cancer, black Morphew, and all melancholy diseases; being twelve times washed,
or oftener; it pureth only downwards, for otherwise it works upwards by vomit.

Lapis Lazuli is of a hot burning nature. It has a double or twofold formal
specific virtue, for by the one it purges melancholy, and by the other it
strengthens the heart wonderfully, and recreates or cheereth the spirits. It
avails in melancholy diseases, stoppings of the Spleen, quartane Ague, and the
Piles, being taken with a decoction of Seen and Fennel-seed. It cleanses the
veins and blood from corruption, and is profitable for diseases arising from
fear, grief and sadness, whereby the heart is oppressed, it purges the breast
and lungs, by which means it helps such as are short-breathed and stopped with
phlegm, it drives away melancholy Fevers, and preserves from the Leprosy. It
brings down the courses in Women. See Trallianus de Melancholia, cap. 16. f.
127. Editione 1560.

These are much of one nature, only some hold that Lapis Armenus is the
stronger in operation, others say that Lapis Lazuli is the stronger in working.

The manner of administering them.
They are chiefly given in Pills and Confections.

Pills against Melancholy.
Take of Hiera picra, and Epithymum, of each four scrupls, Agarick and Lapis
Armenus, of each four scruples, Scammony two scruples or a dram, Cloves twenty;
with the juice of Citrons make a mass for Pills. The Dose is two scruples or a
dram.

Against faintness of the heart, and sadness.
Take of Lapis Lazuli prepared two scruples, of the juice of Borrage, or
Buglosse half an ounce, of the bone of a Stags heart ten grains in powder, mix
them together, and give it.

The external use.
Lapis Lazuli being hung about the neck as an Amulet, keeps children from
fearfulness, sharpens the sight, prevents faintings in women with child, and
hinders miscarrying; but near the time of their delivery it must be taken away,
lest it hinder the birth from coming forth. It is used in medicines for to
clear the eyes, and to take away the hairs of the eyelids.

The hurtful quality
These being taken unprepared cause vomiting, and offend the stomach. They are
prepared by washing and by burning.

By washing thus, bruise them, and make them in fine powder, wash them in fair
water, till the water become clear after washing. Others do thus, after they
are thus washed they dry them in the Sun, or hot place, and wash them again,
and so a third time or oftener if need be; and last of all, they wash them with
Borrage, Buglosse, or Rose Water, or infuse them in the juice of either, and
being dry keep them to use, and when they use them, they add thereto Cloves,
Hiera picra, Sal-niter, etc.

By burning thus, take Lapis Lazuli what quantity you will, burn it in a
crucible, then make it into powder, and wash it first in common water, then
wash it in Rose Water, or Borrage-water, dry it and wash it once or twice more,
or oftener till the water look clear, then dry it and keep it for your use.
Note, that being burned or washed they only work downwards.

The Dose.
The Dose (being washed) is from half a dram to a dram.

These things are made of them.
Lapis Lazuli washed or prepared. Pills of Lapis Lazuli essence, or extract of
Magister. Oil or liquour.

CHAP. 43. De Ligno Aloe, of Wood-Aloes.
LIgnum Aloes is a wood somewhat blackish on the outside, and more gray and
discolored within, brought from India.

The names.
It is called in Latin Xylaloes, Yyloaloes, Agallochum, and lignum Aloes, in
English Wood-Aloes, or Wood of the Aloe-tree.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, astringent, and a little bitter, and of
subtle parts.

The best kind.
The best is that which is knobbed, or in uneven pieces, very brittle and
breaking short, somewhat black on the outside, and more gray and discolored
within, of a small sent, until it be burned, and then it yields a most fragrant
odor, or small, also being put to the fire, it will sweat out an oily
moisture, and that with small bubbles, which soon vanish away, and being put
into water it will swim.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
It strengthens all the inward parts, but especially the brain, which it does
wonderfully corroborate and dry, therefore it is useful in the Apoplexy,
Palsy, Lethargy, and loss of memory, also against faintings of the spirits
and cold diseases of the heart and stomach, for it does much conduce to weak
livers and fainting spirits, helps the Dysenteries, or Lasks and Pleurisies.
It dries up defluxions of rheumatick humors, flowing from the brain, and
hinders sweating. It does strengthen a weak and languishing stomach, takes
away putrefaction, dries up humidity, and expels wind. By reason of its
bitterness it kills worms, and is put into diverse cordials and Antidotes.
It helps also the cold diseases of the womb. The extract thereof is good for
the forementioned diseases.

The manner of administering it.
It is used chiefly in powder and electuaries.

A powder against a moist and cold brain.
Take of lignum Aloes in powder a dram, of pure Sugar six drams, mix them well
together, and take thereof every morning as much as will lie on six pence dry,
or in broth.

An Electuary for the same.
Take of wood- Aloes in powder two scruples, species Aromaticum rosatum a dram,
conserve of Betony, conserve of Rosemary, of each an ounce and a half, spirit
of Marjoram two or three drops, make an Electuary, and take morning and evening
thereof as much as a small Nut.

The external use.
It is used outwardly in fumigations to dry up rheum, and in quilts for the
same purpose. A fumigation thereof (say some) provokes the flowers in women.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given to hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The Dose is from ten grains to twenty or thirty.

Medicines made thereof.
Extract thereof. Species Diaxylaloes.

CHAP. 44. De Manna, of Manna.
MAnna is a condensed dew, falling from the air somewhat like carved Honey,
but in small grains like Mastaick. Some will have it to be a kind of
Gum-issuing from trees, but the former is more probable.

The Names.
It is called in Hebrew (...) Man, quasi praeparatus cibus; from the Hebrew
root (...) Manah, paravit, constituit, for it was food prepared by God for the
Israelites, or Manna may come from (...) Mah, quid, and (...) Na, quaeso, What
is it? quia nesciebant quid esset. For when that dew fell about their tents,
every one asked each other what it was. In Caldee it is called (...) Manna: in
Syriac (...), in Arabic (...) Man, and (...) Alman, in Persian (...)
Tarnagabin, in Greek (...), and (...) aerium mel. The Septuagint translate it
according to the Hebrew (...), Man, Exodus 16.31, 33. but in the New Testament
it is called (...), John 6.31. Heb. 9.4. In Latin Manna, Mel aerium, Mel roris,
seu roscidum, Mel sylvestre, Manna purgatoria. It is called also Tereniabin,
Thereniabin, and Trungibin, Teringibil, in English Manna.

The Temperament.
Manna is hot and moist in the first degree.

The kinds.
There are three kinds of Manna. First, that which is found on leaves, and is
called, Manna de folio, this is most perfect and good. Secondly, that which is
gathered from bou^hs and trunks of trees, and is called Manna ligni, vel
trunci, but is not so good as the former. Thirdly, that which falls on the
earth; or on stones and sticks, and is called Manna terrae. Or Manna is of two
sorts, one called Manna liquida, which is liquid and thin, like some kind of
Honey; the other is called Tereniabin, which is Manna coagulated, and is hard
being in greater or lesser pieces. Ant. Musa exam. suc. praedent. f. 341.
Tragos. aromat. fruct. etc. histor. f. 108.

The best kind.
The best is that which is white, grained like Mastick, being sweet and
pleasant in taste The best is called Manna Calabrensis.

How Manna is adulterated.
Manna is adulterated with Sugar-pellets, and the green leaves of Seen rolled
up with them: or with Amylum Seen, etc. but this deceit is soon discerned by
the taste. See Levinus Lemnius herb. bibl. explicat. cap. 3. f. 12.

The duration.
It will keep good a year.

The time of gathering Manna.
Manna is gathered in April and May.

The inward use.
Manna purges choler gently and hot humors, therefore it is profitable in
burning Fevers and Phrensies: it lenifieth the hoarsness of the throat,
quenches thirst, and eases the cough, and is convenient in the Pleurisy, and
inflammation of the lungs. It may be given to such as are troubled with the
stopping of their urine, and to such as have weak Kidneys, and also to such as
have Ulcers therein. Women with child, and children may safely take it.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Potions.

A Potion.
Take of Manna two ounces, or two ounces and a half, dissolve it in four ounces
of clean broth or posset drink, strain it and give it.

Or
Take of Manna two ounces, Pulpe of Tamarinds one ounce and a half, dissolve
first the Manna in four ounces of Posset Drink, and then the Tamarids, make a
Potion. A Bole

Take of Manna half an ounce, of Cassia newly drawn one ounce, with Sugar make
a Bole.

Tabulates, or Cakes.
Take of Manna one ounce, Cream of Tartar in powder a dram, make Tabulates or
Cakes thereof, and give them as need requires. Schroder. Pharm med. Chym l. 4.
f. 249.

Against the Colic.
Take an ounce of Manna, and two ounces of the Oil of sweet Almonds; dissolve
the Manna in the Oil and give it.

Note, that Manna is not to be boiled (for then it does more hurt then good)
but only dissolved, and so strained through a clean cloth, casting the dross
away.

The hurtful quality.
Manna does not profit in intermittent Fevers, nor is it safe to give it in
cold diseases, for in such it will more hurt then help.

The Dose.
The Dose is (in children) from three drams to an ounce. For persons of years
the Dose is from an ounce and a half to two ounces, or three ounces. Here note
that these Doses are to be given only in broth or posset drink, for if it be
given in the infusion of Seen or such like, then the Dose is to be less.

These Medicines are made of Manna.
Electuary Diacassia with Manna. Electuary Lenitive of Manna Vide Spirit of
Manna. Schroder. Pharm. Med. Chym. l 4. f. 249. Water of Manna, Syrup of Manna.
Vide Tretag. aur. Med. f. 423.

Whether Manna be more convenient in hot, or in cold diseases?
Heurnius, Massaria, Platearius, Sennertus, and some others deny the use of
Manna in hot burning fevers, and commend the use of it in cold diseases, and in
old persons: now the reason they forbid the use of Manna in burning fevers, is
from a place in Galon de aliment. facult. l. 1. c. ^8 f. 120. and de sanit.
tuend l. 4. where he says that Honey and all sweet things are not convenient
in hot diseases and hot seasons, because they are apt to turn into choler. But
others do approve of Manna in burning fevers, and daily experience does
witness how useful it is in hot diseases; For my own part I have known the
use of it above twenty years in Frensies, burning fevers, etc. and that with
good success; but the best and safest way is to give it with infusion of Seen,
with cream of Tartar, or with a decoction of prunes and Tamarinds, etc.
Actuarius meth. med. f. 340. VVecher. antid. spec. f. 222. Theod. Dorstenius de
herb. caet. simpl. med. f. 285. Constantinus Afric. de gradibus f. 347. Fernel.
meth. med. l. 5. f 112. Tragos. hist. Ind. med. f. 110. Matthiol. Comment. in
lib. 1. Diascor f. 85.

Whether the Manna now in use among Physicians be such as the children of
Israel had in the. wilderness?
To which I answer in the negative, and that for these reasons. First, because
that Manna which the Israelites had, was miraculous, and but for a time, Joshua
5.11, 12. Nehemiah 9.20, 21. now that it was miraculous appears plainly by
that place in Exodus 16.18. And when they did mete it with an Omer, he that
gathered much, had nothing over, and he that gathered little, had no lack. But
our Manna has continued many years. Secondly, the heat of the Sun melted that,
but the heat of the Sun or fire condenses, or hardens ours. Thirdly, that
putrefied in one night, when it was kept contrary to Gods command, Exodus 16.20.
ours does not so, but is durable, and will keep good many months. Fourthly,
that was hard to be ground in a Mill, or beat in a Mortar, Numb. 8.11. ours not
so, but soft, and being put on the tongue it melts. Fifthly, that was
nourishing, ours purging. Sixthly, that fell all the year, except on the
Sabbath ours is gathered in the Summer.

CHAP. 45. De Mastiche,, of Mastich.
MAstick is a gum, or a gummie rosen in small whitish grains, flowing from the
Lentisk-tree. It is called in Latin Mastiche and Mastix, in English Mastich,
or Masticke.

The temperament.
Mastick is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best kind.
The best is that which is clear, splendent, white and brittle, and is brought
from the Isle of Chio.

The duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
Mastick is excellent for the stomach, and does much strengthen the same,
stays vomiting and nauseous subversions thereof, and helps the retaining
virtue of the stomach, and brings good concoction and digestion. It stops
the flux of the belly, and profits those that spit blood, and that have coughs,
being taken with syrup of Coltsfoot or the like, it stays the acrimonie, or
sharpness of strong purging medicines, and is a good corrector of them: it
stays thin distillations falling from the brain, and thikneth them,
especially in Fevers, and preventeth the Falling Sickness and giddiness of
the head arising from vapors if a few grains thereof be taken after meat,
and helps also the stinking of the breath. If three or four grains thereof
be taken at night when you go to bed, it eases all pains in the stomach, and
prevents the like for the future. The powder of Mastick with Amber and
Venice-Turpentine is good against the running of the reins, and for both
whites and reds in women. Pliny says, it provokes urine Plin. Not. Hist. l.
24. c. 7. f. 184. Oil of Mastick chymicall is useful for the forenamed
diseases.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, in electuary, in powder, etc.

In decoction.
Take of mastick half an ounce, boil it in three or four pintes of water;
Give of the decoction often to drink of. It is profitable in loosenes and
fluxes of the belly.. Schroder. Pharm. med. chym. l. 4. f. 194. Mastick must
not be too much boiled for fear of losing its virtue.

An electuary for the cough proceeding from thin rheum, and against spitting
of blood.
Take of mastick and Olibanum in powder, of each two scruples, Conserve of red
Roses two ounces, Diacodion half an ounce, mix them together, and take
thereof morning and evening as much as a small nutmeg.

The outward use.
Mastick being infused, or steeped in Rose Water, is good to wash the mouth
withal to fasten loose teeth, and to strengthen the gums, or mastick heated in
wine, and the Gums, mouth, and teeth washed therewith cleanses the corruption
thereof, and fastneth the looseness both of Gums and Teeth. It is used in
ointments and plasters to mundifie and heal ulcers and sores, to stay the
freeting fluxes of humors to them, to dry them up, and to fill up the
hollownesse. It strengthens and binds also the parts whereunto it is
applied, and comfort the aching joints and sinews very much; it is used also
in plasters and ointments to strengthen and comfort the stomach. Mastick
dissolved in milk, and dropped into the eyes, takes away the dimnesse thereof.
The teeth being rubbed with the powder thereof, it whitens them. Being held in
the mouth and chewed upon, it does dry and comfort the brain, draws phlegm
from the brain, and stays the falling down of humors, and also causes a
sweet breath. It is used to lay the hairs of the eyelids even. The same
spread on Velvet or Plush and laid upon the temples, stays the Rheum from
falling down, and eases the toothache. It knitteth broken bones. The oil of
Mastick made by infusion and ebullition, or boiling, is mollifying, comforting
and binding, very useful in diseases of the Mother, against all pains in the
belly and stomach, the hardness of tumors, and pains of the joints and
sinews; it also comfort the brain, and strengthens the liver and heart.

Against pain of the temples proceeding from vapors ascending up to the brain.
Take of Mastick and Olibanum in powder, of each half an ounce, Bole Armoniack
in powder two drams, with the white of an Egg, and a little Vinegar, make a
poultesse, and apply it (on lint or towe) to the temples.

Against chaps of the hands and lips.
Take of Mastick in powder half an ounce, Deers-suet an ounce, Oil of Roses
four ounces, make an Ointment, by meking the Deers-suet with the Oil, and
keeping it stirred, when it is almost cold put in the Mastick, and keep it for
your use.

The hurtful quality.
Mastick causes belchings in the stomach, against which you may eat Carraway
or Anise-seed-Comfits.

The Dose.
The Dose is from five grains to ten, or twelve, but give not too much of it.

Of such Medicines as are made of Mastick.
Pills of Mastick, spirit of Mastick, Oil Chymicall of Mastick. Aqua
Mastichina, Oil by infusion and boiling, Ointment of Mastick.

CHAP. 46. De Mechoacana, of Mechoacan.
MEchoacan is a whitish root cut in thin slices, brought to us from beyond the
Sea, somewhat like white Brionie-root.

The names.
It is called in Latin Mechoacanna, Mechoacana, Mechoaca, Mechoaca Peruviana,
Mechoacanum Indicum, Rhabarbarum album, and Rhabarbarum Mechoacanum; in English
it is called Mechoacan, Mechoaca, and Indian Bryonie. Now it is called
Mechoacan, because it is brought from a place in the Province of New Spain,
called Mechoacan, near the City Mexico.

The temperament
Mechoacan is hot in the first degree and dry in the second, consisting of an
airie substance and subtle parts, as also of an earthy quality, or somewhat
binding.

The best kind.
The best Mechoacan is that which is new, whitish, in taste like meal, or
insipid, not old or wormeaten.

The duration.
It will keep good two or three years. The root is kept good and much preserved
if it be kept in wax, says Tragosus Med. Ind. hist. c. 35. f. 81. Monardus
gives counsel to roll it up in Sear-cloth. Monard. f. 26.

The inward use.
Mechoacan purges chiefly thick phlegm, water, and serous humors, and that
from the head, stomach, belly, reins, nerves and joints; therefore it is
profitable in a long continued headache, and lethargy, in pains of the joints,
reins and womb, in the Falling sickness, Catarrhe, Rheum, diseases of the
breast, in old Coughs; shortness of breath, Jaundise, stoppings of the Liver
and Spleen. It is very useful in the Dropsy; for it draws away water and
phlegm, and also strengthens the Liver, and inward parts; It is commended in
the French Pox, Kings Evil, Scurvy, and Gowt, and causes one to make water,
eases the Colic, and expels wind wonderfully. It helps inveterate
Agues, whether Quotidian, or Tertian. It does much conduce to the purging of
crude and viscous, or tough humors in the stomach and breasts of children. It
works without any hurtful quality, molestation, nauseousnesse, or griping,
and is void of any hurtful quality; for having done its work, it leaves the
inward parts strengthened, without debility and weakness, contrary to most
purgative Medicines. Old-men, children, women with child, and weak persons may
safely take this inoffensive Medicine.

The manner of administering it
It is given in Powder, Pills, Boles, Tabulates, or Roulets, and Potions. But
the best way is to give it in white Wine, for so it works best: It may be given
with a little Cynamon in broth, or with Mastick, Anise-seed, or Fennel-seed.
Note that the powder given by it self, or with Wine does work better, then
mixed with Syrups or other things.

A Powder against the Dropsy.
Take of Seen and Mechoacan of each two drams, Ginger, and species Diagalanga,
of each three grains, Diagredium two grains, make a powder and give it in broth.

Pills.
Take of Mechoacan in powder a scruple, Gum Gutta six or eight grains, with
syrup of Roses make Pills, and give them with Physical observation.

A Potion.
Take of Mechocan in powder a dram, or a dram and a half, white Wine or
Fennel-water four ounces; let them stand all night, or all one day shaking them
two or three times together, then put to them of syrup of Roses laxative an
ounce mix them together, and make a Potion. Or you may give it only with the
White Wind.

Tabulates.
Take of Mechoacan in fine powder a dram and a half, of Diagredium three grains
with Sugar dissolved in a little Rose Water, make cakes, dry them gently, and
give them for a Dose.

A Bele.
Take of Mechoacan in powder a dram, of the Electuary called Diacarthamum two
drams, with syrup of Storchados make a bole or lump, and eat it in a morning
fasting.

Note two errors of Monardus, the one is in that he says, hac radice purgatos
esse fortiores, quam ante; the other that after the taking of a little broth,
or food, it cease to work any more, which is contrary to daily experience.
Tragos. Med. Ind. Hist. f. 82.

The hurtful quality,
Although it work without any hurtful quality; yet in hot diseases, and pure
tertian Fevers, and also in hot and dry bodies, and in such as are subject to
be bound, it is not safe to give it.

The Dose.
The Dose to a child is a scruple or a scruple and a half, to persons of
years, in substance from a dram to two drams: in infusion from two drams to
half an ounce.

Medicines made of Mechoacan.
Pills of Mechoacan, extract of Mechoacan, both simple and compound. Vide
Schroder. Pharm. Med Chym. l. 4. f. 232.

CHAP. 47. De Myrobalanis. of Myrobalans, or purging Indian Plummes.
MYrobalans are fruits brought us from the East- Indies.

The names, and kinds.
There are five kinds of Myrobalanes. First, the yellow Myrobalane, or purging
Indian Plum, as big as a reasonable Plum, somewhat long and not round, of a
yellower color then the rest, called in Latin Myrobalanus Citrina. The second
is the Chebule, or purple Myrobalane, called in Latin Myrobalanus Chebula, and
is the greatest and longest of all the five sorts, of a blackish purple color
on the outside, while it is fresh and also dry, being five square as the
former, of the thickest substance, and more fleshy then any other, and with the
smallest stone in the middle, not fully so hard to break as the former, but
with the smallest kernel therein. The third sort is the Bellerick, or round
Myrobalane, yet being as it were three square in many, of a pale russetish
color when they are fresh, but of a dark or dusty whitish color on the
outside being dry, of the thinnest substance, or least fleshy of any of them:
the stone whereof is thick and greater then any other, proportionable to the
fruit, very hard to break, with a kernel within of a reasonable bigness, and
is called in Latin Myrobalanus Bellerica. The fourth sort is the six square
Myrobalane, or beaded, called in Latin Myrobalanus Emblica, they are round in
show, and brought unto us broken into small pieces, without any stones, the
kernels within being separated into three several divisions, having each of
them two cauls, wherein the parts of the kernel lie almost three square. The
fifth sort is the black or Indick Myrobalane, called in Latin Myrobalanus
Indica, and are eight square (as Gartias says) which may be when they are
fresh, but they cannot be so plainly discerned in those that are brought over
to us dry; they are the smallest of all the rest, somewhat long, altogether
fleshy, without any stone in the middle, and the blackest of any. In Arabic
they are called (...) dulegi or delegi.

The temperament.
They are cold in in the first degree, and dry in the second.

The best sort.
The best are such as are new and not too old, fleshy, thick, and heavy or
ponderous, and gummie within.

The duration.
They will keep good two or three years.

The inward use.
All the sorts of Myrobalans do purge gently, some more, some less than
others, some also purging choler, some phlegm, and some melancholy: but they
have in them also an astringent faculty much more then is in Rubarbe: they are
exellent in fluxes of the belly.

The Citrine or yellow Myrobalans do purge choler, strengthen the stomach,
heart and liver, profit such as have the Hemorrhoides, and are proper for such
as are of a temperate heat, they are good in tertian fevers, cause a good
color, and hinder old age, being often used.

The Chebule do purge phlegm, quicken the brain, and sharpen the sight,
strengthen the stomach after purging, they are profitable for such as have the
Dropsy, and are troubled with long continued Agues.

The Emblick and Bellerick purge the stomach from rotten phlegm lying therein,
and strengthens the brain and joints, heart and liver, and bind all other
loose or fluent humors in the parts of the body, and are very effectual for
the trembling of the heart, and to stir up the appetite, stay vomiting, and
restrains the fury and belching of choler, qualifieth the great heat of the
inward parts, and allayeth thirst, gives ease to those that are troubled with
the Hemorrhoides or Piles, by restraining the fierceness of choler flowing
into them, and for this last effect the Citrine are most used.

The Indies or black Myrobalans do purge Melancholy and black or a dust
choler, and therefore are available for the quartane Ague, the Leprie and all
Paraliticall diseases, and they cause a good color of the face.

They are brought over unto us preserved, especially the Chebules and Emblicks,
whereof the Chebules are more used physically, for such purposes as are before
set down, then the Emblicks are.

Note that the rind is to be used when you find them in any receipt, and not
the stone.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in decoction, in infusion, and in powder, but the decoction or
infusion does purge better then any way else, yet so gently that they bind and
strengthen the stomach, liver and heart, but given in powder they bind more
then they purge.

A Potion against the Dysenterie flux.
Take of red Roses, of Plantaine, of each two drams, of Licoris bruised half
an ounce, Raisons of the Sun stoned, and Tamarinds of each six drams, of yellow
Myrobalans half an ounce: boil them gently in a sufficient quantity of water
and Honey, strain it, in which steep or infuse of Rubarbe four scruples, of
Spicknard half a scruple; let them stand five or six hours, strain it and
add syrup of Quinces, or syrup of red Roses an ounce; make a Potion and give
it.

Against a looseness of the body.
Take and burn a pint of Clarret wine with a little Rose-mary and Sugar, in
which put to steep all night a dram of Rubarbe a little dried at the fire, and
half a dram of Chebule Myrobalanes, which standing by the fire all night, and
strained forth in the morning, is to be taken at two several times, a draught
in the morning fasting, which if it help not sufficiently the first time, being
renewed and taken two days more, will certainly stay the laske wholly, if the
malignity and sharpness of the humors be not too strong, that scarce any
medicine will cure it. Parkinson in his Herball, folio 248.

The outward use.
The Citrine are used in Collyries, or medicines for the eyes, with the juice
of Fennel or Rose Water, and against the inflammations; and flowing of humors
to the eyes: the powder thereof with Mastick or Rose Water is used in Ulcers to
heal them and dry them. The powder of the kernels is used against dimnesse of
the eyes, or to take away the web therein, or the powder thereof infused in
Rose Water, and dried, and then infused two or three times more, and dry them,
then make it in powder and use it. The Bellerick stay the flowing of the
Hemorrhoides, and help the falling of the hair, the affected place being
bathed with the decoction thereof, and the powder strewed on afterward, and it
makes the hair become blacker.

The hurtful quality with the corrective help.
Although these may be given without any danger or detriment, yet they are not
to be used in obstructions, or stoppings of the inward parts, nor where the
body is much bound, nor in fevers. They are profitably infused in Whey, or
Posset Drink, or in the juice of Fumitory, or juice of Worme-wood, adding a
little Spikenard, or Honey thereto. That they offend not the stomach being
stopped, they may be infused in Oil of sweet Almonds, and rubbed with ones
hands, and then dried. Some give them in fat broth, as with the pulp of
Raisons, or with Honey and Raisons of the Sun boiled together. Others give them
with Manna, Cassia, Conserve, or syrup of Violets. Others mix a little
Scammonie with them to quicken their slow operation. They may be given also
with infusion of Seen, Hydromel or water and Honey, or with opening and
diureticall things, or such things as provoke urine.

Note that the infusion of Myrobalanes does only purge, and little or nothing
bind the body; the decoction there of does both purge and bind, the powder of
them does also purge and bind, but more bind then purge, and being dried and
so given, they only constringe, or bind the body.

The Dose.
The dose of them in infusion and decoction is from three drams to six drams,
or to an ounce, in substance the dose is from half a dram to two drams, or
more.

Of the compounds made of Myrobalanes.
Pills of Myrobalans extract of Myrobalans, Syrup of the five kinds, Myrobalanes
preserved.

CHAP. 48. De Myrrha, of Myrrh.
Myrrh is a gum, or concreted gummie juice of a certain tree growing in
Arabia, Aethiopia, and other places, of a reddish color. Stacte is the purer
part of Myrrh, or liquid Myrrh, sweating out from the tree of its own accord
before the tree be cut.

The names.
It is called in Latin Myrrha, in English Myrrh.

The temperament.
Myrrh is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best kind.
The best is that which is pinguous or fatty, reddish and clear, having some
whitish veins in it, very bitter and light. That which is heavy and black is
to be rejected.

The difference between Bdellium and Myrrh.
Bdellium in sight is somewhat like to Myrrh, but may be distinguished thus;
Myrrh is extreme bitter, so is not Bdellium; again Myrrh is easier to be
broken, and of a more quick sharp sent.

The duration.
Myrrh will keep good many years; Platearius says it will keep good a
hundred years.

The inward use.
Myrrh is opening, discussing, glutinative, and drying: it resists
putrefaction, and is useful in stoppings of the womb, brings down the
courses, and expells the child living or dead, being taken with a decoction of
Lupines ane the juice of Rue. It helps stoppings of the Breast and Lungs, and
hoarsenesse, as also the cough, and is useful in the Quinsey, Pleurisy, or
pains of the side, in the Colic, in fluxes of the belly, and kills worms.
It mollifieth the hardness of the Matrix, and is good against rheumatick
distillations It takes away the shivering fits of Agues, being taken an hour
or two before the fit comes, especially of Quartane Agues, as if a dram or
less be taken in Muscadine warm two or three times before the fit come, and
sweat after it: this cured Matthiolus of a quartane Ague. Mathiol. Com. in lib.
Diascor. Cap. 68. f. 78.

Pills made thereof with Treacle and Birth-wort-root, are effectual for the
same purpose, to take one or two at a time as big as a Pease, an hour before
the fits, for many days together: it is also a great preservative in the
Plague or pestilence, and against the venom, or poison of Serpents and
venomous creatures, therefore it is put into Antidotes and Counterpoisons: it
is a singular remedy, for a stinking breath. It does conduce much to women to
help Conception, especially by removing obstructions, or stoppings from the
uterine parts

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, in Pills, in electuary and Trosses, though it be rarely
given alone by reason of its bitterness.

To hasten the birth.
Take of Myrrh in powder two scruples: Give it in a little Posset Drink, or
make four or five Pills thereof with a little Honey, and give them, drinking a
draught of posset drink after them.

The outward use.
It heals wounds of the head, and helps to cover bones that are bare, and
incarneth good flesh in deep wounds. It helps a stinking breath if the mouth
be washed with the decoction thereof; and helps rotten gums, and fastneth
loose teeth, being dissolved in wine and washed therewith, it cleanses also
the filthiness of the Ears. Being used with Ladanum and Wine of Myrtles, it
stays the falling or shedding of the hair: it helps watering eyes, and
takes away the skin that begins to grow therein and darken the sight, and
helps ulcers of the eyes. It is commended to beautify the face, and to make
it smooth and youthful, to be made into an oil, or rather liquour of Myrrh,
which is made with Eggs boiled hard, cut in the middle, the yolks taken forth,
and filled up with the powder of Myrrh, then put into a Glass and set in a
Wine-seller, or moist place, and with this liquor to wash the face.

A fumigation hereof comforts the brain, and dries up superfluous humors. It
opens, and mollifieth the hardness of the matrix, and a fumigation thereof
helps conception; and it brings down the courses if a Pessarie be made
thereof and used. It does facilitate or hasten the birth being used to the
genitals or privities with oil of white Lillies. Being used with Vinegar it
helps Tetters and Ring-wormes, and freckles, or used with Cassia and Honey it
helps the Gangrene and wild fire, the stinking, or chafing of the
arme-holes, used with oil of ^ox it does extend and mollify the nerves that
are stiff with cold. It helps Tenasmus (or a desire often to go to stool)
from a cold cause.

A Powder for wounds in the head.
Take of myrrh half an ounce of Madder-seed, of Cypresse-root, of Orris-root,
of Sarcocole, of each three drams, make a powder, and us it as need requires.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given to women with child, for it causes them to miscarry,
nor to such as have very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples.

Of such things as are made of Myrrh.
Trosses of Myrrh, Myrrh depurated, or cleansed, Extract of Myrrh, Oil of
Myrrh.

CHAP. 49. De Opio, of Opium.
Opium is the juice of black Poppie-heads, being cut after they are full ripe.

Meconium is the juice of the heads and leaves of white or black Poppy, pressed
forth.

The names.
It is called in Latin Opium, and in English also.

The Temperament.
Most of the Ancient writers say Opium is cold in the fourth degree, others
will have it partly cold and partly hot; but some of the new Writers will have
it to be altogether hot, as Sennertus, Doringius, Schroderus, etc.

Now the reasons given that it is hot are these. 1. Because it is bitter, now
that which is bitter is hot, but Opium is bitter, therefore hot. 2. It is sharp
and biting, that being put upon the tongue it bites and blisters the same and
palate. 3. Causes dryness. 4. It is of a very strong smell and savor. 5. It
does soon burn and flame being set on fire; for the true Opium (says Pliny)
will burn like a Candle; From whence we reason thus, Omne quod cito
inflammatur, est calidum: Opium cito inflammatur: Ergo calidum. That which does
soon burn and flame is hot, but Opium does soon burn and fleme, therefore it
is hot. 6. It troubles the mind, and brings a kind of madness or dotage to
such as take it. 7. It stirs up and provokes Venery. 8. It stirs up and
provokes the Itch. 9. It provokes sweat. 10. It softneth hardness, and
discusseth, or dissolveth swellings, all which are effects of heat. Now though
Opium be narcoticall, or stupefactive, or make dull and senseless; yet this
does not proceed from its frigidity, or coldness, but this it does by an
occult, or hidden quality.

They that desire to know more concerning the nature of Opium, let them read
that excellent Tract of Doringius de Opio printed 1620, and Freitagius de Opio,
and Med. Opiat. printed 1632. Also Sennertus Paralipomena fol. 347, printed
1644, and Mercurialis de morb. venenosis, and venenis lib. 2. cap. 7. fol 59,
60, 61. printed 1624.

The best Opium.
The best is that which is heavy, not too thick in substance, nor too thin, in
color like Aloes, very bitter in taste, and burning, of a stinking smell,
soporiferous like Poppie; if dissolved it be yellow like Saffron, it is
adulterate, for it ought to be of a brownish yellowness, color being
dissolved. The best is called Opium Thebaicum, because it comes from Thebes. I
much question whether we have the true Opium of the Ancient, for that which we
use is either adulterate, or meconium. It is adulterated with Glaucium, which
is the juice of an herb, with leaves like to horned Poppy.

The Duration.
It may be kept good many years, some say nine or ten years, others say twenty
years.

The inward use.
Opium is given to provoke sleep, to ease the pain of the Iliack and Colic,
as also to mitigate the pain of the stone in the bladder or kidneys, and to
ease pain of the Gowt; It cools inflammations, agues, or frensies, and
stays defluxions which cause a cough, or consumption: It is given in great
pains of the head, and to stop fluxes of the belly, and women's courses. It is
put into Mithridate, Treacle, and other medicines that procure rest, and ease
pain.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Pills, Potions, Boles, Electuaries, etc.

An Electuary against fits of the mother, and pains of the womb, either with
an ulcer, or without an ulcer.
Take of the species Diamoschu amari, and Diambra, of each two drams, Castor in
powder a scruple, Opium half a dram; with syrup of Mugwort make an Electuary.
The dose is a dram.

The outward use.
It is used outwardly to ease the pain of the Gowt, or any other pain, to
cause sleep, and to cool inflammations: being put into a hollow tooth, it
eases the pain thereof. Some commend it in medicines for the ears and eyes;
but I think it rather dulleth the sight then otherwise.

An ointment to cause sleep.
Take of Vnguentum Populeum one ounce, powder of Mandrake-root or leaves a
scruple, oil of Nutmeg (by expression) a dram, oil of Violets half an ounce,
Opium a scruple, make an ointment, and at night anoint the temples therewith.

Against the Toothache.
Take Pellitory of Spain a dram and a half, Henbane-seed a scruple, Opium five
and twenty grains, make all into fine powder, and with the Mussilage of gum
Traga^anth (made in spirit of wine) make up little balls, and put on^ into a
hollow tooth, there to remain an hour.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
Opium by all is counted a dangerous medicine, and the frequent use thereof
brings Palsies, Lethargies, trembling of the joints, cold sweats, This you
must understand of the true Opium, for that which is now in use (being well
prepared) is not so dangerous.
shortness of breath, and great sleepiness: it does much stupifie the senses,
and understanding, and often brings death. It is dangerous to give it to
children, women, or delicate bodies.

Opium is corrected with Castor, Euphorbium, juice of Garlic or Onions, also
with spirit of wine, vinegar, and sharp juices, as with juice of Lemon, or
Citron; others correct it with Breast-milk, Almond-milk, Butter, and oil of
Almonds. Note, that in pains of the head, it is not to be used with Saffron,
because it offends the head, but with Nutmeg.

The Dose.
The dose is from a grain to two or three, but it is rarely given by it self. I
have known it given (to ease the pain of the stone) from five grains to
fifteen, and all in a short time; for at the first five grains gave ease, and
that for some reasonable time, then seven or eight, so that the dose was
increased still.

Opium is much in use in Asia and Africa, so that if they abstain from it they
think their life is in danger thereby, which wants not admiration as Gartias ab
horto says, especially being so narcoticall and stupefactive, for such as use
it much are still sleepy and drovvsy. The dose among them there, is from a
scruple to fifty grains. The Turks and Persians take it to two or three drams,
and they think thereby they are more apt to perform any business, and
especially they are fitter for war, Verery, and animosity Also Hollerius
writes of a Spaniard, that in the hot vveather did eat half an ounce of it at
one time, and that without any hurt to the party: Holler. de morb intern. lib.
1. cap. 6. fol. 54. But vvonderfull is that of Gartias ab horto Aromat. lib. 1.
cap. 4. fol 23. who relates of one that for diverse days together did eat
three slices of Opium, which did weigh ten drams and upvvard, and although he
was sleepy and stupid, yet very ready to dispute of any thing. Opium has
killed many, therefore my advice is to let it alone, and not to meddle with
it, or else to look that it be well prepared. Pet. Forestus in his
observations mentionss a woman, that took Opium one day, and was found dead
the next day.

I shall relate what I have heard of an empericall practitioner, who (being ill
and not taking rest) sent to one (either Physician or Apothecary) for some
Opium, when the messenger had it, the party he had it of said, There is too
much for once, but I hope your Master knows that the messenger brought it home,
and this emperick (it seems) took it all, and wrote to this effect in a piece
of paper, I shall sleep so many hours and then wake, but forgot to give any
notice thereof: after he had took it, he fell into such a sleep, that he was
given over for dead, laid forth and buried; so soon as he was buried, his wife
(thinking to find some money) looking in his chamber found this writing before
mentioned, whereupon she sent and had the grave dug up, and the coffin
opened, where they saw he had turned himself when he waked.

Of such things as are made of Opium.
Extract of Opium, Laudanum Opiatum, Nepenthes Opiatum.

CHAP. 50. De Opopanace, of Opopanax.
OPopanax is a Gum of a plant called Panax, very brown on the outside, and
yellow within. It is taken chiefly from the roots of Panax, and not from the
stalks.

The names.
It is called in Latin and in English Opopanax, and Gum Opopanax.

The temperament.
Opopanax is hot and dry in the third degree, or hot in the third degree, and
dry in the second.

The best kind.
The best is brown without, and white or yellow within, bitter and of a
sowerish sent and somewhat strong, which being dissolved with Wine or Vinegar,
will make it look yellow, and not mixed with sticks or dross, but clean Gum.

The duration.
It will keep good five or six years.

The inward use.
Opopanax purges thick and tough phlegm from remote parts, as from the brain,
nerves, sensitive parts, joints, and breasts; therefore it is profitable for
any cold disease incident to any of those parts, as in the Palsy, in debility,
or weakness of the sight, old cough, shortness of breath, Sciatica, and in
other kinds of Gowt. It is good for Convulsions and Cramgs, as also against
wind in the belly, Stitches in the side, hardness of the Spleen, Strangury,
and difficulty in making urine. It likewise discusseth the Windiness,
Hardness, and Suffocations of the Mother, and brings down the courses, and
brings away also the mola or lump of flesh bred in the Womb. Being drunk with
Water and Honey, or Wine it helps the Itchings and inward soars of the
Bladder. It expels Worms, helps the biting of a mad Dog, and is good
against poisons of other venomous creatures. Dissolved in Wine and given, it
helps the Dropsy; and taken in Vinegar one hour before the fit comes, it
takes away the cold fit of an Ague, and especially if you dissolve some of it
with the juice of Smallage and Oil of Dill, and anoint the ridge of the back
therewith. It is good after falls and bruises to dissolve any congealed blood,
especially in cold bodies, and where no Fever is. It is commended against the
Falling Sickness, and it dissolveth Milk coagulated, or curdled in the stomach.

The manner of administering it.
It is given with Wine, Honey, or any convenient juice, but chiefly in Pills.

Pills against the Palsy and Convulsion.
Take of Opopanax, Rue, Serapinum, Pepper, of the juice or extract of Lorage,
Myrrh, of each a dram: Powder what is to be powdered, and with the juice of
Cowslip, make a mass, or lump, of which frame Pills. The dose is a dram, every
second, or third night, so long as need requires.

The external use.
Opopanax being dissolved with Vinegar, and the juice of Smallage and applied,
it softneth the hardness of the spleen, and a plaster made thereof
dissolveth the Kings evil, and hard nodes of the joints, as also any
plague sore, botch, or bile, especially if you dissolve it in Vinegar, and mix
it with a little Leaven, and so apply it. Being dissolved in a little Vinegar,
and applied with the pulp of Raisons of the sun, it eases any kind of Gowt.
It dissolveth hard tumors of the womb: if the mouth be washed with a decoction
of Vinegar, made with Opopanax, it eases the pain of the Teeth; or if it be a
hollow tooth, let it be stopped with a piece of Opopanax. Some commend it
against the dimnesse of the sight, being mixed with other things. Opopanax does
much help to the curing of old ulcers, and Fistulaes, breeds good flesh, and
especially where the bones are bare and naked, and that by a peculiar virtue.
It is with profit applied to the biting of any venomous creature.

The hurtful Quality.
It must not be given to Women with child (for it destroys the birth) nor to
such as have hot diseases: It is corrected with Spiknard, Mastick, etc.

The Dose.
The Dose is from half a dram to a dram, or a dram and a half.

Of such compounds as are made of Opopanax.
Extract of Opopanax, Pills of Opopanax, Oil of Opopanax.

CHAP. 51. De Polypodio, of Polypodie.
POlipodium is a root generally known, growing on the roots of Trees, chiefly
on Oaks, sometimes upon houses and old walls.

The names.
It is called in Latin Polipodium, also ^ilicula, quasi parva filix; because
the leaves are like Fern. In English Polipodie, and Oke-ferne.

The temperament.
Polypodie is hot and dry in the second degree.

The best kind.
The best roots are those that are fairest, or biggest, and full of nodes,
which grows on Oaks, and is therefore called Polypodium quercinum.

The duration.
These roots will keep good a year or two.

Note, that the hotter the Region is where it grows, the better it is.

The inward use.
Polypodie purges adust choler, or melancholy, and phlegm, though but gently.
Therefore it is commended against melancholy, as in affects of the
Hypochonders, quartane Ague, also in stoppings of the Liver and Spleen,
Jaundise, Scurvy, or Scorbute, and in any kind of Gowt, in the Leprosy, Scab,
and foul diseases of the skin. It does much prevail in the Colic, arising
from a cold cause, and that by a specific virtue.

The distilled water both of roots and leaves is much commended against the
quartane Ague, being taken many days together, as also against melancholy,
troublesome sleep and fearful dreams: And taken with some Sugar Candy
dissolved therein, it is good against all the ill affects, or diseases of the
Lungs. Also this water helps the pale color of the face, and purges the
blood. The Salt and Oil of Polypodie are used in the Pleurisy, and pains of
the side.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, broth, or infusions, for it can hardly be made into
powder alone.

By infusion.
Take of Seen. Raisons of the sun stoned, of each half an ounce Maiden-haire,
Polypodie, white Tartar, of each three drams, of Fumitorie-water, Carduus
water, Buglosse-water, of each two ounces: let them infuse one night, in the
morning boil them gently, then strain it, and to four ounces of the clearest
add Honey of Roses Solutive, or Manna two drams or half an ounce, mix them
together, and give it; it purges gently. Freitag. aur. med. f. 256.

Against hardness of the spleen and melancholy wind, it may be given with
Epithymum and Salindum, or the decoction of an old Cock (with Polypodie, Seen,
Epithymum, Thyme, Dodder, black Hellebore, Buglosse, Cream of Tartar,
Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, Raisons of the sun, and such like) is much commended.

In diseases of the breast use Polypodie with Figs, Raisons of the sun,
Elecampane, Hyssop, Maydenhaire, Hore-hound, etc. In the Colic boil it with
Anise-seed, Fennell-seed, etc. In the scab arising from burnt choler, boil it
in Posset Drink, or Whey.

The outward use.
The juice of the green root, or the powder of the root snuffed up into the
nose, cures the disease called Polypus. A plaster made of the roots and
Honey, helps luxations or bones out of joint, Ruptures, chaps of the fingers,
and the Piles. If the root be steeped in Wine four and twenty hours (made
sharp with a little spirit of sulphur, and then dried) it may be used for a
Dentifrice, or medicine to make the teeth white and clean, being rubbed
therewith.

The hurtful quality.
It is judged by many to be windy and to offend the stomach, but daily
experience does manifest the contrary, and that it is a safe and gentle
medicine, fit for all sorts of persons, and may be given in any season. It is
given with Anise-seed, Fennel-seed, Ginger, etc. Not because it offends the
stomach, or hurts the other inward parts, but to help its energie or force.

Let the Polypodium you use be new; for if it be too old, it binds the body.
Heurn. prax. med f. 271.

The Dose.
It is given in decoction, or infusion from half an ounce to two ounces, or
more.

Compounds made of Polypodie.
Salt of Polypodium, Extract of Polypodium, Syrup of Polypodium, Oil of
Polypodium.

CHAP. 52. De Psyllio, of Flea-wort.
FLea-wort is an herb that rises up with a stalk two foot high or more, full
of joints and branches on every side up to the top, and at every joint two
small long and narrow whitish green leaves somewhat hairie: the seeds are small
and black, l^ke to Fleas in bigness and color.

The names.
It is called in Latin Psyllium, Pulicaria harba, and ^ulicaria, because it is
like unto Fleas, and not because it drives away Fleas; for that it will not
do. In English Flea-wort, not Flea-bane.

The temperament.
The seeds are cold and moist in the second degree.

The best seeds.
The best are the biggest and the fairest, heavy, that being put into the water
they sink.

The duration.
They will keep good a year or two in the seeds.

The inward use.
The seeds are chiefly in use, the missilage, or infusion whereof being made
with Rose Water, or Barley-water, and taken with syrups of Violets, syrup of
Roses, or Sugar, purges choler and thick phlegm, and is useful in hot burning
Fevers, in great thirst, and helps to ^e^ifie the dryness of the mouth and
throat; it helps also the hoarsnesse of the voice, and diseases of the breast
and lungs caused by heat, as the Pleurisy and such like. It helps all
inflammations of the head, and all hot pains of the joints. The muccilage of
the seed made into an Electuary with Marmalade of Quinces, with Popie-seed, and
Sugar-pellets, or Sugar Candy, and so taken, does temper the heat and
roughness of the throat, and tongue, and stays hot fluxions, or rheumes
flowing down. In hot burning Agues, it quenches thirst, and abates heat,
being taken with syrup of Violets, or Barley-water, and purges also choler
gently.

The seeds torrified or dried, and taken with Plantaine-water stays the flux
of the belly, and helps the corrosions, or gripings of the belly that come by
reason of hot, choleric, sharp and malignant humors, or by the
super-purgation, or over-working of any violent medicine, such as cammonie or
the like. The seeds being kept on the tongue, eases the cough, and helps the
dryness thereof proceeding from heat. It dothnso wonderfully cool that (says
Fernelius) being cast into hot boiling water, it presently cools it. Fernel.
meth. med. lib. 6. cap. 1. fol. 143.

The outward use.
The seeds bruised or the herb, and mixed with the juice of House-leeke or
Nightshade, eases the hot Gowt and hot Apostumes, being thereunto applied;
mingled with Oil of Roses and Vinegar, it cures hot swellings in the joints,
and Apostumes behind the Ear; with Vinegar, or Oil of Violets, it helps
the pain of the head, if it be applied to the forehead and Temples. The same
laid to with Vinegar is good against the going out of the Navell, and burstings
of young Children. The water wherein the seeds have been steeped is good
against St. Anthonies fire, or Wilde-fire. The juice with Honey put into the
Ears kills worms, and stays the running thereof. It helps hot
swellings, or eruptions of the skin, as blaines, wheales and such like; as also
pains of the joints, and places out of joint, and the Hip-gowt. The same is
applied to women's nipples, and sore breasts, and that with good success,
laying it often thereon. Being mixed with Hog's Grease, and applied to foul
corrupt and filthy Ulcers and sores, cleanses and heals them, by cooling the
heat and repressing the sharpness of the humors flowing unto them. The
Muccilage of the seed made in Plantaine-water, whereunto the yolke of an Egg
or two, and a little of the oint meant called Populeon is put, is a most safe
and sure remedy to ease the sharpness, prickings and pains of the
Hemorrhoides, or Piles, if it be laid on a cloth, and bound thereunto. It
stays the bleeding of the Nose applied with the juice of Shepherds-purse and
Bole. The herb boiled, or the seeds with the root, and the fundament bathed
therewith, or to sit over the hot liquor, eases the Tenesmus, a disease when
one is often provoked to stool. It takes away the burning and acrimonie of
Lime, Euphorbium and Cautharides. It takes away the roughness of the hair
being bathed with the mussilage thereof. Flea-wort-seed keeps Camphor very
well, and that by its coldness and moisture.

The hurtful quality, and correction thereof.
Some have judged it to be dangerous to take it inwardly, and that it is
hurtful to the nature of man, and causes stiffness, and coldness of the
body; which is to be no otherwise understood then of all cold herbs such as
Nightshade, House-leeke and such like, being not taken with discretion. It Is
not amiss to give it with Cynamon or Mace. It is not safe for cold and moist
bodies, neither may it be given to such as have narraw entrals, or narrow
passages within.

The Dose.
The seeds of Fleabane (which are to be given in infusion rather then in
substance) are taken from a dram to three drams, or half an ounce.

Of such things as are made of Flea-wort.
Electuary of Psyllium. [the Dose of which is from half an ounce to an ounce]
the distilled water of Flea-wort.

CHAP. 53. De Rhabarbaro, of Rubarbe.
RVbarbe is a root of a yellow color, brought chiefly from China, in the East-
Indies.

The names.
It is called in Latin Rhabarbarum, in English Rubarbe and Rewbarbe.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree, of a mixed substance, partly airie,
thin and purging, whereby it opens the stoppings of the Liver, Gall, and
viscerous parts, and also draws away choler: partly gross and earthy,
whereby it binds and constringeth the body, and does wonderfully strengthen
the stomach and entrals, or inward parts.

The kinds.
There are three kinds of Rubarbe mentioned by Authors. First, Rhabarbarum
Indicum, and that is brought from China. Secondly, Rhabarbarum Barbarum, which
comes from Barbary. Thirdly, Rhabarum Turcicum, which comes from Pontus and
Bosphorus; for the Turkish Merchants bring it from thence.

The best kind.
The best Rubarbe is brought from China, and is of a light purplish red, or
yellowish color: being chewed in the mouth, it is somewhat clammy, and in
color like Saffron, which being rubbed on paper shows the color more
plainly; in taste it is somewhat bitter, but of a pleasing smell.

The duration.
It will keep good two or three years if it be kept close from the air. The
usual way to keep it is to wrap it up in Cotten-wooll.

The inward use.
Rubarbe purges choler, phlegm and watery humors; and is therefore useful in
diseases of the Liver, as in choleric and long continued Fevers, in the
Jaundise, Green-sicknesse, Dropsy, Stoppings of the Liver, as also against the
hardness thereof, or intemperate coldness. It is so effectual for the Liver,
that it is called the life, soul, heart, and the Treacle of the Liver. It
cleanses the blood gently, and is profitable against tumors of the Spleen,
putrid, or rotten Fevers, and in all fluxes of the belly, whether bloody or
not, as also in spitting of blood, and in bruises or falls. The powder of
Rubarbe given with Cassia and Venice Turpentine washed, cleanses the reins,
and strengthens them afterward, and is very effectual in Gonorrhaea, or
running of the Reins. It kills Worms, helps the Hickcock, and may be given
to weak persons, old-men, children, women with child; and that without any
danger.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, in infusion, in Pills, Boles, etc.

A Powder.
Take of Rubarbe two drams, Spicknard a scruple, make them into powder, and
give it.

A Potion.
Take of Rubarbe cut in thin slices two drams, Spicknard five grains,
Goats-Whey, or Posset Drink four ounces; steep them all night, and strain it,
then add syrup of Roses solutive one ounce and a half, make a potion.

Pills.
Take of Rubarbe in powder five scruples, of Spicknard in powder five grains,
with syrup of Roses make pills, and give them.

A Bole to cleanse the reins.
Take of Cassia newly drawn an ounce, of Rubarbe in powder four scruples, mix
them together and make a Bole, or lump.

Now seeing Rubarbe is of a mixed substance, as before is showed; if you desire
to open Obstructions, then give the infusion thereof; if you desire to bind and
strengthen, give it in substance. And when you would give it more to purge then
to bind, make but a gentle straining thereof; but if you would bind the body
more then purge, strain it hard, that so more of the earthy substance may come
forth.

Rubarbe by boiling loses its purgative faculty.

Note, that there is a kind of contrariety, or Antipathy between Rubarbe and
Diagredium, for being put together in one Medicine they work very churlishly;
yet I have observed that when Diagredium is put to an infusion of Rubarbe
(being lightly strained) it works better then when Diagredium is given with
the substance of Rubarbe. This (I conceive) may be the cause why Confectio
Hamech works so churlishly upon the stomach, for if you leave out the
Rubarbe, and put in the more of Seen, you shall find it to work better. And so
in other compositions where the substance of Rubarbe is put to Diagredium, you
shall find them to work churlishly.

Rubarbe may be cut into thin slices or pieces, and so taken with Raisons of
the Sun, as Massaria gives counsel, f. 478.

The outward use.
Rubarbe heals those Ulcers that come in the eyes, or eyelids, being steeped
in white Wine, or any other convenient liquour. Being boiled in Wine and
applied, it takes away the black and blew spots that come by bruises or falls,
or oil wherein Rubarbe has been boiled, takes away black and blew spots.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
Rubarbe is hurtful to those that have very hot and dry bodies, as also to such
as are hectical, or troubled with the Strangury. It is corrected with
Spicknard, Squinanthum, or Cynamon, especially where you desire more to
strengthen then to purge. If you give it to purge and open obstructions, or
stoppings, give it in Whey, Posset Drink, Endive or Succory-water, or in White
Wine, being first infused therein.

The Dose.
The Dose in substance is from a dram to two drams, in infusion from two drams
to half an ounce.

The compounds made of Rubarbe.
Extract of Rubarbe. Trosses of Rubarbe. Pills of Rubarbe. Syrup of Succory with
Rubarbe. Syrupus Augustanus, vel de Rhabarbaro. Syrupus Diasereos. Rhabarbarum
conditum. Syrupus Magistralis ad Melancholiam. Oil of Rubarbe.

Whether Rubarbe (being dried or burnt) may be used in the Dysenterie, or
Bloudy-Flux?
Although many learned Physicians give counsel to dry or burn Rubarbe, and so
to give it in the Bloudy-Flux, and the greater the Flux is the more to dry, or
rather to burn it, because hereby it binds the more: yet surely Rubarbe being
much torrified or burnt, has a sharp and biting qualiity, whereby it does
rather increase the Flux then stop it. Massaria, f. 478. Rondel. Meth. cur.
Morb. f. 457. Amatus lucit. cur. Med. Cent. 2. f. 176. Schroderus Pharm. Med.
Chym. lib. 4. f. 235.

If you would use Rubarbe to bind chiefly, it is best to cast away the first
decoction, or infusion, then to boil it gently, and to make a strong
expression, or straining thereof, and so to give it.

CHAP. 54. De Rubia tinctorum, of Madder.
MAdder has many long apiece reddish stalks trailing on the ground,
rough or hairy, and full of joints: at every joint come forth long and somewhat
narrow leaves, standing like a star, or the rowell of a spur about the stalks,
rough and hairy: toward the tops whereof come forth many small pale yellow
flowers, the root is very long and red.

The names.
It is called also Rubia tinctorum, and all from the color, because it dies
Wool or Cloth into a red color.

The temperament
Madder-roots are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third, and have an
opening quality, and also an astringent property.

The best.
The best are the reddest and fairest roots, not too old.

The duration.
The roots will keep good two or three years.

The inward use.
Madder brings down the courses in women, and provokes urine, brings away
the birth and afterbirth, cures the Jaundise, opens the stoppings of the
Speen, Liver and Gall, and diminishes the Melancholy humor. Some have
reported that it provokes urine so much, that it causes blood to come forth
with it, but this is only the color of the root, which being taken into the
body does cause the urine to look like blood, as Rubarbe does make it look
yellow. The same taken in decoction or powder, dissolveth congealed blood in
the body, and is good for such as have fallen, or are bruised, and is much used
in vulnerary or wound-drinks. It is good for such as have the Dropsy, Palsy,
Sciatica, or Hip-gowt. The seeds of Madder taken with Vinegar and Honey,
helps the swelling and hardness of the Spleen. It is used also to amend, or
help the ill color of the face, and it helps Ulcers of the mouth, if to the
decoction be added a little Alome and Honey of Roses. The juice of the root or
decoction thereof is given to such as are hurt with venomous beasts, and
preserves the body from putrefaction. It is very good for such as have the
Itch or Scab.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, and in powder.

A decoction to provoke the Courses.
Take of Madder-roots bruised two ounces, of Licoris bruised an ounce, of
Mugwort two handfuls, of Rue half a handful; boil these in three pintes of
White Wine, till a pint or more be consumed, then strain it, and sweeten it
with Sugar. Give a good draught thereof warm, morning and evening.

A powder against falls or bruises.
Take of Madder-roots two drams, Mumme a dram, Rubarbe half an ounce; make them
into powder, and give a dram (for a Dose) in Wine.

The outward use.
Madder-roots bruised (especially green) and applied to any part that is
discolored with Freckles, Morphew, the White-scurfe, or such like deformities
of the skin, cleanses them thoroughly, and takes them away, especially if
Vinegar be mixed therewith, or the powder of the root mixed with a little juice
of Garlic, Oil, and a little Honey, cures any Itch, Scab, or foulness of the
skin, being anointed therewith. The juice of the root dropped into the ears,
mitigates the pain thereof. The roots applied as a Pessary, or the powder of
the root made up with Oil of Savin, and applied brings away the birth and
afterbirth. The leaves of Madder have a special property to color the hair
of the head. Dyers use it much, says Pliny (Not. Hist. lib. 24. c. 11. fol.
192.) to color their Wool, and Woollen-cloth, so do Curriers about their
skins and Leathers.

The hurtful qualities.
It must not be given to Women with child, nor often to such as have hot and
dry bodies.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples, or more, in decoction,
from two drams to half an ounce.

CHAP. 55. De Sagapeno, of Gum Sagapenum.
THe Gum Sagapenum is the juice of a kind of Ferula, growing in Media.

The names.
It is called in Latin Sagapenum, and Serapinum.

The temperament.
It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second.

The best kind.
The best is that which does smell like Garlic, or between Laser and Galbanum,
bright and clear of a yellowish color without, but white within, and will soon
dissolve in water, or Vinegar, also sharp in taste.

The duration.
It will keep good four or five years.

The inward use.
Sagapenum purges thick, gross and tough humors, as also watery from the
stomach, belly, womb, reins, brain, nerves, joints, and lungs. Therefore it is
profitable in the Dropsy, old cough, shortness of breath, pain of the head,
as in the Megrim, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Cramp, or Convulsion, trembling of
the joints, in stoppings and tumors of the Spleen, in the quartane Ague,
Colic, in the stopping of the Urine, and in suppression of the Courses in
Women. It is useful in suffocation or rising of the Mother, and against the
stinging of venomous beasts, or poison taken into the body.

The manner of administering it.
It is chiefly given in Pills.

Pills against the Dropsy.
Take of Sagapenum, (moistened or dissolved in the juice of Elecampane) two
scruples, Trosses of Alhandal a scruple, Diagredium five grains, with syrup of
Roses make a mass or lump for two Doses.

The external use.
Being dissolved in Wine and applied, it eases pains of the side, the cough
and shortness of breath, and is commended against the Pleurisy, but I question
whether it be not too hot, except in a bastard Pleurisy. If it be dissolved in
Vinegar and the juice of Rue, and applied, it helps Contusions and bruises,
and used with Oil of Rue to the back, it drives away cold pains thereof.
Being dissolved with Vinegar of Squills, and applied, it dissolveth the
hardness of the spleen, as also the Kings evil, or Scrophulaes bred under
the ears and near the throat, and those hard nodes that arise in the joints
after the Gowt; with the juice of Rue or Fennel, it clears the sight, and
takes away all spots therein. Dissolved with Oil, and applied, it
strengthens those members that are out of joint, or the strained members, and
joints. It draws forth Thorns or splinters, and breaks any Botch or Boil.
Being put into Glysters it eases the Colic; and a Pessary made thereof and
put up, brings down the afterbirth, and the courses A fumigation thereof
with the horn of a Goat is commended against the Lethargy.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
It hurts the Liver and Stomach, therefore it is corrected with the third part
of Mastick, Cynamon, Ginger, Spicknard, etc. It must not be given to women with
Child, for it kills the birth. The best way to prepare it for the diseases of
the brain, nerves, breast, joints, and cold diseases of the Womb, is to
dissolve it in Wine, and with Aqualangii, etc. to draw forth its virtue in the
manner of an extract.

The dose.
The dose is from half a dram to a dram.

The compounds made of Sagapenum.
Pills of Sagapenum, extract of Sagapenum, oil thereof.

CHAP. 56. De Sambuco and Ebulo, of Elder and Wall-wort, or Dane-wort.
THe Elder and Dane-wort, being of such affinity, I shall join hem together in
this Chapter.

The Dane-wort is very like Elder, but much lower in growth.

The names.
Elder is called in Latin Sambucus from Sambix the first finder of it.

Dane-wort is called Low-Elder, in Latin Ebulus, in English Wall-wort,
Dane-wort, or Dwarfe-Elder.

The temperament.
They are hot and dry in the second, or third degree, and the Wall-wort is
somewhat hotter then Elder.

The duration.
They will keep good a year.

The inward use.
There is in use the flowers, leaves, inward bark or rind, the Seeds,
Berries, and the spongie substance.

They are profitable in the Dropsy, joynt-Gowt, Agues, stopping and swellings
of the spleen, stone of the Kidneys, affects of the Womb, and St. Anthonies
fire. They purge tough phlegm, water and thin choler chiefly from the belly and
joints. They are good in the Scorbute or Scurvy, and kill worms in the stomach
or belly.

The first shoots, or young leaves of the Elder boiled in Broth or
Posset Drink, draws forth strongly choler and tough phlegm; the tender leaves
eaten with Oil and Salt do the same. The inner bark boiled in water and given
to drink, works much more violently; and the berries also green or dry expel
the same humor, and is often given with good success to help the Dropsy, by
evacuating great plenty of waterish humors: the bark of the root also boiled
in Wine, or the juice thereof drunk, works the same effect, but more
effectually then either leaves or fruit do; the juice of the root taken,
provokes vomit mightily, and purges the watery humors of the Dropsy. The
decoction of the root cures the biting of the Adder, as also of a mad Dog,
and brings down the courses of women.

The decoction of the Berries in Wine being drunk provokes Urine. The powder
of the seeds first prepared in Vinegar, and then taken in Wine, half a dram at
a time for certain days together, is a means to abate and consume the fat
flesh of a corpulent body, and to keep it lean. The Berries so prepared, and
as much with Tartar, and a few Anise-seeds put to them, a dram of this powder
given in Wine, cures the Dropsy by purging very gently The dry flowers are
often used in decoction for Glisters to expel wind, and eases the Colic;
for they lose their purging quality which they have being green, and retain an
attenuating. The flowers in Ale or Beer are very good for such as have the
Dropsy, being put into a bag. The flowers of both provoke sweat. The Vinegar
made of the flowers of Elder, by Ma ceration and setting in the Sun is much
more used in France then any where else, and is grateful to the stomach, and
effectual to quicken the appetite, and helps to cut gross and tough phlegm
in the breast. The distilled water of the inner bark of the Tree, or of the
root, is very powerful to purge the waterie humors of the Dropsy, or
Tympany, taking it fasting and two hours before supper: The dose is two ounces
in the morning, and as much before supper, or take four ounces in the morning.
The water of the flowers also is good in the Dropsy, and opens the stoppings
of the Liver, Spleen and Reins: it drives away the tertian Ague, and is good
against melancholy, and strengthens the stomach. The dose is three or four
ounces fasting.

The Mushromes of the Elder called Jewes-eares, are much used (being dried and
boiled with Ale or milk with Columbine-leaves) for sore throats, and with a
little Pepper and Pellitory of Spain in powder to put up the Uvula or palate of
the mouth when it is fallen down.

The young and tender branches of Dane-wort and leaves thereof taken with Wine,
helps those that are troubled with the stone and gravel. The juice of the
root is a strong purger of watery humors, and excellent for the Dropsy. The
leaves boiled in water and given to drink, helps the dry Cough and the
Quinsie. The dried Berries or Seeds beaten to powder and taken in Wine fasting,
works the same effect as the juice of the root does. The powder of the seeds
taken in the decoction of Ground Pine, and a little Cynamon to the quantity of
a dram at a time, is an approved remedy both for the Gowt, joint-aches and
Sciatica, as also for the French disease, for it eases the pains by
withdrawing the humors from the places affected, and by drawing forth those
humors that are fluent, peccant and offensive: the powder of the root works
the same effect. The root steeped in Wine all night, and a draught thereof
given before the fit of an Ague, does much prevail to abate the fit, or to
take it quite away, especially taken the second or third time if need be. In a
word, what has been said of Elder may be said of Dane-wort, only Dane-wort is
more forceable or powerful then Elder.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in powder, Boles, and decoction.

A Powder against the Hip-gowt, and joynt-gowt.
Take Dane-wort-seed, Turbith, Hermodactyles, Seen, Tartar, of each a dram, of
Cynamon two drams, make all into fine powder.

The dose is four scruples, in any convenient liquor.

A bole purging phlegm, and useful in the Dropsy.
Take of the juice of Elder berries half an ounce, powder of Seabinde-weed a
dram, Oil of Cynamon four drops, make a bole or lump, roll it up in Sugar,
and take it in a morning, drinking some Posset Drink after it.

A decoction against the Quartane Ague and Quotidian.
Take of Elder-bark, with the root, of each an ounce, of Asarum three drams,
Cynamon a dram and a half, boil them in milk, and give half of it. This will
work upward and downward. Take it before the fit comes, once or twice if need
be. Vide Blochwitius, Anotomia Sambuci.

The outward use.
A decoction of the roots of either, mollifieth the hardness of the womb, if
women do sit therein, and opens the veins, and brings down the courses.
The leaves boiled and laid hot upon any hot and painful Apostumes, especially
in the more remote and sinewie parts does both cool the heat and inflammation
of them, and ease the pains. The juice of the leaves snuffed up into the
Nostrils, purges the tunicles of the brain. The juice of the green leaves
applied to hot inflammations of the eyes, asswageth them. The juice of the
berries boiled with a little Honey, and dropped into the ears, eases the
pains of them.

A decoction of the root makes the hair black if it be washed therewith: the
leaves boiled till they be tender, then beaten and mixed with Barley-meale, and
applied to hot inflammations, asswageth them, and helps places that are burnt
either by fire or water, cures Fistulous Ulcers being laid thereupon; and
eases the pains of the Gowt being beaten and boiled with tallow of a Bull, or
Goat, and laid warm thereon. The young buds and leaves of the Elder, and as
much of the roots of Plantaine beaten together, and boiled in Hog's Grease, this
being laid warm upon the place pained with the Gowt does give present ease
thereto: the leaves also burnt, and the powder of them put up into the Nostrils
stays the bleeding once or twice used. The leaves of Elders boiled tender,
and applied warm to the fundament, eases the pains of the Piles, if they be
once or twice renewed growing cold. The pitch in the middle of the Elder
stalks, being dried and put into the cavernous, or hollovv holes of Fistulous
Ulcers that are ready to close, opens and dilateth the Orifices, whereby
injections may be used, and other remedies applied for the cure of them. The
Mushromes called Jewes-eares, helps the inflammation of the eyes being
macerated or steeped in Rose Water, or Plantaine-water, and the eyes washed
therewith. The dried Jewes-eares steeped in Rose Water and applied to the
Temples and forehead, do ease the pains of the head or headache. The distilled
water of the flowers of Elder, is of much use to clear the skin from
Sun-burning, Freckles, Morphew or the like: and both the forepart and
hinder-part of the head being bathed therewith, it takes away all manner of
headache that comes of a cold cause. The same water takes away the heat and
inflammation of the eyes, and helps them when they are blood-shotten. The
hands being washed morning and evening with the same water of the flovver does
much help and ease them that have the Palsy in them, and cannot keep them from
shaking.

The foul inflamed or old Ulcers and sores of the legs, being often vvashed
with the water of the leaves or of the flovvers distilled in the middle of
the month of Maey does heal them in a short space. The water also helps the
pain of the side, if a linen cloth be wet therein, and the side bathed
therevvith vvarme. Oil of Elder-flovvers does assuage pain, cleanse and
mundifie the skin, profits in stoppings of the Liver and spleen, and is good
for the pains of the joints and nerves, and is very useful in burning and
wildfire. An ointment made of the green leaves of Dan-wort and May butter made
in the Month of May, is accounted with many a sovereigne remedy for all
outward pains, aches and cramps in the joints, nerves or sinews, for
starcknesse and lamenesse by cold and other casualties, and generally to warm,
comfort, and strengthen all the outward parts ill-affected, as also to mollify
the hardness, and to open the obstructions of the spleen, the grieved parts
anointed therewith.

Against burning by Fire or Water.
Take one pound of the inner bark of Elder, bruise it or cut it small, and put
it into two pound of pure Sallet-Oile, or Oile-Olive, that has been first
washed oftentimes with the distilled water of Elder-flowers, let them boil
gently a good while together, and afterward strain forth the Oil, pressing
it very hard; set this Oil on the fire again, and put thereto four ounces of
the juice of the young branches and leaves of the Elder-tree, and as much new
Wax, let them boil to the Consumption of the juice, after which being taken
from the fire, put presently thereto two ounces of liquid Vernish (such as
Joyners use to vernish Bed-steds, Cubboards, etc.) and afterward of Olibanum
in fine powder four ounces, and the whites of two Eggs being first well
beaten by themselves, all these being well stirred and mixed together, put it
up into a clean pot, and keep it for to use when occasion serves. Parkinson
Treatise of Plants, fol. 210, 211. taken out of Matthiolus.

Against the Toothache.
Take of the root of Elder cut in thin slices, two ounces and a half, Vinegar
of Elder, or White Wine half a pint: boil them together, then wash the mouth
and teeth therewith.

Or
Take of the middle rind of Elder, and flowers thereof, of each a handful, of
Jewes-eares one or two, boil them in a sufficient quantity of Vinegar and
Wine, use it as the former.

An Ointment against the hardness or scirrhus of the Spleen.
Take Oil of Elder an ounce, Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, of Elders two
drams: boil them to the Consumption of the watery substance, then add a little
wax, and make an ointment. Two or three drams of Wax will be sufficient. With
this Ointment anoint the spleen morning and evening warm, laying a warm cloth
on.

A Cataplasme or pultis against bruises.
Take of Elder-flowers in powder two ounces, Camomill and Worme-wood in powder,
of each half an ounce, mix them with a sufficient quantity of Oil of Elder,
and apply it warm to the bruised parts.

For the Piles or Hemorrhoides.
Take a handful or two of Elder-leaves, and boil them in water till they be
tender, take them out of the water and mix a little Linseed-Oile therewith,
then apply it warm (upon a red cloth, or a piece of Scarlet) to the Piles,
there letting it lie till it be almost cold, then apply fresh, do thus for the
space of an hour or two if need require, and let it be bound up, having the
party to his warm bed. This says Gerard has not failed at the first dressing
to cure the said disease. Ger. Herball. fol. 1423.

The hurtful quality.
Both Elder and Dane-wort offend the head, are hurtful to the stomach and
liver that is hot, as also brings gripings, and weakneth the body, let them
be given with Anise-seed, Carraway-seed, Cynamon, Mace, etc. Wal-wort is not to
be given but to such as have strong bodies.

The dose.
The juice of the leaves or rind is given from half an ounce to an ounce or
two ounces. The juice of the berries from two drams to six drams. The seeds
from half a dram to a dram. The distilled water from two ounces to four
ounces. The powder of the bark or rind from half a dram to a dram.

Of such things as are made of them.
From the flowers of Elder are made these following.

The distilled water both of the flowers and leaves. Spirit of Elder-flowers.
Wine of Elder-flowers. Syrupus acetosus Sambucinus. Honey of Elder. Conserve of
Elder. Oil both by infusion and distillation.

From the berries, Rob-Sambuci, or Pulp of the berries. Tincture, Extract,
Wine, Spirit, water distilled. Oil.

From the tender branches. Conserve.

From the leaves, middle rind, roots and Jewes-eares. Distilled water. Syrup.
Oil.

From Dane-wort are made: the distilled water; the spirit: from the flowers.
Rob-Ebuli, or the pulp of the berries. Tincture or essence.

CHAP. 57. De Santalis, of Sanders.
THese are woods that are brought to us from the Indies.

The names and kinds.
There are three sorts of Sanders, white, red and yellow. The white is called
in Latin Santalum and Sandalum album, the red Santalum rubrum, the yellow
Santalum citrinum or flavum.

Difference between Brasill-wood and red Sanders.
They differ thus. 1 They grow far one from the other. 2 Sanders is neither
sweet in taste, nor gives any dye as the Brasil does. 3 Red-Sanders is more
ponderous and weighty then Brasil, and will sink in water. 4 It is a harder
and shorter grained vvood, and more brittle in breaking short.

The temperament.
They are cold and dry in the second or third degree. Some say they are hot,
the red is more cooling and binding. The yellow is the best, the next is the
white, the red is least of use.

The duration.
They will keep good three or four years, or longer.

The inward use.
They are Cephalicall, Hepaticall, and Cardiacall, that is good for the Head,
Liver and Heart, to open the obstructions of the Liver, and to cool the heat
thereof, and to ease the pain of the head, especially the white and the
yellow. They are good for faintings of the heart and pa^pitation o beating
thereof, also for weak and faint stomachs which comes through heat; good
against melancholy, and procures mirth and alacrity. They are used to stay and
bind the spermaticall flux in men and women, for which purpose either the
powder taken in a rear Egg, or mixed with other things for the purpose, or
steeped in red Wine, and kept in a hot Balneo, or in hot Embers close stopped
all night, and strained forth and drunk in the morning and evening, both stay
the Gonorrhea, or running of the Reins in men, and the whites in women. They
are good in hot diseases, as in burning Fevers, inflammations of the Liver, and
such like. The Indians (says Gerarde) do use the decoction made in water
against hot burning Agues, and the overflowing of the courses, Erisipelas, the
Gowt, and all inflammations, especially if it be mixed with the juice of
Nightshade, House-leek, or Purslane. They are put in Collises and Jellies, and
all delicate meats, which are good to strengthen and revive the spirits.

The red Sanders have an astrictive and strengthening faculty, but are not
cordial as the other two: they are used in diverse Medicines and meats both for
their faculty and pleasing red color, which they give to them, as in savvces,
Pies, etc. The red is often used to stay defluxions of thin rheum from the
head, and to cool hot inflammations, hot Gowts, and to temper the heat of hot
Agues.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in Powder, Electuary, and Pills.

A powder against the Pestilence.
Take of the three Sanders, of each two drams, Cloves and Cynamon, of each a
dram, Hartshorn two drams, make them into a fine powder, and take thereof
morning and evening half a dram in Carduus-Water.

An Electuary against the Whites in Women.
Take of old Conserve of Red-Roses four ounces White and Red- Sanders in powder
a dram and a half, with syrup of Water Lillies make an Electuary, and take of
it morning and evening as much as a Nutmeg.

The outward use.
It is used outwardly in Catarrhes, or Rheumes, pains of the head, against
vomiting, and in Epithemes and Fomentations against the intemperate heat of the
Liver. They are used against the Gowt and hot inflammations with the juice of
Purslane and Plantain, or Housleek. Applied with Rose Water to the temples, it
gives ease to the headache, and keeps back the flowing of humors to the
eyes. Being applied to the breasts of Maids, or Women mixed with the juice of
Purslane, abateth their greatness, and hinders their overmuch growing.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a scruple to two scruples.

Of such things as are made of Sanders.
Extractum gummosum. Species Diatrion santalon. Trosses of Sanders. Ointment of
Sanders. Cerote of Sanders.

CHAP. 58. De Sarcocolla, of Sarcocoll.
SArcocolla is a Gum of a plant growing in Persia, bitter in taste, and in very
small pieces and powder, like the small pieces of Frankincense, and little
bigger then Poppy-seed.

The names.
In Latin Sarcocolla, in English Sarcocoll.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the first degree, or hot in the second degree, and dry
almost in the same.

The best kind.
The best is that which is new, inclining to white (for being old it waxes
reddish) or of a pale color, bitter in taste, of a porous substance, viscous
and easy to be dissolved in water,

The duration.
It will keep good five or six years.

The inward use.
It purges phlegm both crude and tough, chiefly from the brain, eyes, nerves,
joints, breast and lungs; therefore it profits and avails in coughs, and
shortness of breath, especially in old persons that are phlegmatic; also in
all pains of the joints. It is thought by some to fatten the body, and to
increase sperm or seed.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, or in pills.

The external use.
It is used outwardly against inflammations of the eyes, with milk and the
white of an Egg, and to stay Rheumes and Catarrhes, Defluxions, and Redness
thereof, also against all spots in the Eyes. It cleanses corrupt Ulcers, and
incarnateth, or breeds good flesh, also closes up Wounds and Ulcers. A fume
made thereof is profitable aganist Tenesmus, a disease when one is often
provoked to go to stool. Being mixed with Saffron and Honey it heals
Scrophulaes, or hard swellings called the Kings Evil in the neck, after they
are sufficiently drawn. It is used against bleeding of the Nose, or to stay the
bleeding of Wounds, and heals Ulcers in the Ears, being mixed with Hydromel,
or Water and Honey, and instilled therein.

A powder for Wounds in the head.
Take of Myrrh half an ounce, Madder-seeds, Cypress, Orris, Sarcocoll, of
each three drams: make them into powder, and use it where need is.

A Powder to incarnate, or breed good flesh.
Take Sarcocoll, Aloes, Olibanum, Dragons-blood, and Orris, of each two drams,
make them into powder.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
Sarcocolla must not be given to hot and dry bodies, or choleric stomachs, for
it does much trouble and offend such. The often use of it causes young men to
wax old, and to become bald. It is corrected as Sagapenum.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a dram to two drams.

Of such medicines as are made of Sarcocoll.
There are made Pills of Sarcocoll, Trochisi albi, Rasis.

CHAP. 59. De Scammonio, of Scammonie.
SCammonie is the juice of a root, being full of milkie juice, of a grayish
color.

The names.
It is called in Arabic (...) Mahmuda, in Greek (...), i. e. sodiendo, and
cavenda radice, says Minsheu in his guide into the Tongues, fol. 647. ^n
Latin it is called Scammonium, Scammoneum, and may be derived from the Hebrew
word (...) Shamen, i. e. pinguis, because of it is unctious quality, or Shamen,
per Metaphoram, signifies robustus, for Scammonie is of strong operation, and
fit only for robustious bodies Scammonie being prepared, (that is, baked in a
Quince in embers, or baked in an oven) is called Diagredium, Diagrydium,
Diacrydium, and Diadredium. In Greek (...), i. e. Lachrymula, a little tear.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best kind.
The best is of a dark grayish color, somewhat light, and not ponderous, a
little spongie also, or with some holes in it, somewhat clear, and not muddy or
drossie, of a strong taste, brittle or easy to break, being wet with the
tongue, it shows like milk, but not burning in the mouth or throat; for that
is a sign of adulteration, and that it is mixed with Spurge. The best comes
from Antioch.

The duration
It will keep good two or three years, some say twenty.

The time of gathering and p eparing it.
The time to gather it and to prepare it, is in June.

The inward use.
Scammonie purges primarily and chiefly choler and watery humors* and that
both strongly and speedily from remote parts: afterward (say some) it purges
phlegmatic humors.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Pills, Potions, Boles, etc, and is the Basis or chief ingredient
of most purging electuaries and pills.

Pills.
Take Pills Aggregative, and Cochiae, of each two scruples, Diagredium three
grains, make Pills thereof,

A Potion.
Take of Polypodie, Seen, of each two drams, Anise-seed, and Licoris bruised,
of each a dram: bruise the Polypodie: and make an infusion in a quarter of a
pint or strong Beer or Ale all night on embers, then strain it, and add of
Diagredium eight grains, syrup of Roses laxative an ounce, make a Potion.

A bole.
Take of Conserve of Roses half an ounce of Diagredium eight or ten grains, mix
them together, and make a Bole.

The external use.
Scammonie being mixed with Honey and Ox-gall, and rubbed on pimples or wheales
takes them away, and boiled in vinegar and anointed, takes away the Leprosy,
and spreading scabs. If it be mixed with oil of Roses and vinegar, and applied
to the head, it eases old pains thereof. Being applied with Honey and oil, it
dissolveth cold swellings. A Pessary made thereof, and put up, brings down
the Hours, and expels the Secondine or afterbirth.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
There are these hurtful qualities found in Scammony. First, it ingenders
sharp and gnawing winds in the stomach, insomuch that it provokes to vomit: to
help this, it must be baked in a Quince with Fennell-seed, Daucus-seed or
Galingall. Secondly, it inflames the spirits, especially in those that have
obstructions, or stoppings, and have putrid humors, whereby burning fevers
are procured. This is helped by putting into your decoctions, those things
which do cool and extinguish the heat thereof, as Flea-wort-seed, pulpe of
Prunes, juice of Roses or Violets, or with Rose Water, or Violet-water, or with
the juice of a sour sweet Quince, and mix with it a little Sumach or Spodium:
or before boiling of the same, (that is, the Scammonie) steep it in oil of
Roses or Violets. Thirdly, it has a strong opening and drawing faculty,
whereby it brings immoderate fluxes of the belly, by opening the mouth of the
veins exceedingly: This is helped by mixing binding and astringent things
therewith, as Mastick, the juice of Quince, or of yellow Myrobalanes. Fourthly,
it raseth or shaveth (by it is acrimonie) the intrals and guts, and thereby
brings pains and torments thereof, and procures the Dysenterie, and Tenesmus,
or Bloody Flux, and often provoking to stool. This hurt is taken away by using
fat, moist and slippery medicines, as Gum Tragacanth, or Bdellium, oil of
sweet Almonds, oil of Roses, or pulp of Prunes with Sugar, with the m^ssilage
of Fleawort-seed, Mastick and Quinces taken afterward, and vvarm water last of
all: All which causes it to pass the sooner from the stomach and bowels, and
keeps it from doing hurt. From hence the wise are taught to give Barley-broth
(sweetened with sugar) to those that have taken thereof. Fifthly, it hurts the
heart, liver, and stomach totius substantiae proprietate, through the property
or essence of it is whole substance. This hurt is taken away, if cold medicines
as well as hot being mixed together and given, thereby to yield help to the
heart, liver, and stomach. It may also be taken with Cassia, Manna, the pulp of
Raisons, and Sebesteus. It is dangerous to give it in Fevers, or to give it to
old and weak persons, children, or women with child, or to such as have hot
and dry bodies, or to persons that have great obstructions. It is seldom given
alone, but mixed with some other medicine. Heurnius advises to give
Barley-broth after the taking of it: Heurn. prax. med. f. 259.

The Dose.
The Dose is from six grains to twelve.

The compound medicines made of Scammonie.
Extract of Scammonie, Extractum Diagredii aromati satum, Elixir Scammonii,
sive Pill, Scammonii Crollii, Scammonium sulphuratum. Infusion of Scammonie, or
purging spirit. Diacydonium lucidum Scammoniatum, Gelatina Cidoniorum cum
Turbith. with many others which you may find in Schroderus pharm med chym.
lib. 4. f. 247, 248, 249.

CHAP. 60. De Sena, of Seen.
Seen is a leaf of a plant like unto Licoris, and was not known to the ancient
Writers.

The names.
It is called in Latin Senna, and Sena, in English Seen.

The temperament.
It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

The best kind.
The best is the greenest leaves, and that which is new, not brown, nor too
old. The best is said to come from Alexandria, and is called Sena Alexandrina.

The duration.
It will keep two or three years; but the newer it is the better it works.
Some say it will keep good ten years.

The inward use.
Seen purges chiefly and primarily melancholy, afterward thick phlegm and
other humors, from the spleen, Mesenterie and entrals, also from the brain,
lungs, liver and heart. It is very profitable in obstructions of the spleen and
Hypochonders, and against hard swellings thereof, as also in chronicall Agues,
whether quartaine or quotidian. It is a singular remedy against melancholy; the
Falling Sickness, and foul diseases of the skin, as in scab, itch, leprosy,
elephansie, etc. It quickens the senses both of seeing and hearing, takes away
the cause of sadness and melancholy, and is useful in madness, in the
frenzy, etc. It causes a fresh, quick, and lively habit of the body, and
cleanses and purifieth the blood. It is given also in all headaches and
palsies. Seen is a very safe medicine, and may be given to old men, women with
child, delicate bodies, and children.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in substance, in decoction, or by infusion, which last is the best
way.

In substance.
Take of Seen of Alexandria a dram, or a dram and a half, make it in powder and
give it in posset drink, or mace-drink.

In Decoction.
Take of Seen one ounce, Anise-seed, Carraway-seed, Ginger, of each a dram,
Licoris two drams, Currents and Raisons of the Sun, of each an ounce, make a
gentle decoction hereof in a sufficient quantity of water, and strain it. The
Dose is from two ounces to four ounces.

In infusion.
Take of Seen an ounce, Raisons of the Sun half an ounce, Anise-seed,
Citron-seed, of each a dram, make an infusion on hot embers in Fennel water,
for the space of five or six hours, then strain it, and give the clearest.

Or
Take of the forementioned infusion four ounces, Confectio Hamech two drams
and a half, syrup of Roses one ounce, make a Potion, and give it against
melancholy.

Or thus for the poorer sort.
Take of Seen half an ounce, Borrage-flowers, and Rose-leaves, of each half a
dram, Ginger half a dram: let them be macerated or steeped in Whey or
Posset Drink, for the space of six or seven hours, then strain it, and being
sweetened with Sugar give it to drink. If you add three or four grains of
Diagredium to the same, it will be the more effectual. Weichard. de Med.
nunnul praepar f. 92.

Note, that ^ene does better purge the body when it is infused, then when it is
decocted or boiled; for this is certain, that Seen (being boiled) does much
bind the body after the taking of it: and Seen will not endure any long
boiling.

The outward use.
The Lie wherein Seen and Cammomile-flowers are boiled, is commended for weak
brains, to comfort and strengthen them, as also for the sight and hearing, if
the head be washed therewith; the same Lie is very profitable for the sinews
that are stiff with cold, or shrunk with Cramps: it helps also the Itch in
the body and hands, if they be washed therewith.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
Because Seen is judged (by many) to be windy, and to offend the stomach;
therefore it is corrected with Ginger, Cloves, Galingall, Anise-seed, or
Cynamon. It is excellent to infuse it in Whey or Posset Drink. Also it may be
given with fat broth of a Cock, with the decoction of Prunes, Jujubes, Raisons,
Marshmallows, or with Manna and Cassia, or Polypodium, Violet-flowers,
Borrage, etc. In hot Diseases in^use it in Whey, or Posset Drink; in cold
diseases infuse it in Water of Fumitory, or Wine; for being steept in Wine it
does not offend the stomach Schyronius says, that Seen ^s hurtful to the
bladder and Womb, especially if there be any Ulcer there. Schyron. Meth ^ed.
f. 107, 116.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a dram to two drams, in decoction from three drams
to six drams, in infusion from half an ounce to an ounce.

The compound Medicines made of Seen.
Pulvis Senae Montagnan. Syrup of the leaves of Seen. Syrupus de Pomis Reg.
Saboris Electuarium Diabalsemer, seu Elect. Senatum R. n^d. Passulae laxativa.
Extract of Seen. Elect. de Sena Nicolas. Confectio Hamech.

Whether Seen offend the stomach, and be a griping and windy ^edicine?
Although some hold that Seen does offend the stomach, especially being weak;
yet in regard that it is somewhat bitter, and partaking of heat and dryness,
it does rather strengthen and profit the stomuch, then weaken and offend it.
Now that after the taking of Seen in some bodies, (especially in Women and
phlegmatic persons) gripings do follow, is not denied, but this comes not from
the flatulency or windiness of the Seen, but by accident in drawing gross and
phlegmatic humors to the bowels, and there causes these gripings, especially
where the passages are much stopped. Fernel. Meth. l. 5. f. 115. ^reitag. Aur.
Med. f. 264. Sennert. Instit. f. 959. Matthiol. Comment. in lib. 3. Diascor. f.
521.

CHAP. 61. De Soldanella, of Seabinde-weed.
SEabinde-weed is an herb growing near the Sea, having many small branches
somewhat red, trailing or lying upon the ground beset with small and round
leaves, not much unlike Asarabacca, but smaller: the flowers come forth like a
bell, of a bright red incarnate color: the seed is black, and grows in round
cods: the root is small and long.

The names.
In Latin, Soldana, Soldanella, and Convolvulus marinus, in English
Seabinde-vveed, Seacavvl, Seacoale, Sea-vvith-vvinde, because the branches
wind themselves, and the flowers are so like the small kind of Binde-weed,
and that it grows naturally near the Seacoasts. It is called also Sea-be^ls,
for the likeness of the flowers, and some call it Sea-fole-foot, for the
resemblance of the leaves and Scottish scurvy-grasse.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree.

The duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
Binde-weed purges chiefly water, and phlegm also, therefore it is very
useful and profitable in the Dropsy, and opens the obstructions, or
stoppings of the liver, and kills worms. It has two excellent properties,
the one is that it wonderfully draws away watery humors, the other that it
corroborates or strengthens the liver.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, Decoction, Pills, etc.

A Powder against the Dropsy.
Take of Sea-bindeweed a scruple, Hermodactyles half a scruple, Turbith and
Diagredium, of each seven grains, Ginger and Cynamon, of each four grains,
make a powder hereof, and add oil of Fennel and oil of Anise-seed, of each
two drops, mix them together, and give it in Posset Drink.

A Potion against the Dropsy.
Take of Sea-bindeweed a handful, Raisons of the Sun stoned an ounce,
Anise-seed a dram; make a decoction in the broth of a cock, strain it, and
add syrup of Pumitarie an ounce, of the electuary Diaturbith two drams, make
a potion, and give it.

The outward use.
The powder of the dried herb is used to bring or raise up flesh in deep and
hollow Ulcers, helping also to heal them. The juice also not pressed, but
issuing forth of its own accord when it is broken, gathered and dried, and
afterward relented or made soft, and laid as a plaster to the bottom of the
belly, draws forth watery humors by siege.

The hurtful quality, and the corrective means.
Diascorides and some of the Ancient write that it is an enemy to the stomach,
and sharp in taste, and therefore advises that it be boiled in broth of fat
meat, to hinder the strength of its working, and they say it must be given only
to strong bodies. And happily it might operate so with them by reason of the
climate where it did grow. But that which we use now is a most safe medicine,
and may be given to children and weak persons as daily experience does
manifest. It may be given with Cynamon, Ginger, Anise-seed, Mastich, or Sugar,
also with Rubarbe and Cubebs, for Rubarbe is counted an excellent consort for
it. In decoction it is given with Raisons and Anise-seed.

The Dose.
In powder it is given from half a dram to a dram and a half, or two drams.
In decoction from half an ounce to an ounce and a half. The juice is given
from two drams to half an ounce.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Extract of Seabinde-weed. Succus inspissatus.

CHAP. 62. De Succino, of Amber.
Pliny says, Amber issues forth from trees like as Gum in Cherrie-trees, and
Rosin in Pines, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 37. Cap. 3. f. 607. But it is generally
taken for a kind of liquid Butimen, whose springs and fountains are in the
Germane Seas, and running into pieces, some greater and lesser then others, and
is taken up with Iron-hooks, being soft under water, but hardening in the Air
like Coral.

The names.
In Latin Electrum, Chrysolectrum, Glessum, Resina terrae; but the usual
Latin names are Succum, Carabe, Charabe and Karabe in English it is called
Amber.

The temperament.
Amber is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

The best kind.
Although Authors mention three sorts, yet there are but two sorts in shops,
the white and the yellow: the best is the whitest, and that which is most
clear, and being rubbed will draw straws unto it, and gives a sent like
Bitumen.

The duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
Amber strengthens the heart and stomach, stays vomiting, dries up moist
humors in the stomach, and hinders the breeding thereof, and stays the flux
of the belly. It is useful in cardiack passions, and palpitations, or beatings
of the heart. It recreates, or refreshes the brain, and is profitable in
Rheumes, or Catarrhes, in the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Swiming
of the head, suffocation, and inflation or windiness of the Mother. It stays
the flowing of blood and seed, provokes the terms in women, and causes a
speedy delivery. It helps women that have the whites, and men that have the
running of the Reins; for it stops the flux, and strengthens the parts
very much. Being taken in Saxifrage-water, it is a sure remedy for such as have
their urine stopped. It is very good for old coughs, and those that are falling
into a Consumption, being mixed with conserve of Red Roses, and so taken
morning and evening; and is profitable for joynt-aches, and the running Gowt,
if it be taken with two or three ounces of the decoction of Lignum vitae.

The chymicall oil of Amber taken inwardly avails against the Pestilence and
contagious air, if three or four drops be taken for diverse mornings together,
in Carduus or Angelica-water. It helps the biting of a mad Dog, and is
excellent to preserve from the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, svviming of the
head, and Nightmare, taken in Piony-water, Betony-vvater, Lavender, Rosemary,
black-Cherry-vvater, or in Lily Convally-vvater, or Sage-vvater, or taken in
Wine, especially if it be taken about the new of the Moon, in the morning
fasting: for this oil is a singular secret to comfort the animal, vital, and
natural spirits. If five or six drops be taken in Sage-water it restores the
speech lost. It dries up Rheumes and sharpneth the sight, being taken in
Fennel-water, or Eye-bright-vvater. It helps trembling of the heart and
faintings of the spirits, shortness of breath taken with Horehound-vvater,
and the Pleurisy with water of Sage of Jerusalem. It helps spitting of
blood taken with Tornentill-vvater. It helps a cold stomach and vomiting
being taken with Mint-vvater. It helps the intemperate frigidity or
coldness of the Liver and Spleen, taken in Spleenwort-water or
Wormwood-water, and helps such as are melancholy if it be taken in Borrage or
Buglosse-water. Given in Endive-water, or a few drops thereof taken in the pap
of a roasted Apple, with a leaf of Gold cures the Jaundise. It does
wonderfully ease the stone and urine stopped in the Kidneys or Bladder, if a few
drops be given in Saxifrage, or Parsley-water. It stirs up to Venery taken with
Diasatyrion in Wine. It helps the Running of the Reins taken with water or
syrup of Purslan. It eases the Colic taken with Cynamon-water or Aqua-vitae.
It cures the Dysentery, or bloody Flux taken in Tormentil-water. It kills
Worms taken in Tansey-water. It helps the joynt-Gowt and Sciatica or
Hip-Gowt taken with the decoction or Lignum sanctum, as also trembling and the
cramp. It much helps the affects of the womb, as the suffocation and
precipitation or ^a^ling down thereof, as also barrenness, taken in Minch or
Penny-royall-water, or Anise-seed-water, and eases pains in travel, brings
away the child and afterbirth, provokes the terms, and brings away the
dead child, given in Savin-vvater, especially if five or six drops thereof be
given, and then as much more within half an hour if need require.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, in Electuaries, etc.

A powder to hasten the birth.
Take of Cynamon half a dram, or a dram, Cassia lignea, two scruples, Saffron
half (...) dram, of white Amber a scruple, make all into powder, and g^e^ in
Savin-water.

An Electuary against the pain and heat of the stomach, etc.
Take of conserve of red Roses two ounces, Marmelate of Quinces an ounce,
Mastick in powder two drams, red Coral in powder a dram and a half, oil of
Amber a scruple; with syrup of Quinces make an Electuary. Take of it morning
and evening before meat and after meat. It is excellent also to stay vomiting
and the flux of the belly. Doring. de ol. succinii viribus f. 73.

The outward use.
Amber being burned on hot coals, and the fume thereof received to the head,
does help moist distillations thereof falling on the eyes, teeth, nose or
stomach. The fume thereof (says Doringius) cured an old man of the Apoplexy,
that was judged to be certainly dead. Doring. de ol. Succinii viribus, f. 71.
Being worn about the neck, it cures Agues, and helps swellings of the throat
and almonds, and is good in times of infection, especially used with salt, and
hinders defluxions. A fume thereof does much help to cure the Falling
Sickness, and is good in the Pestilence, made into powder, and mixed with
Honey and Oil of Roses, it is good for the infirmities of the ears, and mixed
only with Honey, it cleers the dim sight. It is a present remedy against
burning or scalding, if it be boiled with Linseed-oile, and the parts anointed
with the same, or wet clouts therein, and lay them on. It is commended against
the clifts or chaps of the hands, if the powder be strewed thereon, for it
closes them up and dries. The Chymicall Oil of Amber is good for cold and
moist diseases of the brain, if the temples or nape of the neck be anointed
with a few drops thereof: it discusseth, or expels wind in the ears and
head, and strengthens the memory. It is commended in the curing of Wounds,
Ulcers, and Fistulous tumors being applied with other ingredients. It helps
the Cramp being anointed therewith, and deafness if a few drops be put into
the ears with Cotton-Wooll. It helps the stinking of the breath, if it be
mixed with Plantain-water, or Rose Water, and the mouth washed therewith, and
eases also the pain of the teeth coming from a cold cause; it cleanses black
teeth, and makes them white, and helps the putrefaction of the gums and
teeth. It is useful in the relaxation or swelling of the Uvula, or palate of
the mouth. It stays the bleeding of the nose if the nostrils be anointed
therewith, especially if a cloth wet in Plantain-water be applied to the
temples.

A Plaster against the heat of Ulcers.
Take of white Amber in powder an ounce, of Honey a pound, of common Salt in
powder two ounces, mix them together and apply it. This draws out the heat,
eases the pain, and heals it Doring de Ol. Succin. virib. f. 183.

The hurtful qual^ty.
It is not to be given in very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
Amber in powder is given from a scruple to a dram, or four scruples. The
Chymicall Oil from three drops to ten.

Of such things as are made of Amber.
Oil of Amber, Magister of Amber, Tincture of Amber, Pills of Amber, Balsam of
Amber.

CHAP. 63. De Tamarindis, of Tamarinds.
TAmarinds are the fruit of a tree growing in India, Gart. ab Horto, aromat.
histor. cum annotatione car. clus. f. 119. Others say they are strangers in
India, and grow in Arabia, being brought from thence into the Indies. Renodaeus
de Mat. Med l. 1. sect. 1. f. 349.

The names.
They are called in Latin Tamarindi, from the Hebrew word (...) Tamar, i. e.
Palma, and Indus. In Greek they are called (...), Palmulae acidae, in English
Tamarinds.

The temperament.
They are cold and dry in the second degree, or in the beginning of the third

The best kind.
The best are of a blackish, or reddish color, fresh and moist, of a sharp
taste, with many threads (as it were) among them. They are adulterated with
Prunes, but that is easily known by the color and taste.

The duratisn.
They will keep good (being kept close) two or three years.

The inward use.
They purge choler and adust humors; therefore are used in acute Fevers, in
the Frenzy and madness, they stay vomiting, cool inflammations both of the
Liver and stomach, as also of the reins and back, and help the running of the
Reins; they also stay Rheumes and Distillations. They open obstructions, or
stoppings both of the Liver and Spleen, and are profitable against all
eruptions or breakings forth of the skin, which arise from the heat of the
blood, or from sharp or salt water running between the flesh and the Skin, or
Scab, Itch, Leprosy, and such like. They quench thirst wonderfully, and are
good against the Jaundise; as also most excellent in Erysipelas, or Wildfire,
bleeding of the nose, (arising from choler) and Women's fluxes.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in Boles, in Potions and Decoctions.

A Bole.
Take of the pulp of Tamarinds an ounce and a half, species Diarrhodon Abbatis,
two scruples, mix them together and make a Bole.

A Powder.
Take of the pulp of Tamarinds half an ounce, Manna two ounces, Succory-water
four ounces; dissolve them in water and make a Potion.

Or
Take of Prunes, Sebestens of each ten in number, Tamarinds an ounce, of the
four greater cold-seeds, viz. Gourds, Cutruls, Cucumers and Melons, of each a
dram, of Borrage, Buglosse, Rosemary and Violet-flowers a dram; make a gentle
decoction in about a pint of Endive or Violet-water, then strain it, and add
thereto syrup of Roses one ounce and a half, syrup of Violets half an ounce,
Oil of Vitriol five drops, mix them together, and give it. This is excellent
in burning Fevers arising of choler.

They may be given in Posset Drink or Whey, also in Succory-water, or
Goats-Whey.

Against the small Pox, boil them with Dates, Figs and Jujubes, and give them
in broth made with Lentiles: But note, that they must not be much boiled, for
they will not endure any long boiling. They are most convenient in hot and
acute Fevers, in hot seasons, and in hot bodies.

The external use.
They are applied outwardly against all inflammations of the skin, as Wheals,
Pimples, and such like.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
There are two inconveniences in Tamarinds, First, they offend and hurt a cold
stomach; therefore to help it, give them with Mastich, Cynamon, Anise-seed,
Mace, or such like. Secondly, they are very astringent and binding, therefore
in the beginning of putrid Fevers abstain from them, and be very cautious in
giving them, except it be in a small quantity, and with Manna, Cassia, or the
like.

The Dose.
The Dose of the pulp is from one ounce to two ounces. In decoction or infusion
it is given from two ounces to three or four ounces.

The compound Medicines made of Tamarinds.
Pulp of Tamarinds, Electuary lenitive, Electuary Diacatholicon, etc.

CHAP. 64. De Tormentilla, of Tormentill.
TOrmentill is an herb so like Cinquefoile that many mistake it. Common
Tormentil has many slender weak branches rising from the root, leaning as it
were upon the ground, with many short leaves that stand closer to the stalks
then the other Cinquefoiles do, with the footstalk encompassing the branches
at several places: the leaves be small, five or most commonly seven growing
upon a stem much like the leaves of Cinquefoile or five-leafed grass, but
somewhat longer and lesser dented about the edges many of them: the flowers be
yellow, much like Cinquefoile, but smaller: the root is black without, but
reddish within, and sometimes a little crooked.

The names.
It is called in Greek (...), ex (...) septem, et (...), folium, that is, seven
leaves. In Latin Tormentilla, quia valet adversus tormenta intestinorum. In
English Tormentill and Set-foile.

The temperament.
It is dry in the third degree without any manifest heat, binding, and of
subtle or thin parts.

The duration.
The herb will keep a year, and the root two years.

The inward use.
Tormentill is Diaphoreticall and Alexipharmacall, and vulnerary, that is, it
provokes sweat, expels poison, and is good to cure wounds. The herb, root and
water are in use. It is much used in the pestilence, and other malignant
diseases, as small pox, measles, spotted fevers and purples, driving forth by
sweat any contagion, especially if a flux of the belly be joined with these
diseases. It is useful in Catarrhes (to dry up rheumes) and in the French
disease. It cures the bloody flux, and all other fluxes of the belly, and
stops the spitting of blood, pissing of blood, vomiting, and the
overflowing of women's courses. The powder of the root or the decoction thereof
is very available against Ruptures, bruises or falls, and dissolveth congealed
blood, and eases the pains that happen thereupon. It helps also the
stoppings and hurts of the lungs and liver, and is good against the Jaundise,
and cures the tertian Ague. The decoction of the root in wine being drunk,
hinders abortion, or miscarrying in women with child, the leaves kills
worms in children, and it is a great help to such as cannot keep their water,
if they put thereto some juice of Plantain. A dram of the root in powder taken
in water wherein red hot iron or steel has been quenched, is a good remedy for
such as have the running of the reins, especially the body being first well
purged. The leaves, seeds, or roots are good to put in decoctions for
wound-drinks. In a word, it is most excellent in ^he time of the plague or
pestilence.

The distilled water of Tormentill taken in a morning fasting, is lent against
venom or any contagion, and is a good preservative in times of infection. The
dose is two or three ounces The same taken morning and evening, cures all
inward ulcers in the body, stays the flux of the belly, especially the
Dysentery or bloody flix. It does comfort the brain, heart, stomach, liver and
spleen; as also the whole body, and cures most Agues. The best way to still
the water is to steep the herb all night in wine, and then distill it Balneo
Mariae.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, Electuary Potions, and Decoctions.

A powder against the Pestilence.
Take Tormentil root, Dyttany, of each a dram, Sorrel and Citron-seed of each a
dram and a half, Ginger, Cynamon, Saffron, white and red Sanders, of each half
a scruple, Bole Armoniack and terra sigillata, or sealed earth, of each four
scruples. Make all into powder, and give half a dram thereof or more, in
Carduus-water, and let them sweat after it.

An Electuary against the Pestilence.
Take of Tormentil-root in powder two drams, of the three kinds of Sanders in
powder of each a scruple, Wood-Aloes in powder half of a scruple, Angelica-root
in powder a dram, conserve of Red Roses and of Rosemary, of each two ounces and
a half, with syrup of Gillowflowers make an Electuary. Give of it morning and
evening about a dram.

A Potion against Infection.
Take of Tormentil-root in powder half a dram, London-Treacle a Dram,
Carduus-water an ounce and a half, mix them together, and give it warm, let
the party sweat after it.

The outward use.
The decoction of the root is good to cleanse sores and wounds, and to dry them
up: the root or the juice may be put into ointments for Wounds and Ulcers. The
root of Tormentil and Pellitory of Spain and burnt Allome, of each a like
quantity, made up into a paste, and put into a hollow tooth, does not only
assuage the pain, but stays the flux of humors which was the cause thereof.
The decoction thereof helps rotten Sores and Ulcers of the mouth, or secret
parts. It dissolveth all Knots, Kernels, and Hardness about the Ears, Throat,
Jaws, and the Kings Evil, if the leaves and roots be bruised and laid
thereunto. The same also eases the pains of the Hip-gowt, by restraining the
sharp humors that flow thereunto. The juice of the leaves and roots used with
a little vinegar, is a special remedy against the running sores in the head,
or other parts, scabs also, and the itch, or any such eruptions in the skin,
proceeding of salt and sharp humors: the same is effectual for the
Hemorrhoides or Piles, if they be washed and bathed therewith, or with the
distilled water of the herb and roots. It dries up sharp Rheumes that fall
from the head to the eyes, and cause redness, pain, and watering, itchings or
the like, if a little prepared Tutia, or white Amber, be used with the
distilled water hereof. The powder of the root does wonderfully stay the
bleeding of the nose or any wound, or vomiting. The same mixed with Vinegar,
Oil of Roses, and a little Wax being made into a plaster, and laid to the
back, does prevent Abortion in Women, or miscarrying. If women sit over the
decoction thereof, it is a good help to prevent miscarrying, especially if
after the use thereof they make a plaster with the powder and Honey, laying it
to the navel and back. The distilled water being injected does much help to
cure the Whites or Reds in Women. The powder of the root mixed with Oil of
Camomile eases the pains of the joints. The distilled water does cleanse
Wounds, Fistulaes, Cankers and Sores being washed therewith, and does much help
to the speedy cure of them, and the water also alone does clear the sight, and
stay the flux of Rheum being washed therewith.

A Plaster to prevent miscarrying in Women.
Take of the plaster called Emplastrum contra rupturam, two ounces, the root
of Tormentill in powder two drams, Oil of Roses, or Quinces half an ounce,
make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the back warm.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given in very dry bodies, nor to such as are much bound in
their bodies.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to a dram, in decoction from a dram to
three drams.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled Water. Dioscor^ium, etc.

CHAP. 65. De Turpetho, of Turbith.
TVrbith is the root of a certain plant, brought us from beyond the Sea,
neither have any set down certainly what it is.

The names.
It is called in Latin Turpethum, Turpetum, Turbitum, Turbith, in English also
Turbith, quasi turbatorium, because it troubles the stomach.

The temperament.
It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second: or hot and dry in the
second degree.

The best kind.
The best is that which is white within and hollow, like a Cane or Reed, Gummy,
with an ash-colored bark or outside, smooth and not rugged, easy to be
broken, fresh, not worm-eaten, and not very great, or thick, which is not so
good.

The duration.
It will keep good three or four years.

The inward use.
Turbith purges thick, viscid and phlegmatic humors from the stomach, veins,
joints, nerves, and breast; moreover, it draws away water in the Dropsy. It
is profitable in the Gowt, in long continued Agues coming from gross and
tough humors, and in all diseases arising of thick phlegm. Some say it purges
first and primarily phlegm, and then somewhat adust humors, therefore it is
used in the French pox, Elephansie, Leprosy, Morphew, and also in madness.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, or in substance.

In decoction.
Take of Betony a handful, Turbith three drams, Citron-seed, Long-Pepper, of
each half a dram; make a decoction in a sufficient quantity of water, strain
it, and add thereunto Honey of Roses solutive one ounce and a half, make a
potion. Massar. f. 481.

In substance.
Take of Turbith in powder a dram and a half, mix it with posset drink (wherein
has been boiled Betony, Ivy, Anise-seed, etc.) and give it.

It may be given in broth wherein has been boiled Raisons and Figs. It will
endure boiling indifferent well, but especially if it be first infused it is
better.

The external use.
The powder of Turbith being mingled with honey, and applied, eats and
consumes dead flesh in ulcers and wounds, and is profitable in Gangrenes.

The hurtful quality, with the corrective means.
Turbith has three hurtful qualities; first, it is slow and weak in
operation, so that except it be quickened with something it oftentimes draws
away thin phlegm, and leaves the thick behind. Secondly, it offends and
troubles the stomach, bringing a nauseousness thereof, and many times causes
vomiting, according to the verse.

Nolo damnosum Turbith mea viscera turbet.
Thirdly, it macerates or consumes the body, and brings leanness and
Consumption. It is corrected with Ginger, Cynamon, Anise-seed, Mastick, and the
like. Also oil of sweet Almonds is a good corrective for it, especially in lean
bodies: it is not safe to give it to women that are with child, old, and weak
persons, or to children. After the use of Turbith the eating of fish is
forbidden, and also you must avoid the South-winde. Heurn. Prax. Med. fol. 266.
Tretag. Auror. Med. fol. 322. Sennert. Instit. fol. 857.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a dram to two drams, in decoction two drams to
half an ounce.

The compound Medicines made of Turbith
Extract of Twrbith, Species Diaturbith with Rubarbe, Pills of Turbith, Vinegar
of Turbith.

Deo soli gloria.
CHAP. 66. De Agrimonia, of Agrimonie.
The names.
IT is called in Latin Eupatorium, from Eapator the first finder of it, and
Agrimonia; some also call it Hepatoxium, because it is a good help to the
Liver: In English, Agrimonie and Egrimonie.

The Temperament.
It is hot and does moderately bind, and is of a temperate dryness, it
cutteth and scoureth, and is of subtle parts.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year, being well dried.

The inward use.
It opens the stoppings of the Liver, and cleanses it; it helps the
Jaundise, and strengthens the inward parts, and is good for the Bowels, and
heals their inward woundings, and bruises or hurts, and qualifieth all inward
distempers that grow therein: A decoction of the herb made with wine, and
drunk, is good against the sting and biting of Serpents, and helps them that
have foul, or troubled, and Bloody Waters, and is useful in long continued
Fluxes of the Liver, especially in old people; It is good for the Strangury,
and helps also the Colic, it helps the Cough, and cleanses the Breast: It
is good help to rid a Quartaine or Tertian Ague, if a draught of the
Decoction be taken warm before the fit; the leaves and seeds stop the the
Bloody flixe, being taken in wine. The roots or leaves boiled in wine, and
drunk, helps such as have the Palsy. It is accounted a good herb against
the Spleen being stopped, as also against the Pestilence, and the biting of a
mad Dog. The distilled water helps the Jaundies, Cough, and kills worms,
if two ounces thereof be taken Morning and Evening; and it is esteemed a secret
experiment against the Quartaine Ague, if four ounces thereof be taken Morning
and Evening for many days together, but I rather approve of the Decoction. The
leaves or roots are good in the Dropsey and Green-sicknesse.

The manner of administering it.
It is chiefly given in Decoction.

A Decoction against the Jaundes.
Take of Hore-hound two handfulls, Elecampane root, Buglosse, and Agrimony, of
each a dram and a half, of Rubarbe, and wood Aloes, of each a dram; Bruise the
wood Aloes and the roots, boil them in three pints of White Wind to a quart.
Note that the Rubarbe must not be put in, till the rest be almost boiled. Take
of this two ounces Morning and Evening. If there be a fever boil it in Water.

The outward use.
It helps old Sores, Cankers, and Ulcers that are of hard Curation, being
stamped with old Swines grease and applied, for it cleanses and afterward
heals them: in the same manner also applied, it draws forth thorns or
splinters of wood, Nails, or such like that is gotten into the flesh, and
helps to strengthen Members that be out of joint: it helps also foul
impostumed ears, being bruised and applied; or the juice dropped into them:
The leaves bruised and applied, to the biting of a mad Dog, helps the same,
and the juice mingled with Vinegar takes away warts being laid thereon. The
distilled water of the herb is good for all the purposes aforesaid, and to
cure Ulcers and sores of the mouth and throat being gargled or washed therewith.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
These following are made of Agrimonie, Syrup of Agrimonie. Pills of Agrimonie.
Trosses of Agrimonie. Water of Agrimonie.

The Dose.
The leaves are given in Powder, from a scruple to a dram.

CHAP. 67. De Agno Casto, of the chaste Tree.
The Names.
IT is called Castus, that is, chaste, because the Athenian matrons, in their
Thesmophoria did use these leaves as Sheets to lie upon, thereby to preserve
their chastity: In Latin it is called Agnus castus and vitex, also Salix
Marina, or Salix Amerina, in English Chaste tree.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of a very thin essence or
substance, sharp also and binding.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year, the seed will keep longer.

The inward use.
It is a singular good remedy for all such as desire to live chaste, for
withstandeth all filthy desires to Venery or Lust, and dries up the seed of
generation, in any manner used and taken. The seeds being drunk, resists the
bitings of venomous Beasts, Spiders, or the like, and helps the Dropsy and
those that are troubled with the Spleen: it also procures milk in women's
Breasts, it procures their courses and urine stopped, and helps the
windiness of the Stomach and Belly, and is useful in the stoppings of the
Liver. A dram of the seed given in Powder causes sleep. The decoction of the
herb and seeds is good for women troubled with the pains of the Mother, or
inflammation thereof, and is said to help an Ague if a draught thereof be taken
before the fit.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction powder electuary. Trosses, etc.

An Electuary to cool and abate Lust.
Take conserve of Water Lillyes, and conserve of mints of each one ounce, of
Lettice stalks candyed, six drams; of the seeds of Agnus Castus a dram and a
half, of Rue seed half a dram, of Coral a dram, of Crystal half a dram,
of Camphor a scruple; make those things in powder, that are to be powdered, and
with syrup of Purslane make an electuary; Take often of it as much as a nut.

The outward use.
It helps hardness, stoppings, Apostumations and Ulcers of the Matrix, if
women sit in the Decoction thereof, or receive the hot fume thereof. The leaves
with butter dissolve the swelling of the Cods being applied: applied to the
head it eases the pain thereof, and is good in the Lethargy, being boiled in
salt water with Sage and Smallage, and the hinder part of the head washed
therewith: the same used to the limbs, takes away weariness upon travail or
labor: the leaves are good for wounds. The seeds used with Barley meal does
mollify hard swellings and break Impostumes: and with Niter and Vinegar it
helps freckles of the face; used with Honey it helps the sores in the mouth
and throat. With Vinegar and Oil it is good for the Frensy and Lethargy. The
Leaves used in a fume, and also strowed, drive away Serpents; and being laid on
cure their bitings: Also strowed in the bed or carried about near the skin, it
causes chastnesse: The seeds laid on with water does heal the clifts of the
fundament.

The hurtful quality.
It troubles the head and brings pain thereof, especially when it is green.

The Dose.
The seed is given from a scruple to a dram.

Medicines made thereof.
Syrup of Agnus Castus, Trosses of Agnus Castus.

CHAP. 68. De Erugine, of Verdigrease.
VErdigrease is the rust of Copper or Brass, of a green color.

The Names.
It is called in Latin, Aerugo, Aes viride, and Flos aeris; in English,
Verdigrease.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the fourth degree.

The best kind.
The best is that which is greenest, and clean from dross.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The outward use.
It is of a sharp corroding quality, stops freting and spreading soars,
takes away superfluous flesh in any Ulcer or Fistula, and eats out the
callous or hard flesh thereof, and is good in Ulcers and sores of the Eyes:
mixed with Honey and used, it consumes the fleshinesse in the nose called
Polypus, and helps the Disease in the fundament called a Fig. It cures Cankers
and sores in the mouth being used with Honey and Plantaine water for a
Gargarisme. It is thought Achilles first used this Medicine in the cure of
Telephus: and therefore Achilles is commonly painted, scraping off the rust of
his Sphere head, with his Sword, into the wound of the said Telephus. It is a
drying astringent, and corrosive Medicine. It cures Kibes in cattle, being
mixed with Soap or Hogs-greace. Pliny. Not. Hist. lib. 25. cap. 5. fo. 216.

A water against Ulcers of the Privities.
Take of Rain water four pints, of white Candy half a pound; Boil them a
little, then add of Verdy-grease in powder two ounces, and keep it to use.

An Ointment for the same.
Take of white Camphor ointment four ounces, of Aloes an ounce, burnt Alum a
dram and a half, Verdigrease a dram, Oil of Roses one ounce, Tutty three
drams, Camphon six grains; let those things that are to be powdered be made
in powder, and make all into an Ointment.

The hurtful quality.
It is a sharp, corroding and burning Medicine, therefore there must be care in
the use of it.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Vnguentum viride. Vnguentum Apostolorum. Vnguentum Aegyptiacum Green Treat.
Tinctura viridis, etc.

CHAP. 69. De Allio, of Garlic.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Allium, in Egnlish Garlic, and poor man's Treacle.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, and raises Blisters being applied to
the Skin.

The Duration.
It will keep a year, or longer, being taken up dry.

The inward use.
Garlic being eaten, heateth the Body, makes thin thick and gross humors;
cutteth such as are tough and clammie, digesteth and consumes them; also
opens obstructions or stoppings, and is an enemy to cold poisons, and to the
biting of venomous Beasts, and therefore is by Gallen and others rightly
called, The Country-mans Treacle. It takes away the roughness of the throat,
helps an old Chugh, provokes Urine, kills Worms, expels Wind, helps
the Colic, cures the Dropsy proceeding from a cold cause, provokes the
courses in women, and stirs up Venus or Lust, but dries the seed of
Generation, and is most excellent for a cold and moist stomach and to stir up
natural heat; Zacutus Lucitanus, de Prax. Med. Admir. lib. 2. Obser. 11.
relates of an old man, who in the winter season, lying in the cold some time,
had the innate or natural heat of his stomach almost gone, and his appetite
even lost and decayed, who after many hot Medicines used, yet all in vain, at
length he was cured with Garlic and Honey. It is a good Preservative against
the contagious and pestilent air. A Decoction thereof made with Origan and
Wine, being drunk, kills Worms, Lice, and Nits. It is profitable against
the biting of a mad Dog, and for such as are inclined to the Palsy, for
shortness of breath, and to dry up Rhume, and also for the cold Headache. It
is commended against the Consumption of the Lungs, pissing of blood, and for
such as cannot hold their water: The distilled water is good for the same
Diseases, and for the Quinsey. The milk wherein Garlic has been boiled, is
good for worms in Children. Give two ounces of the water Morning and Evening
for a week if need be.

The outward use.
The Decoction thereof used for a Bath or Fume to sit over, brings down the
flowers, and afterbirth. It cures the bitings of mad Dogs, or the biting of
any other venomous creature, being bruised with Rue and applied. It takes away
the Morphew, Tetters, and cures scabbed heads in Children, Dandraffe and
Scurfe, tempered with Honey, and the parts anointed therewith. The juice kills
Lice and Nits if the head be noynted therewith. The ashes of Garlic being
strowed in Ulcers cures them. The smell of Garlic drives away venomous
creatures, and applied with Figs and Cummin it cures the bitings of the Mouse
called a Shrew. A clove of Garlic put into a hollow tooth that aketh eases
the pain thereof, or stamp it with Safforn and Pepper, and hold it between the
teeth; being bruised and applied to the throat, it helps the Quinsie and
swelling thereof: it helps the Gout being stamped with House-leeke and
applied: The juice mixed with Safforn and Goose-grease cures the noise of the
ears, being put therein. Garlic burned and the ashes mingled with Honey, and
laid to black and blew marks, after bruises, takes them away, and helps
wild fire and Scabs, being bruised and applied. They usually cure the Pip in
poultery with Garlic.

Against the Cough in Children.
Take one ounce of Hogs grease, and half an ounce of Garlic, bruise it, and
mix them together, lay it to the soles of the feet at night warm.

The hurtful quality.
Garlic (especially eaten raw) makes the eyes dim, offends the head,
hurts the stomach over liberally taken, causes thirst, hurts the Kidneys,
heateth and burns the blood, yeildeth no nourishment to the body, and is
hurtful to Young men, and to such as are hot and choleric, and in hot
seasons; and hurts Women with Child and such as give suck, it is only good
for such as are cold and moist, and abound with Phlegmatic, gross and tough
humors, for old persons and in cold seasons. The best way is to boil it
thoroughly, and to eat it with Oil, Vinegar, or such like.

Of such things as are made thereoof.
The distilled water of Garlic. The electuary of Garlic which is made thus,

Take of Garlic four or five cloves, bruise it well with two or three drams
of Honey, and as much Mithridate, then add of Parmacitty, Juniper berries of
each a scruple, Castor two scruples, Pellitory of the wall in powder a scruple,
with Oximell Squillitick make in Electuary, and give of it Morning and Evening
as much as a Nut. It is excellent in the Chollick and against wind.

Whether Garlic and Onions be convenient in the Pestilence?
Concerning Garlic and Onions, there is some question whether they be
convenient and profitable in the Pestilence? Gallen. 1. de Differ. Feb. cap. 1.
among food of ill juice and nourishment does mention Garlic and Onions, and
many other Physicians do forbid the use of them, because they increase hot
humors, whereby a Fever is soon bred. But Galen also says that Garlic is
the Country-mans Treacle, and does commend it against the biting of a mad Dog,
and other venomous creatures. But this may soon be decided thus, If we say
that Garlic and Onions are profitable and useful, not as aliment or food, but
as a Medicine; For as it is certain that it yields no good nourishment, so it
is as certain that it is excellent against Venom and Poison, being used in a
small quantity (as before is showed) and very useful in the Pestilence.

CHAP. 70. De Allumine, of Alum.
The Names and kinds.
IT is called in Latin, Allumen, or Salfugo Terrae, Antonius Musa mentions
four sorts of Alum, Exam. Terrarum, Fol. 459. Schroderus writes of five
sorts, Schroder. Pharm. Med. Chym. lib. 3. cap. 24. fol. 143. But we have but
two sorts ordinarily among us, Roch Alum, and common Alum; true Roch Alum is
rare and hard to be got.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third or fourth degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The best kind.
The best is that which is clearest, white and pure, and is brought out of
Egypt.

The inward use.
Pliny says, it is taken in Pills, for the stoppings and hardness of the
Spleen, drives away the Itch, and brings forth corrupt blood by urine. The
vulgar use to make Possets of it, as thus, to take a pint of milk, and a piece
of Alum as big as a Wallnut, and boil it; then take off the curd, and drink
of the clearest a good draught, before the fit of an Ague.

The outward use.
It is astringent or binding, yet cleansing, and is good in putrified Ulcers,
takes away proud flesh, cures the Itch, and Scab, clears the Sight, and is
useful in lotions for the mouth, throat, or elsewhere; mixed with a little
Vinegar it cleanses the Gums, rotten Teeth, and fastneth loose Teeth, being
washed therewith. It stauncheth blood, and used with Vinegar into any place
where the hair has been plucked up, it causes that which comes again to be
but soft and in manner of a down. With the juice of Pomgranat it is good for
the infirmities of the ears, and amends the fleshinesse growing about the
Nails, and helps Kibes. Mixed with the juice of Beets it cleanses the
Leprosy. Boiled in water and used, it kills Nits, Lice, and such venom
breeding in the head, and cures the Dandraffe. In a Glister it is very good for
the Bloody-flix. Burnt Alum in Powder is chiefly used, to take away spongious
Flesh, to dry up Ulcers, and to procure a Cicatrize.

A Water against filthy eating Ulcers.
Take of Plantaine and red Rose water of each half a pound, Alum two ounces,
Sugar one ounce; boil them together to the melting of the Sugar and Alum,
then reserve it to use.

A Water against the ill smell of the Armeholes and Feet.
Take of Alum one pound; Boil it in about a gallon of Water, and wash the
parts therewith.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Burnt Alum. Spirit of Alum. Magister of Alum, etc. Alum water Magistrall.

CHAP. 71. De Althaea, of Marsh-Mallowes.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Althaeae, and Bismalra, because it is twice as good in
effect, as the other sorts are, in English Marsh-Mallow, Morish-Mallow, and
White- Mallow, from the color of the leaves.

The Temperament.
It is moderately hot, but dryer then the other Mallows; and of a mollifying
and softning Nature: the roots and seeds are more dry and of thinner parts.

The Duration.
The leaves will keep a year, the roots longer.

The inward use.
The roots are in the most use; A decoction thereof does ease the gripings of
the Belly, brings away Gravel and the Stone, eases such as are short
winded, and is good in all diseases of the Breast and Lungs, as Coughes,
hoarsenesse of the Throat and Voice, Plurisy and such like: The roots and seeds
boiled in wine or water, is useful for them that have any Excorations or
frettings in the guts, or Bloudy-flix, and this it does by qualifying the sharp
Choleric humors that are cause thereof, and by the Sliminesse easing the
pains and healing the soreness, and in some sort stays the further eruption
of blood. It: it profitably taken of them that are troubled with Ruptures,
Sciatica, Cramps, or Convulsion of the Sinews. The dried roots boiled in milk
and drunk, are good for the chin-Cough. The roots boiled in wine are good for
such as have fallen and bruised themselves, and for those that have any bone or
member out of joint, and for such as have any swelling, pain or Ach in the
Muscles, Sinews, or Arteries of the Body, and cures such as are stung with
Bees or the like. The distilled water is good for the aforesaid purposes. The
syrop of Marsh-Mallow is chiefly used for the Colic, Stone or Gravel, in
Blader or Kidneyes; the Dose is a spoonful or two in Posset drink, or with
Wine, in a morning.

The manner of Administering it.
Both leaves, seeds and roots, are used in decoction.

A decoction provoking urine.
Take of Marsh-Mallow root half an ounce, Licorish two drams, Fennel root,
and Parsely root, and Kneeholme of each one ounce, Parsely seed, and Gromell
seed, of each two drams; Bruise them all and boil them in a sufficient
quantity of Water or Posset drink, strain it, and add Sugar to it; Drink a
good draught thereof Morning and Evening warm.

The outward use.
The leaves or roots are effectual in decoctions for Glisters, to ease pain
and griping of the Belly, whereby the Stone may descend out of the Kidneys or
Bladder more easily; boiled in Wine and applied, they help Impostumes of the
Throat, the Kings Evil, and those Kernells behind the Ears, as also
inflammations, or swelling in women's breasts. The muccilage of the roots, and of
Lineseede and Fenegreek put together, is much used in Pultises, Ointments and
Plasters, that serve to mollify and digest all hard tumors and inflammations,
and to ease pains in any part of the body: the seeds green or dry, mixed with
Vinegar cleanses the Skin of the Morphew, and all other discoloring thereof
what ever. The root boiled in Vinegar, eases the Toothache, being holden in
the mouth. The leaves laid to with Oil, help burnings and scaldings, and are
good against the bitings of men and Dogs, and against the stinging of Bees and
Wasps. Ointment of Marsh mallows does mollify, heat and moisten, and is very
useful in the Plurisie, in pains of the breast and side.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water. The Muccilage. Syrup of Marsh-mallowes. Ointment of
Marsh-mallowes, simple and compound.

CHAP. 72. De Ambare griseo, of Ambergrise.
THere are diverse opinions concerning Ambergrise, but the most likely and
probable opinion is, that it is a kind of Butumen, whose springs are in the
Rocks of the Sea condensate, or thickened into the form and substance usually
observed, having that Oylinesse which is in it from its own Original, and
being light is carried by the Waves of the Sea, unto the shores of sundry
Countries and Climats. Renod. Dispens. lib. 2. Sect. 1. c. 10. fol. 559.
Fragos. Hist. Med. Ind. de gum. Concret. cap. 2. fol. 89. Gruling. Flrorileg.
fol. 289.

The Names.
It is in Latin called Ambra, Ambragrisea, and Ambergrysea; in English,
Ambergrese, and Ambergrise.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree.

The best kind.
The best is not very white, but dry, and grayish more or less, sometimes with
spots or veins, and sometimes without. Oily, especially being pricked with a
pin or needle, not ponderous but light, and of a good sent. The black is to be
rejected, so is that which is very white.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years being kept close:

The outward use.
It warmeth, resolves, and strengthens, what way soever it be taken. It
comfort the brain, warmeth and resolves the cold defluxions of humors
thereon, and on the nerves: it does likewise comfort and strengthen the memory,
revive the heart and spirits, helps barrenness proceeding from a cold cause:
It is effectual against all weakness of the body and joints, helps
weakness of the stomach and loathing of meat. It does most conveniently agree
with aged persons and moist bodies, to warm, comfort, and strengthen their
cold decayed spirits, adding rigor and lustiness to them, and is accounted
helpful to stir up Venus or Lust.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Powder, Electuary, or Pills,

The outward use.
It eases the pain of the head, being dissolved in a warm mortar, and mixed
with a little Ointment of Orange flowers, the Temples and forehead being
anointed therewith. It helps fits of the Mother, being applied to the place,
and abateth the fits of the Falling Sickness, being often smelt to, and also
recreates the Heart, and both Vital and Animal spirits being held often to
the Nostrills.

The hurtful quality.
It is not safe for women to smell to it, that have fits of the Mother, or have
weak brains, nor is it good for very hot and dry Bodies.

The Dose.
The Dose is from two grains, to four or five in any convenient Liquor.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Species Diambrae. Essence of Amber. Poma Ambrae.

CHAP. 73. De Anetho, of Dill.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Anethum, and Anetum, in English, Dill and Anet.

The Temperament.
It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second, especial being green,
but being dried, it is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year, the seed longer.

The inward use.
The decoction of the herb and seeds provokes urine, expels wind, eases
pains and swellings in the body, stays vomiting and the Hickops extinguisheth
Venery or Lust, for it mightily expels wind, and dries up the natural
sperme, and is very effectual in the Colic, and griping pains. It is
accounted by most writers good to breed milk, but truly I rather think it
dries up the milk in women's breasts. The seeds are good to digest raw, and
viscous, or tough humors in the Body. If two drams of the seeds be boiled in
White Wind and drunk, it comforts the womb, helps the windiness of the
Mother, provokes the courses, and expells the afterbirth. The seeds are most in
use.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

A Decoction against wind in the Belly or Stomach.
Take Stachados, Camomill flowers, Rue and Melilot flowers of each half a
handful, Aniseede, Carraway-seede, Fennell-seede, Dill-seede, and Bay Berries
of each three drams; Bruise the seeds and make a Decoction in four pints or
less, boil it to the Consumption of about half, strain it, and give thereof
a good draught, Morning and Evening with Sugar.

The outward use.
It stays the Hickocks, being boiled in Wine, and but smelled unto, tied in a
cloth. The Decoction helps the rising of the Mother, if women sit therein, or
receive the fume thereof. The seed being toasted or fried, and used in Oils or
Plasters, dissolveth the Apostumes in the fundament, and dries up all the
moist Ulcers especially in the secret parts. Oil wherein Dill seed, or Dill
has been boiled procures sleep; and is effectual to warm, to resolve
humors and Impostumes, or hard Tumors, and to ease pain.

The hurtful quality.
It dulleth the sight being often taken, and extinguisheth Venery or Lust, and
is hurtful for hot and dry bodies.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Oil of Dill seed Chymicall: Oil by insolation, or
infusion, and setting in the Sun.

CHAP. 74. De Angelica, of Angelica.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Angelica, from the Angel-lick properties thereof, in
English also Angelica.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second or third degree.

The Duration.
It will keep pood a year, the root and seeds will keep longer.

The inward use.
The roots and leaves are most excellent against Poison and Venom, and
against the infection of the Plague and Pestilence, by defending the Heart, the
blood and Spirits, and gives heat and comfort to them. If half a dram of the
root in Powder be given in Carduus water, and the party laid to sweat thereupon
in their bed, it is effectual as aforesaid and provokes sweat. The stalks or
roots Candid and eaten fasting, are good helps also in times of infection, and
at other times to be warm and comfort a cold stomach. The decoction thereof
being drunk before the fit of an Ague, so that they sweat before the fit come,
will in twice or thrice taking rid it quite away: it helps also digestion in
the Stomach, and is a good remedy for a Surfeit: It helps the Colic, the
Strangury, and stoppings of the Urine, procures women's courses, and expels
the afterbirth, eases and discusseth all inward tumors and windiness: it
opens the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, cures the bitings of mad Dogs,
and all other venomous creatures. The root taken dry or in any other drink,
will abate the rage of Lust in young persons. The root being used green,
helps such as be short breathed, and be troubled with stuffings in their
Stomach. The root also steeped in Vinegar, and a little of the same taken
fasting, is a good preservative in time of contagion. The decoction taken
helps inward bruises and congealed blood, and strengthens the Stomach, and
is effectual for the suffocation of the Mother. The distilled water is good
for the aforesaid Diseases, especially if the roots and leaves be steeped in
wine, and distilled in a glass: The Dose is two or three spoonfulls at a time,
and does much ease cold or gripings that come of cold or wind, so as the body
be not bound: The said water taken, with a scruple of the root in powder,
helps the Plurisie being taken at the beginning, as also all other diseases
of the Lungs and breast, as Coughs, shortness of the breath and such like.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction, in powder Electuary, Potion, etc.

In Decoction.
Take of the leaves of Angelica a handful, of Angelica roots two drams; boil
them in a pint and a half of water, or Posset drink, to a pint, strain it,
and give a good draught thereof, Morning and Evening.

A Potion against the Pestilence.
Take of Angellica root in powder, of London Treacle of each a dram, Angellica
water three ounces, wine Vinegar half an ounce, mix them together, take it
and sweat upon it.

A Potion against faintness of the heart.
Take of Angellica root in powder thirty grains, Angelica water one ounce,
Cinnamon water a spoonful, mix them together, and give it diverse times, if
need require.

The outward use.
The juice or the water dropped into the eyes clears them, and takes away
filmes or skins therein, and helps deafness if dropped into the ears: the
juice put into hollow teeth eases the pain. The roots in powder made up with
a little Pitch into a Plaster, and laid on the biting of a mad Dog, or any
other venomous creature, does wonderfully help them: the juice or the water
dropped, or tents wet therein, and put into old and filthy deep ulcers, or the
powder of the root in want of the other, does cleanse them and cause them to
heal quickly by covering the naked bones with flesh: The distilled water
applied to places pained with the Gout or Sciatica, does give a great deal of
ease. The root smelled to or held in the Mouth, is a good preservative in the
times of contagion.

The Dose.
The root or leaves are given in powder from half a dram to a dram.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water. The juice. The extract thereof. The Stalks and roots
canded. Oil. Balsam of Angelica.

CHAP. 75. De Antimonio, of Antimony or Stibium.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Antimonium, Antimonium Hyacinthinum, vitrem Antimonii,
Stibium, and Sti^^mi; in English, Antimony and glass of Antimony.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best kind.
The best is the clearest glass, without dross or earthy substance, and of a
red color and brittle, or easy to break.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
Antimony is a strong Medicine and works strongly both by Vomit and Stool;
It is profitable in old pains of the head, Catarrhes or R^umes, pains of the
Stomach arising from Malignant humors, in the Dropsey, Green-sicknesse,
shortness of breath, Palsy, Falling Sickness, in the Tertian or Quartaine
Ague, in the French Pox, Melancholy and madness, in stoppings of the Liver
and Spleen, in the Leprosy, Elephansy, Scab, Itch, and foul Diseases of the
skin; It is most excellent in the Pestilence especially at the beginning.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Substance or by Infusion.

In Substance.
Take of Stibium or glass of Antimony in fine powder three or four grains, of
Sugar in powder two drams or half an ounce, mix them together and take it in
a Morning fasting with Physical observation.

Or thus,
Take of Stibium in fine powder three grains, Sugar of Roses two drams, or as
much conserve of red Roses, mix them togther and take it as before.

A Bole good in the Dropsey.
Take of Antimony in very fine Powder three grains, London Treacle a dram,
conserve of red Roses two drams, being well mixed take it as before.

In Pills.
Take of Antimony in Powder three grains, Pilula Alephanginae a scruple, make
Pills, and cover them with leaf Gold; Sed fraus honesta latet.

By Infusion.
Take of Stibium in powder three or four grains, white wine four ounces, let
them stand all night, in the Morning pour off the clearest, and give it.

The outward use.
Stibium is used in Medicines to clear the sight, and against Ulcers and
Festulas thereof, or also to take away proud flesh in sores, and procures a
cicatrice in Ulcers. Being mixed with soap and used, it helps to cure Cankers
and the fleshinesse growing in the Nostrills. Pliny says, t stops the
bleeding of any fresh wound being strewed therein, and singular to heal the
bitings of Dogs; but this I conceive is spoken of crude Antimony. Plin. Not.
Hist. lib. 33. cap. 6. fol. 473.

A water to take away spots in the eyes, and to dry up superfluous moisture.
Take of clear Antimony in powder ten grains, red Rose water three ounces,
mix them together, and let them stand four and twenty hours, then drop four
or five drops of the clearest into the eyes, twice in a day.

The hurtful quality.
Stibium is a strong and violent Medicine, and brings Convulsions, Cramps,
Faintings of the Spirits, and many times sudden death, therefore take these
cautions.

Cautions in the use of Antimony.
Give it only to strong and able bodies. Let it not be given where the body is
much bound, till a glister has been administered. Give it not to women with
child, nor to weak persons, nor to any that are in a Consumption, or to such
as spit blood or have bad Lungs. Give it not to any immediately before or
presently after bleeding. When any do take it let them keep their beds while
it works, and take warm Posset drink, having a care they take no cold.
Fabricius mentions two Matrons, that after the taking of Antimony, the one lost
her hearing, and the other became foolish. Cent. 5. Obser. 12.

If an^ desire to know more of the nature of Antimony, let them read these
following Authors, Matthiol. in lib. 5. Diascor. cap. 59. f. 837. 838. Massar.
lib. 7. de Med. Purg. cap. 30. fol. 485. 486. Schroder. Pharmacop., Med. Chym.
lib. 3. cap. 17. fol. 42. 43. 44. etc. Freitag. Aur. Med. lib. 4. cap. 15. fol.
616. 617. 618. etc. Basil. Antimon. Ham. Poppii Printed, 1618. Crol. Basil.
Chym. Printed, 1631. fol. 211. 212. 313. etc.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Hepar Antimonii, or Liver of Antimony. Flowers of Antimony. Antimony
diaphoreticke, Regulus Antimonii. Oil of Antimony. L quor of Antimony.
Tinctura. Salt. Spirit of Antimony, with many others.

The Dose.
The Dose is from three grains to five or six.

CHAP. 76. De Aniso, of Anise-seed.
The names.
IT is called in Latin, Anisum, in English, Anise and Anise-seed.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree, or hot in the second degree and dry in
the first.

The Duration.
It will keep good two or three years, but the newer it is, the better
operation it has.

The inward use.
The seed often taken, helps a stinking breath, and to break wind in any
part of the body, be it the Head, Stomach, Spleen, Bowels or Mother, and to
provoke Urine and sleep to them that want it: they help Nurses to store of
milk for their Children, to eat the seeds comfited, or Anise-seed comfits
fasting and last at night, and is very good for teeming women, or with child:
they help those that are short winded, or have a Consumption, to take the
Decoction of them with Figs, Licorish, etc. They help to expectorat phlegm in
them that have a Cough, or straitness in the breasts, and is very conducible
to the Stomach, and being boiled in wine and taken, it helps the stoppings of
the Liver, and the Dropsey that comes thereby. The same stays the Hickock
and helps Digestion. It stirs up bodily Lust, and boiled in wine it is
good against all poison, and biting of all venomous beasts. It availes in
Children that have the Falling Sickness, being taken. The chymicall Oil taken
in broth or wine three or four drops at a time, does help the giddiness of
the Head, the straitness and pains in the breast and stomach, or the
crudities and belchings therein, the much desire to cast, and the rising of the
Mother, as also all other griefs and pains inwardly that rise of cold or
wind. The Quintessence gives ease to those that are Phrantick, or distempered
in their brains, and for such as are troubled with the Falling Sickness, or
have the Cramp or Convulsion. A Decoction of Anniseed is excellent in the
Chollick, and eases the Cough.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder in decoction, or the seeds are eaten whole.

A Decoction against the Colic, and wind in the Belly or Stomach.
Take of Anisse four ounces, Licorish two ounces, boil them in three or four
pints of water, strain it and drink thereof a good draught at any time.

The outward use.
If Anise either green or dry be beaten and laid to their Eyes, that have any
hurtful thing fallen into them, it will soon draw it forth, and likewise take
away the venom of any hurt by the biting of venomous creatures, and heals
them quickly: the seeds boiled in Oil of Roses, and dropped warm into the
Ears, eases the pain and noise in them: the seeds bruised and mixed with
Storax, and the fumes thereof taken, being cast on quick coals, will soon
ease the continual Headache. Being boiled with Hyssop, and a little Vinegar
and Honey added thereto, it helps the Quinsey, if the throat be gargled
therewith.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water of the herb and seed. Confections of Anis-seede,
Laxative, both simple and compound. Anisseede comfits. Oil of Annisseed and
Quintessence thereof. Salt of Anisseede. Species Dranisu. Anisseede water hot.

CHAP. 77. De Argento vivo, of Quicksilver.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Argentum vivum, from its agility and moving nature,
also Hydrargyrum, that is, watery Silver, in English, Quicksilver, or
Life-silver, but Pliny says, it might be called Death-silver, because it is
the death of so many. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 33. cap. 6. fol. 473.

The Temperament.
Some will have it hot and moist in the fourth degree, others say its cold and
moiste, others say it is of a mixed quality, partly hot and partly cold.

The Duration.
It will keep many years.

The inward use.
Some commend this to be given inwardly for worms and against the Chollick,
for by the weight thereof the gut is unfoulded, and the Excrements and worms
are brought away. Paraus relates of a Gentleman that when he could not be freed
from the pain of the Colic by any means prscribed by a learned Physician,
at length by the Counsel of a certain German his friend, drank three ounces
of Oil of sweet Almonds drawn without fire, and mixed with some White Wind,
and Pellitory water, and swallowed a leaden bullet besmeared with Quicksilver,
and that bullet coming presently out by his fundament, he was wholly freed
from his Chollick. Par. l. 17. cap 58. fol. 441. But this must be only done in
desperate cases, and in strong Bodies, for the outward use is dangerous, and
must be done with great caution. Others give it to women against hard labors,
and to facilitate or hasten the birth, and to bring away the secundine or
afterbirth,; Paraeus Book 21. Chap. 38. and Doctor Primrose in his poular
errors, Book 4. Chap. 29. Translated lately into English by Doctor Witty.
But this must be only used in desperate cases as is before showed.

The outward use.
It is chiefly in use outwardly against the Frence-pox, Itch, Scab, and kills
Lice and Nits, dissolves hard nodes or bunches of the joints, and swelling
behind the ears; cures also malign Ulcers, penetrateth and Purges, for it
draws from the center to the circumference, that is, from the inward parts to
the outward.

An Ointment against the Itch.
Take Quicksilver killed with oil of Bays one ounce, Hogs grease twelve
ounces, oil of Turpentine one ounce, red Bole in powder half an ounce, the
yolks of four Eggs. Let the yolks of Eggs be roasted very hard, and beaten well
with the oil of Turpentine, then add the rest, and make an Ointment. Let the
Body be anointed with it f o diverse nights together.

Or,
Take of Quicksilver killed with Fasting spitle half an ounce, of Stavesacre
in powder as much, of Butter or Hogs grease six ounces, or half a pound; beat
them well together, and use it as before; this will kill Lyce, and cure the
Itch.

The hurtful quality.
Quicksilver is counted by most writers a dangerous Medicine to be given
inwardly, because it brings dangerous symptoms, as Cramps, and Convulsions,
Lethargy, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Tremulations, Stupefaction, Torments in
the bowels, and pain of the whole body; suppresseth urine, causes the body
to swell, hurts the Stomach and Belly, causes vomiting, and brings faintness
of the heart: Petrus Forestus de venenis Observat. 8. in Scholia, mentions an
Apothecary who in stead of a glass of water (being dry) to quench his thirst,
he took a glass of Quicksilver and drunk it up, and dyed thereof, and being
opened, his heart was found congealed, as also his blood about his throat was
congealed and frozen. The like happened to an Ape that had Quicksilver given him
in beer. Others say it is a safe Medicine, and may be taken inwardly without
any danger. In a word, it is good, it is bad, it cures, it kills, according as it is
used; therefore I advise the vulgar not to meddle too much with it, for it has
mastred mighty Giants, and fooled the best Artists. See Fabric. Observat. Chin.
Cent. 5. Observat. 13. Revodaum de Mat. Med. lib. 2. cap. 15. fol 606. 607.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Vnguentum Neapolitanum. Vnguentum Enulatum cum mercurio. Vnguentum Catapsoras,
etc.

CHAP. 78. De Artemisia, of Mugwort.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Artemisia, from the Queen Artemisia, the wife of
Mansolus King of Caria, being good for women's Diseases; in English, Mugwort.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
The leaves are most in use; The decoction whereof made with water or wine, and
drunk, provokes the courses, brings away the birth and afterbirth, and
helps the inflammation and stoppings of the Mother, as also the stopping of
the urine, and is a good help against barrenness in women. It helps the
stoppings of the Liver and Spleen from a cold cause, and against the Jaundise,
being boiled with centory and taken. Two or three drams of the leaves in powder
taken in wine, helps the Sciatica. The juice taken helps the bitings of a mad
Dog.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Powder or Decoction.

In Decoction.
Take a handful of Mugwort and boil it in a pint and a half of water, or
White Wind to a pint, Strain it, add Sugar thereto, and drink a quarter of a
pint of it Morning and Evening warm.

The outward use.
A Decoction thereof being set over, does bring down the courses, expel the
birth and afterbirth, helps pains and stoppings of the Mother: the juice
thereof made up with myrrh, and put under as a Pessary, works the same
effect, and so does the root also; being made up with Hogs grease into an
ointment, it takes away Wens, and hard knots, and kernells that grow about the
Neck and Throat, as also to ease the pains about the neck, and that with more
effect if some field Daisies be put with it: The herb or the juice taken is a
good remedy upon the overmuch taking of Opium. A decoction thereof made with
Camomill, Agrimony and Sage, and the place bathe therewith warm, takes away
the pains of the Sinews and Crampe.

A Fomentation against the Arthriticall Gout.
Take of Git, or Nigella, and Mugwort, of each four handfulls, boil them in
Sea water to tenderness, and let the parts affected be bathed therewith warm.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given from half a dram to two drams, in powder.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Syrup of Mugwort [excellent to bring down the courses if a spoonful thereof
be taken Morning and Evening.] The distilled water. Salt of Mugwort.

CHAP. 79. De Betis, of Beetes.
The Names and kinds.
THere are diverse kinds of Beets, and but two sorts are more generally known,
the white and red Beete, the white is called Beta alba, and the red Beta rubra.

The Temperament.
The white are temperate in heat and moisture, but the others are dry and
abstersive: they have also a nitrous quality whereby they provoke to stool.

The inward use.
The white being boiled in broth does loosen the belly and provokes to stool,
but nourishes little or nothing. The juice of the white Beets cleanses and
provokes urine, opens the stopping of the Liver and Spleen, and is good for
the Headache, the swiming therein, and is effectual against all venomous
creatures. The red stays the Bloody-flixe, women's courses, and the whites,
and helps the yellow Jaundise.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly boiled in broth or in decoction.

The outward use.
The decoction of Beets is used in Glisters to loosen the belly. The juice put
up into the Nostrills, does draw forth fl^gme, purges the head and helps the
noise in the Ears: the same applied upon the Temples stays the inflammation
in the Eyes, and helps burning being used with Sallet Oil, and if a little
Alum be put into it, it is good for Wild fire: the same is good for all
Wheales, Pushes, and other Blisters and Blanes in the Skin: the herb boiled
and laid upon Chilblaines on the hands, or Kibes on the heels, helps them:
it heals the Itch if the place be bathed with the decoction of the herb in
water and some Vinegar; the same does cleanse the head also of Dandraffe,
Scurfe and dry Scabs, and does much good for fretting and running sores,
Ulcers, Cankers in the head, legs or other parts. It is much commended against
baldness and shedding of the hair. The root anointed with Oil, and put up as
a Suppositary into the fundament, does provoke to stool, and soften the Belly.
The juice of Beete kills Lice if the place be rubbed therewith.

The hurtful quality.
Beets offend the Stomach, and breed ill humors in the body.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water. The juice.

CHAP. 80. De Betonica, of Betony.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Betonica, and Vetonica, from people in Spain called
Vettones, as Pliny says: in English Betony and wood Betony. Pliny Not. Hist.
lib. 24. cap. 8. fol. 224.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
It is singular against all pains of the head proceeding from cold, helps
those that have weak Stomachs, and loath their meat, as also the Jaundes,
Falling Sickness, Palsy, Convulsions or Cramps, the Gout, and those that are
enclining to the Dropsey: the powder mixed with pure Honey availes for Coughs or
colds, wheesing and shortness of breath, distillations of thin Rhume from the
Lungs, which causes Consumptions. The decoction made with Mede and a little
Pennyroyall, is good for those that are troubled with rotten Agues of any kind
arising from the Stomach; and to draw down and evacuate the blood and humors
that by falling into the eyes do hinder the sight: the decoction thereof made
in wine and taken, kills worms in the Belly, is good to open stoppings of
the Liver and Spleen, and for stitches or other pains in the sides or back,
the gripings of the bowels, and the wind Chollick, and with Honey helps to
purge the belly: the same helps to bring down women's courses, and is useful
for those that are troubled with the falling down and pains of the Mother,
and to cause an easy and speedy delivery for those that are in travail, and
helps to break and expel the Stone in the Kidneys or Bladder, it is
commended against biting of venomous Serpents, and mad Dogs, and hinders
drunkenness being taken before hand, and quickly expels it afterward: it
helps such as piss Blood or are bruised by falls, and those that are bursten,
and have a Rupture, as also for those that have the Sciatica, and have any
inward wounds. The Roots have not the same virtue, but provoke vomit being
taken.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Powder, Electuary, or Decoction. A Decoction thereof is made,
as is before showed in the Chapter of Mugwort.

The outward use.
The Decoction with Wine Gargled eases the Toothache. The green Herb
bruised, or the Juice applied to any green wound in the Head or Body will soon
heal it, and close it up, as also to any V^ines or Sinews that are cut, and
will also draw forth any broken Bone, or any Splinter, Thorn or such like
gotten into the Flesh: it is no less profitable for old filthy Sores and
Ulcers, yea though they be Fistulous and hollow; but some do advise to put a
little Salt thereto for this purpose: being applied with a little Hogs-lard, it
helps a Plague Sore, and other Biles, and Pushes: the Fumes of the Decoction
while it is warm received by a Funnell into the Ears eases the pains of
them, destroys Worms, and cures the running Sores in them: the juice
dropped into them does the same likewise. The Leaves bruised and applied cures
the bitings of mad-dogs and of venomous Creatures, and stops bleeding at the
Mouth or Nose.

A cerot against wounds of the Head.
Take of Betony in powder an Ounce, Turpintine, Rosin, yellow wax of each half
an Ounce, Mastick and Francumsence of each half an Ounce, Mummy three drams,
make all into a cerot, and keep it for your use.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies, the roots provoke to vomit,
and causes loathing and belchings of the stomach.

The Dose.
The leaves in powder are given from half a dram to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Conserve of the flowers. Syrup of Betony, both simple and
compound. Plaster of Betony. Salt of Betony.

CHAP. 81. De lapide Bezaar, of the Bezar Stone.
The Names and Kinds.
BEzar-stone is taken out of a Beast like a Heart or Goat. It is called Bezar.
from Paser, which signifies a Goat. Or it is called Belzaar, from B^l,
dominus, a Lord, and zaar, venenum, Poison, the Lord of poison, as being good
against venom and poison. There are two sorts, the E^st and the West, the
East is called Bezoar orientalis, and the West Bezar occidentalis: the East is
most in use.

The best kind.
There is much written by Authors concerning the best choice of these stones,
bu^ I shall only say thus much, that the best is that which you fi^de, by
experience, to be most eff ctuall, for I dare say there is scarce one good
stone among forty to be found.

The temperament.
They are hot in the first or second degree, some say temperat, others cold.

The duration.
These stones will keep many years.

The inward use.
It is useful in the swimming of the Head, Falling sickness, Jaundes,
Colic, Dis^ntery or Flux of the Belly; also against Worms, the Stone, the
Courses stopped, and hard labors of Women; but especially it is used against
poison and venom, the P stilence and P stilentiall Fevers, in the small Pox
and M^asells, and in many other Diseases, to provoke Sweat, and thereby to
expel ill vapors from the Heart and vital spirits, and for Swou^ings, and
against Melancholy also, and the Diseases that arise from thence, and to
preserve strength and youth. Monardus does commend it in the Pleurisy, and
says it does much profit such as have taken Arsenick* or such like corrasives.
Thonerus in lib. 3. obscurat. 5. f. 186. 187. he cured a Maid forty years old,
of the Mother fits, by giving her six grains of Bezar in Balme-water. It does
not always provoke Sweat.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly given in powder.

The outward Use.
The powder put on the place that is bitten by any venomous Creature does free
them from danger of death, and likewise put into a Plague Sore that is opened
it does the like.

The Dose.
I conceive there are two chief causes, why Bezar-stone does not work and
effect, according to expectation; the one is because we seldom get the right
B zar; the other is, because people take too small a Dose thereof, for the
ordinary Dose of the E^st B zar is not above five or six Grains at the most,
nay the vulgar rare y give above two or three G^aines thereof. Whereas we may
safely give of it from three grains to ten or twelve, yea to twenty. Zacutus
Lucitanus de pr. med ad mir lib. 3. obs. 86. relates of a Woman that fell into
a malignant F^ver with dangerous symptoms, who in three days brought upwards
three score and two Worms, having B^zar given her in a small quantity; but
after the taking of a dram of B^zar at once she soon recovered, although
before sh^e was very dangerous. If any desire to read more of the B^zar-stone,
let them read Monardus in English of the Bezar-stone, and the Herb
Escuerconera, printed, 1580. Also Doctor Primrose of errors, tra slated by D
ctor Witty into English lately. And Paeraeus in English, book 21. Chapter 38.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Pulvis Beroardicus. Pulvis e ch lis cancrorum compositus, or Gascons powder.
Pulvis cardiacus magistralis.

CHAP. 82. De bolo Armenio, of Bolarmoniacke.
The Names and temperature.
IT is called in Latin Bolus Armenius, and Bolus Armenia, and that because the
best comes from Armenia: in English Bolearmoniack, and Bole-armeny, or red
Bole. It is cold and dry in the first degree.

The best sort.
The best is firm and close, without gravel or stone, heavy, and for the most
part wholly of one color. without discoloring parts, and being put to the
tongue it cleaves very fast.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
It is drying astringent and strengthening; therefore it is useful in any Flux
of the belly, in women's Fluxes, whether white or red, in Rhumes and Catarrhes,
in spitting of blood, bleeding of the nose or any inward bleeding: it thickneth
humors, resists putrefaction, and is excellent in all contagious diseases of
the Pestilence, Smallpox, Measells, and against poison and venom.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder, or in Electuary.

The outward use.
It stops the bleeding of the nose, or the bleeding of any wound, helps
Ulcers of the mouth, consolidateth broken bones, and is much used in binding
Pultises and astringent powders.

Against bleeding of the nose.
Take Bole Armoniack in powder an ounce, red Rosewater four ounces, Vinegar of
Roses one ounce and a half, mix them well together, and wet clothes therein
and apply it cold into the forehead.

The Dose.
The dose is from half a dram to a dram in Plantaine water, or such like.

Of Medicines made thereof.
Bole Armony washed or prepared. Vnguentum Ophthalmicum. Vnguentum rubrum
siccativum, etc.

CHAP. 83. De Borragine, of Borrage.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Borrago, and Borago, in English, Borrage and Borage.

The Temperament.
It is hot and moist in the first degree.

The inward use.
The Leaves, Flowers, and Seeds, all of them, or any of them are very cordial
and help to expel sadness and melancholy, arising without manifest cause
whereof came the saying, Ego Borrago gaudia semper ago; I Borrage bring always
Courage. It is good in Pestilentiall Fevers, and to resist any venom and
poison, as also to clarify the blood and to mitigate the heat in Fevers. The
Flowers or Seeds breed and increase milk in Nurses. The syrup prevails for
all the purposes aforesaid, and is put with other cooling, opening and
cleansing herbs, to open stoppings, and to help the yellow Jaundise, to cool
and cleanse the blood, and temper the heat and sharpness thereof, especially
with Fumitry, and thereby to help the Itch, Ringwormes, or other spreading
Scabs or Sores that arise from a dust and sharp humors. The conserve is used
to comfort the heart and Spirits, and for such as are weak and in a
Consumption. The distilled water is good for the aforesaid Diseases. Borrage
must be used while it is green, for it will not keep dry.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in decoction, juice and syrup.

The outward use.
The leaves or ashes boiled in water and honey is available against Inflammations
and Ulcers in the mouth or throat. The distilled water being applied with a
linen cloth dipped therein, helps the venom of a Spider or Waspe.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Borrage water. Conserve. Syrup of Borrage. The juice.

CHAP. 84. De Calamo Aromatico, of Aromaticall reed.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Calamus Aromaticus, and Acorus: in English,
Aromaticall reed and the sweet smelling flagge.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree, and of thin parts.

The Duration.
Is will keep good two or three years.

The inward use.
A decoction of this root availes to provoke urine, to ease the pain of the
side, to bring down women's courses, to open the stoppings of the Liver, and
Spleen, and Breast; and helps Convulsions, gripings, burstings, bruises, and
such as piss by drops: It prevails in the Dropsy and against Poison, and is
put into Electuaries for such as have raw, and cold humors in their Lungs or
chest. Half a sc^uple thereof in powder, taken in a little beer, does help the
Colic and expel wind. It helps the Palsy and swimming of the head.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction, Electuary, and in powder.

The outward use.
The juice mixed with a little Honey and used, helps dryness. The root boiled
in wine stamped and applied into the Cods, abates the swelling thereof, and
helps all hardness and collections of humors in any place. The fume thereof
used provokes the courses. The fume th^reof also taken by the mouth in a pipe,
alone or with dried Turpentine, helps Coughs. It makes a sweet breath being
chewed in the Mouth, and is used in perfumes.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is half a dram to a dram, in decoction, from a dram to
three drams.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distelled water of the root steeped fi st in wine. The root preserved. The
Extract. [A scruple of which being taken helps the Collick] El. Diacorum O^ e.

CHAP. 85. De Calendula, of Marigolds.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Calendula, Caliha, Chrysanthemum, and that from the
golden Color of the flowers: in English Marigolds.

The Temperament.
The flowers are hot in the second degree.

The Duration.
The flowers will keep good (being dry) a year or two.

The inward use.
The flowers comfort and strengthen the heart, provoke sweat and the courses,
and expels the afterbirth, withstandeth poison, and venery, good in
Pestilent and contagious Fevers, as also in the Jaundise. The conserve made of
the flowers taken Morning and Evening, helps the trembling of the heart, and
is useful in time of the Plague, or Pestilence and corruption of the air. The
distilled water is good for the aforesaid purposes.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in decoction. As,

Take a small handful of Marigold flowers, and boil them in a pint and a
half of clear Posset drink to a pint, strain it and drink off the clearest.

The outward use.
The juice helps the Toothach being washed therewith, and if warts be rubbed
therewith it takes them away. A fume of the decoction used hot helps to
expel the secondine or afterbirth. The juice dropped into the ears kills
worms. The water helps red and watery eyes, being washed therewith.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Vinegar of the flowers conserve.

CHAP. 86. De Chamomilla, of Camomill.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Chamomilla, Camomilla, and Chamaemelum, in English,
Camomill and Cammomill, and that because the flowers have the smell of an Apple
or Quince.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the first or second degree, and is of thin parts.

The Duration.
The herb will keep good a year, and the flowers longer.

The inward use.
The decoction of Camomill made and drunk, helps all pains and Stiches in
the side, the Chollick, Stone and wind in the Belly or Stomach, and expels
tough and clammy phlegm, as also cold humors, provokes sw^at, brings down
the courses in women, and provokes urine. It is very profitable for Agues that
come of phlegm or melancholy, or from an inflammation of the bowels, and for
the Hypochonders; that is, the sides, and that part where the Liver and Spleen
lie. It moderately comfort all parts that have need of warmth, and digesteth
and dissolveth whatsoever has need thereof by a wonderful speedy property.
The flowers boiled in Posset drink, provokes sweat, and helps to expel
cold Aches, and pains wheresoever. A syrup made of the juice with the flowers,
and White Wind, is a good remedy against the Jaundes, and Dropsy, that comets
by the evil disposition of the Spleen. A decoction made with White Wind and
taken, expels the dead Child, and brings away the afterbirth speedily, and
cleanses those parts.

The manner of administering it.
It is used chiefly in decoctions.

The outward use.
It is used in decoctions for Glisters against wind and the Colic. A
decoction thereof being used, takes away weariness and eases the pains to
what part of the body soever it be applied, and comfort the sinews that are
overstrained, mollifieth all swellings, and those that are not over hard, and
rarefieth or makes thin those that are bound together. The flowers boiled in
lie is good to wash the head, and to comfort both it and the brain. It helps
pains in the side and Stiches, as also the Chollick being applied, and wastes
away raw and undigested humors. The Oil made of the flowers is used against
all hard swellings, and pains or aches, shrinking of the sinews, or Cramps, or
pains in the joints or any other part of the body; and helps to dissolve
wind and pains in the belly, used in Glysters for that purpose, anointed
also, it helps Stitches and pains in the side.

A Potion to procure rest and sleep.
Take Camomill and Marshmallowes of each three handfulls, boil them in a
sufficient quantity of water, and let the Patients Thighs, Legs and Feet be
washed therewith, for a quarter of an hour before the time orest.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Oil both by distillation and by infusion. Salt.

CHAP. 87. De Capillo veneris, of Common Maidenhaire.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Capillaris, and Capillus Veneris; in English,
Maidenhaire and common Maidenhaire.

The Temperament.
It is temperate in heat and coldness, opening and cleansing.

The Duration.
It will keep good (being dry) a year or longer.

The inward use.
It is of singular use against the Diseases of the Breast, the Liver and Reins
especially: the decoction thereof drunk, helps the Cough, shortness of
breath, the yellow Jaundise, stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and urine,
helps to break the Stone, provokes the courses, and stays both bleedings
and Fluxes of the Stomach and belly, especially when the herb is dry, for
being green by the thinness of the parts it looseneth the belly, and causes
choler and fleagm to be voided both from the Stomach and Liver, and by freeing
the Stomach by spitting it out wonderfully cleanses the Lungs, and by
rectifying the Liver and Blood causes a good color to the whole body: it is
said also to resist and to cure the bitings of venomous creatures, and to cure
Ruptures.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction, or in powder.

The outward use.
The herb boiled in Oil of Camomill dissolveth knots, allayeth swellings, and
dries up moist Ulcers, the lie made thereof is singular good to cleanse the
head from Scurfe, and either dry or running sores, stays the falling of the
hayr^, and causes them to grow thick, fair and well colored, for which
purpose some boil it in wine, putting some Smallage seed thereto, and
afterward some Oil.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from half a dram to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water, Syrup of Maidenhaire, both simple and compound.

CHAP. 88. De Caprifolio, of Honey Succles.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Caprifolium, and Periclymenum, in English, Woodbinde
and Hony-succle.

The Temperament.
It is hot and attenuating, or making thin, and not cold.

The inward use.
It is of a cleansing, resolving, consuming and digesting quality, as Hyssope,
Origanum and such like; therefore used in decoctions with Figs and Licorish,
they expectorat fleagme from the Lungs and Chest wherewith they are filled. The
flowers and leaves are of more use then the seeds, which is said to consume the
Spleen, and to procure a woman's speedy delivery, helps shortness of breath,
and cures the Hicket: they also cause barrenness in women, and make men
unable to generation.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in decoction, as in the Chapter of Mugwort.

The outward use.
The leaves or flowers in powder, or the distilled water of them, is commended
to dry up foul and moist Ulcers, and to cleanse the face and skin from
Morphew, Sunburne, Freckles, and other discolorings of the skin. The Oil
wherein the flowers have been infused and sunned, is good against Cramps,
convulsions of the Sinews, and Palsies, and any other benumming cold grief.

A water for wounds.
Take Honysuccle, Sage, Celandine, of each a handful, boil them in eight
pints of running water to a half, then add to the strained Liquor a pound of
Honey, set them on the fire, and take off the scumme so long as any will rise,
then add thereto of Roch Alum in powder four ounces, grains of Paradise
bruised one ounce; boil them a little, then strain and reserve it.

The hurtful quality.
The Decoction thereof being drunk six days together, will make the urine as
blood; although at the first they will but provoke urine only; neither are
they good for inflammations of the mouth and throat, but hurtful therein, as
the burning heat of the leaf does manifest.

The Dose.
The seeds are given from half a dram to a dram.

Of such things that are made thereof.
The distilled water. Syrup of the flowers.

CHAP. 89. De Cardamomis, of Cardamomes.
The Names and kinds.
THere are chiefly two sorts of Cardamoms, the greater called in Latin,
Cardamomum majus, and the lesser called Cardamomum minus.

The Temperament.
They are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Duration.
They will keep good two or three years, some say ten years.

The inward use.
Cardamomes break the Stone, provoke urine when it is stopped, or passes with
pain, resists poison and the sting of Scorpions and other venomous
creatures: They are good against the Falling Sickness, the Cough; the broad
worms, and the gripings of the bowels, and expels wind powerfully both
from the Stomach and entrails, eases those that by falls or beatings are
bruised and broken, those that have loose and weak sinews, and the pain of the
Sciatica or Hip gout. It does wonderfully strengthen the Stomach and help
Concoction. They are put in many of our compositions, Cordialls, Antidotes and
such like.

The manner of Administering it.
They are given in powder, Electuary. and Decoction.

The outward use.
Being boiled in Vinegar, or steeped therein and used, it is good against Scabs
and Tetters. A fume thereof used kills the birth.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful in very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
They are given in powder from a scruple to two scruples.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Oil of Cardamomes. A confection of Cardamoms.

CHAP. 90. De Carduo benedicto, of the blessed Thistle.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Carduus, and Carduus Benedictus, in English Blessed
Thistle.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree, and also cleansing and opening.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year or longer.

The inward use.
A Decoction of Carduus being taken helps the swimming of the head,
strengthens the memory, and is a good remedy against deafness, kills worms
provokes urine, and the courses, and drives out gravel, cleanses the
Stomach, and helps the pains of the side. It is most excellent in Pestilent
Fevers, and all contagious Diseases, for it expels out by sweat all
noxious, or ill humors: It is very good in any kind of Ague, either by
Decoction thereof taken, or half a dram of the powder taken in Posset drink
before the fit comes for diverse fits if need require, and sweat after it. It
is very availeable against all venom and poison. The distilled water is
useful for the aforesaid Diseases, but the Decoction is far better. The
extract thereof is good against the French Pox, and the Quartain-Ague.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Powder, or in Decoction, as in the Chapter of Mugwort.

The outward use.
The green herb bruised and applied, is good against hot swellings, as
Wilde-fire, Plague-sores, Botches, and it is good also to be laid upon the
bitings of mad Dogs, Serpents, Spiders, Bees, or Wasps, or any other venomous
creature. The powder stops blood at the nose being applied. The juice
thereof clears the sight, being put in, and takes away the redness thereof,
so does the water. Being bruised with a little Hogs grease, and a little wheat
flower mixed therewith. It cures stubborn and rebellious Ulcers if it be
applied thereto. It is used against the Gangreene also.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from half a dram to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Carduus water. Spirit. Extract. Syrup. Oil, and Conserve.

CHAP. 91. De Caryophyllis, of Cloves.
The Names.
THey are called in Latin Caryophylli, and Garyophylli, in English, Cloves.

The Temperament.
They are hot and dry in the second or third degree.

The Duration.
They will keep good many years.

The inward use.
Cloves comfort the Head, Heart, Stomach and Liver; help the Memory, the eye
sight, and concoction, and strengthen nature: they break wind, provoke urine,
and if half a dram thereof be taken in milk, they stir up Venery or bodily
Lust. They are good against fainting, sounding, as also against the Plague, and
any infectious Disease; against all Fluxes of the belly, proceeding of cold
humors, strengthen the retentive faculty, and make the breath sweet, they stay
also vomiting. They are much used in the Kitchen, both for sauces, and sticking
of meat. The chymicall Oil of Cloves is good in a Quartaine Ague, in long
weakness and debility of the Stomach, (for it does take away crudity and
expel wind) in Fluxes of the belly, and very useful for the aforesaid
Diseases, if two or three drops be given in beer or wine.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder, and in Electuary.

The outward use.
Cloves in powder being put into the Eyes, takes away the web therein, and
clears the sight, so does the chymicall Oil, and also cleanses filthy
Ulcers, especially such as are moist, being put therein. A few drops thereof
put into a hollow Tooth that aketh with a little Lint, does ease the pain
thereof. They are used in sweet powders and sweet waters, etc.

The hurtful quality.
They are hurtful for young people and choleric complexions: they are
profitable for old persons, and phlegmatic, and such as are rheumetick, and
that in the winter season.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Oil of Cloves. Extract. Salt. Aromaticum Caryophyllatum.

CHAP. 92. De Castorio, Of Castor.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Castorium, and Castoreum, in English Castor, and
Bever-cod.

The temperament.
It is hot in the third degree and dry in the second.

The duration.
It will keep good two or three years.

The inward Use.
It opens, discusseth wind, strengthens the Head and Nervous parts,
quickneth the animal spirits, resists poison, and provokes the Courses in
Women. It is most excellent in the Lethargy, Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Palsy,
Swimming of the Head, in trembling of the joints, and in defluxions of the
humors to the joints, in fits of the Mother, and in the Colic. It helps to
bring away the birth and Afterbirth. The spirit of Castor is good for the
aforesaid Diseases.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder, or Electuary.

The outward use.
Being smelt to it availes in the fits of the Mother, and put up into the
Nostrills, it provokes sneesing, and helps the cold effects thereof. If a piece
be put into a hollow, aching Tooth, it eases the pain thereof, and helps
deafness or Noise in the Ears, coming from cold, being mixed with a little
Oil of bitter Almonds and put therein. Oil of Castor helps all cold effects
of the Brains and Nerves, as the Palsy, Cramps, Convulsions, Lethargy and
such like. It prevents the strong shaking of Agues, if the spine of the back
be therewith anointed before the fit come.

A Pessary to provoke the Courses.
Take of Castor in powder half a dram, Sage in powder two drams, Myrrh and
Nigella Seed in powder, of each three drams, with the juice of Mercury, or a
little Honey, make a Pessary.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used to very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given from half a scruple to a scruple.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Spirit of Castor, Oil by Distillation, Extract, Electuary of Castor.

CHAP. 93. De Centaurio, of Centory.
The Names and Kinds.
THere are two sorts of Centory chiefly in use, the great and the small: the
great is called in Latin Centaurium magnum, and Centaurium majus vulgar, in
English great Centory: the small is called Centaurium parvum, and Centaurium
minus, in English small Centory, little, or common Centaury.

The Temperament.
The great Centory is hot and dry in the third degree; the lesser is hot and
dry in the second degree, and very bitter.

The Duration.
They will keep good a year.

The inward use.
The lesser Centory purges Phlegm and Choler, and provokes sweat. It is
useful in the Sciatica, in Agues, for it opens the stoppings of the Liver,
Gall, and Spleen, helping the Jaundies and easing the pains in the side:
making thin both the blood and humors, by the cleansing and bitter qualities
therein: it helps those that have the Dropsy, or Greenesicknesse. It kills
Worms, and dries up rheumes: A Decoction thereof also is good against the
Colic, and to bring down Women's Courses, helps to avoid the dead Birth,
and eases the pains of the Mother, and is very effectual in all pains of
the joints, as the Gout, Cramp, or Convulsions. A dram of the powder taken in
Wine is a good help against the biting or poison of Adder, or Viper. The tops
of the stalks with the flowers are most in use.

The great Centory roots, being steeped in Wine, or the powder thereof given
in Wine, is good for such as have the Dropsy or Jaundes, or are troubled with
the stoppings of the Liver: two drams of the root (in powder) taken in Wine,
or water, helps those that spit Blood, or that bleed much at the mouth: It is
also used for Ruptures, Cramps, and Pleurises, and for an old Cough, shortness
of Breath, Gripings in the belly and pains of the Mother. It helps the
Strangury and Stone.

The manner of Administering them.
They are given in Decoction, or in powder.

The outward use.
The Juice of the lesser Centory mixed with a little Honey is good to clear the
Eyes from dimnesse, mistes, or clouds, that hinder the sight, and is singular
good for green, or fresh wounds, and also for old Ulcers and Sores, to close
up the one, and cleanse the other, and perfectly to cure them both, although
they be Fistulous and Hollow, the green herb especially being bruised, and
laid to: the Decoction dropped into the Ears, cleanses them from Worms,
cleanses the foul Ulcers, and spreading Scabs of the head, and takes away all
Freckles, Spots and marks in the Skin being washed therewith.

The Decoction of great Centory, takes away the pain and danger of the
bitings or stingings of venomous Creatures: it helps to sharpen the Eye
sight, if it be steeped in water and dropped in to them: the whole plant as
well herb as root is very availeable in all sorts of wounds or Ulcers, to
dry, Sodder, cleanse and heal them, and should be a principal ingredient in
all wound drinks and injections. It helps the Strangury and Stone if the
juice be injected.

A Decoction against Arthritcall pains, or the Joint Gout.
Take Centory the lesser, two handfulls, root of Assarum two Ounces, spring
water ten pints. Boil them to half. The Dose is about half a pint in bed, for
diverse mornings together.

An injection against Worms in the Ears.
Take of Centory the lesser, Wormwood, Harehound and Calamint, of each an
Ounce; Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to half, add unto a pint
of the strayning, half a pound of Honey, or less, and keep it for your use.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from half a dram to a dram and a half. The juice to
half an Ounce.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Centory-water. Extract of Centory. Salt of Centory.

CHAP. 94. De Ceterach, of Ceterach.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Ceterach, Asplenum, and Splenium, because it helps the
Spleen, also Scolopendrium and Scolopendria, from the likeness of a Worm so
called, in the English Spleen wort, Milt-wast and Scale-ferne.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the first degree, or second, of subtle parts and
somewhat drying.

The Duration.
It will keep a year or two.

The inward use.
It is generally used for the infi^mities of the Spleen, and some report the
Swine in Candy by feeding on it are found without spleenes. It helps the
Strangury and Stone in the Bladder, the yellow Jandes and the Hicket.
Matthiolus says, that if a dram of the dust that is on the back of the Leaves
be mixed with half a dram of Amber in powder, and taken with the juice of
Pursl^w or Plantine it will help the running of the reins speedily, and that
the herb and root being boiled and taken, helps all melancholy Diseases,
and those also which rise from the French disease. The distilled water is good
against the Stone both in the Reins and Bladder, and the Lie made of the ashes
thereof being drunk for some time together helps Splenetick persons.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, and in Decoction, but it must not be boiled long, for
then the strength does evaporate.

The outward use.
It is used in outward remedies for the same purpose, as is before mentioned.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for Women that desire Children, for it hinders conception.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from half a dram, to a dram; in Decoction from two
drams to half an Ounce.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Syrup of Ceterach. The distilled water.

CHAP. 95. De Chinae radice, of China Root.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin China, China radix, and Chinaea radix, in English China
Root, and Chine.

The Temperament.
It is moderately hot and dry.

The Duration.
This Root will keep good many years.

The inward Use.
It is much commended for the French Disease, and is profitable in Agues,
whether quotidian, or intermittent, or pestilentiall, and also Hectickes and
Consumptions, to rectify the evil disposition of the Liver, the inveterate
pains in the Head and Stomach, and strengthens it, and to dry up rheumes, to
help the Jandise and Ruptures in children or others, by drying up the humors
which is the cause thereof. It helps also the Palsy and all other diseases of
the Joints and Bladder, the Gout, Sciatica, and the Rodes also, and Ulcers of
the Yard, Scabs and Leprosy, Scirrous and watery tumors, and is good in all
cold and melancholy griefs, and very useful in the Dropsy and
Green-sicknesse. Some say it provokes lust.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Decoction, and some boil it in broth with a chicken tied up
(in thin slices) in a Linnen-cloath.

A decoction of China Root.
Take of China Root cut in thin slices, one Ounce and a half, put it into a
gallon of fair water, and let it stand covered a night and day, then boil it
gently till about half the water be consumed, strain it, and give about four
Ounces thereof in bed for diverse mornings together if need be.

The hurtful quality.
It is not to be used in very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The Dose in broth is from two drams to four drams, according to the quantity
of water you provide.

CHAP. 96. De Chamedry, of Germander.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Chamaedrys, that is, a small or low Oak, from the
likeness of the Leaves thereof, though lesser: therefore some call it
Aevercula minor, in English, Germander, or English Treacle.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin parts.

The duration.
It will keep good (being dry) a year,

The inward Use.
Some say it purges choler. It is good for coughs taken with Honey, for those
whose spleen is become hard, for those that can hardly make water, and helps
those that are falling into a Dropsey, in the beginning of the disease,
especially if a decoction be made thereof, when it is green and drunk. It
brings down the terms, helps to expel the dead child, and taken with
Vinegar does wast or consume the Spleen; It is effectual against any poison,
pains of the side, and cures both Quartaine and Tertian Ague, as also the
Cramp, if the Decoction thereof be taken, for some days together, it is good
against the Diseases of the Brain, as pains of the Head, Falling Sickness,
Melancholy, Lethargy, Palsy, Gout, and for those that are Sottish through the
dullness of the spirits: a dram of the seed taken in powder, does purge Choler
by Urine, and is thereby good for the yellow Jaundise, and kills worms, so
will the tops of them when they are in flower, steeped a day and a night in a
draught of White Wind, and drunk in the morning. It is commended against the
Plague and Pestilence.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder and Decoction, you may make the Decoction as of Mugwort.

The outward use.
It is good against venom and stinging of venomous Creatures being bruised and
applied: used with Honey it cleanses old and foul Ulcers; and the juice mixed
with Honey and put into the eyes, takes their dimnesse and moistness, the
juice also dropped into the ears kills worms therein. The decoction thereof
stays the whites in women, if they sit therein while it is warm, and
likewise eases the passions of the Mother: being boiled in Vinegar and applied
to the Stomach with a little Leaven, stays vomitings, that rise not from hot
causes; the leaves and the seed of Nigella, quilted in a Cap, stays Rhume:
being boiled in lie with Lupines, and the head washed therewith, takes away
the Dandraffe; or Scurfe thereof.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The Leaves and seeds are given from half a dram to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Conserve, and Syrup.

CHAP. 97. De Consolida majore, of great Comfrey.
The Names.
IT is called Consolida major, and Symphytum majus; in English, Comfrey, and
great Comfrey.

The Temperament.
Comfrey is cold, drying and binding in great measure.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
Comfrey helps those that spit blood, or that bleed at the mouth, or that
make a bloody urine, as also for all inward hurts, bruises and wounds, and
helps the Ulcers of the Lungs, the root being boiled in water or wine; the
same also drunk stays the flowing down of Rhume from the head upon the
Lungs, the fluxes of humors, or blood, by the belly, the reds and whites in
women, and the running of the Reins, happening by what cause soever. The
Syrup made hereof is very effectual for all those inward griefs, so is the
distilled water. A Decoction of the roots is most effectual: Two ounces of the
juice drunk, does much good in the Lethargy, says Camerarius.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly given in Decoction.

The outward use.
The roots being outwardly applied, helps fresh wounds or cuts immediately,
being bruised and laid thereto, by gluing together their Lips, and is especial
good for Ruptures and broken bones: it is good to be applied to women's breasts,
that grow sore by much milk coming into them; as also to stop the overmuch
bleeding of the Hemorrhoides, to cool the inflammation of the parts
thereabouts, and to ease pain: the fresh root bruised, and spread upon the
Leather, and laid to any place troubled with the Gout, does give present ease
of the pains; and applied in the same manner, gives ease to pained joints,
and profits very much for running and moist Ulcers, Gangrenes, mortifications
and the like. The distilled water helps outward wounds or Sores in the fleshy
or sinewy parts of the body.

A mouth water against Ulcers in the mouths of Children.
Take Comfrey great and small, of each a handful; boil them in half a pint
of White Wind or more, then add to the strayned Liquor, Sal gem two drams, Honey
of Roses two ounces, mix them together and reserve it.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used too frequently in such persons as are much ^ound in their
body.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Comfrey water. Conserve. The root Candyed. Extract of Comfrey-Oyle, made of
the dry root.

CHAP. 98. De Corallina, of Coralline, or Sea-mosse.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Muscus Marinus, and Corallina; in English, Coralline,
and Sea-mosse.

The Temperament.
It is cold and dry, and astringent, or binding.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
It is used altogether to kill worms in Children, or Elder persons, but by
what quality it works this effect, is not yet declared by any that I have
seen; happily it does it by a specific virtue. It may be used against hot
Gouts, and inflammations.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in powder.

A Powder against worms.
Take Coralline, Hearts horn burnt, and wormeseede of each two drams, make them
in powder The Dose is a scruple or half a dram, according to age, in Beer, or
Muscadine.

The outward use.
It may be put into ointments against worms.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a scruple to a dram.

CHAP. 99. De Dauco, of Wild Carrot.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Pastinaca sylvestris, and Daucus; in English, wild
Carrot, and Birds nest.

The temperament.
The root and seeds are hot and dry in the second degree.

The Duration.
The seeds will keep good a year or two.

The inward use.
It expels wine, and eases Stiches in the sides, it provokes urine and
women's courses, and helps to break and expel the Stone: the seed also
works the like effects, and is good for the Dropsy, and those whose bellies
are swollen with wind, helps the Chollick and Stone in the Kidneyes, the
rising of the Mother, provoke Lust, and helps Conception, being taken in
wine, or boiled in wine and taken. It is good against the stinging of venomous
creatures.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Powder, or in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The leaves being applied with Honey to running Ulcers or Sores does cleanse
them.

The Dose.
The seeds are given in Powder, from half a dram to a dram.

CHAP. 100. De Endivia, of Endive.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Intibus, Intubus, or Intubuus, and Scariola; in
English, Endive.

The Temperament.
It is cold and dry in the second degree.

The Duration.
It will keep a year being well dried.

The inward use.
It does cool the heat in the Liver and Stomach, and is good in hot fits of
Agues, and all other inflammations in any part of the body, to use the decoction
of the leaves, or the juice, or distilled water: the same also helps to cool
the heat and sharpness in the urine: the seed is of the same property, or
rather more powerful, and besides is availeable for the faintings and passions
of the heart, opens stoppings and provokes urine. It is hurtful for the
Palsy and trembling, as also for cold Stomachs.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given chiefly in Decoction.

The outward use.
Being outwarly applied it does temper the sharp humors of fretting Ulcers,
hot tumors and swellings, and Pestilentiall Sores, and helps wonderfully the
redness of the eyes, and dimnesse of the fight: it is also used to allay the
pains of the Gout.

The Dose.
The seeds are given to a dram or more.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Endive water. Syrup of Endive, both simple and compound. Sir. Bizantinus
simple and compound. Salt of Endive.

CHAP. 101. De Enula, of Elecampane.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Enula, and Enula Campana, also Helenin^, and that
because Hellen first found it available against the bitings and stinging of
venomous beasts, or from Helena an Island, where the best was found to grow; in
English, Elecampane.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, especially being dry.

The Duration.
It will keep a year or two, I mean the root.

The inward use.
It is good against fleagme, tough and clammy humors, which stick in the Chest
and Lungs, against the Cough and shortness of breath, provokes Urine,
comfort the Stomach and helps Digestion. A decoction of the root is good
against poison and bitings of Serpents, for such as have Ruptures, Cramps or
Convulsions, or have any Member out of joint, and for the Hip Gout: the same,
or the juice taken, kills all manner of worms in the belly or Stomach, and
is good for them that spit blood or have inward bruises. The roots canded, or
the conserve taken does warm a cold and windy stomach, and helps the
pricking and stitches therein, or in the sides, caused by the Spleen, and to
help the Cough, shortness of breath, and wheesing in the Lungs: the dried
roots made into powder, mixed with Sugar and taken, serve to the same purposes,
and is also good for those that are troubled with the Mother, and in the Plague
and putrified Fevers very useful* The roots and leaves bruised, and put into
Ale or Beer, and daily drunk, clears, strengthens and quickneth the sight
of the eyes wonderfully. In the root lies the chief virtue.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, or decoction.

A Decoction against Aches in the joints.
Take Elecampane root, and Avers, of each a handful; Boil them in a pint, or
a pint and a half of sweet wine; when it is near boiled, put in half a dram
of Safforn, and boil it again gently; strain it and add Honey and Sugar of
each four ounces, warm it on the fire, or gently boil it; the Dose is four
ounces in a Morning, and to sweat after it.

The outward use.
The root bruised and applied, helps Gouts, Cramps, or Convulsions,
looseness and pains in the joints, or those Members that are out of joint, by
cold or moisture happening to them. The roots boiled well in Vinegar, beat
afterward and made into an ointment with Hogs grease, and a little Salt with
powder and Vinegar added thereto, is an excellent remedy for Scabs or Itch in
young or old. Se^ my help for the pore, Page 21. The place also bathed or
wash^d in the Decoction does the some, and helps all sorts of old, putrid, or
filthy Sores or Cankers wheresoever.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be given to hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The root in powder may be given from twenty grains to thirty.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Water from the root and leaves. Conserve of the root. The root Candyed.
Extract from the root. Wine of Elecampane.

CHAP. 102. De Eryngi^, of Sea h^lly.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Eringus, Eryngium, and Iringus* in English, Sea Holly,
and Sea Hulver.

The Temperament.
It is temperate in heat, somewhat drying and cleansing.

The Duration.
The root will keep good (being dry) a year or two.

The inward use.
The decoctirn of the root in wine being drunk, is very effectual to open the
stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and helps the yellow Jaundise, the
Dropsy, and the pains in the Loins, and Winde-collick in the Bowels,
provokes Urine, expels the Stone, and procures women's courses. It is
usually taken to stir Lust, and to help venerous actions, especially the root
Canded, as also against the biting of any venomous Creatures, or any poisonous
herbs, and is good against the French Disease and the Kings evil. The
continued use of the decoction for fifteen days taken fasting, and next to
bedwards, does help the Strangury, the stopping of the Urine and the Stone,
and all defects of the Reins and Kidneyes, and if the same be continued
longer, it is said perfectly to cure them that are troubled with the Stone. The
distilled water of the young Leaves and Stalks being drunk, is profitable for
all the purposes aforesaid, and does help melancholy, the Quartaine and
Quotidian Ague, and the Cramp of the neck.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Powder, or in Decoction.

In Decoction.
Take of Eringo roots dry, one ounce, or an ounce and a half, bruise them, and
boil them in a pint and a half of White wine, to the wasting of the third
part, strain it, and drink a good draught thereof Morning and Evening.

The outward use.
The roors bruised and applied, helps the Kings Evil, and also the Sting or
biting of any Serpent: Applied also with old Hogs grease, or salted Lard (being
first bruised and boiled therein) to broken bones, thorns, etc. remaining in
the fl sh, does not only draw them forth, but heals up the place again
gathering new flesh where it was consumed, or almost fallen away: the juice of
the leaves dropped into the ears helps Apostumes therein.

The Dose.
The root in Powder, is given from half a dram to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. The roots Canded.

CHAP. 103. De Euphrasia, of Eyebright.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Euphrasia, Eufragia, and Eufrasia; in English,
Eyebright.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good (being dry) a year.

The inward use.
It is chiefly used for all diseases of the eyes that cause dimnesse of the
sight, for either the green herb or the dry, the juice or the distilled water
is very effectual for the said purpose, to be taken in wine or broth; so is
the conserve made of the flowers being taken Morning and Evening. It helps
also a weak brain or m mory, and restores them being decayed, in a short
time. Wine or Ale made with Eyebright and taken, is very good for the same
purpose. The powder of the dried herb mixed with Mace and Fennel seed is
good for the weak sight and memory, being drunk, or eaten in broth.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly given in Powder.

A powder to preserve the sight.
Take Eyebright, Betony, of each a handful, Mace and Fennel seed of each
two drams, make them into powder, and give half a dram thereof Morning and
Evening in Broth or Beer.

The outward use.
The juice of the Eyebright* or the water dropped into the eyes, clears the
sight, and takes away the dimnesse thereof.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from half a dram to a dram, in the water thereof, or
any other convenient L quor.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Water of Eyebright. Conserve of the flowers. Wine of Eyebright.

A water to clear the sight.
Take Rosewater. Eye bright water, Celandine water of each one ounce, of Tutia,
or Tutty in powder a dram, m xe them together and keep it to wash the eyes with.

CHAP. 104. De Ficubus, of Figgs.
The Names.
IN Latin it is called Ficus, and Carica; in English, Figs.

The Temperament.
Figs are hot and moist, especially being green, but dry, they are hot and dry
in the second, or almost in the third degree.

The Duration.
They will keep good half a year.

The inward use.
A decoction of Figs is good for the Cough, Lungs and throat, as also against
shortness of breath, especially if they be boiled in Hyssop and Licorish. They
are good for the Reins and bladder, and to regaine a good color to them that
by long sickness have lost it, and useful also in the Dropsy, Falling
Sickness, Quinsie, and for the infirmities of the womb, where cleansing is
required: they expel also superfluous humors from the inward parts to the
circumference; useful therefore to expel Pox, Measells and such like
venomous matter to the skin. Figs stamp^d with Salt, Rue, and the kernells of
Nuts withstand all poison and corruption of the air. They are best fasting or
when the stomach is empty. Toasted Figs are good for women to facillitate or
hasten the birth.

The manner of Administering them.
They are eaten as they come to us, or toasted and so eaten, but chiefly they
are used in D^coctions.

The outward use.
F gs bruised and applied with Barly-meale, and the powder of Fen^ugreeke
seed, do^ mo^lifie the hard tumors and kernells under the Throat and Ears,
and elsewhere* as also the hardness of the Mother, and if some Leaven and Salt
be put to them, it breaks Plague sores: They are m^xed also with Copperas
against old sores of the Legs, and all other foul running Ulcers: being
boiled in wine with Wormwood, and then applied with Barly-meale, are very
profitably applied to the belly of those that have a Dropsy: and beaten with
Salt and applied, takes away the Itch and Scab, and the Ashes also made up
into a salve and applied, heals K bes and Chilblanes. F^gs bru^sed and mixed
with Fennegreeke Vinegar, eases the hot Gout of the feet. A Figges^t and
toasted does often times ease the tooth ach, being app^yed.

The hurtful quality.
They engender crude and windy humors in the body, and soon corrupt in the
Stomach, whereby they cause the Itch, Scab, and breed Lice also. They hurt such
as have the Chollick, and windy diseases, and that have hot Livers and
chollerick Stomachs; they are best for old Phlegmatic persons, and in cold and
moist seasons.

CHAP. 105. De Foeniculo, of Fennel.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Foeniculum, in English, Fennel.

The Temperament.
The seed is hot and dry in the third degree; the herb not so hot.

The Duration.
The seeds will keep good a year or two, the herb is rarely dried but used
green.

The inward use.
It breaks wind, provokes Urine, eases the pains of the Stone, and
helps to break it: the leaves or seeds boiled in Barly-water and drunk, is
good for Nurses to increase their milk, and to make it the more wholesome for
their children to take: the leaves boiled in water* but especially the seeds
stays the Hicket, and takes away the loathing of the Stomach, and a lays
the heat thereof. The seed boiled in wine, is good for them that are bitten by
Serpents, or have eaten poysonfull herbs or Mushromes: the seed and roots help
to open the stoppings of the Liver, Spleen, and Gall, and thereby much
conduces to all the diseases arising from them, as the painful and windy
swelling of the Spleens, and the yellow Jaundes, as also the Gout and Cramps:
the seed is of good use in pectorall medicines, and those that help the
shortness of breath, and wheesing by stoppings of the Lungs: it helps also
to bring down the courses, and to cleanse the parts after delivery: the roots
are in most use for drinks and broths that are taken to cleanse the blood, to
open stoppings of the Liver, and to provoke urine, and to amend the evil
color in the face after long sickness. Both leaves, seeds or roots are much
used in drinks or broths, for those that are grown fat to abate the same, and
to make them more gaunt and lank, the distilled water of the whole herb is
good for the same purposes. The seed taken in powder does quicken the eye
sight, and are often used to correct purging Medicines.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly given in decoction, but the seeds may be taken in powder.

The outward use.
It is chiefly used outwardly to clear the sight, as the juice or water being
dropped into the eyes to clear them and to help their dimnesse. See my help
for the Poor, in Page 41. and 43.

The hurtful quality.
It is bad for hot and dry bodies.

The Dos^.
The seed in powder is taken in broth or the like, from one scruple to two
scruples.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. A Chymmicall Oil. Salt of Fennel. Fennell-seed Comfits.

CHAP. 106. De Faenugraeco, of Fenugreeke.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Foenum gracum, and Foenugraecum, in English Fenugreeke,
and Fenegreeke.

The temperament.
It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first.

The duration.
It will keep good many years.

The outward use.
The powder of the seed taken with Honey drives forth noisome humors out of
the body, mollifieth inward Impostumes and Ulcers of the Lungs and breast,
eases the griping pains of the intralls, and kills Worms.

The manner of administering it.
It may be given in powder, or in Decoction, but it is not usual to take it
inwardly; yet many give it in powder with Otes to Horses, for it does fatten
them, and kills Worms in their Maw.

The inward Use.
The meal or powder thereof heated with Vinegar and applied to the Region of
the Spleen, does mollify and wast the hardness thereof, as also other hard
tumors and swellings: the Decoction thereof softneth likewise the hardness of
the Mother, and eases the pains thereof, if they sit therein as in a Bath, or
receive the hot fumes by sitting over it: the Decoction thereof cleanses the
head from scurfe, dandruffe, and the running sores thereof; it helps the
Disease called Tenasmus, that is, an often desire to the stool without doing
any thing, as also the Bloody Flux, when the excrements smell strong. A Pultis
made with the meal thereof and Linseede, and the Decoction of Mallows* and a
little Oil, or Hogs grease put thereto, asswageth the swelling and pains of
the Cods, or privy-parts of Women, and generally all other swellings and
tumors: the same also helps the Gout and other joynt-Aches that come of
cold: the Decoction, or muccilage applied to the forehead with clothes dipped
therein stays the Flux of humors to the Eyes, and eases the pains in them,
used also in Clysters it is good in the Stone by opening and mollifying the
inward parts.

A Pultis for the swelling behind the Ears.
Take of the muccilage of Fenugreeke ten Ounces, Cerusse in powder two Ounces,
Camphor half an Ounce, make all into a Pultis and apply it.

The hurtful quality.
Fenugreek taken inwardly does overturne and breed a loathing in some stomachs,
especially if they be weak, therefore only to be used in strong bodies.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Syrup of Fenugreek. Muccilage of Fenugreeke.

CHAP. 147. De Fragaria, of Strawberries.
The Names.
THe P ant is called in Latin Fragaria, and the berries Fragra, from the
Fragrancy of the smell, and taste, in English Strawberries.

The temperament.
The Leaves are cold in the first degree (some say hot) and drying in the
second, the root is more drying and binding, the Berries while they are green
are cold and dry, but being ripe they are cold and mo^st.

The inward use.
The Berries are good to cool the Liver, the blood and Spleen, or an hot
chollerick stomach, to refresh and comfort the fainting spirits, and to quench
thirst, they are good also for other inflammations: The leaves and roots boiled
in Wine and Water and drunk, do likewise cool the Liver and blood, and
assuage all inflammations in the reins and bladder, provokes urine, and
allaieth the heat and sharpness thereof; the same also stays the bloody
Flux and women's courses* and helps the swelling of the Spleen: The water of
the Berries carefully distilled is good in the panting or beating of the heart,
and good for the overflowing of the Gall, the yellow Jand^es.

The manner of Administering them.
The Leaves and Roots are used in Decoctions.

The outward Use.
The juice dropped in to foul Ulcers, or they washed therewith, or with the
decoction of the herb and root, does wonderfully cleanse them, and help to
cure them the Leaves are good to be put into Lotions that are made for so^
^outhes or Ulceers therein, or in the privy parts, or elsewhere, and also to
fasten loose Teeth, and to heal foul gums, and to stay flowing of rheum into
the Mouth, Throat, Teeth or Eyes: the juice or water is excellent for hot and
red Eyes, being dropped therein* and also for all wheales, or other eruptions
or hot and sharp humors into the Face or Hands, or other parts of the body, to
bath them therewith, and takes away redness in the Face, and spots or other
deformities of the skin.

The hurtful quality.
Strawberries are hurtful to cold watery and phlegmatic stomachs, and too many
eaten soon putrify in the stomach.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water, or the Leaves and fruit. Syrup. Spirit, and Tincture of
Strawberries.

CHAP. 108. De Glycyrrhiza, of Licoris.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Glycyrrhiza, Glyzirrhiza, Liquiritia, and Dulcis radix,
in English Licoris and Licorice.

The temperament.
It is temperate in heat and moisture.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward Use.
Licoris is good against the roughness and hoarsnesse of the throat, and is
helpefull for Ulcers in the bladder, and by its moisture it quenches thirst,
and is excellent for any dry cough to digest fl^gme and to cause it to be
easily spit up, to help shortness of breath, and all other griefs of the
Breast and Lungs, the Tiffick, or Consumptions caused by the distillations of
Salt humors on them: it is good also in pains of the Raines, Strangury and
heat of the Urine, especially boiled with Maidenhaire and Figs. The juice of
Licoris is as effectual in all the Diseases of the Breast and Lungs, the
Reins and bladder, as the decoction.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder, in juice, and in Decoction.

The outward use.
The fine powder of Licoris blown through a quill into the Eyes that have a
Pin and Wed, or rheumatick distillations into them, does cleanse them and help
them.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Juice of Licoris. Syrup of Licoris.

CHAP. 109. De Gramine, of Grass.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Gramen, in Enlish Grass.

The temperament.
The roots are moderately cold and dry, a little biting and of thin parts, the
herb cold in the first degree.

The inward Use.
The Meadow Grass and couch Grass, or quick Grass are most in use, and open
obstructions or stoppings of the Liver, and Gall, and the stoppings of the
Urine, being boiled in white Wine, and to ease the gripings of the Belly, and
inflammations, and wastes the matter of the Stone in the Bladder, and the
Ulcers thereof: the seed does more powerfully expel Urine, and stays the
laske, and casting, or vomiting: The distilled water, or the Decoction alone
being taken, kills Worms in Children, especially if some Worme-seede be
added to it. The juice of the whole plant being taken helps spitting of Blood.

The manner of Administering it.
The roots and seeds are given in Decoction.

The outward use.
The roots bruised and applied, heals wounds that are fresh, or green, and
ease pains of the head, as also in inflammations and defluxions of the Eyes.

Of those things that are made thereof.
The distilled water.

CHAP. 110. De Guajaco, of Guajacum, or Pockwood.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Guajacum, Lignum Indicum, Lignum Sanctum, and
Lignum^vitae, in English Pockwood and Indiall Pockwood.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree, and has a cleansing faculty.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
The chief use of this Wood is against the French Disease, for it provokes
Sweat, resists contagion and putrefaction, and cleanses the Blood: It is
good also in the Dropsy, Falling Sickness, Shortness of breath, in Catarrhes,
Rheumes and cold distillations of the Lungs, or other parts, Coughes and
Consumptions, the Gout and all other joyntaches, and for cold phlegmatic
humors, for the Diseases of the Bladder and Reins, and for all long and
lingering Diseases proceeding from cold and moist causes; it opens the
stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, warmes and comforts the stomach and
entralls, and is good in Scabs, Itch, etc.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction.

A Decoction of Lignum vitae.
Take of Lignum Vitae, or Pock-wood a pound, of the bark thereof two Ounces,
steep them in twelve or fourteen Pints of spring water four and twenty
hours, then boil them to seven or eight pints, strain it, and give thereof a
good draught morning and Evening, and let the party sweat upon it. If you add
two Ounces of Licoris, or more, and some Anisseede, it will be much more
pleasant to take. The bark may be given in powder from half a dram to a dram.

The outward use.
The decoction thereof does make the Teeth white and firm being washed
therewith.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in hot and dry Bodies too frequently.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Extract. Chymicall Oil. Spirit, and Salt of Guajacum.

CHAP. 111. De Hedera, of Ivy.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Hedera, and Hedera arborea, in English Ivy.

The temperament.
Ivy is of diverse qualities, some sharp and hot, and some moist, others cold,
dry and astringent.

The inward Use.
A dram of the flowers drunk twice a day in red Wine, helps the Laske and
bloody Flix. The yellow berries are good against the Jandise, and to keep from
Drunkenness, and helps those that spit blood: the white berries being taken
kills worms. The juice of the root is good to be taken against the biting of
the Phalangium, or deadly Spider: the berries are held by many to be good
against the Plague or Pestilence, being made in powder and taken in wine: they
being taken in wine do help to break the Stone, provoke Urine and VVomens
courses, and brings away the birth and afterbirth.

The manner of Administering it.
The berries and flowers are given in decoction, or in powder.

The outward Use.
A Bath made of the Leaves and Berries, does bring down the Courses, and bring
away the dead birth, and afterbirth, being set in, or a Pessary made and used
does the like, but this must be done only upon necessity. The Leaves boiled in
Vinegar and applied warm to the side, help^s the Spleen, Ache or Stich in the
sides: the same applied with Rose Water and Oil of Roses to the forehead and
Temples* does ease the Headache although of long continuance: the fresh Leaves
boiled in wine and used does cleanse old filthy Sores and Ulcers, and is
effectual for green wounds to heal them quickly, and foder up the L ps
thereof: the same heals scaldings of water, and burnings by Fire, or
blisterings in the body. The juice of the Leaves or berries snuffed up into the
Nose purges the Head and Brain of thin rheum, and cures the Ulcers and
stench therein; and dropped into the Ears does help the old and running Sores
of them: the Berries or Leaves used causes the Hair to grow black. The
green Leaves are commonly used to be laid upon Issues, in the Arms, Legs, or
elsewhere. The gum of Ivy is used being dissolved to take away superfluous
hair in any place, and to destroy Nits and Lice in any place: the same
dissolved in Vinegar, and put into hollow aching Teeth does ease the same, and
being often used will cause them to fall out: Some use it as a bait with other
things to Kill F^sh: The fume of Ivy branches being burned drives away Gnats,
Battes, and all other hurtful and noisome creatures.

The hurtful quality.
It brings barrenness in Man or Woman, being too often used, and brings
weakness to the brain and senses: It is an enemy to the nerves and sinews
being taken inwardly, but helpefull to them applied outwardly.

The Dose.
The flowers and berries are given from half a dram to two scruples.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water Oil of the berries, good against all cold infirmities of
the joints; provokes the terms, breaks and expells the Stone in the Reins,
cleanses and health foul Ulcers.

CHAP. 112. De Hedera terrestri, of Ground-Ivie, or Alehoofe.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Hedera terrestris, and Corona terrae, because it
spreads and is like a Garland upon the ground, in English Alehoofe, Ground
Ivy, Gill creep by the ground, Cats-foote, Haymaids, and Tunnehoof, because
the Country people use it much in their Ale.

The Temperament.
It is hot and dry, sharp and bitter in taste, it opens also, cleanses and
rarefieth, or makes thin.

The inward use.
It is a good wound herb for all inward wounds, as also for Ulcerated lungs, o^
other parts, either by it self or with other the like herbs boiled together,
and being drunk by them that have any griping pains of windy or chollerick
humors in the Stomach, Spleen or Belly, does ease them in a short space: it
helps likewise the yellow Jaundes by opening the stoppings of the Gall, Liver
and Spleen; it expels venom or poison, and the Plague also: it provokes
urine and women's courses, but does not stay them as some have thought; but the
Decoction of the herb in wine being drunk for some time together helps them
that have the Sciatica, or Hip-gout, as also the Gout in the Hands, Knees, or
Feet, helps to dissolve and disperse the peccant humors, and to procure
ease. The syrup of Alehoofe is useful in Ulcers of the Lungs and
Consumptions, as also in ^humes flowing down to the Stomach. Boiled in broth
and taken, it provokes sleep, and expels ill humors out of the body.
Being steeped in Aquavitee, and taken, it does bring away the gravel and Stone.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction. See the Decoction of Mugwort.

The outward use.
A decoction thereof is good to gargle any sore throat or mouth, putting
thereto some Honey and a little burnt Alum, as also to wash, the Sores and
Ulcers of the privy parts in man or woman; it speedily heals green wounds
being bound thereto: and the juice boiled with a little Honey and Vardigrease,
does wonderfully cleanse Fistulas and hollow Ulcers, and stays the malignity
of spreading and eating Cankers and Ulcers: it helps also the Itch, Scabs,
Wheales, and other breakings forth in the skin in any part of the Body: the
juice of Celandine, field Daisies, and ground Ivy clarified, and a little fine
Sugar dissolved therein, dropped into the eyes, is a sovereign remedy for all
the pains, redness and watering of the eyes, the Pin and Web, skins or Filmes
growing over the sight, or whatsoever might offend them: the same helps
beasts as well as men: the juice droped into the ears does help the noise and
singing of them, and helps also deafness. The leaves are used in Bathes and
Glisters to dissolve the Stone.

An ointment to heal burnings.
Take ground Ivy, four handfulls, Plantaine leaves a handful, Burnet half a
handful; Bruise all these together, and let them stand eight days; then add
to them a handful of Goose dung and one ounce of wax; boil them together till
the herbs have almost lost their color, then strain and reserve it. Or you
may boil them presently after they are bruised.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled Water. Conserve of the flowers. Syrup both simple and compound.

CHAP. 113. De Hordeo Gallico, of French barley.
The Temperament.
IT is cold and dry in the first degree, or cold and moist, of a clensing
faculty.

The inward use.
It is much used in pectorall diseases, or diseases of the breast, helps the
sharpness of the throat and increases milk, especially boiled with Fennel.
It provokes urine, and is very profitable in chollerick Fevers.

The manner of Administering it.
It is used only in Decoction. As thus*

Take two ounces of French-barly, boil it in two fresh waters, then boil it
again in a quart of water (adding half an ounce of Licorish, and a handful
of Violet leaves, and as many strawberry leaves) to a pint or a pint and a
half, strain it and put thereto of syrup of Violets two ounces, or for the
poorer sort you may sweeten it with a little Sugar. This is good in a burning
Fever.

The outward use.
It is used outwardly to soften hard swellings, and is good for inflammations
and soreness of the throat, being boiled alone or with other fitting Herbs,
and the mouth and throat washed therewith.

A bath good against the Scab, Itch, etc.
Take Mallows, Violet, Beets, black Hellebor, Fumitory of each three
handfulls, of French barley six handfulls, boil them in a sufficient quantity
of water for a bath.

The hurtful quality.
It is bad for cold and windy bodies.

We have had of late years a Barley called Pearl'd Barley, and is much in use
for the forementioned Diseases.

CHAP. 114. De Junipero, of the Iuniper-tree.
The Names.
THe Juniper tree is called in Latin, Juniperus, the berries are called Grana
Juniperi, or Baccae Juniperi: the Gum that runs from the tree being cut is
called Lachrima Juniperi, vernix, or vernia, quasi veris ros, issuing forth in
the spring, as also Sandaracha and Sandarax of the Arabians, but not of the
Greeks. Yet some will have Vernix to be made of Amber and Linseed Oil.

The Temperament.
The Juniper both leaves and wood are hot and dry in the third degrees, the
berries hot in the third degree and dry in the first; the Gum hot and dry in
the first degree.

The Duration.
The Berries will keep good a year, the wood longer.

The inward use.
The leaves and young tender branches of the Juniper tree, or the juice of them
or of the berries, or the berries themselves taken in wine, are very eff ctuall
against the biting of a Vipers or Adders, as also against the Plague or
Pestilence, or any other infection or poison: the same also is profitable
against the Strangury and stopping of the Urine, and so powerful against the
Dropsy, that as Matthiolus says, he has known diverse to avoid so much water
by urine, by taking four or five ounces at a time of the lie made of Juniper
Ashes, that they have been helped thereby: it does also provoke the courses,
and help the rising of the Mother, and other pains thereof: the berries are
good for the Cough and shortness of breath, and other diseases of the Chest an
Lungs, and to ease the griping pains in the Belly; they are prevalent also to
help Ruptures, Convulsions and Cramps, to procure a safe and easy delivery
unto women with Child: The berries are very comfortable to the brain, and
strengthen the memory and sight, and all the senses, and the heart also, being
either drunk in wine, or the decoction of them in wine taken: the same also is
good against the Quartaine, and dissolveth the wind in the Belly or Stomach,
and in general is effectual for all diseases proceeding from any cold cause,
if they take of the berryes two or three times a week, three, four or more at
a time in wine. The Salt made of the Ashes of the Juniper wood is a singular
remedy for the scurvey, the putrified and foul Gums, and generally resisting
all putrefaction. The chymicall oil drawn from the ber^ies while they are
green, is as effectual if not more to all the purposes aforesaid: and the
oil drawn from the Juniper wood is good against the Chollick, rising of the
Mother, Gout, Worms, Headache, etc. if four or five drops thereof be taken in
a Morning in Broth, or in B^ere. The Gum of Juniper in powder taken in wine
does stay vomitings, inward bleedings and spitting of blood, women's courses
also, and all other fluxes of the belly, and the Piles, also kills worms in
children.

The manner of Administering it.
The berries and wood are given in powder, or in Decoction.

The outward use.
The smoke of the Juniper wood being burned, besides that it yields a good
sent to perfume any house, it is of good use in time of infection, and drives
away all noisome Serpents, Flies, Wasps, etc. the Ashes of the wood or bark
made into a lie with water does cure all Itches, Scabs, Pustules, or other
eruptions in the skin, yea and the Lepry also if the places be bathed
therewith. The Gum is used to stay cold distillations and Catarrhs that fall
upon the eyes or Lungs etc. the fume thereof upon the burning on coals being
taken into a Cap (the head also holden in the mean time over the said fumes)
at night, and to lie covered therewith: or the powder thereof with other things
fit for the purpose, strewed upon flax and to be quilted into a Cap to be worn
in the night chiefly, and in the day also as need shall require: the powder
thereof mixed with some oil of Roses and Myrtles heals the chaps of the
fundament, Kibes also and Chilblains on the hands and feet: the powder also
mixed with the white of an Egg, and applied to the forehead stays the
bleeding at the nose: the same also burned upon coals, and the fumes thereof
taken through a Funnell upon an aching tooth takes away the pain: it is
effectual in most Ulcers and Fistulaes, and weeping running sores to dry up
their moisture: The Liquid Varnish is an especial remedy against scaldings
with water, or burnings with fire, and to help the painful and bleeding Piles,
and Palsy, Cramps, Convulsions of the nerves and sinews. The chymecall oil of
the wood is good against the Toothache and for the Gout, Sciatica, and
resolution of the nerves coming of cold.

A bath against the Hip-gout.
Take Camomill flowers and Juniper berries of each ten handfulls, boil them in
a sufficient quantity of water for a Bath.

A quilt or bag for the same.
Take of Juniper berries what quantity you will, bruise them and make two large
quilts for the hip; wet them with strong Aquavitee, make them very hot and
apply them one after another unto the place affected.

The hurtful quality.
They must not be used in hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The berries are given in powder from six to twenty.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Spirit of Juniper. Oil Chymicall both of the berries and wood. Salt. Extract.
Elixer juniperinum. Rob. juniperinum, etc.

CHAP. 115. De Iujubis, of Iujubes.
The Names.
THey are called in Latin, Iujubae, Ziziphae, and Ziziphi; in English, Jujubes.

The Temperament.
They are temperate in heat and moisture.

The Duration.
They will keep long, but soon dry away.

The inward use.
Being green or dry (say some) they open the body, and purge collar gently,
and cleanse the blood, others deny any purging faculty in them. All Authors
agree that they cool the heat and sharpness of the blood, and therefore good
in hot Agues, and help them that have a Cough to bring away tough fleagme, and
good for other Diseases of the Chest and Lungs, as shortness of breath, hot
rhumes and distillations proceeding from hot humors: they are also to good
purpose used to cleanse the reins and bladder from gravel, in making the
passages slippery; they also stay vomitings procured by sharp humors.

The manner of Administering them.
They are chiefly used in Decoctions. See an Example of a Decoction of them in
my first part in the Chapter of Dates.

The hurtful quality.
They are hard of digestion, nourish very little, and do not easily pass out
of the Stomach, they are therefore always used in decoctions with other
fitting ingredients.

Of those things that are made thereof.
Syrup of Jujubes, simple and compound, good against the Cough, shortness of
breath, thin rhumes and hot humors falling upon the Lungs, etc.

CHAP. 116. De Lacte, of Milk.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin, La^* in English, Milk, and is cold and moist.

The best Milk.
The best milk ought to be white in color, of equal consistence, which being
dropped on the nail stands round and firm without flowing abroad. And a
black or brown Cowes milk is by most esteemed the best. In the spring time,
milk is thinnest: and at the fall of the leaf thickest and best, according to
that old saying: When Fearne waxes red, then is milk good with bread.

The inward use.
Milk does nourish the body well, breeds good blood, and is very useful in
Consumptions and Ulcers of the Lungs, yea no remedy is found like it for the
same: it is excellent in the bloody flix, or any other flux of the body, where
there is no Fever, nor choler abounding. It mundifieth and cleanses, takes
away pains of the Breast, Lungs, Reins, Bladder, and Entrails, and very
profitable in Ulcers of the bladder. It is good for temperate bodies, whose
stomachs are free from chollerick and phlegmatic humors, for in such it is
well digested aad engendereth good blood, and makes the countenance fair: it
asswageth heat and scalding of the urine, furthereth Venus, and is very good
in times of infection.

The outward use.
It is used in Glysters against fluxes of the belly, in the Gout to assuage
pain, and to soften swellings, etc.

A Glyster against the Bloody Flux.
Take a pint and a half of new milk, and add theteto Barley a handful,
Comfrey root and Linseede of each an ounce; Boil them therein to about a pint,
and being strained, dissolve in it of brown Sugar an ounce, the yolks of two
Eggs, and make a Glyster.

The hurtful quality.
Milk is hurtful for those that are troubled with the Headache, or Fevers,
or Hypochondriacke wind, or thirst, or that avoid choleric excr^ments
downwards, or have had some plenti^ull evacuation of blood, as Hippocrates
witnesses. It is also bad for cold windy and weak stomachs. Gouty persons,
such as have the Stone and Livers stopped, as also for the Palsy and Cramps, for
sore eyes and distillations of rheum; hurts the teeth and Gums, and is
unprofitable for old persons, and such as have the Chollick. Some boil it and
put thereto Salt, Sugar or Honey, others put in Mints. In fluxes of the Belly
let it be boiled, or pieces of Steel, quenched therein before it be taken, and
you may put some Cinnamon therein, or Sugar rosat.

Cautions to be observed in taking milk.
After the taking of milk the party is to rest, lest by the motion of the
body, the heat be drawn from the Center, to the circumference of outward
parts. After the taking of milk do not sleep lest headache, heaviness and
drowsin sse follow: only very weak persons are permitted to sl^epe after
milk. Let milk be taken fasting, and take nothing after till it be concocted
in the stomach. Drink no Wine after the taking of milk, neither mingle any
sharp or sour things with it, nor eat F sh with or after the taking of
Milk. Wash your Teeth and Gums well (after the taking of Milk) with Beer or
Wine.

Of those things that are made of Milk.
Cream, Butter, Cheese and Curde, Whey, etc.

CHAP. 117. De Lactuca, of Lettuce.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called Lactuca, a Lacteo succo, from the milky juice which issues forth
from the wounded stalks, and Leaves, in English Lettuce and Lettice. It is
cold and moist in the second or third degree.

The Duration.
It is rarely dried, for it will not keep long, but is used green.

The inward Use.
Lettice is good for a hot stomach, and yields good nourishment to the body.
Ant. Musa did by Lettice ease Augustus of the violence of his disease. It
procures rest and sleep: being taken raw or boiled it helps to loosen the
belly, and the boiled more then the raw, which eaten last performs it the
better, and was generally so in ancient days. It helps digestion, quenches
thirst, increases milk in Nourses, and eases all griping pains of the
stomach or bowels that come of choler: it abateth bodily lust, and tempereth
the Heat of Urine: the seeds and distilled water are good for the virul^nt
running of the Reins, and for the heart of the Urine, as also for the
aforesaid purposes. It was formerly eaten at the latter end of meals, but now
it is eaten at the beginning.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given only in decoction, as

Take a handful of Lettice and boil it in a pint and a half of Posset drink
to a pint, strain it and drink a good draught at night thereof.

The outward use.
The juice of Lettuce mixed or boiled with Oil of Roses and applied to the
forehead, and temples, procures rest and sleep, and eases the headache of
any hot cause: applied with camphor to the Cods it abateth the heat of lust: or
applied in the same manner to the region of the Heart* Liver or Reins, or by
bathing the said place with the juice or distill^d water, wherein some white
Sanders and red Roses are put, does abate the heat and inflammations therein,
as also comfort and strengthen those parts.

A Fomentation good in the Frensy.
Take Lettice, Violets, Plantaine, Nightshade, Housleeke, Purslane, of each a
handful, Violet-flowers, Water Lillies and red Roses of each a Pugill, that is
as many as you can hold in three fingers, or a small handful, of Myrtle
flowers half a pugill; make a decoction, and bath the forepart of the head
therewith.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful to phlegmatic and melancholicke bodies, dimmeth the sight,
quenches natural heat, causes barrenness, makes the body sluggish, and
weakneth the stomach, being too much eaten; and is bad also for those that are
short-winded, or have any imperfection in their Lungs, or do use to spit blood,
and hurts the Teeth. It is good to eat Mints therewith, or to boil it, and to
eat Vinegar and Pepper with it.

Of such things as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Lettice-stalkes canded. Syrup of Lettuce. Lapis Bezoar,
see Bezoar.

CHAP. 118. De Lavendula, of Lavender.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called Lavendula and Lavandula, and of some Lavanda, because it was much
used in washings. It is hot and dry in the third degree, and of thin substance.

The duration.
It will keep good a year, being dry.

The inward use.
It is of especial good use for all the griefs and pains of the head and
brains, that proceed from a cold cause; as the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness,
Lethargy, Cramps, Convulsions and Palsies, as also those that are given to
faint often. It strengthens the stomach, and freeth the Liver and Spleen from
stoppings, provokes Women's Courses, and expels the dead Child, and
afterbirth. Two spoonefulls of the distilled water of the flowers taken, does
help those that have lost their Speech or Voice, restoring it them again. It
helps also the tremblings and passions of the Heart, and the swounings and
faintings thereof. The Chymicall Oil is excellent for the Diseases before
mentioned, if a few drops thereof be taken in Beer, or the like; So is the
Conserve made of the flowers and Sugar.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in Decoction, as Mugwort.

The outward Use.
The flowers of Lavender steeped in Wine, helps them to make water that are
stopped; as also that are troubled with the winde-collick, if the places be
bathed therewith. It is good to gargle the mouth with the Decoction of the
flowers, against the pain of the teeth. The fume or smoke thereof drives
away Lice.

A Lotion to strengthen the senses and Nerves.
Take of Seen one Ounce, red Roses and Lavender flowers a handful; Boil them
in water, and make a Lotion for the head.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for hot and dry complexions, and where the body is repleate, or
abounds with blood and humors.

Of those things that are made thereof.
The distilled water. Conserve of the flowers, Chymicall Oil.

Lignum Vitae, see Guajacum. CHAP. 119. De Lupinis, of Lupines.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Lupinum and Lupinus, in English Lupines, o^ flat Bean.
It is hot and dry, and very bitter.

The Duration.
They will keep good a year or two, or longer.

The inward use.
By reason of their bitterness they open, digest, dissolve and cleanse: being
steeped in water, and afterward dried, beaten and taken with some Vinegar,
takes away the loathing of the stomach to Meat and provokes the appetite:
the Decoction or Infusion of Lupines taken with Honey and Vinegar kills Worms
in the belly, but if you mix Rue and Pepper thereto, it will the more
effectual; the Meal or Powder taken with Honey and Vinegar, or in Drink does
the same: the said Decoction taken opens the stoppings of the Liver and
Spleen, provokes Urine and Women's Courses: If it be taken with Myrrh it
expels the dead Child.

The manner of administering it.
It is used in Decoction, or in powder.

The outward use.
A Decoction or Lie made of Lupines with Wormwood, Centory and bay salt added
thereto, stays the running and spreading of a Gangrene, being applied thereto
very hot, with stupes of Cloth or Tow; A Decoction of them cleanses all Scabs,
Morphew, Cancers, Tetters and creeping or running Ulcers and Sores, and boiled
in Lie it cleanses the head from Ulcers, Scurfe, etc. breeding therein: it
also cleanses the Face and takes away the marks that the Pox does leave
after their healing, and all other marks, and black and blew spots in the
skin: the meal thereof being boiled in Vinegar and applied takes away
Pimples, and scatters the Rodes or Kernells that rise in the body, and
breaks Carbuncles and Impostumes: the burning of the husks drives away
Gnats, Flies, etc. whatsoever. The powder mixed with Oil of Sarin, and applied
to the belly kills Worms.

The hurtful quality.
Being steeped some days in water, until they have lost their bitterness
they may be eaten, but they breed gross and crude humors, are very hard to
digest, and slowly pass through the body.

Mace, see Nutmeg. CHAP. 120. De Majorana, of Marjerome.
IT is called in Latin Majorana, Amaracus, Sampsuchum, and Sampsuchus; in
English Marjerome and sweet Marjerome.

It is hot and dry in the second, or as some, in the third degree, and of thin
parts.

The Duration.
It will keep good a Year.

The inward use.
Sweet Marjerome is comfortable in cold Diseases of the Head, Stomach,
Sinews, and other parts: it digesteth, attenuateth, opens and strengthens:
the Decoction thereof, being drunk helps all the Diseases of the chest,
which hinder the freeness of breathing: it is likewise profitable for the
stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, for it not only clears them of those
humors that did stuff them, but strengthens the inward parts: it helps the
cold griefs of the Womb, and the windiness thereof, or in any other inward
part: the Decoction thereof, helps such as entering into the Dropsy, and such
as cannot make water, and provokes the Courses in Women. The Leaves in powder
mingled with Honey and taken dissolveth congealed blood in the body after falls
or bruises: it is used also against poison. A Decoction thereof made with
Pelletory of Spain and long Pepper, or with Origanum or Acorus, being taken,
helps the loss of speech by the resolution of the Tongue.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction, or in powder.

The outward use.
The powder of the Leaves snuffed up into the nostrills provokes sneesing,
draws forth phlegm, and is very useful in the Apoplexy, Palsy and cold
diseases of the brain: it eases the toothache being chewed in the mouth, the
powder mixed with Honey and applied, takes away the black marks of blows or
bruises: It is much used in sweet waters, powders, etc. It is put into
Ointments and Salves that are made to warm, and comfort the outward parts or
members, the joints also and sinews. The Oil made thereof is good against
Cramps, Convulsions and all aches proceeding from a cold cause.

A Liniment that eases the Headache, caused by a Bruise.
Take the juice of Marjerome and the juice of Sage of each half an Ounce, of
Sack three drams; make all into a Liniment with the yolke of an Egg, and apply
it to the part affected.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from a half a dram to a dram.

Of those Medicines that are made thereof.
The distilled water. Oil chymicall [excellent in the Apoplexy, Falling
sickness, loss of speech, etc.] Oil by infusion and boiling. Conserve,
Balsame.

CHAP. 121. De Malvis, of Mallows.
The Names and temperament.
THe wild or common Mallow is called in Latin Malva, and that quasi molva,
because it softneth the belly, in English Mallow. They are temperate in heat
and moisture, of a digestive and softning Nature.

The inward Use.
The Leaves and the Roots boiled in Wine, or in Water, or in broth with
Parsley or Fennell-roots, does help to open the Body, and is good in hot Agues
and other distemperatures of the body; for by the mollifying quality, it not
only voideth hot choleric and other offensive humors, but eases the pains
and torments that come by stoppings of the belly: the same used by Nurses
increases Milk in their Breasts: the Decoction of the Seeds made in Wine,
Milk or Posset drink, does marvellously help all the Diseases of the Chest
and Lungs that proceeds of hot causes, as Excorations, P^isicke, Pleurisy, and
the like, if it be continued for some time together, the Leaves and the Roots
work the same effects: they help much also in the frettings of the Guts, and
harness of the Mother, and in all hot and sharp Diseases thereof: the juice
drunk in Wine, or the Decoction made in Wine does help Women to a speedy
and easy delivery. They are counted also good against poison or venom, so as
the poison be presently voided by vomit.

The manner of administering it.
It is used chiefly in Decoction.

The outward Use.
Mallows are often used in mollifying Glysters. The Leaves bruised and laid to
the Eyes with a little Honey, takes away the impostumations of them: the
Leaves bruised or rubbed upon any place stung with Bees, Waspes or the like,
takes away the pains, redness and swelling thereof. A Pultis made of the
Leaves of Mallows, boiled and bruised, whereunto some Bean or Barly-flower,
and Oil of Roses is put, is an especial remedy against all hard tumors, and
inflammations of impostumes and swellings of the Cods and other parts, and
eases the pains of them, as also against the hardness of the Spleen or
Liver, to be applied to the places: the juice of Mallows boiled in old Oil
and applied, takes away all roughness of the Skin, as also the falling of the
Hair, the Scurfe, Dandruffe, or dry Scabs, in the Head or other parts, if they
be anointed therewith, or washed with the Decoction: the same also is
effectual against Scaldings or Burnings, and to help wild fire and all other
hot, red and painful Swellings in any part of the Body. The flowers boiled in
water and a little Honey added is a good Gargle for any sore mouth or throat: If
the feet be bathed with the Decoction of the Leaves, Roots, and flowers, it
helps the flowing down of rheum from the Head, which rose out of the
stomach: the green Leaves beaten with niter and applied draws out thorns or
pricks in the flesh.

A Fomentation against wind.
Take of the Leaves and roots of mallows a handful, of Camomill and Melilot
flowers a handful, Linseede one Ounce, Aniseede half an Ounce, Figs in
number forty. Boil them in water, and fill a bladder with the hot Decoction;
apply it Once or twice to the side or part affected.

Of those things that are made thereof.
The distilled water. The conserve of the flowers.

CHAP. 122. De Melle, of Honey.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Mel, in English Honey, and is hot and dry in the second
degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good two or three years.

The best Kind.
The best Honey is very sweet, pleasant in smell, of a clear yellowish color,
indifferent firm and stiff, yielding but little scum on the top when it is
boiled.

The inward Use.
Honey is profitable in many Diseases of the breast, as Cough, Shortness of
Breath, Pleurisy, Cold, Rheumes, and does cleanse the Breast and Lungs of
phlegmatic and Rheumatick humors; it helps such as are costine or bound,
opens the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, strengthens weak Parts,
helps the Bladder and Reins, and is good in the Dropsey, It resists
putrefaction, and (as Pliny says) suffers no dead Bodies to putrify, and is
very profitable for old Age, and phlegmatic persons. The Roman Pollio being
asked by Augustus the Emperor, by what means he had prolonged his Life to an
hundred Years? Answered, that he had used Honey within, and Oil without. It
is better boiled then Raw. Pliny Not. Hist. Lib. 22. Cap. 24.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly used in manner of an Electuary, or mixed with other things.

An Electuary for the Cough.
Take of pure Honey four Ounces, o^ Elecampane in Powder two Drams, of Licoris
in Powder a Dram, mix them together, and take often of it especially Morning
and Evening.

The outward use.
It is good in the Quinsie, Sore Mouths and Throats, being used in
Mouth-water or otherwise, but if choler abound, forbear the use of it. It
cures Burnings and Scaldings without Scarre, and heals Ulcers of the Ears,
and good also to cleanse and heal other filthy Ulcers. Being dropped into the
Eyes it helps the Dimnesse of them, and cures Corns in the Feet. If it be
mixed with a little Camphor, and used, it takes away Spots or Pimples in the
Face. It is used in Supposittories.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for hot stomachs, choleric Bodies, and young persons, for it
inflames the Blood, increases Choler, and hurts such as have hot Livers.
And though it be of a cleansing and opening Faculty, yet being too much used,
it stops the Body, puffs up the Stomach, takes away the appetite to
Meat, and must not be used in very windy Bodies.

Of such Medicines as are made of Honey.
Oxymel simple and compound. Water of Honey. Essence of Honey. Tincture of
Honey. Hydromel, that is Water and Honey boiled together. Meade, Methegline,
and many others.

CHAP. 123. De Meliloto, of Melilot.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Melilotus, in English Melilot, Kings Claver, and Hearts
Claver, because if it grow where Stagges and Dear resort, they will greedily
feed thereon: Now it is called Melilot from a Lotus that smells sweet like
Honey. It is Hot and Dry in the first Degree, and has a binding Quality,
besides a Wasting, and Ripening Faculty.

The duration.
The Herb and flowers will keep good a Year.

The inward use.
The Herb boiled in Wine, and taken, provokes Urine, breaks the Stone, and
asswageth the pain of the Kidneys, Bladder and Belly, and ripeneth phlegm.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Decoction.

The outward use.
It mollifieth hard Tumors, and Inflammations that happen in the Eyes or other
parts of the Body, as the Seat or Fundament, and the privy Parts of Man or
Woman, being boiled in Wine and laid to the place, and sometimes the Yolke of a
roasted Egg, or the powder of Fenigreeke, or Linseede, or fine flower, or
Poppy-seede, or Endive is added unto it. It eases the pain of the Side or
Stomach, applied either fresh, or boiled with any other of the aforenamed
things. The juice dropped in the eyes clears the sight, and takes away the
Web, Pearl, or spots therein: it helps also the pains of the ears being
dropped into them, and steeped in Vinegar or Rose Water it eases the Headache,
the flowers of Melilot and Camomill are much used in Glysters to expel wind
and to ease pains, as also in Pultises that are made for the same purpose, and
to assuage swellings or tumors that happen in the Spleen or other parts. It
helps Wens being applied after it is boiled in water, and also running Ulcers
of the head if it be applied with Chalk, Wine and Galls: The plaster of
Melilot dissolveth hard tumors and swellings of the Spleen, and cures green
wounds.

A quilt or bag to ease the pain of the side.
Take Melilot flowers, Camomill, Rosemary, and Elder flowers, of each half a
handful, of Branne a handful, of Anisseed, Fennell-seed, and Carawey seed
bruised of each two ounces; make a quilted bag for the side, sprinkle it with
wine, and being made hot apply it.

Of those things that are made thereof.
The distilled Water. Plaster of Melilot, both simple and compound.

CHAP. 124. De Melissa, of Baulme, or Bawme.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin, Milissophillum, and Melissa, because Bees delight much
in it, and of the effect being good for Bees; in English Bawme, and Baulme,
from the singular effects therein, in imitation of the true natural Baulme.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
It is excellent against the Diseases of the Brain, Stomach, Heart, Womb, as
in Melancholy, troublesome sleep, Palsy, Apoplexy, Falling sickness,
Swimming of the head, and to revive the fainting heart, falling into swimmings:
It is good for a cold stomach and to help digestion, as also among other things
for the Plague or Pestilence, and the water thereof is used for the same
purposes. It provokes the courses, helps a stinking breath, and good for the
rising of the Mother. A decoction of bawme made in wine and drunk, is good
against venom and poison, helps the griping pains of the belly, and is good
for them that cannot take their breath, unless they hold their necks upright,
being taken in a lohock or licking electuary. The syrup of Bawme is a good
cordial, and strengthens the heart and stomach, resists Melancholy, and is
very profitable in burning and contagious Fevers. A Candle made with Eggs and
the juice thereof while it is young, putting some Sugar and Rosewater to it, is
often given to womin in Childbed, when the afterbirth is not thoroughly avoided,
and for their faintings upon or after their sore travells.

The manner of Administering it.
It is used chiefly in Decoction; See the Chapter of Mugwort.

The outward use.
The herb bruised and boiled in a little wine and oil, and laid warm on a
Bile will ripen and break it: used with salt it takes away Wens, Kernells or
hard swellings in the flesh or throat; it cleanses foul sores and eases the
pains of the Gout: the juice thereof used with a little Honey is a good remedy
for the dimnesse of the sight, and to take away the mistiness of the eyes. It
is used in Bathes among other warm herbs, to comfort the joints and sinews. It
is a good remedy against the sting of Scorpions, or other venomous creatures,
and against the stinging of Bees, as also against the bitings of Dogs: The
decoction thereof is good for women to bath or sit in to procure their courses,
and for those that have the bloody Flix, as also to wash the teeth therewith
when they are full of pain. It is very often put into oils or salves to heal
green wounds.

A quilt or bag against the beating of the heart.
Take of Bawme dry four handfulls, of Roses, Violet, Borrage and Rosemary
flowers of each half a small handful, make them in gross powder, and add of
Camphor two scruples, then with red Silk and Bombace make a quilted bag and
apply it to the region of the heart.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful in hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from a scruple to two scruples.

Of those Medicines that are made thereof.
The distilled water. Extract, Conserve of the flowers; Syrup both simple and
compound.

CHAP. 125. De Menthis, of Garden or Spearemints.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Mentha, Mentha hortensis, and Mentha acuta.

It is hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree, of thin parts, bitter
and binding.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year being dry.

The inward use.
Speare-mints are good against vomiting, weakness and rawnesse of the Stomach,
the Hickop, and allayeth choler, expels wind, eases gripings of the
belly, helps stoppings of the Liver, and is good in any cold pain or
giddiness of the head, being taken in powder or a decoction thereof made and
taken. The juice taken with Vinegar stays bleeding. Mints stir up Venery or
bodily lust, kills worms, stays the courses in women, and helps the
whites, keeps the milk from curdling in the breasts, as also in the stomach.
It is profitable against the poison of venomous creatures. It is good for women
in their hard and sore travailes in Childbearing, and against the gravel and
Stone in the Kidneys and Strangury, and helps a stinking breath. The
distilled water is much used against vomitings, gripings in the belly, etc. It
warmeth and strengthens the stomach, and dries up moist humors therein, and
causes good Digestion.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder or in Decoction.

The outward use.
Being outwardly applied, it stays vomiting, and eases gripings of the
Stomach and belly: it dissolveth Impostumes being laid to with Barley meal; it
is good to repress the milk in women's breasts when they are swollen
therewith, and keeps them from growing great; applied with salt it helps
the biting of a mad Dog, with Water and Honey it eases the pains of the Ears.
Applied to the Forehead or Temples it eases the pains thereof, and it is good
also to wash the heads of young Children therewith against all manner of
breaking out therein, whether Sores or Scabs: and heals the chaps of the
fundament. It helps the stinging of Bees or Wasps being applied.

A quilt against weakness and pains of the Stomach.
Take Wormwood and Mints dry of each two drams, of Citron pill dry, an ounce,
of Galingall, Cyperus root and Cloves of each half an ounce, of red Roses two
drams; make them all into powder, and let a quilt be made for the Stomach.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for hot and dry bodies, and for chollerick persons.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from half a scruple to two scruples.

Of those Medicines that are made thereof.
The distilled water. Syrup. Conserve. Chymicall Oil. Oil by infusion.
Balsam. Salt.

CHAP. 126. De Mili osolis, of Gromell.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Milium solis, and Lithospermum, from the hardness of
the seed; in English, Gromell and Pearl plant: It is hot and dry in the
second degree.

The Duration.
The seeds will keep good a year or two, some say ten years.

The inward use.
The seeds are counted singular good to break the Stone and gravel in the
Reins or Bladder, as also to provoke Urine, to expel Wind and to help the
Chollick. The same taken is effectual to procure a speedy delivery to women in
travail. The seeds being taken in Posset-drinke before diverse fits cures the
Quartaine Ague.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder or in decoction,

The outward use.
The decoction or bath thereof, being sit in, helps the Stone and Strangury,
the Chollick and wind, etc.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The seed is given from a dram to two drams.

Of those things that are made thereof.
The distilled water of the leaves. Holland powder, etc.

CHAP. 127. De Moscho, of Musk.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Moschus, and Moscus, in English, Musk. It is hot in
the second degree, and dry in the third.

The best Musk.
The best Musk is very odoriferous or sweet, of a dark liver color, or
yellowish.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year or two being kept close.

The inward use.
It comfort the heart and fainting spirits, and takes away the passions and
trembling thereof, makes it merry and joyful, and helps to expel sadness;
it comfort, warmeth and refreshes the brain and senses, quickening the
dullness thereof, and is a help unto Venery. It is put in many cordial
powders. It is commended in the Chollick, and makes the breath sweet.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given chiefly in powder.

The outward use.
It helps moist and rheumatick eyes, and ease cold pains of the head being
mixed with Populean ointment, and the temples therewith anointed. It is much
used for all sorts of perfumes and fits of the Mother to the lower parts. It
helps deafness being put into the Cotton wool.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful to weak brains and hot Livers, for the often use thereof
burns up the blood, and makes the face pale; it is counted bad for such as
have fits of the Mother, yet Horstius does commend it in such fits if it be
taken in a small quantity. Greg. Horst. Observat. lib. 1. part. 2. Observat.
24. fol. 49, 50.

The Dose.
The Dose is from two grains to five or six, in any convenient Liquor.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Species Diamoschu dulcis, and amari. Oleum Moschellinum. Musk powder.

CHAP. 128. De Mumia, of Mummie.
The Names and Temperament.
MVmmie is the body of a man or woman embalmed, and brought chiefly from Egypt
or Syria adjoining. It is called in Latin, Mumia, in English, Mummie. It is
hot and dry in the second degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
It eases the pain of the head coming of cold and moisture, and is good in
Palsy and Crampe, Falling sickness, swiming of the head: it is cordial for
the heart and preventeth the danger of poison, or the venom of the Scorpion
and other Serpents, dissolveth wind both in the Stomach, spleen and bowels,
stays the Hickop and inward Bleedings, or Fluxes of Blood, dissolveth the
congealed Blood of bruises by falls or otherwise, and helps the Ulcers of the
Bladder, and stopping of Urine, being taken in Goats Milk, and is good against
the Cough.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given chiefly in powder.

A Powder against Bruises or Falls.
Take Bole Armoniack, or sealed Earth, Dragons blood and Mumme of each two
Drams, of Parmacitty a Dram, Rubarbe half a Dram, make them in powder, and
give half a Dram or more thereof.

The outward use:
It stays Bleeding of the Nose, or the Bleeding of Wounds, and is good to
consolidate or close up Wounds: it is used also against Cramps and Distentions
of the Mouth, the hardness and shrinking of the Sinews, and Lamenesse in the
Feet through cold and wet.

The Dose.
It is given from a Dram to two Drams.

Of those Medicines that are made of Mumme.
Tincture, or extract of Mumme. Powder against Bruises. Sympatheticall Ointment.

CHAP. 129. De Nardo, of Spikenard.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin, Nardus Indica, Spica Indica, and Spica Nardi, in
English Spicknard. It is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward Use.
It provokes Urine and brings down the Courses, as some say, other will have
it to stop all Fluxes both of Men and Women, and to stay the looseness of the
Belly, and thin watery humors: being Drunk with cold Water, it is profitable
to those that have a loathing of their Meat, or having swellings or gnawings
at their Stomachs, as also for them that are Liver-growne, that have the Yellow
Jandise, or the Stone in the Kidneyes: it dries up the Flux of humors both in
the Head and Breast, and is put into Antidotes against venom and poison. It is
very convenient for the Liver and Stomach.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder, or in Decoction.

The outward use.
It stays any Flux of the Belly being applied, and helps Watering Eyes by
staying the humors, and thickning it also. The Decoction used as a Bath for
Women to sit in, or over it, takes away the inflammation of the Mother. It is
good to cause Hair to grow on the Eyelids of such as want it, and dries up
superfluous moisture in any part of the Body being strewed thereon. Oil made
thereof is good for all Cold Griefs and Windiness of the Head, Stomach,
Liver, Spleen, Reins and Bladder, and of the Mother.

The hurtful quality.
It causes vomitings, and therefore is left out in many cordial Medicines; it
is hurtful for hot and dry Bodies, and must not be given to Women with Child
without great caution, because it procures them much disquiet, and may force
their Courses beyond either their time or convenience.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a Scruple to thirty Grains.

Medicines made thereof.
Oil of Nardus, Simple and Compound.

CHAP. 130. De Nigella, of Gith, or Nigella.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Melanthium and Nigella, from the black color of the
Seed, in English Gith, Nigella, and Fennell-flower. The Seeds are hot and dry
in the third degree.

The Duration.
The Seeds will keep good a year or two.

The inward use.
The Seed drunken with Wine is a good remedy against Shortness of Breath,
expels Wind, provokes Urine, and the Terms in Women, increases Milk in
the Breasts of Nurses, kills Worms, and is very good against poison, and the
biting of venomous Beasts, as also against the Quartaine and Quotian Ague if a
Dram thereof be taken in Wine or Posset before the fit. It is an excellent
remedy where there is need of cleansing, drying, and heating.

The manner of Administering it.
Is is given in powder, or in Decoction.

The outward use.
It Kills Worms being laid to the Navell with the juice of Wormwood. Being
dried and put into Linen or Sarfenet, and so quilted in and laid to the Head,
it cures Catarrhes or Rhemes, dries the Brain, and restores the smelling
being lost. It takes away Freckles, Scurfe and Hard Swellings being mixed with
Vinegar and applied. The Smoke or Fume thereof drives away venomous Creatures,
and Kills Flies, Bees and Waspes. The same mingled with Oil of Ireos, and
laid to the forehead, cures the Headache coming from cold.

The hurtful quality.
If too much thereof be taken, it is dangerous, and brings Death.

The Dose.
The Dose is from half a Dram to a Dram.

Medicines made thereof.
The distilied water. Oil thereof.

CHAP 131. De Nitro, of Nitre.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Nitrum, and Sal nitri, in English Niter and Salt of
Niter. It is hot of temperature, says Pliny, in Not. Hist. Book 310. Chap.
10. and does extenuate, or make thin, others say it is cold.

The duration.
It will keep good many years, being kept dry.

The inward use.
It is profitable in burning Fevers, as also in putried and malignant Fevers,
in the Calenture at Sea, for it resists putrefaction, and cools the boiling
of the blood; it is useful also in the Pleurisy, inflammation of the Lungs, in
the Stone of the Kidneyes and Bladder, in the stoppings of the Liver and
Entralls. It stays the bleeding of a Vein, or of the Nose.

The manner of Administering it.
It is chiefly dissolved in some convenient Liquor, and so given, as if to stop
bleeding, give it in Plantaine water.

The outward Use.
It is used in Lotions against the inflations of the mouth and throat, in the
Quinsie, against the Gout, and in burnings and scaldings, as also against spots
in the Eyes, being mixed with Honey, and put therein. Being boiled with Wine
and Pepper, and the Mouth washed therewith, it eases the Toothache, and
cleanses the Gums. The powder thereof (being burnt) makes the Teeth white,
being rubbled therewith. It is of excellent use to kill the Itch, Scab,
Morphew, or any foul Diseases of the Skin, if it be mixed with Fullers
Earth and Vinegar, and the Skin anointed therewith.

A Lotion for Tetters, or Ringwormes.
Take of Nitre three Drams, of common Salt a Dram, of the distilled water of
Dockes four Ounces, Vinegar of Squills one Ounce, dissolve and mix them
together; moisten a Cloth or Sponge therein (being warm) and rub the places
affected. Or against the Itch dissolve Niter, and Alume with distilled Vinegar,
or with Water of Scabions, and therewith wash and rub the places affected.

The hurtful quality.
Where the Body is loose, it must not be given in any great quantity.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a Dram to a Dram and an half.

Medicines made thereof.
Spirit of Nitre. Tincture of Nitre, etc.

CHAP. 132. De Nuce Moscata, and Maci. Of Nutmeg and Mace.
The names and temperament.
THe Nutmeg is called in Latin Nux moschata, and Nux myristica, in English
Nutmeg. The Mace is called in Latin Macis, in English Mace. They are hot and
dry in the second degree, and somewhat astringent.

The best kind.
The best Nutmegs are the heaviest, fastest, and such as are fullest of juice,
which being pricked with a pin or needle yields an oily juice. The largest
Mace is the best.

The Duration.
They will keep good many years.

The inward Use.
The Nutmegs are used in all cold Diseases of the Head, for Palsies, shrinking
of Sinews, and the Diseases of the Mother, they stay the Laske, cause a sweet
breath, expel wind in the stomach or belly, help to quicken the sight, stay
vomiting, comfort the spirits and strengthen the stomach. They are profitable
for the Liver and Spleen, cause such as are lean to grow fat, help venery and
increase sperme: they help to procure sleep being applied to the Temples.
Being mixed with Venice Terpintine washed and taken, it helps the running of
the Reins. They provoke Urine, say some.

The Nutmeg being green is preserved in the Indies, and brought over: the
which is not so hot and dry as our dry Nutmegs; and therefore very comfortable
for the Head and Stomach, eaten Morning and Evening, or after meals. Mace has
the same property, but somewhat more warming and comforting, and is good
against Vomiting, Fluxes and Spitting of blood. The chymicall Oil of either is
excellent for the cold Diseases of the Head and Stomach, but must be
cautelously and sparingly used.

The manner of Administering them.
They are given in powder, Electuary, etc.

The outward Use.
They are used outwardly to stop fluxes, to stay vomiting and to make the
breath sweet.

The thick Oil that is drawn both from Mace and Nutmegs are good for the
Cough, vomiting, to warm a cold stomach, and to dry up Rheum and cold raw
humors therein.

A Cap or Quilt against the pain of the Head arising from superfluous moisture.
Take Galingall, Calamus Odoratus and Cyperus Root, of each three Drams, Nutmeg
and Cloves of each two Drams, Betony, and Marjerome of each an Ounce,
Rosemary-Flowers, and Stoechados of each half an Ounce. Powder them, and make a
Cap.

The hurtful quality.
They are hurtful to hot and dry Bodies, and to melancholy persons.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a Scruple to two Scruples.

Of those Medicines that are made thereof.
Oil chymicall, and oil by expression of either. Salt of Nutmegs. Balsome of
Nutmegs, and Mace.

Nimphaea, see the 69. Chapter.

CHAP. 133. De Ocimo, of Bassill.
The names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Ocimum and Basilicum, in English Basil and Bassill. It
is hot in the second degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
It is good for those that are short winded, provokes Urine, and the Terms in
Women, and brings a speedy deliverance to them in travile. The seeds are used
to help the trembling of the Heart, and to comfort the same, as also to expel
melancholy, or sadness. A Decoction of the herb made and taken is good
against poison, and the sting of Scorpions, and helpful for those that are
given to swownings, and it provokes venery or lust.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction, or in powder.

The outward Use.
Used with Oil of Roses, or Mirtles, and Vinegar, it is good against the
pains of the Head, and it is pofitably applied to those that are troubled with
the Lethargy, the Jandise and Dropsey. It is good to be put into the Ears of
young Children with a little Goose-Grease, to help them of pains thereof: the
juice, or seed bruised put into the Nostrills procures neesing. Mixed with
Honey and used, it takes away the spots in the Face. The juice put into the
Eyes takes away the dimnesse thereof, and dries up humors that fall into
them. Hollerius relates of a certain Italian that by often smelling to Basil,
had a Scorpion bred in his Brain, who after vehement and long pains Died
thereof. Hollerius Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Fol. 3.

The hurtful quality.
It dulleth the sight, troubles a weak brain, and causetth headache.

The Dose.
It is given from a Scruple to thirty or forty grains.

Medicines made thereof.
The distilled Water.

CHAP. 134. De Nymphaea, of Water Lilly.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Nymphaea and Nenuphar, in English Water-Lilly. The
Leaves and Flowers are cold and moist, but the root and seed cold and dry.

The duration.
The dried Flowers will keep a year.

The inward use.
The Flowers boiled and taken, cool inflammations, and all inward heats of
Agues. The Seeds and Roots are effectual to stay Fluxes of Blood, and Seed
both in Man and Woman, as also the running of the Reins, and the involuntary
passage of Sperme in sleep, and is so powerful that the frequent use thereof
extinguisheth lustful or venerious actions; the Root likewise is very good
for those whose Urine is hot and sharp, to be boiled in Wine or Water, and the
Decoction drunk. The Syrup of Water Lilly or Conserve, helps much to
procure rest, and to settle the Brains of Frantic Persons, for it
wonderfully helps the distemperature of the Head arising from heat. The
distilled Water of the flowers is effectual for the Diseases aforesaid.

The manner of Administering it.
It is used in Decoction.

The outward Use.
The Leaves and Flowers are used in Lotions, and Bathes against Heat and
Inflammations, as in the Frensey and Fevers. The green Leaves bruised, and
applied to the Back helps the running of the Reins. The Distilled Water
used takes away Freckles, Spots, Sunne-burning and Morphew from the Skin in
the Face, or any other part of the Body. The Oil made of the flowers, as oil
of Roses is made does cool hot tumors, and the inflammations of Ulcers, and
wounds, ease the pains, and help to heal the sores.

Of Medicines made thereof.
The distilled water. Syrup, both simple and compound. Conserve. Oil and
ointment.

CHAP. 135. De Olibano, of Olibanum.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Olibanum, and Thus Masculum, in English, also Olibanum
or white Frankumcense. It is hot in the second degree and dry in the first, and
binding withal.

The Duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
It restrains bleedings, stops the Laske and running of the Reins,
helps the memory, sadness and melancholy, and comfort the heart, mixed
with other things for that purpose: it is also very pectorall and good for the
Cough, for thin rhumes and distillatious, and the Pluresie also, mixed with
conserve of Roses and taken fasting.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder electuary, or taken whole in the pap of a roasted Apple.

The outward use.
The fumes thereof when it is burned, being taken at the mouth and nose (the
head being covered) is very availeable both for the Cough of the Lungs, and
those thin distillations thereon causing it: the fumes thereof taken beneath,
or the applycation of it in ointment, helps the Piles, and the Tenasmus,
which is a disease provoking noe often to the stool without doing any thing.
It is a singular good medicine for the redness and pains in the eyes, or in
the ears. Mirrhe and Olibanum mixed with the white of an Egg, being beaten
and laid to Temples, helps the Megro^es and pains in the head: it stops
bleeding of the nose or wounds, and is of especial use and account in Balmes,
Salves, Plasters and Ointments for Wounds and Ulcers, after their clensing to
incarnate, or breed flesh, and heal them speedily, and in Fractures of the
Skull most effectually, so that the Piamater (which is thin Skin that
compasses the Brain) be not perished. It helps the falling of the
Fundament being strewed thereon, and the Fume on Coals sit over.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful to hot and dry Bodies, and to such as are Frantic.

The Dose.
The Dose is from half a Scruple to a Scruple.

Medicines made thereof.
Electuary Diaolibanum. ung. Basilicon, etc.

CHAP. 136. De Lavendula, of Lavender.
The Names.
IT is called in Latin Onomis and Anomis, also Aresta Bovis, Resta Bovis, and
Remorum aratri, because the roots are so tough that the Plough cannot easily
cut them, but cause the Oxen to be at a stand for a time; in English it is called
Rest Harrow, Cammock and Petty whin.

The temperament.
The root is hot and dry in the third degree, having some cleansing and
cutting faculty therein also.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
The Bark, or Root it self in Powder, taken in Wine, provokes Urine,
breaks the Stone, and drives it forth. The Powder taken in Wine for many
Days together Cures the fleshy Rupture, for it consumes it by little and
little. The Decoction thereof is effectual to open the stoppings of the Liver
and Spleen, and other parts, and to help the Jandise, as also to cure the
Blind Hemorrhoides or Piles. The tender sprigs or stalks hereof before they
come prickly, are pickled up to be eaten as a sauce, or alone, and are
commended against a stinking breath, and to take away the smell of wine in them
that have drunk too much. Boiled in Oxymell to the Consumption of the one
half it is a singular drink for the Falling Sickness. Plini. Not. Hist.
Book 27. Chap. 4.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in powder, or in Decoction.

The outward use.
A Decoction thereof made with Vinegar and gargled in the mouth eases the
Toothache, especially when it comes of rheum. the powder of the roots
strowed upon the hard callous brims of Ulcers, or the said powder mixed with
any other convenient thing and applied, does consume the hardness, and cause
them to heal the better.

The hurtful quality.
Hot and dry bodies must not be too busy with it.

The Dose.
It is given from a scruple to two scruples.

Med cines made thereof.
The distilled water from the whole plant.

CHAP. 137. De Origano, of Organy, or bastard Marjerome.
The Names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Origanum, in English Organy, or bastard Marjerom. It is
hot and dry in the third degree.

The Duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
The decoction of Organy with wine, is good for those that are bitten with
Serpents, or venomous beasts, and to be taken with sodden wine, for such as
have taken Hemlock or Opium. It is given with Figs to those that are bursten,
or have a rupture, Convulsions or Cramps, or have the Dropsey. The dried herb,
or juice taken in honyed water, purges downwards choler and melancholy
humors. It provokes the courses, and taken with Honey it helps those that
have a Cough. It provokes those that have an Itch, or are Scabbed and Mangy,
and those that have the Jandes, are much helped by a Decoction thereof taken,
when they are in a bath. The Decoction thereof with a few Cloves and Sugar,
helps those that have the Hickop exceedingly, it helps the stoppings of the
Liver, Spleen or womb, and all other stoppings, provokes Urine, and is good
for such as have sour belchings, and Squamish Stomachs.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given in Decoction or in powder.

The outward use.
It heals the Scab and Itch being used in a Bath, and takes away the yellow
color of the Jandise. The juice of the green herb heals the swellings of
the Almonds of the throat, and the Ulcers of the mouth; it draws forth
fleagme by the nostrills, if it be infused in the oil of Flower-de-luces. It
eases the pains of the ears, being used with Milk. The powder thereof mixed
with a little Saltpeter and Honey, made into the manner of a thin electuary,
and therewith the teeth being rubbed often, will make them white and firmer.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The Dose is from half a dram to a dram.

Of those Medicines that are made thereof.
The distilled water. Oil. Salt.

CHAP. 138. De Orobo, of bitter Vetch.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Orobus, because Oxen are fat therewith, and Ervum, in
English, Orobus, and bitter Vetch. It is hot in the first degree and dry in the
second, and by the bitterness cutteth cleanses and opens stoppings.

The inward use.
The meal or powder of Orobus mixed with Honey and taken is a good Medicine to
cleanse the breast and Lungs of thick humors that offered them; the manner of the
ancients preparation of the meal hereof was in this manner: being steeped in
water a good while, they after fried or parched them until the rindes broke,
which then being ground and passed through a boulter, they keep this meal as
of great use, both to move the belly downwards and to provoke urine, and to
cause them that use it to be of a good color. If it be taken diverse Mornings
together fasting, it consumes the Spleen, and taken in Wine or Vinegar, it
helps the bitings of Serpents and mad Dogs, and Men, and taken with Vinegar,
it helps the Strangurie, and that disease when one does often desire to go to
stool but can do nothing: The said meal mixed with Honey and taken, helps
those that relish not their meat, and are ready to fall into a Consumption.

The manner of Administering it.
It is given chiefly in powder, with Honey, or any Conserve.

The outward use.
The Meal hereof mixed with Honey cleanses foul Ulcers, and take away the
spots, freckles, and other discolorings of the face or other parts of the
body: it suffers no Cankers, Gangreens, or spreading eating sores to breed in
the body; it mollifieth the hardness of the breasts: The decoction thereof
helps the Itch and Kibes being bathed therewith, and made into a Plaster with
wine; it will break Carbunkles if it be laid thereon.

The hurtful quality.
If too much thereof be taken, it causes headache and pains in the belly, and
causes bloody urines.

The Dose.
The Dose is from a scruple to two scruples.

Medicines made thereof.
The Meal of Orobus.

CHAP. 139. De Passulis, of Raisons.
The Names and temperament.
THey are called in Latin Passulae, and Vvae passae, in English Raisons and
Raisins. They are hot in the first degree, and moist in the second.

The best kind.
The best are those we call Raisons of the sun.

The duration.
They will keep good a year.

The inward use.
They are much used in decoctions and drinks, to help coughs, hoarsness of the
throat, shortness of wind, toughness of phlegm, causing it to be more easily
spit out, and do lenif^e sharp and nauseous humors that offend the mouth of
the stomach: they open the stoppings of the liver, spleen, and bladder, and
taken by themselves, they nourish much by reason of their thick, sweet and
temperate substance, whereby also they stay not long, nor putrefie in the
stomach.

The manner of administering them.
They are used only in decoction.

The outward use.
Being bruised and applied (the stones taken out) with Rue in manner of a
Poultis, it helps Warts, Carbuncles, Corns in the feet, the Gangrene and the
Gowt. They take away loose nails being applied. Being mixed with a little
Cummin-seed in powder and Oil of white Lilies, it asswageth the swelling of
the Cods.

The hurtful quality.
Hot and choleric persons must not eat too largely of them, lest for their
sweet meat, they have sour sauce.

Medicines made thereof.
Lohoch de Passulis. Mel passulatum.

CHAP. 140. De Poeonia, of Piony.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Poeonia and Pionia, from Poeon that famous Physician,
in English Piony; or Peony. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and of thin
parts.

The duration.
The root or seeds will keep good a year or two.

The inward use.
Peony procures Women's courses if it be taken in honeyed Wine, and it is good
to open the stoppings of the Liver and Kidneys, helps the Jaundise and Stone:
the root also made into powder and taken helps the Falling Sickness, the
body being first well purged and prepared: it is effectual for Women that are
not sufficiently cleansed after childe-birth, and for such as are troubled with
the Mother, for which likewise the black seeds being beaten to powder is given
in Wine, the red seeds being taken for Fluxes, especially if they be boiled in
red Wine, and the same drunk; the black also taken before bedtime, and in the
morning also is very effectual for the Nightmare: it is also good for
melancholy dreams, and restores speech to those that have lost it, if thirty
grains husked be made into powder and given in Wine. It is good against the
bitings of Serpents, and helps Convulsions in children.

The root of the male is to be chosen, and to be taken before and after a full
Moon.

The distilled Water and Syrup are used for the same Diseases.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, or in decoction.

The outward use.
It is usually hung about the neck of children or others against the Falling
Sickness, either the root green or the seeds.

A Cap or Quilt against the Falling Sickness.
Take Orris, Cypress and Peony-root, of each two drams, Peony-seed, and the
skull of a dead man, of each a dram, Mace and Nutmeg, of each a scruple, of
Camomile-flowers as much: Powder them all, make a cap, and let it be worn
continually.

The Dose.
The root is given from half a scruple to a scruple and a half, and seeds from
ten grains to thirty.

Of Medicines made thereof.
The distilled water of the flowers. Syrup both simple and compound. Extract of
Peony, conserve of Piony, Salt, Oil.

CHAP. 141. De Pentaphyllo, of Cinquefoile.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Pentaphyllum and Quinquefolium, from the number of
leaves being five, in English Cinquefoile, Cinquefield, and five-finger-grasse,
or five-leaved grass. It is moderately hot, but dry in the third degree.

The duration.
It may be kept a year.

The inward use.
It is used in diseases proceeding from Rheum, in the Palsy, consumption of
the lungs, joynt-gowt, and to correct the moistness of the Womb, against
spitting of blood, or any flux of blood, bleeding of the Piles, or bleeding at
the Nose, and any looseness of the body: It is profitable in the cough,
jaundise, stoppings of the liver and spleen, where sharp choler does abound. It
is good against venom and poison in all inflammations and Fevers, whether
infectious or not, to cool and temper the blood and humors in the body: the
juice hereof drunk about four ounces at a time for certain days together,
cures the Quinsie and yellow Jaundise, and to be taken for thirty days
together cures the Falling Sickness and all Fluxes; the roots boiled in milk,
and drunk is held most effectual of any other remedy, and is good also against
ruptures, and bruises or falls: the juice or the decoction is good to help the
hoarsness of the throat, taken with a little Honey. A decoction of the root or
leaves in Mead or honeyed water, being taken before diverse fits cures the
quartane Ague.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, or decoction.

The outward use.
It is used in lotions, gargles and injections for sore mouths, ulcers,
cankers, sistulaes, and other corrupt and foul or running sores: the roots
boiled in vinegar, and the decoction held in the mouth, eases the toothache.
The root boiled in vinegar helps all Knots, Kernels, hard Swellings and lumps
growing in the flesh in any part applied thereunto; as also all inflammations
and Saint Anthonies fire, all Impostumes and painful sores, with heat and
putrefaction, the Shingles also, and all other sores of running and foul Scabs,
Sores and Itches: the same also boiled in Wine and applied helps any joints
full of pain and ach, the Gowt of the hands or feet, as also the Sciatica. The
juice dropped into the eyes helps the inflammation thereof. The root or
leaves applied to the Nose stops the bleeding thereof, as also of any Wound
that bleedeth.

A Water to kill an Itch.
Take Cinquefoile and Plantain, of each half a handful, Roch-Allome half an
ounce; boil them in a quarter of a pint of strong Wine Vinegar, to the wasting
of half, then add to the strained liquour a spoonful of Honey, and two drams of
white Mercury, boil them a little and reserve it.

The Dose.
The Dose is from half a dram to two scruples.

Medicines made thereof.
The distilled water. Extract of Cinquefoile.

CHAP. 142. De Pimpinella, of Burnet.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Pimpinella and Sanguisorba, in English Burnet, and
Pimpinell. It is hot and dry in the second degree say some, others will have it
to be cold in the second degree, and dry in the third.

The duration.
It will keep good a year, being dry.

The inward use.
It is a friend to the Heart, Liver and other principal parts, two or three of
the stalks with leaves put into a cup of Wine especially Claret (as all know)
give a wonderful fine relish to it, and besides do quicken the spirits,
refresh the heart, and make it merry, driving away melancholy: it is a special
help to defend the heart from noisome vapors, and from the infection of the
Plague or Pestilence, and all other contagious diseases, for which purpose it is
of grear effect, the juice thereof being taken in some drink, and they either
laid to sweat thereupon, or wrapped and kept very warm. It is available in all
manner of fluxes of blood or humors, to stanch inward bleedings, laskes or
scourings, the bloody flix, Woman's too abundant courses, and the Whites also,
and choleric belchings, and castings of the stomach, and is singular good for
inward Wounds. The powder of the herb taken in Comfrey-water, is excellent for
such as have fallen or are bruised. The Water has the same effects, being taken.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, in powder, or in Electuary,

An Electuary against the Consumption of the Lungs.
Take of Burnet in fine powder two ounces, fine Sugar an ounce, with a
sufficient quantity of Pimpinel-water make an Electuary, of which take morning
and evening the quantity of a Nutmeg.

The outward use.
It is an excellent herb for all sorts of Wounds, both of the head and body,
for all old Ulcers or running Cancers, and moist sores which are of hard
curation, either the juice, of decoction of the herb, or the powder of the herb
used, or else made into Oil or Ointment by it self, or with other things to be
kept. The seed dries up moist sores being put therein in powder. The distilled
Water makes the face and hands fair being washed therewith.

An ointment to dry over moist Wounds.
Take four good handfuls of Burnet, of May-butter or fresh Butter a pound, cut
the Burnet, and boil them gently at the fire until the herb wax black, then
strain and reserve it.

The Dose.
Take half a dram of the herb or root at a time.

Of those Medicines that are made thereof.
The distilled water, conserve made of the seed, the root candied, Oil, Salt
of Burnet.

CHAP. 143. De Pipere, of Pepper.
The Names and sorts.
THere are three sorts of Pepper chiefly in use, white Pepper, called Piper
album, long Pepper, called Piper longum, and black Pepper, called Piper nigrum,
and this last is most in use.

The temperament.
It is hot and dry in the third degree, or near the fourth degree, of a heating
and resolving quality.

The duration.
They will keep good many years.

^he inward use.
The black pepper is most in use for sauce and meats. They are all us^d to warm
cold stomachs, and to stir up an appetite, and to consume ^rude and moist
humors therein, or distilling from the head: they also help to break and
dissolve wind in the stomach, or bowels, to provoke urine, to help the cough
and other diseases of the breast, and are effectual against the bitings of
Serpents, and other poisons, and are therefore put into the great Antidotes.
They are given before the fits of Agues, to abate the rigor and shaking
thereof, and are used in the Quinsie with Honey. They strongly heat the sinews
and mus^les, and all cold parts. Pepper must not be too small beaten for fear
of inflaming the blood, and other profitable humors of the body. ^hey help the
dimnesse of the sight, and stir up Venery. If five or six grains of black or
white Pepper be taken for certain days together, it does help a cold and raw
stomach, and such as are subject to the Colic.

The chemical oil of Pepper is good for the aforesaid diseases, and especially
against a tertian Ague if three drops thereof be taken with a scruple of Myrrh
two hours before the fit comes.

Pepper is best for cold, moist and gross meats, for cold and moist seasons,
for the aged and phlegmatic, for such as have cold, weak, and windy stomachs,
and that are subject to distillations.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in powder or in Electuary.

An Electuary against wind in the stomach and belly.
Take black, white and long Pepper, of each a dram and a half, of Ginger,
Amse-seed and Thyme, of each half a dram, make them into a gross powder, and
with six ounces of Honey, or conserve of red Roses make an Electuary, and take
often of it as much as a Nutmeg.

The outward use.
It is used outwardly against Agues mixed with Honey and laid to the Wrists,
and against the Quinsie, and disperseth the kernels as well in the throat as in
any other part of the body: it eases the toothache being put into a clout,
tied up and chewed on, and snuffed up into the nostrils, it provokes neesing.

A Medicine to help the toothache.
Take of Mastich an ounce, Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, of each a dram and a
half, make them in powder, and with Honey make a paste, of which take about the
bigness of a small Bean, and hold in the mouth by the space of half an hour
fasting.

The hurtful quality.
Pepper is hurtful to hot choleric and dry bodies, in hot weather, and hot
Countries; consumes the seed and burns the blood, if it be immoderately used.

The Dose.
It is given from half a scruple to thirty grains.

Medicines made thereof.
Species Diatrion pipereon. Chemical Oil. Oil by decoction.

CHAP. 144. De Plantagine, of Plantaine.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Plantage, in English Plantaine. It is cold and dry in
the second degree.

The duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
The juice of Plantaine clarified, and drunk for diverse days together, either
of it self, or in other drink, prevails wonderfully against all torments and
frettings in the guts, helps the distillations of Rheum from the head, and
stays all manner of fluxes in man or woman, even the courses also in Women:
it is good to stay spitting of blood, and all other bleedings at the mouth, by
having a vein broken in the stomach, and that makes bloody or foul water by
any Ulcer in the Reins or Bladder; it is held also an especial remedy for those
that have the consumption of the Lungs, or Ulcers in the Lungs; or have coughs
that come of heat.

The greatest Plantain is counted by some the best.

The decoction or powder of the roots or seed, is much more binding, for all
the purposes aforesaid then the herb, and helps Agues. The seed made into
powder and mixed with the yolk of an Egg and some wheat flour, and made into a
cake and baked, does stay any flux of the stomach and vomiting.

It is a singular good wound-herb.

The herb, but especially the seed (which is of more subtle parts) is likewise
held to be profitable against the Dropsy, Falling Sickness, yellow Jaundise,
and the stoppings of the Liver or Reins: the powder of the dried leaves taken
in drink, kills the Worms in the belly.

It must be eaten warm for certain days together.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, or in powder.

The outward use.
The juice, or the herb stays the bleeding of the Nose, or the bleeding of
Wounds: the clarified juice or the water thereof dropped into the eyes cools
the heat thereof, as also cures the Pin and Web therein, and dropped into the
ears eases the pains thereof, and helps deafness: the same also is very
profitably applied, with juice of Housleek against all inflammations and
breakings out in the skin, and against burnings or scaldings by fire or water:
the juice or the decoction is good for old or hollow ulcers, for Cancers and
sores in the mouth, or privy parts of man or woman, and helps also the pains
of the Piles and Fundament: the juice mixed with Oil of Roses, and the temples
and forehead anointed therewith, eases the pains of the head, proceeding from
heat, and helps frantic and lunatic persons very much, as also the bitings
of Serpents, or of a mad Dog; the same also is profitably applied to all hot
Gowts in the hands or feet, especially in the beginning, to cool the heat; and
repress the humors; it is also good to be applied where any bone is out of
joint, to hinder inflammations, swellings, and pains, that presently rise
thereupon. A decoction of the leaves kills Worms that breed in old and foul
Ulcers. The roots of Plantaine and Pellitory of Spain, beaten together and put
into hollow teeth takes away the pains therein: one part of Plantaine-water,
and two parts of the brine of powdered beef boiled together and clarified, is a
most sure remedy to heal all spreading ^cabs and Itch in the head or body, all
manner of Tetters or Ring-wormes, the Shingles, and all other running and
fretting sores. The leaves are very good to heal fresh or old Wounds and
Sores, as also to make a water or lotion for a sore mouth or throat, or for
sores of the privy parts of Man or Woman.

A Pultis to ease the pains of the Hemorrhoides.
Take a handful or two of green Plantain-leaves, bruise them well, and with
Linseed-oile make a pultis, and apply it.

An ointment against Burnings, or Scaldings with fire, Water, Lead, Tin, etc.
Take of the juice of Plantain, Housleeck and Comfrey the lesser, of each four
ounces, sheeps dung (dessolved in the foresaid juices) two ounces, sheeps suet
a pound. Boil them together at a gentle fire into due height, then strain and
reserve it.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for cold constitutions.

The Dose.
The leaves, roots and seeds are given from half a dram to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water. Syrup of the juice.

CHAP. 145. De Portulaca, of Purslane.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Portulaca, in English Purslane and Porcelane. It is
cold in the third degree, and moist in the second.

The duration,
It is rarely dried, but used green.

The inward use.
It is good to cool any heat in the Liver, Blood, Reins and Stomach, and in
hot Agues nothing better: it stays also hot and choleric fluxes of the
belly, as also of Women's courses, the Whites, and Running of the Reins, the
distillations from the head, and the pains therein proceeding of heat, want of
rest, or the Frenzy: the seed is more effectual then the herb, and singular
good to cool the heat and sharpness of urine, and the outrageous lust of the
body, venereous dreams and the like: the seed bruised and boiled in Wine, and
given to children that have the Worms expels them, the juice of the herb is
held as effectual for all the purposes aforesaid, as also to stay vomitings,
and taken with some Sugar, or Honey helps an old and dry cough, shortness of
breath and the Tissick, and to stay an immoderate thirst taken upon extreme
heat. The distilled water of the herb is used with Sugar, and works to the
same effect. The herb is generally used in Sallets, in the heat of the year, to
cool and temper the blood, and hot and fainting stomachs, and is good for them
to use that have the Falling Sickness, and also for those that have their
teeth on edge by eating sour Apples or the like. The juice helps spitting of
blood. The syrup of Purslane is good for the aforesaid disease.

The juice made into pills with the powder of Gum Tragacanth and Arabic, and
taken, prevails much to help those that make a bloody water.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in juice, or the feeds in powder, or in decoction.

The outward use.
The juice is singular good in the inflammations and ulcers of the secret parts
in man or woman, and for the Piles being applied thereto. The herb bruised and
applied to the forehead and temples, allayeth excessive heat therein, causing
want of rest and sleep, and applied to the eyes, takes away the redness and
inflammations in them, and those other parts where Pushes, Wheals, Pimples,
Saint Anthonies fire, and the like break forth, especially if a little Vinegar
be put to it; and being laid to the neck with as much of Galls and Lindseed
together, takes away the pains herein, and the crick in the neck; the juice
also is used with Oil of Roses for the said causes, or for Blastings by
Lightning, and for burnings by Gunpowder, or otherwise, as also for women's sore
breasts upon the like hot causes, and to allay the heat in all other sores or
hurts: it is said also to stay the spreading of venomous Serpents bitings, and
to draw forth the poison: Applied also to the navel of children that stick
forth it helps them; it is good also for sore mouths and sore Gums when they
are swollen, to fasten loose teeth. The distilled Water (says Cameraius) used
by some took away the pain of their teeth, when all other remedies failed. The
herb bruised and applied, eases the hot Gowt: the juice put up into the
fundament with a Glister-pipe, helps the ulcerations and flux of the guts. It
takes away Warts being bruised and applied.

The hurtful quality.
The over-frequent use of Purslane extinguisheth the heat and virtue of natural
procreation, weakneth the stomach, and hurts the sight: it is hurtful also to
aged persons, and to cold and phlegmatic persons.

The Dose.
The seed is given from half a dram, to a dram.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water, syrup both simple and compound.

CHAP. 146. De Prassio, of Horehound.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Prassium and Marrubium, in English Horehound. It is hot
in the second degree, and dry in the third.

The duration.
It will keep good a year, being dried.

The inward use.
A decoction of the dried herb with the seed, or the juice of the green herb
taken with Honey, is a remedy for those that are pursie and short-winded, for
those that have a Cough, and for such as, by long sickness, or thin
distillations of Rheum upon the Lungs are wasted and fallen into a Consumption:
it helps to bring away tough phlegm from the chest, being taken with the
dried root of Orris. It is given to women to bring down their courses, and to
expel the afterbirth, as also to them that have sore and long travels; and is
good also against poison, or stinging of venomous beasts; it helps the pains
of the side, opens the stoppings both of Liver and Spleen, kills Worms, and
is good for such as have the Itch, Scab, or running sores. The syrup of
Horehound is used for old Coughs, to bring away tough phlegm, as also for old
men and others, whose Lungs are oppressed with thin and cold Rheum, and for
those that are short-winded.

The manner of administering it.
It is chiefly given in decoction; see the first Chapter.

The outward use.
The leaves used with Honey do purge foul ulcers, stay running sores, and the
growing of the flesh over the nails: the juice thereof with Wine and Honey
helps to clear the eyesight, and snuffed up into the nostrils helps to
purge away the yellow Jaundise; and either of it self, or with a little Oil of
Roses being dropped into the ears, eases the pains of them: the green leaves
bruised and boiled with old Hogs Lard into an ointment, heals the bitings of
Dogs, abateth the swellings of women's breasts, and takes away the swelling and
pains that come by any pricking of thorns, or any such like thing. Used with
Vinegar it cleanses and heals Tetters: the decoction thereof is a singular
help for women that are troubled with the Whites, if they sit over it while it
is warm: the same also heals any Scabs, whether dry or moist, if the places
be bathed therewith.

The hurtful quality.
It hurts the Bladder and the Reins, and must not be used in hot and dry
bodies; if Raisons and Licorish be used therewith, it is less hurtful.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to thirty grains.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled Water thereof. Syrup of Horehound* Species Diaprassii.

CHAP. 147. De Pulmonaria, of Lung-wort.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Pulmonaria, of the likeness of the form which it has
with Lungs or Lights, and also Lichen arborum, in English Lung-wort, and Wood-
Liver-wort. It is cold and dry.

The inward use.
It is used against the diseases of the Lungs, and for Coughs, Wheesings, and
shortness of breath, and also against spitting of blood and pissing of blood:
it stays the Reds in Women, and stops the fluxes of the belly, and stays
vomiting. The shepherds do give it to their sheep (with Salt) that be troubled
with the Cough, and be broken-winded, and they give it also to other cattle for
the same purpose.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, or in decoction.

The outward use.
It is commended for bloody and green wounds, and is very profitably put into
Lotions that are made to stay the moist humors that flow to Ulcers, and hinder
their healing, as also to wash all other Ulcers in the secret parts of man or
woman.

The Dose.
The Dose of the powder is from half a dram to a dram.

CHAP. 148. De Raphano, of Radish.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Raphanus, in English Radish and Reddish. Garden- Radish
is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second: the Horse- Radish is hot and
dry in the third degree.

The duration.
Radish-roots (especially Horse- Radish) may be kept a year or two.

The inward use.
The Garden and Horseradish are in use, but chiefly the latter, and is
excellent against the pains of the Reins, Bladder and Stone, provokes much
Urine, and helps to separate the gravel from the stone, and to expel it,
being boiled with Honey and Vinegar into an electuary: it is also a good remedy
in strong bodies, both for the Cough, the Tissick and other diseases of the
Lungs, as also to provoke women's courses. The same steeped in Oxymel three
days, causes vomit, and is commended against the quarta ne Ague: the juice
given in drink is held to be very effectual for the Scurvey: it kills
Worms, helps the Colic and Jaundise, and brings away the afterbirth.
The distilled water of the herb and roots is often taken with a little Sugar
for all the purposes aforesaid.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction or in powder.

The outward use.
The roots bruised and applied to the belly of Children kills worms: the
same also laid to the place grieved with the Sciatica, Joynt-ach, or the hard
swellings of the Spleen and Liver, does wonderfully help them all: the root
stamped with the meal of Darnell and a little White Wine-Vineger, takes away
all blew and black spots of the face, being thereto applied.

The hurtful quality.
Radish hurts the Brain, causes sharp and sour belchings, oppresses the
stomach, ingenders raw humors and much wind, raises up noisome fumes which
are hurtful to the Eyes and head. Being often eaten it wastes the teeth.

The dose.
The root in powder is given from a scruple to thirty grains.

Medicines made thereof.
The distilled water, Syrup of Radish.

CHAP. 149. De Rapis, of Turnips.
The names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Rapum and Rapa, in English Turnep and Rape. They are
hot in the second degree, and moist in the first.

The inward use.
Turnips well boiled and eaten moderately, nourish meetly well, increase milk
in women's breasts, and natural seed, provoke Urine, and sharpen the sight. A
decoction of Turnips being taken, is good against the Cough, Consumption and
hoarsenesse, being taken morning and evening with Sugar, or clarified Honey;
but especially if the liquor be made into a syrup and so taken morning and
evening. The seeds of Turnep resists poison, (therefore are used in
Antidotes) provoke Venerie and expel out the malignity of the small Pox and
Measels. The oil of the seeds is given to women against their after-paines,
and to children against the worms.

The manner of administering them.
They are used in decoction, Syrup, or eaten with Butter and Vinegar.

The outward use.
Oil of Roses put into a Turnep made hollow for the purpose and then roasted in
Embers, heals the kibed-heels, being thereto applied: the decoction also of
Turnips is good for the same purpose. Being boiled in milk, it eases the Gowt
being laid thereto. A decoction thereof helps the Leprosy and Malignant
scab, as also the Palsy, if the parts affected be bathed therewith. The Oil
of the seed is used against the ruggedness of the skin.

The hurtful quality.
Turnips breed wind, trouble a weak stomach, being hard of digestion, cause
stopping in the Veins and pores, and annoy the sinews, and are hurtful for
those that have the Colic.

The Dose.
The seeds are given from a scruple to thirty grains.

Medicines made thereof.
The distilled water. Syrup of Turnips.

CHAP. 150. De Rosis, of Roses.
The names and kinds.
THere are chiefly three sorts of Roses in use, the Red, Damask and White, the
two first being principally used, the Red Rose is called in Latin Rosarubra,
the Damask, Rosa Damascena, and the white Rosa alba.

The temperament.
Roses are counted by most cold in the first degree, and dry in the second, or
cold and dry in the second degree, others say they are partly cold and partly
hot; others again will have them hot because of their bitterness, fragrancy,
and purging faculty. See Sennert. Paralipomen. fol. 158, 159. The Damask Roses
have more airy and spiritual parts in them, the Red Roses are more earthy and
binding.

The duration.
The leaves being dry will keep good a year.

The inward use.
Red Roses do strengthen the heart, Stomach, Liver, and the retentive
faculties; they mitigate the pains that arise of heat; assuage inflammations,
procure rest and sleep, stay women's courses both White and Red, the running of
the Reins, and the Fluxes of the Belly: the juice of them does purge and
cleanse the body from choler and phlegm.

The conserve of Red Roses is binding and cordial, good for those that have
rheum falling from the Brain to the Nose or Lungs, comfort a weak stomach
and a fainting heart; being taken morning and evening.

The yellow threads in the middle of the Red Rose being powdered and taken in
the distilled water of Quinces stays the abundance of women's courses.

If it be mixed with the powder of Mastich and taken, it is very good for
running of the Reins and other looseness of humors in the body. ^he Syrup of
red Roses strengthens a weak stomach given to casting, cools an overheated
Liver, and the blood in Agues, comfort the heart and resists putrefaction
and infection, and helps to stay fluxes of the belly. Sugar of Roses is a
good cordial to strengthen the heart and spirits, to dry up rheum, and to help
the Hectic Fever. The heads with seed being used in powder or in decoction
stays the lask and spitting of blood.

The Damask Rose is more purging, the juice of which does gently and safely
purge choler and hot humors; the syrup of Roses laxative does also purge
choler and phlegm gently and loosen the belly, taken from one ounce to three or
four; but the syrup of Roses with Agarick opens the body more then the
former, and purges as much phlegm as choler; if you take one ounce of it or
two at the most: the compound syrup is more forceable in working on melancholy
humors, and available against the Lepry, Itch, Scab, Tetters, etc. The
conserve hereof does also gently loosen the body: the distilled water of the
syrup of Damask Roses being taken does bind the belly; yet Costaeus says,
that if ten ounces of Damask Rose Water be drunk in the morning, it does open
and purge the belly.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in powder, in decoction, in juice, in electuary, etc.

An Electuary to comfort the stomach, and to dry up rheum.
Take of Conserve of Red Roses two ounces, of the species called Aromaticum
rosatum a dram, mix them together, and take often of it.

The outward use.
The decoction of Red Roses made with Wine and used, is very good for the
headache and pains in the Eyes, Ears, Throat and Gums, the fundament also and
lower bowels and the Matrix, being bathed or put into them: the same decoction
with the Roses remaining in them is profitably applied to the region of the
heart to ease the inflammation therein, as also Saint Anthonies fire, and all
other diseases of the stomach. Red Roses are used with other things for sore
Eyes, and to dry up rheum: the husks of the Red Roses with the beards and the
nails of the Roses are binding and cooling, and the distilled water of either
of them is good for the heat and redness of the Eyes, to stay and dry up the
rheumes and watering of them, so is the water of the leaves if the Eyes be
washed therewith, Vinegar of Roses is of good use against pain and heat of the
head, as also to procure rest and sleep, if some thereof and Rose Water
together be used to smell unto, or the nose and temples moistened therewith, but
more usually to moisten a piece of Red Rose-cake, cut fit for the purpose, and
heated between a double-folded cloth with a little beaten Nutmeg and
Poppy-seed, strewed on that side that shall lie next to the forehead and
temples, and so bound thereto for all night: the ointment of Roses is much used
against heat and inflammations in the head to anoint the forehead and temples,
and being mixed with some Populeon ointment to procure rest, as also it is used
for the heat of the Liver, of the back and reins, and to cool and heal
Pushes, wheales and other red pimples rising in the face and other parts. Oil
of Roses is not only used by it self to cool any hot swellings or
inflammations, and to bind and stay fluxes of humors unto sores, but is put
also into many other compositions both ointments and plasters, that are
cooling and binding and restraining the flux of humors. Rose-leaves and Mints
heated and applied outwardly to the stomach, stays castings and strengthens
a weak stomach very much, and applied as a fomentation to the region of the
Liver and Heart, does much cool and temper the distemperature of them.

The distilled water of Damask Roses, and the distilled oil or spirit are
much used for outward perfumes; and the leaves are used also in sweet powders.
Honey of red Roses is used for sore mouths and throats either alone or with
White Wine.

A Quilt or Bag to strengthen and comfort the stomach.
Take of red Roses dried two drams, of Mastick and red Coral, of each half an
ounce, Anise-seed and Fennell-seed, of each a dram, Cloves and Nutmeg, of each
a dram and a half, Wormwood and Mints, of each a handful Make them all into
a gross powder, and make a quilted bag according to art, to be laid to the
stomach.

A Pultis against the bleeding of the Nose.
Take of the seeds of red Roses an ounce, Dragons-blood, Sealed earth, and
Bole-Armoniack, of each a dram: make them into powder, and with the white of an
Eg and the hairs of an Hare make a Pultis and lay it to the temples and nod of
the neck; also make some of it stiff, and put up into the Nose.

The hurtful quality.
It is not safe to give the juice of Damask Roses to women with child, because
it provokes their courses, and the water also thereof is hurtful to such as
are troubled with the headache.

The dose.
The leaves and seeds are given from a scruple to two scruples.

The juice is given from one ounce to two ounces. Syrup of Roses laxative is
given from one ounce to 3. or 4 ounces. The electuary of the juice of Roses is
given from two drams to six drams.

Of those Medicines that are made of Roses.
The distilled water of Damask, red and white Roses. Conserve both of Damask,
and red Roses. Sugar of Roses, or Sugar-roset. Oil chymicall, and spirit of
Roses. Species Aromaticum Rosatum. Diarrhodon Abbatis. Rosata novella. Syrup of
Roses solutive. Syrup of the juice of Roses. Syrup of Roses with Agarick. Syrup
of Roses solutive with Hellebore. Syrup of Roses solutive with Seen. Syrup of
red Roses dry. Honey of Roses. Tincture of Roses. Oil of Roses by infusion,
Ointment of Roses. Vinegar of Roses. Balsam, etc.

CHAP. 151. De Rosmarino, of Rosemary.
The names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Rosmarinus, and Rosmarinum, quasi Rosa marina, English
Rosemary. It is hot and dry in the second degree, and also of an astringent or
binding quality, yet of subtle or thin parts: it is best for cold and moist
seasons, for the age phlegmatic and rheumatick.

The duration.
It will keep good a year or two being dried.

The inward use.
It helps all cold diseases of the head, stomach, Liver, belly and womb; A
decoction thereof in Wine helps the cold distillations of the brain into the
eyes, and the giddiness or swimming of the brain, drowsinesse, or dullness of
the mind and senses like a stupidnesse, the dumb Palsy, or loss of speech,
the Lethargy, Apoplexy, and Falling Sickness: it helps the pains in the
Gums and teeth by rheum falling into them, or by putrefaction causing an evil
smell from them, or a stinking breath: it helps a weak memory by heating and
drying up the cold moistures of the brain, and quikening the senses: It is a
good remedy for windiness in the stomach or bowels, as also the Hypochondriack
passion, and wind in the spleen: It helps those that are Liver-growne, by
opening the stoppings thereof, by warming the coldness, and making thin the
grossness, and afterward binding and strengthening the weakness thereof: it
helps dim Eyes, and to quicken the sight, as also the yellow Jandise, and the
whites in women, and the rising of the Mother, if the flowers or leaves be
daily taken, in decoction or in powder. The dried leaves shred small and taken
in a Pipe as Tobacco is taken; help the Cough or Tissick, and Consumption, by
warming and drying the thin rheum, which causes those diseases. The Chymicall
oil is good for the aforesaid diseases, if two or three drops thereof be taken
in Beer, or other Liquor. The flowers and the conserve made thereof does
comfort the brain and heart, and is good to expel the contagion of the
pestilence. If you steep or infuse a few Cloves, Mace and Anise-seed in the
distilled water of the flowers for certain days, and take morning and evening
thereof, it helps a stinking breath and mouth.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, or in powder.

The outward use.
It helps the cold diseases of the head, if a decoction thereof be made, and
the temples and neck bathed therewith. The leaves are much used in bathings;
and made into Ointments or Oiles is singular good to help cold benumbed joints,
sinews or members: the herb burned in houses and chambers in time of infection,
is good to correct the air in them. The Herb is much used in powders and
quilts, to dry up rheum, and to strengthen the womb. The Chemical oil is good
for the cold diseases of the brains, if the temples, nostrils, and nape of the
neck be anointed therewith.

An Epitheme for the cold headache.
Take Rose-mary, Sage, Camomil, Melilot, Betony and Bryonie-root, of each a
handful; Boil them in water, and with a spnge, or soft linen clothes, made
wet therein, apply it hot to the forehead.

The hurtful quality.
It must not be used in very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is gven in powder from a scruple to two scruples.

Of such Medi ines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Chemical Oil. Conserve of the flowers. Species Dianthos.
Balsame.

CHAP. 152. De Rusco, of Knee-holme.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Ruscus, Ruscum, and Bruscus, in English Butchers Broom
and Knee-holme. It is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first with some
tenuity or thinness of parts. It is one of the five opening roots.

The duration
The roots will keep good a year or two.

The inward use.
A decoction of the roots made in Wine, and taken, opens stoppings, provokes
urine, and amendeth the strong smell thereof, helps to expel gravel and the
Stone, Strangury and Women's courses: the same also helps the yellow Jaundise,
and the Headache, and with some Sugar or Honey put thereunto helps to bring
away phlegm, and to cleanse the chest of much clammy humors gathered therein.
The juice of the leaves taken with Sugar helps spitting of blood, and
cleanses the womb.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, or in powder.

A Powder against Wind, and gripings of the belly.
Take the roots of Knee-holme, Anise-seed and Fennel-seed, of each half an
ounce, make them in powder, and mix therewith half an ounce of Sugar; take
every morning thereof as much as will lie on a shilling in White Wine, or
Posset Drink.

The outward use.
The juice thereof takes away the stink of the mouth, and Gums being washed
therewith, and the powder of the root cleanses Wounds, and preventeth a
Gangrene being strewed therein.

The Dose.
It may be given from half a dram to a dram.

CHAP. 153. De Ruta, of Rue.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Ruta, and Ruta hortensis, in English Rue, and
Herb-grace, or Herb of Grace; it is hot and dry in the third degree.

The duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
Rue provokes urine and women's courses, expels all venom and poison, and
is most excellent in time of the Plague or sickness: the seed also taken in
Wine is an Antidote or Counterpoison against all dangerous Medicines, or deadly
poisons. A decoction made thereof with some dried Dil-leaves and flowers,
eases all pains and gripeings in the body. The same being drunk helps the
pains both of the chest and sides, as also Coughs, hardness, or difficulty of
breathing, the inflammations of the Lungs, as also the shaking of Agues, to
take a draught before the fit come. It kills Worms being boiled in Wine and
Honey, and taken. The juice taken with Wine, purges women after their
deliverance, brings away the dead child and afterbirth. It dries up the
milk, and the natural seed of generation, and quickens the sight.

The leaves of Rue first boiled and then laid in pickle, is by some eaten as
sauce, for the dimness of sight, and to warm a cold stomach.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, in decoction, and electuary.

Mithridates his Antidote against Poison.
Take twenty leaves of Rue, a little Salt, a couple of Wal-nuts, and a couple
of Figs; beat them together into a mass. This is for every day.

The outward use.
It helps tht swelling of the cods, if it be boiled with Bay Leaves, and they
bathed therewith. The juice mixed with Honey, and the juice of Fennel, helps
dim eyes being dropped therein: being boiled or infused in Oil, it is good to
help the winde-collick, or the swelling hardness, or windiness of the Mother,
and freeth women from the strangling or suffocation of the Mother, if the
shares and parts thereabouts be anointed therewith: It helps the Gowt or
pains in the joints of hands, feet, or knees, and also the Sciatica applied
thereunto: the same with Figs helps the Dropsy. It cures the Morphew, and
takes away all sorts of Warts on the Hands, Face, Nose, or any other parts, if
it be boiled in Wine with some Pepper and Nitre, and the places rubbed
therewith: and with Allome and Honey, helps the dry Scab, or any Tetter. The
juice dropped into the ears, eases the pains thereof. It is good against the
bitings of venomous beasts, and to be laid to Carbuncles.

A fomentation against the running Sores of Childrens heads.
Take of green Copperas two ounces, of Rue and Sage of each a handful; boil
them in a quart of water to half, and wash the head therewith.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for women with child, and destroys the ability of getting
children.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple, to thirty grains.

Medicines made thereof.
The distilled water, Chymicall Oil, Oil by infusion, Salt, Vinegar of Rue,
and Balsame.

CHAP. 154. De Saccharo, of Sugar.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called Saccharum, Sacchar, Succharum, Mel Arundinaceum, and Mel Cannae,
it is Honey of the Cane, because it grows in Canes, in English Sugar. It is hot
and moist in the first degree, or temperately hot and moist, and is abstersive
or cleansing.

The best sort.
Some commend the coarsest, or brownest Sugar before the other; but sure the
whitest refined Sugar being made up without adulteration or deceit, is the
best, and most wholesome for nourishment.

The duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
Sugar is good for the diseases of the breast, cleanses and strengthens the
Lungs, is convenient for the stomach, helps the roughness and dryness of
the mouth and throat, also thirst and drought in Fevers, especially being
mixed with water, and so taken, and it is very profitable for the Reins and
Bladder.

The outward use.
Sugar, or white Candy being put into the eye, takes away the dimnesse
thereof, and the blood shotten therein; and strewed into foul sores it
cleanses them.

A Water against an Ulcer in the Bladder.
Take of the water of Milk distilled half a pound, of white Sugar five ounces:
mix them at the fire, and inject it hot with a Syringe.

A Water against redness of the Eyes.
Take of white Sugar and Aloes, of each five drams, Tutia, or Tutty in powder
half a scruple, White Wine, Rose Water, and Fennel-water, of each half an
ounce. Put them together in a glass vessel, and let them infuse six or seven
hours, then use it as need requires.

The hurtful quality.
Sugar soon turns to choler, causes thirst, and is hurtful to hot
constitutions; being overmuch used, it produces dangerous effects in the
body; for it heateth the blood, breeds the Jaundise, Stoppings, the
Green-sicknesse and Consumptions, rotteth the teeth, and makes them black
withal, causing also many times a loathsome stinking breath. And therefore let
young persons especially beware how they meddle too much with it, lest they
have for their sweet meat sower sauce. I knew a young maiden whose mother was
so indulgent over her, that she gave her all the sweet meats she desired, and
that for many years together, till at length her teeth were so corrupt, and her
breath so stanck that she was loathsome to company; then followed Apostumation
of her teeth and gums, the Kings Evil, and so continued a long time.

Of such things as are made thereof.
White Sugar Candy* Red Sugar Candy, or Brown Sugar Candy. Sugar-Pellets. Sugar
of Roses. Sugar of Violets. Oil and Salt of Sugar.

CHAP. 155. De Sale, of Salt.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Sal, in English Salt, it is hot in the second degree,
and dry in the third: it is of a cleansing, digesting, attenuating, drying,
consuming, and somewhat also of an astringent faculty.

The duration and kinds.
Salt will keep good many years. There are two sorts in use, White and Bay Salt.

The inward use.
Salt may most justly be called Condimentum condimentorum, Sauce of sawces, as
being necessary for seasoning and preserving of meats, that we cannot well live
without it. For it is a custom among us to set it first at the table, and to
take it away last. It makes thin, gross, and clammy humors, resists
venom, preventeth and corrects putrefaction, by drying and consuming all
crude and moist superfluities, stirs up Venery, strengthens weak and loose
parts, helps digestion especially in a cold and moist stomach, consumes all
corrupt humors, and is very profitable in stoppings of the urine and belly, as
also in the Colic.

The manner of administering it.
It is used chiefly in powder.

A powder to help concoction.
Take of common Salt one ounce and a half, Pepper six drams, Cummin-seed half
an ounce, Caraway-seed, Cynamon, Zedoarie, of each three drams, Ginger and
Mace, of each two drams and a half: make all into a fine powder, and let it be
eaten with meat.

The outward use.
It is used in rotten and putrid Ulcers, as also in creeping Ulcers and simple
Tumors, in the Itch, Scab, Tetters, or Ringworme, in the Gowt, cold Aches,
pain of the Teeth, Headache, Colic, and to take away the skin growing over
the Eye. It is good also in Gangrenes, and in Burnings to draw out the heat.

A Lotion against the Gowt.
Take of common Salt three or four handfuls; boil it in water to the
consumption of half, with which bathe the parts affected warm.

Against pains of the Ears.
Take Salt and dry it, make it in powder, and being put into a bag, apply it
warm to the ears.

A Suppository gently to provoke siege.
Take of Honey half an ounce, of common Salt a dram; boil it gently to a due
light and form, and being cold anoint it with Oil or Butter, and put it up.

The hurtful quality.
Salt used too much, dries up the humors of the body, wastes seed, burns
the Liver and Blood, ingenders sharp and biting humors, causes Itch and
Scabs, annoyeth the stomach, dimmeth the sight, destroys the radical
moisture, corrupts and spoileth the habit of the whole body, making persons
soon look old and wrinkled, as may be seen in young maidens that eat much
thereof. It is very hurtful for lean, dry, and choleric persons.

Of such things as are made thereof.
Oil of Salt, or Spirit. Tincture of Salt. Flowers of Salt.

CHAP. 156. De Salvia, of Sage.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Salvia, because it makes men safe and sound in health,
in English Sage. It is hot and dry in the second or beginning of the third
degree.

The duration.
It will keep good a year.

The inward use.
A decoction of Sage made and drunk provokes urine, brings down the
courses, eases pains of the head that proceed from cold and rheumatick
humors, as also all pains of the joints, and therefore helps such as have
the Falling Sickness, the Lethargy or Drowsy Evil, such as are dull and heavy
of spirit, and those that have the Palsy, and is in much use in all
distillations of thin rheum from the head, and for the diseases of the breast.
The juice of Sage is much commended for women that have moist and slipperie
wombes, and not able to conceive by reason thereof, if they take a quantity of
the juice with a little Salt, for four days before they company with their
Husbands, and it is good to prevent miscarrying in women. If three spoonfulls
of the juice be taken fasting with a little Honey, it does stay the spitting,
or casting up of blood. It stops the whites and reds in women. It is of
excellent good use to help the memory by warming and quickening the senses, and
the Conserve made of the flowers is used to the same purpose, as also for all
the former recited diseases. It is of good use in the time of the Plague, and
good also against the Cough, hoarsenesse, pains of the side, and Dropsy.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, in powder, in Pills, Potions, etc.

A Potion against Arthriticall pains.
Take of Sage and Hyssop, of each two ounces, infuse thereein (for a nights
space) of Agarick trochiscated two drams, Rubarbe four scruples, Cynamon half
a dram; then strain it, and dissolve therein of the Electuary Diacarthamum two
drams, Syrup of Sto^chodas half an ounce, make a Potion.

Pills against a Comsumption.
Take of Spicknard and Ginger, of each two drams, of the seed of Sage a little
dried at the fire one ounce, Long pepper twelve drams, all these being made
into fine powder, make it up into a mass with the juice of Sage; the dose is a
dram every morning and evening.

The outward use.
A decoction of Sage takes away the itching of the Cods if they be bathed
therewith: it stays the bleeding of wounds, and cleanses foul ulcers or
sores: The leaves of Sage and Nettles bruised together and laid upon the
Impostume that rises behind the Ears, does assuage and help it much. The
leaves boiled in Wine, and the place bathed therewith, helps the Palsy,
Cramp, cold joints, pains in the side coming of wind, if the grieved place
be bathed warm therewith* and the Herb after the boiling be laid warm also
thereto. Gargles for mouth-waters are made with Sage, Rosemary, Honey-sackles,
and Plaintane boiled in water or Wine, with foine Allom put thereto, to wash
Cankers, sore mouths and throats, or the secret part of man or woman as need
requires. It is also commended against the biting of Serpents. The often
chewing of Sage in the mouth, is profitable for the Teeth, and sinews, for it
strengthens the one, and preserves the other from putrefaction.

The hurtful quality.
The frequent use of Sage is hurtful to lean and dry bodies, and in hot and
dry seasons.

The dose.
The dose in powder is from a scruple to thirty grains.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
The distilled water. Chymicall Oil. Conserve, and Salt of Sage.

CHAP. 157. De Sassafras, of Sassafras.
The names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Sassafras, in English also Sassafras, and Ague-tree, of
his virtue in healing Agues: It is hot and dry in the beginning of the third
degree.

The duration.
It will keep good many years.

The outward use.
The decoction of Sassafras is given in all cold diseases, and stoppings of the
Liver and Spleen, as also in cold Rheumes that fall on the teeth, eyes, or
lungs, warming and drying up the moisture, and strengthening the parts
afterward, and therefore is available in Coughs and other cold diseases of the
breast, stomach and lungs, and restrains castings and helps digestion,
breaks and expels wind, the gravel and stone in the Kidneys, and
provokes urine, and Women's courses; it also warmeth, heateth and dries up the
moisture of Women's Wombes, which is the cause of barrenness, and causes them
to be more apt to conceive: it is of good use in tertian and quotidian Agues,
that are of long continuance. It is generally used in all diseases that come of
cold and raw, thin, and corrupt humors, the French Disease, and other of the
like foul nature.

The manner of administering it.
It is given chiefly in decoction as thus.

Take of Sassafras four ounces, steep it in a gallon and a half of water four
and twenty hours, then boil it close covered, till it be near half consumed,
then being strained, give a good draught thereof morning and evening for the
diseases before mentioned.

The outward use.
It is thought to be good in the time of the Pestilence, to wear some thereof
continually about them, that the smell of it may expel the corrupt and evil
vapors of the Pestilence.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful to very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from a scruple to two scruples.

Medicines made thereof.
Extract of Sassafras. Chymicall Oil.

CHAP. 158. De Sarsaparilla, of Sarsaparilla.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Sarsaparilla, Salsaparilla and Zarzaparilla: it is hot
and dry in the first or second degree, of thin parts, and provokes sweat.

The duration.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
It is chiefly used in the French Pox, in Rheumes, Gowts, cold diseases of the
head and stomach, expels wind both from the stomach and mother. It helps
all manner of aches in the sinews and joints, all running sores in the legs,
all cold Swellings, Tetters or Ring-wormes, and all manner of spots and
foulness of the skin.

The hurtful quality.
It is bad for hot Livers and choleric persons.

The manner of administering it.
It is given chiefly in decoction; see the fore-goin Chapter.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from half a dram to a dram.

CHAP. 159. De Scordio, of Water-Germander.
The names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Scordium, because it smells like Garlic, in English
Water-Germander, and Garlick-Germander. It is hot and dry in the second degree,
bitter in taste, harsh and sharp.

The duration.
It will keep good a year, or two.

The inward use.
It is effectual to provoke urine, and Women's courses, kills Worms in the
belly or stomach, is also a safe and sure remedy for falls and bruises, and for
such as are bursten, either the decoction, or the leaves in powder being taken.
It is excellent good against all poisons and infections, either of the Plague
or Pestilence, or other epidemicall diseases, as the small Pox, Measels, faint
Purples, or spotted Fever, and also against the gnawing pain of the stomach,
and pains of the side, that come either of cold or stoppings, and for the
bloody flix also; it is good against an old Cough, and to bring away rotten
phlegm in the breast, and good for the Cramp, and for the stoppings of the Liver
and Spleen. It is a good cordial to comfort and strengthen the heart, and
cures the quotidian Ague, by an occult quality.

The Electuary Diascordium is of the same nature.

The manner of administering it.
It is used in decoction, or in powder.

The outward use.
The dried herb being used with a little Honey cleanses foul ulcers, and
brings them to cicatrizing, as also closes fresh Wounds: the dried herb made
into a Poultis, and applied to Wens and such like, helps both to constrain
the matter from further breeding of them, as also to discuss and disperse them
being grown It being used with Vinegar or Water and applied to the Gowt, eases
the pain thereof. The green herb laid or bound to any Wound (first bruised)
heals it, be it never so great.

A Liniment against Worms.
Take of Scordium, or Water-Germander and Aloes in powder, of each a dram, of
the juice of Wormwood and Southernwood, of each two drams, of common Oil one
ounce, Wax two drams; make a Liniment, and anoint the belly and stomach
therewith warm, morning and evening.

The hurtful quality.
It is not safe to use it in hot, dry and choleric bodies.

The Dose.
It is given from half a dram to a dram and a half.

Of those Medicines that are made thereof.
The distilled Water. Syrup, both simple and compound. Conserve. Salt.
Diascordium.

CHAP. 160. De Sebesten, of Sebesten.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Myra, Myraria, Sebesten, and Sebestena, in English
Sebesten, or Assyrian Plum. They are temperately cold and moist, and have a
thick clammy substance.

The duration.
They will not kep long, but soon grow dry.

The inward use.
They open the body as Prunes do, especially being green. They serve to cool
any intemperate heat of the stomach or Liver, and are good in hot Agues, and to
purge choler whereof they come: they are very effectual also to lenifie the
hoarsenesse and roughness of the throat: they help the Cough and Wheesing of
the Lungs, and distillations upon them, by making smooth the passages, and
causing much phlegm to be avoided: they also give ease to them that are
troubled with pains in their sides, and marvellously help them that are
troubled with the sharpness of their urine, proceeding from choler or salt
phlegm; they also drive forth the long Worms of the belly.

The manner of administering them.
They are given in decoction, or in pulp; see Jujubes.

The hurtful quality.
They stop the intrails, and stuff up the narrow passages, and breed
inflammations.

The Dose.
The pulp is given from half an ounce to ten drams.

Medicines made thereof.
Electuary of Sebestens. Pulp of Sebestens.

CHAP. 161. De Sinapi, of Mustard.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Sinapi, and Sinapis, in English Mustard. The common
seed is hot and dry in the fourth degree, but the white seed, and the other
small sorts are not so hot.

The duration.
It will keep good a year, or two.

The inward use.
A decoction of the seed made in wine, and drunk, provokes urine, resists
the force of poisons, the malignity of Mushromes, and the venom of the
Scorpion, or other venomous creatures, abateth the fits of Agues, and does
mightily prevail to stir up bodily lust: it helps the spleen and pains in
the sides; and gnawings in the bowels, shortness of breath, and provokes the
terms. Mustard made with strong Vinegar, is good to bring down Women's courses,
and for fits of the Mother, for the Falling Sickness, Lethargy, or
Drowsinesse of the brain; for by the sharpness thereof it pierces to the
Brain, and purges it by sneesing and drawing down rheum and other tough
humors which by their residence do much offend, or by their distillation upon
the Lungs and Chest procure coughing. It does much help concoction in a cold
stomach, and dries up the superfluous moisture thereof, and is good for the
Palsy.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, in powder, in Electuary, etc.

The outward use.
It helps the uvula or palate of the mouth, when it is fallen down, and
fasteneth it, being used as a Gargle; and also dissolveth tumors and Kernels
about the throat being applied, and helps the toothach being chewed in the
mouth. It eases the Sciatica and other Gowts, pains in the side or loins, the
shoulders or other parts of the body, upon the applying thereof to raise
blisters, and by drawing the pains to the place from the inward or more remote,
cures the disease, or diverteth it to those outward places where local
Medicines may help. It helps the falling of the hair, and mixed with Honey
and applied, it takes away the black and blue marks that come of bruisings,
the roughness of the skin in any place, as also the Leprosy, Lousy Evil,
and Crick in the neck. Applied with Figs to the head (first shaven) it avails
against the Lethargy, and Falling Sickness. The powder of the seeds put into
the nostrils, causes sneesing, and raises women sick of the Mother out of
their fits.

A Cataplasme against Rheum.
Take Mustard Seed and Olibanum, of each half an ounce, Nigella-seed dried one
ounce, Mastich two drams, of Pigeons dung and Barley-meal of each an ounce,
with Oxymel of Squills, make it in form of a Pultis, and apply it to the
coronall suture, or forepart of the head.

The hurtful quality.
It is offensive to choleric and dry bodies.

The Dose.
The seed is given from half a dram to a dram.

Medicines made thereof.
The distilled Water. Oil of the seed, good in cold diseases of the Nerves.

CHAP. 162. De Sperma Ceti, of Parmasitty.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Sperma Ceti, Spuma Maris, and Flos Maris; also Ambra
subalbida, in English Parmasitty, It is cold and moist.

The best kind.
The best is that which is white and fatty, not yellow and rancid or stinking.

The duration.
It will keep good a year or two, but it loses much in keeping.

The inward use.
It is chiefly used against falls and bruises, and to dissolve clotted blood in
the body, and for women that are newly delivered: it is also used in the
Colic, and in pains and torments of the belly both of children and others. It
eases the Cough, and provokes sweat.

The manner of administering it.
It is chiefly given by it self, in Sack or Beer.

The outward use.
It takes away the marks of the small Pox, cleers the skin from spots and
morphew, helps bruises being applied warm, and cleereth the sight. It is also
used in spreading and eating Ulcers.

The hurtful quality.
It offends weak stomachs, and causes an inclination to vomit, if it be
often taken.

The Dose.
It is given from half a dram, to a dram and a half.

Medicines made thereof.
Oil of Parmasitty, good against bruises, spots and strains in any part.

Stibium,
see Antimonie.

CHAP. 163. De Staechade, of Stickadove.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Staechas, and Stichados, from the Islands called
Staechades where it grows, in English Stickadove, Steckado, Cassidony, and
French Lavender. It is hot and dry in the second degree, or hot in the first
degree; and dry in the second.

The duration.
It will keep good two or three years*

The inward use.
It is chiefly used in cold diseases of the brain and nerves, as in the
Swimming of the head, Apoplexy, Palsy and Lethargy. It is also as ffectuall
for Colds and Coughs as Hyssope: and for the diseases of the breast, and
provokes urine, and the courses in women, resists poison, and helps the
affects of the Hypochondres, or windy Melancholy. A decoction thereof opens
the stoppings of the Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Mother, and of the other inward
parts, and strengthens them also. The syrup made thereof is effectual for
the aforesaid diseases, and for the quartane Ague.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, or in powder.

The outward use.
It is very useful in Baths or Lotions for all cold griefs of the head, womb
and other parts. It kills Worms, and the fumes thereof taken into the
nostrils open them when they are closed.

A Lotion against cold diseases of the Brain.
Take of Steckadove half a handful, Sage, Rosemary, Organy and Calamint, of
each a handful, of Bay Leaves half a handful, make a decoction to wash the
head withal, in the morning fasting, and after to rub it dry.

The hurtful quality.
It hurts those that are hot, dry, and choleric, offends the stomach, and
causes thirst and fainting: but because it works slowly, some Sal-gem is
added unto it to quicken it. If it be boiled or steeped in Whey, with a few
Raisons of the sun it is less hurtful.

The Dose.
It is given in substance from half a dram to a dram and a half, in infusion or
decoction to half an ounce.

Medicines made thereof.
Syrup of Stechados both simple and compound.

CHAP. 164. De Sulphur, of Brimstone.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called Latin Sulphur, in English Brimstone, and is hot and dry.

The duratihn.
It will keep good many years.

The inward use.
It resists putrefaction and venom, therefore very useful in the Pestilence
and pestilentiall Fevers, as also in the Cough, Defluxions of Rheum,
Consumption, shortness of Breath, Colic, Itch and Scab, and kills Worms;
it is good in the Jaundise taken in an Egg.

The flower of Brimstone is much better for the aforesaid Diseases.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, or in Electuary.

The outward use.
It is of good use against the Itch, Scab, Leprosy, and all foul Diseases of
the skin, being mixed with Vinegar, or Hog's Grease and used. It dissolveth all
hard tumors and nodes in the body, and eases the Gowt being mixed with Niter
and Water, and the place affected bathed therewith: it helps also pains of
the ears being mixed with Wine and Honey, and dropped into the ears. The fume
thereof stirs up such as have the Lethargy.

An Ointment against Scab or Itch.
Take of quick Brimstone and Salt, of each half a pound in fine powder, of
Hog's Grease two pound, make them into an Ointment.

Or
Take of yellow Brimstone in powder four ounces, of white Ginger and Salt in
powder, of each two drams, of the juice of three Lemons, of sallet-Oile half a
pound, mix them well together, and make an Ointment.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful to such as have hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given from a dram to two drams: flower of Brimstone is given from half a
scruple to a dram.

Medicines made thereof.
Flower of Brimstone, Milk of Brimstone, Oil of Brimstone, Balsame, Essence af
Sulphur, etc.

CHAP. 165. De Valeriana, of Valerian.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Valeriana and Phu, in English Valerian* and
Caporis-tail. It is hot and dry in the first or second degree.

The duration.
It will keep good a year, especially the root.

The inward use.
It provokes urine, and courses in Women, helps the Strangury, eases pains
of the sides, and is used in Antidotes. The root boiled with Licoris, Raisins,
and Anise-seed, is singulat good for those that are short-winded, and have the
Cough, and helps to open the passages, and to cause phlegm to be easily spit
out. It is given to those that are bitten or stung by any venomous creature,
being taken in Wine, and is of special virtue against the Plague, and expels
wind in the belly. It helps the Jaundise and stoppings of the Liver, Spleen,
and Womb.

It cleereth the sight, and helps Ruptures, or any inward wound or bruise.

The extract of the roots is a good medicine against the difficulty of making
water, and the yellow Jaundise.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in decoction, as the root is given in powder.

The outward use.
The green herb bruised and applied to the head takes away the pains and
prickings therein, stays Rheumes, and thin Distillations, and being boiled in
White Wine* and a drop thereof put into the eye, takes away the dimnesse of
the sight, or any Pin, Haw, or Web therein. It is excellent to heal as well
green as other wounds, and draws any splinter or thorn out of the flesh. The
distilled water cleereth the eyes being washed therewith.

The Dose.
The root is given in powder from half a dram to a dram:

Medicines made thereof.
The distilled water, and extract of Valerian.

CHAP. 166. De Visco, of Misselto.
The names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Viscum and Viscus, in English Misselto: It is hot and
dry in the second or third degree.

The duration.
It will keep good a year or two.

The inward use.
The Misselto of the Oak is counted the best, but that is rarely to be got, and
therefore we use that of the White Thorn or Chesnut-tree. It is chiefly used
against the Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, and Giddiness of the head, but it
must be used thirty or forty days together.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder or in decoction.

The outward use.
It is hung about the neck of such as have the Falling Sickness, to mitigate
their fits; and the juice of the fresh wood drawn forth, and dropped into the
ears that have Impostumes in them, does help and ease them within a few days.
The Bird-^ime that is made of the Berries hereof does mollify hard knots,
tumors and impostumes, ripeneth and discusseth them, and draws forth thick
as well as thin humors from the remote places of the body, and being mixed
with equal parts of Rosin and Wax does mollify the hardness of the Spleen,
and heals old Ulcers and Sores: being mixed with Sandarack and Orpment
helps to draw off foul nails, and if quick lime and Wine-Lees be added
thereunto, it works the stronger. It helps strains, aches, or bruises being
spread on leather and applied.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from a scruple to a dram.

CHAP. 167. De Urticis, of Nettles.
The Names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Urtica, ab urendo, of his burning and stinging quality,
in English Nettle. It is moderately hot, and dry in the second degree, of thin
and subtle parts.

The duration.
The seed will keep good a year.

The inward use.
The leaves boiled in Wine and drunk, are said to open the belly and make it
soluble. The roots or leaves boiled, or the juice of either of them, or both
made into an Electuary with Honey or Sugar, is a safe or sure Medicine to open
the pipes and passages of the Lungs which causes shortness of breath, and
helps to bring away tough cold phlegm sticking in them, or in the stomach, as
also to raise the impostumated pleurisy, and spend it by spitting. The
decoction of the leaves in Wine and drunk is singular good to provoke Women's
courses, and to settle the strangling of the mother, and all other diseases
thereof, also provokes urine, and expels gravel and the stone in the reins
or bladder, kills Worms in children, and is said to ease the pains in the
side, and to expel wind in the body; but others think it to be windy of it
self, and therefore not so powerful to expel wind, but only to provoke Venery:
the juice of the leaves taken two or three days together stays bleeding at
the mouth, which rises from the stomach: the seed being drunk is a remedy
against the stinging of venomous creatures, the bitings of mad Dogs, the
poisonful qualities of Hemlock, Henbane, Nightshade, Mandrake, or such like,
that stupifie and dull the senses, and helps them that have taken
Quicksilver, or those that have eaten evil Mushromes, or surfeit of the good. A
Decoction of Nettles is profitable for such as have the Gangrene and
Chin-cough, as also to expel the small pox.

The Roman Nettle is held to be most effectual. The roots are commended against
the Jaundise.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in Decoction chiefly, the seeds are given in powder, or in
Electuary.

The outward use.
They help the Almonds of the throat being swollen, to gargle the mouth and
throat therewith; the juice also is effectual to settle the palate of the
mouth in its place, and to heal and temper the inflammations and soreness of
the mouth and throat. The seeds or leaves bruised and put into the nostrils,
does stanch the bleeding of them, and takes away the flesh growing in them
called Polypus: the juice of the leaves, or the Decoction of them, or of the
roots, is singular good to wash either old, rotten, and stinking sores, or
Fistulaes and Gangrenes, and such as are fretting and eating Scabs, also
Maunginess and Itches in any part of the body as also green Wounds, by washing
them therewith, or putting the juice into the sores, yea, although the flesh
were separated from the bones, the same applied to over-wearied members
refreshes them, or to places out of joint, after the joint is set in its right
place, it strengthens, dries and comfort them, as also to those places
troubled with Aches and Gowts.

The Dose.
The seed is given from half a dram to a dram*

CHAP. 168. De Wis, of Grapes.
The Names and temperament.
THe Grape is called in Latin Uva, in English Grape. The sweet Grapes are hot
in the first degree, and moist in the second. Sower Grapes are cold and moist.

The inward use.
Sower Grapes being eaten do quench thirst, and mightily extinguish the
overmuch heat of the Stomach and Liver, repress the sharpness of choler and
choleric vomitings, stir up the appetite, help to stay spittings of blood,
and strengthen the stomach that is weakened through abundance of choler. They
are excellent in burning Fevers, especially where choler abounds, and provoke
urine and Venus.

The juice is very profitable to cool and repress choleric vomitings, and
too often going to stool, so is the syrup thereof.

The sweet Grapes nourish most, and do fatten the body, but the flesh procured
by that nourishment is soft and foggie, and not firm and solid; they make the
body soluble also.

Grapes are best to be eaten when the stomach is empty, and not after meat; for
so they hinder the concoction, and hurt the stomach: the skins and stones must
not be swallowed down.

The outward use.
The juice of Grapes is used to cool all inflammations, and Saint Anthonies
fire, or wildefire, being used alone, or with cool herbs.

The hurtful quality.
Grapes immediately used cause thirst, and breed wind^, trouble the stomach and
belly, bring the Colic and Gripings, puff up the Spleen, increase Rheum in
old persons, and are only profitable for the choleric.

Medicines made thereof.
Syrup of Grapes.

CHAP. 169. De Zedoaria, of Setwall.
The names and Temperament.
IT is called in Latin Zedoaria, Zurumbet and Zerumbet, in English Setwall. It
is hot and dry in the second degree.

The duration.
It will keep good two or three years.

The inward use.
It is effectual against poisons of all sorts, and venomes of venomous
creatures, and is of much use and profit in the Pestilence and other contagious
diseases, as also to warm a cold stomach, and to expel Wind marvellously, to
stay Vomitings, to dry up and consume Catarrhes and defluxions or flowings down
of Rheum, and to dissolve the impostumes of the Matrix, and to stay loosnesse
of the belly, and is also very powerful to stay or disperse the unsavory
belchings of those spirits, that Garlic, Onions, etc. or Wine have caused. It
provokes the courses in women (say some, others will have it to stop them) and
is effectual against the rising of the Mother, helps the Colic, and the
pains of the stomach, kills all sorts of Worms, and is much used in
Antidotes.

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, or in decoction.

The outward use.
It is used to chew on, in times of infection.

The hurtful quality.
It is hurtful for very hot and dry bodies.

The Dose.
It is given in powder from a scruple to two scruples.

Medecines made thereof.
The roots Candied as Ginger is. Extract. Chymicall Oil. Balsame* The
distilled Water of Setwall,

CHAP. 170. De Zinzibere, of Ginger.
The names and temperament.
IT is called in Latin Zinziber, Zingiber, and Gingiber, in English Ginger. It
is hot and dry in the third degree.

The best kind.
The best Ginger is the newest and the whitest.

The duration.
It will keep good two years.

The inward use.
Ginger is good to help digestion, and to open stoppings, to cut and make thin
gross and tough phlegmatic humors, to discuss wind, and help to expel it
out of the body; it heats the joints, sharpeneth the sight, and provokes
sluggish husbands. It is very profitable in the swimming of the head, and in
all cold diseases of the head and stomach, as also in the cold Gowt. Canded, or
Green Ginger is very useful for the same diseases taken often of, especially
morning and evening, and does help weak stomachs and bad memories, and such as
are subject to Rheumes. Ginger does much resist the putrefaction and malignitie
of humors,

The manner of administering it.
It is given in powder, or in Electuary.

The outward use.
It is chiefly used outwardly in Ointments for the Itch, Scab, Tetter, and such
like. See the Chapter of Brimstone, 164 Chapter. It is used also against the
toothache.

The hurtful quality.
It inflameth hot Constitutions, and is very hurtful to young and choleric
persons, and to be much used in hot seasons.

The Dose.
The Dose in powder is from a scruple to two scruples.

Of such Medicines as are made thereof.
Canded Ginger. Green Ginger in syrup. Diazinziber Nicolai Confectio
Zinziberis cocti. Ginger laxative. Oil of Ginger made by distillation.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall TABLE of those Diseases for which the Simple Medicines are
set down in this TREATISE.
A ABortion, see miscarrying Aches to cure, chap. 39 Adder stinging, chap. 11.
56. 93. 114 Afterbirth, chap. 6. 7. 11. 33. 54. 55. 59. 62. 69 73, 74. 78. 85.
86. 92. 111, 118. 146. 153 After pains, chap. 5. 149 Agues to cure, chapter 12. 32.
33. 48. 50. 56. 62. 67 70. 74. 80. 86. 90, 93 95. 143. 144. 158 Agues, to take
away the shaking thereof, chap. 41. 92. 153 Agues of long continuance, chap. 2.
7. 34. 46 47. 53. 60. 65 Ague tertian, chap. 8. 39. 47. 64. 66. 75. 96 157
Agues to cool, chap. 24 57. 134 Ague quotidian, chap. 3. 16. 41. 102. 130. 157
Ague quartane, chap. 2. 7. 8. 27. 29. 34 36. 37 39. 42. 47. 48. 51. 55. 66. 75.
90. 91. 96. 102. 114 126. 130. 141. 148 Agues in children, chap. 27 Almonds
inflamed, chap. 137 Appetite to procure, chap. 1. 32. 56. 74. 76. 80 100. 119.
125. 129. 143. 168 Apoplexy, chap, 11. 17. 28. 37. 39. 42. 43. 62 92. 118.
120. 124. 151. 166 Apostume to ripen, chap. 4, 11, 21, 26, 28, 31 37, 52, 56,
67, 119, 125, 141 Apostume behind the ear, chap. 71, 77, 104 156 Arm-holes
stinking, chap. 14 Arm-holes chafing thereof, chap. 48 Arthriticall pains, or
joynt-gowt, chap. 23* Astma, see Breath short.
B BAck pained, chap. 5. 80 Back hot, chap. 12. 63 Back weak, chap. 24
Baldness, chap. 17. 79 Barrenness to help, chap. 62, 78, 156 Barrenness to
cause, chap. 88 Bats to drive away, chap. 33. 111 Belly pained, chap. 31, 33,
37, 45, 71, 121 Bees stinging, chap. 71, 121, 125 Bees to kill, chap. 130
Belching, chap. 76. 137 Bile, or botch, chap. 50, 80, 124 Belly to loosen,
chap. 16, 79. 117, 138, 150 Birth to bring away, chap. 6, 11, 14, 18, 21, 23,
25, 31, 33, 48, 54, 62, 69, 77, 78, 80, 88, 92, 104, 111. 121, 133 Birth to
destroy, chap. 36 Blackness and spots, chap. 11 53, 162 Bladder stopped, chap.
22. 139 Bladder pained, chap. 19, 24, 49* 116 Bladder itching, chap. 50
Bladder, ulcer thereof, chap. 107, 116 Bladder inflamed, chap. 107 Bleeding
inward, chap. 10, 23, 128. 135, 142 Blister to draw, chap. 28, 161
Bloud-spitting, chap. 2, 5, 10, 18, 19. 24 39, 45 50, 53, 62, 64, 82, 93, 97,
101, 109, 114, 132 141, 144, 145, 146, 150, 152, 156 Bloud-pissing, chap. 64,
69 Bloud-vomiting, chap. 144. 156 Blood congealed, chap. 10, 11, 29, 33, 39,
50, 54, 64, 74, 120, 128, 159 162 Blood to purge, chap. 1, 18, 27, 29, 37, 42,
53 60, 105,, 110, 115 Blood ^ot to cool, chap. 15, 131, 141, 145 Bones to
scale, chap. 28 Bones broken, chap. 45, 82, 97 Bones out of joint, chap. 23,
24, 51, 55, 71 101, 144 Bones broken to draw out, chap. 6, 11, 23, 28 31, 80,
102 Bones naked to cover, chap. 48, 50, 74 Botches, chap. 50, 55, 90 Bowels
inflamed, chap. 86 Brain to refresh, chap. 12, 14, 45, 47, 62 Brain cold, chap.
2, 7, 23, 30, 37, 91, 92, 120 151, 163 Brain weak, chap. 1, 8, 14, 43, 48, 60,
72, 92 103, 114, 127 Breast to cleanse, chap. 5, 23, 56, 66, 138 Breast pained,
chap. 71, 116 Breasts of women inflamed, chap. 52, 97, 145 Breasts of women
swollen, chap. 4, 52, 71, 97 125, 138, 146 Breasts of Maids to abate, chap. 57
Breath short, chap. 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 17, 21, 23 26, 31, 33, 41, 42, 46, 50,
55, 58, 62, 69, 71 74, 75, 76, 80, 87, 88, 93, 101, 104, 105, 108 110, 114,
115, 120, 122, 124, 125, 130, 133 139, 145, 146, 147, 153, 165 Breath stinking,
chap. 1, 14, 30, 33, 41, 45, 48 62, 76, 84, 91, 127, 132, 136, 151 Bruises and
fall, chap. 2, 10, 11, 28, 32, 33, 50 53, 54, 55, 64, 66, 69, 71, 74, 84, 89,
97, 101 120, 128, 141, 142, 145, 159, 162 Burning and scalding, chap. 39, 56,
62, 71, 79 111, 114, 121, 122, 131, 144
C CAlenture, chap. 131 Callous slesh in Fistulaes, chap. 37 Callous knobs,
chap. 16 Cancers to cure, chap. 11, 27, 36, 37, 42, 64 66, 68, 75, 79, 101,
112, 119, 138, 141, 142 144, 156 Cancers in the nose, chap. 6, 10 Cankers in
the mouth, chap. 68, 144 Cancerous Ulcers, chap. 8 Carbuncles, chap. 7, 16,
119, 138, 139, 153 Catarrhe, see Rheum Cattle stung; chap. 33 Chaps of the
fingers; chap. 51 Chaps of the fundament; chap. 114, 125 Chastnesse to procure,
chap. 67 Child dead to bring away; chap. 4, 6, 9, 25 31, 33, 36, 48, 86, 93,
96, 118, 153, 157 Chin-cough; chap. 71 Chilblanes; chap. 23 Choler to purge;
chap. 1. 3. 6. 8. 11. 14. 16. 17 26. 29. 32. 34. 39. 40. 41. 44. 47. 51. 52.
53. 56 59 63. 93 95. 115. 121. 137. 150. 160 Choler, phlegm and water to purge;
chap. 11 Choler adust to purge; chap. 27. 37. 4^ Cicatrize to procure; chap. 70
Choleric vomitings; chap. 168 Clifts of the fundament; chap. 67 Clifts of the
fingers; chap. 62 Clifts of the hands and lips, chap. 14. 62 Cod swollen; ch, 41,
67, 84, 106, 139, 153, 165 Colic; chap. 1. 6. 13. 14. 17. 19. 20. 22. 30, 31
41 46. 48. 49. 51. 55. 56. 62. 66. 69. 71. 74. 76 77* 80. 81. 84. 86. 92. 99.
102. 114. 118. 126 127. 143. 148. 153. 167 Conception to help; chap. 18. 20.
48. 99. 156* 157 Concoction; chap. 30. 45 91 Consumption; chap. 24. 49. 83.
108. 110* 112 116. 138. 146. 149. 151 Consumption of the Lungs; chap. 2. 37. 69
108. 112. 141. 144* Contusion, see Bruises. Convulsion and Cramps; chap. 6. 9.
11. 18, 20 27. 28. 31. 33. 36. 37. 39. 41. 50, 55. 56. 62. 71 76. 78. 80. 84.
92. 93. 96. 101. 105. 114. 118 120. 128. 137. 139. 140 Corn^; chap, 4. 7. 16,
122. 139 Cough; chap. 2. 5. 7. 9. 13. 14. 17. 24. 25. 33. 41 44 45. 46. 48. 49
50. 52. 55. 56 58. 62. 66* 69 71. 76. 80. 84. 87. 89 93. 96. 101. 104. 108 110.
115 122. 128 137. 141. 143 145. 146 147. 148 149. 151, 156, 157, 159, 160, 565*
Courses to provoke; chap. 1, 3, 4* 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 11, 14, 17, 20, 22, 23, 25,
26, 29, 31, 33, 36 37, 39, 41, 43, 48, 49, 50, 54, 55, 56, 59, 67 69, 73, 74,
78, 80, 81, 84, 85, 86, 90, 92, 93 99, 102, 105, 111, 112, 114: 118: 120: 124:
129: 133: 137: 140: 146: 148: 152: 153: 159 157: 161: 165 Courses overflowing
to stop; chap. 9, 10, 18, 24, 49, 57, 64, 107, 114, 125, 142, 144, 147, 150,
156. Cramps, see Convulsion. Crudities; chap. 1, 76.
D DAndrasse; chap. 2, 19, 69, 70, 79, 96, 106, 121. Dead child to bring away,
see child. Dead flesh to eat out;, chap. 3, 4, 23, 65, 68, 70, 75. Deafness;
chap, 5, 21, 23, 26, 62, 90, 92, 144 Dog biting; chap. 71, 74, 75, 124, 146.
Dog mad, biting thereof, chap, 5, 33, 50, 56, 62, 66, 69, 74, 78, 80, 90, 125,
138, 144. Dropsey, chap, 1, 2, 7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 15, 17, 20, 22, 23, 25, 26,
28, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 40, 41, 46, 47, 50, 53, 54, 55, 56, 61, 65, 67, 69,
76, 80, 84, 86, 93, 95, 96, 99, 102, 104, 110, 114, 120, 122, 133, 137, 144,
153. Dreams, chap, 51. Dryness to help, chap, 84. Drunkenness to resist,
chap, 5, 21, 80, 111. Drunkenness to bring, chap, 21, 23. Dysentery flux,
chap, 43, 81.
E. Ears pained, chap, 1, 25, 31, 54, 56, 70, 76, 80, 123, 133, 135, 137, 144,
146, 150, 153 Ears running, chap, 1, 48, 52, 111 Ears, Ulcers thereof, chap,
53, 58, 111, 122 Ears, worms therein, chap, 52, 93, 96 Ears, noise and
singing thereof, chap, 5, 17, 23, 36, 37, 41, 62, 69, 79, 92, 112 Ears,
Impostumes thereof, chap, 52, 66, 102 Elephansie, chap, 17, 27, 36, 37, 60, 65,
75 Eruptions of the Skin, chap, 15, 52, 63, 64, 107, 114, 144 Expectoration to
belp, chap, 5, 41, 76 Erysipelas, see wild fire Eyes dim, chap. 1, 5, 29, 36,
42, 45, 47, 50 62, 74, 93, 96, 103, 105, 112, 122, 123, 124, 133, 143, 146,
151, 153, 154, 165 Eyes red, chap, 2, 12, 18, 21, 22, 33, 47, 55, 56, 57, 58,
64, 79, 90, 100, 107, 109, 123, 135, 141, 144, 145 Eyes blood-shotten, chap,
56, 151 Eyes rheumatick, chap, 18, 24, 41, 47, 48, 56, 75, 85, 107, 127, 129,
150 Eyes, Ulcers thereof, chap, 48, 68, 75 Eyes, spots therein, chap. 3, 4, 7,
23, 33, 41, 47, 48, 55, 58, 74, 91, 112, 123, 131, 144 Eyes to preserve from
the Pox, chap, 21 Eyes impostumated, chap, 121 Eyes hurt, chap, 76 Eyes pained,
chap, 22, 135
F. FAce pale, chap. 14, 21, 47, 51, 54, 87, 104, 105, 116, 138 Face, spots
thereof, chap, 14, 19, 26, 107, 119, 122, 133, 148 Face to make fair, chap,
12, 48 Falling sickness, chap, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 11, 17, 18, 25, 26, 27, 31, 33,
36, 37, 39, 42, 45, 46, 50, 55, 60, 62, 72, 75, 76, 80, 81, 89, 92, 96, 104,
110, 118, 124, 128, 136, 140, 141, 144, 151, 156, 161, 163, 166 Falls, see
Bruises Fatness to abate, chap, 56, 105 Fever burning, chap. 15, 19, 44, 52,
57, 63, 113, 131, 141 Fever putrid, chap, 19, 53, 101 Fever pestilent, chap,
18, 19, 64, 81, 83, 85, 90, 95, 124 Fever hecticke, chap, 95150 Fever
erraticke, chap, 37 Felon, chap, 7 Fig in the fundament, chap. 2, 16, 68 Fish
to kill, chap. 16, 111 Fistulaes, chap. 2, 6, 16, 23, 36, 37, 64, 112, 114, 141
F stulous ulcers, chap. 33, 56, 80, 93 Fleas and Gnats to drive away, chap. 1,
114, 119 Flies and Gnats to kill, chap, 36, 130 Phlegm to purge, chap, 1, 2, 3,
4, 6, 8, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 23, 26, 27, 28, 32, 34, 37, 38, 40, 41, 46, 47,
50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60, 61, 93, 150 Phlegm to bring away, chap,
101, 139 Phlegm tou^h to expel, chap. 28, 65, 69, 139 Flesh in wounds to
procure, chap, 6, 18, 38, 48, 50, 61, 102, 135 Flux of the belly, chap, 1, 5,
10, 14, 19, 45, 47 48, 49, 52, 53, 62, 63, 64, 66, 71, 81, 87, 91, 97, 109,
114* 116, 129, 132, 135, 140, 144, 147, 150, 169 Flux bloody, chap, 1, 43, 62,
64, 66, 70, 79, 106, 107, 111, 116, 124, 134, 141, 242, 158 Fluxes in women,
chap, 79, 82 Foul diseases of the skin, chap, 36, 37, 51, 60, 75, 131 For
Maungie, see Hair falling. Freckles, chap. 11, 14, 16, 26, 31, 32, 33, 48, 54,
56, 67, 93, 130, 134, 138 Frenzy, chap. 44, 49, 60, 63, 76, 134, 144, 145
French Pox, chap, 1, 27, 28, 29, 34, 46, 56, 65 75, 77, 90, 94, 95, 102, 110,
157, 158 Fundament pained, chap, 21, 24 Fundament fallen down, chap, 23* 135
Fundament inflamed, chap, 123 Fundament, Impostumed thereof, chap. 73
G GAll stopped, chap, 8, 21, 22, 27, 54, 93, 105, 107, 109, 112 Gangrene, chap,
11, 48, 65, 90, 97, 119 138, 139, 152 Genitals, Apostumes thereof, chap. 9
Gnats to drive away, chap, 1, 111, 119 Gonorrhaea, see Running of the Reins
Gowt, chap. 4, 6, 11, 14, 15, 20, 21, 26, 28, 29, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41,
46, 49, 50, 52, 56, 57, 65, 69, 74, 80, 93, 95, 96, 97, 98, 100, 101, 104, 106,
110, 114, 116, 124, 131, 139 141, 144, 145, 149, 153, 159, 167 Gravel, chap,
14, 32, 71, see Stone Green Sickness, chap, 1, 8, 22, 26, 40, 53, 66, 75, 93,
95 Gripings of the belly, chap, 1, 27, 52, 71, 80, 84, 89, 93, 109, 114, 117,
121, 124, 125 Gripings of children, chap, 5 Gums bleeding, chap, 144 Gums sore,
chap, 10, 14, 18, 45, 48, 70, 107, 114, 131, 150, 151, 152 Guts fretting, chap,
71, 121, 144, 145
H Hair of the eyelids to take away, chap, 42 Hair to take away, chap, 16,
22 Hair rough, chap, 52 Hair falling, chap, 17, 23, 28, 47, 48, 70, 79, 87,
121, 161 Hair black to cause, chap, 24, 47 Hairs of the eye lids to cause to
grow, chap, 129 Hands to make fair, chap, 5, 142 Headache to cure, chap, 1, 3,
4, 5, 8, 17, 22, 27 37, 46, 49, 52, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 67, 72, 75, 76, 79, 80,
96, 109, 111, 114, 123, 127, 133, 135, 144, 150, 151, 152 Head cold to warm,
chap, 118 Head inflamed, chap, 52, 134, 150 Headache from cold, chap, 1, 26,
69, 118, 127 128, 130, 132, 156 Head scald to cure, chap, 37 Head scabbed,
chap, 69, 121 Head running sores thereof, chap, 64, 106 Head hot, chap, 12,
117, 150 Head to purge of phlegm, chap, 36, 41, 111 Heart to comfort, chap, 14,
18, 19, 21, 43, 64, 72, 85, 91, 100, 114, 128, 135, 142, 150, 158 Heart
trembling, chap, 14,30, 42, 43, 47, 57, 62, 107, 118, 124, 127, 133
Hemorrhoides to provoke, chap, 3, 23, 26, 42 Hemorrhoides bleeding to stay,
chap, 3, 24, 47, 64, 97, 114, 141 Hemorrhoides painful, chap, 33, 37, 41, 47
51, 52, 56, 114, 144, 145 Hemorrhoides blind, chap, 136 Hickock, chap, 1, 6,
53, 73, 76, 88, 94, 105, 125, 128, 137 Hip-gowt, see Sciatica Hoarsnes, chap,
5, 7, 13, 24, 44, 48, 52, 71, 107, 139, 141, 149, 156, 160 Hot hum^urs to
purge, chap, 44 Hypochondres affected, chap, 27, 29, 37, 51, 60, 86, 151
Hystoricall fits, see Mother fits
I JAundise to cure, chap, 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 23,
25, 26, 27, 29, 35 37, 39, 41, 46, 51, 53, 54, 63, 64, 66, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83,
85, 86, 87, 93, 94, 95, 96, 102 107, 111, 112, 129, 133, 136, 137, 140, 141,
144, 146, 148, 151, 152 Jaundise black, chap, 29, 32 Iliack passion, chap, 16,
49 Impostume, see Apostume Incarnate, see flesh to procure Inflammation, chap,
12, 49, 56, 57, 63, 71, 98 100, 107, 113, 123, 134, 141, 144, 150 Joint Gowt,
chap, 4, 6, 56, 57, 62, 110, 112, 141, 148, 153 Joints pained, chap, 32, 36,
37, 45, 46, 52, 56, 57, 64, 93, 101, 106, 110, 141, 156 Joints trembling, chap,
55, 92 Joints cold, chap, 41 Issue to keep^open, chap, 56 Itch to help, chap,
6, 21, 27, 29, 35, 36, 54, 60, 63, 64, 70, 75, 77, 79, 101, 104, 110, 114, 131,
138, 141, 144, 146, 150, 155, 157, 16^.
K KErnels to dissolve, chap, 4, 33, 78, 119 124, 141, 161 Kibes and
Chilblanes, chap. 23, 70, 79, 104, 114, 149, Kidneys hot, chap, 14, 63, 117
Kidneys stopped, chap, 5, 140, 144 Kidneys, ulcers thereof, chap, 44, 144 Kidneys
pained, chap, 45, 116 Kidneys weak, chap, 44 Kibes in Cattle, chap, 68 Kings
evil, chap, 4, 11, 23, 26, 31, 32, 33, 37, 41, 46, 50, 55, 58, 64, 71, 102
Knee, ach thereof, chap, 32 Knots and tumors, chap, 28, 33, 50, 55, 64, 77,
87, 141, 166
L LEan persons to fat, chap, 5, 24 Legs sore, chap, 56 Leprosy, chap, 1, 11,
17, 27, 29, 36, 37, 42, 47; 59, 60, 63, 65, 70, 75, 95, 114, 149, 150 Lethargy,
chap, 28, 36, 43, 46, 62, 67, 92, 96, 97, 118, 133, 151, 156, 161 Lice to kill,
chap, 1, 32, 36, 69, 70, 77, 79, 111 118 Lips, Apostume thereof, chap, 3 Liver
stopped to open, chap, 1, 4, 5, 8, 11, 20, 21 22, 23, 26, 27, 29, 33, 34, 35, 46,
51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 61, 63, 66, 67, 74, 75, 76, 78, 79, 80, 84, 87, 93, 102,
105, 109, 110, 112, 118, 120 122, 125, 129, 136, 137, 139, 140, 141, 144 146,
148, 151 Liver hot, chap, 12, 14, 18, 57, 63, 100, 107, 145, 150 Liver to
strengthen, chap, 40, 43, 46, 47, 150 Liver cold, chap, 53 Loathing of meat,
chap, 7, 72 Lump of flesh in the womb, see Mol^ Lungs to cleanse; chap, 5, 13,
138 Lungs hurt; chap, 64 Lungs inflamed; chap, 5, 15, 44, 131, 153 Lungs,
consumption thereof; chap, 2, see Consumption Lungs stopped; chap, 21, 48, 51,
52, 64, 71, 74 80, 84, 87, 88, 100, 105, 115, 121, 147, 148 159, 160 Lungs
impostumated; chap, 106 Lust to provoke; chap, 69, 76, 91, 95, 99, 102 Lust to
abate; chap, 12, 74, 88, 117, 145
M Madness; chap, 27, 36, 37, 42, 60, 63 65, 75 Malign Fevers; chap, 1
Manginesse; chap, 11, 137 Marks of the Poxs and Measels; chap, 119 Matrix fallen;
chap, 10, 31, 62 Matrix pained; chap, 14, 21 Matrix, impostume thereof; chap,
169 Measels and Pox to drive out; Chap, 10, 19, 64 81, 82, 104, 149, 158 Meat,
loathing thereof; chap, 129, Melancholy to purge; chap, 16, 27, 29, 37, 40 47,
51, 60, 137, 150 Melancholy to help; chap, 21, 29, 36, 37, 42 54, 57, 60, 62,
75, 81, 83, 94, 96, 102, 124 133, 135, 142 Melancholy Dreams; chap, 140 Memory
to quicken; chap, 8, 21, 62, 72, 90 91, 103, 114, 151, 156 Megrim, see swimming
of the head Mice and Rats to kill, see Rats Milk in women's breasts to dry up;
chap, 4, 8 153 Milk to increase; chap, 67, 76, 83, 105, 113 117, 121, 130 Milk
curdled in the breasts; chap, 4, 7 Miscarrying to hinder; chap, 10, 24, 42, 64
Mola, or lump of flesh in the Womb; chap, 31, 50 Morbus Gallicus; see French
Pox Morphew; chap, 11, 16, 17, 29, 41, 42, 54, 56 65, 69, 71, 119, 131, 134,
153, 167, Mother-fits; chap, 7, 11, 12, 20, 31, 33, 50, 55 62, 72, 74, 76, 81,
92, 96, 99, 101, 114, 124 127, 132, 140, 153 Mother pained; chap, 2, 45, 67,
80, 93 114 Mother hard; chap, 9, 48, 104, 106 Mothes and Worms to preserve
from; chap, 1 Mother, windiness thereof; chap, 30, 31, 45 62, 67, 73, 75, 78,
129, 153 Mother inflamed; chap, 129 Mouth sore; chap, 6, 10, 14, 23, 29, 37 64,
66, 67, 70, 107, 121, 122, 131, 141, 150 152, 156 Mouth bleeding; chap, 93, 97,
141 Mouth dry; chap, 52 Mushromes eaten; chap, 1, 105
N NAils, fleshinesse thereof to take away; chap, 70, 146 Navel going out;
chap, 52, 145 Navel swollen; chap, 27, 145 Neck, crick thereof; chap, 145 Nerves,
cold to warm; chap, 7 Nerves bruised; chap, 6 Nightmare; chap, 3. 42, 62, 140
Nipples sore; chap, 52 Nits to kill; chap* 69, 70, 77, 111 Nodes of the joints;
chap, 9, 28, 50, 55, 77 95, 119 Nose bleeding; chap, 10, 12, 18, 23, 52, 56, 58
62, 63, 64, 80, 82, 90, 114, 125, 128, 131 135, 141, 144, 167 Nostrils stopped;
chap. 79, 137 Nostrils, stench thereof; chap, 41, 111 Nostrils, fleshinesse
growing therein; see Polypus
O. OBstructions to open, chap, 14, 19, 22, 69, 83 Opium too much taken, chap,
78, 137
P Pain to ease, chap, 49 Pale color to help, chap, 2, 3, 47 Pallat of the
mouth fallen, see Uvula. Palsy, chap, 11, 16, 20, 26, 28, 39, 43, 47, 50, 54,
55, 56, 60, 66, 69, 75, 80, 84, 92, 95, 96, 114, 118, 120, 124, 128, 131, 141,
149, 151, 156, 159, 161, 163, 166. Pestilence, chap, 1, 10, 12, 18, 21, 25, 29,
33, 34, 37, 62, 64, 66, 69, 74, 75, 81, 82, 85, 96, 111, 124, 142, 151, 153,
159, 157, 169 Pestilent fever, see Fever: Phlegmon, see Inflammation. Piles,
see Hemorrhoides. Pip in poultery to help, chap, 69 Pimples and wheales, chap
12, 15, 59, 63, 79, 119, 145 Pissing blood, see blood-pissing Pissing by drops,
chap, 84 Plague, chap, 10, 21, 64, 77, 80, 91, 96, 101, 111, 112, 114, 142,
153, 156 Plague Sore, chap, 7, 50, 81, 90, 100, 104, 165 Plurisie, chap, 5, 14,
21, 39, 43, 44, 48, 51, 52, 55, 62, 71, 74, 81, 93, 121, 122, 131, 135 Polypus,
chap. 6, 1023, 51, 68, 75, 167 Pox and Measels to expel, chap, 10, 19, 21, 64,
81, 82, 104, 149, 159 Pox, marks thereof to take away, chap, 119 Poison, chap,
1, 6, 7, 10, 14, 23, 25, 31, 50, 55, 64, 69, 74, 76, 81, 83, 84, 85, 89, 92,
96, 101, 104, 112, 120, 121, 124, 128, 129, 130, 133, 141, 145, 146, 149, 158,
161, 165 Privy parts inflamed, chap, 106, 123, 144, 145 Purples, chap 10, 64,
159 Pustules, chap, 37, 80, 114, 145, 150 Putrefaction to restist; chap. 3, 6,
12, 14 19, 33, 34, 43, 48, 54, 82, 110, 114, 122, 131 150
Q Quartane Ague; see Ague Quinsie; chap, 1, 4, 15, 26, 48, 56, 69, 76 104,
122, 131, 141, 143
R RAts and Mice to kill; chap. 36 Reds in Women; see Courses Reins pained;
chap, 39, 108, 116 Reins cold, chap, 30 Reins hot; chap. 14, 107, 117 Reins to
cleanse, chap, 5, 32, 53, 115 Rheum to purge; chap, 3, 17, 46, 48, 75 Rheum
to stay; chap, 2, 6, 10, 14, 43, 45, 48 49, 52, 57, 58, 62, 63, 64, 80, 82, 93,
95, 96 97, 107, 110, 121, 122, 130, 135, 141, 144 146, 150, 151, 157, 169*
Rheum hot; chap, 15, 115 Rheum cold; chap, 80, 114, 122 Ring-wormes; see
Tetters Running of the Reins; chap. 10, 12, 15, 18 45, 53, 57, 62, 63, 64, 94,
97, 117, 132, 134 135, 137, 145, 150 Ruptures; chap, 2, 6, 9, 10, 20, 31, 33,
51, 64 71, 84, 87, 89, 93, 95, 97, 101, 114, 136, 141 159
S Sadness; chap, 42, 60, 83, 127, 133, 135 163 Salt humors to purge; chap,
29 Scab; chap, 1, 6, 16, 17, 22, 27, 29, 35, 36, 37 51, 54, 59, 60, 63, 64, 69,
75, 77, 79, 83, 93 95, 101, 104, 110, 112, 114, 119, 121, 131 137, 141, 144,
146, 149, 150, 153, 155, 157 Scaled head, chap, 31 Scaldes, see Burning S
ciatica, chap, 2, 4, 8, 17, 20, 23, 26, 28, 31, 32 34, 36, 39, 41, 50, 52, 54,
56, 62, 64, 71, 74, 78, 89, 93, 95, 101, 112, 114, 141, 148, 153, 167 Sco^bute,
or Scurvy, chap, 3, 29, 34, 46, 51 56, 114, 148 Scurfe, chap, 2, 5, 17, 19, 28,
37, 54, 69, 87, 106, 119, 121, 130 Secondine, see Afterbirth Scorpions,
stinging thereof, chap, 31, 89, 124 133 Se^d, see Sperm Senses to quicken,
chap, 3, 60, 151, 156 Serpents to drive away, chap, 67, 114 Serpents, the
biting thereof, chap. 8, 9, 16, 32 66, 67, 80, 90, 101, 105, 137, 138, 140,
143, 144, 145 Shingles, chap, 141, See Wildfire Side pained, see Stitches
Sight weak, chap* 8, 14, 50, 91, 114 Sight to cleanse, chap, 4, 5, 7, 27, 42,
60, 62, 90 91, 101, 132, 149 Sinews cold, chap, 20, 23, 48, 60 Sinews shrunk,
chap, 60, 128, 132 Sinews cut, chap. 80 Skin, foul diseases thereof, chap, 20,
23, 24, 28, 29, 93 Skin rough, chap, 5, 15, 121, 149 Skin to mundifie, chap, 5,
16, 28, 56 Skin black, chap, 2, 41 Skull broken, chap, 135 Sleep to provoke,
chap, 5, 18, 21, 41, 49, 67, 76, 117, 132, 145, 150 Smelling lost. chap. 12.
130 Sneesing to provoke. chapter 36. 41. 92. 120. 143. 161 Saint Anthonies fire,
see Wildfire Sores old and rotten, chap, 16, 34, 66, 80, 101 111, 106 Sores
old and running, chap, 16, 23, 36, 68, 79, 80, 111, 119, 138, 141, 146 Sores of
the head, chap, 23, 79, 87, 125 Speech lost, chap, 28, 62, 118, 120, 140, 151
Sperm to increase, chap, 5, 13, 58, 132 Sperm passing away to stop, chap. 62,
134 Sperm to dry up, chap, 67, 69 Spirits to strengthen, c, 14, 21, 24, 27, 42,
57 Spider, against the venom thereof, chap, 67, 90, 111 Spleen stopped, or hard,
chap, 1, 4, 5, 8, 11, 18, 20, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 37, 42,
46, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 60, 63, 66, 67, 70, 74, 75, 78, 79, 80, 84, 87, 88,
93, 94, 96 102, 105, 106, 110, 111, 118, 120, 121, 122, 136, 138, 139, 141,
146, 148 Spleen pained, chap, 27, 31, 32, 123, 137 Spleen, windiness thereof,
chap, 9, 27, 101 112, 129, 151, 167 Spleen to strengthen, chap, 40 Splinters to
draw out, chap, 11 Spots to take away, chap, 1, 3, 11, 20, 32, 41 69, 134, 138,
161 Stitches in the side, chap, 6, 9, 20, 31, 32, 33 41, 48, 50, 51, 55, 56,
71, 80, 84, 86, 90, 93, 96, 99, 101, 111, 123, 146, 153, 158, 167 Stomach
stopped, chap, 1, 22 Stomach crude or raw, chap, 3, 14, 30, 33, 69 76, 91, 101,
124, 125, 143, 153, 169, 160 Stomach to purge, chap, 1 Stomach hot, chap, 107,
117, 160, 168 Stomach to strengthen, chap, 1, 3, 14, 18, 40 45, 47, 62, 74, 80,
118, 132, 150 Stomach gnawing, chap, 6, 30, 129 Stomacb pained, chap, 45
Stomach cold, chap 43 Stone to bring away, chap, 5, 9, 14, 18, 25, 32 39, 71,
80, 81, 89; 93, 99, 102, 105, 106, 109 111, 112, 126, 129, 131, 140, 148, 152,
167 Strangury, chap, 8, 27, 50, 66, 74, 44, 102, 108 114, 125, 126, 138
Suffocation of the Mother, see Mother Sun-burning, chap, 11, 56, 134 Surfeit,
chap, 32, 74 Super-purgation, chap, 9; 52 Sweat to provoke, chap, 8, 9, 19, 56,
64, 74 80, 85, 86, 90, 93, 110, 159 Swellings to abate, chap, 11, 16, 32, 52*
59 67, 116 Swellings hard to cure, chap, 4, 14, 23, 116 121 Swimming of the
head, chap, 11, 17, 27, 30 31, 36, 37, 45, 55, 62, 76, 79, 81, 84, 90, 92, 124,
125, 128, 151 Swounings, chap, 81, 91, 118, 133
T TEmples pained: chap, 8, 125 Tenesmus: or a desire of often going to stool:
chap, 48, 52, 58, 106, 135 138 Terms to provoke, see Courses Tetters: chap, 4,
11, 14, 37, 48, 69, 83, 119 144, 146, 150, 153 Teeth loose: chap, 10, 45, 48,
70, 107 Teeth on edge: chap, 145 Teeth to breed: chap, 18 Teeth to white: chap,
6, 18, 19, 45, 51, 62 110, 111, 137 Thirst to quench: chap, 15, 44, 52, 63, 107
108, 117, 145, 168 Throat sore: chap, 10, 113, 122, 131, 150 Throat swollen:
chap, 9, 15, 62 Throat, roughness thereof: chap, 24, 69 108, 154, 160 Thorns
and Splinters to draw out: chap, 4, 6, 23, 25, 31, 55, 66, 80, 102, 121
Throws: see After-pains Tissick: chap, 108, 121, 145, 148, 151 Toothache:
chap, 1, 12, 16, 17, 23, 31, 36, 37 41, 49, 50, 62, 64, 69, 71, 74, 80, 85, 91,
92 104, 111, 114, 118, 120, 131, 136, 141, 143 145 Tough humors to take away:
chap. 69 Travels sore of Women: chap, 111, 124, 125 126, 153 Trembling of the
heart, see Heart Tumors hard to dissolve: chap, 14, 21, 31 45, 64, 71, 73,
104, 106, 121, 123
V VEin broken: chap, 23, 131 Vein cut: chap, 80, 131 Venery to provoke: chap,
7, 20, 21, 24 41, 62, 69, 72, 91, 102, 116, 125, 127, 132 133, 143, 149 Venery
to extinguish: chap, 12, 41, 67, 73 134, 145 Venom to expel: chap, 2, 6, 7,
10, 12, 18, 20 23, 31, 39, 64, 74, 81, 83, 96, 112, 121, 124 128, 129, 141,
153, 159, 169 Venomous beasts, stinging thereof: chap, 2, 6, 7, 10, 20, 23, 25,
31, 32, 33, 39, 41, 50, 54 55, 67, 69, 74, 76, 79, 80, 81, 87, 89, 90, 93 96,
99, 102, 124, 125, 130, 137, 146, 153 167, 169 Vertigo: see Swimming of the
head Vipers: stinging thereof: chap. 11, 93, 114 Viscous humors to purge:
chap, 1, 17 Viscerous parts to open: chap, 2^ Viscerous parts to strengthen:
chap, 19 Ulcers to cure: chap, 11, 14, 23, 45, 47, 56, 62 64, 66, 69, 79, 93,
136, 141, 147 Ulcers of the leg: chap. 36, 56 Ulcers malign: chap, 6, 27, 77
Ulcers creeping of the genitals: chap. 6, 64 73, 107, 112, 144, 147 Ulcers of
the mouth and throat: chap, 6, 11 54, 64, 66, 82, 83, 137 Ulcers old: chap, 39,
50, 96, 142 Ulcers hollow: chap. 18, 37, 45, 112, 144 Ulcers to dry: chap, 73,
87, 114 Ulcers creeping: chap, 8, 24, 119 Ulcers of the Matrix: chap, 67
Ulcers, heat thereof: chap, 12, 134 Ulcers stubborn: chap, 90 Ulcers of the
head: chap, 119 Ulcers of the Yard: chap, 95, 107 Ulcers running: chap, 10, 33,
97, 104, 119 Ulcers eating: chap, 16, 24, 100 Ulcers of the Bladder: chap, 108,
116, 128 144 Ulcers of the Lungs: chap. 97, 112, 116 144 Ulcers to cicatrize,
chap. 24, 75 Ulcers to cleanse, chap, 16, 23, 31, 74, 91, 93 107, 122, 138,
146, 156, 159 Ulcers putrefied or rotten, chap. 11, 32, 33 39, 52, 70, 80, 111,
114, 144 Ulcers of the eyes, chap. 19 Ulcers, Fistulous, chap. 6, 33, 56, 93
Vomiting to stay, chap, 1, 10, 14, 24, 45, 57 62, 63, 64, 73, 91, 96, 109, 114,
115, 125 132, 144, 145, 147, 168, 169 Vomit to provoke, chap, 8, 13, 16, 32, 34
35, 41, 56, 74, 80, 148 Urine flowing to stop, chap, 10, 64, 69 134 Urine
sharp, chap, 100, 107, 108, 116, 117 134, 145, 160 Urine to provoke, chap, 2,
4, 5, 8, 9, 11, 14 18, 20, 21, 23, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 37, 39, 41 44, 45, 46,
50, 54, 55, 56, 62, 67, 69, 73, 74 76, 78, 79, 84, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 96, 99,
100 101, 102, 105, 107, 109, 111, 112, 113, 114 118, 126, 128, 129, 130, 132,
133, 136, 137 138, 148, 149, 152, 153, 157, 165, 167 Urine stinking, chapter 152
Urine bloody, chap, 66, 97, 144, 145, 146 Vterine parts to cleanse, chap, 1, 6,
3^ Uvula swollen, ch, 62 Uvula fallen, ch, 25, 56, 161, 167
W WArts to take away, chap, 16, 37, 66 139, 145, 153 Waspes to kill, chap, 36,
130 Waspes, stinging thereof, chap, 90, 125 Water to purge, chap, 11, 13, 16,
23, 26, 28, 32, 34, 35, 41, 46, 53, 55, 56, 59, 61, 65 Water yellow to purge,
ch, 17 Water running between the flesh and the skin, ch, 1, 63, Weariness
after travail, chap, 33, 66 67 Wens to take away, ch^p, 24, 78, 123, 124
Wheales and blanes, chap, 52, 59, 63, 79, 107, 112, 150 Wheesing, chap, 80,
105, 147, 160, 167 Whit-flaes, chap, 7, 11, 19, Whites in women, chap, 18, 19,
57, 62, 64, 82, 96, 97, 125, 142, 145, 146 Wild fire, chap, 8, 12, 13, 21, 48,
52, 56, 63, 69, 90, 121, 141, 144, 145 Wind to expel, chap, 1, 6, 7, 20, 30,
33, 43, 56, 69, 73, 76, 84, 91, 92, 101, 112, 114 123, 126, 128, 130, 132, 143,
151, 165 169 Wind in the belly, chap, 33, 50, 86, 157 160, 169 Wine, to take
away the smell thereof, chap, 169 Womb, diseases thereof, chap, 6, 7 Womb to
cleanse, chap, 1, 11, 20, 23 152 Womb, cold diseases thereof, chap, 30, 31 43,
151 Womb windy, chap, 5, 76, 120 Womb stopped, chap, 11, 14, 22, 23, 48 56
Womb, impurity thereof, chap, 6, 11, 20, 23 104 Womb moist, chap, 9, 10, 19,
141, 157 Womb, hard tumors thereof, chap, 48 56 Womb pained, chap, 46 Women
newly delivered to help, chap, 5 105 Women not sufficiently cleansed after
Childbirth to help, chap, 140 Worms to kill, chap, 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 17
19, 20, 23, 25, 29, 31, 33, 34, 39, 41, 43, 48 53, 56, 61, 64, 66, 69, 77, 80,
81, 85, 89, 90 93, 96, 98, 101, 106, 109, 111, 114, 119, 125, 130, 144, 145,
146, 148, 153, 159, 160 167 Worms called Ascarides to kill, chap, 4 Wounds to
cure, chap, 14, 23, 25, 28, 39, 54 67, 93, 144 Wounds bleeding to stop, chap,
10, 58, 75 82, 128, 135, 141, 144, 147, 156. Wounds, heat thereof, chap, 12,
134 Wounds green, chap, 3, 32, 33, 34, 39, 80, 93, 97, 109, 111, 112, 123, 142,
147, 158, 165 Wounds to incarnate, chap, 135 Wounds inward, chap, 112 Wounds of
the head, chap, 6, 48, 80 Wounds to cleanse, chap. 3, 8, 31, 34, 38, 64 152
Wounds of the Testicles and Privities, chap. 3. Wounds moist, chap. 20 Wounds,
dead flesh therein to take away, chap, 3, 4 See more in dead flesh, in Wounds
Wounds to enlarge, chap. 33 Wounds inward to cure, chap. 10, 97, 142 Wounds to
close up.
Y YOuth to preserve, chap. 47.

An Alphabeticall TABLE of those Diseases for which the Compound Medicines are
prescribed in this TREATISE.
A ABortion, or miscarrying to hinder, an Ointment: chap. 10. a Powder 64 a
Plaster 64. Afterbirth to expel, a Potion, chap. 6 Pills 6 Ague, a drink:
chap. 1, 8 Ague tertian, a Potion, chap, 35 Ague quartane, a Potion, chap, 1. a
Powder, 7. Pills, 55 Ague quotidian; a decoction, 16 Arthritical pains, a
Powder, chap. 6. 32 a Potion, 29. 35. 93. a Poultis, 49. a Fomentation; chap,
78
B BElly, wind therein, see wind in the stomach and belly Birth to bring
away, Pills, chap, 6. 14 a Potion, 14, 21. a Powder, 14. 21. 25 Bladder
ulcerated, a water, chap. 154 Blood to purge, a Potion chap. 29 Bloud-vomiting,
an Electuary, chap. 18 Bloud-spitting, a Potion, chap. 39. an Electuary, 45. a
L^hoch, 49 Breast to clease, a Potion, chap. 2 Breath short, a Potion, chap. 2.
Pills, 4. 6. a Potion, 21. a Syrup, 11 Bruises, a Cataplasme, chap. 56. a
Powder, 128 Burning to cure; an Ointment, chap. 112 144
C CHaps of the hands and lips, an Ointment, chap. 45 Choler to purge, a Bole,
chap. 2. 15 Pills, 3. a Potion, 53 Colic, an Electuary, chap. 69. 28. a Potion
44. 76. Pills, 31 Cough, Pills, chap. 6. 55. a Decoction, 24 an Electuary, 122
Courses in women overflowing, Pills, chap. 9 Courses to provoke, a Potion, chap.
6. Pills, 6 8. an Electuary, 10. a Decoction, 54. a Pessary, 93
D DEad child to bring away, a Potion, chap. 6 Dog mad, biting thereof, a
Drink, chap. 33 Dropsy, a Potion, chap. 34 41 46. a Powder, 46. Pills, 17. 46.
a Bole, 42. 46. 56. a Plaster, 17. Pills, 16. 55. a Potion, 16. 29 32. a
Powder, 16. 56. 61
E Ears, worms therein, chap. 37 Ears swollen; a poultis. chap. 146 Eyes red,
a water, chap. 12. 21. 103. 154 Eyes, spots therein, a water, chap. 12
F FAce, spots thereof, chap, 5. 17 Falling Sickness, a powder, chap. 6 Pills,
6. an Ointment, 6. a Syrup, 11 a potion, 49. A Quilt, 140 Fig in the fundament,
chap. 2 Fever, an Epitheme, chap. 57 Fistula, chap. 2 Phlegm to purge, Pills,
chap. 2. a potion, 2 Flesh to produce in ulcers, an Oil, chap. 6 a Cerot, 50.
a powder 48, 58 Flux of the belly, a Decoction, chap. 45. a potion, 47. 53. an
Electuary, 14. 18. 19 Flux bloody, a Glister, chap. 116 Frenzy, a Fomentation,
chap. 117
G GReen sickness, a potion, chap. 8 Gowt, a poultis, chap. 38. a Liniment,
15. a plaster, 50. a powder, 32. a Cerot, 49
H HEads of children sore, a Fomentation, chap. 153 Headache, chap. 21. Pills,
49 a Liniment, 120. a Quilt, 132. an Epitheme, 152 Heart faint, a potion, chap.
42. 30. 74 Heart-beating, a Quilt, chap. 124 Hemorrhoides, pills, chap. 9. a
poultis 144 Hickop, pills, chap. 49 Hip-gowt, see Sciatica
I JAundise, a decoction, chap. 1* 66, 39. a Bole, 35. a potion, 13. 29. 53.
55.. a powder, 19 Iliack passion, pills, chap. 17 Joynt-ach, a decoction, chap.
101 Incarnate, see flesh to procure Itch an ointment, chap. 77. See Scab.
K KIdneys hot, an emulsion, chap. 5 Knots and tumors to dissolve a Cerot,
chap. 4. a plaster, 9
L Leanness to help, a Marchpane, chap. 5 Legs fretting sores thereof, chap.
11 Leprosy, a potion, chap. 29 Liver stopped, pills, 4* 6 Liver hor, chap. 12
Lungs to cleanse, an emulsion, chap. 5 Lust to abate, an Electuary, chap. 67
M MEasels to expel, chap. 21 Melancholy, a potion, chap. 1. 27, 29 Pills 42. a
Syrup, 51. a decoction, 47 Miscarrying, see Abortion Mother-rising, pills, chap.
31. 50. a plaster: 31
N NErves to strengthen, a Lotion, chap. 118. Nodes, see Knots Nose bleeding, a
poultis, chap. 18. 83. 150
P Palsy, pills, chap. 6. 50. an oil 6. a Liniment 28 Pestilence, a potion,
chap. 11. 12. 64. 74 an electuary, 10. 12. a powder 12. 57. 64 Piles, see
Hemorrhoides
R Rheum, a potion chap. 21. an Elect. uary, 45. 150. Pills 49 Ring-wormes or
Tetters, a Lotion, chap. 131 Rupture, a powder, chap. 18
S SCab and Itch, a potion, chap, 29. a Bath 113. a water, 141 Sciatica, or
Hip-gowt; Pills, chap, 4. a Plaster, 31. a Bath; 114 Scurf of the head, chap,
37 Scurvie, a Potion, chap. 29 Senses to strengthen, a Lotion, chap, 118 Side
pained, a Potion, chap. 6. a Bag, 123 Sight to preserve, chap, 103. a water,
103 Sleep to procure, a Bole, chap, 49. a Lotion 86 Spleen, hardness thereof;
a Plaster, chap, 4 a Potion, 6, 31, a Cerot, 11^, a Linimen^, 31, an Ointment,
56 Stomach weak, a decoction, chap. 30. Pills 49 an Electuary, 150 Stomach
pained, Pills, chap, 3. a Potion, 6 an Electuary; 62. a Quilt, 125, 150 Stone
and Gravel, chap, 5. Pills, 50. a decoction Sweat to provoke, a Potion, chap, 56
T TErms to provoke, see Courses Temples pained, an ointment. chap, 45
Testicles swollen, a Plaster, 31 Teeth to white, a Poult's, chap, 45. a Powder
18 Tooth ach, chap. 2. 10 144 Tumors hard to dissolve, a Cerot, chap, 4. a
Plaster, 9
V Venom, an Electuary; chap, 25. 153 Ulcers of the Privities; a water and
ointment, chap, 68 Ulcers, heat thereof; a Plaster, chap, 62 Ulcers to dry, a
powder, chap, 58. a water, ^1 Vomiting to stay, Pills, chap. 49 Ulcers in the
mouth, a water, 97 Urine stopped, see Stone and Gravel. Urine sharp, an emulsion,
chap. 5
W WAtery humors to purge, a drink, chap. 38 Weak to strengthen, a Jelly,
chap, 19 Wind in the stomach, a decoction, chap, 1, 30. an Electuary, 69. a
potion, 6, 74 a Fomentation, 121. a powder, 152 Whites in women, an Electuary,
57 Womb impure, a potion, chap. 6 Worms, a plaster, chap. 1, 3, 4. a potion,
2, 31. a powder 19, 98 Worms in the ear, an inj^ction, chap, 93 Wounds, an
oil, chap, 39. a water, 88 Wounds in the head, a powder, chap. 58. a Cerot, 80
Wounds hollow, a Powder, chap, 48 Wounds to dry, an ointment, chap, 142.


