Several Fresh Inward Openings, (Concerning several things) Which the DAY
will declare of what Nature they are, to which Judgment they Appeal for
Justice, being contented either to stand or fall by it: And being likewise
ready to kiss that Condemnation, which they are likely to meet with in the mean
time, from all sorts of men, whom they find ready to deal hardly with them.

Through ISAAC PENINGTON, ( junior) Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert. M.DC.L.

The Particular Contents of the Ensuing Openings.
1. OF Reconciliation and Union. 2. Of true Faith, true Love, and true
Resignation. 3. A Word to Christians. 4. Of Prayer. 5. Of Sin, the Being of
sin, the blotting out of sin, and the difference between the Creatures blotting
out of sin, and Gods blotting out of sin. 6. Of the Mystery of God. 7. A
Parable translated out of Jer. 48. 11, 12, 13. 8. A Word to the Mad folks. 9.
A Letter. 10. Silence. 11. A check to the Judger of his brethren. 12. The true
ground of mourning, with an invitation to it. 13. A touch more concerning Sin,
as also concerning the Liberty and Perfection of the Creature, with an
Exhortatory close to such as are capable of it.
To all Persons, of all Sorts.
MIne own dear flesh without (or outward,) Mine own Life and Spirit within (or
inwards,) wherever dispersed, however clouded. I am of kin unto you, of your
flesh and of your bone; My Life, my Spirit, my Substance is one with yours; why
are we so strange one to another? we are all begotten by one Father, [For we
are all of his offspring] and therefore cannot but be brethren; and who knows
how sweetly and harmoniously we lay tumbling together in the same womb of
Eternity, before we were brought forth in these several strange shapes,
wherein we now appear? What, shall a few momentany varieties and contrarieties
(fitted only for some present design) make perpetual inroads upon everlasting
Unity? Arise, awake, shake off your disguises, open your eyes, let us look one
another in the Face, let us look into one another and see, if we can then
forbear knowing and owning one another?

But why do I thus speak? Dispensations, and the fight under Dispensations, is
not yet ended. We must contend and remain strange a while longer. There is a
gulf yet between us, that we cannot meet. Light and Love has not yet overcome
us. Ye cannot know me, if it were so, that I knew you. Ye must prosecute me
with hatred, though I should woo you with the greatest and entirest Love. Well;
Let things be as they are, since they cannot be altered: The time is at hand,
wherein time shall be no more; and then whatever had a Being in time, shall
cease from so being any longer. We must all to the grave, to the dust; We must
all sleep an Eternal sleep, when once the last Night comes; where we shall
bury all our quarrels and contentions, and awake in perfect life and love: and
then we shall be, both to our selves and to one another, what now we cannot so
much as desire to be.

In the mean time, Farewell: For I must retire into my secret corner, to lament
and bewail that Misery and Desolation, which is seizing upon all things, by
Those Flames, which have already broken forth, and are ready more powerfully
and Universally to break forth upon the present state of things both outward
and inward, to deface that beauty and luster wherewith hitherto they have
shined. And who can forbear weeping at the sight of this, who has his eye
opened to behold it, and has any creaturely sense left in him? Certainly none
but he, who has another eye also opened, a more piercing eye, which is able to
look through all this, and behold a truer, a greater, a more perfect, a more
everlasting glory, sown in and springing up out of the ashes of these. And he,
who indeed beholds this, may skip and leap in the flames, even while they are
fastening upon and burning up himself. He, who thus knows God, may trust him
with himself, and with every thing else, and cannot dis-relish him in his most
hidden tracks of Universal and most dreadful destructions. He, who Loves the
true God with all his heart, will easily say; Burn up Heaven and Earth at the
very roots; let there be no relics left of any thing that I have tasted,
enjoyed, hoped for; and then I shall be sure to meet with none but God, to
love none but God, to desire none but God, when there is no beauty left any
where else to be desired, nor nothing of that left in me, which did desire
any thing besides Him.

Of Reconciliation and Union.
EPHESIANS. 2. 14, 15, 16. For he is our peace, who has made both one, and has
broken down the middle wall of partition between us:

Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, the Law of Commandments in
Ordinances, for to make in himself, of twain, one new man, so making peace.

And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having
slain the enmity in himself.


For he is our peace, THere is Nothing but offense and war (both in the cause,
and in the effect) between God and the Creature. Every thing in God, as it is
beheld by the Creature, troubles the Creature, and inciteth and draws forth
the enmity of the Creature against it. Every thing in the Creature, as it is
beheld by God, provokes his jealousy and indignation likewise: So that there
is nothing but a constant inveterate War between Heaven and Earth, which should
and must be assistant and subservient one to another, or lose their own
delights.

But shall it always be thus? Shall God and the Creature ever thwart and cross,
and never please one another, nor be pleased in one another?

No, it shall not always be so: When the great Peacemaker comes to put forth
his skill, he shall prevail to make peace between them. He will go through his
undertaking, though he lose his life in it: and yet will he not lose his life
in it, unless he be sure thereby to accomplish it. If he dye, the root of
Enmity in the Creature, and in God too, must dye with him: (for the opposition
and enmity in both is equal, or if in either it be superior, it is in God; and
it is an harder task to reconcile God to the Creature, then the Creature to
God; and therefore in wisdom, that was first undertaken, and Reconciliation
never preached to the Creature, until the foundation of Pacification in him,
was laid.)

He is our peace, There is no approach, no converse, no sweet intercourse
between God and the Creature, but in him, by him, through him. If he had not
been the Propitiatory Sacrifice to reconcile God first, there should never have
been any motion to the Creature to be reconciled. But now he has offered up
that Principle of life whereby he lived, and whereby the Creature lives, freely
giving it back into his hands from whom he received it, that now he himself can
live no longer, nor the Creature neither (the root of its life being slain)
there is no foundation of offense or controversy left between God and him, or
between God and the Creature, so far as it is found dead or dying in him. So
that we, who are dead in Christ, who are dying into Christ, who are filling up
the remainders of his passion in our own spirits, are now at peace; And he, by
his death for us, by his death in us, by his blood which he poured out and
pours out to death in us, is our peace; which till he has poured out
perfectly, we shall never find him perfect peace unto us.

Who has made both one, There was but one at first: yet in this one was all
manner of variety and distinction. As all was produced out of one, so all was
in that one before it was produced. There was but one mass of Earth, and yet
what multitudes of things were brought forth out of it? There was but one Adam,
and yet this one was made into two, and out of these two, what thousands of
generations have proceeded?

And this great lump being brought forth, though they are all the same, all of
one blood, yet they are cut out into two parcels, Jews and Gentiles: And they
are as distinct as may be. Distinct in their race, in their God, in their Laws,
Ordinances, desires, ends, hopes. The Jews must not be like the Gentiles in any
thing: The Gentiles will not be like the Jews in any thing. Oh how diverse, how
distinct, nay how contrary are they! But this diversity, this distinction, this
contrariety must not always last. When Christ comes forth to give up that
principle of life in himself, and to slay it in them, whereby they have thus
lived, the leaves and fruit of variety and distinction will soon wither, and
they will all shrink back into unity and harmony again.

The Jews and the Gentiles were both one, but were made different: But there is
a time for that difference to be unmade, to be taken away, and then they will
become one again.

But how can this be? Why the Next words tell you.

And has broken down the middle wall of partition between us: There is nothing
hinders them from being one, but that which parts them; if that be broken down,
they must needs be one. If Adam and Eve had not been parted, they could never
have become two: If that partition be taken away, they cannot but become one
again.

Here are three things held forth.

1. What it is that makes the difference between things, and that is a wall
set up in the midst. It is by a wall set up betwixt them that they come to be
severed and parted one from another. God and the Creature are severed by a
wall: Man and woman severed by a wall: Jew and Gentile severed by a wall:
Believer and Unbeliever severed by a wall. There is a wall set up; On this side
there is Unrighteousness, on that side Righteousness: On this side Unbelief, on
that side Faith: On this side Unholiness, on that side Holiness: On this side
Darkness, on that side Light: On this side Evil, on that side Good.

There is not such an Original and real difference between them, as we fools
imagine, It is but a made difference, a difference which becomes so by the
setting up of a wall, which is very vast and irreconcilable to that eye which
sees only the difference, and cannot pierce into that Original Union and
Oneness that was between them, and could alone be discerned before this wall
was set up.

2. How this difference shall be taken away; and that is by the breaking down
of this wall, by the laying this partition flat, by the taking away all those
Ordinances, Laws, and Considerations, which make either the one or the other so
to be. That which makes Righteousness and Unrighteousness, Holiness and
Unholiness, Faith and Unbelief, as it had a time to be set up, so it shall be
pulled down again, and where will then the difference between these things be?
There will be a difference and a vast difference, while the partition wall
lasts, but when that is gone, there will remain not so much as a shadow of
difference any longer: When that is wholly taken away, which did in any wise
part them, they cannot but become perfectly one.

3. Who it is that takes this difference away, that breaks down this middle
wall; and that is Christ the same who set it up. It was the letting forth, that
life he received, into several varieties, that caused the distinction; and it
is the drawing back of that life again into its original, that brings all back
into union.

And this he does by sacrificing his own flesh, (as the following words hold
forth;) by offering and giving up through the Eternal Spirit his own life, and,
in it, the life of the whole Creation (which did flow from his life, and
depended upon his life) unto him from whom it first came. Hereby all
Ordinances, Laws, and Constitutions, which take hold of the Creature in its
creaturely state, and follow it to death, fall to the ground; and that
difference and enmity which did arise between them from hence, fall with it
also. A taste whereof was given upon sacrificing the head, in that visible and
demonstrative Reconciliation between Jew and Gentile, the foundation whereof
was then made manifest: But the full fruits thereof cannot be reaped, until the
whole body be burnt in the fire, by the same Eternal Spirit; until every member
likewise has wholly returned back its life also; and then there will remain no
more offense in or from any part of the Creation, when there is nothing left
them wherewith they may offend.

Verse 15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, the Law of Commandments in
Ordinances,

That which nourishes distance and division is Enmity. There is an Enmity sown
throughout the whole Creation, between God and the Creature, between one
Creature and another. The life of one creature is made fit to feed another, and
there is a desire in that other of that food, which Nature has made fit for
it, and yet Nature also teaches the other to preserve its life and Being: Here
is the seed of enmity in all this thus secretly sown in the nature of things,
and so continually springing up throughout the whole Creation. There is an
Enmity between the Creatures themselves, one Creature is an enemy to another:
There is an Enmity between Man and them; Man is an enemy to them all: There is
an Enmity between Man and Man; one man is an enemy to another: Heaven and Hell,
Holiness and Sin, Christ and Belial, The Temple of God and Idols; Oh how high,
how sharp, how intense is the enmity here!

That which causes and continues this Enmity, is a Law of Commandments
consisting in Ordinances, which are appointed to all according to their make,
which are written in the nature of all, by the contrariety whereof they come to
fight and clash one with another. All things that are brought forth, are
brought forth under some Dispensation or other; and according to the
Dispensation, they are subjected to Ordinances of one kind or other, suitable
to the state wherein they are; which are written both in the state it self, and
in their own hearts, (though neither are very legible now, there being a vail
cast over both; yet if man could once attain to read here, he would find these
more certain and satisfactory books, then those he usually applies himself
unto.)

What makes the Day and Night so fly from one another, (darkness and light
cannot endure to be together) but the several Ordinances prescribed to each?
Before which time light could lie still in the darkness (for the light was
caused to shine out of darkness) and keep company with the darkness, as it
could not but do, before they were separated. But when God separated the light
from the darkness, and gave to each distinct natures, names and ordinances,
they are henceforth debarred from any meeting together, or communion with each
other.

That which differenceth the several sorts of men, is the light and the
darkness in them, and the Ordinances thereupon. Every Dispensation under Heaven
has its Light and its Darkness. There is a Day and a Night to man, in every
state, whereinto he is cast: And all under every Dispensation walk either in
the light or dark part of that Dispensation: And Ordinances are suited to every
Dispensation. There is the Law of Light, and the Law of Darkness; the Law of
the Night, and the Law of the Day: And these are made contrary one to another
hereby, so that they cannot meet together in love or peace, but in their
nearest conjunction they keep their distance. There is no possibility of
communion between Light and Darkness under any Dispensation. Indeed he that
rises out of a lower Dispensation into an higher, may comprehend both the
Light and the Darkness beneath himself, (as God comprehends both the Light and
the Darkness under all Dispensations, the Darkness and the Light every where
are both alike to him) but there is no possibility of doing this in the
Dispensation. So he that rises out of one Dispensation into another; as he
rises out of that enmity he was in before, so he rises into a new enmity: And
he that was a Lamb, a Dove, hunted, persecuted in a foregoing Dispensation, may
turn a Wolf, a Lion, a greedy, cruel persecuter, in an ensuing. He that was all
love, all sweetness, meekness, patience, in a former Dispensation, may be all
wrath, fury, malice, in the following Dispensation. It is now a quick time, and
little will men believe, what changes will be made in them, now passage through
Dispensations is become more swift.

That which caused, and so heightened the difference between the Jews and the
Gentiles, what was it but their Ordinances? which the more strict and observant
each were of, the greater was their enmity, and the fight the more sharp
between them. The Heathen cannot but look upon the Jews as disturbers of the
whole world, as persons who would engross both Holiness and Happiness, as a
people who had written among them, in their Rites and Sacrifices, their own
acceptance and salvation, and the rejection and condemnation of all others.
The Jews cannot but look upon the Gentiles, as wicked, unclean persons, as
persons serving Idols at present, and such as could not but, in the issue, meet
with vanity and a lie. The very Laws, which God gives the Jews, will not
suffer them to be, in any thing, like the Nations. The Laws that the Heathen
make, are likewise framed according to that root of Enmity, which was in them
against the Jews.

Now when Christ comes, he takes upon himself both these, and abolisheth them
both in his own flesh: He receives them into himself, gives them full scope
upon himself, that so he may terminate them in himself, and suffer them to pass
no further. He suffers no more the Ordinances of either to remain, but
throws down the Idolatry of the one, the Worship of the other, causes both
the Light and Darkness of each to pass away by a new Light and a new Darkness.
Into his flesh he receives these, and in his flesh he causes these to dye,
and sets up somewhat else, in and by his Spirit, which will never suffer
them to live more.

Now the end why Christ did this, why he did abolish these Ordinances, and
consequently that Enmity which flowed from them, was,

for to make in himself, of twain, one new man, The reason why he pulled down
this old Dispensation, was, to set up another. The reason why he pulled down
both these old houses, was, to make one new one of them both. He meant to cast
both these old vessels into one new one, and therefore destroys the old shape
in them both: To make of twain, one new man.

He had two things in his eye, two intents in his heart: To make these twain
one, to bring this vast diversity into unity; Nor did he like either of them so
well, as to change one into the shape of the other; therefore he casts them
both over again, that he may make them new as well as one.

And this fabric he works in himself. He takes the old building into
himself, the Laws and Ordinances into himself, and abolisheth them in himself:
He likewise frames the new building in himself, and brings it forth in himself.
All things, though they seem to us never so outward (and indeed are so) yet
they are also inward: They are within God, who is the Life and Substance of
all; and within Christ, who is his immediate Shadow and Image. God and Christ
frame every thing within themselves, and also form themselves within every
thing: And O how excellent a sight will it be, to see every thing giving up
Christ and God who are within them, and also taken into Christ, and into God;
when the weakness of the outward part shall be swallowed up in the perfection
of the inward part, and the perfection of the inward part shall break forth and
appear in the weakness of the outward part!

So making peace. This is the way to make peace indeed, to make things one.
Peace flows from Union: it is difference that is the root of Enmity. How can
things fall out with one another, that differ not from one another? No man
hates his own flesh: Man could not hate or afflict the flesh of any other, if
he did indeed see and feel it to be his own.

Yet Union will not make perfect peace in this old building: Man has the skill
and subtilty to hate and fight with that in another, which he loves and
cherishes in himself. Therefore Christ, that he may make sure work, makes a new
man of both; makes an union, not in the oldness of the letter of any old carnal
Commandment, but in the newness of the Spirit. Oh how complete is this union!
how sweet is the harmony that flows from it! There is as great an harmony
between them as can be in any man, for they are made one; yea far greater, for
they are made new, and there no ingredient in this new make, that may cause the
least dislike, dissent, or division; so making peace.

Verse 16. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross,
having slain the enmity in himself. He had a further end in it, in breaking
down the wall, in abolishing these Ordinances, which was, that he might
reconcile both unto God. They were not at so great an enmity one with another,
as they both were at with God. The Gentiles they were all worshippers of Idols,
but had nothing to do with the true God: And the Jews professed they could not
bear his presence, which they evidenced sufficiently all along, for they loved
at heart the Idols of the Gentiles, and were still running after them, but from
the waters of life, which flowed from the Sanctuary. And God could endure
neither of them, but still appeared with terror, as an affrighter and devourer
of them. Their Ordinances set God at a distance with them both, as well as
themselves at a distance one with another.

But now Christ brings them both into one, takes them both (with all their
differences) into his own body, destroys all their differences, offers up all
that God dislikes in them (in his own body) on the Cross, new-makes them in
himself, takes the enmity, in God toward them, and in them toward God, into
himself; slays in them all that God dislikes, and so changes and newmakes them,
that they can dislike nothing in God any more. O the sweet fruit of the Cross!
What pity it is Christ should not dye, who makes such an harmony between the
jarring Creatures, and so sweetly heals up the difference between God and the
Creatures, by his death!

Of True Faith, True Love, and True Resignation.
TO trust God with all one is, or hopes for for ever, this is True Faith. To
trust God with Body, Soul, Spirit; with his Promises, with his Covenant of
Grace, with his Christ, with any thing whereby I might secure my self from
being subject to his pleasure; This is Faith in good earnest, This is Faith
grounded upon true Knowledge: He knows God indeed, who dares thus trust him.
Let others trust God for Salvation, but my spirit can never rest, till it dares
trust God with Salvation.

To love God merely for what he is, this is true Love. To love God, not because
of any appearance of his to us, not for the need we have of him, the good he
does to us, or for that we hope for from him; but for his own Nature, for his
own Loveliness, This is true Love. To love him and his motions in tormenting
us, as well as in cheering and delighting us: To love him in making Sin to
estrange us from him, in making Hell to cast us into, as well as in making
Holiness or Heaven. This is a Love, which no Creature, no Christian, can attain
to, or comprehend; but he alone knows what it is, and whence it came, who is
possessed of it.

To resign up all to God; all outward things, all inward things; all Relations,
Ordinances, Gifts, Graces, Desires, Hopes, Heaven, Christ, every thing: To
having nothing left to Self, Nothing left of Self, but every thing gone. Let it
be so that I perish for ever, I had rather have it so, then have mine own will
fulfilled. I know mine own will so well, that I desire to have it crossed, even
in the things that nearest concern me. I would not be saved, as I have a mind
to be saved. I have such a taste of the Excellency of an hidden will, that I
would not have it crossed, no not in the things that tend to my greatest
prejudice. This may deserve the name of Resignation.

O what a stir there is with Christians to resign up a few Iusts to God, which
they know and sensibly feel that it is their happiness to part with, and yet how
far are they from attaining this too! But who durst resign up his righteousness
in Christ, and go and lie in the grave with the wicked? It is no very easy
task with Christians to give up themselves to God at present, for him to do
what he will with them, so he will bring them to heaven at last: But who durst
say unto God, Take me and throw me into Hell, and let me lie there till I fall
in love with it; till I come to know and feel thee there, and fall in love with
thee there, and become able to enjoy thee there.

Ah! Miserable is that man that is afraid of Hell, and is fain to court God to
free him from Hell, and to cross and deny himself for fear of being in danger
of Hell. That Life deserves not the name of Life, that can lose any of its
strength, vigor, pleasure, sweetness, enjoyment, in the midst of everlasting
burnings. If sin could defile God, where were his holiness? and if death could
entrench upon his Life any where, to damp or interrupt it, it would prove but a
weak, a perishing Life, obnoxious to intermixtures with Death.

Thou can trust God, O Christian, in this present appearance of his to thee
as a Savior of thee. Thou can love this sweetness, kindness, grace and
goodness of his to thee. Thou can give up thy self to him, to do what he will
with thee, so he will bring thee to this Salvation. This thou have attained to
in some measure with much difficulty and striving.

But can thou measure the ways, thoughts or various appearances of that God
whom thou thy self call infinite and immeasurable? Art thou sure he can
appear no otherwise then according to what thou expectest he will? Thou see
that the Jews were cozened (who were as confident, as thou can be, that it
should not be so;) is it impossible that thou should ever be deceived in what
thou further expectest, because thou have gone a step or two beyond them? Is
that which thou have attained, and hoped for, of such an enduring nature, that
it can never pass away? Cannot thy Christ dye, and go away, in that which thou
have known, enjoyed, or hoped for of him? Look into thy Religion, is it indeed
pure and undefiled? is it not self-ish at the very bottom? Is it from true and
original Light, that thou desire and seek for thine own Salvation, or from
a self-ish Principle? Is thy Faith, thy Love, thy Hope, thy Joy, any thing that
thou have, spiritual? are they not all self-ish? do they not all rise, or sink,
from self, and in reference to self?

O Christian, if thou have an ear to hear, hear. Assuredly there is no staying
here. This Heaven, This Hope, This Life, This Happiness, there is corruption,
there is vanity writ in the very root of it. If thou could see into it, thou
could not but see it to be of a perishing nature; and if thou had thy
Senses about thee, thou could not but feel it passing away: and if thou had
but the heart of a man, thou could not but desire and rejoice at its
dissolution.

A Word to Christians.
HArken, O Christians, such of you as have ears, for it nearly concerns you.

That excellency which ye set up, is indeed excellent. Gospel-faith,
Gospel-love, Gospel-obedience, patience, meekness, humility,
heavenly-mindedness, etc. are glorious in their kind, and far surpass any
legal qualifications or performances whatsoever. But withal consider this.

May not the glory of these fall before a greater glory? May not this
Dispensation pass away? and when it does pass away, is not all the glory and
excellency of it rouled up like a scrole, and cast aside with it? Every
Dispensation has but its season wherein the light of it is to shine, but
afterward it must be put out, and be buried in the dark. The Jews knew Christ
under the Law, and it was an excellent knowledge compared with any thing the
Heathen had; but what became of that knowledge? Christians have known Christ
under the Gospel, and this kind of knowledge did far excel that which was
imparted to the Jews; but what shall, nay what is become of this?

And when this is out of date, persons are to be valued no more by it; but the
highest in this Light, Worship, Faith, Love, Obedience, will be laid as even
with the meanest, as the highest and strictest Jews were (when their
Dispensation fell) with the lowest Gentiles.

Thou might easily see, by the nature and course of the Dispensation under
which thou have been, and because of which thou have lifted up thy self above
others, that it must fall, cannot but fall, has still been falling, (being not
of a make to endure;) Thou can save neither it, nor thy self, by all thy
struggling and contending. If thou be wise, cease doting on this which is
still sliding from thee, and look out after somewhat which will stick by thee,
when thou and this come to part, which will be sooner then thou art aware of.

This has been evidently written in the signs of the times, and in the
experience of many, but he that wants an eye cannot read, and he that thinks he
has an eye, cannot forbear mis-reading. Little did the old Israel think they
could have been so deceived about the coming of the Messiah: Little did they
think the Messiah could have laid their Laws and Ordinances so flat, at his
coming, as he did. It is impossible for that eye of wisdom to pierce into the
various ways and appearances of God, which he greatly delights to hide them
from. Nothing is darker then the foregoing Glory, when a new one succeeds. None
are further from espying God in a new discovery, then those that had the
clearest sight of him in the old. And there is ground in the nature of things
for it, for they are hardliest drawn off from the old, which they must
necessarily be, before they can be capable of entertaining the new. Look to thy
self in time, lest this strange Catastrophe overtake thee unawares, lest thou,
while thou art looking for most Happiness from God, for greatest neerness to
and intimacy with God, should meet with most misery, by being cast behind
his back, when others (whom thou much undervaluedst) are admitted into his
presence.

Of Prayer.
EVery Creature has some kind of sense of its state: It feels its weakness,
its wants, its misery. It has some sense of that Power from which it came, who
provideth for it, who is leading it some whither: And it cannot but cry and
complain to this Power, according to what it feels and desires. The young
Ravens cry to it for food: The whole Creation groaneth and pants to it, to be
delivered from its bondage.

Man, as he has a clearer light then these, so he has more clear addresses to
it.

There is a New-Man, a newborn Child, begotten by the spirit of life, in an
higher kind of life then this Creation knows: and this Child has a more
spiritual, a more distinct, a more illuminated breathing toward this Power;
which however it may for a season be interrupted, through the height of
distemper, yet there will be a natural returning to it, when the new nature
begins to strengthen again; and then it will last, till it has attained of
that Power, all that it is lead by him, to desire of him. Christ, in the time
of his agony, sent up strong cries and tears to him who was able to deliver
him: and as his anguish increased, so he prayed more earnestly.

By Prayer, I do not mean any bodily exercise of the outward man; but the going
forth of the spirit of life (in this state of weakness, whereunto it has
subjected it self) toward the Fountain of life, for fullness and satisfaction:
The natural tendency of the poor, rent, derived spirit, toward the Fountain of
spirits. And this may be very vigorous in us, when it is untaken notice of by
us. We can take notice of that, which we call the new Birth, and the motions of
it: But that is not the true Birth, which is or can be taken notice of by the
Child, which is always insensible when it is born, and of all its motions
while it is a babe. The Creatures, they cry to God, expressing their wants to
him, as they are lead and taught by their nature; but yet know not, either God,
or that they pray. This Child may be lead as strongly in his kind according
to his nature, and yet be as ignorant either what he is, or what he does, as
the other is.

Ah poor fleshly Creatures! How have we been buried in carnal Forms and
exercises, not knowing either God as a Spirit, or any spiritual motion toward
him! Indeed we have the outward part, an outward description of God as a
Spirit, and so of many other spiritual things, and a sense answerable
thereunto, but not the inward sight of them. Who knows either God, Christ,
Faith, Love, Hope, Prayer, or any thing else, spiritually? We see these things
with that eye which we call spiritual, but not with that eye which is truly
spiritual: and so we have such a sight, such a spiritual sight of these things,
as we call so; but not such a sight as is indeed so.

Of Sin: The Being or Existence of Sin: The blotting out of Sin; and the
difference between the Creatures blotting out of Sin, and Gods blotting out of
Sin.
SIn is the transgression of a Law; which of what kind and nature it is, of
that nature the sin is. As the Law is more gross and carnal, so is sin; as the
Law is more inward and spiritual, so is sin likewise. It is from the Law that
sin has its being and force, and according to the Law which gives it its
being, is its nature. It would be very offensive (to weak blind man) to draw
the pedigree of Sin from God, who is holy and pure, who perfectly hates sin,
and removes every thing from him that is tainted with it: yet for all that, God
will not lose his honor, in giving that nature to the Law, which gave to sin
its nature.

Now sin has the same reality in it, that the Law, which makes it, has; or
the Creature that commits it. Sin is not a nothing, but as fully real as
Holiness, and as truly real as the Creature it self. It has such a kind of
reality and substance as other shadows have; but truly substantial it is not,
nor cannot be. If the Creature it self be not substance, how can any thing else
be so that comes from it; that has what it has, in and throught it?

Sin has its part to act in every Dispensation, and it is still the black
engine of death, staining the beauty and glory that else would shine in every
Dispensation. But sin coming from the Creature by force of a created Law, is
neither Eternal in its rise, nor in its footing, and therefore cannot live to
Eternity, but as it had a Being in time, so it must end in time. How can the
spurious brat of the Creature come to attain Eternal Life? No, as it came in,
so it must go out, it came in with the Law, and it must go out with the Law;
and as Dispensations change, so the Law changes; and when all Dispensations
end, all Laws end. There is a time to draw out the line of Sin with a pencil
prepared for it, and a time also to blot it out again.

The blotting out of Sin is the taking away the Being of it, the striking it
off from the score; the destroying of it, that it is no more; no more what it
was, no more what it stood for, but is returned into the womb from whence it
came, and is only what it was there, before it came forth. It is sometimes
expressed under this phrase of drowning in the bottom of the Sea; Sin shall be
drowned in the great Sea, so as no eye shall be able to discern it, so as no
Creature shall be able to find it out. Iniquity may be sought for, but can no
more be found, after it is perfectly bloted out.

There is a double true blotting out of Sin, which is effected, either by
satisfying the Law, or by breaking down the Law and making it void. And this
course God takes when he blots out sin: He satisfies the Law for the time
past, and breaks it down for the time to come, whereby all old debts are
fairly absolved, and no new ones can possibly be incurred; Whereas the Creature
does it by changing its own imagination, which is of no true force and
efficacy, but only pleasing to the humor of the Creature.

It is a great vanity (and that which now much abounds,) The Creature thinks,
that if it imagine sin to be no longer, that then it is no longer: but it shall
at length find, though sin be blotted out of its mind, to its view, yet it is
not blotted out of Gods mind. Though they think him altogether such an one as
themselves; yet he will reprove them, and set their sins in order before their
eyes.

Yet he has a season himself also to blot out iniquity, and to remember sin no
more. And he will effect his counsel when he sets about it, though man, in
setting about it aforehand, fails, and makes himself a greater fool then he did
in sinning. Man thinks he can do it, and sets himself very confidently about
it, and makes no question but to accomplish it; He changes his notion, and now
all is changed, sin is gone, he does, he can sin no more; when, alas poor
Soul, sin and all the effects of sin (which would also be gone, if sin were
gone) excepting such as flow from man's imagination concerning sin, stick close
to him.

There are multitudes of things (as we call them) which have only a Being in
the imagination of the Creature, and many sins there are of that kind: Now all
such things fall wholly, when they are rased out of the imagination of the
Creature, which gave them their Being.

But besides these, there are things of another nature, and sins of another
nature, which depend not upon the Creatures imagining of them so to be, but
upon their own frame and constitution: And sins of this nature have as great a
reality (for nature, though not in degree) as the Law which makes them so, and
as the creaturely state it self (they being all of the same stamp and kind)
which abide the same that they are made, according to the will of him who made
them, being no whit changed in their frame and posture, how vast soever the
changes in the apprehension of the Creature be concerning them.

This World has a real existence in its kind (though indeed, in respect of
inward Truth, it is not, it has no existence:) And there is a general Law of
the whole Creation, and a particular Law of every Creature in its peculiar
state; And there are fulfillings, and breakings of these Laws: All which are so
in themselves from their own nature (and will one day be judged so) and do not
vary according to the imagination of the Creature, but stand firm according to
the rule whereunto they are set, and whereby they are made. And the Creature is
not bound or set free, by its own imagination, under any Law; but must answer
for every thing it acts in that state wherein it is, according to that Law
which is prescribed to it, the force whereof it must feel and be subject unto,
what ever it conceives concerning its present state, or freedom in it.

So long as Dispensations last, Sin lasts. So far as the Creature falls short
of answering that Dispensation, whereunder it is set, so far it sins: which sin
is not measured by what the Creature imagines concerning it, but by the
Dispensation it self. An high and deep inspection, into the inward and
spiritual state of things, may elevate the mind of the Creature, but yet it
cannot change the state of the Creature, or lift it out of that Dispensation,
wherein it is, for its season, fixed.

In this outward world, and outward state of things, The Day and the Night,
Summer and Winter, and all things else in it, have their appointed times and
seasons; and are what they are appointed and made to be, what ever any one
thinks of them. If man imagine Summer to be Winter, Winter Summer, Day to be
Night, Night to be Day, or that both are one, or that there is neither one nor
the other; all this makes no alteration in the things themselves, but the
natural man, with the eye of Nature, can discern the person, who thus dreameth,
to be defective and distempered in his naturals. And in the inward state,
things remain the same also: Sin is the same, Christ the same, Heaven, Hell;
Happiness, Misery; God, Devil; all the same they were, and vary not as we vary,
thinking them one while to be thus, and another while thus. The Spiritual Man
may have his sick fits, yea his fits of Phrenzy, wherein he may imagine very
strongly and confidently, yet this nothing alters the state of things, but they
remain the same still both in themselves, and in their reference to him and
others. He is never the further from sinning, by losing his fight and knowledge
of sin. Sin is of a deeper dye, then to be blotted out by notions of the brain.
It was no mean piece of art to bring in sin (the Creature could never have done
it of it self) and it requires the same skill to blot it out again, which
nothing but the blood of a living Christ has the least efficacy to do; and
that cannot but do it, for it contains in it both the things above mentioned,
viz. both satisfaction to the Law, and destruction of the Law.

Yet, for all this, I must confess I cannot but think, that Eternal Life, Love,
Power, and Wisdom (from whom all came, to whom all belongs, and in and for whom
all is, what it is) may take poffession of whom it pleases, either of a
particular person, or one sort of persons, and act them how it pleases, even
contrary to all the Laws and Dipensations that himself has set up, and this to
be neither evil in him, nor in them. He who made the Law, may by a power above
the Law act, in any he has made, contrary to the Law, when he pleases. The
Spirit of the Lord is not bound by those Laws, which he made to bind us with:
Nor are we bound, when he, by his almighty power and presence, loses us.

Of The Mystery of GOD.
SInce this great Fabric of Heaven and Earth has been made to appear, God
has ever been hiding himself: hiding himself in his Life, Being, Motions,
Operations, so that no eye can see him, know what he does, or what he means,
but that eye which is with him, where he is. There is no life but his, there is
no power but his, there is no motion but his (as all came from him, so all is
and must be his own for ever) and yet He, his Life, his Motions are so covered
and kept so close within the vail, that it is impossible in any degree to
discern them. We see the life of the Creature, the motions of the Creature, the
intentions of the Creature, the love or hatred of the Creature; and this we may
see, for it is presented to our view: But that which is beneath these, that
which is within these, with whom or before whom these are not, we cannot
possibly see, until the scean be turned, and our eye changed.

Heaven and Earth, at their first coming forth, were but a vail, behind which
God intended to hide himself, and did hide himself even from Adam, in his
highest and purest state. God indeed showed himself to Adam, as he appeared in
the Creature, as he shined through the vail; but hid himself as he was in
himself: so that Adam could in no wise reach to the true Vision, but only to
such an appearance as God pleased to dart forth of himself through the vail.

When this state was broken, the vail was made thicker and the eye of flesh
grosser; so that now God has more advantage to hide himself more deeply. The
eye being so unapt to see, though there were no covering, and the covering
being so condensated, that it were able to resist the nimbleness of almost any
piercing eye; God may lie still and act securely what he pleases, without the
least jealousy of having his mystery discerned, or so much as suspected by
flesh.

After the breaking of this estate, there are assays to restore it. The whole
Creature is groaning, and panting, and striving after somewhat it has lost.
There is a Light let out, both to discover the loss, and to guide to the
recovery. There are several Dispensations, both to the mass in general, and to
some peculiar sorts picked out of it.

Now in all these motions, in every Creature, under every Dispensation, in all
I say, whether direct motions or oblique motions, is God hidden, is the mystery
of God hidden. God lies hid underneath in his secret shop: it is his Head
contrives all, it is his Hand acts all. There is nothing, either in Heaven or
Earth, acts of it self; but as he moves, so it is moved by him.

Now when God has done his whole work, when he has accomplished all that is
in his heart to do, when he has acted all that he has to act under board
within the vail; Then he will rent the vail from himself, and rent the vail
from the eye of the Creature, and present his own workmanship to his own eye in
the Creature. Then ye shall see what Dispensations meant, what all his motions,
(under every Dispensation) both on the right hand and on the left hand, meant:
Then ye shall acknowledge, that not one motion that ever has been throughout
the whole Creation, could have been spared in this workmanship, no not the most
deformed; but as it came equally from him with the most beautiful, so has it
its proper place and luster in this his intricate piece of work.

But before this, the Creature must pass through all Dispensations, and come to
judgment; every Creature according to the Dispensation it has been under.

And O how strict and exact will the Judgment be! According as it is found
guilty must it be dealt with, and have death proportionable to its desert
measured out unto it; Eternal death, it shall dye for ever and never live more,
The smoke of its torment shall ascend for ever, and never be forgotten more.
But the life which was in it, which was underneath it, shall not dye, but break
forth and enjoy it self, and rejoice in the destruction of its enemy. And
though this death be not Eternal as man has imagined it (for Eternity
consists not in duration of time, but has a nature proper to it, whereby it
is known and distinguished: Eternal life lives its own life, its own eternal
life, every moment,) yet it is truly Eternal, and the pain of it unutterable
and lasting. This fire shall burn upon the flesh, till it has quite consumed
it; The worm shall never dye nor leave gnawing, while there is any thing of
flesh to be eaten up; The prison doors shall not be opened, until the utmost
farthing be paid.

And then at last, when all is done, when it is wholly finished, then the
meaning of all these things, the mystery of God, God in the mystery, the
mystery in God, shall be opened: And then, Eternal Joy, Everlasting Life shall
break forth. Flesh shall grieve no more, feel no more, complain no more, when
the fire has spent its whole force upon it: The Spirit shall suffer no more in
flesh or because of flesh, when flesh is made a meet companion for it. When
every thing in God appears, when every thing appears as it is in God, as it
came forth from God, as it was managed by God, in that excellency, perfection,
universal love and loveliness, that greater cannot be: When every Creature
shall see it was ever tendered, even when it seemed most neglected; it was
improved to the best advantage, when it seemed most cast off; it could never
have wished so well for it self, as it is provided for; its Death, Life,
Misery, Happiness, were all acted under a vail, and were none of them what it
took them to be, but were all of them what it was best for it they should be:

Then shall Glory shine round abound him, who is what none else is, who works
as none else can.

A PARABLE Translated out of JEREM. 48. 11, 12, 13.
Moab has been at ease from his youth, and he has settled on his lees, and
has not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither has he gone into
captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed.

Therefore behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will send unto him
wanderers, that shall cause him to wander, and shall empty his vessels, and
break their bottels.

And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of
Bethel their confidence.


THe Moabites were bastard- Israelites: Not the children of Abraham, but the
children of Lot; nor the legitimate children of Lot neither. They were of kin
to Israel, of the blood of Israel, but not in a direct, but in a collateral
line.

Now God, who orders all things toward all persons, acts very differently
toward the Israelites and these. He is very sharp and severe toward his own
people, but very gentle toward these. Israel was afflicted from his youth up,
he is ever and anon scourging Israel: Moab has been at ease from his youth;
Moab meets with nothing to dissettle him, nothing to trouble him, nothing to
disquiet him, but enjoys his portion, his habitation from his very youth:
enjoys his God, his worship, has plenty, prosperity, all goes well with Moab.
Famine often befalls Israel, that they are fain to run for relief into the land
of Moab: but Moab meets with no such misery or distress, Moab has been at ease
from his youth.

Israel has been tossed and tumbled up and down, emptied from vessel to
vessel, carried up and down into several captivities one after another, never
suffered to rest in his own Land: But it has not been so with Moab, Moab has
not been thus emptied, Moab has not thus gone into captivity.

This is the different Dispensation of God toward Israel, and toward Moab.

Now there follows a different effect. Moab setles upon his lees, enjoys,
possesses his rest, and that strength which flows from rest, has that in his
state which keeps it fresh, quick, living, which preserves his excellency, as
the lees do the wine.

Therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed. There are
two excellent properties in wine, The taste and the scent, both which are
preserved by the vessel wherein it is kept. Let a Nation settle in peace, and
it will gather and keep its sweetness, its freshness, its beauty, its glory:
but toss and tumble it, remove it out of one place into another, it quickly
loses all. Empty wine out of one vessel into another; the taste, the scent
quickly changes.

And this is the common lot of the people of God, his dearest his strictest
ones; by his continual tossing and tumbling of them, by his continued, sharp,
vehement exercises upon their spirits, they come to lose their taste; their
taste changes, their scent changes; that sweetness, that freshness, that vigor
which was once in them, quickly wastes and passes away, after they have been
a while emptied from vessel to vessel.

O what a sweet taste is there in a true Israelite, a lively Israelite! How
lovely is the Israel of God when it is new-made, when it comes newly out of the
fingers of God! Moab is not worthy to be compared to him, for taste, for scent.
But how suddenly is this changed, by Gods emptying him from vessel to vessel?

But now it is otherwise with Moab, with the more bastardly fort: Their
excellency, their life, their beauty, their religion, their loveliness remains
still the same. They are not thus emptied from vessel to vessel, and therefore
they keep that taste and scent they had.

But shall it always be thus? No, there shall be a time for Moab to be met with
too. Though Judgment must begin at the house of God, yet it will not end there,
but after he has done with Israel, he will begin with Moab; after he has done
emptying Israel, he will empty Moab, and then he shall lose his taste and scent
also. And then he shall find, that it was not for his excellency beyond
Israel, that he escaped all this while: His Religion, his God, his Worship, was
not of so much value beyond Isreal's, because he thrived in it, and kept up the
life and vigor of it, when Isreal's was falling, and a great degree fallen: But
he shall be ashamed of that God that he framed to himself, as well as Israel
was of that God they framed to themselves.

That which might carry the bell for excellency, O Christians, is fallen, is
smitten to death. That Knowledge of God, that Life, that Zeal, that Holiness,
which did sparkle with luster and heavenly beauty, has not been spared: But
that which is of a more degenerate birth, does yet live; But shall it live? Can
God be just in making Israel ashamed of Bethel, and suffer Moab to go on
prosperously in worshipping Chemosh? No certainly, it cannot be thus; but Moab
shall be made ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel
their confidence.

A Word to the Mad Folks.
YE have been very eminent (many of you) formerly in your generations, the
springing up and sprouting forth of your Religion, strictness of conversation,
sweetness of deportment, has yielded an wholesome savor to all with whom ye
have conversed. Ye have sweetly enjoyed God (though ye have now forgot it) not
only at a distance in longing desires, but nearer at hand, even in close
embraces: Gifts, Graces, Ordinances, Duties, spiritual exercises of all kinds
ye have been well acquainted with* and have known how to suck life through
them, and (if ye have been skilful indeed) how to let them fall, and fasten
upon the life it self

But now ye are dead to all this. All this is gone and passed away: ye have
been slain to this by him who was wont to convey life to you through it: He
that built you, has made you desolate. And as your frame and fabric, was more
beautiful and glorious, then was elsewhere to be found: So proportionable have
been your ruin and desolations from the Lord, who has dealt so sharply with
none, as with you: It has not been done to any under Heaven, so as has been
done to Jerusalem. And it is not fit a book of Lamentations should be written
for you, because nothing that can be said is deep enough to express your
misery. Ye are so slain to your Religion, that the very sweetness, life, vigor,
power, purity of it stinks in your nostrils. That which, to others, carries the
greatest excellency, carries to you the greatest abomination.

Thus far are ye dead indeed: And because ye have felt so great a power of
death seizing upon you, ye think ye have felt all the pangs of it, and have
nothing now to look for but the breakings forth of life, and are ready
beforehand to name every thing so that passes through you. The Creature is
passed away, and whatsoever now appears in you or to you, is God. Sin is now
gone, ye are not under any Law, and therefore cannot sin. The Creature is
swallowed up, there is nothing left but the Lord in Being, the Lord in motion
and operation, in whom can be no evil, from whom can come no evil. All things,
all actions are alike, there is no difference; God is all and in all, who is
every way full, every way like himself, in all he is, in all he does.

How now Sirs? where are ye? Are ye dead? Are these the postures of death? is
there any such knowledge in the grave? Has the dead man any such reasonings,
such light, such principles in him? This is a Life of an higher Nature, then
that which ye had before. Your bottles are not empty, but filled with new, with
fresh wine. Ye dissemble, if ye say ye are dead, who thus speak: ye can praise
your own notions, your own principles, and condemn all others: ye have a new
desire, a new hope, a new interest, a new strain of life in every kind! Are ye
dead Sirs? Does not the feign Life live subtly in you, as did before, under a
strange disguise? O that ye were indeed dead! O that ye were as sober and
silent as those that are in the grave! If ye be dead, make it appear; take your
rest in the grave, stir not thence, till life quickens you. Have no party, no
interest, no principle, no desire, no end: but lie like the clay before the
Potter, free to be molded any way. But ye are very skilful; ye can tell what ye
shall never be more, and what ye must be next, what in the issue, and the way
ye must pass to it: O depth, O height of wisdom! here is wisdom in its very
life and strength. How strangely do your hearts deceive you, to make you think,
ye are dead!

I am sure, ye had need have life, to carry you through what ye undertake: for
ye set about two of the greatest works, that ever were undertaken, viz. to
pluck down, and to plant; to destroy and to build; to throw down the greatest
glory of God that ever yet was discovered, and to set up a greater. Christ, the
Spirit of Christ, the Life of Christ, the Salvation by Christ, are all nothing
before you; these ye lay flat without any scruple: All manner of sin,
wickedness, filthiness, abomination, these ye set up. Ye magnify what ever God
expresses himself to loath; and ye loath what ever God sets a price upon.

But harken, O mad Souls! ye have understanding to speak, to reason; make use
of a little to hear.

Are ye sure that Sin shall be thus lovely? Nay are ye sure that it is so
lovely at present, that ye make no bones of it in any kind? Is not the whole
Creation under some Law, which judges sin in what kind soever it be, and has
proportioned smart unto it? May not ye your selves sin, and be met with for
sin, though ye can acknowledge neither? That ye will live before your time, is
not this your sin? and that ye will be holding out Eternal Life before ye have
received it, and d^clare how things are in the bosom of Eternity, before ye
know how they are in any creaturely Dispensation? And may ye not be met with
for this? May ye not be given over (for a season) to such a bastardly life as
is far worse then death; as falls short of your former life, even the life of
your Religion, which ye now so much despise, having no true excellency in it,
but misery and vanity written so plainly in the face of it, that the very eye
of the Creature may read it?

And are ye sure that Christ the Life of Christ, Salvation by Christ, are
passed away? If not, why do ye hold it forth? if ye be, why do ye say ye are
dead? Can ye consider what is now to be spoken?

Ye are both dead, and alive: Dead to Principles, and alive to Principles: dead
to one poor weak shallow state, and alive to another inferior to it. Ye are far
yet from tasting of Eternal Death, and farther from tasting of Eternal Life. Ye
have been too hasty to conceive and bring forth, and therefore the birth must
miscarry, and the womb be destroy^d. What ye have said must fall, as well as
what others have said before you. Your testimony, either for or against things,
deserves not to be received. Indeed, that which Eternal Wisdom has written
upon your state and condition, deserves to be diligently read, and woe be to him
who mis-reads it, or neglects to read it: But the words that ye speak in this
state and in this condition, are of very little value, further then they make
the state it self more clear and evident.

Come Sirs, Let us be ^^ill. We are broken, we are distressed, our life is
slain, our eyes are put out, we cannot see; let us not pretend to it. Let us
not say what shall be, nay not so much as what is: Let us not say what shall
not be, nay not so much as what is not. Let us not be too forward to throw away
Christ, and Salvation by Christ, we may come, for ought we know, to stand in
need of them. Let not us be imagining a new Christ, while we are blaming others
for imagining an old. Let not us come forth with a new imagination of God to be
all things, and lay this down as a Principle, and thereupon work it out in our
Reason, that all things must be alike, all good, etc. but stay till we see, and
know what he is in his own light, and with his own eye: And then when any of
these things appear to us certainly, infallibly, let us without fear hold them
forth, so far as that light, that life, that power guides us. Till then, for
mine own part, I am resolved to be very still and silent, and not to speak a
word concerning these things, further then mine own spirit within presses me:
And if I be made a fool or mad (for sure I am, I may be made any thing) so long
as I have so much ingenuity left in me, I will confess my self so to be, and
(if it be I that speak) that I speak after that rate, and not wish any to
regard any thing that comes from me, but to seek out a bottom on which they may
safely build. Yet as I cannot advise any, to receive any thing that passes
through me; so neither can I advise them to neglect and slight it: because I
know not what it is that speaks, nor what it is that is spoken, and therefore
must needs be ignorant how it is to be entertained; which I am not at all
solicitous about, but very indifferent in my spirit concerning.

A Letter.
Dear Heart,
I Have looked upon thee, as the Captain of that Generation, whom my Soul
loves, whom, of all persons, my spirit (through the strength of love) turns
most vehemently toward, and most vehemently from. Your life I love, though it
be deeply hid and covered; your covering I love likewise, because it is so fit
to hide that life, which must not yet be seen: But that the thick, black, dark
covering should exalt it self, as if it were the life, before it be swallowed
up in the life, is very nau^eous and dis^el^shing to me. Your brave resolute
spirit, that dares trample upon Heaven and Earth, laying your levelling line to
all things, is of much value and excellency with me; yet your creaturely coming
forth in weakness and darkness, your managing this from Principles of Reason
and creaturely understanding, which has deceived all men that have leaned upon
it, and cannot but deceive at last, though it may give very firm ^ooting to
some: in respect of others at present, This my Throat cannot swallow, nor my
Stomach digest. And let me a little open my heart to you, and if in true light
you find it dark, send it back to me further opened by that light.

Ye hold out certain Notions and Principles, such as these, That God is all,
that all things are good, that all things are alike, etc.

Understand ye what ye say? Speak ye these things wildly, or comprehensively?
Can ye show the several lines and gradations of good and evil, how far they go,
on whom they take place, in what respect, and how long, and where, and when,
and how, they come to be swallowed up? Otherwise, though ye may speak a truth;
yet from you and to you it is but a lie. In former days, and under former
Dispensations, ye could speak truth, yet not understanding it, ye found it a
lie to you: Ye are gone but one step further in that which must pass away as
vanity, unless your feet be indeed fixed upon the only bottom, not as it
appears, but as it is. Tell me, See ye these things in Original Light? Not in
that light, which streamed forth in you, or to you; but in that light which
dwells in the Fountain? All the streamings forth of light have colors, which
cannot but deceive every eye, which saw them not before they were colored, and
how they were colored, and is not yet able to pierce into them, or through
them, while they are colored. Things so refracted, as appearing all to be good
and in God, what excellency is there in this, what certainty is there in this?
Indeed in some respect it may excel other appearances, but in other respects it
must fall beneath them. To look upon my self as God by virtue of a Notion (how
ever conveyed or received) and find my self but a Creature in life, in motion,
in power, is very irksom to a Noble Spirit, which loves not to make a sound
above what it is or feels. This I have felt, Power enough to batter to confound
me in every thing; but no power to build any thing, or so much as to fix me in
a state of confusion. But ye are differently acted: ye know, ye understand
things: ye have Principles to bottom upon: ye have received the light, and
life, with certainty and satisfaction in that light. Well let it prove so; but
my spirit is ready to say it cannot prove so, but that all that ye have
received (as yet ye have received) must pass away and prove a lie: and that ye
will be as sick of saying. God is all, all is good, all is alike, etc. as ever
ye have been of any of your former Notions.

Shall I tell you what my spirit in the dark says concerning these things? It
speaks thus:

That it will be so one day, as ye say; God will be all, all good, all alike,
yet not so as you or I speak, or can understand it: and therefore though we
knew these things, yet had we not whereof to boast, because our knowledge in
this kind will vanish and deceive us, as well as the knowledge of others in
other kinds has, and must deceive them.

My Spirit says yet further:

That it is so at present, to him who does not vary, and to whom nothing else
can vary; and also to those who are one with him, and perfectly live in him.
But, That it cannot be so to the Creature in its creaturely state, while it
remains under any Dispensation, or has any Dispensation to pass through. It is
not the changing of the Imagination of the Creature, that makes any real
change in things beheld by the Creature, or in the state of the Creature it
self. And the present frame of these earthly moldering Tabernacles seems to
me suited only to different Administrations, but quite void of any capacity of
entertaining and enjoying absolute perfection, though perfection cannot be
hindered by them, from enjoying it self in them.

SILENCE.
THere is a time to speak, and a time to be silent. When the Light of the Day
discovers things as they are, it is then a time to utter and declare what
they are: When darkness and confusion covers them, it is not proper for the
Tongue to be uttering, what the Eye cannot see. Nothing is more beseeming,
though nothing more difficult to the fool, then silence. The wise man can hold
his tongue when he should not; but the fool must be babbling, though he himself
cannot but confess, he has nothing to say.

O God, what a strange kind of Night is this, which affords no rest, which
admits of no stilness! What a noise the empty Creature makes, talking as if it
were filled with all the fullness of God, when as yet it is far from being
emptied of it self! Where is the tongue of the learned, to speak a skilful
word, a true word, a word in season! Vain Man may easily trample upon Christ
and the Apostles, and dash their glory out of countenance, as weak and fading;
but who can bold forth a glory beyond them? nay, who can yet show a glory equal
with them? who can speak, or act like them?

We have Prophets who see great strange visions, wonderful visions and
revelations, beyond all that yet has been. We have spiritual men who see into
the mysteries, into the depths of God, who can fathom every thing, and laugh
all off from the stage that suiteth not with their measure. Ah wise flesh,
whither will thou go? or whither art thou leading? where will thou stop? when
will thou crouch, and take up that sentence of condemnation which thou have
laid upon others, which does as properly appertain to thee, as unto any others?

No flesh shall glory or be justified in his presence, who is now breaking
forth. The Prophet is already a fool, The spiritual man is already mad. Into
the fool wisdom cannot enter, ( bray him never so much in the mortar, yet his
folly will not depart from him:) Nor is the mad man capable of a right, sober,
true understanding of things: Nor is it possible for either to be silent, until
they be cast as powerfully into it, as they were into this prophetical folly
and spiritual madness; and then they shall be as unable to speak, as now they
are to forbear speaking. When their brains are weary of imagining, their
tongues of expressing, and their hearts speak plainly, that all is vanity; that
which springs up from within, as well as that which is received in from
without; both head, heart and tongue will begin to fail, and at last faint, and
cease from these kind of motions: And then it will be time for him, who truly
understands things, to speak, when every mouth else is stopped.

A Check to the Judger of his Brethren.
FROM 1 COR. 4. Verse. 3. But with me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you, or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self.
HOw prone is Man to be judging! Man has an eye and light, in his Day; and he
cannot forbear passing his judgment either upon things or persons. The Natural
man will be judging natural things; and the Spiritual man will be judging
spiritual things. Men will be judging men, and Christians will be judging
Christians, yea both will be judging both. And as men grow in light and
experience, so much the more confident are they in their judgment: And it is so
with Christians too; a Church, a gifted Church will not spare passing their
sentence on the very prime of the Apostles.

In this place three things are held out.

1. The nature of this judgment. It Is but man's, it is but in man's day, in man's
light; It Is a judgment passed by man. Mark it well; The judgment of the
Churches in the Apostles times, when the Spirit was poured out so abundantly,
yet it was but man's judgment. That was not the Day of God, it was but the Day
of Man. There was not so much light even then broke out from God, as to make
the day of God appear in man.

2. The invalidity or worthlessness of this judgment in Paul's account. With me
it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment.
Man cannot be more forward to judge me, then I am to slight him in that action.
Alas, what is man! what value is he of! wherein is he to be accounted of! what
is the judgment worth that he passes upon things? Paul, though he had not seen
the perfect light of God, yet he had seen enough to discover to him the
shallowness of the light of man. The time is not yet come to judge, nor the
light whereby the true state of things is to be discerned, and therefore a
right judgment of things cannot be produced: And though man will be so forward
as to judge aforehand by way of anticipation, yet it will stand for nothing
then, nor is it of any true value now. It is a very small thing with me, a
thing I make as light of as may be. Though ye are a Church of Christ, though ye
have the gifts of the Spirit; yet if ye will set about judging once, I do not
regard you one rush; it has no manner of impression upon my spirit as a matter
of any seriousness, as a matter worth regard: with me it is a very small thing
that I should be judged of you.

Or of man's judgment. I do not only speak of you, but any else, any other
Church: I see how blind and ignorant the best of men are, and how unfit for
any such undertaking, and can say to the best of ye all, who art thou that
judge another man's servant? to his own master he stands or falls. I can
except against the person who judges, be he what he will: who art thou? Pray
how come thou to be so exalted, as to come to judge another? art thou his
Lord? art thou Master; it belongs to the Lord to be Judge: thou have no more
right to judge thy fellow servants, then he has to judge thee.

Besides, it is the day of man, and so but the light of man. The Lord has kept
his own light for his own day, and so thou can not discern the true nature
and state of things, what they are in themselves, what force there was from
without; Thou can not see how they lie in the heart, nor how they come forth
from the heart: all which must be thoroughly seen, and duly weighed, before
righteous judgment can be passed. Therefore the Lord knowing how unfit man is
for this work, has forbid him it, has bound him up very close, left him to
judge nothing before the time, till the Lord bring forth the hidden things of
the heart, which is as necessary to judgment as any thing else. And man might
easily discern, how unfit he is to judge, in this respect: for there is hardly
any sort of persons judged by others, but this is their refuge, they run
presently for shelter to the integrity of their own hearts; and though at some
times and in some cases it be very improbable, yet it is very hard fairly to
overthrow them. Were it not therefore better to stay till the appointed time,
when all things shall be made clear, then to be passing an uncertain, and
consequently an unrighteous judgment, and thereby to expose thy self to
judgment? Wherein if thou should come off for judging aright, yet thou will
not come off in this respect, for judging before the time: neither can thou be
justified in thy judging, though thou should judge aright, because thou did
it but by ghess, and not in the clear and universal light of the day.

3. The Apostles modesty upon the knowledge and sense of this; yea I judge not
mine own self-

A Man has great advantage of judging himself. There is None can look into a
man's heart so as himself may. The chief consideration in every action is the
reference it has to the heart. A man's heart may justify him wherein all
others condemn him, and a man's heart may condemn him wherein all others
justify him. And upon this ground a man may more safely judge himself, then he
can judge any else, because he may observe the passages of things from his
heart, and the influence they have upon his heart better then others can, or
then he can observe in others.

The Apostle had greater advantage of judging himself then most men. He had
that light which gave him a true insight into things, and a truer insight into
his own heart, then others could attain to.

Yet says the Apostle, I judge not mine own self: I see clearly that there is a
greater a more searching light to judge me, then as yet I have received, and how
things will appear by that, I know not. And therefore I value not mine own
justification of my self in any thing. If man condemn me, I regard not that
condemnation; and if mine own heart clear me, I set no great esteem on that
neither. There is another judgment which I must stand or fall by, as like wise
every motion within me, and every action that comes from me: But what others
think, or what I my self think in the mean time concerning these things, is not
much material.

O how sober does true light, spiritual light, powerful light, make the person
in whom it is* He can enjoy it, and yet not be lifted up by it. He can use it,
and go beyond any; in the use of it, to whom it is not communicated in the same
degree, and yet not stretch it beyond its line. He can judge beyond others; more
clearly, more truly; more certainly; and yet, in his own spirit, lay his own
judgment lower and flatter then others can theirs, who judge weakly, foolishly,
falsely.

But who writes after this copy? Man, nowadays, is as short of this sobriety,
as he is of this light. Where is the man that judges not himself, that judges
not others; that justifies not himself, that condemns not others? Look upon
the Natural man, upon the Religious man, upon the inward and spiritual man:
They are all able to judge, all able to justify, all able to condemn.

The Natural man, he has his Principles of Reason, whereby he judges. So far
as he himself or others walk up to them, he justifies himself and others; so
far as they differ or fall short; he condemns them. Yea he is so bold that he
will lay this very line to Religion and religious persons, and condemn it,
further then it suits with the rule of his reason. But how little does he
consider the weakness, the shallowness, the uncertainty of these principles?
and therefore is not drawn to set so low a rate upon this his judgment, as he
ought to do.

The Religious man, he has his light to judge by too. The Turks* their Alcoran:
The Papists, their Church; or at best the Scriptures interpreted by men of
their own Principles: We, the Scriptures interpreted by men of our Principles.
(Indeed we go beyond them, in taking a further latitude to our selves then they
allow of; yet withal we cannot but see the inconveniency of that latitude, but
know not where to pitch upon an infallible remedy, for want whereof we are
often endevoring to set up one much like theirs. Does not every one almost see
a necessity of deciding things in difference, and thereupon desire that the
decision might be put to that sort of persons whom they most affect, and judge
most able? And what is this but an hood winking our selves for quietness sake,
a running in a circle into the same foundation of error and deceit, for which
we blame the Papists?) Now we all judge one another very confidently. The Turks
judge the Papists, and us: The Papists judge the Turks, and us: We judge both
Turks and Papists. So among our selves, There are several sorts and Sects,
different Opinions about several things; Differences in points of Government
and Worship, Differences in matters of Faith, in matters of practice, in
interpretations of Scripture in reference to all these. What do we all do? why,
every man thinks and judges himself in the right, condemns all others,
making no bones of laying blame, of laying accusations of error and disturbance
upon them.

The inward or spiritual man, he will be judging too. All things without, he
casts by without any scruple; there is nothing can stand before him, but the
light within: And all things within or from within, that vary from his track,
that differ from his light, from his sense, from his experience, must come
under his lash. And this is a great exception which has been very strong in my
spirit against all that has appeared in this kind; that they break forth with
a great vehemence of unbounded judging; They come forth with a fleshly
interest, and for that they fight very vigorously with all that stands in their
way.

Now what shall become of thee, O Man! Is it not high time for thee to be taken
down? Thou, who have ever been judging, do thou think thou shall never come
to judgment? Thou, who have still been judging the things of God in thy day, by
thy light, without the light of God, must be judged for this in the day of the
Lord, and by the light of the Lord. Thou now justifiest thy self, that thou
keep within thy bounds, thou judge no further then thou have ground and
warrant to do: We shall see what will become of this plea then.

Judge not, says Christ. And he himself forbear judging ( I judge no man, Joh.
8. 15.) though if he had judged, his judgment had been true, Verse. 16. Yet
being not his time to judge, though he was to be Judge, he could forbear his
sentence, until the proper season of it.

Judge nothing before the time, says Paul, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the heart. And what he counsels others, he practiced himself:
for notwitstanding the great advantage he had both of light and experience, yet
he would not venture to judge so much as himself, either positively to condemn
or justify himself. If others accuse him, he can wipe off their accusation,
and justify himself in respect of any thing they can lay to his charge: But
yet he does this as a fool, he cannot justify himself understandingly, but
even in this very thing may he be foiled, when he comes to a stricter trial and
judgment. And the Apostle, knowing this, though he could tell how to clear
himself from any blame men might fasten upon him, yet he did not value it at
all, but suspended even his judgment concerning himself, until the time of
trial.

How will thou hold up thy head, O thou self-justifier (who art confident thou
shall stand in judgment, and art sure that in such and such particulars thou
shall not be cast) and severe condemner of thy brethren! If thou knew but
the pure and searching nature of that light, whereby thou shall be judged, thou
would be of another mind then thou art* and the less thou know^st it, the
more strange will it be to thee when it comes, and thy judgment the more
unexpectedly dreadful.

The true ground of Mourning, with an invitation to it.
LUKE 5. 34, 35. And He said unto them, Can ye make the Children of the
Bridechamber fast while the Bridegroom is with them?

But the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and
then shall they fast in those days.


THere are two great exceptions against Christ, his Ministry, and Followers, a
little before these words.

1. His keeping company with the looser sort. Verse. 30. The Scribes and
Pharisees murmured against his Disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with
Publicans and sinners? They expected, that the Holy One (when he once came)
should have picked out the most holy ones to have conversed and delighted
himself with, and not have associated himself with the vile and profane sort.

2. Their distance from that strictness and exactness wherein others walked,
and wherein they expected him and his to exceed, and not to fall short. Verse.
33. Why do the Disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and likewise the
Disciples of the Pha^irisees, but thine eat and drink? Men that are addicted to
a kind of devotion and strictness cannot relish any thing that comes out of
that way: Christ himself, his followers, his and their practices, cannot but be
judged by them, if they fall short herein.

Christ gives them an account of both these. Of the former, Verse. 31, 32. They
that are whole need not a Physician, etc. Where should a Physician be but with
his Patients, with those that are sick, with such as need and desire his skill.
Of the latter here, in these 34, and 35, Verses. Can ye make the Children of
the Bridechamber fast, while, etc. Why, says he, there is no possibility of it,
no suitableness of it to their present state: ye cannot make them fast; they
cannot fast, if they would. Can ye make the children of the Bride-chamber fast
while the Bridegroom is with them? etc.

The children of the Bride-chamber. In this great Bulk of the Earth, which has
been generally cast off since the Fall of Man, there has still been some
parcel which God has picked out, in a more especial manner to own as his, to
converse with, and to please himself in. Some he has still picked out for his
Children, for his Spouse, for his own Lot and Inheritance. To these he is the
Bridegroom, they his Bride; He their God, they his People; He the Father, they
his Children, etc. Thus he picked out Abraham and his Seed: then the whole
people of the Jews. Thus he picked out the twelve Apostles: then the whole
Spiritual Seed that came, as it were, out of their loins.

Now particular persons in this body, they are members of the whole. The whole
together, makes up the Society, or Church, or Bride: The particular persons
are members, or children of the Bride-chamber.

This phrase, children of the Bride-chamber, notes their weak state at present
while they are under Dispensations: They are not grown up to be a Bride, they
are but a Bride in seed, in childhood, under age. Though they be in the
Bride-chamber, made much of by the Bridegroom, yet this is not purely as a
Spouse, but as children. Their society and sports together are but weak and
childish, not grave and solid; like such as are between the father and the
child, not like such as are between the man and the wife. Their very Nuptial
pleasure in the Bride-chamber can be but suitable to their own state: They can
yield delight to the Bridegroom but according to what is in them, and they can
receive from the Bridegroom but according to their own capacity.

Fast or mourn. Fasting is but an expression of grief or mourning; an effect
that comes from it, a companion that accompanies it, a means to give further
scope to it. Grief takes away the stomach from the meat: Grief and fasting are
companions: fasting gives vent and scope to grief. Therefore was fasting
appointed to the Jews, to further their mourning, that they might have full
scope to grieve and mourn, that they might afflict their Souls before the Lord.

Now the season of fasting is in those days, when the Bridegroom is taken from
the Church, from the Spouse, from the children of the Bride-chamber.

Obs. 1. When God is present with his People in any Dispensation, communicating
himself to them according to the nature of that Dispensation, it is no proper
season of grief. There is none can make them grieve then: They cannot grieve
then, if they would. Can ye make the children of the Bride-chamber fast while
the Bridegroom is with them?

Reas. All cause of joy is present, and all cause of grief is removed. What is
the great cause of joy, indeed the whole cause of joy in and to the heart of
the Church? why this. Enjoying of God, and pleasing of God. This is all that
the Spouse desires; to enjoy her husband, and to please her husband: and this
is present. What ever is in God, all his Sweetness, Goodness, Life, Power,
Love, etc. is let out (according to the nature and degree of the Di^pensation)
into the heart of the Spouse, by his presence: What ever the Spouse would be to
him, what ever the Spouse can desire to be to him, what ever he would have her
be to him, he makes her to be by his presence. This is the state of the Bride
in the B^ide-chamber: The Soul has, what it would; from her Husband; The Soul
is, what she would be, to her Husband, in her degree, and according to the
Dispensation.

And then, there is no matter of grief. All enemies, all accusations, all
troubles; all fears, are damped by the presence of her Husband. Nay she cannot
so much as star the loss of her Husband; for while he is so near her, that she
can look into his heart, she sees that it is impossible for him to part from
her, further then she would have him: It is by mutual consent that they part
for a time, that they may both dye in that present relation of weakness,
wherein they cannot enjoy one another fully according to their hearts desire;
that they may meet again in perfection. They estrange themselves mutually from
these weak, low, vanishing embraces, that they may attain to eternal and
everlasting embraces.

Obs. 2. There is a season for the Bridegroom and his Spouse to part. In every
Dispensation there is a time of enjoyment, a time of life, a time of sweet
solace and delight between God and his people in it; and a time of death. God
has a time to leave the Bridechamber, and then the Bride loses his presence,
and all that sweetness which she found in it.

Reas. It is necessary that God (thus appearing, thus enjoyed) should go away:
both to make way for further Dispensations, (that every Dispensation may have
his course,) and to put an end to all Dispensations. If God did not pass away
in one Dispensation, how could he make way for the discovery of himself in
another? And if he did not cause all Dispensations to wither and dye, how could
he bring forth his own Life and Glory, which was before all Dispensations,
passes through all Dispensations, and can alone discover it self by swallowing
up all Dispensations, and representing that vastness and incomprehensibleness
which cannot appear in any Dispensation whatsoever, but must have its own
limits to discover it self in?

Obs. 3. When the Bridegroom and the Bride (or children of the Bride-chamber)
are parted, there is true cause of grief. Then is the proper season of grief:
then there will be mourning and lamentation in the heart of the Spouse. Such a
ground of grief, meeting with such a subject of grief, must needs cause it to
swell within, and to spout forth abundantly.

1. This is the true cause of grief. There is no true cause of grief but the
loss of God. There is no true cause of joy but the enjoyment of God. There is
nothing the heart of the Spouse does truly hanker after, but God: and since it
cannot taste immediate enjoyment, O how sweet it is to enjoy him in
Dispensations! and the loss of this is very bitter, which appears in this. Let
the Soul lose all things, and enjoy its God, it hardly misseth any thing: Let
the Spouse have all manner of delights and contents, and miss God, it can take
pleasure in nothing. Since God has wrapped up himself in his own absolute
perfection, there is nothing worth seeking after, but him in a Dispensation:
and there is nothing worth lamenting, but the loss of him in that Dispensation.

2. This is the true subject of grief, and that in diverse respects.

In respect of the tenderness of her Spirit. The more tender the spirit is, the
more capable is the person of grief. There is none so tender as the Church:
None like to Christ for bowels, and the same bowels have his Church. A little
matter of grief will take great impression upon a tender spirit. Oh how does a
little unkindness from God wound and grieve his people! what will then his
total departure do?

And in respect of the largeness of her heart. By communion with God; by
knowing, tasting and enjoying of God, she comes to have a large heart, and so
to be more capable of joy or sorrow. None can bear her joys, wherewith she is
filled, in enjoying of God: and none can give entrance unto such wounds and
sorrows as she receives upon his departure.

And lastly in respect of her love. Her love was wondrous great; her whole
heart was set upon him; her life, her content, her very soul was bound up in
him. This makes a loss very bitter; when not only the thing lost was very
excellent, but the whole heart of the party was wrapped up in it.

Consider this, O ye who forget the afflictions of Joseph! The whole Creation
groaneth and mourns, because they sensibly miss their creaturely perfection
and happiness: But the Spirit of the Bride mourns very bitterly, because she
much more feels the want of her Bridegroom. O how lovesick is the poor
Spouse; her eyes full of tears, her heart full of grief, her thoughts restless,
her desires endless, and she altogether incapable of any comfort, while she
misseth her beloved! O mourn with Jerusalem ye that truly love her: Was ever
sorrow like unto her sorrow? Was ever destruction and desolation like unto that
which has lighted on her?

Let us press after Unity, so far as we may. We cannot all be one in
enjoyments, one in dispensations; because we do not all enjoy, nor are we all
cast into one form and dispensation by him who delights to bring us forth in
great variety: But we may be one in grief. There are none enjoy so much, but
that they have still cause enough to mourn over what they want; and if they can
spare any grief in respect of themselves and their own condition, there are
enough besides to expend it upon, which true love (where it is lively and
sympathizing) will easily teach them how to do.

But ye, who will by no m^ans be drawn off from beating your fellow servants,
and persecuting them whom the Lord has smitten; Go on, enjoy your pleasure,
till the Bridegroom be awakened by the spirit of the Bride, which cries very
vehemently, Come, oh come, come; how long! when, when, oh when! and then ye
will not need to be put upon mourning, though that mourning which will then
light upon you, is likely to be more chargeable, and less profitable, then that
which ye are now invited to.

A touch more concerning Sin, as also concerning the Liberty and Perfection of
the Creature, with an Exhortatory Close to such as are capable of it.
SIn, is the deviation of the creature from that rule which is prescribed to
it, by him who made it, according to its make, nature and state wherein it is
set. The creature is not its own original, but was made by another; and he who
made it has given it its nature, set it in its station, appointed it its
course, and its compass or rule, whereby it should steer; the deviation from
which is sin, and lays the creature open to his lash, who is its King and
Lawgiver, and will call it to an account. Poor weak man does not make Laws for
nothing, but looks to have them boundaries, and does execution upon
violation: and can you think the Mighty, Eternal, Everlasting Being, the great
King, is more slight and trivial then man, in the Laws he writes in the natures
of all things and persons?

Liberty is the freedom of the creature to walk up to this rule. It sees its
present happiness to lie in it, and therefore cannot but press toward it,
which if it find no cumberance in, it may be said to be free. When it has no
inclination within, nor nothing from without can have any power upon it to draw
it aside, but it goes on sweetly, vigorously, easily, according to its hearts
desire, both in pursuit and enjoyment, then it is free. While it is subject to
contrary desires, to temptations to the contrary, it is in bondage: but when it
is set free from these, and endued with full power to walk up to its rule, it
is made free indeed.

This was the freedom Christ enjoyed, ( Which of you convinces me of sin?
There was no guile found in his mouth.) This was the freedom Christ preached;
This was the freedom Christ promised, to set men free from sin. And this was
the liberty the Apostl^s likewise sought after, and pressed others to: They
could do nothing against the truth, but for the truth; nothing against God, but
only for God. (I know in one sense nothing can be done against God, but in
another sense many things may be done against him, and as yet are, by all under
all Dispensations.) Not that they could do no evil; that what ever they did was
good: but the inward inclination of their spirits was otherwise, and they had
power (in a great measure) to follow this inclination, and to resist and
overcome what would set upon them to draw them to the contrary. They tasting of
this, in a degree, tasted of true spiritual Liberty, which the greatest freedom
unto sin, is not. If I had never so much liberty within me to curse, swear,
drink, whore, etc. (let me speak a little broadly, as is now very usual,) for
my part, I profess, I could not look upon this as liberty; but as a new strain
of bondage, engaging me unto that which there is an impression in my mind and
nature against, and which my very sense discovers to me to be contrary to the
sweetness and content of the creaturely state. I protest, for my part, I cannot
desire any such freedom, nor conceive how there can be any true delight in any
such goings forth, nor see how they can come from, or be accompanied with true
freedom in any whatsoever transportations may attend them therein.

When any shall indeed grow into perfect union with, and enjoyment of, the
fullness of the Godhead; then shall they know how to do these things as God
himself now does them. But for the creature, in its weak, dark, shallow, empty
state, to rise up and say, I will be like the most High, nay I am the most
High; There is no evil to me, nor to my eye; Darkness and Light are the same to
me in every kind, as well as to him. I must profess, this is, to my foolish
apprehension, the purest piece of madness that ever yet brake forth, proceeding
from a cup of very deeply intoxicating wine, which all that drink of cannot
choose but err in judgment.

Wine makes a person strongly conceited, makes him forget himself, his state,
his sorrow, his misery, makes him foolhardy, and altogether void of fear in
the midst of the most apparent and most eminent danger; but makes no real
change in his state, or in other things about him, which he judges far
different from what he did before, not from a true sight of the difference, but
from the strength of the wine. The fumes of the wine now abroad may make a
person forget sin, its reference to him, his danger by reason of it, etc. But
when they are expelled, and he awakened out of these his drunken dreams, he
will find himself but where he was, even in the clutches of sin, under the
power, guilt, and condemnation of sin, which will not leave him, until he be
more fairly quitted and delivered from it. O God, I have waited for thy
Salvation! All the turnings and windings of the creaturely imagination cannot
relieve me. A mighty power of misery, of death, has seized upon my very Soul,
and nothing but a greater power of life can prevail to rescue me.

Perfection is the creatures full enjoyment of God in and according to its
creaturely state: When God is married to it, and keeps company with it
completely, even as abundantly as may be, in that station wherein it is set:
when the creature has as much of God as it can desire, in that very way that
it is taught and led to desire him. Why may there not be a perfection in that
very way, in that very kind, wherein imperfection has hitherto appeared? And
why may there not be a season for that perfection to discover it self, and be
set up, as well as there has been for this imperfection? There is an happiness
to come forth before our being swallowed up into the fullness of God, which is,
the letting forth of God into us in measure and degree proportionable to our
creaturely state.

Well, to draw to an end, What shall we say to the present state of things? Let
me freely shoot my bolt: which is this.

God has been throwing down; But man (not able to endure a state of
desolation) has been building up again, as fast as he could. God has thrown
down power with power: but man has reared up his new fabric with weak, airy,
empty notions. What is like to be the issue? God will make good his throwing
down, but man's re-building will come to nothing. There is a worm in the
foundation, yea in all the materials; which eats out the life, heart and
strength of them, and so makes them quickly discover their own weakness,
creatureliness, and rottenness. Yet do not boast over these, O Man, but
consider thy self, lest thou also be tempted. As yet thou stand; but art
thou able to stand before that power by which they have fallen, if it should as
forcibly deal with thee, as it has with them?

I will conclude all with an Exhortation out of Zephaniah, chap. 2. verse. 3.
which shall be only to such to whom the words themselves direct it. The words
are these.

Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the Earth, which have wrought his Judgment,
seek Righteousness, seek Meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the
Lords anger.

Seek. It is a time of scarcity, of want, of loss; Seek. Men have lost their
light, their life, their excellency, their sight and knowledge of every
spiritual thing: it is a very proper time for seeking. Let those that have,
make much of what they have, let them enjoy: But let those that are sick, that
want the Physician, that want their spiritual health and strength, let them
seek.

But what shall we seek? Seek what ye want: Seek the Lord. Do not seek shadows,
lies, vanities, things that will pass away: But seek the Lord, seek bread, seek
life, seek substance, seek true riches, seek truth: Seek that which your
spirits most naturally gasp after, and can only be satisfied with.

Who are those you would have seek? All ye meek of the earth, which have
wrought his judgment. The meek and righteous ones, they are only fit to seek,
they are the persons God would have seek him. Those that are broken in their
spirits, made tender by their breakings; those that have had some taste of
righteousness in their spirits, that have the relish of it still on their
palates, and so cannot but hunger and thirst after it, these are fit to seek,
these God only desires to have seek him. The high, the lofty, the unrighteous
ones; let them alone (says God) let me deal with them: but put the poor,
tender, broken spirits out of the track of my indignation, as much as may be.

But what should we seek in God; what should we seek of God? Seek
righteousness, seek meekness. Do not seek God in his fullness, in his
perfection; your house is not yet large enough to entertain him; ye are not
able so either to receive him, or bear his presence: but seek him in such a
way, in such an Administration as is suitable to you; seek righteousness, seek
meekness, seek him to be in you a living power of righteousness and meekness.
This is the way to be serviceable to God, to hold forth God, to enjoy God in
Dispensations, viz. to be righteous and meek. The righteous and meek one, He is
a kind of God to his fellow creatures, He enjoys sweetness within in
himself, and he has God still flowing in more and more upon him. This is that
every one should seek in every Dispensation, namely righteousness and meekness
in that Dispensation.

But what will this avail? This is but momentany; All this must pass away. When
God comes forth in his perfection, this will be discovered to be but empty and
creaturely, and will fall flat before him. The fire must fall upon this, and
burn up as well the righteousness and meekness, as the unrighteousness and
ruggedness of the Creature.

How know you that? It may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger.

God is angry at the state wherein things have been yet brought forth; (I can
say he is pleased with it too, yet he is also angry, and truly angry. In the
Creature there is but the shadow of anger, but in him there is anger in
substance, in truth.) He does not like either the deviation of the Creature, or
the misery which that deviation leads into. He does not like that vanity,
misery, and corruption, which is rivetted into the Creature. He does not like
the present constitution of the Creature, the present motions and actions of
the Creature according to that constitution. He is offended at the whole state
and course of things; at every thing that thus is, at every thing that thus is
done. And he has a day for his anger, a day to give his anger scope in, a day
wherein he will let the Creature see and feel how angry he is with it.

A Day. It will be night with the Creature, a very black time to the Creature:
but it will be the Lords day. He will not let out his anger, as we commonly do,
in confusion and darkness; but in clear light, and in perfect love. As anger
came from love; so anger shall be subservient unto love, and be guided and
managed in and by the light of love. Yet still it shall be anger, it shall
retain its own nature, and make the Creature sufficiently sensible of it, on
whom it lights.

Now for all this, he has an hiding place, wherein he can cover what and whom
he pleases, in this time of indignation, from the heat and fury of it. And
this ye may meet with, if ye be led by him to seek righteousness and meekness,
ye may be hid by him from the scorching violence of it. If any thing escape, it
is like to be righteousness and meekness, if any person escape, it will be he in
whom these are found. The indignation will be so hot in that day, that the most
righteous and meekest person breathing will hardly avoid the danger of it, but
there will be somewhat found even in them, for the fire to seize upon and
torment to death: but this is the only way to escape, and perhaps by this
means ye may escape it. It may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lords
anger. Whatsoever shall become of righteousness afterward, yet certainly it
shall escape that brunt that is to light upon sin: Righteousness shall be hid
in that day of anger, and all persons so far as they are found righteous. And
let men think and speak what they please at present, yet they shall one day see
and say, verily there is a reward for the righteous, when they shall see God
come to judge the earth, and putting a difference between things and things,
persons and persons: For doubtless notwithstanding the present confusion and
distraction whereinto things are cast, yet there is a time for the orderly
bringing of them forth unto judgment, where they shall receive their doom; not
according to what they now take themselves to be, but according to what they
are, and shall by clear light be then made appear to be. To shut up all.

When the eyes of our spirits are opened in the inward and spiritual world, we
shall then see the frame of inward and spiritual things: We shall see, in the
spiritual Creation, light and darkness, good and evil; which is as real in its
kind, as that, which the eyes of our senses cannot but see and acknowledge in
the outward world, is in its kind. And though darkness and light are both
alike to God, yet they are not so, nor cannot be so in the outward world to the
sense of the Creature: Neither are they nor can they be so in the inward world
to the sense of the spiritual man. It Is true they are so to God; but neither I,
nor you, nor any else can apprehend how they are so, while we are what we are,
and therefore cannot speak truth in discovering how they are so.

O how has infinite Wisdom entangled our reason in its going about to
understand and fathom these things, catching it in the greatest and strongest
bands of folly and madness, while it thinks it has, and gloryeth as if it had
taken possession of the deepest Wisdom!

So let the glory of Man fall for ever. So let the Reason, Understanding and
Wisdom of the Creature always prove a broken reed to run into it, pierce and
wound it; that none may ever come to know or enjoy God, or any thing of God;
but as he freely imparts himself, or of himself, unto them.

FINIS.

