A perfect Relation of four LETTERS OF Great Consequence, Read in the House of
Commons, October. 11. and 12.

1. The King of Spain His Letter to His Ambassador, concerning the Affairs in
England. 2. Of the taking of five ships by the Merchant Adventurers, that were
coming out of Spain to aid the Rebels in Ireland, with great store of money,
Arms and Ammunition. 3. Captain Thompsons Relation to the House, of his taking
Sir Edward Berkeley, and diverse others in the County of Somerset, and his
bringing of them up to London. 4. Secretary Nicholas his Letter, concerning the
Earl of Essex.
October 14. Printed for Robert Wood, 164^

C R
device representing the Union of the Crowns depicting a lion and a unicorn, i.
e. England and Scotland, respectively.
A RELATION OF The taking of five ships by the Merchant Adventurers, that were
coming out of Spain to aid the Rebels in Ireland, with great store of money,
Arms, and Ammunition.
O O Tuesday last Letters were read in the House of Commons, intimating, that
the Merchant Adventurers for Ireland, had taken five ships which were coming
from Spain, laden with Ammunition and other provision for war, that were
coming toward Limbrick to aid the Rebels in Ireland, and as it is credibly
informed, they took with the said ships, and ammunition at least 30000. l, in
money.

Whereupon the House taking it into serious consideration, that it is a Breach
of the Treaty between Spain and England, that they should send aid into
Ireland, to assist those that are Rebels to the Crown of England, they sent to
the Spanish Ambassador, to desire him to send to His Master the Catholic
King, that He should prevent the coming over of any such aid and assistance
into Ireland, or any other part of His Majesty's Dominions, because it is
plainly against the Articles of Peace, between England and Spain.

And because the Dunkirks do rob and pillage our English Merchants, and others
of His Majesty's good subjects, and do use their uttermost endeavor to bring
relief to the Rebels in Ireland, the Parliament has granted Letters of Mort to
certain Merchants to send out ships to cleanse the Seas, and to ceize upon all
Pirates or other ships sending aid to the Rebels in Jreland, or against the
Parliament, and to take them as their lawful Prize.

A Letter from the King of Spain to His Privy Counsel at Madrid in Spain,
when they were consulting of the Affairs of England and Germany.
RIght Trust, and well beloved Cosens and Counselors, we greet you well,
Whereas We had a hope by Our Agents in England and Germany, to effect that great
Work of the Western Empire, and likewise on the other side to surprise Venice,
and so incerculing Europe at an instance, and to enfold it in Our arms to make
the easier Rode upon the Turk in Asia, and at length to reduce all the World to
Our Catholic Command. And whereas to this holy end We had secret and sure
plots and projects on foot in all Christendom, and good Intelligence from all
Courts.

Know ye, that we have received late and sad News of the apprehension of our
most trusty and all Pentioner Barnevelt, and of the discovery of other our
Intendments, so that our hopes are for the present adjorned, till after more
convenient and auspicious time.

We therefore will ye presently upon sight hereof, to break off your
consultation, and repair straight to Our presence, there to take further
directions, and proceed as the necessity of the time and cause shall require.

Captain Thompsons Report to the House of of Commons, October 12.
On Wednesday Captain Thompson that has done good service for the Parliament
in Somersetshire, came to the House, certifying them, that he had with much
difficulty and danger taken Sir Edward Radgar, Sir Edward Berkly, and certain
others of those that were the principal Incendiaries of discord in that
County, and that they were coming up with a guard to the Parliament, and would
be at London this night.

A Letter was intercepted going from Secrerary Nicholas to the E. of Newcastle,
affirming with confidence, that Colonel Sands should acknowledge he was through
misinformation, and his own ambition, drawn to side with the Parliament, and
that his conscience did satisfy he was engaged in a bad cause, and craved
pardon of God and the King, and would hereafter, if he recovered turn against
the Parliament.

This being made known to Collonell Sands at Worcester, October 4. he did
express much Indignation against the Secrerary, and said that such perfidious
persons as he was, did make the King do that he would not do, and that it was
false which the Secretary had written: For he was so far from repenting to
lay down his life in this Cause in the King and Parliaments behalf, that if he
had ten thousand lives he would sacrifice them all, and was satisfied in his
conscience, that they were the Kings best subjects that stood with the
Parliament to defend Religion, Laws and Liberties, and they the worst Subjects
that did advise or assist his Majesty by force to destroy His Parliament, and
in them Religion, Laws and Liberty.

The Secretary further writ, that the Essexians were but 8000. foot, and 2000.
Horse, and that His Majesty had 5600. foot well armed, besides the Lord Strange
3000. men, and that His Majesty intends for London.

FINIS.

