AURORA ISMENIA AND THE PRINCE: BY Don Juan Perez de Montalvan.

ORONTA THE Cyprian Virgin: BY Signr. Girolamo Preti.

Tout vient a poinct qui peut attendre.

Translated by Thomas Stanley Esquire; The Second Edition, with Additions.

London, Printed by W. Wilson for Humphrey Moseley at the Sign of the Princes
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

The Reader
MAy be pleased to take Notice, That what he has in his hand, was undertaken
with no other Intention, then as an exercize of both Languages; That it now
comes abroad in Obedience to private command, which could not be withstood;
That the Licentiousness of the French Translation brings hither no assistance:
But if he find the Names of Persons or Places differ from the Original, let
him suppose it done for the better accommodation of the Scaene.

Upon AVRORA.
THis Transplantation of Sicylian Loves
To the more pleasing shades Albions Groves
Though I admire, yet not the thing betrays
My soul to so much wonder as the ways
And manner of effecting; that thy youth
Vntravail'd there, should with such happy truth
Unlock us this Iberian Cabinet,
Whose Diamonds you in polisht English set:
Such as may teach the eyes of any Dame
In The British Court to give and take a Flame.
But here the greatest Miracle we see,
That Spain for this has traveled unto thee.
W. H.

LAnguage and Wit, which equally dispose
Both light and life to Poetry and Prose,
In this traduction as their Orb do shine,
And make these Stories, like thy self, Divine.
Aurora brighter then she was of late.
The Prince in his misfortunes fortunate.
Montalvan proud to see himself outdone,
By a Reflection clearer then his Sun.
W. F.

TRanslations that should give light,
Eclipse their Authors from our sight;
But here like Christalls do convey
The luster of a foreign day:
Which the enlightened world might see,
Is owing to thy Charity,
Who reinspir'st Aurora's cheek
With such fresh Roses, that we seek
Truth in the original, which Spain
To own must borrow back again.
J. H.

Upon ORONTA.
FLames rescued fair Oronta from the power
Of an insulting Thracian Conqueror.
The Fame of which brave action Preti's Rhyme,
Freed from the greater tyranny of Time:
Yet in that freedom she less glories, then
In being thus made Captive by thy Pen.
E. S.

Far brighter now in thy Poetic fire
Oronta seems then in her fatal Pyre;
For there, her beauty lost, her virtue shines;
But thy admired expression both combines;
And Cyprus, whose best glories here are seen,
Is prouder of her Virgin then her Queen.
W. F.

Aurora.
Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant had a daughter, for her Celestill beauty named
Aurora, not more fair then unfortunate; and scarce had she completed the last
years of her Infancy, when Heaven was pleased to let her know that she was
beautiful by eclipsing her fortune. For Nature, as if she esteemed beauty a
crime, and not her own image, does for the most part punish it: The Mother of
Aurora dyed; and Dionysius, although the loss of his wife gave him no real
resentment, expressed in feigned tears how extremely he loved her; but within a
few days discovered the hypocrisy of his grief, receiving in her place
Arminda, an Italian Lady of quality, but not worthy of that Crown, because he
had many years before kept her as a Mistress. She was of a lively spirit, witty
and fair; but of a disposition so harsh, that she gained little upon the
affections of the people, bearing such command over her husbands actions, that
she permitted not any thing to pass in the Kingd^me, without first consulting
her pleasure; a care proper to such of small worth, as make ostentation of the
power they enjoy, that by this means they may dissemble their low beginnings;
but the sucesse proves contrary, in regard the injured by murmur and complaints
discover more then was imagined. Aurora, considering that to permit such
excess were to lend wings to her pride, advised her not to rely with so much
confidence on her fathers affection, since it was not impossible that it might
fail, and then would she fall lower for not having treasured the good will of
his subjects: adding moreover that she should remember what she was formerly,
that she might not vainly be transported with her new estate. These words so
incensed Arminda, that from thenceforward she plotted Aurora's death; and to
effect her desire made Dionysius believe that she was jealous, telling him he
loved his daughter so passionately, for being the picture of the dead
Original; since as the Phoenix leaves her ashes to perpetuate her succession,
so affection uses to leave some living pledges to preserve its memory: and
certainly, the neglect he sometimes expressed toward her, was occasioned by
that dead love pictured in the beauty of Aurora. Arminda urged this so
earnestly, that Dyonisius making impiety a Complement, resigned his daughters
fault into her hands, allowing her in this cause to be both Judge and Party.
Love the common excuse of all extravagace did not here acquit Dionisius; for a
man is not obliged to despise the pledges of his blood for a woman that
dissembles when she weeps, and weeps when she pleases. Arminda was satisfied,
so that Aurora were in some remote place out of her sight; whereupon her Father
commanded her to depart out of Sicily, choosing rather to live without a
daughter, then displease a wife; such was the affection of a blinded Lover, the
rashness of an unnatural Father. They conveig'd the fair Princess to a
little Island, seated betwivt (the two Promontories) Pelorus and Pachynum which
seemed as a Garland of Flowers in the Tyrrhen Sea; it was done privately to
avoid the mutiny of the people, who loved her for her beauty and her virtue:
He ordered a select number of servants for her attendants, with forfiture of
life to any who should discover that Aurora resided in that narrow Palace. The
discreet Lady did with much wisdom bear her Fathers unkindnesse, diverting
her mind now with the music of the little wanton Birds, which hearing her
name thought it ever morning, and sung continually: Now with the pleasant wind
which sporting upon the smoothness of the Crystal sea did amorously disquiet
it: now with reflecting on her own misfortunes, for the unhappy are often
recreated with the same thing that afflicts them: Now with the Ladies that
attended her, especially with Celia, who being of the same age and kindred well
deserved her privacie; but when all failed, and nothing could delight her, she
took an Instrument which in her hands might boast it was not dumb; and weeping
sung thus:

When will arrive the Day,
Which must my life and sorrows terminate,
That angry fortune may
(The tyrant goddess of all humane state
Her cruelty fulfilling)
By one kind death thus make an end of killing.
When shall my troubled years
Be to a verdant grave of flowers restored?
My injuries, my fears,
Too little merited, too much deplored?
When shall my just complaint
From equal heaven receive a full restraint?
Now I am thrown thus low,
What more can be desired by cruel Fate;
No hope my sad thoughts know,
Of reinjoying their past happy state:
Oh my afflicted mind!
Death would thou come, a welcome thou shall find.
With patience forlorn,
I pass the Months, the years in solitude,
The Evening and the Morn:
In vain my hopes thus striving to delude,
My tears I constant keep,
And as I am Aurora, daily weep.
When the Rebellious Sea,
Armed with Snow, strives to subdue this Rock,
It seems my misery,
At once kindly to warn, and rudely mock:
For so the Destinies
My life each minute offer to surprise.
Soon as the morn appears,
And ushers in with dubious light the day,
My real sorrow wears
So true a shade of death, that I betray
My reason to that dream,
And (though awake) dead to my self do seem,
All things within my view,
All things that grow and thrive by Natures care,
My sorrows do renew:
For by successive change they bettered are,
But to me fortune still
Is therefore constant, 'cause she first was ill.
This Tree from January
No livery but the hoarie Frost receives,
Yet May its dress does vary,
Proudly adorning it with painted leaves:
Unto the fruitful plain,
What August stole, April restores again.
This Sea sometimes enraged,
Swells up in Crystal mountains to the skies,
Yet often is aswag'd:
But only I in constant miseries,
Confined to endless grief,
Expect no liberty, nor hope relief.
Aurora closed this sweet Music with so many Sighs and Tears, that he must
have had a soul truly insensible, that could hear her without Compassion.
One evening as she entertained her self with the present prospect of the sea,
she saw a man struggling with the waters, and breaking the waves, though he
relied more on the mercy of a Planke, then the strength of his arms,
endeavoring to recollect his fainting Spirit, till he might approach the shore
for preservation of his life. Aurora moved with a noble pity, and tender fear
to have him die before her eyes, commanded those few that attended her, to
relieve him: who putting to sea in a little Skiffe, took him up and treated him
most carefully; (for so Aurora had commanded them) besides the person and
civilty of Pausanias (for that was his name) moved them to respect and
affection. Being recovered from his rough usage, (which had caused him to vomit
much water) he shared amongst them some Jewels, which he had preserved from
the sea in his late danger; telling them that he was nobly descended, and that
until he saw his fortune amended, it was necessary for him to live concealed;
and therefore desired the company to accept of his service, for that possibly
hereafter it might not repent them of that favor. His gold and person had
purchased the affection of those that heard him: they returned thanks for the
complement, promising to serve him to the utmost of their power. Pausanias was
glad, conceiving he might securely continue there, without being known; for
that Island was little acquainted with other, then the watchful Guardians of
that beauty, which so unjustly suffered* Going forth one night when the bright
(...) with her beams enlightened the Wood, he heard a voice that with a
cheerful sweetness thus related its grief to the Birds and Waters:

From the early Dawne until the Sun retire,
I to these woods and hills my grief exspire;
My eyes with boundless Rivers overflow,
Like troubled Fountains murmuring at my woe:
Perpetual miseries I still deplore,
As they are mine: but as immortal more.
What is it by nature beauties wealth to own,
If to these woods confined I live alone:
Or that my eyes have power to kill with love;
If near me none but birds and beasts do move?
Too cruel heaven that know my innocence,
Or with my sorrows, or my life dispense.
Thou to torment me do forbid me die,
For death is pleasing unto misery:
Let those that happy are enjoy their breath,
The wretched never live but in their death.
To each dull hour that slides through lazy day,
My griefs or memory of griefs I pay.
Thus live I, only pleased with this relief,
Death is the latest remedy of grief.
For patience fails where th'injur'd soul sustaines
The rigor of unintermitted pains.
Pausanius was astonished as well at the sweetness of the voice, as to hear it
in so strange a place, wondering who it could be, whose soul so feelingly
deplored its own misfortunes: and as well that he might not be ungrateful for
the favor he recived, (though he were ignorant from whom) as to try, if by
this means he might come to know the divine owner of so sweet a harmony, to
the suspense of the listening Nightingales he sung this song.

Torment of absence and delay,
That thus afflicts my memory,
Why do thou kill me every day,
Yet will not give me leave to dye?
Why do thou suffer me to live?
All hope of life in life denying?
Or to my patience tortures give,
Never to dye, yet ever dying?
To fair Narcissa's brighter eyes,
I was by loves instruction guided,
A happiness, I long did prize,
But now am from their light divided*
Favors and gifts my suit obtained,
But envious Fate would now destroy them;
Which if to lose I only gained,
What greater pain then to enjoy them?
The same wonder which before seized Pausanias, surpised Aurora, knowing none
of her servants were of such extraordinary parts, or could so sweetly complain
of the insupportable torment of absence. Aurora inquisitive to know, and
incited by the curiosity that is incident to women, was desirous to see the
Orpheus of those Rocks: but the shadow of the trees, the distance of place, and
above all, the regard of her quality which detained her, represt this desire,
so that she deferred it till some other time; and calling one of her
attendants, demanded of him, if there dwelt any in that wood, besides those
that came with her out of Sicily. The servant answered, she forgot him, whom
not long since she commanded them to succor, seeing him in danger of his life.
Aurora asked if he knew who he were? He replied, he knew no more then that he
had said he was called Pausanias, concealing his quality and country, yet could
assure her, that he seemed to be of noble Parentage, or at least his person and
spirit deserved to be so. Aurora would not enquire further, lest her curiosity
might breed some suspicion; and although it be true, that none can love what he
never saw, or conversed with; yet Fame, Virtue, and Desert incite a desire to
see whether that satisfy the eye, which had by the ear affected the soul.
We will not say Aurora was in love, though her solitude might require it, her
greatness would not consent to it: Yet she had a desire to know the man so
well qualified.

Pausanias soon seconded this desire, for not enquiring the mystery enclosed
in the Palace, he continued to frequent the place where he first heard her: and
Aurora had the opportunity many evenings of seeing him pass by with such a
grace as might endanger the liberty of one less restrained then she was: for
the afflictions of love are not for those that have other misfortunes to
resent. Pausanias could not behold the fair Aurora, the windows and lattices
debarred him her sight, neither would he discover himself to those he conversed
with; supposing, that since they kept their business so private, the secrecy
much concerned them, and therefore he concealed what he desired: For it is a
rule of discretion to know no more of any man then he is willing to
communicate. Nevertheless, desisted not to prosecute his intentions, hoping he
might find opportunity to see that sweet Siren. The morning often found him
under her window, not knowing whom he courted, loving in ignorance; yet
confident more then a private Lady was within those Walls. Before the Palace
he used several pastimes and recreations, that he might thereby obtain a
sight of the Goddess whose voice had enchanted his soul.

Pausanias had good success in all things, having bin brought up in the
exercise of arms, he hunted the wild Beasts of that wood so fortunately, that
he made their deaths acknowledge him Master of their strength and fury. There
was not any in the Palace but applauded his gallantrie; only Aurora was
perplexed at his perfections; for every day he increased her affection by new
deserts. And although she liked all she saw in him, yet the inequality she
conceived was betwixt them displeased her discretion, those that disparage
themselves being unexcusable. Hereupon she advised, whether it were not
expedient to have him killed; for when a mean person may occasion
extraordinary mischief, his death is esteemed mercy: but she could not
attempt it in earnest: For, to take away the life of those we love, because we
love them, is no good reason in the state of affection; she would have him
depart the Island, but immediately she repented: For it is hard to put that out
of sight which is imprinted in the mind: In effect, seeing that to kill him
were cruelty to Pausanias, to banish him tyranny to her self, she resolved to
divert her sadness, passing her solitary hours with more delight; and that he
might never know that it was she that loved him, she exchanged names with
Celia, to whom she imparted the Plot, that she might assist her in pursuit of
it, and with her name dissembling her quality, she resolved to give
entertainment to this new affection, until she might know who he was that had
wone so much upon her heart.

Aurora might safely have admitted to her greatness the affection of
Pausanias, for he was sole heir, to the King of Macedonia; and being enamoured
of the fame of Aurora's beauty, which verses and pencills had extolled, whilst
other Princes by Ambassadors solicited her marriage, resolved that his fortune
should rely upon his own diligence, and by going to Sicily to be both the
Agent and the Lover: This desire made him put to sea, and forsake his own
Country; such is the power of a noble resolution, so did the imagined beauty
disquiet the Princes mind, and attract his will and freedom, that he exposed
his life to the perrill of the waves, and his greatness to a mean lodging of
Planks and Canvas, to see if truth were correspondent to same. But he was less
fortunate then adventrous; for one evening the Sea being angry, or weary to
sustain the weight of so high a Majesty in so little room begun to rage
furiously, so that the valiant Princes life was in danger; the heavens were
darkened, and the Air so turbulent, that the company expected every minute,
should end their lives, and without thought of saving themselves made him leap
into the foaming Sea, fearing some worse event; and by embracing a plancke, to
use the most difficult means for his own safety: Thus passed he two days
befriended by the weather, at length arrived so near the Island, that Aurora
could relieve, and after love him so extremely as we see.

She resolved at last to speak with him, but under the feigned name of Celia,
which defire was increased by Pausanias; for one night he amorously sung these
Verses upon the curiosity of his love.

What would thou have unquiet breast?
What is it thus disturbs thy rest?
Say not thou love, it cannot be,
Who never did deserve or see.
Love, where the mind out-strips the eye,
Is only Curiosity.
But thou will say, why do pursue
Thine own disquiet then? it is true;
And though this only care express
Of an imagined happiness,
Desire to see does ever prove
A sure preparative to love.
An object so divine I frame
Within my breast, as does inflame
My captived mind: I love, subdue,
Desire, oblige, hope, and pursue,
Resign my liberty, bestow
My soul on one I do not know.
And thus can Master be of none,
For I no longer am mine own.
As soon as Pausanias had made an end, Aurora called to him and said, (though
with some difficulty, by reason that the Balcon's were very high) that he might
leave his curiosity, and profess love: For his addresses were not
unacceptable. Pausanias remained contented with this favor, since although he
had never seen the bestower, yet at least his affections were not so ill
placed as he before imagined; and seeing it was not possible to speak to her,
he determined to write, transferring his thoughts to the Pen, which uses
to be the discreetest tongue, expressing more then is felt. The Letter was
short (though the subject did not require it) to leave her with the desire of
receiving another: and thus it said:

Madam,
I May justly say you are obliged to favor me, having cost me infinite cares,
without any recompense, although ever since the last night I have presumed to
be more fortunate, and so am resolved to dye rather importunate then bashful:
for my birth is noble, and will not suffer me to fly from any attempt. That
which I now desire, is to see you, if perhaps my love have merited it; and
since heaven suffers it self to be loved, and you appear such, be like it
in condition as in beauty: for if your beams inflame me, it is but justice I
should know the sphere from whence they come.


Pausanias repaired thither as he used to do, and having first courted her
with a Song, which he had composed that day, as well sung as penned, he showed
her the Paper, saying it was a piece excellent for Music, and that he should
be extreme glad to hear it set to the Gittrah. Aurora understood him, and was
pleased with the deceit, because that which otherwise would have appeared
lightness, now past for civility, (for there are some so discreet in what they
demand that by encouraging the crime, they seem to excuse the fault) and
throwing down a string of Pearl, Pausanias returned it more weighty then
before: Aurora read the Paper, and in part to satisfy his expressions,
desiring him to expect a while, commanded Celia to write, not that she could
not her self, (for she was extremely accomplished in every thing) but for the
danger might ensue, if her hand were known; and betwixt them both they framed
this Answer:

THat you may not when you return home to your Country accuse the Sicilian
Ladies of ingratitude; since your desire is so reasonable, as the sight of a
woman, I will perform what you require me; though then your eyes will
contradict your fancy; for it is certain, that I am fairer in your opinion
now, then I shall be afterward: I am called Celia, and attend a Lady of
quality that lives in this Castle: She and I will be to morrow in this place,
so that you may then see me; be of good courage, and thank me for being so
soon quit of your love, if that can be love, which has past no further then
imagination: I only entreat you to keep this indiscretion secret, and to tell
me your name, estate, and quality, for it imports us both.


Pausanias kissed the Paper, and read it often: for a Lover is never satisfied at
the first, and the day following went to see what he so much desired. Aurora
had commanded her servants to retire to another quarter of the house, and being
alone with Celia, caused her to attire her self richly, and she stood beside
her. Pausanias beholding, was exceedingly ravished, in regard his fancy had come
short of the truth; for Celia, besides her slender shape, was of a pleasing
beauty; but her luster was eclipsed by Aurora's presence, whose eyes were
spheres of light, her forehead a plain of Lillies, her hair the riches of
Arabia; in her cheek Roses, her mouth Pearls, her neck of Alabaster, her
breasts of Snow, and hands of polisht Ivorie; she was attired in green Tabey,
wrought with gold, so that she appeared like a Diamond enchased in Emralds, her
Gown Skie-colour, laid with black Buttons and Loopes: in a word, she was
altogether divine, her perfections many, and her years few. Pausanias was much
astonished, yet fearful the Sea should see her, lest he should woo her for
one of his waterie Deities; and thanking his own perseverance, he determined
to gain her that had got his soul, though at the expense of a long absence
from his Country: for he found that the Picture of Aurora that he had seen was
far un^quall to the divine Celia: he esteemed the time well employed that he
had spent in adoring those Walls, since within them he had found so much more
then expectation had promised.

Whilst Pausanias enjoyed these favors passing the night with them, and the
day with hopes, it happened that Dionysius sent for one of those that waited on
Aurora, and threatened him, that if either through his or his fellows fault, it
should be known where his daughter was, they should instantly dye a shameful
death. With this fear he returned to the rest, and gave them notice how much
it concerned them that Pausanias would quit the Island, since he might easily
at one time or other, as he walked in the wood, see the Princess, and occasion
all their ruins: So easy is it, replied another, that I think he pretends,
if he have not already effected it: for I have observed, that he looks up very
intentively to those Balcones; and she has enquired of me who he is; and if he
persist, he must of necessity come to know her, and we to lose Dionysius
favor. In effect, fear overcame them, and all agreeing that he should not
continue there, they advertised him that it concerned his life to absent
himself.

Pausanias wondered at their sudden resolution, and after many conjectures
began to suspect that without doubt some one of them loved Celia, and would use
that means to secure his jealousy or envy: and thereupon he determined to
speak to them all, that he might satisfy him who conceived himself injured,
and to beseech them again not to offer him so great a discourtesie, as to
constrain him to depart the Island, until such time as he had news of his
servants, whose lives perhaps the Sea had pardoned. He plainly perceived how
difficult it was to reclaim them, seeing those that before so kindly
entertained him, now behold him distastefully (for ill will is discovered by
the eyes, countenance, and carriage) and one morning finding them altogether,
he said to them:

Gentlemen and friends, my birth is noble, and though I live where I am
unknown to all but my self, I do not think any here can complain of my
demeanor, for men of my parentage receive not benefits unthankfully,
(ingratitude and nobleness differing as night and day) I came to this Island,
or to say better, my fortune threw me here, not unhappily, since in it I have
found both protection, and friends. Here I have lived a while, endeavoring to
satisfy to my power, though not to my desire, the favors I have received from
all: but it seems I have not sufficiently expressed my self; since when I think
you most my friends, you threaten me with death unless I depart: I have
enquired what might be the reason, but indeed can find none, unless some one
of you being jealous, incites the rest to this violence: which if it be so, he
ought to consider, that a man does not offend, unless he know that he
injures; for he who through ignorance or innocence sollicits that whereunto
another has right, can only then be said to offend, when after he knows the
truth he pursues his wish; and so to have surveigh'd this Castle, with a desire
to see what it enclosed, or by curiosity to have obtein'd that fight can not
disquiet any one; for before this present I knew not that it would give
offense; and if I conceive aright, there is more then one Goddess inhabits
there; so that none has reason to complain of me, because I neither injured
him out of malice, nor can he know to which I am inclined.

Pausanias thought by this to have appeased and satisfied them, but the event
was contrary, for the knowledge of this secret being their greatest fear, they
needed no other information to draw their swords, and assault his life. But
before they could dispatch it, Aurora and her gentlewomen hearing the noise,
saw the treacherous mischief they intended to a single stranger, and
forgetting her greatness, (for love considers not quality, when that which is
esteemed is in danger) sent to command them all to desist, and inform her of
their quarrel; who coming before her, related what charge her Father had
given them, adding, that Pausanias for certain either had already, or else
meant to speak with one of the Ladies that attended her highness; which might
give occasion to discover what Dionysius intended to keep so secret, that none
but heaven and themselves should know, and therefore to excuse the danger that
threatened them, it was necessary to take away his life.

It would be (replied Aurora) impiety in me to consent to it, and treachery in
you to effect it, because I am informed you have received courtesies from this
Gentleman, and there is no reason you should take away his life, whom you your
selves confess to be of such estimable parts; especially for that which may be
remedied without blood. I understand that Pausanias saw one night one of my
women, whom either for the novelty, or opportunity he courted, and she (I
think) heard him not unwillingly; For this reason it concerns me that he stay
no longer in this Island; and since his absence is sufficient to secure you, I
take that and your danger upon my self, for Pausanias is a gentleman, and can
conceal what he has seen.

With these hopes they were satisfied, and Aurora remained in a thousand
perplexityes: for she loved him so passionately, that there would be but little
difference betwixt loosing him and her own life. And indeed so powerful was
his discourse and conversation, that although he had been less worthy of her
beauty, yet to see and hear him would beget affection: And at last she became
so resolute, that it would have grieved her to have been freed from her prison,
if she should thereby be deprived of his pleasing conversation: for women, when
they once fall in love, are sensible neither of pains or misfortunes which
befall them in the company they affect: wherefore she considered by what means
she might comply with her own affection, and her servants fear. To keep him
there against all their wills were to hazard her honor, and to give her
enemies an occasion of a more severe revenge. Having first adviz'd with Celia,
she writ a Letter, wherein she informed him of what had past, entreating him
affectionately to preserve his life, and to prepare for departure; two things
in appearance contrary. When night was come, the fair Princess went forth to
take leave of Pausanias, and delivering him the Letter, with a little Silver
Cabinet wrapped in Taffata, not having power to speak, she withdrew her self,
to lament her ensuing misfortunes. Pausanias also retired, through the
suspicion of the late quarrel, and kissing the Signature, which said, Your
Celia, he read it with much fear, on this manner.

SIr, I have had much care for you this day; I saw you draw your Sword, and I
assure you it troubled me: I think it was love, yet unfortunate, since it must
dye as soon as borne. We are both the cause of it, because I guess our
affection has been discovered. My birth is more noble then you imagine; and it
concerns us both that you immediately absent your self, that you lose not your
life, nor I my reputation. (Believe me I am very sensible of it, for in a
word, I love you, and must lose you. You may comfort your self with this
thought, that it was impossible I should ever have been yours, not for love to
any other, but for my quality too transcendent. I send you here a thousand
Crowns to serve you in your journey, with a knot of Diamonds and Emeralds,
which I did sometimes wear at my breast, that in your Country you may
remember it was mine, and its owner yours.

Having read and deplored the rigorous sentence of his death, he resolved
precisely to obey all that Aurora in it had commanded, and to let her know some
part of his regret, he took the Pen, and returned this answer:

I Should have esteemed it a happiness if to day I had received death by my
enemies (since such they were) that I might not have expected it from your
hands: Before the mornings light breaks forth, I will absent my self from
yours, that you may say I knew how to love and to obey you: What I would not
do for my own life, I will for your honor: I cannot express what I feel,
because I write perplexed, and can ascertaine nothing; only I assure you my
blood is so noble, that the King of Syracuse himself cannot say he is my
better. I came out of my Country to marry in this Kingdom, and for your sake
will return back. I give you infinite thanks for your Present, and will not
excuse my self from repaying it hereafter. The knot I will keep as your
favor; and since you have given me so much cause of grief, give me time to
lament it, though I hope so to resent it, that when you least think of it, you
will hear news of his death, who knew how to love you, but had not the
happiness to deserve you.

Aurora with much trembling made an end of reading the Letter, and not able to
restrain her eyes, bathed it in tears. Celia came to her, and took out of
her hand the occasion of her grief, but that little availed, for she took it
not out of her breast; so that as she went through a long Gallerie, she wrung
her hands, beseeching heaven to increase her Fathers rigor, and Arminda's
hate, that they might contrive her death. She went to look toward the Sea,
imagining that her lost lover was already embarked; and coming thither, so
excessive were her tears and passionat expressions, that Celia fearing she
might offer some violence to her self, amongst other reasons said thus to her.

Is it possible Madam that a disproportioned affection should so extremely work
upon you! I should not have believed this of your reserved discretion, if I had
not seen it. I confess Pausanias deserves to be loved, but you know he is not
a man equal to your condition, nor can in reason be yours; what proof have
you of his descent, more then his own relation? which may well be doubted, for
the meaner sort where they are not known, give large testimonies of their
blood. Alas (replied Aurora) that uncertainty is my greatest trouble: If
Pausanias be as noble as he has intimated, perhaps I might have attempted
something you would little have suspected from my reservednesse; and I persuade
my self it might yet well be done, were it but to free my self from
imprisonment: And though I should marry into a stranger Country, I should not
lose my right to the Kingdom after my Father; I believe his Subjects affect me
so entirely, that if they knew I were here in prison, he would have little
security either of his Kingdom or life. Tell me Celia, what can I hope for in
this Castle but death? My Father is married, and in love: Arminda governes the
Kingdom, and bears me so much ill will, that I many times eat my meat in
fear, suspecting she has sent something to kill me, though I shall now need
no other poison then the absence of Pausanias. Oh Celia, you would oblige me,
if you could contrive how I might speak with him, and be better informed of
his quality, that I may not continue thus in suspense: If he be of mean
Parentage, I will rather dye by mine own hand, then admit a thought may stain
my blood; and if to my happy fortune he should prove (as is not impossible)
some Prince cast upon this Island by accident, be confident, I would hazard my
life for my liberty, though in all things I should first take your advice, that
I might not err through mine own opinion.

Celila was attentive to what she said, and compassionating her tears, began
to consider, if by any means she might come to the sight of Pausanias,
without endangering his life; she had an acute and ready wit, but withal
accompanied with so much discretion, that whatsoever she undertook succeeded
happily. After much deliberation she concluded, that it was requisite (for
fear of his enemies) not to see him for that time; but that he should continue
some days in the thickets of that mountain, and then might come hither by
night having notice given him by Libanius, (one in whom she reposed trust.)

Thus far, replied Aurora, you have well ordered it, but what means remains
to speak with him? for to discourse from hence is very dangerous. If you will
not hear me make an end, (replied the discret Celia) neither can I let you
know the desire I have to serve you, nor you your self obtain your affection:
I say, Madam, that Pausanias coming to these Walls may get up, by our
assistance, and the help of a Ladder, to this part of the house adjoining to
your lodgings: so that I having the key of the outward door, you need not
fear, and by the Balcones that look toward the Sea, may discourse with him
till you are satisfied concerning his birth. Consider now, if you find within
your self love enough to embolden you for this contrivement: for my own part I
assure you that I am ready to lose my life in your service.

Aurora was by this much comforted, and embraced Celia a thousand times; who by
Letter advertised Pausanias of her determination, she charged Libanius to
deliver him the Letter, and attend him as a guide. Pausanias had taken the road
toward Sicily, to try if he might find in that way any of his lost servants.
Libanius over-tooke him, and delivered the Letter and Message from Celia:
Pausanias received it as one that saw his dead hopes revived, and having read
it, and rewarded the welcome news, Libanius informed him of what he was to
do. So passing through the wide wood, they came to a poor Shepherds Cottage
where Pausanius stayed, and Libanius returned to give his Lady notice of what
had passed. He continued there four days, favored and cherished by Aurora,
who every day sent Libanus to visit him: and one night, as dark as the wish of
any Lover could paint it, he came to the Palace, (or rather to the sphere of
the Sun of that Island) and dismissed Libanius, (for a servant may not be
witness to every thing) then upon a sign given, Celia and Aurora came forth,
and letting down a Ladder of Cords, Pausanias in a moment got into the
Balcone, and having kissed Aurora's hands as his Mistress, and Celia's as his
Mistresse's Lady, they led him through many rooms, so richly furnished with
hangings, chaires of State, and pictures, that it showed no less magnificence
then what he had forsaken in Macedonia. And coming to a part that excelled the
rest, as being furnished for strangers, Aurora told him, that he might abide
there, intimating how requisite care and obedience were, and that to attempt
the contrary, was to put his life in apparent danger. Then so far replied
Pausanias, I shall preserve it safe, having no will but your pleasure. Aurora
gave him thanks, telling him, that because her Lady was present, she omitted
many things which she reserved for more privacie; and taking her leave showed
him the Balcone by which they might discourse.

Pausanias was well contented with his courteous entertainment, passing the
greatest part of the day in contemplating that miracle of beauty; their mutual
affection increased equally (for by conversation love out-growes his infancy)
and as one night they were both in dispute, whether loved more truly (a
quarrel wherein it grieves none to be overcome) Aurora with some expressions
of resentment, said thus:

I have long desired my Pausanias, to know a truth, though, for fear of
exposing my self to the hazard of dying, I have not demanded it; but that I
may not remain ever in this suspense, I will boldly adventure my life: It
concerns me no less then my honor and quiet to know who you are, that I may
dispose of my self with some resolution, and hereof I require no other
testimony, then to know it from your own mouth: for I have so great an opinion
of you, and repose so much confidence in your worth, that I am sure you will
not deceive me. My birth is noble, and so noble that no woman can boast higher
blood: for this Lady on whom I wait (though my Mistress) in this has no
advantage of me, as, by the favor she shows me, you may have gathered the
inequality is not much. The reason why we dwell in this Castle, I will not now
let you know; though, if your answer suit with my mind, you may: But in the
mean time I conjure you by My self, by the love you bear me, and by that you
owe me, to satisfy me in this request, which I assure you detaines my soul in
extraordinary affliction.

Pausanias obliged by Aurora's entreaties was ready to have discovered
himself; but that he might with less difficulty be believed, he answered,
that he was only Son to the Admiral of Macedonias a man so eminent and
beloved of the people, and of Timenides his King, that he possessed the first
place in his affection, and in the government of that Monarchy. Aurora remained
not discontented, since the innequalitie, was not so great as might deface the
pleasing hopes she had imprinted in her breast. Only Pausanias was angry at
himself, being conscious that to deceive her who relied so confidently on him
was a kind of treachery: yet this offense was not inexcusable, in regard it is
scarce esteemed a fault to make use of a slight deceit to compass our desire.
He succeeded so happily in his love, and so favored by the divine eyes of
Aurora, that though he were not naturally distrustful, yet was he fully
persuaded of her affection; and not without reason, since the expressions he
had from her of this truth confirmed him in that belief.

Aurora communicated to Celia all that had past; resolving at last to let
Pausanias know the true causes of her imprisonment, that he might deliver her
out of it, and conveigh her where she might be secure from her unkind fathers
severity; Yet would she concea^e this happiness a while, to make trial of
his constancy, whereof she had no need to exact so many proofs; for he lived
so contented only in loving her, that he scarcely employed any other desire,
though sometimes he wished himself elsewhere, that he might enjoy a nearer
conversation, yet with all respect to her honor. As he continued in this mind,
it fortuned that Aurora, through some indispositions could not be seen for
four days: Pausanias bearing with much impatience this absence (along one to
so true a lover) resolved to see her; and though such boldness might violate
the promise he had made, he supposed the occasion would excuse him, whereupon
one night, forcing the lock, he came with as much fear as silence to the bed
where Aurora lay, who had then yielded to a short slumber. He was astonished,
not without cause, to behold the most perfect piece of Natures Pencill; and
setting down the light he carried upon a little silver Cup-board, began to
contemplate that dead beauty, and living pattern of Divinity. Her hair was
loose upon her shoulders, without more confinement then a green Ribband; her
right hand under her cheek, and her left carelessly upon the bed, which with a
lovers timerousnesse he took and kissed. Aurora perceived that something did
disquiet her, with her eyes half open, like the Sun when he wakens the day,
saw a man at her bed side; and as soon as she knew it was Pausanias, warmed
with a modest bashfulnesse, she changed the Lillies of her Cheeks to Roses: She
asked him angrily, why he came thither; He answered to see her: I never thought
(replied Aurora) you had valued me so low as to prefer your own pleasure
before my entreaties, and your curiosity before my honor. I warnd you, that to
stir forth, concerned the reputation and life of us both; which since you have
done, judge what I may justly think of you. You will say Love was the cause:
Presumption deceives you; you know such testimonies better consist with the
hazard of the man then of the woman. Reserve this freeness, or rather
boldness, for women of meaner quality: rudeness is not pardonable with every
one: and be assured, I am herewith so offended, that you cannot oblige me in
all your life so much as you have with this one action displeased me. Return
to your lodging, and despair not of liberty, if you esteem it an imprisonment
to be thus locked up; to morrow I will speak to my Lady, that with her leave you
may return from whence you came; so rash a man is unfit for high designs.

Pausanias would gladly have replied to excuse himself, but Aurora would not
suffer him, telling him of the danger she incurred, if he were discovered.
Being thus forced to retire, he wished with grief he might expiate this
enterprise with the loss of life. Aurora was not so much displeased as she
seemed: Yet to let him know the respect due to her person, and to refine his
affection, she thought it discretion not to see him for a few days.

Mean while, the people (in Sicily) impatient of Aurora's absence (whom they
extremely loved) began to murmur at her Fathers cruelty, saying: what mercy can
Subjects expect from him that tyrannizes over his own blood? It proceeded so
far, that some with clamours, others with Arms, required the restitution of
the Princess: The peoples insolency affrighted Dionysius, so that to dismiss
them, and to comply with the desires of his Subjects, Friends, and Kindred, he
promised they should all suddenly see her: Hereupon he went out privately that
night with Clearchus his Favorite, and arriving where Aurora was, excused his
unkindnesse, and related the reason of his coming; he commanded that
immediately she and her company should make ready, for they must with all speed
go to Sicily.

Aurora was so dismayed as might have given occasion of suspicion: Celia was
struck dumb, and so sudden was their departure, that Aurora had not time to
weep. Nevertheless, Celia ordered it so that she spoke with Pausanias, but
with so much perplexity and fear, that she was hardly understood, in
interrupted expressions she said thus:

Now, Sir, the time is come, that you may go out of this prison, and enjoy the
desire you have to see Sicily; there is a necessity that divides us. I believe
the love I bear you will seek you out wheresoever you are: One to whom my
fortune has subjected me (more severe then his relation requires) enjoyneth
me to live absent from what I most esteem; the occasion is urgent, and he that
commands powerful; so pardon me, and believe it lies not in my power to excuse
it: a servant shall come hither, to bring you safe into Sicily, though not so
soon as I could wish: more witnesses then ordinary see me. Heavens give you
life to my desire.

Sad and amazed was Pausanias at this accident; Sad, because Celia's words
seemed to imply that he must lose her; and amazed, as being ignorant of the
cause: he could not apprehend the meaning of what he had heard; sometimes
imagining that he was sentenced to depart in punishment of his late boldness;
sometimes that she meant to absent her self; and that which held him in
greatest suspense, was the reflecting on her words, That one to whom by fortune
she was subject, less merciful then his relation required, commanded her not
to see him. A thing which she had ever concealed from him; but she referred
the discovery of this truth to time, the undeceiving Glass. The day following
past, and neither Celia nor the maid appointed to attend him visiting him; the
night came, when making his accustomed signal from the Balcone, he was
answered by his own echo: then liftning at the doors, and perceiving that
all things were in deep silence he suspected one of these two things, either
some strange accident had happened, or Celia dwelt no longer in that place;
having surpast those doubts; he resolved not to suffer himself to languish,
wherefore opening the first door with a Dagger, he went so far till he came
to the Chamber of his absent Mistress, where looking round about, and finding
nothing but a dismal solitude, he began to think all was illusion and
witchcraft; and therefore confidently expected his death: Yet being Master of
no less valor then discretion, he drew his Sword, and went up and down the
Castle to try if he could free himself out of those enchantments: at length
coming into a Hall, which to his thinking was the last, he saw a small light,
and a little further four men: Drawing near them he said, they must either
suffer him to go out quietly, or prepaire for Death; for he was so resolute,
that their lives seemed but few to his indignation. They, amaiz'd to see a man
where the Sun (the great Lynx of Heaven) could hardly enter, to do their
office, drew their timorous swords upon him: But he had endangered all their
lives, if one of them, laying hold of a Halbert, had not held it to his breast.
The valiant youth was moved; for fear his excusable where the multitude of
enemies may assault on every side; Yet considering withal, that to render
himself, were to run the hazard of being carried dishonourably to Sicily, he
would rather undergo the danger, then preserve his life with the stain of
Coward; He charged them to dispatch him, or else he would adventure to change
fortunes with them. At these words they were all daunted, and through fear had
not courage enough to strike. At last they agreed, not only to let him depart,
but that one should accompany him past danger of the way; because that place
was so encompast with Mountains and woods, that they who were best acquainted
with the Desert, often lost themselves.

Pausanias gave them thanks for the courtesy, though it rather proceeded from
fear then good will; and taking leave of them, went forth into the wood, with
one that held himself the most valiant among them: Before they parted, he
entreated him to tell him who was owner of that Castle; and to oblige him the
more, put into his hand a rich Diamond Ring; scarce had he received it, (though
with many protestations that he needed not any reward to serve him) when he
confessed that it was a house of Pleasure, where Dionysius used to divirt his
mind from the cares which attend affairs of State; though it were long since
he had resorted thither, by reason his fair daughter Aurora had dwelt there
privately, whom last night (moved by the importunity of his Subjects) he
carried back to Court. Had this Princess (said Pausanias) no Ladies that
attended her? Yes, replied the timorus Flatterer, but there is only one,
called Celia, who deserves her affection: For, besides that her beauty is as
singular as her discretion, she is daughter to the Prince of Arsinda, one of
the greatest and most eminent in all Sicily. Pa^sanias with this information
was less afflicted: He dismissed the Man, determining to go concealed to
Court, to see his dear, though absent, Celia.

Let us leave Pausanias in this Mountain, whilst Aurora seeks means to
advertise him of the suddenness of her departure, and Celia writing (as she
used) a Letter in her name, gave it to Libanius, commanding him to go where he
was, and to bring him thence unperceived if it were possible: It succeeded not as
Aurora and Celia desired: For Clearchus a Favorite of the Kings, had long
loved Celia, and she favored him not only by her eyes and affection, but by
the Pen, assuring him by many Letters, that none but he should ever possess
her beauty. Neither was she mistaken, in her choice: for Clearchus in every
respect was her equal, and had so high a place in the Kings esteem, that he
was never from his side. This love was kept so private, that none but her self
and Heaven knew of it. Clearchus by chance asking Libanus whither he went, he
freely told him, On a Message from Celia. Seeing a Letter in his hand he began
to mistrust her constancy: for long absence occasions suspicion of injury.
Disguising himself the best he could, he took Horse and went after him; but
could not guess at the end of his journey, because he went directly toward
the Sea. It was already night when he entered into a Fisher-Boat; Clearchus
quitting his Horse, went over with him: when both were in the Wood, Clearchus
bad him deliver what he had about him; Libanius supposing he was a Thief, drew
forth the Crowns that Celia had given him, and laid them at his feet; then
begun to strip himself, to show that he had nothing else about him. Clearchus
finding the Letter, promised him his life, if he would tell for whom it was;
and so wrought with him, that poor Libanus confessed all that he knew.
Clearchus confirmed in his suspicion, restored him his Crowns, doubled; kept
the Paper, and charged him to return to Cicily.

Clearchus remained solitary, grieving that he thought himself undeceived; and
finding a poor Shepherds Cottage hard by, hasted thither, where taking a
firebrand in stead of a Torch, he drew out the paper, broke the Seal, and
read what follows.

I Have been very sensible of this absence; the rather because I am in such a
condition, that I cannot communicate my resentment to you: My excuse is the
truth, which you shall hereafter know more at large. If upon sight hereof you
come to Court and discover your self to his Majesty, I am confident his
Nobleness will esteem of you according to your merit. That you may the less
delay the performance of this request, I say no more, but that I am (as ever)
Yours,

CELIA.


Nothing can express the passionate fury, or the Arguments wherewith this
misapprehending Lover complained of Celia's ill usage, and the injustice
toward his affection. He was about to go back, with intent to tear him in
pieces who was the cause of this jealousy; but a compassionate Shepherd
dissuaded him, entreating him to pass the rest of the night under that Shed:
for to do otherwise would show indiscretion.

Clearchus (though with small content) yielded, and laying himself down upon a
fresh bed made of Flags and Hay, saw hard by him a man sleeping, who by his
shape and person seemed of the best quality: demanding who he was, the
Shepherd answered, that four hours since he came to their Cottage, and
desired to rest under that Covert, to avoid the sharpness of the night.
Pausanias (for it was he that slept so securely, having his greatest enemy
beside him, and had been glad to find this poor Cottage where he might repose
himself, wearied with Travel) awaking, perceived that he was not alone, but
heard him that was by him, with sad complaints curse his Love, Jealousy, and
Fortune.

Pausanias listening was troubled at what was said, but much more at the mention
of Celia, a name that disquieted his soul. Observing him more diligently, he
heard him thus discourse to himself:

Is it possible (ungrateful Woman) thou can find in thy heart to dispossess
an affection of so many years and pains? Could not thy quality acquit thee of
lightness? Oh Celia, how does a deceitful promise misbecome one that
professes so much worth? Do thou so injuriously requite so observant a
Lover? I persuade my self the reason why thou enjoynest me to conceal my
affection, was for fear of making thy Pausanias jealous. But I vow never to
return home, till he has satisfied my jealousy: Ungrateful, I will begin my
revenge in killing him whom thou love best; I will proclaim thy lightness:
The World shall know, these six years that I have served thee, I have been in
such favor with thee, that thou never usedst Pen but to assure me thou were
mine. Thou have deceived thy self, false woman, deserting me for a stranger,
that cozens thee with profession of Nobility. What can thou say to excuse
they self, since this Letter under thine own hand speaks thy unworthiness,
and my misfortunes?

Pausanias hearing this, was in such perplexity that he could not believe
himself to be awake. Impatient that any man should profess himself favored
of Celia (to defend her reputation, and to chastize his foolish arrogance) he
arose and told him, that the part of his sorrows which he had heard troubled
him as much as himself; but if a sight of Pausanius would allay his anger, the
last night he was with a Gentleman of the same name, and perhaps they might
find him in the next Wood. I shall not be so happy, said Clearchus, for I know
my ill fortune when I desire a thing. Yes, I believe you may replied Pausanias.
Then lighting a dry Olive branch he invited him to come after, prominng that
within a few hours he would bring him to him.

Thus went they forth together, and coming to the most intricate place of the
Wood, Pausanias stuck the light upon a Tree, and drawing his sword, resolutely
said to him:

I am Pausanias, thy greatest enemy; I love Celia, and must enjoy her, though
the King of Syracuse himself should oppose it. Since thou say that thou
seek'st me earnestly, make use of this sudden occasion which is offered
thee. If thou refusest to draw thy sword because thou know me not, be
assured, my quality is so noble, that whosoever thinks he has any advantage of
me, deceives himself. I have served Celia, if not with as much secrecy, yet
with more affection: if she heretofore loved thee, and now forgets thee,
complain of thy fortune, not her easiness; and since thou say the Letter
which thou unjustly detain'st was sent to me, give it me, for I will put it
a-amongst others that I have of hers; if not, I Will force it from thee.

Do not think (answered Clearchus) thy menaces move me: my heart is formed for
higher enterprises, and e're long thou will repent this foolish rashness. Yet
that thou may know the cause why I sought thee so earnestly, and with what
reason I complain of Celia, hear her falsehood, and thou will confess that I
have not spoken very extravigantly of her. Celia and my self have these many
years reciprocally exchanged a pure and secret affection; but she being
necessitated to absent her self from me for some reasons, I was so unhappy
that in that time she saw and loved thee: if she had neglected me for love of
thee, I had less reason to complain; but she was so far from neglect, that
she never favored me with larger expressions then now; and that thou may
not think these calumnies, proceeding rather from jealousy then the truth of
one that respects his honor, see whether it be fa^se or no: so drawing out of
his breast many Letters and Papers, he cast them at his feet.

Pausanias read some of them; amongst others his own, and another which the
same day she had written to Clearchus. A good while he took not his eye off
from the Papers, it seeming to him impossible there should be in the world a
woman so facile and so cunning: but at last being fully persuaded of her
falsehood, he gathered together all the cozening Letters, and threw them into
the fire, as if he could consume so many deceits at once. Thereupon Clearchus
with his sword in hand bad him, if he were a Gentleman, prepaire to defend
himself: for it was not fitting it should be said in Sicily, that having had
his enemy in the field he left him alive. Thou shall not need to prevent me,
answered Pausanias, for that was the only reason why I drew thee out into this
wood: and so assaulting him furiously, the Combat began, without any apparent
advantage on either side. Clearchus was the more weary, as being less dextrous
in the exercise of Arms. Pausanias avoiding a blow that he made, falsifi'd
another, and wounded him dangerously in the head. Clearchus having his face
bathed in blood, lost not his courage, but enflamed with revenge, assaulted
Pausanias so desperately, that he was forced to use all his skill to guard
himself. The clashing of their swords disturbed the Shepherds that went
whistling their Sheep together. They came in the instant, when the loss of
blood abated strength, but not courage in Clearchus. They all ran in to him,
seeing him the more necessitated, and carried him home to their Cottage, where
with medicinal Herbs they entertained and cured him.

The valiant Prince (no less astonished at the courage of Clearchus, then at
the lightness of Celia) expected the approach of day, with intent to take
shipping, and return to his Country. He went toward the Sea, and discoursing
with himself on the various events of his fortune, saw a ship, which by its
loss of tackling and sails, showed it had suffered the anger of inconstant
Neptune. He observed the Arms it carried, and knowing they were his, drew
nearer to satisfy himself: but this doubt lasted not long; for Leontius,
Son to the Admiral of Macedonia, leaping a shore with his Company, knew him,
and gave thanks to Heaven for the favor it had vouchsafed them in preserving
his life.

They related to him, how that after a long tempest and imminent death, it
pleased Fortune to appease the Sea: But all of them bewailing their Princes
absence, resolved not to return to Macedonia without him, since he might
possibly escape alive. Pausanias gratified their noble resolution with favors
and rewards. He caused them to repair their Ship, determining to go
privately into Sicily; that they might not return unsatisfied to Macedonia; to
see if the Beauty of Aurora pleased him; and to revenge himself on the
inconstant Celia.

With this resolution he went to Court; but his arrival could not be so
private, but Dionysius had notice of it, and immediately gave him a visit,
bestowing such extraordinary favors upon him, that words sufficed not to
express his thankfulness. Dionisius carried him to see the Princess; knowing
her beauty to be the chief motive of his coming thither.

Pausanias amazed when he perceived Celia, to whom he spoke, to be by all
called Aurora, was ready to have accused Dionysius of imposture; but Leontius
(who had been Ambassador before in Syracuse) assuring him it was Aurora, he
was almost distracted; and not treating with Dionysius any further in that
business, he resolved to return to Macedonia, since a woman engaged to
another in love, was not fit to be his wife.

Aurora's thoughts were very different from his, for perceiving her good
fortune, that Pausanias was every way equal to her, she thought the time long
till she had some means to accomplish her affection.

Celia already was informed of the quarrel that had been betwixt Clearchus
and the Prince. And as Aurora was once complaining of him, for not coming to
solicit that which he so much desired, Celia told her, that the reason why
he was so cool in his Love, was the deceit of her Letters, and thereupon
recounted all that past, advertising her, that this mistake was as well cause
of her losing Clearchus, for he was infected with the same jealousy; so that
it concerned them both to discover the private devise her Love had made use of.
Aurora excusing the Princes indifferency, in regard it proceeded rather from
his own honor then neglect of her, called Clearchus, and discovered to him
the whole business, that he might not suspect any thing in prejudice of
Celia's honor; she commanded him to go visit Pausanias from her, and to let
him know the mistake that had detained him in jealousy.

Clearchus now freed from all former suspicion, obeyed, and having kissed the
Princes hand, asked pardon for drawing his sword against him, though unknown.
Pausanias told him, he was engaged to love his valor, and to desire his
friendship. I must requite this honor, answered Clearchus, with welcome news;
and then related the occasion of Aurorah's living in the Castle; and how
imagining he was below her greatness, she had dissembled her name, changing it
for Celia, until she were fully informed of his condition; how to avoid the
danger of having her Letters known, she caused Celia to write for her; how the
reason of his going to find him in the Wood, was because he had for many years
loved Celia, as he had gathered by his words, and seeing the Letter with her
Seal he was confirmed in his jealousy, blaming the affection of guiltless
Celia.

The Prince was surprised with wonder and joy at this relation of Clearchus,
and casting his Arms about his neck, in sign of love and delight, said, the
news was so conformable to his wishes, that only time could express how highly
he esteemed it. Then went he to treat with Dionysius concerning his love; who
promised her to him, thereby requiting the complement of having left his
Country; neither was any more worthy of the Princess, and immediately they
writ to Timenides the Princes Father about their agreement.

Pausanias had now opportunity to visit her, and to expostulate the favorable
deceit, whereby she had caused his jealousy. Their Espousals were solemnized
with the greatest Pomp that Cicily ever beheld, jointly celebrating those of
Clearchus and Celia, whose constancy merited a success no less fortunate.
Within a few days they imbarqued for Macedonia, attended by all the
magnificence of the Court.

Timenides received them with the joy of a Father, who supposing his Son lost
or dead, found him so much improved in all things; Then feeling himself
burdened with years, and through infirmities unable to be the Atlas of that
weight, he transferred the Crown to his Sons head: And that the pleasure of so
true an affection might be complete, Heaven was pleased to bestow on their
first year a Son. Pausanias and Aurora living and loving so unanimously that
every day seemed the first of their marriage.

The Prince.
FRom the top of Caucasus, a Mountain in Armenia, descended a man, savage in
appearance, though not in mind; clothed with several skins of wild Beasts,
his limbs strong and swarthy, his face scorched with the Sun, his hair long;
at his shoulder hung a Quiver of Arrows, at his left side a Wood-knife, and in
his hand he carried a young tree, which (being stripped of the boughs and
leaves) was both his stay and defense; who sitting down upon a Carpet of sweet
though ordinary Flowers, drew out of his breast a beautiful Picture, so lively
in the obscure Tablet, that it seemed to have more soul then it received from
the Pencill; and beholding it as intentively as if it had been the Original;
much troubled he thus passionately discoursed to it:

Oh dear, though absent Polixena! it is long since I enjoyed thy divine sight
in another condition: but what assurance will not envy and fortune dissolve,
where both conspire to prosecute? When I first caused Tebrandes to draw thy
Picture in this Tablet, I little thought that this unequal shadow of thy
beauty should ever have been my greatest comfort. Who would have said when in
Albania I maintained a Tourney in a habit which thy fair hands had
embroydered, that I should ever have seen my self in an estate so different,
the inhabitant of a mountain, my arms naked, my feet covered only with the
skin of a Bear, a Trunk of a tree my Sword, my lodging a Cave, and companions
a pair of Lions? But the heavens know that neither to be so exposed to the
injury of weather, that the Sun takes me for July, and the Snow for January;
nor to be brought so low, that I am forced every day to kill some wild Beast to
sustain me; nor to live in this dismal solitude, where I converse only with
Flowers and Rivers; nor yet to consider the small hopes I have of better
fortune, have power to make me sad; but only the fear that thou do forget
me: For amongst the troubles which an absent Lover suffers, none but this is
able to torment him. It is now twelve years since for thy sake I first
deserted Albania, and were my self dilated to an age should always thus
preserve thee in my breast: but alas I fear thou do not requite me: for
women are said to place their eyes and wills only on what they see present;
because what is past is no longer enjoyed. Having so long disappeared can I
doubt my death is not believed for certain? And some perhaps there are that
affirm it, to comply with those that hate me. Yet if I live in thy memory,
nothing else can afflict or trouble me. I often imagine, that as being but a
woman, thou have proved unconstant, and though thy love might continue the
first year my absence, yet sure the second thou tookst comfort, and the third
did quite turn me out of thy breast. However, this world has had some,
whose constancy has triumphed over the natural imbecelity of their Sex; and
thou may be one of those. The dagger of Lucretia, the Coals of Portia and
the Aspes of Cleopatra testify, that Love is an unapprehensive of Death. Thy
constancy (fair Polixena) would have had no such inconvenience; it would not
have hazarded thy life.

The tender-savage Lover would have proceeded in Discourse to the Picture, had
he not been interrupted by a young Shepherdess, who passing by the skirts of
a green Mountain (imagining she was heard of none but the Birds) as she went
along sung thus:

Menga, a Shepherdess, near these Brooks borne,
(Wonder of the earth, and envy of the morn,)
Sad and ashamed complains of her hard fate;
For beauty seldom proves more fortunate.
Love whose soft chains she freely did dispense
To all, at least ensnared her innocence.
Anton, a Swain, that many other eyes
Attracted, was to hers a sacrifice;
Nor slights she his affection, though she fear
Their envy who for him like passions bear.
Teresa's love she knows to him inclined,
A Nymph though fair, yet wanton as the wind:
Favors and gifts she never yet withstood,
Inconstancy deriving with her blood:
All that she sees her boundless thoughts desire,
For longing fancies greedy eyes require:
Once Menga found her with Anton less coy
Then she could wish, his but to rob her joy.
Shame did suppress her anger, but her tears
Did unrestrained betray her jealous fears.
What have I done, false shepherdess she said,
That thou should all my happiness invade?
Thou love another, me have dispossessed,
Because stolen pleasures are to thee the best:
I Have seen thee many love, but true to none,
Thou do hereditary lightness own:
Enjoy thine own, not my delights remove,
Thou wrong'st thy beauty to molest my love.
Thus Menga, who against Teresa cries,
When she begun to love, left to be wise.
Gesimenes (for so was this prodigy of fortune named) was much astonished to
hear so sweet a voice in a wild wood unfrequented by any. He arose and called
to her, bidding her not fear, for he was a man rational as others, though his
habit expressed no^ his condition. The timorous shepherdess, when she saw his
savage appearance, giving her self for lost, fled from this counterfeit Satyr,
till staid by weariness, she fell at his feet, so affrighted and out of
breath, that it pitied him he had overtaken her. When he beheld her divine
beauty, he thanked Heaven that it had contracted its greatest perfections in a
poor Shepherdess. Neither did this admiration proceed from a forgetfulness
of his fair Polixena; but the reason which induced him to this liking, was her
resemblance of the other; such as would confound a Painter in drawing them
both: He took her in his arms and carried her to his poor Cave; where, having
first recovered her senses with water, which he fetched in a Tortoise shell
from the neighboring Rock, he set before her Cakes and dried fruits; he
assured her that she was not in danger; that his quality was more gentle then
his appearance promised; that she might continne there in safety; and, that her
beauty had kindled in his breast so just an affection, that though he had been
savage indeed, he should not have been so to her: for at the first sight of
her an inclination did secretly invade his soul, which obliged him not only to
honor, but to engage his life for her. Therefore he entreated her by the great
respect which, in so short a time, she had gained upon him, not to leave his
company, but rather to help him to pass the tediousness of that solitude,
then afflict his love by her absence, which he should infinitely resent.

Truly, replied Ismenia, (so was the Shepherdess named) what you require is
not only just, but due to that civility and protection you promised; besides,
it concerns my own interest as well as yours: for I am fled hither to avoid a
man, to whom my parents would have married me; one, they say, does every way
equal me; but, to say truth, though I was borne among the; Rocks, and am of a
low parentage, yet have I a spirit and thoughts so high, that I am not in my
own opinion inferior either the heir of Albania, or the King of Armenia.
This morning I rose with intent to subdue that self-conceit, and love him in
obedience to those that persuaded me; but finding I could not affect him, nor
reclaim my stubborn will, I stole away and hid my self in this Mountain,
choosing rather to be a prey to the wild beasts, then to one I could not without
disdain behold: though many women are of opinion that conversation may produce
affection; yet could not I expose my self to so apparent hazard, fearing the
worst: For the danger is great which she incurs, who out of this confidence
undervaluing her own liberty, marries one that she abhorres. But because I
find within my self (besides the thanks I owe your courtesy and
entertainment) something that moves me to love and respect you; for though you
appear outwardly a son of these Rocks, yet your civil demeanor contradicts
that appearance; I conjure you therefore by your self to tell me who you are,
and the reason of your living in this Desert; since we have agreed to dwell
together, and I have given you an account of my fortune, it is fit you requite
me with the like.

This request (said Gesimenes) will much afflict me: the remembrance of
miseries cannot be renewed without tears, though I use often to repeat mine
to the heavens, to the fields, and to this little river; yet because in them
you are my only comfort, and to satisfy in some manner for the favor you do
me in dwelling (as you have promised) with me, I will relate my birth,
condition, and misfortunes.

I am natural son to Pharnazes, King of Albania, who dearly loved Clorinda, a
Lady whose eminence and merit made her hope to be his wife, and in that
confidence resign her self into his arms; but not long after was by reason of
state induced to marry Rodantha, who proved with child at the same time that
Clorinda my mother went with me: I would to heaven I had never seen the light,
(for he that is borne to be unfortunat,e begins not his life, but death.) So it
happened that Pharnazes had in one day two sons, one by his wife, the other
by his Mistress: and (though brothers) of a different fortune and quality, for
Lucanders Mother was the more noble: but who would think that Pharnazes loving
my Mother so affectionately, nay she her self, forgetting the pains, and
grief I had cost her, should hate me: It was sure the malignant influence of
my Stars which arrived at that hight, that I was constrained when I would
obtain any thing of my Father, to have recourse to the Queen, who though she
had a just reason to hate me, pitied and favored me. Lucander and my self
came to the state of youth; I, as being the less fortunate, was more beloved
of the people; he of my Father, as heir to the Monarchy: Thus far I cannot
say I was very unhappy, for if he may justly be called so who is borne
indiscreet, and lives hated Lucander was the less fortunate; but the original
of all my afflictions was the fair Polixena, at the same time brought up at
Court, daughter to the Prince Saga, one of great power, and near allied to the
King, without whose advise he undertook nothing of weight: I would discourse
more largely of her beauty and perfections, if my love would not make that seem
passion, which heaven and my self know is but truth. I speak to a woman, and
such hear with small delight the praises of others: She was the fairest in
that Conntrey, and from our tender years, we began to court her: I with less
hope then Lucander, as one not borne a Prince: but Love both a child, and
blind, often mistakes and stumbles. I did ill to say my birth was attended by
no happy fortune, since Polixena fixed her eyes on me, and that so freely,
that whatsoever I did she graced with esteem, whatsoever my brother attempted
displeased her. At the public and solemn Exercises, her favorable eyes
encouraged me, and made me successful, not without the envy of many Princes
that adored her, especially of Lucander: truly I had the advantage of him in
behavior, discretion, and stature; yet few women would have considered those
accidents, the qualities of the mind being in little esteem in the
unfortunate. But Polixena either less ambitious, or more unhappy, inclined her
affection to me so far, that after a long time she gave me leave to obtain
her embraces, which by a private way into her chamber I enjoyed: Lucander had
treated with her Father about marriage, engaging himself still further in his
fond affection; knowing I was his rival, he was the more earnest in his
solicitation, being vexed to see Polixena prefer me, the illegitimate son,
before him the heir to the Kingdom. Her Father (transported with his
interest, and hope of seeing the Crown upon his Daughters head) being
displeased with my affection, looked not favorably on me, and chid Polixena,
advising her to love Lucander; because from thence more good then she imagined
might result. But this counsel was vain; her election was no longer free;
much less when she perceived she was with child. This confirmation of our
love increased my Obligation, and her danger: for this Disease being difficult
to conceal, and her Father unwilling she should be mine, we had reason to
fear the event: she dissembled the mishap so carefully, that not any of her
servants suspected it. The perplexity wherein I remained was as of one that sees
his Love in the power of enemies: If she would have sent me the child, she
durst not; for Lucander had gained all or the most part of them to be of his
party. Thus every moment did these fears disquiet us, till one night such
extremity of pain wakened her, that she presently knew the reason, and putting
on her clothes in haste, she went out at the back gate of the garden, (having
before provided her self of the key for that occasion) with intent to retire
to an house of an intimate friend of mine, whom we had made acquainted with our
affairs: but she had scarce past two streets when she was so surpised that
she could not stir a step further, turning aside into the Porch of the next
house, was there delivered of a Daughter; and seeing two men pass by muffled
in their Cloaks, she called to them, and delivered them the child, desiring
them, because she was a woman and alone, that they would do her the favor to
carry it to Gesimenes the Kings son, who would give them a better reward then
they imagined: Their Civilitie obliged them not to follow her; so she returned
back to the Court, and within two hours was laid again in her bed, where
complaining of a sudden indisposition, she was attended and served as one,
whom all hoped ere long to see their Queen.

But so unfortunate was my affection and Polixena's honor, that one of those
to whom she had delivered the child was Lucander my brother and enemy; who
devising with himself who the Mother of it might be, and seeing that Polixena
fell sick that very night, begun to think it was she; her extraordinary
affection to me, making any conjecture seem credible; the child's countenance
confirmed this suspicion, which like a Copy could not deny the original:
Wherefore to revenge his jealousy, and to punish my boldness, he resolved to
tell my Father, and my Wives, (for so I must call her so long as I live) what
had happened; first commanding one of his servants to cut the child in pieces,
he sent it me in performance of the promise he had made the night before. As
I was in the morning making my self ready, there came into my Chamber a
Gentlewoman of great trust with Lucander, and a Page bearing in a Basin the
body of the little child, so pierced with wounds, that the features of the
face could hardly be discerned.

Thou may imagine Ismenia how I received this Present: My heart was instantly
congealed at the bold impiety of Lucander, I then foresaw my misfortune, and
mixing a Fathers tears with the yet warm blood, I bathed the mangled Limbs;
dissembling my passion as well as I could, I went to see him, and asked him the
reason of so strange a Present, which would have moved fear and pity in the
most cruel breast. My treacherous brother, as if he had done me an
extraordinary favor, related the sad accident, and told me his design to
ruin me, and persecute the afflicted Polixena.

It is not possible (replied I) he can be of noble blood that glories in such
base attempts. There is no reason to embolden thee to injure my life and soul,
but the lowness of my condition; if it were otherwise, I would make thee feel
my anger; if my love displeased thee, and thou were jealous, why do thou not
like a man rather kill me, then revenge thy self on a thing that had neither
hands nor tongue to defend it self: But thou art so base a Coward, that thou
fear me, though of a despicable fortune: from henceforward thou shall have
more cause to do so: for I will surprise thy life when thou least suspect'st
it: But heaven I believe not using to remit the punishment of such wickedness
to the next life, will prevent me in the revenge of that innocent blood.
Lucander knew not what to answer to so just an accusation, but began to
reproach my birth, saying, that his Mother notwithstanding was free from
infamy. And as sons are most sensible of those injuries, though truths, that
reflect on their Parents, I was so full of passion that the least occasion
would have transported m^e beyond reason, and drawing my Sword I (...) him
before he could cry out for help or defend himself, and left him wounded, and
weltring in his own blood; with this the Court was in a tumult, and the news
coming to the King my Fathers ear, he commanded that they should seize on me,
and tear me in pieces; but escaping from the swords of those that pursued me,
I took horse and fled into the covert of this mountain, till my enemies had
lost sight of me. After two days I arrived at this solitary place, where, to
defend my self from the sharpness of the night, I made use of the shelter of
this Cave, and being overcome with weariness, I slept till the day following:
So soon as the Sun enlightened this wood, awaking I saw a fierce Lion lying at
my feet, who having found me asleep, either imagining I was dead, or complying
with his native generositie, granted me my life (for there is even in the most
savage Beasts, a kind of natural pity) and not only forbear to do me hurt,
but by fawning, and other expressions of love, seemed to court me. Though the
society were dangerous, my life being at all times in his power: I considered
that my life was without doubt reserved, for some extraordinary end, since
heaven had preserved it from so many chances. Having found more kindness in a
Lion then in a Father or Brother I made much of him, which he requites with his
usual bringing me in his mouth the prey that he has killed, to sustain my
life, esteeming me rather his companion then enemy. Within a year I was so
much master of these Mountains, Cliffs, and beasts, that all obeyed me, like
the first man, and for this reason would I not leave this place; in another I
must meet my death: for the injuries that are done to the powerful cannot (but
miraculously) escape unrevenged.

Instead of a Palace I have here a secure, though poor dwelling; for a guard
of soldiers two Lions to protect me: these Hives offer me honey; this river
water; these mountains a shady Covert; and these Trees their wild fruits: The
Beasts that I kill afford me clothing, the Sea fish, and the Woods venison:
This is my life and story; so that if thou resolve to continue here, I promise
to entertain thee with as much care, as if thou were my dear wife, or poor
daughter, whose face I never saw, though I once handled it. Thou shall have a
fresh and sweet bed made of Rushes, Flags, and Thyme; in Winter we will
shelter our selves in the Bowels of this Rock, and in summer thou shall enjoy
the pleasant West wind, underneath the shade of these Hazell Trees: my
disposition is gentle, my birth such as thou have heard, and from this minute I
swear never to offend thy chastity so much as in a thought. We will spend the
morning in praising heaven, that figuring it self in all its Creatures has
enriched a mean Shepherdess with such perfections. The Evenings we will visit
this Grove from whence we will borrow Bows for fuel and light: The time that
we save from sleep we will spend in relating our past misfortunes, and by
this means I may beguile my love, imagining that Polixena dwells with me: for
thou so nearely resemblest her, that Heaven seems to have made thy Beauty as a
copy of hers.

Here Gesimenes stopped (for the remembrance of his wife drew tears from his
eyes) and Ismenia coming to him, comforted him, promising not to be a minute
from his side; for besides that his person deserved it, a natural inclination
induced her to esteem, and to give him as much respect as if he were her
Father: so that to divert some part of his griefs, she took out of her Scrip
an instrument, and sung thus:

Narcissa passing through a pleasant Mead,
To cool her thirst was to a River led:
When she perceived the lazy stream had lost
Its course, condensed to Crystal by the Frost;
Which had perhaps enamored of her sight,
Begged of December chains to stop its flight;
But the kind Sun did with his warmer beams,
Dissolve the Ice into its native streams:
And the angry little Brook, denied by stay,
Was enjoyed flying, wept, and went away.
The company of Ismenia was an extraordinary comfort to Gesimenes, who
recreated by her beauty and wit passed the hours of the day with less
anxiety; loving each other with so true yet chaste affection as they never
entertained one loose thought. Thus lived they both secure and contented,
especially Ismenia, because she was not in love, nor acquainted with any cares
that might disquiet her rest. But she could not long boast her liberty: for as
one afternoon she beheld her self in that Crystal Rivolet, when the dying
Sun was giving up his languishing light, she spied a young Gentleman who
wearied in the pursuit of some wild beast, having left his horse, slept upon
the Flowers, (leaning his cheek on his hand) to the sweet Music which the
water made, playing with the blew pebbles. Having earnestly beheld him, (for
his person was warlike, his apparel Majestic, and his form Divine;) she
would have gone away, but could not; for love seizes on free hearts, and like
a flash of lightning suddenly scorches. In brief, Ismenia found her feet
fettered, and her soul inclined to stay. Thus suffering her self to be
vanquished by love, she softly approached him, and drawing the sword that hung
in his Scarffe, suddenly awaked him, bidding him receive it, and acknowledge
that he owed his life to her, who could so easily have taken it. Perozes (for
that was his name) starting up, and admiring Ismenias exquisite beauty,
answered, that he could not thank her pity for not giving him death by the
sword, if he must receive it from her eyes; that she expressed thus more
cruelty then mercy, for asleep he should not have been sensible of the one, but
it was impossible for him waking to escape the other. Her habit caused in him
no less wonder then her beauty, wherefore he besought her by entreaties and
promises to tell him the reason why she lived in that Mountain, enricht with
perfections that might become a Palace; unless she were some new Diana, some
divine Huntresse, who disdaining to live amongst men, resolved to spend her
time in that wilderness. Ismenia replied, that she came thither to accompany
her Father, one of a noble birth, and excellent qaalities, though thrown down
by fortune to a low estate, They were both as much entangled in love as if they
had conversed together many years, each of them so delighted with the others
company, that Ismenia had no power to retire up the Mountain to Gesimenes, nor
Perozes to descend to the valley to seek his servants, whom that afternoon he
had lost in the chase: but the discreet Shepherdnesse seeing the night threaten
them, and being far from home, thus spoke unto him:

Sir, I would to heaven, as you have engaged my affection, so I had worth to
deserve yours; yet if love be begotten by sympathy of blood, what I have seen
in your suspense, your eyes and words, may at the least be good will: and that
you may not think I participate of the rudeness of this place, I will
sometimes descend to this seat, where you may see me, with this caution, that
you offer me no injury: That would be both dishonorable and unsafe; For my
Father will at my call come down, and to second him a Lion to tear you in
pieces.

It seems (answered Perozes) you do not know me, seeing with such unnecessary
care you instruct me in a respect that I am obliged to keep for both our sakes:
Yours, because I adore you, and he that loves cannot injure; my own, because
my birth is noble, which it could not be, if I had a desire to tyrannize over
women. When heaven has clothed the night with Stars I will come hither with
as much humility as love, and adore these Flowers, because you have trod on
them, and this River because it has been your glass.

With this they took leave of each other. The affection of Ismenia daily
increased so much that Gesimenes might easily have perceived it, if he had
suspected there had been more men in the wood to converse with: nor was
Perozes her debtour; for every hour of the day she was in his mind, and the
nights he waited in the Mountain expecting her; though she could not come
down so often as she would; for Gesimenes had chid her for coming home so
late, little suspecting love to be the cause, but rather her eagerness of the
chase.

Upon a time she came thither unobserved by Gesimenes, and casting her eye
aside found in a crimson Taffata a Picture of a fair Lady wrapped up in Paper,
which served for its case: this it seems Perozes had through negligence the
night before let fall amongst the Jesmines: Ismenia perceiving the Inscription
was directed to him, moved with the curiosity of a jealous woman, read it, and
found it said thus:

SIR,
I Am now come to Albania, where I live privately, and have seen the Princess,
whose beauty I here send you drawn in this Tablet, though it be so excellent,
that these Colors do but injure it. May I know your pleasure that I may
hasten my journey, and the contract of these happy Nuptials, whereby the
wars that have long infested both Kingdoms may have an end.


Ismenia would not proceed any further, nor indeed could she for jealousy and
anger; a less discovery might have been sufficient to have killed her: she
accused her malicious fortune, and much bewailed the loss of Perozes,
apprehending so many inconveniences, that it seemed impossible he should ever
be hers. First, his Birth, and the distance between them; next, he was to
marry a Princess, enriched (as the Picture showed) with extraordinary beauty;
but hearing some body come, she dissembled her grief, and perceived it was her
Enemy, who (as he came along) sung thus:

As fair Ismenia forth did go,
A Sapphire sparkled in each eye,
And on her cheek did Jesmines grow,
Bathed in the Roses Purple dye.
But when I nearer came to have played
Within the Sunshine of her light,
She scorc'd me, in her beams betrayed
Like sportive flies to loss of sight.
What fear and reverence does beget
The approach unto so bright a flame,
Which can extinguish with its heat,
And makes both love and death the same!
An injured woman is not sensible of any thing so much as of flattery from him
that wrongs her; and Ismenia confident that Perozes love was counterfeit, took
it more unkindly to be deceived, then unrequited; for disaffection may be
natural, and out of our power, but dissimulation is not, being bred only in
malicious breasts. That Perozes might not boast he had forsaken her first,
though for the Princess of Albania, she went to him, and betwixt reason and
jealousy said thus:

Perozes, though you see me in this Mountain, so rudely attired, that my
richest ornament is the spotted skin of a Tygresse, yet you may well perceive,
my soul has more worth then my habit promises. You say you love me so
infinitely, that though you are of the best blood in Armenia, yet you will
hazard both life and fortune to be my Husband; and as this expression must not
either by the Laws of Civility or affection be unacknowledged, I requited it
with the like. But as those that love cannot dissemble, (for that is a crime) it
grieves my affection to have hid a secret from you. It is impossible we should
ever enjoy each other. Do not wonder that I undeceive you now, whereas I might
as well have done it before. All women at first conceal their passions,
unwilling to discover their imperfections to them they know not; for by open
profession of love they might beget too slight an opinion of themselves; but
when we find engagement we have a care to discover the truth to such
Professors of affection, that they may see the danger they incur, either for
avoidance or excuse. The sum of all is to let you know I am another; he who
I told you was my Father, is not so, but one whom misfortune has banished
Albania, and he has my promise to be his wife, though in truth he has yet had
no other assurance then my hand; therefore love me less, and contain your
self more: my descent is noble, and I must be his, having once professed it; for
my Obligation cannot be discharged but by giving my self unto him, and he is
of so excellent and gallant a mind that he (think it not passion) surpasses
you.

Scarce had the jealous Ismenia ended, when without expecting an answer of
satisfaction, she ran away into the more envious part of the Wilderness;
Perozes being unacquainted with the place presently lost her, expressing so
much passion as might have mollifi'd a Rock, if it could have heard him; but
all in vain; Ismenia would not run the hazard of relenting by hearing what
he could say: for the tender disposition of women is persuaded to weep by
seeing others do so: yet was she not without resentment; for, retiring to the
remotest corner of the Cave she wept affectionate tears, and taking out the
Letter that was directed to her lover, she kissed that name in the
superscription which was engraved in her heart. Thus the two Lovers passed two
days without meeting, not through Perozes neglect, but Ismenia's obstinacy,
who saying late one evening at the border of the mountain to behold a tree, on
whose bark both their names were engraven: What availes it (said she
complaining to her self) that Peroses writes himself mine on the trees, when
the Princess of Albania may countermand it? what that he flatters me with
such kind affection in this solitude, if at Court he adores a brighter beauty?
she would have said more, had she not been interrupted by the Music of a
sweet voice from amongst the Poplars: though she knew it was her ungrateful
Lover, yet she was willing to dispense a little with her resolution, and
hearken to this Song:

Ismenia's eyes my soul divide,
A fair yet hapless Sheperdesse,
In whom rich Nature all her pride,
And Fates their poverty express.
To move the suit I fear to miss
Her worth and my respect deny;
For where even hope endangered is,
Lovers in silence use to dye.
Thus the desire I entertain,
Neither shuns love, nor suit preferrs;
For though she to be mine disdain,
I Am blessed enough in being hers.
Ismenia perceiving by the words and voice it was Perozes, sought to hide her
self in the bushes, that she might avoid sight and speech with him; not that
she was averse from it, but she would not give occasion to awake that love
which slumbred in absence; but the rushing of the leaves betrayed her: Perozes
told her, She had no reason (unless she had with her habit changed he
humanity) to fly from one who had not lost her through any offense of his own:
But since he was so unfortunat, that he could not be hers, he entreated her to
inform her self by that Paper of his extreme passion, that she might at least
know how much she was indebted to him: so taking leave of her, he left in her
hand these Verses, which she imprinted as she read them in her soul.

Divinest Siren, cruel fair;
Cause of my life, and my despair;
Grief that descends to words is weak;
But mine is full and cannot speak:
For how can Fate more cruel be,
Then to grant life, denying thee?
Yet I in death hope to adore
Those joys without which life is poor:
My reason's banished by my pain;
Who can lose thee, and it retain?
How soon was my calm soul dejected,
And ruin suffered ere expected!
But since that bliss which once was mine,
Thou to another wilt resign.
Be happy in thy choice; whilst I
In unregarded ashes lie
Be happy in him; it is unfit
To wish thee joy and hinder it.
Then finish what thou have begun,
Increase my grief, and kill me soon.
And when I Am dead let pity move thee,
But to remember I did love thee.
Ismenia relenting would have read them often, had she not been hindered by
Gesimenes, who coming to seek her, and glad to have found her, entreated her
to divert his continual Melancholy with a Song; whereupon, more to obey him
then please her self, (dissembling her grief) she sung thus:

Why does that fool unjustly love accuse,
Who through his own fear did occasion lose?
To miss an offered happiness must be,
Or want of love, or too much modesty:
Thy scorn Lysarda I have justly won,
Who wanted light when I embraced the Sun.
O look into my heart, thou will see there,
'Twas admiration only caused my fear:
Respect curbed my affection; let me dye,
(displeasing thee) by thy enflaming eye:
Such death will make thy cruelty confess,
I never wanted love, though happiness.
When Ismenia had ended her Song, it being late, they retired homewards; and as
they were going up the Hill, by a Lane fenced on either side with Willowes and
white Poplars, they heard a great sound as of something that fell from an high;
Ismenia was amazed, and Gesimenes laid hold of his Bow, thinking it might be
some wild beast; they searched all about, but could not find the cause; at last
they perceived a Bark (^o they were not far from the Sea) near the Shore; it
was covered over, and had neither Helm nor Mariner to guide it; Gesimenes and
Ismenia fastened it to Land, and were desirous to know what was in it; scarce
were the Sails and Coverture taken off, when such astonishment seized them,
that for a good space they did nothing but look on each other: within it was a
man bathed in blood, and by his sid a beautiful Lady, living, yet so dismayed,
that she wanted little of the dead body which lay beside her: They were both
afflicted at so sad a spectacle, especially Gesimenes, who intentively
beholding the Lady, fancied, he saw in her the face and person of his absent
Wife. He gave the dead body burial in the Sea, since there was no means to
restore his life: he took the Lady in his arms, and carried her to the homely
Palace of his Cave, where he entertained her with such care, that in a short
time he had good hope of her life.

When she had recovered so much strength as to open her eyes, and found on
either side of her a man and woman: At first she was afraid of them, though
their behavior and hospitality had expressed more piety then her severe father
and kindred: She wondered much that Gesimenes so constantly fixed his eyes upon
her; and hearing Ismenia sometimes call him by his name, she said to him. Two
things hold me in this suspense, you may do me a favor to instruct me in
them: Is it true that you are called Gesimenes? Why since I opened my eyes have
you so steadfastly beheld me, often sighing, and sometimes weeping? you may ask
the same of me, because when I first heard your name, it struck me to the
soul; For I loved a Gentleman of the same name, at the expense of so many
afflictions, that this hazard of my life was the least; and should I say, that
this Gesimenes (whom I call Husband) was son to the King of Albania, truth
would not accuse me.

Gesimenes was so transported with joy, that he could scarce express his
mind. If (said he) I am the unfortunate Son of Pharnazes, and thy Husband;
if thou art Polixena, and my eyes deceive me not, how can I behold thee without
an ecstasy of content? how can my heart but break with the apprehension of the
misfortunes thou have suffered for my sake? Polixena, I am Gesimenes; and will
be thine, till heaven deprive me of this life, which I esteem now I enjoy thy
sight and embraces. Henceforward I shall desire life, which I thought I should
never have done: for during the time I have dwelt among these Rocks, the rising
Sun never found me not suing to heaven to be eased of it; for life is not a
pleasure, but a torment to the unfortunate.

Words are not full enough to express the content of these two Lovers; for
language is too narrow to cloth great passions; so that with their eyes and
souls they congratulated their strange and happy meeting. The beauty of
Ismenia and Gesimenes care of her, might well have given Polixena cause of
jealousy; yet when she was informed of the occasion which brought her to live
with him, she esteemed her with as much affection as if she had been her
own daughter. Thus being all three equally contented, Gesimenes desired her to
instruct them in the afflictions she suffered during his absence: for the
relation of past miseries in prosperity does deiight more then disconsolate:
wherefore to comply with their request, she said:

So many, my dear Gesimenes, have been the troubles that oppressed me in your
absence, and so continual, that it is impossible I should either then have
resented them, or now relate them fully. I was left as your surety, to satisfy
the hurt you did Lucander; who seeing he could not revenge himself on you,
resolved to do it on your other self, divulging my weakness, and giving it
out that I was delivered in his arms: My Father instead of punishing the
infamous cruelty he used to the innocent Infant, forgetting the relation it had
to his blood, encouraged him, and commanded I should be shut up in a Tower,
where for a long time I neither saw the face of the Sun, or of any humane
creature; until at last the King your Father moved with pity, permitted one
that had been brought up in my Fathers house to visit me, for they reposed
trust in him. With him I recreated the tedious hours of my imprisonment,
relating to him my misfortunes. One day he telling me that you were for
certain in a Village near Albania, I earnestly begged of him to afford me
some private means of writing to you, which he did: Then did I sign the death
of us both; For I writ a Letter, wherein I informed you of my sad condition,
and of the great affection of the people to you, who continually pitied you as
much as they wished Lucanders death, for being possessed of the Crown, he oppressed
them with tyrannical injuries. I advised you to make use of the protection of
some other Prince, by whose aid you might compass your revenge; In the mean
time, that I would (if it were needful) poison the Prince, that the Subjects
seeing him dead, and hearing you were alive, might be necessitated to seek
after you, lawfully to possess the Kingdom after the decease of Pharnazes.
These, and other things of importance did I write in that unhappy Letter, to
ease my heart, and redress your miseries; but there is no success where Fate
opposes; so unfortunate were Arnestes and I, that as he went from my chamber
to seek you out, he met Lucander, who questioned him concerning me; whereupon
he was so confounded, that your Brother began to suspect something, and causing
him to be apprehended and searched, found this Letter, by which he confessed more
then he knew: this put the Court into a tumult. My Father (who would be
singular in Loyalty, though at the expense of my life) executed on me the
greatest cruelty the world ever saw. He gave order for a Bark, so closed that
the air had no passage; into which, having killed poor Arnestes with many
wounds, he shut him dead, and me alive, to the intent that I might with the
horror miserably end my life. Then setting the Bark a drift, he committed us
to the mercy of the waves, pitied of as many as beheld us. Thus we floated
until heaven (moved with my prayers and tears) was pleased to cast me on this
shore, where your care has brought me once more into the light, and restored
that happiness which from my infancy I desired, though it has cost me so
dear.

Ismenia and Gesimenes congratulated Polixena's good fortune; for though it
were Eclipsed with troubles and discontents, yet the event being happy it
cannot be called adverse. Thus lived Gesimenes with his wife more contented
then if he had been Lord of the whole world, enjoying her beauty and company
without fear or interruption, endearing to himself that blessing which heaven
after so many years of affliction had reserved for him. Ismenia and Perozes
past the time with less delight, complaining each of the others affection; she
as thinking he was contracted to another, and he as having the same opinion of
her: But Ismenia weary of concealing her jealousy, was unwilling that Perozes
should accuse her of inconstancy, when she had just cause to condemn him:
wherefore she found him out amongst the Laurels and Jesmines, and showed him
the Pictnre and Letter: She told him, That the reason why she had belied her
own affection and constancy, was not that she loved any else, but that she was
of opinion he was another; that those two witnesses would prove it and that he
could not wonder at her cruelty, since his falsehood and ill requital deserved
it.

I confess (fair Ismenia) replied Perozes, that before I saw you, I treated of
a marriage with the Princess of Albania; but I assure you, after I beheld your
divine beauty, and believed that I had obtained some place in your affection, I
alterd my resolution (though to the discontent of my Father and his Subjects,
who earnestly desire the accomplishment of that match, to put an end to the
wars between the two kingdoms) To comply with your affection, I engage my faith
never to marry as long as I live, unless with you; nor shall you be, (if the
stories say true) the first Queen that was bred up amongst Woods and Rocks; but
be sure that he, whom you call your Father, be so indeed; for if you deceive
me, and he prove a Lover, I will so revenge my self on both, that my love
shall wonder at my severity.

Ismenia was so well satisfied and pleased with Perozes promise, that to
confirm what she had said, she placed him so, that he might see Gesimenes in
his Wives arms; and as Lovers seldom conceal any thing from one another,
notwithstanding she had told him that he was her Father, she related to him
their true story; to which Perozes hearkened with much content, seeing how
nobly his beloved Ismenia was descended if Gesimenes and Polixena were her
Parents, for then she was Niece to the King of Albania, a good reason to excuse
his unadvised love, since he married, though not the Princess, yet one of her
blood. With these joyful hopes Perozes took his leave, but Ismenia was troubled
when she considered that she had done ill to feign her self the daughter of
Gesimenes, knowing how easy it was to disprove it: for though her affection
and resemblance made it probable, yet she was conscious that their births were
extremely different.

Perozes, devoting himself wholly to the affection of Ismenia, and resolving to
marry her, refused the match with the Princess of Albania, and sent to give
Pharnazes notice he was already married, who was sensible of this affront,
believing that this neglect was in contempt of his alliance; and without
expecting either Letters or Ambassadors, with his Son Lucander he raised a
great Army, binding themselves by a solemn Oath not to return to Albania, till
they had either taken or slain Perozes.

On the other side Perozes was not negligent; for having notice of the
intention of Pharnazes, he desired of his Father a Commission for that War,
and leavied sufficient forces to resist the proud Albanians. Mean while,
visiting Ismenia, he desired her to persuade her Father Gesimenes (who was a
great Soldier) to command his Army; as well to protect the cause which was his
own, being his daughters, as to revenge himself upon Lucander, who now came
insolently with Pharnazes; besides the Albanians might hereby know he was
alive, and had power to oppose them. Ismenia was much perplexed to foresee her
imposture would be soon discovered; but committing all to time and fortune,
she determined to speak to Gesimenes, and thereupon informed him of the
Princes affection, the occasion of the War, and the opportunity which heaven
has offered him to return from that miserable kind of life to his first
estate.

Gesimenes disliked not the means which Ismenia in Perozes name offered for
obtaining the desired end of his affairs. He was willing to serve him; but
not thereby to injure his father: a relation (though he were ungrateful) not
to be dispensed with. His hope was to be the instrument of peace, and of the
death of his treacherous brother, upon whose death he might return to Albania
and enjoy the Crown. Ismenia told him, that it would be requisite for some
time to acknowledge her for his daughter. Gesimenes replied, that he should not
only for a time, but as long as he lived esteem her so: For the love he bare
her, and the resemblance she had to Polixena was such, that if her Parentage
had not been very mean, it would easily have bin credited. Ismenia brought him
to Perozes, the two Princes conversed together with great expressions of
affection. Perozes wondered to behold him so altered and different from what he
had known him before; and enquiring after Polixena, he entreated him to bring
her along that she might bear his sister company. They were honorably
received by the Nobility and commons of that Kingdom, with respect due to
persons of such eminence. The King conferred the Generals Staff on Gesimenes,
who changing his Habit, appeared so graceful and majestic, that they could
hardly persuade themselves he was the same whom the day before they had seen
in that wild shape: so much do ornaments add to exterior Beauty.

By this time the proud Albanians were come so near, that the mountains
resounded with the echo of their Warlike instruments: At night Gesimenes went
out in his old habit, to espy in the Camp with what force his father came; he
was so well acquainted with that place that he feared not to lose himself,
and wearing so strange a habit it was improbable they should suspect him. One
night as he went down from his Cave to the bottom of the Hill, with intent to
return to the Court, he heard some not far off consulting privately
together; withdrawing himself behind a tuft of Oaks and Pines, he beheld
from them thence a young man in Armor, whom all the rest seemed to respect and
honor as their Master; Gesimenes by reason of the darkness of the night could
not discern who he was, but he gathered that from his words, which sufficiently
troubled him, for he was speaking to them to this effect:

Though here are but a few that hear me, yet I may well say here is the
greatest part of the Nobility of Albania; for there is not any one can equal
Lucander, or stand in competition with you. I am as you know, the Kings only
son: for though I lately had a Brother, I believe either the Sea or Land by
this time has hid him in its Bowels; or if he were alive, yet being a
Bastard, he could not oppose me the lawful Heir; nor has he the right I
have. My Father is old, and uses both you and me too harshly. Indeed I am
sorry he has lived thus long: It troubles me to be a Subject, being now fit
for government, which so long as he lives I cannot enjoy. I have at other times
advised with you about this business. The cause that moved me now to call you
together is an opportunity of effecting this design, which offers it self
unto you. My Father is so industriously careful in this War, that though his
years dissuade him, he often goes forth alone to view both his own Camp and
the enemies. This night I espied him; and if I mistake not, he is now coming
along that Path, so that if you please now to follow me, we may this very
instant assault and kill him; and we will tear his garments, that it may be
thought the wild Beasts of these mountains were his Murderers. The Soldiers
then being destitute of a King, must of necessity transfer the Crown on me; of
which when I am possessed, and the Scepter in my hand, I will by degrees destroy
all that favored Gesimenes. You shall not be my Subjects but my friends, my
companions, on whose Shoulders I will lay the weight and care of the whole
Kingdom.

The Piety of Ges^menes could scarce believe the villainy which Lucander
intended against him to whom he owed his being: but giving thanks to heaven for
the favorable opportunity of preserving his Fathers life, he went that way by
which Lucander said he was to pass. He had not gone far when he found him
completely armed, going about to inform himself of the state of the Camp, who
seeing him drew his sword, thinking he was a wild man, and assaulted him to kill
him: But Gesimenies in token of peace throwing down the young Tree which he had
in his hand, told him that he might see he was a man as himself, that he came
to advise him, not to go that way, because his son with some of his Subjects,
who it seems would be advantaged by his death, lay in wait to kill him.

If thou do think, said Pharnazes, by this deceit to injure me, know thou art
mistaken, for at my call twenty thousand men that I have in the field will come
forth, against whom neither thy swiftness nor strength can avail thee;
besides I am able to defend my self not only against thee (who art a poor
conquest) but against as many wild Beasts as this Desert nourishes.

That you may be assured, (replied Gesimenes) I neither deceive, nor desire to
injure you, go down by this little hill, and you will see to whose trust you
commit your self: be confident I would not suffer you to pass any further, or
consent you should put your self into so imminent danger, were I not certain
my own strength could sufficiently, defend you: Believe your self secure in
my faith, for I love you more then you imagine, though not out of obligation,
for you have used me with severity, of which some other occasion shall inform
you, if my unfortunate stars permit.

Pharnazes was amazed at this Speech, and was the sooner inclined to credit it,
when he called to mind the ill disposition of Lucander, and some others that he
conversed with: he was unwilliug to return to his Tent before he had satisfied
himself; wherefore he descended the bottom of the Hill, and Gesimenes after
him, earnestly desiring the Traitors would sally forth, that he might have an
occasion to oblige his Father, and be revenged for all the injuries had been
done him. Lucander, so soon as Pharnazes came near, gave notice to the rest
and assaulted him, crying, Kill the Tyrant of Albania. Pharnazes called to
Gesimenes to perform the promise, and protect his life. He needed not much
entreaty, for as soon as he saw the ambush appear, he came up to him, and so
laid about him on every side with the young Oak, that he dispersed them, and
if any opposed him, he paid for his boldness, by measuring his length upon the
ground. Lucander adventured, for the de^ence of one blow to trust to his
Buckler, thinking to get in with his sword; but with such fury did Gesimenes
let fall upon his enemy, that he felled him to the ground: The assistant
Conspirators afrighted at his fall, left him and ran away: Pharnazes leading
away Lucander, sent him to prison, but concealed the cause, fearing the
soldiers might mutiny: Then being alone with Gesimenes, entreated him to let
him know who he was to whom he owed life. Gesimenes yet unwilling to be known,
answered, he was the son of that mountain; but the reason which obliged him to
his defense with such earnestness was the intimate friendship he once had with
one called Gesimenes, who professed himself his unfortunate Son.

Alas, said Pharnazes, drowning his face in tears, had he lived, this Traitor
Lucander durst not have attempted so impious a Treason. He not only lives
(answered Gesimenes) but ere many days pass, I shall be able to let you see
him, as obedient still, as you had never used him unkindly. Then believe if me,
(replied Pharnazes) that very instant will I set the Crown of Albania upon his
head; the Kingdom will not be sorry for it: though they think he be not heir
while Lucander lives, yet there is more in this then they know. You are his
friend, and will rejoice at his happiness: that therefore you may seek him
with greater diligence, be attentive and and hear what a low condition his
Fate decreed him, even before he was borne. Gesimenes with wonder observed what
his Father said, and giving him time to wipe away the tears of his affliction,
heard him proceed in this manner:

Know that in my youth I loved a Lady, with so unreasonable an affection, that
I forgot both Heaven and my self for her: This blind passion arrived at such a
height, that the Queen and she, being at once both with child, and delivered
of two Sons both in one day, to make a transcendent expression of my love to
her, I caused the children to be changed, unknown to any except heaven, and
one who was my Favorite. By this means Lucander, the son of my Mistrisse
(suppoz'd the Queens) was esteemed heir of the Kingdom, and I had a better
pretense for my affection. Gesimenes, who was indeed my lawful Son, had
Clorinda (the Lady I most esteemed) assigned for his mother. The whole Kingdom
wondered I should hate Gesimenes, the son of her I adored; and esteem Lucander
whose mother I hated I will not relate how cruelly I used Gesimenes, i^ cannot
but grieve you to hear it, if you love him: my disaffection proceeded so
far, as to banish him Albania: If he be alive (as we had news of his
death) he has lived many years miserably abroad in strange Countries. But the
nature of man is unconstant, the love I bear Clorinda vanished, and my
undeceived understanding, perceived its error; then began I so much to dislike
Lucander, that I intended to have discovered his Birth; but I forbore,
considering the Crown would be without an heir, seeing Gesimenes was wanting.
But since Lucander proves so ungrateful, as by treason to deprive me of life
and Scepter, and you assure me Gesimenes lives; if you perform your promise in
bringing him, you shall see him King of Albania, that he may have his own,
and you in part be paid the debt is owing you for my life: His happiness
cannot but reflect on you who are so much his friend.

Gesimenes was not able to contain his joy, but falling down at his Fathers
feet discovered himself, saying he was Gesimenes, and that he was well content
with the miseries Fortune had inflicted on him, since he had been banished from
his sight; Now she had bestowed on him the happiness to rescue his gray
hairs. Pharnazes transported with such joy to see him alive, as the
strangeness of the accident required, embraced him most affectionately, and
told him that he should go along with him, for on the morrow his Commanders
should kiss his hand, and his presence would animate the Soldiers, for they
all loved him extremely, and knowing his valor would undertake the war, with
the greater resolution. In this Gesimenes could not obey, excusing himself
with the acknowledgement of many favors received from Perozes, of whose Forces
he was General, yet that he had taken Arms against his Father, was not to
offend him (as he had shown) but to be a means of peace between both
Kingdoms. Gesimenes at parting enquired of him for his Wife Polixena; he much
troubled, desired him not to speak of her; for it would afflict his heart to
remember the cruelty which her Father and Lucander had used in her death.

Let it not grieve you so much, said Gesimenes, For she is living; and although
it may seem impossible, I have long enjoyed her company in this Desert, for
Heaven does favor innocence, and protect those Lives which Power and Fortune
do unjustly persecute.

Hereupon Gesimenes departed joyfully: And Pharnazes was no less glad for
having found his son, and with him his own life, which had that night been
lost, had it not been preserved by Gesimenes. Then communicating this strange
event to his Counsel, he determined to treat with the King of Armenia, and
Prince Perezes concerning Peace, and the former Marriage. The evening following
a place of meeting was appointed for the two Kings. The first thing they did
was the proclaming of Gesimenes King of Albania, and the same day Polixena was
confirmed his Wife; the King and Queen of Armenia offering themselves to give
her at the Temple. Perozes told Pharnazes that the reason why he rejected the
propounded Marriage with the Princess, was because he was already married to
Ismenia, who was Niece to him, and Daughter to Gesimenes and Polixena.
Hereupon, they both to inform him of the truth, replied that they had no
further knowledge of her, then that she had been brought up some years in their
company; that the business was now of such consequence, that it would be
unjust to deceive him; and though they had reason to love Ismenia as well as if
she were their Daughter, yet in truth she was but of poor and mean Parentage.

This struck Perozes, as if he had heard the sentence of his death, but it
troubled him more, when he understood Ismenia could not be found; for seeing a
necessity that her deceit must be discovered, and that she must lose Perozes,
shame would not suffer her to appear; so she retired into the woods, flying
from him she loved, and intending to end her life in that solitude. The
Nuptials were deferred till they might have news of the lost Ismenia; for the
married couple were so discontented at her absence that their resentment gave
occasion to many to suspect she was indeed their Daughter, and that they denied
it only because they were unwilling to give her to Perozes: The truth was,
they loved her so extremely, that if Gesimenes had not known Ismenias Parents
might have contradicted it, he would have owned her. Perozes in great passion
offered a great sum of money to any that should bring news of her. Gesimenes
calling to mind that she had often told him the place where she was borne,
instantly dispatched Messengers to inform themselves with all diligence of her
Parents, and to see whether she were not returned to them: After inquiry they
found them, and upon examination they confessed, That Ismenia was not their
Daughter, thought they had professed her such almost ever since she was borne;
that a Gentleman of Albania named Artaspes one night brought her to their
house, to be brough up by them, charging them upon forfeit of their lives, not
to reveal the secret to any; that three years ago having a desire to match
her with a Kinsman of theirs, on the day intended for marriage she stole away,
since which time they could never know whether she were alive or dead.

This increased the admiration of all; seeing Artaspes had brought her thither,
they supposed she must be his: He being at that time in Albania, they sent
for him to declare what he knew concerning Ismenia: Being come he desired a
little privacy with Gesimenes, and thus spoke unto him.

What I shall affirm of her that you call Ismenia, concerns none so much as
your self to know; not to keep you in suspense; Prince Lucander and my self,
walking late one night in the City, as we were returning to the Palace, a
woman with her Face veiled called to us, and addressing her self to Lucander,
he asked her, (being well nigh dead) if she would go along with him, or that
he should do her any service I would beseech you (answered the Lady,
delivering a Child into his arms) to carry this infant to Gesimenes, who will
easily know from whence it comes: and (believe me) we may both be able to
requite this favor: so giving it to Lucander, (whom if she had known she
would sooner have given it to a Lion) she went away, desiring us not to follow
her, because it concerned both her life and honor: We both stood amazed,
devising who this Lady might be; for knowing how entirely you did love
Polixena, we could not persuade our selves, that you should have any other
affection, and Polixena living so carefully watched, we as little suspected it
could be she. In the end we carried the child to my house, and he gave me order
to deliver it to a Nurse; the next day he under stood Polixenas sudden sickness,
and viewing the child's countenance, was fully persuaded it was hers and yours.
The rage of his jelousie was incited by cruelty, and relying on his power he
commanded me to bring it that he might kill it, and perform the promise he had
made to send it you; when I understood this unjust intent, I was as much
perplexed as if the Child had been mine own, so divine was the beauty of it.
I was (to say truth) afraid: if I obeyed him not I lost his favor, (for
Princes for one displeasure forget the services of our whole life) and to obey
him was contrary to my piety: at last I resolved to bring it to him, not to
displease him; but as I was going to this bloody Sacrifice heaven seemed to
applaud my compassion, offering me an opportunity to save it: for
understanding that a servant of mine had a child borne two days before, newly
dead, I took it; and wounding the innocent breast, besmeared it with the
congealed blood, and carried it to Lucander, who thinking it had been that
which caused his jealousy, commended my cruelty, and perfected his furious
revenge on it, tearing in pieces the poor Infant, and thus was it sent to you,
the more to afflict you, that the grief of seeing it might kill you: Hereupon
ensued the misfortunes that you know; when night was come I departed privately
from Albania, and in a private place enquired for a Nurse with whom I left the
Child, telling her it was requisite, that it should not be known that I brought
it to her, and giving her two hundred Crowns, I took my leave of her; since
which time, lest Lucander might come to know it, I never saw her but twice;
This is all I know concerning Ismenia.

Gesimenes amazed to hear these things, doubted whether the prodigy of his
own story and Ismenia's life were a Dream, or true: for according to the
Relation of Artaspes she was his Daughter: And her face had been sufficient to
prove it, if there had been no other testimony. He flung his Arms about
Artaspes neck, and promised him such requital, that he should not repent his
courtesy. He presently related all to Pharnazes, Perozes, and Polixena, and as
great was the joy of all, as their grief that Ismenia was missing. They went to
seek her, Gesimenes as her Father, Perozes as her Husband: Gesimenes went to
the Hill where he had formerly lived with her, and at the side of a Wood, he
saw a man lying a long upon the gras: coming near, and asking what he did
there, he answered, he was a poor Soldier, that hearing a Proclamation,
promising ten thousand Crowns to him that should find Ismenia, out of a
desire to better his Fortune he went to seek her, and was not out of hope to
find her, because he had the same day seen a woman on the top of the
mountain, clothed with skins of wild beasts, whom he suspected to be
Ismenia; for as soon as she heard that name, she made away so fast, that it
was impossible for him to overtake her.

Gesimenes rewarded the Soldier for his information, and both ascending the
mountain, they rested not until they came to a Spring dressed up with Rushes
and Flags, where under a Cypress Tree they found her asleep. Gesimenes
related to his Daughter her happy birth; at which she rejoiced more for being
worthy of Perozes, then for being daughter to the Prince of Albania. Returning
to Court, she accknowledged those for her Parents whom she ever loved, as if
she had known them to be so. And her Marriage with Perozes was immediately
Celebrated with much Solemnity.

FINIS.

