A Perfect NARRATIVE OF THE BATTLE OF Knocknones, WITHIN THE COUNTY Of Cork
and Province of Munster, on Saturday, the Thirteenth of November, betwixt the
Parliaments Forces under the Command of the Lord INCHIQUIN, Lord President of
Munster; AND The forces of the Irish Rebels under the Lord Taaff, set down by
an Officer of the Parliaments Army, present and acting at the Fight.

Directed to an Honorable Member of the House of COMMONS.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, in Paul's Church-yeard, at the sign of the
Kings Head. 1647.

A Narrative of the Battle of KNOCKNONES.
IT was now a season as unapt for Action to the naked English, as opportune for
the Jrish better inured and accommodated to the hardships of that Country, when
the Lord Taff, General for the Irish, advanced toward the English Quarters,
with a Design to block up, or distress them in their Garrisons, wherein it
being discerned, that he might prevalently proceed to their destruction, if a
seasonable opposition were not given; It was at a Counsel of War summoned by
the Presedent, long debated whether to issue forth of our Garrisons to
encounter this approaching Torrent or not, and at length after an earnest
endeavor of diverse to the contrary, resolved to be more consistent with our
safeties to make head against the Rebels in the field, then to suffer them to
come within our Quarters, and so disable us either to join together in an
offencive, or subsist together in a defensive posture, In pursuance of which
resolution, The Army (being by the general vote, and the Presidents Orders
drawn together at Moyallo) marchched on the Twelfth of this Instant (after a
due discharge of those pious invocations and exercises of addresses to the
Divine Providence which the President had enjoined) to a place called Gariduff
(in English Blask-gardens) the Rebels encamping at Knocknones within two miles
of us; but the day so far spent, as that it was not held fit to make any
attempt then upon them; About the evening came a Trumpet from the Lord Taff
with a Letter to the President, in these words,

My Lord,
THe delay of my not sending to you a return of your last Letter by your
Trumpet, was occasioned by my stay for my Artillery, which being come, I tell
your Lordship, That Captain Courtepp very much magnifying the Excellency of
your Foot, I offered (more for recreation then with a suspicion that it might
break your Army) That a Thousand or two of mine should (when ever you made an
indifferent appointment,) sight with a like number of yours; which I am now
ready to perform in this place; And if you please to draw the Remain of your
Army hither, I will look upon you, and certainly neither of our Parties will
want the gallantry of seconding their engaged friends. Our quartell is to
preserve the Kings Interests, which all of us with the hazard of our lives will
maintain against my opposition; And when I consider, that by the destruction
of your party, I may be in the more unmolested Condition to serve him, be
certain your invitation to battle is neceptably received by me. I know that
in your Lordships Army there are a great many Gentlemen which have been very
faithful to their King, and (...) is your Lordships, practice to abuse them by
(...) them in a service to destructive to His Majesty's Rights. And pray, my
Lord, do not delude them by detracting this Army, who are unalterably, and
without any hope of particular benefit, determined to loose themselves, or
restore (as much as in them lies) the King to His former greatness; This is
truth, and it proceeds cordially from

Knocknones 12. Novem. 27. Your Lordships Servant, TAFF.


To which the Lord President returned.

MY LORD, I have received your Letter, by your Trumpeter, and your Lordship
might before this have perceived that I was not ignorant where your Army lay,
had not the approach of night scanted me of time to march up unto you; And
being you have performed as much as I desire in bringing your Army hither, I
shall not desire you to loose any advantage you have in numbers of men, being
your offer was only made for Recreation: You are pleased to say your quarrel
is chiefly to preserve the Kings Interest, and because I believe it will little
avail me to offer Reasons to convince you of the contray, I shall defer the
dispute until we meet in the morning, when I believe these Gentlemen whom ye
suppose to be deluded by me, will by Gods help use Rhetoric that will better
conduce to that end, to which I shall refer your Lordship for satisfaction,
being resolved to contribute there in to the endeavors of

Your Servant, (...).


This night we lodged in a wood which equally affoarded both security and
convenience unto the soldiers. The word was to the Foot (Pray) to the House
(Prevail;) and this night some (...) was observed in the nature of (...) early
in the mornning we began to prepare (the light giving us now a clear
manifestation of what was to be done) the enemy was drawn up upon a hill about
two Miles of called Knoknones, which being of great advantage to them. The Lord
President (if possible) to withdraw them from it sent this Letter to the Rebels
Gene all.

My Lord,
Here is a very fair piece of ground betwixt your Lordships Army and ours, one
this side the brook; whether if you please to advance, we will do the like; we
do not so much doubt the gallantry of your resolution, as to think you will
not come, but give you this notice, to the end you may see we do stand upon no
advantage of ground, and are willing to dispute our Qaurrel upon indifferent
terms; being consident that the justness of our Cause will be this day made
manifest by the Lord, and that your Lordships judgment will be rectified
concerning

Novem. 13. 1647. Your servant Inchiquin.


To which the Lord Taaff returned verbal answer, that he was not so little a
soldier, as not to improve any advantage he had, of ground or otherwise, which
he doubted not the President would do in like ease.

The reason as we learned afterward by some of their men taken prisoners,
(besides the advantage of ground being a steep hill) why the Lord Taaff so
pertinaciously stuck to that place was this.

There was a certain old blind Prophecy running amongst the Irish, which
converted into English rymes like their old bard speaks thus.

Mac Donogh (future age shall see
A man of thy posterity,
By whom the English Lord shall fall
Blood shall ascend to the legs small
The place we Knoknones do call.
Which was by the Lord Taaff applied to himself, for that the hill whereon he
stood was called Knocknones, and his Ancestors had the lands of Mack. Donagh
given by the Kings of Enland in reward of their service performed against he
Rebels here, their Leuiftenant General Sr. Alexander Mac Donnell known
vulgarly by the name of Colkitta, was unwilling to have the fight performed on
that day (upon a superstious observation,; for that he was exceedingly afraid
of Saturns malevolent influence, that day being to him critical) the former
name of this place was antiquated almost this last age, the name of it now
being Englishmans hill, as it proved upon this happy and successful day.

The Lord Taaff therefore resolving obstinately to adhere to his chosen ground,
the Lord President calling a Counsel of War to advise whether it were
expedient to assault them on such a disadvantageous place (the wind freinding
them likewise, and their numbers almost doubling ours) but the sense of our
present condition quickly resolved this scruple, it being to no purpose to have
advanced hitherto, if we should proceed no further, and for the success to put
our selves upon the mercy of God. It is not to be forgotten here that before
the Counsel, the Lord President commanded that God should be sought by prayer,
for our direction in this needful time of trouble. The word given on our side
was Victory, the mark a branch of new broom in our hats, wherewith our
Quarters then abounded. The enemies mark was a strawen rope about their hats;
their Word was God and St. Paterick, they having forgotten how lately their
contry St. had failed them; (for that was the word when we put them to the
sword at Cashel) their numbers consisted as themselves gave out 9000. Foot.
and a 1000. Horse, but by list found afterward in the Leiuftenant Generals
pocket, they were mustred in the field 7464 foot, and 1076, horse. besides
Officers: our Army was near 4000 Foot, and 1200 horse, the enemy ranging
their battle in a plain front, all along the hill, that so they might engage
all their force together, their foot were drawn into nine divisions, of which
the greater part by much was Pike, winged with three bodies of Horse on each
side, beside reserves; our foot whose number was by half the less, were
marshald into three devisions, whereof two parts of three were Muskets, the
right and left Wing of Horse were made of 13 bodies of Horse, 7 on the right
wing, and 6 on the left (with their Reserves;) Both Armies thus drawn up,

The Rebels held firmly (their first resolution) not to part with their
station, but that we should either not fight at all, or do it upon these
unequal terms, the wind was for the Rebels, the Lord President (whose Rival
no man can be in this piece of glory, it being indeed in all men's judgments,
under God, the gaining of the day on our side) thoroughly weighing their numbered
ground and Comodity of the place, above us, all which he considered of too much
moment they might be to turn the Seal in the Balance of War, thought of a way
of forcing them to that which they would not willingly be drawn to, to leave
the ground, and discompose their present form, that so (we might have the
advantage in that disorder) to assault them; and this he effected thus;

He drew the left wing of his battle from the ground, wherein he at first
placed them, making them move into a place of fallow ground more leftward, as
if he would get upon the enemies backs on that side, and Commanded his right
wing to wave a little that way too, as if he went with all his Force to assail
them in that one place. The Rebels careful enough to support their own
design, had a watchful eye upon all our motions; and by this last, imagining
they might be charged in the Rear, or surcharged with the multitudes of our men
at one place, the train of the Lord Presidents Plot immediately took; for they
breaking their first form, parted with their stands: Likewise drawing most of
their Forces to succor their right wing, by varying the scene of their ground,
we got these advantages. The wind was made an indifferent arbiter, the ascent
of the hill not so steep, and only the Sun was now a neuter to ripen the
Fruit of this Design quite, which was now more then green. The Lord President
commanded two pieces of Artillery to be drawn to play on their right wing, and
if any disorder thereby happened, our Horse and Foot were in that nick to fall
on: our right wing having observed the left of theirs, made thin with some
confusion likewise in sending relief to their friends, had command to resume
their first stations, and to incline further to the right hand (as our left
wing had done before to the left) as if they likewise intended to surprise the
Rebels on the back; to prevent which, the Rebels resolved immediatdly to fall
on: to this end they advanced with their Horse before their Foot, to charge;
but that error being soon espied by ours, our shot were commanded presently to
advance under the shelter of a Ditch that parted them and us, who poured such
showers of hail upon them (that it proving a funeral peall to many) the rest
retired foul, and routed their own Foot. This their neighbors espying,
followed their example, and so their main body of Foot, and left wing of Horse
ran clean way, and our Horse followed after them in the chase: But God willing
to mingle a little gall with the sweet cup he had before given us (that so we
might be contented to receive every thing at his hand) was pleased, that part
of ground which was assigned for our left wing, was not so convenient for
horse, yet to be accepted (where there was no choice of better) but very
defenceable by Foot, by reason of some enclosures and ditches, and a lane near
adjacent; there the Lord President made the bounds of his Foot, but they by
their valor (if not rashness rather) fancying to themselves some imaginary
advantage, pressed further, and so clouded us a little with the smoke of their
shot, that the right wing of the Rebels Army which was led by Sir Alexander
Mack-Donnel, alias Colkitto. the Rebels Lieutenant general, on whom our guns
playing fiercely (to prevent that danger and perform some notable service, as
he had promised with his Red-shankes) came thundering down without the least
sense of danger, even the Rebels horse on their right winge advancing with
those foot, were charged by their opposite horse on our left wing, and routed;
who following hard upon them, the Rebels foot slipped in undecerned of them upon
our foot, whose forwardness, seeing the enemies horse routed had left their
defensive stage which they might with ease and safely have maintained; and
rouling down like a Torrent impetuously on our foot, routed our forlorn hope,
by which means our foot being our numbered the Enemy began to have the
execution of them; possessed two of our guns, and one of them being loaded,
discharged it against us, and so tearing down all before them got to our
wagons and there fell a plundering had it not bin for this disaster, without
doubt, we had bought a most perfect and glorious victory at the easiest rate
that might be without the loss as is imagined of ten men, but this cost some
fifty of our common men their lives, and diverse of out galantest Commanders not
being able to stay their men nor willing to run along with them, there
gloriously sacrificed their lives, rather choosing to die, though almost
deserted of all, then to give the least ground back to so barbarous and cruel
Rebels. The Lord President was but newly parted from the left wing being on the
right, where he joyfully saw a Victory on the nick of gaining, by the total
discomfiture of that part of the Enemy: but looking toward our left wing,
there his eyes were presented with the rufull spectacle of his men's slaughters
and the Rebels overturning all before them even to our wagons, he immediately
posted down some Regiments of Foot, and a troop or two of Horse, which had been
there for Reserves, and not come upon the charge: These coming down fell upon
the Rebels in their return from our Baggage, where they made there lives, pay
the price of their insolent attempt by putting the greatest part of them to
the, sword, amongst whom fell Sir Alexander Mack Donnell and his Lieutenant
Colonel. And thus by Gods help and the wisdom and valor of our General,
Commanders and Soldiers, a glorious victory was gained over the Rebels, the
chase was followed every way by our Foot and Horse, but Horse especially, for
they were too light for our footmen, all over the Country, till night hindered
the further prosecution when a retreat being sounded for that time the Lord
President and his Officers in the field with their Soldiers, gave thanks to
God for his extraordinary great mercy, and deliverance. The slaughter was not
made an end with that day, for the next day our Horse ranged the Country and
found diverse; and the foot hunted the woods, and bogs, and by that means found
many of the enemy which were put to the sword upon the place.

The storm fell sore upon their foot, the Country who should know best report
five thousand to be slain, there could not be less then four thousand, we
recovered near 6000 Arms, 38 Colors of Foot, with some Cornets of Horse,
we also recovered their Wagons and all their Ammunition, took the Lord
Taaff's their Generals tent, field bed, and Cabinet wherein are papers of
concernment, importing much of this service of Ireland, which is to be
delivered into the House. In it was found likewise his Commission from the
Supreme Council for being General of the Forces of Munster; so that by the
loss of his Army he wants Men to command, and of his Commission, power to
command men: On our part were slain in that unhappy rout of our left wing,
some noble and gallant Officers, Sir William Bridges Collonell of Horse,
Collonell Gray, Major Brown, Sir Robert Travers the Judge-Advocate was killed
at our Baggage, a Captain or two, Reformades, and some other Officers of
inferior rank, when the sword had sufficiently quenched his thirst of blood,
then in a cooler vain, mercy began to take place, and these Persons
undermentioned were taken Prisoners.

A List of the Prisoners taken.
Colonel Randal Mack-Donnel. Lieuten. Col. Mac-Namarrow. Major John Fealane.
Captain Garret-fitz-Morris. Captain Pursell. Captain Hugh Kely. Captain Edmond
Bourke. Captain Pierce Wealsh. Captain Robert Supple. Captain Lieutenant
Nugent. Captain Gully Reagh. Captain Bryan. Captain Mack nee Marra. Captain
Lieuten. Stephenson. Captain Donnogh O Bryen. Capt. Daniel Mack nee Marra.
Capt. Lieute. Kenedy O Bryen. Captain Florence Mack Carthy Captain Donnogh Mack
Carthy Captain John Mack nee Marra Captain Richard Ferrester. Captain William
Butler. Captain Theobald Butler. Captain To. Mack Domrohugh. Captain Alexander
Jamson. Captain Mlaghlame. Captain William O Dudie. Captain Farriah O Donnell.
Captain Eneas O Doniell. Captain John O Donnell, Captain Arthur Lyncie, Captain
Marcus Nestor, Captain Hugh O Conner. Captain Doniell O Sulavan.
Lieutenants.
Lieutenant Thomas Hellihed, Lieutenant Patrick Hogane, Lieutenant Conner Mack
Nanamarra, Lieutenant Conner O Bryen, Lieutenant Edmond Swine, Lieutenant Manus
Mack Donnogh, Lieutenant John Bourke, Lieutenant Noll Dignume, Lieutenant
Thomas Butler, Lieutenant William Kelly, Lieutenant Eneas O Duly, Lieutenant
Teige O Donnoghue Lieutenant Dwyer, Lieutenant Dolton.
Ensigns.
Thomas fitz Morris, Ensign Mack Namarra, Ensign Hanraghane, Ensign Lyllice,
Ensign Edmond Bourke, Cornet Purcell, Ensign Edmond O Grady, Ensign Donnoh
Mack Maghane Ensign Doniell O Nelane, Ensign Daniel Mac Cady, Ensign Loghin
Kelly. Ensign William Hodnet, Ensign Donnogh O Broe, Ensign John Mack
Doniell Carthy, Ensign Francis Gordian, Ensign Daniell Bourke, Ensign John
Corcrew, Coronet John fitz Gerrald, Quartermaster Richard Segerson, Ensign
Lacy: Troopers, 14 Serieants, 9 Corporalls 7 Soldiers, 22 Chirurgions. 6

Gentlemen of the Country.
Master Purtell. Master Stephen Brown, Master John Novy, Master Christopher Oge
Purtel, Afterward found out with the Soldiers, Lieutenant Bryen Mack Cragh,
Ensign Barret, Ensign John Bourke, William Lee Quartermaster.
Diverse other Captains and Officers were made prisoners, who remaining yet in
the Soldiers hands unbrought in, could not be inrold in this list, on our part
were taken prisoners, Lieutenant Collonell Crispe, who is now releast and with
us for an Officer of theirs of like quality, besides one Lieutenant more, here
to give you just account what every Officer and Soldier performed, (except that
small party which unfortunately fled, would swell this relation too much, and
inquire the actors modesty, who desire the glory should be ascribed to God,
themselves being but employed as instruments. For the Officers, and amongst the
forwardest of them, Colonel Temple, who had seen them perform this days
service, would have thought them worthy of a better reward, then having
conquered all their enemies abroad, to go home, and be conquered themselves by
their own wants, each Soldier honored God by his valor, and none
dishonored themselves. The Lord President has not yet made an end of his
victory, for he is prosecuting it vigorously, by reducing all the Country into
Contribution, where he marches notwithstanding the violence of the weather, and
the practices of some to draw the Soldier to a mutinous crying out, Home, Home
it being now a deep snow, and his men almost naked, that so the Province may
be subdued, and the Rebels disabled to draw suddenly to a head again, which
if it please the Divine Providence to assist us with seasonable supplies, we
shall use all possible and effectual means to prevent.

A brief of the slain and taken.
Taken of the Enemies Horse. 200 Slain of the Foot. 4000 Gentlemen Officers
taken Prisoners, 68 Gentlemen of the Country. 6 More common Officers. 4
Colors of Foot. 38 Cornets of Horse. 3 Of Ammunition, wagons. 4 Of Arms. 6000
The Lieutenant General slain.
FINIS.

