A PERFECT NARRATIVE: Or a Full, and Exact RELATION Of the late Great and
Bloody FIGHT BETWEEN The DVTCH, SPANISH, and IMPERIAL FORCES on the one Side,
and the FRENCH ARMY, under the Command of the PRINCE of CONDE, on the Other.

With the Numbers Slain on both Sides; and a List of the COMANDERS that were
Killed, and taken Prisoners: As it is Confirmed by several Letters.

Published to prevent False Reports.

LONDON, Printed for H. B. 1674.

THE NARRATIVE Of the Late FIGHT BETWEEN THE French and Confederate ARMIES.
THe Imperial Forces being Joined, sometime since, with the Dutch, and Spanish
Troops, making in all, a Body of above Sixty Thousand Men, Effective, were
drawn up very near the French Army, under the Command of the Prince of Conde
which lay Encamped in a very Secure Post; and it is supposed, might might intend
to have declined a Pitcht-field, until Turenne, with the Forces lately Employed
in the Palatinate had Joined them, had they not unexpectedly been Surprised
into a Battle: The Manner whereof (after several various Reports-) is now
sound, and Confirmed to be thus:

On the First of August, the Confederate Armies designing to pass a River; a
great Party of the French taking the Advantage, came, unexpectedly, forth of a
Wood, and fell upon the Reer-Guard, consisting of about Nine, or Ten Regiments,
for the most part Spanish, whereof the hindermost were those of Holstein the
Regiment of Morber, and the Regiment of the Young Prince of Vandemont; All
which, with some others, were Miserably Shattered; and, for the most part, Cut
to Pieces in the first Charge of the French Fury; So that the Remainder were
forced to Fly: And that part of the Army that was gone over the Ford, made
what haste they could back again, to their Relief, the whole Army making Head
as fast as the Inconvenience of the place, which was very troublesome, and
uneven, would Permit.

In This Defeat of the Rear, the Prince of ORANGE'S Carriages were Surprised,
but as they were Carrying them off; A strong Fresh Party of the Dutch came in,
which after a sharp dispute, were compelled to retreat by a Body of six
Thousand Horse sent in by the Prince of Conde, who in a very short time were
met by a Party of our Cavalry, and most furiously engaged, and now the Generals
on either side drawing up with all possible speed, and sending Releifs to their
respective Friends, the Gross of both Armies came to a smart and most cruel
Engagement, nothing of Courage or Resolution being omitted on either hand: The
adverse Troops breaking into and through each other, and the Generals often
mingled amongst the common Soldiers of the Enemy; In which confusion the Prince
of Orange gave incomparable Testimonies of his Valor and Heroic Spirit, and
the rest of the Commanders inspired with an example of such undaunted
Gallantry, seemed to brave all dangers, though several of them there
unfortunately, yet gloriously fell, dying in Bed of Honor; The Prince of
Conde, and grand Officers of the other side, meeting them with an equal Bravery
and Resolution, so that the Prince himself had his Horse thrice shot under him,
and though at first it was reported he was near slain or wounded, yet we are
now satisfied he came off unhurt though it is certainly affirmed, the brave Duke
D' Engnin his Son received some wounds in the Face.

The fight continued desperately till mid night, and then after some
intermission, was renewed again the next morning, with as much Courage as ever:
Both sides acquitted themselves with extraordinary Valor, but especially the
Imperial Infantry; Never did Fortune weigh the Issue of a Battle more Nicely;
Nor could that of Pharsalia (where Fate Decided the Empire of the World) be
bought with a more Sullen Obstinacy.

The first Attaque, began on Saturday, about eleven of the Clock, in the
Fore-noon, and continued with all imaginable fury, and horror; except some
little respit about midnight, till the same time-next day: at which time, both
Parties wearied, but not satisfied, separated from each other, the French
Retreating to their Trenches; and though the Confederate Troops may boast
themselves to be left Masters of the Field, yet they thought fit also, quickly
to repair to their former Posts.

The slaughter in the whole, cannot but be very great, though as to the certain
Number, common Fame speaks very differently, according as the Interests, or
Assertions, of the several Reporters run Byast to either Party. Some relating
near twenty Thousand in all slain, though more moderate Computers cannot allow
of above half that Number, the Confederates Writing about four Thousand on
their side; and near twice as many of the French. But the Paris Letters speak
just contrary, though most certain it is, abundance of the Flower of the French
Gentry, (some affirm near four Hundred) spurred on by an excess of Gallantry
Sacrificed here their lives to Honor. The Account of Persons of extraordinary
Quality, stands thus.

Of the Dutch, Spaniards, etc.
The Marquess D'Aslentar dead of his Wounds. Monsieur De Cavier killed. The
Baron De Beck killed. Prince Charles of Lorrain Wounded. Count Wolbeck Wounded
in three places. Prince Prio Wounded. The Prince of Salme taken Prisoner. Duke
of Holstein Wounded, and taken Prisoner. The Count Morode Wounded, and taken
Prisoner.
Of the French.
The Duke D'Enguin Wounded. Duke of Luxenburgh Wounded. Monsieur Rochford
Wounded with a Musket Shot. Monsieur Montal his Thig^ broke. The Chevalier
Fowrilles Wounded. The Count De Lussan Wounded.
FINIS.

