A perfect NARRATIVE Of the late Proceedings of the Parliament of Scotland, In
relation to the Affairs of England.

Also the manner of the FUNERAL Of the Right Honorable, FERDINANDO Lord
FAIRFAX: WITH The chief Heads of his Lordships Funerall-Sermon, preached by Mr.
Bowls. 15. March instant.

And sundry other particulars concerning the L. Widdringdon, Sir Thomas
Glemham, Sir Charles Lucas, and others late going into Scotland.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Austin. March 22. 1648.

SIR,
NOtwithstanding Captain Wogans Alarm, and another relation since his
marching into Scotland of about 200 foot lately come out of Ireland landed at
Chester, and gone that way too by the incitement of a Cavalier Captain, who
gave them money to drink, and told them they should have two Months advance in
Scotland if they would go thither and fight for the King; we yet enjoy peace in
these parts, and go on with the work of settling these Forces now after the
reducement of them into Quarters; Major Cholmleys Troop in Northumberland,
Capt. Lilburnes in the Bishopric, Capt. Stoddarts in Darby-shire, another in
Lincolnshire, all the Foot in Yorkshire. The Field-Forces since the reducement
are all mustered: and in regard we have but one Muster-Master, his task is so
great, that he cannot possibly in time muster all the Forces in these parts; so
that the Castles are not yet mustered. I have here enclosed sent you the
Relation of the Lord Fairfax his Funeral. This is all at present from

York 18. March, 1647. Your loving friend, T.A.

The manner of the Funeral of the Right Honorable, Ferdinando L. Fairfax.
SIR,
ON Monday the 13. of March about noone the Lord Fairfax died at his house at
Denton, and being appointed to be buried on Wednesday, his Corpse was brought on
Wednesday morning from thence in a Chariot with six Horses attended by about
200, some Justices of the Peace, and other Gentlemen of the Country, and were
met at Tadcaster about four a clock afternoon by the Lord Fairfax of Gilling,
the Lady Fairfax of Steeton, the Commander in chief and his Lady, and about 50
of the chief Officers of these Forces, who with the rest attended him from
thence to Bolton Piercy about 6. miles from York, where his Body was first
carried into his Brother M. (...) Fairfax his house, and there the company,
being in all about 300 or more, were entertained with Wine and cakes, and each
a black Riband given: Afterward he was carried into the Church by the noblest
Bearers present, viz. the Lord Fairfax of Gilling, the Commander in chief,
Colonel Maleverer, Sir Robert Barwick, M. Charles Fairfax, M. (...) Fairfax
his Lordships Brother, Colonel Fairfax, etc. being assisted with diverse
Torch-lights, and interre in his Fathers Sepulcher, being about nine a clock at
night, after which M. Boules ascending the Pulpit, first sung a Psalm, then
prayed and made a Sermon according to the usual manner, in the first place
prefacing according to the occasion, and afterward taking his Text 2. Chron.
22.33. concerning the death and burial of King Hezekiah the great Reformer and
restorer of the Church and State of Judah, one passage was much taken notice of
for speaking by way of parallel between that good King and the noble Lord
deceased, he expressed to this purpose, that he whose funeral we solemnize had
the advantage of that great Reformer; for though he went far in the work,
yet he left a Manasseth behind him that undid all that he had done before him;
but this Reformer has left one behind him that treads in his Fathers steps,
and I may say, one by whose faithfulness and industry under God, we enjoy our
present peace and security; at last he exhorted the Auditors to imitate that
noble Lord.

First in his younger years he was given to the study of Arts and Sciences,
that must make him useful and serviceable to his Country, and not to Dogs,
Hawks, etc.

In the choice of his wife, one who was virtuous, wise, etc.

As a Justice of Peace, being very laborious in his place that way.

As a Gentleman of the Country, faithful to his trust, willing and ready to
reconcile differences between neighbor and neighbor, etc.

As a Soldier (you that are Soldiers) faithful, courageous and resolute.

York, March 18. 1647.
SIR,
FOr continuance of a just correspondency with you, News from Scotland is,
that that perfidious Wogan with his Troop and some Foot are there entertained,
some moneys sent them, but by what hand or authority is not yet certainly
known, only 100. l. from Lievtenant-Generall Middleton, and some say 1000. l.
was sent them besides, and and some say 200. Foot are marched into Scotland,
but we understand, care is taken for prevention of the like attempt by any
others. Sir Thomas Glemham, Sir Charles Lucas, the Lord Widdrington also, (as
they say) and other great Cavaliers are entertained here, some appear
publicly, but the rest confine themselves to their private chambers.

Their Parliament we are informed, consists of three factions, one to raise an
Army, to resettle the King, the second party not willing to betrust Malignants
again with Arms, desire to have an Army to root all Sectaries out of England:
the third party, being the honest party, oppose all designs for War; and
Marquess Hamilton having given some affront to the Ministers, they are
extremely incensed and bitter against the Cavaliers, and press the people to
stick fast to their first principles, and they are framing an Oath to be taken
by their Contrymen for taking away the Kings Negative Voice in Parliament,
and to be partly contrary to any design for His Majesty till he take the
Covenant, with other particulars, etc.

The Lord, Craford, Lindsey, Lord Treasurer there apprehending some occasion of
distaste in a Passage of M. Cants Sermon, and suspecting it was occasioned by
Argiles appointment, sent the Earl a challenge, and both with seconds met, but
some noble men having intelligence thereof, immediately hastened to them, and
finding them out, prevented their sighting, and so endeavor to take it up, but
there is a suspicion it will not have a period so.

There is far more fear of confusion there amongst themselves, then any
disturbance from them to us.

Edinburgh, March 14. 1647.
Imprimatur.

Gilb. Mabbot.


