The true Speeches of COLONEL JOHN PENRUDDUCK, AND HUGH GROVE: Delivered on
the Scaffold at Exeter Castle, May the 17.th, 1655.
VVRetched Man that I am; who shall deliver me from this body of Death?

Gentlemen, it has been the custom of all Prisoners, when they come to Dye,
to discharge themselves, in order, to the satisfaction of the World; whether,
they are guilty of the Fact, they stand charged of, or no? The crime for which
I am to Dye; it is high Treason (as they say.) J must confess I was at
South-molton in this County: But whether my being there, or my actions there,
do amount to so high a crime, as high Treason: I leave to the world to judge?
If I were guilty to my Self, of any base end, I had in these my Undertakings; J
would not be so injurious to my own soul, or so dis-ingenious to you, as, not
to make a public acknowledgment thereof: I believe, diverse persons, as they
are biased by their several Interests, and relations, will give their
opinions to the world concerning me: As it is therefore as impossible to
express my self in these particulars, as not to expose, both my judgment, and
reputation to others, without a breach of charity concerning my self, or my
Actions: I thought fit, to decline all discourses, which may give them, a
capacity; either to injure my Self, or my cause: My trial was Public,
Honorable, and eminent? My several Examinations (I believe) will be produced
when J am in the Grave: I will refer you therefore to my first Trial, which
(I am sure) some of you, in good time may see: Had Captain Crook done
himself, and us, that right which a Gentleman and a Soldier ought to have
done; I had now enjoyed my own, and not been here this Day: I forgive the man
with all my heart; But truly, He did us an injury by enforcing those Articles
upon us, when his own Conscience told him, he had no intention to perform
them: And indeed (his protesting against those Articles) which He himself with
so many Protestations had forced upon us, has drawn so much dishonor, and
blood, upon his head, that (J leare) some heavy judgment will pursue him,
'cause He has been so false to Us: I pray God I prove not a true Prophet to
him; yet, I am glad that some of our Party, have enjoyed the benefit of his
Articles; though I my self were deprived of them: Yet I drew them with my own
hand: This I Will say for the honor of my Soldiers; that they have been so
far from breaking any Articles given to others; that they have rather
bettered them, then otherwise. But I will not load the Protector with this
dishonor; For, I have heard He would have made our Conditions good, if Crook
that gave them had not abjured them: But this is not a time for me to enlarge
my Self upon any subject, when I (my self) am become the subject of Death: But
whereas I said, I drew them with my own hand; I thought I was obliged to a
particular vindication of them. I could tell you of some of Crookes Soldiers,
that were turned out of his Troop, for defending those Conditions of ours; but
let that pass: But howsoever hence-forward, in stead of Life, Liberty, and
Estate, which we should have had, by our Articles; let Hanging, Drawing, and
Quartering, be the denomination of Captain Crookes Articles. However, I thank
the Protector that he has indulged me so far, as to let me have the Honor,
as to have my Head severed from my Body.

J should now, (Gentlemen) give you an account of my Faith; But this Nation is
rent into so many several Opinions, that it is impossible, for me to give you
mine own, without displeasing some, or others of you; yet, if any be so
critical, as, to inquire of what Faith I dyed: It is the same of the Apostles,
and Athanasius Creed, without which no man can be saved: I have subscribed,
and do own the 39. Articles of the Church of England: If this will not
satisfy them; I refer them to the reverend Dr. Short, to whom I have
unbosom'd my self, as, to the particulers of my Religion.

And now (Gentlemen) having given you account of my Self: I hold my self
obliged, to give you some account (too) of my Friends (I mean) as, to some
persons of Honor; who upon my Examination I was charged to have correspondency
with, (concerning this business:) The Lord Marquis of Hartford; the Marquis of
Winchester; the Lord of Pembroke: These were the Persons denominated to me,
whom I did then acquit, and do now second it, with this Protestation, that I
had never any correspondence with either of them, in relation to this
particular Business, or any other that concerns the Protector, or his
Government: As for the Marquis of Winton, I saw him Twelve years ago, and not
since; and if I should see him here presently. J should not know him: As for
the Lord of Pembroke, he was not a man likely to whom I should discover my
thoughts; because I never knew how he stood affected: I was likewise Examined
concerning my Cousin Freake, my Cousin Hastings, and my Cousin Dallington: they
are men of great Estates (I confess) which may make them liable to this
Inquisition, and endeavor, to be brought into my condition: but J do so far
acquit them, that I give the world this further Protestation of them, that as
far as I know, I am confident, They are as innocent as any Child here.

I have no more to say, but that I am in Charity with all men; and I thank God
I can forgive my greatest Persecuters; and can go upon my bare knees to my
greatest Enemies to forgive them: and I forgive all those, that had any hand in
my Death: I have offered the Protector as good Security for my future demeanor,
as I suppose he could have expected, if he had thought fit to have given me
my Life; certainly I should not have been so ungrateful as to have employed it
against him. But I submit to Gods pleasure, knowing that the issues of Life and
Death are in the hands of God.

My blood is but a small Sacrifice, if it had been saved, I am so much a
Gentleman, as to have given him thanks, that had preserved it: and I am so
much a Christian, as to forgive him, that takes it away.

But since God by his providence has called me, to lay down my Life; I do
heartily submit to his will: Death is a debt, a due Debt, owing by all; it is
terrible to Nature, but I look on it without terror. It has pleased God to
make me a good husband, to pay this Debt before my due.

Gentlemen, I am not ashamed of the Cause for which I dye: and I hope none of
my alliance or Friends will ever be ashamed of it: J do not look upon it as a
pulling down of my Family, but as the raising of it a story higher: yet J was
not, so prodigal as to throw away my Life; for I used, all, yet none, but
honest, and Honorable means to preserve it: but these unhappie times have
been very fatal to my Family; two of my Brothers have been already slain, and
I my self am now going to the slaughter.

It is Gods will, and J do submit to that Providence: I must render an
acknowledgment of the great civilities I received from the City of Exon, and
from some Persons of quality, for that plentiful provision made for the
Prisoners: I thank this noble Sheriff, for his many favors, and courtesies
toward us; and in particular to my self; and I desire the Sheriff to present
my due respects to the Protector, that, though he had no mercy upon me (my
self) yet, that, he would be pleased to have some, toward my Family.

As for this business I now Dye for? I look upon it, as an Individium vagum:
J know not how, they assert this to be Treason, unless they make it, to be
like the Wind in the Gospel, To blow where it lists; I know not, to what
end, this may come; but I pray God, that my blood, and my Brothers, (that is to
Suffer here with me) may be the last.

I am now putting off my clothes to fight a duel with Death; for, (I
conceive) no other Duels to be lawful? But my Savior has pulled out the
Sting of this my enemy, he has made himself a Sacrifice for me; I do not
account that Man worthy of one drop of his Blood, that will not spend all for
him in a good cause: As I now put off these garments of Cloth, so I hope I
have put off my garments of Sin, and have put on the robes of CHRIST's
Righteousness, which will bring me to his glorious Robes, anon.

I desire to see the Axe, and he kissed it; and said, I am like to have a
sharp passage of it; but my Savior has taken away the sting? and I hope he
will sweeten it unto me.

Thus I commit my soul to God my Creator and Redeemer: O Lord look upon me in
my last gasping! O Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy upon me, and hear my Prayers!
and the prayers of all good People for me. J will close up all with praying for
the King, and his restoration, --

I thank thee O God, for all thy dispensations toward me: Glory be to God on
high; On earth Peace; goodwill toward Men.

Gentlemen, if I would have been so unworthy, as others have been, I might for
a Lie, have saved my Life? But I scorn to purchase it at such a rate? But deny
all such temptations, and those that offer them.

FIN.
Mr. HUGH GROVES Speech on the Scaffold, at the same time and Place.
GOod People? J was never guilty of much Rethorick? Nor ever loved long
Speeches in my life, Therefore you cannot expect either of them at my Death:
All that I shall desire of you, besides your hearty Prayers for my Soul; is,
that you would bear me witness, that J dye, a true Son of the Church of
England, as it was established, by King Edward the 6th, Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and King Charles, of ever blessed memory? And that I dye a Loyal
subject to King Charles the 2. my undoubted Sovereign, and a lover of good old
Laws of the land? The just privileges of Parliament? The rights and liberties
of the People. For the re-establishing of all which, I undertook this Design?
and for which, I am now ready to lay down my life: God forgive the Judges and
Council, for perverting the Law? And God forgive the bloody minded Jury, and
all those, that procured them? God forgive Crook, for denying and forswearing
his Articles, so unworthily? And God forgive Mr. Dove, and the rest for
swearing so falsely, and maliciously against me? And God forgive all mine
Enemies; for I heartily forgive them.

Now God bless the King, and all those that love him; and turn the hearts, of
all those that hate him: God bless you all? And God be merciful unto you;
and to my Soul, Amen.

Printed to prevent false Copies, AN. DOM. 1655.


