MASTER HENRY PIERCIES LETTER TO THE EARL OF NORTHVMBERLAND, and presented to
the Parliament, June, 16. 1641.

1. Concerning the Bishops functions and votes. 2. The not disbanding of the
Irish Army until the Scots were disbanded too. 3. The endeavoring to settle
his Majesty's Revenue to that proportion was formerly.
With a true Discovery of the late intended Plot.

Printed in the year, 1641.

Mr. Henry Percies Letter to the Earl of Northumberland, and presented to the
House of Parliament, JUNE 16. 1641.
WHat with my own innocence, and the violence I hear, is against me, J find
my self much distracted, I will not ask your Counsel, because it may bring
prejudice upon you, but I will with all faithfulness and truth tell you what
my part has bin, that at least it may be cleared by you, whatsoever becomes of
me.

When there was 50000 l. designed by the Parliament for the English Army, there
was, as J take it, a sudden demand by the Scots at the same time of 25000 l.
of which there was 15000 l. ready, this they pressed with much necessity, as
the Parliament, after an order made, did think it fit for them to deduct 10000
pound our of the 50000 l. formerly granted, upon which the soldiers in our
house were much scandalized, amongst which J was one, and sitting by Wilmot and
Ashburnham, Wilmot stood up and told them, if that of the Scots would procure
money, he doubted not but the Officers of the English Army might easily do the
like: but the first order was reversed notwithstanding, and 10000 l. given to
the Scots, this was the cause of many discourses of dislike amongst us, and
came to this purpose, that they were disobliged by the Parliament and not by
the King, this being said often to one another, we did resolve that Willmot,
Ashburneham, Pollard, Oneale and my self, to make some expressions of serving
the King in all things he would command us, that were honorable for him and us,
being likewise agreeing to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, that so
sarre we would live and dye with him, this was agreed upon with us, not having
any Communication with others, that I am coupled now withal, and further by
their joint consent I was to tell his Majesty thus much from them, but withal
I was to order the matter so as the King might apprehend this as a great
service done unto him, at this time when his affairs were in so ill a
condition, and they were most confident, that they would engage the whole Army
thus far, but further they would undertake nothing, because they would
neither infringe the liberties of the Subjects, or destroy the Laws, to which
J and every one consented, and having their sense, I drew the heads up in a
paper, to the which they all approved, when I read it, and then we did by an
oath promise one another to be constant and secret in all this, and did all of
us take that oath together, then I said; Well Sirs, I must now be informed what
your particular desires are, that so I may be the better able to serve you,
which they were pleased to do, and so I did very faithfully serve them
therein, as far as J could: this is the truth, and all the truth upon my
soul. In particular discourses, after that, we did fall upon the Petitioning
to the King and Parliament for moneys, there being so great arreares due to us,
and so much delays made in the porcuring of them, but that was never done.

1. Concerning the Bishops functions and votes.

2. The not disbanding of the Irish Army until the Scots were disbanded too.

3. The endeavoring to settle his Majesty's Revenue to that proportion was
formerly.

And it was resolved by us all if the King should require our assistance in
those things, that as far as we could we might contribute thereunto, without
breaking the Laws of the Kingdom. And in case the King should be denied those
things being put to them we would not fly from him, all these persons did act
and concur in this as well as I, this being all imparted to the King by me
from them, J perceived he had been treated with by others concerning some
things of our Army, which not agreed with what was purposed by me, but inclined
a way more sharp, and high, not having limits either of honor or Law, I told
the King he might be pleased to consider with himself, which way it was fit
for him to hearken unto, for us we were resolved not to depart from our
grounds, we should not be displeased whosoever they were, but the particular
of the designs, or the persons we desired not to know, though it was no hard
matter to guess at the^. in the end I believe the danger of the one, the
justice of the other made the King tell me he would leave all thoughts of other
propositions but ours as things not practiceable, but desired, notwithstanding
that Goring and Jermin who were acquainted with the other proceedings should be
admitted amongst us, I told him J thought the other Gentry would never consent
to it, but I would propose it, which I did, and we were all much against it;
but the King did press it so much, as at the last it was consented unto, and
Goring and Iermin came to my Chamber, there I was appointed to tell them after
they had sworn to secrecy, what we had proposed, which I did, but before I
go into the debate of the way, I must tell you Jermin and Goring were very
earnest Suckling should be admitted, which we did all decline, and was desired
by all our men to be resolute in it, which I was, and gave many Reasons:
whereupon Mr. Goring made answer, he was engaged with Suckling his being
employed in the Army, but for his meeting with us, they were contented to pass
it by. Then we took up again the ways which were proposed, which took
great debate, and theirs differred from ours in violence and height, which we
all protested against and parted, disagreeing totally, yet remitted it to be
spoken of by me and Iermin to the King, which we both did, and the King
constant to his former Resolutions told him, these ways were all vain and
foolish, and would think of them no more, ^omit one thing of Mr. Goring, he
desired to know how the chief Commanders were to be disposed off, for if he
had not a condition worthy of him, he would not go along with us, we made
answer that no body thought of that, we intended if we were sent down to go
all in the same capacity we were in, he did not like that by no means, and by
that did work so with Mr. Chidley, that there was a Letter sent by some of the
Commanders to make him Lieutenant General, and when he had ordered this matter
at London, and Mr. Chidley had his instructions, then did he go to Portsmouth,
pretending to be absent when this was a working, we all desired my Lords of
Essex and Holland, that if there were a General at Newcastle, they were
pleased to give out a report that I should be General of the horse, but J
protest neither to the King nor any else, did I ever so much as think of it,
my Lord of Holland was made General, and so all things were laid aside, and
this is the truth and all the truth, I knew of these proceedings, and this J
will and do protest unto you upon my Faith, and Willmot, Ashburnham, and
Oneale have at several times confessed and sworn, J never said any thing in
the business, they did not every one agree unto and would justify: This
Relation J sent you rather to inform you of the truth of the matter, that you
may the better know how to do me good, but I should think my self very
unhappy to be made a betrayer of any body, what concerned the Tower or any
thing else, I never meddled withal, nor never spoke with Goring, but that night
before them all, and I said nothing but what was consented unto by any party, J
never spoke one word with Suckling, Carnarvan, Davenant, or any other Creature,
me thinks if my friends and kindred knew the truth and justice of the matter,
it were no hard matter to serve me in some measure.

FINIS.

