The penitant Traitor, or the humble Confession of a Devonshire Gentleman, who
was condemned for high treason, and executed at Tyborne for the same, in the
Reign of King Henry the third, the ninteenth of July, 1267.
You may sing this if you please. To the Tune of, Fortune my Foe.
ATtend good Christian people to my Story,
A sadder yet did never come before ye;
What I have been, and am, and like to be,
I will declare, whilst you give ear to me.
Love, grief, and zeal, does make me sing this Dittie,
To warn my Brethren of each close Commitie,
That each of them learn like a good Disciple,
To shun foul Treason, and the Tree that is triple.
Long time I lived in the Country next to Cornwall,
And there my Children were both bred and borne all,
Great was my credit, (as my debts did speak,)
And now I Will show you why my neck must break.
A Parliament was called in November.
I, for the Commons was cried up a Member,
With coin, and cogging, I got peoples voices,
Whereby I was elected with loud noyses.
My wicked Life I do lament with Tears,
I was in debt quite over Head and Ears,
But when I purchased a Commit Chair,
My broken State I quickly did repair.
I had the Art to threaten or insinuate,
And as I pleased) increase faults or extinuate:
My frown or smile, was forcible and mighty,
As cold as Ice; or hot as Aquavitie.
I got some two and twenty of my Faction,
(All witty Members, and all men of Action,)
We (as we pleased) made all our Brethren Widgeons,
We winked at Tumults, and at strange Religions.
For though (by tale) we sat above four hundred,
Yet I my self, was for the first part numbered:
Most of the rest were crowned men of Goram,
And I was almost Dominas Factotum.
Fair seeming Piety I made my Mantle,
But of good Conscience I never had one cantle:
My fellow Knaves, and I, conglutinated
So fast, we never thought to be separated.
Thus by my Faction the whole House was swayed,
But (most) to me the people flocked for aid:
I promised ease for all their griefs most troublesome,
Yet racked them more then ten times twice the doublesome.
I was in hope my reign should be perpetual,
Which made me proud, and very bold to cheat you all,
The Kingdom groaned, and under slavery lingers,
Whilst like a cunning Cook I licked my Fingers.
Those who were grieved, I gravely did advise,
They should Petitions bring in humble wise:
Which I did frame my self, and thus did rooke 'um,
They paid me when I gave, and when I took 'um.
The King himself with slanders I disgraced,
His faithful Servants, from him I displaced:
Taxes, on taxes, on the people passes,
And they did bear the burdens like tame Asses.
I purchased Land for Plough and Pasture Ground,
As much as cost me nere ten thousand pound:
I waxed rich, my State was mighty made,
Which proves a Chaire-man was a thriving Trade.
Thus did I rise, when better men did fall,
My Wealth encreac'd, I got the Devil and all,
Fools brought me gold, and plate, in hugger-mugger,
Besides eight hundred pounds worth of loaf sugger.
The twentyeth part, the weekly Fasting Days,
The feazement for the Sots and Subsidyes:
The weekly seazements for the Trained Bands,
The Crowns Revenue, and the Churches Lands.
The Contributions, Sequestrations, Plunder,
The sale of Offices, The Queen was then a French-woman she was Daughter to the
Earl of Provence, in the 20 year of the Kings reign. Stow, Page 184.
enforced Loanes, it is wonder:
This all is true, as true Records does sing,
When as th^rd Henry was this Kingdoms King.
Thus I gained much, and by my Money-Pole,
And something like Excize, these made me whole,
My Children Portions too, with much content,
I played in State my Act of Parliament.
And least my Plots should after be unmasked,
And how I got such wealth might chance be asked:
I cast about how I might gain such power,
As might from future justice me secure.
Then first I labored to divest the Crown.
Of all Prerogatives and to bring them down,
First to both Houses, then but one, shonld have it,
Five Members next, and last my self would crave it.
But I did know the State would not admit,
Such c^ange unless the Church did usher it:
I left the old Religion for advantage,
Endeavoring to erect on which did want age.
Which when the learned Levites did withstand,
Regarding Gods word more then my command;)
Such I suppressed, and made (for which I woe am,)
The basest people Priests, like Jeroboam.
Then each Profession sent out Preachers more,
Then both the two Universities could do:
T'handle a Text, the Good wifes fingers itches,
She dares preach with her Husband for the britches.
I first committed sacrilegious hansells,
I robbed both Chapel, Church and Chancell,
I said Gods Table was a Popish Alter,
For which you see, that my reward's a Halter.
By this new godliness, but few did gain,
The rest for want of Trading did complain,
I told them 'twas a wicked Counsellor's plot,
And till his head went off, their wares would not.
This great man's guilt was Loyallty and Wisdom,
Which made me cast about me to work his doom:
The Sword of Justice was too short to do it,
Ten thousand Clubs must therefore inch it out.
He thus knocked down, some others (for like crime,)
Were sent to Prison, some escaped in time:
Thus Law and Equity, in awe were keept here,
And Clubs were taught how to control the Scepter.
We took from the upper House Votes five times five,
And they aimed at the Kings Voice Negative,
Which to effect, we did an Order make,
That what he would not give, our selves would take.
Then we Petitioned that the Forts and Towers,
And all the strength of the Kingdom might be ours,
This was to save the King from foreign dangers,
As if h' had better fall by us then Strangers.
Whilst he denies, they legally are seized on,
By a Law called Resolved upon the Question:
But still his chief strength was above our Arts,
His righteous Cause, and's loyal Subjects Hearts.
The King at Evesham gave the Rebels battle,
Whereas he made Bones in their Skins to rattle:
Leicester was slain, This Battle was fought at Evesham in Worcestershire, on
Friday the 5 of August 1265. Stow, page 195.
who was their General,
And sixteen Lords with him likewise did fall.
Thus was their Army all to shatters shaken,
Ten thousand men slain, and as many taken,
Some hundreds suffered punishment condignant,
For being as I am a foul Malignant.
Thus did the wheel of Fortune turn quite round,
And my mis^deeds my Conscience deep does wound
I had bin better to have lived in beggary,
Then thus to fall into the hands of Gregory.
Oh Tyborne, There was a Wag-halter living in those times whose name was
Gregory, Hen. Mounmouth, page 2000.
Tyborne, oh thou sad Triangle,
A Viler weight never under thee did dangle:
See here I Am come, at last with Hemp so new,
To give thee what was (long before) thy due.
How would I bless thee, could thou take away,
My Life and Infamy, both in one day:
But this in Ballads, will survive I know,
Sung to that solemn Tune, Fortune my Foe.
Then mark good Christian people and take heed,
Use not Religion for an upper Weed:
Serve God sincerely, touch not his Anointed,
And then your Necks shall never be dis-joynted.
God bless the King, the Queen, and all their Children,
(And pardon me, what I against them have ill done,)
May one of that brave Race still rule this Nation,
So I beseech you sing the Lamentation.
FINIS.

