THE LAND-TEMPEST: OR, A PAPER-PELLET; Or, much in a Mouthfull; or, a long
Answer To a short Question; Containing an Abstract, Epitome, or Effects of the
woes of these Wars.

By (W. P.) a plundered Preacher in the County of GLOUCESTER.

June 25 1644

Experta loquor. Difficile est invenire, facile est addere inventis. -- Brevis
esse laboro, Obscurus fio. --
Obscurus fio, Cur? ouia, tam brevis esse laboro.
Some words are hard in this to understand,
Because I haste with th'wars I have in hand.
No heart can think upon these things worthily; (for) it is a Tempest, which no
man can see,

Ecclus. 16.20, 21. Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know, for whose
sake this evil is come upon us,

Jon. 1.7. Question. What is War? Answer. It is a Tempest.
BY musing on Jonah's Tempest on the sea, we may take occasion to meditate on
our Tempest on the land. Yet great difference between that and our Tempest.

That was one-sinner-following, one ship-indangering, a Little-wares-losing, a
few Mariners affrighting Tem.

But this Tempest astonisheth all our Land and Sea-Passengers, all our Sea
Sailers, i. All our Parliament-Pilots, all the whole three kingdoms Inhabitants
whatsoever.

That Tempest turned the causer into the belly of the Whale.

This will tumble the causers (without their converting) into the bottom of
hell.

That is mavelous in our cars, this in our eyes.

That was great, grievous, horrid, hideous.

But this Tempest, one thousand six hundred forty and three, is a far greater
Tempest, then ever yet we did see.

It is An All-Acts and statutes-strict-sifting Tempest. Lawvers search all
their books touching the Kings Prerogative and the Parliaments privileges


An Academick-altring Temp. changing an Act into artillery, arts into arms,
pens into Pikes, Postils into Pistols, Doctrines into Drums, Back-hoods into
Buffe, square-caps into round, Head-pieces.
gowns into Guns, Goosquils into Gauntlets, books into bullets.

It is an Artist over-arting, an armor-shining, an armes-for-seeking,
Half-Crowns.
i. a George on horse-back-satisfying Temp.

A Letters-for-looking, Silver.
i. 2 Mint-letter-meaning Temp.

It is a Beer-brewing, a Beer-broaching, a Beer-wanting, a Beer-wasting a
Bread-begging, a Bed-abandoning, a Bullet-blowing, a Brain-beating, a
Back-bruising, a Bone-breaking, a Body-wounding, a blood-brewing, a
Blood-thirsting, a Blood-shewing, a Bloodshedding a Blood-showring, a
Building-unbeautifying, a Beauti-blemishing, a Bulwark-rearing, a
Breath-stopping Tem.

It is an Eye-bedewing, an Eye-soring, an Eye-dazling, an Eye-dimming, an
Eare-dulling, an Eare-deafning, Man their (...) at the ^sing of ^ege (...) G^
The ^thon (...) pl^ b^ of S^ D^
an Hand-off-chopping Temp.

It it an Ox-waiting, an Ox-wearying, an Ox-quick-drawing, an Ox-quite-away
driving Tempest.

It is an Horse-hurrying, an Horse-unhiring, an Horse-housing, His O^ drive
(...) wa^ L. (...) W^ both (...) Wa^ shall b^ pri^ the P^mers (...) per^
an Horse-hiding, a Horse-catching, a Hors-stealing, a Horse-killing Temp.

It is a Carrier-crossing, a Carrier-ceasing, a Carrier-crying, a
Carrier-cursing, a Broad-Cloth-coveting, a Cloth-carrying, a Cloth-renting,
another mans-Cloth-wearing Tem.

It is a Linnen-looking, a Linnen-loving, a Linen loading, 10 p^ she ^le^ it
(...) my (...)
a Linnen-losing, a Linnen-lacking.

A Clothiers-dis-imploying, a Clothiers-distressing, a Clothiers-much-crushing,
a Clothiers, -attaching a Clothiers-out-hunting Tempest.

It is a selfe-seeking, a selfe-soothing, a Neighbour-neglecting, a
selfe-commending, anotherman-censuring, another man-slighting, another
man-condemning, A blind Buzzards-nothing seeing, Then men (...) cross (...)
the Law (...) Nature, ^ton, ^^ason, and ^^ligion.
a crooked-Canker-worm-crawling

A Weapon-weilding, a Thunder-bolt-darting, a Watchman-blinding, a
way-man-blending, a Pilgrime-wandring Tempest.

It is a Plaintifes-complaining, a Tide-turning, an Atturney-tormenting, a
Term-unterming, a Criers-mouth-muzling, a Justice-out-justling, a
Judge-disrobing, a Jury unpanneling Tempest.

It is a Newes-enquiring, a Lie-broaching, a Day-stealing, a Theft-professing,
a Plunder-producing, a Pleasure-down-pulling, a Brownist-bewraying, an
omniscious-ignorance-tub-out-teaching, a Jesuit-projecting, a
Projects-pursuing; a Sectaries Sugar-sweetning, a Papists embracing, a
Pope-best-pleasing Tempest.

It is a Wise-mans be fooling, an After-wit-buying, a Wit-tenter-stretching, a
Body and Mind-anatomizing, a Fast-binding, a Few-friends-finding, a
Feare-feeding, a Faith-wavering, a Conscience-shipwracking Tempest.

It is a Love-banishing, a Peace-forbidding, a Friend-parting, a Foe-raising, a
beast-but chering, a Sheep-slaughtering, a Father-killing, a Children-howling
Tempest.

It is an House-emptying, a Home-unhoming, a Head-hiding, a Head-cleaving, an
Heart-aking, a hard-heart-relenting, a Flint-heart-opening, an Earth-groaning,
a Maker-provoking, a Sleeper-summoning, a Soule-dutie-slack ening, a
Soul-sadding Tempest.

It is a Flock-scattering, a Church-unpeopling, a Sinner affrighting, a
Sin-scourging, a Tear-trickling, a Truth-trying, a From-truth-straying, a
Downe-truth-treading, a Prayer-for-praying, 10.1.6.
a Preacher-fearing, When men say they are on the one side, when they are on
the other.
a Text-wresting, a Preacher-tongue-tying, a Tell-troth-tongue-clipping Tempest.

It is a Clock-telling, a Print-employing, a Plate-melting, I save up wa^^ing
at (...) Bridge^, the whose night, (where Pr. Rupert then quartered) and there
had liberty to tell the hours of the night.
an All-metall-molting, an Hypocrites unmasking, a Powder-plotting, an Acts
27.14.
Euroclydontizing, i. a quiet-sayling-opposing Tempest, a Ship-tossing, a
Ship-tearing, i. a State-staggering, a Realm-reeling, a Religion-unliganding
Tempest.

It is a Jehovahs-great-wonders-working-by Tempest, making the Land like Moses
Bush, burning and yet not consumed, turning men's Insides outward, fetching
darkness out of light for the present, and light out of darkness for the
future time; changing wine into water for present humiliation, and water into
wine for future exultation.

It is a London-coin-licking, a Leaden Hall unloading, a
Blackwell-hall-mourning, a Lady-lap-leaving, a Lazie-bones-loving, Such
Soldiers as follow toe Camp only for case, idleness. pay, profit.
a Friend-fare-well not bidding, a Feather-plucking, i. a naked-bare-making, a
Faint-heart-complying, a Flatterers-non-gain-saying Tempest.

It is a well-known-unknowing, i. a Familiar-estranging, an
unwelcome-welcoming, a Four-quarters-quartering, a Pool-dragging, My W^ drawn
(...) and Pod^ dragged a^^ raked, (...) my ^com g^ to search for brass (...)
pewter, which the^ found, (...) for plate, which I was (...) owner of
a Well-diving, a Water-drinking, a worse-deserving, a Protection-unprotecting,
i. a promise-not-performing Tempest.

It is a Leaders misleading, a Day-darkening, a Night-enlightning, a
Sun-clouding, a Moon-eclipsing, a Light-lessening, a Darknesse-inducing, a
danger-drawing, a Doubt-infolding, a Double-dealing, a Dearth-breeding, a
Famine-forcing, a Death-desiring, a Death-deserving, a Death-bringing, a
Death-worsting, i. a pain worse then death causing Tempest.

It is a Calm-shunning, a Cannon-roring, a City-quelling, a Cross-coveting, a
God-Dammee-wishing, i. a Curse-for-calling Tempest.

It is a Souldiers-sword-selling, a Souldiers-solace-seeming, a
Souldiers-certain sorrowing, a Souldiers-siune more sinfully-sinful-shewing
Tempest.

It is a Captain-up-calling, Cowing, Conquering, a Colonell-conflicting,
captiving, overcoming a King-Caring, fearing, fretting-flying Tempest.

It is a Bishops-unhierarching, a Court-crossing, a Country consounding, a
Harlot-haunting, a Wo-men-mourning, a Wife-ravishing, a Widow-making, a
Wo-working, a Wealth-wasting, a Harvest-hindring, a Corn-consuming Tempest.

It is a Lawyers-labyrinthing, a Schollers-unschooling, a Land-lords-losing, a
Tenants-pooring, a Poore-famishing, a Plough-staying, a Shop-shutting, a
Tradesmans-tyring, a Peer-apalling, a Parliament-puzling, a Prison-stuffing, a
Patience-proving Tempest.

It is a People-pillaging, a Poor-spoyling, a Rich-robbing, a
Robbery-rejoycing, an Oaths-out-ratling, ^aine ^ings, a ^after (...) a Sow^
used (...), and ^hless ^nie in ^a^ters (...) the ^lay a^ Glou^. ^e be ^ed
(...) Au^ (...),
an against Roundheads all-railling tempest.

It is a Begger-boasting, a Wilde-Boare-bristling, a Rude, Reveling, Rovsting,
Ruffling, Rifling, i. a Ruffian-by overruling, a Slave-by over-mastring
tempest.

It is an All-Common-causing, an on-All-sides Ruing, a Debt-denying, a
Lawdown-laying, a Countrey-counsell-down-crying, a Nation-nulling, a
Non-like-noy-sing, a No-bound-limiting, a No-person-sparing, a
Non-such-looked-for, an Antipodes-walking, When the one Army at the siege
mined, and the other countermined.
i. an under-ground-working; a Liberty-restraining, a Ship money-surpassing, an
in Payments-all-away-paying, an Un-civill-civill-unnaturalizing tempest.

It is a Laodicean like-luke-warming, a Professor-key-colding, a
Holiness-hooding, a Way-laying, a Hatred-hatching, a Mischief-watching, a
Malice-manifesting, a Misery-multiplying, a Mony-for-mining, a Member-maiming,
a Manners-infecting, a Mercy-loathing, a Mirth-menacing, a Maid-deflowring, a
Market-marring, a Mariners-ama-zing, a Minister-mocking, Mis-using, Moving, a
Men-dog-like-driving, a Men-madding, a Men-mowing, i. a Men-murthering tempest.

It is an Aftertimes recording, an Actors-name-eternizing, a
Weather-cock-like-winding, i. a Turn-coat-discovering, a
Topsie-turvie-things-turning, a Publike-Post-fixing, i. a Proditors-proclaiming
tempest.

It is a Wild-fire-spetting, a Bloody-minded-sporting, a Right-expelling, a
Wrong-compelling, a Revenge-renewing, a Rapine-unregarding, a Reason-rejecting,
a Rest-refusing, i. a sleep-not-suffering, a Refuge-concealing, a Rock-rending,
a Rod-reaching, a Sword-unsheathing tempest.

It is a Shepherd and Sheep, an Husband and Wife, an Head and Members, i. a
Prince, and People-dividing tempest.

It is a malignantizing, i. an All-malignants-making tempest.

It is a Land-shaking, a King-dome-quaking, a Grief-lasting, a Gold-gaping, a
Grave-filling, a Gospel-gagging, a God-grieving, a Devill-delighting, a
Diseases-procuring, a Death-bell-tolling, an Alarum-to Judgement-ringing
tempest.

It is a Forainers-mouth-watering, a Welch-mens-cause-weeeping, The (...) test
p^ the G^son at Hei^ nigh G^cester, t^ by Sir W^^^^^^ Waller, were Welster
an Irelands-weakning, a Scotlands-warnning, a New-Englands-condoling, an
Old-Englands-de-stroying, an Heaven-daring, an Hel-hastening, a
Thunder-out-sounding, a Tongue-unutterable, a Pen-inexpressable, an All-the
worlds-won-dering, an All-former-unparalleling, i. an All-Tempest-exceeding-
Tempest.

Lector, Tu, si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti, si non, his utere
mecum.
King Reader, if thou know,
How better to express,
These present woes of wars,
In Prose, or else in verse;
Then show thy wit and will,
Reveal the same to me;
If that thou will not do,
Then like this help to thee.
Know that the truth of most,
In this Pellet-Paper,
Is knowingly known,
To this present Relater.
Ob. WOrds are but wind. Sol. But this is such a tempestuous wind that has
overturned many trees, turrets, towers, walls, houses, men and beasts; and yet
it rages still. Jon. 1. No man knowing when the calm will be. Verse. 13.The
Mariners have rowed hard to bring the Ship to land, but it cannot be: for the
Sea works, and is tempestuous against them. Verse. 5. The greatest part of the
wares in the Ship are cast into the Sea, to lighten the Ship; but this tempest
is so mighty still, that the ship is like to be broken. Verse. 12. We know,
that for some Jonah's sake, this tempest is still upon us; O Lord think on us,
that we perish not.

O that the many Jonah's of Ignorance, Atheism, profaneness, Popery, Faction,
Neutrality, Ambodexterisme, were commanded to be cast overboard, that the calm
might be as great as is yet the storm.

Mat. 8.16.That all men, in sign of thankfulness, might learn to know, fear,
love, and serve that Man-God, whom winds and waves, men and devils, heaven and
earth do obey. Verse. 26. Surge Domine, Impera Ventis and Mari; Talem
Tranquillitatem Da, Domine. Amen.
This is Printed according to Order.

Printed for Nicholas Vavosour, and are to be sold at his Shop in the Inner
Temple, 1644.


