A PERFECT RELATION OF The memorable Funeral of the Right Honorable Robert
Earl of Essex; whereto diverse things are explained, which were not understood
by many of the Spectators. Also, the manner of his imba^^^ing, and the
inscription written upon his breast, and buried with his body; and the finding
of a Crosier Staff in digging of the Vault.



London Printed for B. A. 1646.

A RELATION OF The Manner of the Funeral of the Right Honorable, Robert
Devoreux Earl of Essex, late Lord General of the Army raised for defense of
King, Parliament, and Kingdom.
Monday last was five weeks the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Essex departed
this life; and in acknowledgment of the good and faithful service to the
Public, and honor of his Person and Name, It pleased the Parliament to allot
a large sum of money (besides what was left by the Deceased) toward the
honorable Burial of the said Earl, and voted that the vhole House should
attend at his Funeral Rites. Great preparations was then made for all kind of
accommodations befitting such a Solemnity: First, his Corpse was put in a Sere
cloth, and afterward enclosed in Lead; upon which was his Arms cast or
engraver, and an Inscription, wherein his Titles were set forth, and the time
of his death in this wise.

Robert Devoreux Earl of Essex, and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord Peirers of
Chartley Bourchier, and Lovain, Lord General of all the Parliaments Force,
Dyed on the 16. of September. 1646. Then were most of the Herrolds Painters in
London employed to make Banners, Scutchions, Flagges, Streams, etc. and an
exceeding great quantity of mourning prepared; And in the great Chamber in his
Excellencies house was set up a Hearse covered with black Plush or Velvet; on
which was laid the Statu of the said Earl, having a pair of white Boots,
skarlet Breeches, a Buff Coat (the same as he wore at Edgehill fight) with his
Parliament Robes, a Sword by his side, a Commanders Staff in his hand, and an
Earls Coronet on his head; the room was hanged with Broad-cloth, and adorned
with Scutchions, as was also the Hearse with his Arms, Colors, Ba^ners, and
the like; All which remained diverse days together in great state, and a great
number of People resorted thither to behold it.

And as these preparations were in his House; so was there the like in the Abbey
at Westminster: for at the upper end of the Church where the Communion Table
stood, was erected a Hearse, which was made four square, standing on large
Pillars, about 12. foot high; the edges are guilt with gold, and hung round
about with Velvet, And on the top of the Hearse a rich Coronet, and four small
Coronets upon the Supporters, the velvet being gallantly set forth with his
Arms, quartered several Scutchions, Banners, Mottoes, and the like; the
Pavements covered with cloth, and the long Seats or Benches covered; The Abbey
Church from the Belfrey to the upper and hung with black, and decked with
scutchions, a rich Pulpit cloth, and several other things, which are
needless to be related: Yet before we come to the solemnity it self, give me
leave to carry your thoughts and spectation a little further, viz. to the place
where the Corpse of this noble Earl rests.

In a Room called St. John Baptists Chapel, a little before you go up into
Henry the 7 Chapel, as you turn in on the right hand of the Chapel was the
earth broken, to make a Vault for a burial place for his Excellency: in which
place had been buried Bo^on Abbot of Westminster, who (as I take it) dyed
temper R. 2. And as the manner was to put in the Grave with them a Crostier
staff; so was it by this occasion dug up again, which although it is but
wood, yet one end thereof feels hard, and appears sound: We do no^ recite
this, as though we conceived any virtue in it more then in another piece of
wood; but the cause that it continued so long was doubtless dryness of the
place in which it lay, and if any one doubt hereof, they may see it.

But not to digress any longer, let us return again to what we have in hand,
and give you a view of the Vault prepared in the place aforesaid, which is
about two yards and a half in length, a yard and half broad, and height
proportionable arched over with Freestone, and in the next Vault to him lies
the Lord Hundsdon. It is said a stately Monument will be erected for him in
that place.

We will in the next place proceed to the Solemnity of the Funeral it self,
which was on this manner

The Solemnity of the Funeral Rites.
On Thursday the 24. of this instant. October about one of the clock in the
afternoon, the red Regiment of Westminster, the Regiments of Southwarke, the
Regiment of Hamblets. the 6 Regiments of the City of London met in the strand,
and Colonel Manwerings Regiment of horse, consisting of 6 Troops marched to
the broad place against White Hall, All the Regiments of foot (except the blow
and red Regiment of the City) stood along the street from Essex House in the
strand, to westminster, and presently after two of the clock, the horse began
to march toward the Abbey westminster, there walking by them threescore and ten
poor mourners (or Gown men) and after them 12 Almemen belonging to the Church.

Then came the blew Regiment of the City (that were with his Excellency at
Ne^gbury fight, and after them the Red of the City, before whom there went many
of the Parliaments ^ens servants Mourners.

Next unto the the red Regiment came by estimation about 800. Colonels.
Lieutenant Collon is, Majors. Captains, Reform does, and Gentlemen every one
trasing of a Pike, and Sir William Waller brought up the rear.

After these marched Colonel Tompson bearing his own Banner in close mourning,
having a Gown, with a Hood that came over his head, and part of his face, with
his Horse led after him, covered from head to tail with black cloth, which
came almost to the ground, and on his head a stately sether and a great sprig
standing upright on his Rump and after him went Sir William Be^fore, Sir Samuel
Luke and others with mourning Gowns, in manner as before said, and their Horses
in like manner; carrying Banners.

Then was carried his Excellencies Spurs and other Emblems of Honor as also
the Kings of Herrolds went along with his several Coats of Arms, after which
went a great many of his Excellencies chiefest Domestic attendance and
immediately after them was drawn a rich Charret with 6. stately Horses, with
great plums of feathers, and all covered with velvet, the Coach-men and
Foote-men having velvet Cassits, and in the Charret lay the Statu of his
Excellency, set forth to the life, to the open view of all the beholders in the
garb before declared, and at his head sat one close mourner and at his feet
another.

This Charret was honorably attended by the Earl of Warwick Pembroke, Earl of
Northumberland, and the rest of the Honorable House of Peiers in long
mourning, having their raynes carried up in great state, the Members of the
House of Commons followed afte; the Speaker having the Mase carried before him
and every one walking in a solemn posture as befitted the occasion and after
them many Aldermen of the City and Assembly of Divines.

When they came to the Abbey Church the statu before mentioned was carried in,
and is laid upon the standing Hearse in the Church before mentioned, where it
is to remain during the pleasure of the House or as many days as was from his
Excellencies death to the time of his burial, and afterward is to be set up in
a press. Mr. Vines preached the Funeral Sermon* having now given you a
perfect relation of the memorable rits performed at the entering of this
Honorable Earl, let the Mules join in framing an Epetapth which may declare
to future ages, the worth and heroic Acts of his Excellency in the entering to
enlarge his memory, let us borrow something from famous Drayton.

An Epitaph.
Do polisht Marble let thy Readers know
What they and what their Children owe
To Essex Name, whose honored dust
We recommend unto thy trust;
Protect his Memory, preserve his Story,
Remain a lasting Monument of his glory;
And when the ruins shall disclaim
To be the Treasurer of his Name;
His Name that cannot fade shall be
An everlasting Monument to thee.

