AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST The Contagious Air of Independency.

SHOWING I. Six sufficient Grounds, why they ought to revoke their
Schismatic Principles. II. Six Paralells betwixt theirs and the Jesuitical
practices.


By D. P. P.

1 COR. 1.12, 13. For this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul,
And I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ.

Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were ye baptized in the
Name of Paul? etc.

Feb. 18. 1644.
Imprimatur

JA: CRANFORD.



London, Printed by John Field for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in
Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1644.

An Antidote against the Contagious Air of INDEPENDENCY.
1 Cor. 1.12, 13. For this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul,
And I of Apollo, And I of Cephas, And I of Christ.

Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized in the
name of Paul? etc.


IT was not without cause, that Solomon the wisest King that ever breathed upon
earth, cried out in the beginning of the book of his Recantation, Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher; Vanity of vanities, all is vanity,
etc. For surely, if any that have seen the former happiness of this Kingdom,
should behold the miseries of it at this present, they might with Solomon,
bewail the vicietude of all temporal things; if they took into consideration
the sudden change that is befallen to this Kingdom in so short a time; for it
is fallen from the highest flood of prosperity, to the lowest ebb of
desolation; and not by the incursions of foraign Nations, but by its own
children, that have (like young Vipers) ripp'd up the womb of their Mother, to
imbrue their hands in their own blood, with less remorse and humanity, then
barbarous heathen; for Tacitus, lib. 2. chap. 8
Tacitus records, that one Brother having slain his Brother unawares in the
Battle of Bedriac (that was fought between the Commanders of the Emperor Otho,
and the Commanders of the Emperor Vitellius) killed himself upon his Brothers
body, for grief that he had been so unfortunate, as to slay him, that he was
bound by nature to love dearly. And Guichardin records, That Robert Earl de la
Mark loved so dearly his two sons the Barons of Floranges and Jamets, that
having broken through the Battle of See Guichardin History, in the Battle of
Novare.
Novare, and made a worthy retreat with his own Regiment, in despite of the
victorious Enemy; hearing (when he was past all danger) that his two sons lay
among the dead in the midst of the field, returned, and in despite of all
opposition, recovered their bodies, and brought them away upon his horse, and
by this extraordinary valor saved both their lives, notwithstanding they were
then speechless, and mortally wounded, But alas, we are so desperately wicked,
and void of all humanity and natural affection, in this Intestine War of ours,
that diverse Gentlemen, of both parties, have looked upon their nearest Kinsmen
that were wallowing in their own blood, in the Battle of Keynton, without
offering them their aid, nor casting a sigh of compassion for them: Nay, some
have been so cruel, and deprived of all natural affection, that they and
their Abettors have ridden twenty miles in a dark night to surprise their
Father, Uncle, or Brother, for to carry them away to their own Garrison, to
wring out of their hands some considerable Ransom, which being refused, they
have, like Job 1.17.
Caldeans, deprived them in another night, of all their cattle and means, and
reduced them (that were Knights fellows) into Jobs case, without any compassion
or reluctation. Its no wonder therefore, if our miseries do rather increase,
then draw near to a period, since our cruelties, inhumanities, and oppressions,
are not to be paraleld in any History. But that which does most of all increase
the wrath of God against us, is, that some of our Clergymen, that should, like
Exo. 32.10, 11, 12.
Moses, stand in the gap to appease the Lords anger, are they, that inflame the
same, by the contentions and Schisms they foment in the Church of God, about
the establishing of a new way of Church Government, which they have brought
from Holland or America, (where they were constrained to fly, by the
over-rigorous courses of the Prelacy;) having been infected with this
contagious air, by sojourning in those parts among Sectaries; so that, thinking
by flight to avoid a Rock, they have cast themselves upon a quick-sand, that
may if God in his mercy prevent it not, conduce their Souls to greater danger
then their Bodies were, during the persecution of the Archbishop Land. It is
therefore necessary that Christians should be very circumspect where they fly,
because the contagious Air of a perverse generation is apt to be infused
insensibly into their hearts; for the sojourning of righteous Lot among the
Sodomites, did in some sort taint his noble disposition, otherwise he had not
proffered his two daughters to the desperate lust of the Sodomites, to preserve
the two Angels from Genesis 19.8.
violence, that the Rites of Hospitality might not be wronged; And the abode of
his two daughters amongst that impious Generation, taught them to drown the
Genesis 19.32.
continency of their Father in the Wine of Drunkenness, that he might not
abhor their incestuous imbracements, which he had undoubtedly detested, if the
light of his reason had not been over-clouded with the vapors of the Vine. And
the Genesis 42.15, 16
long abode of the most continent of men, chaste Joseph, amongst the Egyptians,
bred in him that vicious habit, to swear by the lift of Pharaoh, etc. Even so,
they having been infected with this contagious Air of Independency, oppose as
much as in them lies, the Presbyteriall-Government; notwithstanding it is
approved of by the Word of God, the practice of the Apostles, and of all the
Primitive Churches, And endeavor to bring in this new revealed way, that has
no president but the practice of some private Congregations of Separatists that
are in Holland and America, which is as good as nothing at all; as it shall
appear in the Reasons following. Now because I conceive these Schisms and
Spiritual Divisions do as much, or rather more retard the true Reformation in
hand, then our Civil Divisions; I conceive my self obliged by the rule of
Christian Charity, to exhort in the name of God, and for CHRIST JESUS sake, all
such Independents, that have rent in pieces the Mystical body of our Savior;
by gathering to themselves private Congregations, and by a kind of Mercenary
way, robbed diverse of their brethren of the Ministry, of some of the fattest
sheep of their flocks; to give over this destructive way; for did they know the
irrepairable breaches, they make by it in the Church of God, I am persuaded
they would suddenly forsake the same, for the advancement of Gods glory, and
their own safety (which ought to be dearer to them then their lives, and all
other respects whatsoever) which is much impaired and endangered, by this their
separation from the Church; entreating all those to whom this Antidote shall
come to hand, to excuse; if I write freely what I conceive of their way, and
relate what I hear other men say of it, since the Lord is my witness, that it
is not out of spleen or malice that I bear against any of them; but merely out
of zeal to advance Gods glory, and for their own safety, that is much impaired
by it, as I have said before; that such gifts that the Lord has bestowed upon
diverse of them (which their disciples would have men to esteem rare and
extraordinary) may be employed to increase the Kingdom of Christ, and not
Satan's, nor to foment Divisions between them that should remember, that Unity
is their duty, as says I. P. very judiciously, of whose opinion I am in this
first case, that in controversies men are to be mild in expressions; but
whether he be of my opinion in this second case I know not; viz. that men are
bound to speak ingeniously what they know, and conceive to be true and
profitable for the advancement of Gods glory, and our brethrens good; whether
it be pleasanr or distasteful unto them: And as I say, so will I write in the
following Reasons.

I.
THeir new way must needs by all ingenious spirits be thousand bodies that have
every one of them ahead that is absolute, and has neither reference, nor
Dependency with any other authority, but of his own body: 2. Because we should
by it, be divided from that union that we have contracted; and have taken a
Solemn Oath to maintain with our brethren the Scots; which would divide us and
them into so many small channels, that the River of our Forces would be
fordable every where; and these two Kingdoms exposed to the cruel mercy of our
enemies: 3. Because we should as the French Proverb says, Fall from a
Quotidian to a burning Fever; and for our Hierarchy of Prelates, that has
with much ado been supported; we should establish 9324. that would like so many
Caterpillars devour the substance or every green thing of the Land, Exo. 10.5.
and suck more blood of the Common people in one year, then the Star Chamber,
the High Commission Court, the Arches, or all the Bishops Courts could do in
six; although their hunger was insatiable.

II.
Pryn, I will pass it over, for it would seem presumption in me, to add any
thing to that he has already delivered concerning the same.

III.
THis new way has no warrant out of the word of God; for we are not to
separate our selves from the Church, but upon palpable errors, that are crept,
or wilfully maintained (as they are in the Church of Rome) against the Analogy
of Faith, and the true Orthodox Doctrine of the best Reformed Churches of
Christendom: But for men to gather secret congregations, and rent in pieces, as
some Independants do, the Mystical Body of Christ; I say some, for they do not
all separate themselves from the Church, nor fall into that sin of offense,
Matthew. 18.6. But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, which believes
in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Under color, that their
consciences are so tender, that they cannot receive the Communion in a mixed
congregation without offense: But these men can stumble at a straw, and lep
over a block; for in this case their consciences are offended without cause;
and when they commit a great sin, and tear in pieces the Mystical body of our
blessed Savior; they are not offended at all, so this seems a Paradox to me,
are one of the equivocations they have learned from the Roman Jesuits; that is
rather a sign of a seared conscience, then of a tender conscience: Because it
is impossible for them to obtain (should they separate every mouth) and change
their private congregations; one so pure as to be free from all Hypocrites,
Profane, or ill prepared receivers; for of four men that entered into the Ark,
by the Commandment of God, one of them was an Atheist, and See Genesis 7.7 and
9.22. Ham the son of Noah.
wicked hypocrite: And amongst our blessed Redeemers twelve Apostles; Mat.
26.20, 26, 27.28.
Judas, the son of perdition was one of the twelve: what probability is there
then that the private Congregations of the Independants can be free from all
unworthy Communicants; for if we grant they may be freed from notorious
sinners; yet they dare not affirm they are free of hypocrites, that are more
odious to God and men then open sinners: Now if they conceive that the sin of
an impenitent receiver is transferred to them, if they receive the Communion
with him; they are of necessity as much polluted by the company of Hypocrites,
as by the company of known sinners: But it is certain that the guilt of an
impenitent receiver is not transferred upon the well prepared receiver, Ezekiel.
18.19, 20.
for if it were, Gods promises were in vain, and to think so were blasphemy:
Notwithstanding whatsoever I have said, or shall say concerning this point, it
is not to excuse the carelessness of the Pastors or Elders that admit notorious
sinners to so blessed a Sacrament, for they cannot be too precise to examine
such as they suspect to be of scandalous life, or to refuse them the
admittance, until they give to the world clear evidence of their conversion,
and amendment of life: But it is to show that such are to blame, that does
separate themselves from their Parish Congregations, because some few known
sinners are admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper by the carelessness
of the Pastors, Churchwardens, or Elders of their Parish, and specially now
the honorable Houses have taken order that this abuse should be redressed, and
diligently amended; for as I have said before, they have no warrant out of the
word of God to separate themselves upon such sandy grounds; because Christ the
fountain of all wisdom and purity, had not admitted to his own table, that very
night that he instituted that blessed Sacrament to his disciples, Judas, that
he knew then to be a thief, and was to be presently after the most perfidious
Traitor that ever breathed upon earth, if separation had been so necessary to
be observed. Moreover, although the Church of the Corinthians was polluted with
such an incestuous person, as was not so much as named among the Gentiles, yet
we do not read that the Saints of that Church did separate their selves, but
only excommunicated him for a time, according to Saint Paul's direction; that
the Spirit might be 1 Cor. 5.1.5.
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, etc. Neither do we read of any separation
of the Saints in the seven primitive Churches of Asia, although there were
diverse among them infected with the erroneous opinions of the Balaamites and of
the Rev. 2.14.15.
Nicholaitans, etc. I do not deny but the true children of God are to separate
themselves from the company, frequentation, and familiarity of all profane men,
and notorious sinners, because they are as the Prophet Jeremiah says, to take
forth the precious from the vile, Ier. 15.19.
that they may be as the mouth of God, etc. But this separation is a peculiar
separation, and not a Public or a general separation of the Church; this
confirms the first point that I have spoken of, that there is nothing more
dangerous for a Christian to inhabit, or to be familliarly acquainted or
conversant with Sectaries, profane, Licentious, and impious men; for as it is
impossible for us to handle pitch, without our hands be stained and besmeared
with it; even so it is impossible to converse with the wicked, without we be in
time accessory to some one or other of their wicked actions; and the like to
converse familiarly, or to go constantly to bear the Independants Sermons,
without one be tainted with the contagious air of their Positions.

IV.
THis New-way, and the Separation of Independants from their Parish-Churches,
is an encouragement to all the Separatists, Brownists, Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Socinians and Libertines, that are in and about the City; for they
shelter themselves under their name; and when they are taken in their
Conventicles, by some of the public Officers, and enforced to answer for
themselves, they affirm to be Independants, to cover their Heresies, it being
an ordinary thing among the wicked, to disguise themselves under the name of
such, that are reputed to be more sincere then themselves; for although the
Independants gather congregations, and separate themselves from their Parish
congregations, as the Sectaries do; yet they ar^ for the greater part sound in
Doctrine, and dissent from us only in Discipline; but the Sectaries are
Erroneous both in Doctrine and Discipline, and draw daily upon our heads, the
just judgment of God, because we connive at their Errors, and suffer them to
infect the simple people with their contagious Tenants. Now these disguisements
and fallacies of the Sectaries, should in my opinion induce the Independants to
a holy indignation, and detest to be any longer the harbor of such Vermin, or
the President or Patron of their Separation from the Church of God; for if they
are demanded why they dismember themselves; their answer is, That the greatest
Precisians in the Kingdom have taught them the way. And surely, if it were
unlawful (say they) such Learned and Religious Men as they are, would not be
example of offense and of evil to others; and by this means are a stumbling
block to them, and the cause that the wicked are hardened in the ways of
Error and Impiety.

V.
THis revealed Discipline i^ inferior to the Presbyteriall-Government; in this
point, That the effects of the Issue is uncertain; whereas the Presbyteriall is
approved, by the happy success it has had for many years in Switzerland,
France, Holland and Scotland. But this is a mere Novelty, that may be compared
to the projects of some young Mathematician drawn upon paper, that promise much,
but when they are to be put in practice, are ordinarily of no use at all. Or
like to some of our Engineer Models, that seem to promise in a small form,
diverse rare effects; As for the elevation of Water above her natural spring;
which seems a thing impossible, according to humane reason: Or to raise a piece
of Timber, or a great stone of a thousand weight from the ground to the top of
a structure, with a small Engine that may be carried in a man's hand. But when
by the proofs of these small Modells, they have with much ado induced an
undertaker to have them made in great, with extraordinary charges, there is not
one among a hundred, when they are set up, that prove to be successful,
because some Spring, Wheel, or Counterpoise, is either too weak, too small, or
too light to endure the violent motion of it, whereby it is presently rent in
pieces, and the charges of the credulous undertaker cast away: even so it would
fall out with this new revealed way, if our supreme Magistrates were so
credulous, as to try the operation of it: (the which the Lord prevent,) for
although it might be effectual in some small congregations, in Holland, or
some small Boroughs in America; yet it would certainly be destructive to this
populous Kingdom, and would prove like Platos Commonweal, beautiful in
conceits and imaginations; but altogether unusefull, and as impossible to be
put in practice among us, as that was among the Athenians.

VI.
THis new way would rather increase our divisions and miseries, then lessen
them; for of all sorts of governments: whether they be civil or
Ecclesiastical, a Democraticall form is most apt to foment and breed
divisions and contentions, witness the Democraticall Commonweals of the
Athenians, Aetolians, and Achaians, that were of small continuance, and always
tossed up and down with Civil contentions, Thusides History.
as the rolling billows of a tempestuous sea, and fell sundry times under the
yoke of Tyrants. Now if this new way should take place, and every Pastor with
his Elders to be absolute over their congregation, we should (as the French
proverb says) fall from a Quotidian to a burning Fever; and for one Hierarchy
of Prelates, raise 9324. of Independants (as I said before) for there are so
many Parishes in this Kingdom; and they cannot conveniently be reduced in a
lesser number of congregations. Now what Unity can be expected among so many
Law-lesse men; whose actions and doctrine are not to be controuled by any
civil or Ecclesiastical Authority: I leave it to the consideration of the
Reader; for if great Princes that are of a more noble education, and of a more
ingenious inclination, are subject to become Tyrants, when they fear neither
Laws nor men, as Tacitus the great Politician Records of the Emperor Tiberius,
and of the Emperor Nero; what may be expected of meaner men; Tacitus.
Tiberius says he, kept himself in a kind of moderation as long as Livia his
mother lived, and so did Nero all the life time of his mother Agrippina, but as
soon as Livia died of her, natural death; and that Agrippina was made away by
her impious son: they both give themselves over to commit before the sun all
manner impiety; which they committed before secretly, for fear to displease,
or grieve their mothers: It is therefore the Laws, and the respect of
Magistrates, that curbeth the pernicious inclination of men: But if this new
way should take place; what Impiety would not be committed, or what Heresies
would not be invented, to please the palate of their Auditors, for to increase
the number of their congregations, and the revenew of their contributions, or
out of ambition, to be reputed more precise and singular then their brethren or
neighbor Iud. 17.5.
Pastors, upon which would ensue unheard of divisions, contentions, and
confusions, as it fell out in the time of Micah, when there was no King in
Israel.

As long as Iehojada lived, Joash King of Judah feared the Lord, but as soon as
he was dead, he gave himself over to Idolatry, and Impiety, for he caused
Zacharias 2 Chr. 24.20.
the Son of Iehoiada, that had raised him to the Crown, most cruelly and
ingratefully to be stoned to death, because he admonished him to return unto
the Lord. And shall we hope better of men of lower degree, that are risen from
nothing to ride on Eccl^s. 1^.7.
Horseback, when their Master walks a foot, have we forgotten the Proverb,
Set a beggar on horseback and he will, etc. No surely, but rather worse; for
there never was two such insulting Prelates in the Christian world, as Card:
Woolsey, and William Laud Arch Bishop of Canterbury; and yet the first was but
a Butchers Son, and the second a poor Cloathworkers Son; the first durst
presume to name himself before his King, and the second to control his
Prince; reform the Royal Oath, and insult over the supreme Court of this
Kingdom. Even so, if this new way should take place, we should have many
thousand petty Tyrants, domineering over their Congregations, as the last
Archbishop did in the Star Chamber, and the High Commission Court, and as many
Religions as Pastors; for every one of them would frame a Religion after their
own Idea. But the Presbyterian Discipline is a medium way between Hierarchy,
and a Democraticall Government; much like to the Civil Government of the
Venetians, that has continued this twelve hundred year, and so may this
continue to the last day, because it is free from all extremes, which in all
Discipline are dangerous. But the Kingdom being divided into twelve Classis,
and every Classis having six Reverend Divines, appointed to call twice a year
all the Pastors that shall be under their Jurisdiction before them, and to
examine and determine of all Cases as well for Doctrine, Discipline, and
misdemeanour in life and conversation; And these twelve Classis to be called
once a year to a National Synod, for to judge of the Appeals, and of the
greater affairs of the Church. This medium way I say, is able to suppress all
Schisms and Divisions, and to keep the Clergy in that purity of Doctrine and
Discipline, as is beseeming the true Ministers of God. These Reasons then
should in my opinion induce the Independants to reunite themselves with the
Church of God, to abhor all separation, and to disdain to shelter any longer
the Sectaries that live in and about this City; but rather to endeavor to
convince them of their errors by the sword of the Spirit: But if they will
desperately remain obstinate, then to lend their helping hand to their
Brethren of the Ministry, to remove them from hence, that they may not draw
any longer the Judgments of God upon this Nation, as they have done for
conniving at them, which kind of halting between two opinions is most odious to
God; for it is impossible to serve God and Mammon: And in so doing, they will
vindicate themselves of these six imputations following, which are daily cast
upon them, which otherwise will confirm this opinion in the common people,
that there is seldom any smoke without fire.

I.
THat they are as like the Roman Jesuits in their Principles, Method,
Insinuations, 6. Paralells.
Equivocations and Fallacies; as two Paralell-lines are like one another.

II.
As the Jesuits will not charge themselves with any parish cures, but desire
rather to instruct Scholars in the liberal Arts; preach Funeral Sermons all
the Lent long: even so our Independents shun all parish cures, and endeavor to
obtain as many Legative Lectures as they can, for to avoid the extraordinary
pains that parish cures require, and in lieu of Scholars, they gather to
themselves as many Disciples as they can, and of them they frame private
congregations, of which they require a Covenant, for to contribute to the
necessities of their Pastors; and an oath or promise to follow him wheresoever
he is enforced to flee; whether it be in Holland or in America; and so by these
Lectures, that are the most certain rents to men and punctually paid of any;
and the contributions of their private congregations, their yearly revenew does
excel the yearly coming in of the best parish Cures.

III.
The Jesuits entice all the ingenious spirits of a County to their Schools, and
allure thither the eldest sons of the richest Families living about them;
whereby they insinuate themselves in the affections of their Parents, which
leave them great Legacies at their decease; so that in few years, they get the
greatest part of the free-land, seated near unto their Colleges; and if the
Magistrates in Romayne and in the state of the Venetians had not by an Edict
prevented their wiles, they had in a short time incroached the greater part of
their demains; But they have now made an Edict, That if any leave any land by
his last Will to the Jesuits, they are upon pain of forfeiture to sell the same
within the year, to Laymen, that they may no more incroach upon their
Territories: But the Jesuits finding means notwithstanding this Edict, by
supposed names to hold these Legacies: The state of Venice for this and another
of their Wiles, viz. About the Oriculary confession, have been constrained to
banish them out of their State; for as long as they remained in Venice, the
most secret Councels and Resolutions of the Senate was revealed to the Pope and
the King of Spain, by the insinuations used in the Oriculary-confession of the
Venetian Ladies: Even so the Independants entice and allure to their side the
most accute spirits, and insinuate themselves cunningly with the richest and
most eminent persons where they live, and allure the best and richest families
to their private congregations, whereby they increase their Revenew; and obtain
the best Legative Lectures about the City; and had they the use of the
Oriculary confession as well as the Jesuits, that they might use their
insinuative faculty to dying men and women, they would undoubtedly excel the
Jesuits in riches and demaines.

IV.
WHeresoever the Jesuits set footing, they drive away, or impoverish all the
rest of the Ecclesiastive Orders of the Roman Church; be they Priests, Monks,
or Friars, and are generally hated of them all for their extreme ambition, and
griping coveteousnesse; Even so wheresoever the Independants are admitted, they
impover shall their Brethren of the Ministry; for they draw from them, after a
mercinary way, the fattest and the best wooll'd sheep they have in their flock,
to increase the contributions of their private congregations: Moreover, they
are generally hated of their neighbors for their vain ostentation and avarice;
for although they would be accounted to be humble, yet they will not give way
to the best, but will have their own opinion to be reputed as a law; and their
arguments, although they are sometime weak and ridiculous, to be infallible;
and for their Avarice, it is apparent, for their revenew exceeds the best
Parish Cures.

V.
THe Jesuits, wheresoever they come, foment divisions, and contentions both in
Church and in Commonwealth because they love to fish in muddy waters; even so
the Independants wheresoever they come, they foment discord in Church and
Commonwealth; for proof of it, we need no other, then our own experience, for
since they are come from Holland and America, they have increased our
divisions, and retarded by the one moity of the time, the establishing of the
Directory of the Discipline of the Church, and of the true Reformation; And
their separation, and their gathering of private congregations, has encouraged
the Sectaries in their erroneous ways; that for one Anabaptist or Antinomian,
that was among us, when they came over, there is now ten.

VI.
AS the Jesuits have an extraordinary opinion of themselves; even so have the
Independants, a certain immovable self-conceitednesse Witness ^. W. concerning
his name.
of their own sufficiency, and Sanctity; was it not a self-conceitednesse of
them to disassent to the Presbyteriall Government, when all their Arguments,
and Reasons to maintain their new way, have been confuted and sufficiently
answered; Or is it not rather an unheard of obstinacy, that six of them should
oppose and control the Judgment and opinion of threescore and ten, as Learned
and Religious Ministers as themselves? And is it not a dangerous conceit of
their Sanctity, to separate themselves from their Parish congregations, because
a few of unworthy receivers are admitted by the ignorance, or the carelessness
of the Church officers; surely these proceedings of theirs do bear evidence
against them, that they are as well conceited of themselves as the Pharisee,
Luke 18.11. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with him self, God I thank thee,
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as
this Publicane, etc. Because they consider not, that humility and self-denial,
are the two fairest flowers of the Christian Garland, and a most certain sign
of a true hearted Nathaniel. These are the aspersions that are daily cast upon
the Independants, that should induce them for the time to come, to be more
circumspect of their ways, then they have been heretofore (for men begin to
take notice of their Carriage) and to abstain from renting in pieces, as they
have done formerly, the Mystical Body of Christ; but rather to endeavor with
all humility, and with the spirit of meekness, Acts, all chap. 2.
to be with one accord and assent, assistant and yoak-fellows with their
brethren of the Ministry, to establish the Presbyteriall Discipline in the
Church; that is, in all probability the way to advance Gods glory, the good of
his Church, and the Peace and the Unity of these three Kingdoms, and to
increase his sacred Majesty's honor, and to lay a sure foundation for his
gracious Posterity to be the Monarchs of Albion, as long as the Sun and Moon
shall endure; whereas if they continue in their wilfulness and obstinacy; God,
notwithstanding their traversing, endeavors, will bring this great work of
Reformation to a blessed period in his due time, and they shall see it, but as
the Prophet Elisha said to the lord on whose hand the King leaned, Thou shall
see it with thine eyes, 2 Kings 7.2.
but shall not eat thereof; so except they repent from their former ways, and
endeavor with their brethren of the Ministry, to root out of this Kingdom
these numerous swarms of Sectaries, that infest the Air of the Land with
their erroneous and blasphemous opinions, they may see this Reformation
effected in their days, but shall never reap or eat of the fruits of it, but
shall be enforced to return in exile from whence they came, except they return,
as I have said, unto the Lord, and prefer the advance of his glory, before
their own ends.

FJNJS.
Errata: Page 8. line 13. for supported read suppressed.


