DUBLIN the 24 of May, 1642.
A perfect Relation of the proceedings of the English Army against the Rebels
in Ireland, From MAY 12. to the 23. 1642.
May 12.
THis day we had Intelligence, That the Scots bent themselves to releeve
Colraine, besieged by the Rebels, and that Sir Phelim O Neal had burnt the
Church of Armagh, and all the Town to the ground, Charlemount and Castle Slaney
used in the like sort, himself and the wicked crew flying to the woods and bogs
for fear of the English and Scots Northern forces. From Trym we heard, That
Colonel Gibson, who now commands Sir Simon Harcourts Regiment, issued out, and
did cut off about 200 Rebels, chased the rest into a bog about four miles
distant from Trym, from whence they went to the Navan, which they burnt for
fear, and fled further Northward.

May 13.
We received Intelligence from the Naas, That the Rebels had raised many
Alarums, and fired some houses by stealth, but were still beaten, and forced to
fly every day for six days together, more or less of the Rebels were killed
by our men, by the conduct of Captain Rotchford, and without any considerable
loss on our side.

May 14.
Sir Charles Coot was buried with much lamentation to all Protestants; and as
much joy to the Papists, as was well observed by many whose countenance
betrayed their falsehood, the same day Captain Sterling a Scot being left in
Garrison at Kilshoughine being invited to a protected Papists house to dinner,
was betrayed to the Rebels, where he and his Lieutenant, with a Minister, were
killed. The next day Colonel Crafford went out to bring off his body, and
killed about 100 men, women and children, giving no quarter, no not to such as
were protected, upon which day every Pulpit at Dublin was filled with Funeral
Sermons and tears for Sir Charles Coots death, whose loss we already too timely
feel.

May 16.
A small party of horse went out to plunder, two of which were cut off by the
Rebels, the rest came back and got some booty; about 12 of the clock that
night there was an Alarm upon the North-side of the City, over the River,
which was done by some of the Rebels horsemen which charged our Sentinels, who
were quickly beaten off again by our foot, without any loss of either side,
some few Cows and Carrons they got away with them.

May 17.
The next day Captain Armstrong with a troop of horse was sent out to find the
last nights troublers; but the Rogues were fled to the Monntaines with the
pray; A Convoy came from the Naas which brought home some wagons, and left them
all well and quiet there, but brought Captain Rotchford sick to Dublin. Word
was brought that most part of the County of Fermanaugh is burnt by the Rebels,
so that now both parties have nothing but destruction and ruin amongst them;
It is reported that the Lord Mountgarret has besieged Carlow Castle with 3000
men, in which place are a great number of distrested English, and if taken,
will doubtless be put to the sword, which is much feared it cannot hold out
long.

May 18.
News was brought hither from the County of Cavan that Sir Francis Hamilton and
Sir James Cragge, who did good service in all this War, had notice that a great
many of the Sept of the Mac-Dorings were assembled together about seven miles
distant from them, made what strength they could, and went thither, and
surprised them all which were put to the sword, to the number of about 30 of
the chief of that Sept, returned the next morning, with whole heads of Cattle
to their own Castles. The same day Colonel Gibson brought two notable
prisoners from Trym to Dublin, the father and the son, one Wisby, a man of 1800
l. per annum; many and almost continual are the Alarums about Trym, but the
Rebels do always run for it. Want of pay breeds much discontent amongst the
Soldiers, there being due to them above 100000 l. besides what the City of
Dublin is taxed at. The same day Colonel Monk was sent out with a considerable
number to New Castle, six miles from Dublin, where the State had notice of some
Rogues, but before he came the birds were flown, only some 18 or 20 men,
besides women and children were found, who dyed the common death of Rebels; and
the next day returned with 200 head of Cattle, and good booty to Dublin.

May 19.
A crew of desperate rogues at 7 in the morning came, and took about 60 Cows,
within half a mile of Dublin another Party took 20 horses in the other side of
the Town; the same day the Rebels attempted to stop the water which came to
Dubline Mills, but were beaten off and cleared again. One of his Majesty's
ships took a French barque, laden with Arms and Ammunity, going into Limerick
for the Rebels.

There came advise, that the Earl of Saint Albans had relieved the Fort of
Galloway, and had blockt up the Town, so that we May 20.
doubt not but he will quickly master it.

Sir Henry Titchbourn and Sir Thomas Lucas was elected of the Privy Counsel,
that night my Lord Parsons his stable was May 21.
burnt in the middle of the City; and in the morning we had an Alarm upon the
North-side of the City; such strange boldness they have since his death, who
was their terror, some Cattle they drove away in the view of the Town.

Advise from the Naas, that the Garrison there had gotten many Cows and Sheep
from the Rebels, which they gained out of May 22.
the woods, and bogs, and much pillage, but were like to mutiny about it, by
reason the Captain would have all to himself.

London, Printed for Ralph Rounthwait. 1642.


