

MVLTVM in PARVO: Or, Some useful SAYINGS, IN VERSE and PROSE, COLLECTED By a
Lover of Virtue and Goodness in Whomsoever.

The Heart of him that is upright,
In Heavenly knowledge takes delight.
I will delight my self in THY Statutes.

If thou would true Wisdom win,
Then thou must retire within.
That which may be known of GOD is manifest in them,

Romans 3.19. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Manship at the Black Bull in Cornhill,
1687.

MVLTVM in PARVO: Or, some Useful SAYINGS, IN VERSE and PROSE, etc.
TO work aright, O LORD, instruct thou me,
That in THY Sight I may approved be:
Then shall my Soul have Rest and Peace for ever,
In THEE, which neither Death nor Hell can sever.
IT matters not, how I appear to Man,
A Witness in my Soul there is, that can
This record to the FATHER bear that I
Seek not Man's praise, but Immortality:
That so a Crown of Rest I may receive,
Which Mortals have not in their Power to give.
If I yet pleased Men, I should not be the Servant of Christ. Though all the
World my Actions discommend,
I am at Peace, when Conscience is my friend.
And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of
offense, toward GOD and toward Man. THe Glories of our Birth and State
Are Shadows, not Substantial things;
There is no Armor against sat,
Death lays his Icy-hand on Kings;
Scepter and Crown must tumble down,
And in the Dust be equal made
With the poor crooked Sithe and Spade;
All heads must come to the cold Tomb
Only the actions of the Just
Smell sweet and blossom in the Dust.
Vivit post funera virtus, Virtue lives after Death. ALL outward Honor is a
Painted fable,
The humble Man is truly honorable;
Of virtues all there is none more wished by me,
Than that which graces all, Humility.
The greater thou art, the more humble thy self. Honor thy Parents to prolong
thy end,
With them, though for a Truth, do not contend;
Though all should Truth defend, do thon lose rather
The Truth a while, than lose their Loves for ever.
Honor thy Father, and forget not the Sorrows of thy Mother, Eccl. 7.27. AS
GODS dear See d, to learn give heed,
That when thy Head is hoary;
Wisdom may be a Crown to thee
Transcending Earthly Glory.
Thy Peace and Rest, from GODS own Breast,
Then Death, nor Hell, shall sever:
But thou shall see, thy Joys shall be
Amen in HIM for ever.
The Wise in Heart shall inherit Glory, but shame shall be the Promotion of
Fools, Prove. 3.35. TRue virtue is a Coat of Mail,
Against which no Weapons can prevail.
Virtus vera nobilitas.
Virtue is true Nobility.
TRuth oppressed we often see,
But quite suppressed it cannot be.
He left not himself without a Witness, Acts 14.17. THink that is just, it is
not enough to do,
Unless thy very Thoughts are upright too;
If well thou do, and well intend,
Thou shall be Crowned in the End.
Be thou faithful unto Death, that thou may receive a Crown of Life. THE
surest Riches he shall gain,
Who always Faithful does remain.
Tutum praesidium integritas. Honesty is the best Policy. A Blessing will with
him abide,
That has true Virtue for his Guide.
Blessings are upon the Head of the Just, Pro. 10.6. NO Temper more Man's life
does bless,
Than simple prudent harmlesness.
Hugo Grotius, a Man of Universal Learning and profound Policy, said, I would
give all my Learning and Honor, for the plain Integrity and harmless Innocence
of Jean Vtrick. ABove thy Knowledge do not rise,
But with Sobriety be wise.
Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos. Those things that are above us, are nothing to
us. WHat matter is it, Man, for thee to know
The reason, why the Sea does Ebb and Flow;
Or what course the variable Moon does steer,
Or how the Sun does run throughout the year;
It is thy Wisdom, and would better please,
To fear thy MAKER, than to know all these.
The fear of the LORD is the instruction of Wisdom, Prove. 15.33. HE that
Commands himself is more a Prince,
Than he who Nations keeps in Awe;
And they that yield to what their Souls convince,
Shall never need another Law.
The word is nigh thee, in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, to obey it and do it.
To. 10.8. Deu. 30.14. He Is still himself, when company is gone,
Too well employed ever to be alone;
He takes no thought to be observed or seen,
Whilst all his Acts are echoed from within.
Ama te nesciri and pro nihilo reputari;
Love to be unknown and nothing accounted.
HE dares not wish, nor his own fate propound,
But if GOD send, reads love in every wound;
And would not lose, for all the joys of sense,
The inward comfort of Obedience.
Remember Abraham, the Father of all the Faithful. Who with their present State
are not content,
Often worser find for their just punishment.
The Murmuring Israelites are a dreadful Monitor.
Content's the Crown of Earthly Happiness.
OPinion is the rate of things,
rom whence our peace does flow;
I have a better fate than Kings,
Because I think it so.
Animus omnia facit. The mind does all. WHen all the stormy World does roar,
How unconcerned am I:
I cannot fear to tumble lower,
Who never would be high.
The lowliest mind is safest. HAppy that Soul that is content alone,
And needs no entertainment, but its own.
Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus;
Never less alone, than when alone.
AT length this secret I have learned,
Who will be happy must be unconcerned;
Must all their Comfort in their bosom wear,
And seek their Treasure, and their Power there.
We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. FLy Tales and Rumors,
lest of News
The Inventer thou be thought,
For Silence seldom hurts a man,
But Speech much harm has wrought.
Vir sapit, qui pauca loquitur:
That man is wise that speaks little.
AGainst thy Friend with force of Words,
Strive not in any wise;
Sometimes of Words (which are but Wind)
Great Controversies rise.
Beati pacifici; Blessed are the Peacemakers. WHat faults thou find'st in
other men
Let not be found in thee,
Great shame in him that Vice reproves,
Himself not to be free.
It Is bad, when Vice corrects Sin. TO carp at others words, let not thy Wit be
ill applied,
Lest by thine own Example taught, another thee deride.
He that keeps his Tongue, keeps his Soul from troubles, Prove. 21.23. IF
with a Stranger thou discourse, first learn
By strictest observation to discern,
If he be wiser than thy self: if so,
Be dumb, and rather choose by him to know;
But if perchance thy self the wiser be,
Then do thou speak, that he may learn by thee.
Refrain not to speak, when there is an opportunity to do good, Eccl. 4.23.
SAge Counsel from thy Servants mouth
Disdain not to respect,
Nor any man's advice, that may
Thy proper good effect.
Fas est and ab host doceri. It Is fit to learn even of an Enemy. IN all thy
actions have a care,
That no unseemliness appear.
Abstain from all appearance of Evil. A Thankful heart has earned one favor
twice:
But he that is ungrateful wants no vice.
Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris.
Say a Man's ungrateful, and you say all.
LET not Anger cause thee to reveal,
What Love and Friendship caused thee to conceal.
A Talebearer reveals secrets: but he that ii of a faithful Spirit,
concealeth a matter, Prove. 11.13. ONce reconciled rip not up the wrongs of
former days,
Old Sores to rub, and Wrath to move, a wicked Mind bewrays.
He that rules his Tongue shall live without strife; and he that hates
babbling shall have less Evil, Eccl. 19.6. BY Slanders we arrive to high Renown,
The greatest crosses win the greatest Crown.
Many are the troubles of the Righteous, but the LORD delivers them out of all,
Psalm. 34.19. TAke well what e're shall fall, though bad it be,
Take it for good, and 'twill be so to thee.
Quod sis, esse velis. Will to be, what thou art. That Is Friendship, and true
Love indeed,
Which firmly bides in time of need.
Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur;
A sure Friend is known in a doubtful matter.
SUre is that knot which true Religion ties;
And Love that is rightly grounded never dies.
Witness Jonathan and David. HE that enjoys a Patient mind,
Can Comfort in Afflictions find.
It gently sweetens every Bitter Cup,
And calms tempestuous storms, when they are up.
In Patience possess ye your Souls.
Prudens qui patiens;
He is wise that is patient.
BE well advised and wary Council take,
E're thou do any resolution make.
Deliberandum est diu, quod statuendum est semel.
Consider long of that, which is but once to be done.
TO gather Wealth through Fraud do not presume,
A little evil got does often much consume.
Male parta male dilabuntur. Ill got, ill spent.
SPare not, nor spend too much, be this thy Care,
Spare thou to spend, and only spend to Spare:
Who spends too much may want and so complain,
But he spends best, that spares to spend again.
Prodigality and Coveteousness are both to be abhorred.
SPare for no cost when time shall serve,
And cause require the same;
For what is better spent than spared,
Adds to an honest name.
Fac sumptum propere, etc.
Be not sparing, when need requires.
USe what thou have in doing good,
But see thou make no wast;
Who vainly spend their own and want,
Seek other Men's at last.
Better to prevent, than repent.
THings needful then they cannot want,
That cutb their vain desires:
And measure their expense with what
Necessity requires.
Natura paucis contenta.
Nature is Content with sew things.
ONe special note of blessedness,
Is riches to deny;
Which whosoever covets to ingross,
Lives always beggarly.
Avarus semper eget.
A Covetous Man is always in want.
THe Worlds a snare, I find, unto an honest mind,
And O how few there be, who from that snare are free!
From which LORD save all thine which trust in THEE.
No Tongue, nor Pen, unless the heart be pure,
Avails any thing, nor can procure
Peace to the Soul, Ah! nothing ever can,
Without a good Life, make a happy Man;
Then, Soul of mine, since this must needs be true,
See that thou labor all Sin to subdue.
What signify good Words, unless they rise
From Love? it is Love alone that makes us wise;
Soul, love thy GOD, let it be seen in this,
Thou never Think, nor Speak, nor Do Amiss.
Say, -- Soul of Mine;
HAs not thy experience proved,
What ever thou have over-lov'd,
Thou thereby have injured been,
Have thou not thy error seen?
Is there any thing below
GOD himself, that thou can bow,
Or bend thy Mind to with delight,
And be approved in his sight?
Approved in his sight, who is?
That so fondly acts amiss?
Then tell me, is it not time for thee
By experience Wise to be?
What Joy or Comfort can thou find,
In things uncertain as the Wind,
No Joy, but in a prudent Mind?
A prudent Mind can never be,
Injurious I am sure to thee;
Why then, my Soul, come bid adieu,
To all that comes within thy view:
Seeming Comforts but not true.
Look upon them as they are,
Do not let them prove a Snare:
Soul, bid all empty Joys be gone,
And joy thou in thy GOD alone.
Thy GOD alone the Author is
Of everlasting Joy and Bliss:
Thy GOD alone can give thee this.
TRoubles here attend us must,
Until we return to Dust;
They Are intended for our good,
Were they rightly understood.
By experience this I find,
They cannot hurt a prudent Mind;
Then, Soul of mine, do not be
Vexed, when Troubles come on thee,
HE that sends them, HE can best
Remove them and give ease, and rest.
Rest thou contented with thy lot,
Good is GODS will, is it not?
Troubles here and exercise
Are good for thee to make thee wise;
Heavier they shall not be,
Than thy GOD sees good for thee.
Good I am sure for thee it is,
To reckon, nothing comes amiss:
Be content, and thou shall see,
Nothing comes amiss to thee.
Judge Hales on Changes and Troubles, Contemp. p. 380.
PEace, way ward Soul, let not those various storms,
Which hourly fill the World with fresh Alarms,
Invade thy Peace, nor discompose that rest,
Which thou may keep untouched within thy Breast.
Amidst those Whirl-winds, if thou keep but free
Thy intercourse betwixt thy GOD and thee;
This Region lies above these storms, and know
Thy thoughts are Earthly, and they creep too low;
If these can reach thee, or access can find,
To bring, or raise, like tempests in thy mind.
But yet in these disorders something lies,
That Is worth thy notice, out of which the wise
May trace, and find that just and powerful hand,
That secretly, but surely, does command.
And manage these distempers with that skill,
That while they seem to cross, they act, his Will.
Observe that Silver thread, that steers and bends
The worst of all disorders to such ends,
That speak his Justice, Goodness, Providence,
Who closely guides it by his Influence;
And though these Storms be loud, yet listen well,
There is another Message that they tell.
This World is not thy Country, it is thy Way:
Too much Contentment would invite thy stay
Too long upon thy journey, make it strange,
Unwelcome news, to think upon a change.
Whereas this tugged entertainment send
Thy thoughts before thee, to thy journies end;
Chides thy desires homeward, and tells thee plain,
To think of resting here, it is but vain.
Makes thee to set an equal estimate
On this uncertain World, and a just rate
On that to come, it bids thee wait and stay,
Until thy MASTER call, and then with joy
To entertain it: Such a Change as this
Renders thy loss, thy gain; improves thy bliss.
Judge Hales Contempl. p. 121.
LET him that will ascend the tottering Seat
Of Courtly Grandeur, and become as great
As are his mounting wishes; as for me,
Let sweet Repose and Rest my Portion be;
Give me some mean obscure Recess, a Sphere
Out of the Road of Business, or the fear
Of falling lower; where I sweetly may
My self and dear Retirement still enjoy.
Let not my Life or Name be known unto
The Grandees of the Times, tossed to and fro
By Censures or Applause, but let my Age
Slide gently by, not over-thwart, the Stage
Of Public Action, unheard, unseen,
And unconcerned, as if I never had been.
And thus whilst I shall pass my silent days
In shady privacy, free from the noise
And bustles of the World; then shall I
A good Old Innocent Plebeian die.
Death is a mere Surprise, a very Snare
To him that makes it his life's greatest care
To be a Public Pageant, known to all,
But unacquainted with himself, does fall.
There Is no such thing as Pleasure here,
It Is all a perfect Cheat,
Which does but shine and disappear;
Whose Charm is but Deceit:
The Experienced Prince then reason had,
Who said of Pleasure, it is mad.
I said of Laughter, it is mad, and of Mirth, what does it. Eccl. 2.2.
On Man's Mortality.
LIKE as the Damask Rose you see,
Or like the Blossom on the Tree,
Or like the dainty Flower in May,
Or like the Morning to the Day,
Or like the Sun, or like the Shade,
Or like the Gourd which Jonas had.
Even such is Man whose Thread is Spun,
Drawn out and cut, and so is done.
The Rose withers, the Blossom blasteth,
The Flower fades, the Morning hastes,
The Sun sets, the Shadow flies,
The Gourd consumes, and Man he dies.
Like to the Grass that is newly sprung,
Or like a Tale that is new begun,
Or like the Bird that is here to day,
Or like the Pearly dew of May,
Or like an Hour, or like a Span,
Or like the Singing of a Swan.
Even such is Man who lives by Breath,
Is here, now there, in Life and Death:
The Grass withers, the Tale is ended,
The Bird is flown, the Dew's ascended,
The Hour is short, the Span not long,
The Swan's near Death, Man's life is done.
Like to the Bubble in the Brook,
Or in a Glass much like a look,
Or like the Shuttle in Weavers hand,
Or like the Writing on the Sand,
Or like a Thought, or like a Dream,
Or like the gliding of the Stream:
Even such is Man who lives by Breath,
Is here, now there, in Life and Death.
The Bubble's out, the Look's forgot,
The Shuttle's flung, the Writing's blot,
The Thought is past, the Dream is gone,
The Water glides, Man's Life is done.
Like to an Arrow from the Bow,
Or like swift course of Watery flow,
Or like the time 'twixt Flood and Ebb,
Or like the Spider's tender Webb,
Or like a Race, or like a Goal,
Or like the dealing of a Dole:
Even such is Man, whose brittle State
Is always subject unto Fate.
The Arrow's shot, the Flood soon spent,
The Time no Time, the Webb's soon rent,
The Race soon run, the Goal soon won,
The Dole soon dealt, Man's life is done.
Like to the Lightning from the Sky,
Or like the Post that quick does hie,
Or like a Quaver in short Song,
Or like a Journey three days long,
Or like the Pear, or like the Plum,
Or like the Snow when Summer's come:
Even such is Man who heaps up sorrow,
Lives but this day, and dies to morrow.
The Lightning's past, the Post must go,
The Song is short, the Journy's so,
The Pear does rot, the Plumb does fall,
The Snow dissolves, and so must all.
It is appointed for all men once to die; and after that the Judgment. Memor
esto brevis aevi:
Be thou mindful of thy short Life.
Farewell, poor World, I must be gone,
Thou art no home, no rest for me:
I Will take my Staff, and travel on,
'Till I a better World may see.
Now we desire a better Country, that is an Heavenly, for we look for another
City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is GOD.

HElp me my GOD, O let me find
That noble Fortitude of mind,
Not to be shak'd with every puff of Wind!
With every puff of Wind let me
Be driven nearer unto THEE;
Else, Holy GOD, How can I happy be?
How can I happy be indeed,
'Till joined to that Holy Seed,
That makes man happy when he has most need?
Need, LORD, thou knows I have of THEE
To kill the Root of Sin in me,
LORD, let the Root of Sin consumed be:
Consumed be, destroyed quite,
That Spotless I may in THY sight
Appear, and THOU in me mai'st take delight.
SOME USEFUL SAYINGS IN PROSE.
1. THE Fear of the LORD is the first step to be accepted of HIM, and true
Wisdom obtains HIS Love.

2. Blessed is that Soul that hears the LORD speaking in her, and receives
from HIS Mouth the Word of Comfort.

3. Blessed are those Ears that hearken only to the Divine Voice, and listen
not to the Allurements of the World.

4. He that has little Understanding, and fears GOD, is better than he that
is exceeding Wise, and transgresses the Law of the most HIGH.

5. He that intends to attain to the more inward and Spiritual things of
Religion, must, with JESUS, depart from the multitude and press of People.

6. 'Twas Sir Henry Wotton's Motto, after all his Travels and Embassies, I have
at length learned, That the greatest Wisdom is got by a quiet retirement.

Let it be our care to live here, as we ought; contented with the Condition
Providence allots us; whatever we may meet with in the way, we shall be Happy
in the end: Which the Wise considers.

7. Learn to overcome thy self in all things, for the Love of thy CREATOR.

8. If thou spend the Day profitably, thou will have cause to rejoice in the
Evening.

9. Simple Obedience is to be preferred before all Worldly Wisdom.

10. The Glory of a good Man is the Testimony of a good Conscience; have That
and thou will have inward Peace in the midst of many troubles.

11. To do always well and to have low thoughts of thy self, is a sign of an
Humble Soul.

12 They that follow Sensuality, stain their own Consciences and lose the
favor of GOD.

13. Withdraw thy self violently from that, to which nature is viciously
inclined.

14. They that avoid not small faults, by little and little fall into greater.

15. They that live at liberty and ease, shall ever live in disquiet.

16. True quietness of Heart is got by resisting our Passions, not by obeying
them.

17. Remember always thy end, and how that lost time never returns.

18. If we engage into a large Acquaintance, and various Familiarities, we set
open our Gates to the Invaders of most of our time.

19. Time fruitlesly passed away, will in the end cause an aching Heart.

20. Defile not thy Mouth with Swearing; neither use thy self to the Naming of
the Holy ONE.

21. Let the Name of GOD be sparing in your Mouth, but abundantly in your Heart.

22. The Jews of Old accounted the Name JEHOVAH so Sacred, that they durst not
utter it; the High Priest alone, and that in the Temple only, but once in the
Year at their Solemn Feast, while he blessed the People, might have leave to
mention it, for others it was Death, Buxt. Lex.

23. It is a mark of solly and ill nature to hate reproof.

24. Sin and Sorrow are unseparable Companions, thou can not let in the one,
and shut out the other; he that swims in Sin, must sink in Sorrow.

25. Corrupt Examples may sway with weak minds, but the wise in heart will
regard and consider their own Duty.

26. Oppose no Man wilfully, neither follow any in evil Courses.

27. The clean Soul of a Christian is the House of GOD, and also the House of
Prayer, whose Body is his Temple.

28. There are some that Pray often, yet are not heard to speak much. There are
many that make long Prayers, yet Pray not at all -- acceptably.

29. Prayer is a more Spiritual and Secret thing in the Sanctified, than is
understood by most.

30. Religion (however pulled several ways) is of it self a quiet and
strifeless thing; Holy indeed, but Harmless, and Divine: yet still shining
forth in much Plainness and Simplicity. Be you of that Religion which gives
Glory to GOD on High, on Earth Peace, and Good Will toward Men.

31. True Religion is not to fill Heads with Notions and Opinions, but to Sow
in the mind the Seed of Virtue, to direct how to Govern Passions, and to
destroy self-will.

32. Virtue and Goodness ought to be owned in all Parties and Opinions, and if
these were practiced it would reconcile all Men to each other.

33. Obstinacy is an Advantage to our Enemies, a Trouble to our Friends, and
the assured overthrow of our Selves.

34. So gracious is Providence, that every Man has a Light set up within
himself for a Guide.

35. Cordially espouse all Virtue, constantly decline and hate all Vice.

36. To be humble to Superiors, is Duty; to Equals Civility; to Inferiors
Courtesy; to all Safety.

37. It is to be Observed, that the Poor Man sings at his Plow, while the Rich
Man frets in his Palace: This shows, that it is the mind not the fortune that
makes us happy.

38. Art thou desirous of a Kingdom, says the Philosopher, I will presently
show thee one: Rule wisely over thy Self.

39. The Glory of the Aged is their Experitence and their Wisdom, the Glory of
a young Man is his Modesty and Submission.

40. He that is a Companion of Riotous Men, shameth his Father and dishonors
his Moher.

41. It Is not for young Men to drink Wine, nor for lovers of Virtue to be
Drinkers of strong Drink.

42. Be not a Companion with Wine bibbers, nor with Riotous eaters of Flesh,
Prove. 23.20.

43. He that will be lavish in his Superfluities, will afterward find himself
unavoidably straightened in his necessities.

44. Conscience once embased, the Heart once polluted by vicious Courses, is
not easily recovered to the true Fear of the LORD.

45. Youth should be a Pattern for Virtue, not a Privilege for Vice: Therefore
let thy Virtues be Grave, whilst thy Years are Green.

46. Be meek and courteous to all, yet choose only the Virtuous and Harmless
for your Companions. The Dove flocks not with Ravens.

47. Let thy Speech be sober and seldom: To know how to be silent, is a great
advantage to speak well; and he that knows not how to do the one, knows not the
other.

48. Who hears much and speaks little, may best discern Falsehood from Truth.

49. We ought always to keep a Bridle at our Mouths, even in Religious and
Holy Occasions; because it is hard to fall into arguing, without offense to GOD
and our Neighbor.

50. Let thy Speech be short, comprehending much in few Words. For long
Discourses, Amplifications, and Repetitions, are a sign of Ostentation in the
Speaker, tedious and irksom, and of no real good, to the Hearer. Even in a good
cause, or on a good subject, a man may say too much.

51. The beginning of strife, is as when one lets out Water; therefore leave
off Contention before it be meddled with, Prove. 17.4.

52. Silence is a Guard of the Conscience, a Bridle from Insolence, and a sign
of Innocence, and preserves from many Evils.

53. They that turn an others words to a worse end than was intended, shows an
evil mind; and are far from doing therein as they would be done unto.

54. There is more desireableness in Meekness and Innocence, than in all the
Mountains of Prey or Self exaltation.

55. A virtuous Man is more Patient in Adversity, than a Vicious in Prosperity.

56. I will learn contentment by considering others wants and my own
enjoyments, and not learn discontent from others enjoyments and my own wants.

57. A Rich Worldling is rather to be pitied for what he wants, than envied for
what he has.

58. Unsatiable desires in Temporals, make a man poor in Spirituals.

59. How little soever the thing be, if it be inordinately loved, it defiles
the Soul, and hinders the enjoyment of the chiefest Good.

60. There is nothing in the World conduces more to the Composure and
Tranquillity of the Mind, than the serenity and clearness of the Conscience;
keep but That safe and untainted, the Mind will enjoy a Calm and Tranquillity in
the midst of all the Storms of the World. And although the Waves beat, and the Sea
works, and the Winds blow; the Mind that has a quiet and clear Conscience
within, will be as stable and as safe from Perturbation as a Rock in the midst
of a tempestuous Sea, and will be a Goshen too, and within it self, when the
rest of the World without is like an Egypt for Confusion and Darkness, Judge
Hales Contempl. 373.

61. Whatever thou do hazard or lose, keep the Integrity of thy Conscience,
both before troubles come and under them; it is a Jewel will make thee Rich in
the midst of Poverty, a Sun that will give thee Light in the midst of Darkness,
a Fortress that will keep thee safe in the greatest Danger, and that is never
to be taken from thee, unless thou thy self betray it and deliver it up. p. 374.

62. Many words do not satisfy the Soul, but a good Life comfort the Mind,
and a pure Conscience gives great assurance in the sight of GOD.

63. He that keeps the Law of GOD and abstains from the impurity of the World,
that is, the good Man, the just Liver; he is the Apostles true Jew and
Circumsition.

64. The Curse of the LORD is in the House of the Wicked, but HE blesses the
Habitation of the Just.

65. Whosoever fears the LORD, it shall go well with him at the last; and he
shall find favor in the day of his Death.

66. If I choose the LORD for my Portion, then Mercy and Goodness shall follow
me whilst I live, and Glory and everlasting happiness shall be my Portion when
I die.

67. Let reason go before every Enterprise: And Counsel before every Action.

68. Tho a good Life has but few days, yet a good Name endures for ever.

69. What are the delights of the World to the Peace of my Conscience? Rather
let me be Poor with a good Heart, than rich with an evil Mind.

70. How can Pleasures content me, whilst the Sting of them Poison me?

71. Never think those true hearted Friends to thee, that are false to their
own Consciences.

72. A froward Man sows strife: and a Whisperer seperateth very Friends.

73. They who suffer their own Wills and Lusts to Rule, not only oppress others
thereby, but stifle and crucify the Just and Faithful witness in themselves.

74. There are no such Enemies without, as unruly Lusts and Passions within,
therefore labor to overcome them all.

75. Humility and Abstinence keeps the Body and Mind, in much evenness and
tranquillity; but Pride and Fullness are Pernicious to both.

76. Afflictions are sent for the good, even of good Men; and it is their fault
if they have not that effect.

77. Let thy Afflictions make thee humble, and thy deliverance therefrom the
more increase thy humility.

78. Follow Peace and Holiness with all Men, not only with your Friends, but
with your very Enemies; that you may be the Children of the HIGHEST, and of a
good example to all Mankind.

79. Happy is he that shall be exe^^is'd in these things, and he that lays
them up in his Heart shall become Wise.

Something touching Excess, by Judge Hales.
THe great folly of Mankind, is the unruliness and want of Government of the
Sensual Appetite or Lusts: Hence grows Intemperance and Excess in Eating and
Drinking, unlawful and exorbitant Lusts: and these exorbitances break out into
very foolish, vain, and imprudent actions, exhaust the Estate, wast and consume
the Health; embase and impoverish the mind; destroys the Reputation, and fills
the World with much of that folly and disorder that is every where observable.

It was always my care to use the Creatures with Temperance and Moderation; --
Not to Luxury and Excess, to make provision for my Lusts, with Vainglory or
Ostentation, but for the convenient support of my Nature and Condition; -- I
looked not upon the Wine when it gave its color in the Cup, nor gave my self
over, either to Excess or Curiosity in Meats or Drinks; I checked my self
therein, -- And still remembered I had the Creatures under an account, and was
ever careful to avoid excess or intemperance, because every excessive Cup or
Meal was in danger to leave me in arrear to my LORD.

A POSTSCRIPT, by J. P.
THOU shall well consider in thine Heart, and remember all the Way that I have
hitherto led thee, to try thee, and to prove thee, that thou may in the
following part of thy Life, know and acknowledge the GOD of all thy Mercies.
Oct. 13. 1687.

O LORD! Cleanse THOU me, and I shall be clean; Purge and Purify THOU me, that
I may be as white as Snow, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: This,
this, is that my Soul has long longed for; and now beg of THEE that it may be
fully accomplished to THY Honor and Glory, henceforth even for ever and ever.
Oh! hear, defer not I beseech THEE, to forgive whatever has been amiss in me;
even for THY Great Names sake; for THY Suffering Seeds sake; and THY Endless,
Infinite, and Incomprehensible Mercies Sake, which has ever been extended
toward all who have put their whole trust and confidence in THEE, as I do at
this Day: Glory, Glory, for ever be to THEE, OTHOV most HIGH! who were, who
art, and who art to come! GOD Blessed for ever, and for evermore!

Amen. and Amen. October. 19. 1687.
This following was Writ the same day of the foregoing month, and several
Copies sent to my Friends and Acquaintance in and about London; and is here
Printed for the Sake and Service of all concerned therein.
Dear People,
YOu, who are from your Habitations, I am at this Moment, in suffering for you;
and am made, in that Love that is not of this World, to entreat and beseech you
who have in any measure tasted of the Good Word of GOD; to return every
Individual of you to your own Homes, Tents, and Tabernacles: and there to wait
in the stilness and silence of all flesh, for the Resurrection of that Life,
and Power, which at present seems to lie Dead; and as it were even Buried in
most. Oh! reject not, withstand not, but be freely given up to the Counsel and
Advice herein given you, then will you reap the Benefit, and I the Reward of
this my Love and Faithfulness toward you all.

J. P.

Choose you whom ye will serve: But as for me and mine, we are bound and
engaged to serve the LORD, the great GOD only.



