The pennilesse PARLIAMENT of Threed-bare Poets: OR, The merry Fortune Tellers,
Wherein all persons of the four several Complexions may find their FORTVNES.

COMPOSED By Doctor Merry-man: Not only to purge Melancholy: but also to
procure Tittering and Laughing.

Full of witty mirth, and delightful recreation, for the content of the Reader.

depiction of Dr. Merry-man

London, printed for John Wright, a^ the Kings Head in the Old Bayley, 1649.
7ber 20 1649

Here begins the pennilesse Parliament of Threed-bare Poets.
FIrst of all, for the increase of every fool in his humor, we think it
necessary and convenient that all such as do buy this Book, and laugh not at
it before they have read it over, shall be condemned of melancholy, and be
adjudged to walk over Moore-fields twice a week in a foul shirt, and a pair
of boots, but no stockings at all on.

It is also agreed upon, that long bearded men shall seldom prove the wisest,
and that a niggards purse shall scarce bequeath his Master a good dinner: and
because water is like to prove so weak an Element in the world, that men and
women will want tears to bewail their sins; we charge and command all
Gardiners to sow more store of Onions, for fear widows should want moisture
to bewail their Husbands funerals.

In like manner we think it sit that Redwine should be drunk with Oysters, and
that some maidens shall blush more for shame then for shamefastness: but men
must have care, lest conversing too much with red Petticoats, they banish the
hair from their heads, and by that means make the poor Barbers beggars for
want of work.

Furthermore, it is lawful for those women, that every morning take a pint of
Muskedine with eggs, to chide as well as they that drink small beer all the
winter: and those that clip that they should not clip, shall shave a
horse-night-clap for their labor.

Eentiemen that sell land for Paper, shall buy penury with repentance: and
those that have most gold, shall have least grace: some that mean well, shall
fare worse; and he that has no credit, shall have less e commodity.

It is also ordered and agreed upon, that such as are choleric, shall never
want woe and sorrow; and they that lack money, may fast upon Fridayes by the
Statute: and it shall be lawful for them that want shoes, to wear boots all
the year: and he that has never a cloak, may without offense, put on his
best gown at Mid-summer, witness old Prime the keeper of Bedlem Dicinghouse.

Furthermore we think it necessary, and lawful, for the husband and wife to
fall at square for superiority, in such sort as the wife shall sit playing
above in the Camber, while the husband stands panting below in the Kitching.

Likewise we mark all Brokers to be knaves by letters pattents, and Usurers
for five marks a piece shall lawfully be buried in the Chancell, though they
have bequeatheed their souls and bodies to the Devil in hell.

In like manner it is thought good that it shall be lawful for Muskedines in
Vinteners cellers, to indite their Masters of commixtion, and Sargeants shall
be contented to arrest any man for his fees: Ale-wives shall sell flesh on
Fridayes without license, and such as sell Beer in half penny pots, shall
utter Bread and Cheese for money throughout the whole year: and those that are
past honesty and shame, shall smile at sin: and they that care not for God,
prefer their money before any good conscience.

Furthermore it shall be lawful for Footstooles (by the help of women's
hands) to fly about without wings, and poor men shall be accounted knaves
without occasions: and those that flatter least, shall speed worst: and Pigges
by the statute shall dance the Anticks with bells about their necks, to the
wonder and amazemen of all Swineherds.

In like manner it is convenient that many men shall wear hoads that have
little learning: and some surfeit so much upon wit, and strive so long against
the stream, as at last their necks shall fail them: some shall build fair
houses by brides, and gather much wealth by contention, and before they be
aware heap up riches for another, and wretchedness for themselves.

Furthermore it shall be established, for the benefit of increase, that some
shall have a Limpany in their bellies, which will cost them a Child bearing;
and though the Father bear all the charges, it shall be a wise Child that
shall know his own Father.

It shall be lawful for some to have the palsy in their teeth, in such sort,
as they shall eat more then ever they will be able to pay for.

Some shall have such a Megram in their eyes, as they shall hardly know another
man's wife from their own.

Some shall have such a stopping in their hearts, as they shall be utterly
obstinate to receive grace.

Some sort of people shall have such a buzzing in their ears, as they shall be
enemies to good counsel.

Some such there be, that have a sent or smell in their noses, as no feast
shall escape without their companies: and some shall be so needy, as neither
young Heirs shall get their own, nor poor Ophants their patrimony.

Also, it is enacted and decreed, that some shall be so humorous in their
walks, as they cannot step one foot from a fool.

Some so disguised in purse, as they count it fatal to have one penny to buy
their dinners on Sundays: some so burdened in conscience, as they count
wrongful dealing the best badge of their occupation.

But amongst other Laws and Statutes by us here established we think it most
necessary and convenient that poulterers shall kill more innocent Poultry by
custom, then their wives and maids can sell without good conscience.

Also it is ordered and agreed upon, that Bakers, Woodmongers, Butchers,
Brewers, shall fall to a mighty conspiracy, so that no man shall either have
bread, fire, meat or drink, without credit or ready money.

Sycophants by the Statute shall have great gifts, and good and godly labors
shall scarce be worth thanks: it is also thought necessary, that maids about
midnight shall see wondrous visions, to the great heart-grief of their mothers.

Furthermore it is marked and set down, that if Lawyers plead poor men's
causes without money, Westminster hall shall grow out of custom, to the great
impoverishing of all Nimmers, Lifters, and Cutpurses.

Those that sing bases, shall love good drink by authority: and Trumpeters
that sound Treble, shall starve by custom.

Women that ware long Gowns may lawfully raise dust in March: and they that
keep a temperate diet, shall never dye on surfets.

In like manner it shall be lawful for Sailors and Soldiers, to spend at
their pleasures what they can get by their Sword: and if the Treasurer or
purser of the ship pay them any money beyond count and reckoning, if they build
not an Hospital therewith, they may bestow it on apparel by the Statute.

It is furthermore established and agreed upon, that they that drink too much
Spanish Sack^, shall about July be served with a Fiery Facies: but Oh you
Ale-knights, you that devour the marrow of the Malt, and drink whole Ale tubs
in consumptions; and such that use to sing Queen Dido over a Cup, and tell
strange news over an Ale-pot, how unfortunate are you! who shall piss out
that which you have swallowed so sweetly: you are under the law, and shall be
awarded with this punishment, that the rot shall infect your purses, and eat
out the bottomes ere you be aware.

It is also agreed upon, and thought necessary, that some Women's lips shall
swell so big, as they shall long to kiss other men beside their husbands:
others cheeks shall be so monstrous out of frame, as they cannot speak in a
just cause without large fees: some with long tongues shall tell all things
which they hear: some with no brains shall meddle much, and know little: and
those that have no feet, may by the statute go on crutebes.

But now touching the benefit of private houses, by our rare and requisite
Judgment we think it very commodious, that those married men which are of the
^eakest wit and worse courage, should provide themselves of good weap^^s to
defend themselves from assaults which shall assail them about midnight.

And it shall be lawful for all wives to have a masculine courage, in such
sort, that they who had their wills to this hour, shall have the mastery all
the year after; and those husbands which do not valiantly resist them, shall
be awarded to pay a sheeps head to their next neighbor, in penance for their
f^lly.

Also it i^ further established and agreed upon, that Essex Calves shall indite
Butchers knives of wilfu^l murder. and wh^soever will prove a partial Iu^yman
in this case, shall have a hot sheep skin for his labor.

Bow bell in Cheapside, if it break not, shall be warranted by letters pattents
to ring well: and if the Conduit heads want no water, the Tankerd-bearer^ shall
have one custard more to their solemn dinner, then their usual custom is to
have.

Moreover it is thought good, that it shall be lawful for all tripe wives to be
exquisite physicians, for in one Offall they shall find more Simp^es, then
ever Galen gathered, since he was first borne,

Besides that, if Dancers keep not tide and time in their measures, they shall
forfeit a fat goose to their teachers for their slender judgment.

In like manner we think it necessary and convenient, that there shall be
great noise of wars in Taver^es, and wine shall make some so ventrous, as
they will destroy Tyrone and all his powder at one draught; also we think it
meet, that there be craft in all occupations; and those that are penitent in
this world, shall have comfort in a better.

Also silke-weavers, by the statute shall prosper well, if they wash their
hands clean on Fasting days: for otherwise in soyling their work, they shall
loose their worke-masters: Dawes by authority shall leave building in Steeples,
and dwell in Cities: and such as are cunning in music, shall know a Crotchet
from a Quaver: but let such men as instruct youth, be very circumspect, for if
they learn more then their Masters can teach them, they shall forfeit their
wits to those that bring them up.

Furthermore we think it most necessary and convenient, that the generation of
Judas should walk about the world in these our latter days, and sell his
neighbor for commodity to any man: but the Usurers shall be otherwise
disposed; for having mouthly taken but a penny in the Shilling, ever since they
began first their occupation, shall now with a good conscience venture upon
three pence with the advantage: besides, many men shall prove themselves
apparently knavish, and yet in their own opinions will not be so: and many
women shall imagine that there are none fairer then themselves.

Moreover, for the further increase of foolish humors, we do establish and set
down, that fantastic devises shall prove most excellent, and some shall so
long devise for other men, that they will become barren themselves: some shall
devise novelties to their own shames: and some snares to entrap themselves
within.

In like manner we think it most necessary that those that be Fortune tellers,
shall shut a knave in a circle, and looking obout for the Devil, shall find
him locked in their own bosoms: Acheists by the law, shall be as odious as
they are careless: and those that depend altogether upon destiny, and not upon
God, may chance look through a narrow lettice at Footmans Inn.

But my dear friends the Groeers are plentifully blessed, for their Figs and
Reysons may allure fair Lasses by authority: yea, many men by the statute
shall be so kind-hearted, that a kiss and an Apple, and a pint of wine, shall
serve to make them Innocents.

And we think it conventent that some shall take their neighbors bed for their
own: some the servant for the Master: and (if Candles could tell tales) some
will think a familiar for a flea.

And we think it meet that there should be many Fowlers, who instead of Larkes
shall catch Lobcockes: and many for want of wit shall sell their Freehold for
Tobacco-pipes, and red Petricoates.

Likewise we think it convenient that there should be many takers: for some
would be taken for wise men, who indeed are very fools: for some will take
cracked angels of poor devrors, and a quart of Malmene when they cannot get a
pottle.

But stay a while, whither are we carried: leaving the greatest laws
unpunished, and establishing the less? Therefore we enact and ordain as a
necessary Statute, that there shall great contention fall between Soldiers and
Archers; and if the fray be not decided at at a pot of Ale, and a black
Pudding, great bloodshed is like to ens^^e.

But O gentle fellow Soldiers, then leave your controveriies if you love a
woman, for I will prove it, that a Mince pie is better then a Musket, and he
that dare gainsay me, let him meet me ^t the dagger in Cheap, with a case of
pewter spoones, and I will answer it: and if I prove not a Mince pie the better
weapon, let me dine twice a week at Duke Humphries table.

It is further more established, that the four knaves at the Cards shall
suddenly leap from out the bunch, and desperately pranke about the new
Playhouse, to seek out their old master Captain Crop-eare.

Also it is thought meet, that some men (in these days) all be politic beyond
reason, and write more in one line, then they can prove in an age if all be
lawful for some to study which way they may wa^^e to get them a stomach to
their meat, whilst others are as careful to get meat to put in their bellies:
likewise there shall be great persecution in the Common wealth of Kitching
fees, so that some desperate woman shall boil, try and sees poor Tallow, to
the general commodity of all the whole company of Tallow-chandlers.

Alas, alas, how are we troubled to think on these dangerous times? for
Tailors, by act of Parliament may lawfully invent new fashions: and he that
takes Irish Aqua-vitae by the pint, may by the law stumble without offense,
and break his face.

Many men shall be so venterously given, as they shall go into Petticote-lane,
and yet come out again as honestly as they went first in.

In like manner it shall be lawful for Tems water to cleanse as much as ever it
did in rimes past: and if the Brewers of London buy store of good Malt, poor
barge-men at Queen-hive shall have a whole quart for a penny: Saint Thomas
Onions shall be sold by the rope at Billinsgate by the statue: and Sempsters in
the exchange shall become so conscionable, that a man without offense, may buy
a falling band for twelve pence

It shall be lawful for Smiths to love good Ale: and if it be possible to have
a frost of three weeks long in July, men shall not be afraid of a good fire at
Mid-summer.

Also Porters Baskets shall have authority to hold more then they can honestly
carry away: and such a drought shall come among Cannes at Bartholmew fair in
Smith-field, that they shall never continue long filled.

And Millers by custom shall have small minds to morning Prayer (if the wind
serve them) in any corner on Sundays: Those that go to the wars and get
nothing, may come home poor by authority: and those that play fast and loose
with women's Apron-strings, may chance make a journey for a Winchester Pigeon:
for prevention thereof, drink every morning a draught of Nolime tangere, and
by that means thou shall be sure to escape Physicians purgatory.

But amongst all other decrees and statutes by us here set down, we ordain
and command, that three things (if they be not parted) ever to continue in
perpetual amity; that is, a Louse in an old Doubiet, a painted Cloth in a
painters stop, and a fool and his babble.

Furthermore, it shall be lawful for Bakers to thrive by two things: that is,
Scores well paid, and Millers that are honest.

Physicians by other men's harms, and Churchmen and Church yards by often
Burials.

Also we think it necessary for the Commonwealth, that a Sammon shall be
better sold in fishstreet, then the Beer shall be sold at Billinsgate.

And hearts-ease amongst the company of Hearb-wives, shall be worth-as much
money as they can get for it.

And such as are inclined to the Dropsy, may be lawfully cured, if the
Physicians know how.

Also we ordain and appoint, that (if there be no great store of Tempests)
two Halfe-penny loaves shall be sold for a penny in white Chapel.

O what a detestable trouble shall be among women about fourscore and ten
years old, for such as have more Teeth about them then they can well use,
shall dye for age, if they live not by miracle.

Moreover, we think it necessary, that those that have two eyes in their head.
shall sometimes stumble: and they that can neither write nor read, may as
boldly forswear themselves, as they that can.

And it shall be lawful for Almanacke makers, to tell more lies then true
tales.

And they that go to Sea without viduals, may suffer penury by the statute.

In like manner it shall be lawful for any man to carry about him more gold
then Iron, if be can get it.

But they that are given to sullen complexion, if they be Females, must be more
circumspect: for if they repent their hidden sins too much, they may chance
catch Heaven for their labor.

Therefore let maidens take heed how they fall on their backs, least they
catch a forty weeks favor.

And he that has once married a shrew, and by good chance bury her, beware how
he come into the st^s again.

Further, it shall be lawful for those that be Rich, to have many friends: And
they that be Poor, may by authority keep money, if they can get it honestly.

Also we command and charge all such as have no conscience, to do their worst,
least they dye in the Devils debt: As for the rest, they that have have more
money then they need, may help their poor Neighbors, if they will.

In like manner, it shall be lawful for such as are subject to hot Rheumes, to
drink cold drink: And those that have a mind to enrich Physicians, to be
never without diseases.

Also Soldiers that have no means to thrive by plain dealing, may by the
statute swallow down an ounce of the sirrop of subtility every morning: And if
they cannot thrive that ways, we think it necessary, that four times in the
year they go a fishing on Salisbury plain.

But as for you dear friends and scholars, thus much we favor you; for you
shall dine upon wit by authority: and if you pay your hostess well, it is no
matter though you score it up til it come to a good round sum.

Such as are sick in the spring, may take Physic by the Statute; and those
that are cold may wear clothes without offense.

Further, it shall be lawful for some to be lean, because they cannot be fat.

Some by the statute shall love Beef passing well, because they can come by no
better meat: and othersome simper it with an egg at dinner, that dare
manfully set upon a shoulder of Veale in the afternoon.

Some shall be sad when they want money: and in love with Widows rather for
their wealth, then their honesties.

It is also thought necessary, that some shall suspect their wives at home,
because they themselves play false abroad.

And some love Bowling-Allies better then a Sermon.

Furthermore, it shall be lawful for him that marries without Money, to find
four bare legs in his Bed: And he that is too prodigal in spending, shall dye a
beggar by the statute.

In like manner, we think it necessary, that he that is plagued with a cursed
wife, to have his pate broke quarterly, as he pays his rent.

Likewise, he that delights in sustility, may play the knave by custom: and he
that has his complexion and courage spent, may eat Muton on fasting days by
the Law.

And to conclude, since there are ten Precepts to be observed in the Art of
Scowlding, we humbly take our leave of Duke Humphries Ordinary, and betake us
to the Chapel of Ill Counsel; where a quart or two of fine Trinidado, shall
arm us against the Gunshot of Longue-mettle, and keep us from the assaults
of Sir John Find fault. Vale my dear Friends, till my next return.

FINIS.

