Perfect OCCURRENCES: Faithfully communicating The chief Intelligence and
Proceedings of the King of Scots, the King of France, and the Prince of Conde:
With the Affairs and Designs now on foot in France, Denmark; Sweden, and
Portugal, in relation to the Parliament, Army, and Commonwealth of England.

Containing these ensuing Occurrences, viz.

1 The Message and Proposals of his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, and
the General Council of the Army, to the Officers of the several Garrisons and
Regiments of Soldiers, both in England, Scotland, and Ireland; concerning the
electing and calling of a new Parliament; the removing of heavy burdens, and
grievous Oppressions from the people; the regulating of all abuses, both in
City and Country; and the restoring of Liberty and Freedom.

2 A great Victory obtained by the English against the Dutch; the sinking of
the Pearl, the Dragon, the Temple of Solomon, and ten more; The re-taking of
the Island of Amboyna; and the putting of man, woman, and child to the sword.

3 The States of Hollands Message to Vantrump; his advancing with his Fleet
toward England; the Letters read in the General Council at the Hague, touching
the King of Scots; And a Narrative of their present proceedings.

Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1653.

Perfect Occurrences, etc.
THe Officers of the Army having had a General Meeting at James's Westminster,
about the emergent and weighty Affairs of the Nation; in consideration thereof,
agreed upon a Letter to be sent to the Officers of the several Garrisons and
Regiments of soldiers both in England, Scotland, and Ireland; a breviate
whereof take as follows; to wit,

That after several days waiting at the Throne of grace, we were generally
convinced, That our hearts have been looking after the things of this world,
and our own private affairs, more then the things of Jesus Christ and his
people. That we have been overtaken with a slothful spirit, and growing weary
of the work of the Lord, have been ready to say with Baruch, Woe is me now, for
the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and find no
rest^ Jer. 45.3. That the people of this Nation are subject to grievous
oppressions through the obstruction of justice: and that the Lord might say to
us, for whom he has done such great things in England, as he did to his
Vineyard, Isa. 5.7. And he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a Cry. That through the corruption of many in places
of Authority some good men are made to suffer for conscience sake, and many bad
men take encouragement in their licentious principles, and profane practices,
by reason whereof wickedness does very much abound amongst us. Upon these and
the like considerations we have been strongly convinced, that it is a duty very
much incumbent upon us to awaken our selves, and by all lawful ways and means
to endeavor the procuring of these following things, which have been promised
by the Parliament, and, as we are informed, are under their present
consideration.

First, For the preventing the many inconveniences apparently arising from the
long continuance of the same persons in supreme Authority, That there may be
successive Parliaments consisting of men faithful to the interest of this
Commonwealth; Men of Truth, fearing God, and hating covetousness.

Secondly, That the Laws may be regulated in such sort, that what is good in
them may be maintained, and the corruptions, abuses, delays, vexations,
unnecessary Travels and expenses, and whatsoever shall be found really
burdensome and grievous to the people, may be taken away

Thirdly, That liberty and protection may be given by a Law to all the truly
godly though of d^fferent judgments to worship God peaceably, with^u^ imposing
upon, or molesting one another. And that no enc^ur^g^ment be thereby given to
such as are popish or proph^ne in the exercise of their superstitious forms, or
licentious practices.

Fourthly, That the Gospel of Jesus Christ may be dispensed to all the p^^ple
of this Commonwealth, and those that labor faithfully in that work, receive
all due countenance and encouragement.

From aboard the Leopard in Leghorn mole, January 7.
The first of this instant the great Duke was pleased to create himself in a
Galley upon the water; and at his going out, the Dutch Admiral gave him 9 guns,
and all the rest of his Fleet in order. At his going in we gave him two Vollies
of small shot, and 31 guns, and the rest of our ships in order. The 3. of Jan.
his Highness sent aboard a Present to Cap. Badiley. The 4. here came a
messenger from Naples to the Captain, who brought Letters, informing us, That
the Elizabeth and the Warwick have taken a Dutch ship bound for Apulia. She was
light, having in her 26 Guns. The 5 instant here came aboard the great Dukes
brother, who is a Cardinal, and another Prince with him; and at their going
away Cap. Badiley gave them 31 Guns.

This day, by Letters from our English Merchants at Aleppo, we are adver^ised
that our English Conful there resident, has received Letters from the English
President in the East Indies, That at Amboyna, an Island now under the command
of the Dutch, which they got in time past by blood and treachery, there rode 9
Dutch ships at Anchor, which by a sudden storm were cast away. Most of their
men got ashore thinking to save their lives; but the Natives rose, and put them
all to the sword, and immediately fell upon the Towns and Fortifications, and
took them all except one castle. They put man, woman, and child to the sword.

The English President wrote further, That he thought the Natives had gained or
would quickly gain the remaining Castle, and that very suddenly.

I saw a copy of the Letter that came from our Aleppo Consul, and heard it read
to Cap. Badiley aboard our ship. A just Judgment of the Almighty on the Dutch,
for murdering so many English as they did formerly on that very Island.

We hear that Cap. Cox, with 7 sail of English, has had a sharp conflict with
11 sail of Dutch; but after four hours dispute obtained a glorious Victory,
sunk one, and took Three.

A Letter from Holland.
SIR,
THe States are very busy about hastening away the new Fleet, and have sent
Orders to Trump, to repair forthwith into the Channel; so that he is suddenly
expected from the Isle of Ree; he has about 70 fighting ships, and some 300
Merchants. Prince Rupert is expected by some; but when he will return, no man
knows, for as yet there is no certain news of his being in any part of the
world. Here are two Irish-men lately arrived out of Ireland, they have Letters
from Charles Stuart, to countenance their addresses to the State in the behalf
of the Irish; yet before they deliver them, they have taken the advice of the
holy Fathers of their own faction, of whom there is a crew now residing at the
Hague, as well as in other places; and their design (if possible) is to stir up
and engage this State to do somewhat against the Parliament of England in
Ireland. On Wednesday one of these Irish factors delivered a Letter to their
High and Mighties at the Hague. This gives just occasions to suspect that the
Scottish King endeavors to hook his own interest into the engagement of this
Hogen State, upon an Irish account, so that if the Dutch should clap in between
these two interests, they would be daintily engaged, and a fine blessing must
follow the business.

Amsterdam Jan. 31. stilo novo.
From Zealand Jan. 30.
Great brags are made here of their alliance with Denmark, giving our, That
they expect great supplies thence for their assistance. But the Danish Resident
here in the Hague has made an unexpected motion to their Lordships for laying
aside the Treaty of Redemption, fo^merly made betwixt them and his Master, and
resume another way, which fills their heds with jealousy. They have likewise
an eye still upon the intercourse betwixt England and France, suspecting the
worst of this French application.

They have news also, That the Swede will insist resolutely upon the
maintaining of a free Trade betwixt the Hans-Towns and Sweden. But we hear that
her Majesty has declared against Denmark.

From aboard the Bryar-Frigot riding in Tinmouth haven the 27 of Januarp. SIR,
BEing the 23 instant upon the North coast in company with a Fleet of Lyn ships
bound hither, we fell in company with a man of War belonging to Flushing, which
had taken some small English. Our Captain immediately gave chase to this man of
war, and after an hours chase he came up with him; who after the firing of one
broad side, yielded his ship: After which we rescued two of the Vessels he had
taken. We are now arrived here with the fleet and the prise, which is a ship of
15 serviceable Iron guns, and well appointed with Sails, Cables, and
Ammunition. She sails well, and will make a very good man of war.

From Marseilles Jan. 21.
Here is no great news, but too much sorrow: A Toulon French man of war has
taken an English ship laden with 370 Hogsheads of Pilchards, which is brought
into this Port, where they intend to make sale thereof; and in very few days
there will be 4 men of war more out of Tonlon, to go in course, besides those
ships and fireships designed for West France.

From Nantes we have received advertisements of a London ship of 16 guns
brought thither as a prize by a Holander, boudd from Bilboa to the Canary
Islands; the Masters name being Mr. Crane.

But that which does equalize this loss, is, the taking of a Flemish Vessel,
called, the Arms of Genoa, by the Warwick frigate, who carried her to Naples.
Besides, the Pearl, the Temple of Solomon, the Dragon, and 10 more are cast
away at Abarka, on the coast of Barbary. But the Letters from Genoa advertize,
That a Flemish Merchant man that be^rs a Letter of Mart, has brought in an
English prize which he took in Alicant-rode, riding at anchor under the command
of the Castle, at midnight. Her name is the Robert and Richard, loading 120
Tuns of Oil, and 72 sacks of Anniseede, belonging to Mr. Robert Burdet. But
supplications are made to the Duke to secure her, till it be determined whether
she be lawful prize.

From Paris Feb. 5. stilo novo. The long expected Return of Cardinal Mazarine
is now accomplished; he was entertained with abundance of Triumph (being
accompanied by the titular Duke of York) and was no sooner entered the Lovure
but the King carried him to the Queens Lodgings, where he was received with
great alacrity, and after a long conference, his Majesty invited his Eminence
to a stately banquet prepared on purpose for him, which was very sumptuous; and
during the Feast a famous fire-work was prepared to play, which lasted above
half an hour, that the city might take notice of this joyful night of Jubilee;
Yet notwithstanding, the Citizens were al a mort; and very observable it is,
that from the Gate of their entry into the Lovure, none but a few little boys
and some Porters, cried

Vive le Roy.

