The Peoples ECHO To the Parliaments DECLARATIONS, Concerning a Personal
Treaty with the KING.

Containing a Collection of some few passages out of several Declarations and
Expresses of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament at Westminster,
concerning a Personal Treaty with the KING.

Together with an humble enforcement of the equity and justice of the said
Expresses; Humbly presented, not only to the review of the Honorable
Parliament: but also to the serious consideration of the Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Commons of LONDON in Common Council Assembled.

Isa. 59.9. Judgment is far from us, neither does Justice overtake us. We
wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in
darkness.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1648.

The Peoples Echo to the Parliaments Declarations concerning a Personal
Treaty with the KING.
Declaration of the Lords and Commons of the 4th of March, 1647. in answer to
the papers of the Scotch Commissioners, page 20.
WE ask what reason have we to expect better satisfaction in the way of a
Treaty, then formerly we had therein at Uxbridge, or in a Personal Treaty at
Oxford,unless we be resolved before hand to treat away all that we have fought
for, and to be treated out of all that we could not be fought out of; or at
least what can we expect of a Treaty, but that under pretense of satisfying all
Interests, one Interest shall be set up against another to divide us: And that
thereby having laid no foundation of safety beforehand, the King might set up
His Interest above them all.

Ibid.
If we cannot have Peace but upon these terms, viz. The will of the King, and
the advantage of the Crown in the Kings esteem. Upon these terms we needed
not to have any War, which had been much the more Christian resolution, and
would have saved the effusion of much blood; whereof if we proceed upon such
principles as those, we must needs draw the whole guilt upon our own selves.

Decl. of the 4th of March, 1647. page 24.
If the way of reason and persuasion be the only equal, fair,and just way to
obtain a well grounded Peace, etc. we have gone in a very foul way hitherto,
which should have been taken into consideration, before we had engaged our
selves and the Kingdom in so much cost and blood, which was not only spent
unnecessarily, but also very unlawfully, if we must go no way but that of
persuasion, etc. who does not see that these Principles do not only BRING UPON
US ALL THE BLOOD THAT HAS BEEN SHED IN THIS WAR, but also plucketh up the
foundation of any hope of ever settling a Peace with the King, which shall be
both just and sure, seeing we cannot have it justly but upon his terms; which
no man that has his eyes in his head can believe, that they will be other then
such as tend to the apparent destruction of the persons which have engaged, and
the loss of the ends for which both Kingdoms have engaged in this war.

Decl. of the 24th of March, 1647. page 25.
The bringing of the King to London for a Personal Treaty with the Parliament
before the maine points in difference between them be settled and assured, is to
no other purpose, but to increase that fond humor of confidence in misled and
deceived people, which prevails in them too much already before they have
assurance; which they and their posterity may after rue and repent, when it is
too late to help it.

Decl. of the 4. of March, 1647. page 21.
The Scotch Commissioners mistake their aim, if they think the Kings presence
with the Parliament necessarily implies his presence at London, which HE and
THEYso much desire; THAT HE MIGHT HAVE OPPORTUNITY TO CAJOLE THE CITIZENS, etc.
His return to his Parliament with the same affections and intentions; that is,
to destroy and undermine his Parliament, and to renew the war against them is
as great a reason for his absence from it, as his absence formerly from it in
order to destroy it, and to begin a war against them was then a reason for
his presence.

Decl. of the 4. of March, 1647. page 86.
How BASE and DISHONORABLE a thing would it have been for the houses of
Parliament being in that condition they are, to have treated under the
Gallows, to have treated as Traitors, their Cause being not justified, nor the
Declarations against them as Rebels recalled: And how FOOLISH a thing would it
have been, being possessed of the sword according to their right, not to secure
it even from his own claim to the contrary, to themselves and posterity
before they treated of any thing, to the end that neither they nor their
Posterity might be put to play another bloody game for the same thing.

The Parliaments and Scots Commissioners answer to his Majesty's Letters of the
26. and 29. of December. 1645.
Concerning the Personal Treaty desired by your Majesty, there having been
so much innocent blood of your good Subjects shed in this war BY YOUR
MAJESTY'S COMMANDS AND COMMISSIONS. Irish Rebels brought over into both
Kingdoms, and endeavors to bring over more into both of them; as also forces
from Foreign parts; Your Majesty being in Arms in these parts, the Prince
in the head of an Army in the West, diverse Towns made Garrisons, and kept in
hostility by your Majesty against the Parliament of England. There being also
forces in Scotland against that Parliament and Kingdom BY YOUR MAJESTY'S
COMMISSION. The war in Ireland FOMENTED AND PROLONGED BY YOUR MAJESTY,
whereby the three Kingdoms are brought near to utter ruin and destruction;
We conetive that until satisfaction and security be first given to both your
Kingdoms; Your Majesty's coming hither cannot be convenient, nor by us
assented unto.

Answer of the Lords and Commons to His Majesty's message of the 25. of Aug.
1642.
The Lords and Commons in Parl. assembled, having received your Majesty's
Message of the 25. of August, do with much grief resent the dangerous and
distracted state of this Kingdom, which we have by all means endeavored to
prevent, both by our several Advices and Petitions to your Majesty, which
have been not only without success: but there has followed that which no ill
Council in former times has produced, or ANY AGE HAS seen, namely those
several Proclamations and Declarations against both the houses of Parliament,
whereby their actions are declared treasonable, and their persons Traitors, and
thereupon Your Majesty has set up your Standard against them; whereby YOU
HAVE PUT THE TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, AND IN THEM THIS WHOLE KINGDOM OUT OF
YOUR PROTECTION: So that UNTIL your Majesty shall recall those Proclamations
aad Declarations, whereby the Earl of Essex and both Houses of Parliament, and
their Adherents and Assistants, and such as have obeyed and executed their
Commands and Directions, according to their duty, are declared Traitors, or
otherwise Delinquents: And until the Standard set up in pursuance of the said
Proclamations be taken down, YOUR MAJESTY HAS PUT US INTO SUCH A CONDITION;
that whilst we so remain, we cannot by the fundamental privileges of
Parliament, the public trust reposed in us, or with the general good and
safety of this Kingdom, give your Majesty any other answer to this Message --
which was a denial of a Treaty according to his Majesty's Message until as
afo^esaid.

In the beginning of the Declaration o the 11. of Feb. 1647.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled:
That they do declare that they will make no further addresses or applications
to the King.

Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons: That no application or
addresses be made to the King by any person whatsoever, without the leave of
both Houses.

Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons: That the person or
persons that shall make breach of this Order, shall incur the penalties of
HIGH TREASON.

Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Common: That they do declare that
they will receive no more any Message from the King: and do enjoyne that no
person whatsoever do presume to receive or bring any Message from the King to
both or either of the Houses of Parliament, or to any other Person.

Echo.
No more addresses or applications to be made to the King, no message to be
brought from the King to both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, or to any
other Persons? What means then the common bleating of the common people of a
Personal Treaty with the King? Is it the uncertain voice of unsettled
multitudes, or the certain Vote of our present Parliament? If true as it is
reported; how do our Councels ring changes? whose hearing ears we humbly crave
to hearken to the ECHO of their own language. Honored Sirs, we ask what
reason have you to expect better satisfaction in the way of a Treaty, then
formerly you had therein at Uxbridge, or in a Personal treaty at Oxford. Can
it enter into our hearts that THIS, EVEN THIS PARLIAMENT, whose Declarations,
Protestations, Votes, Orders, Ordinances, Vows, Covenants, Promises, have
filled the ears of all Europe, and the Christian-world with words of gallantry,
piety, just liberty and freedom in the behalf of them that have betrusted
them. THIS PARLIAMENT, whose several Expresses, and frequent promises to make
us a happy and free Nation, raised up the people, and be-spirited the Kingdom,
to stand by them in their hopeful endeavors to this end? THIS PARLIAMENT, in
whose just War against an unjust enemy, so many Widows and Fatherless have
been made, so many families undone, so many houses, Villages and Towns sacked
and burnt, so many Hospitals filled with lame and maimed Soldiers; such
leadings into captivity, prisons and dungeons; such shedding of tears,
wringing of hands, sorrows, miseries, and tribulations of many kinds have been
endured, and that after all THIS, THIS, EVEN THIS PARLIAMENT should be resolved
to treat away all that they have sought for, and to be treated out of what
they could not be fought out of? We beseech you satisfy our judgment so lately
instructed by your own Declarations; What can you NOW expect of a treaty
(especially as things stand) but that under pretense of satisfying all
Interests, one Interest shall be set up against another, to divide us: and that
thereby having laid no foundation of safety beforehand, the King might set up
his Interest above them all. They are your own words, published on put pose
(as we conceive) for our information: Be not offended if we tell you, your
hands have found out their enterprise; for your words have taken such hold upon
our hearts, that we cannot easily let them go. We beseech you what foundation
of safety is laid? Is there any thing yet concluded between his Majesty and
Parliament securing the peace and sasety of the Kingdom as praevious to a
Treaty? If none, shall you not have the way and terms of your peace cut out
unto you? And what can that be but the laying a foundation of utter slavery and
vassalage to this poor Nation? If you cannot have peace but upon such terms,
viz. the will of the King (as doubtless you cannot if you must treat as
Traitors, and the Kings printed Expresses so branding you, unrecalled) bear
with the Echo of your own language. Upon THESE terms you needed not have any
Wars, which had been much the more Christian resolution, and would have saved
the effusion of much blood; whereof if we proceed upon such principles as
these, WE MUST NEEDS DRAW THE WHOLE GUILT UPON OUR SELVES. The weight of your
lines do depress our spirits: and certain it is that they are the words of
truth and soberness: And let that day be darkness wherein, even this
Parliament, shall draw the whole guilt of the blood (shed in these Wars) upon
themselves. Job 3.3, 4.
Let not God regard that day, neither let the light shine upon it. Let
darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell upon it, Job
10.16, 17.
let the blackness of the day terrify it. How will these lines of yours be
(as Job says) Gods witnesses against you, and make him increase his
indignation upon you; changes and war will be upon you, and hunt you even at
a fierce Lion. Shall Englands Parliament, that Parliament of Parliaments, that
eight years Parliament; which professed more of God, Reformation, Religion, then
all Parliaments before them, with whom God did more visibly appear; for whose
defense, safety, and protection, many a time did the Lord break the heavens,
and come down, making mountains plains before them: That Covenant-making
Parliament, that Sermon hearing Parliament, that have charged the blood of the
late Wars upon their adverse party, draw the whole guilt thereof upon
themselves, even by their own confession? Can you suppose the way of reasons
and persuasions by a Treaty the only fair and just way to a well-grounded
Peace? Surely then your selves being Judges, you have gone in a very foul way
hitherto, which should have been taken into consideration before you had
engaged your selves and Kingdom in so much cost and blood (as your own words
are) which was not only spent unnecessarily, but very unlawfully. And you
further add, who does not see that these principles do not only bring upon us
all the blood that has been shed in this War, but also plucketh up the
foundation of any hope of ever settling a Peace with the King, that shall be
both just and sure, seeing we cannot have it justly but upon his (viz the
Kings) terms, which no man that has his eyes in his head, can believe that
they will be other then such as tend to the apparent destruction of the persons
which have engaged, and loss of the ends for which both Kingdoms have engaged
in this war. Can you bear your own words, and stand in the day of such a
visitation? Will you take such a course and way after eight years striving and
struggling in fire and blood, to settle the Kingdom, which shall pluck up the
foundation of any hope of ever settling a peace with the King which shall be
both just and sure? Has not God given you such wonderful advantages by
subduing your enemies under your feet, to settle not only a just, but a sure
peace, and will you neglect the day of such grace? Will you now at last take
such a way to settle peace, viz. by having it upon the Kings terms, which no
man that has his eye in his head, can believe that they will be other then
such as tend to the apparent destruction of the persons which have engaged, and
loss of the ends for which both Kingdoms have engaged in this war? Will not
the blood that has been already shed in these wars, bring in judgment
enough, and wrath enough, but that those of the well-affected party that do
yet remain alive, must likewise apparently be destroyed for adhering unto you?
Have we spent our estates, our trades, our limbs, our lives for you, and must
apparent destruction be our reward? Is this your requital of us? Is this that
just freedom which you promised? Well, if it must be so, Fiat voluntas Domini.
The expense of our former treasure and blood is so far from being matter of
repentance unto us, that we resolve through the strength of our God, to choose
rather to let this apparent destruction triumph over us, and even hurry us into
the pit of silence, rest and peace, in confident expectation of a most
advantageous resurrection, then to turn head upon our just principles, and
strike hands with a revolting and apostatizing generation; but must not only
the PERSONS that have engaged, but the ENDS also for which they have engaged,
in joining with you, be apparently destroyed? Is not the blood of men
sufficient to provoke God, and bring wrath, but must the life even of truth it
self, viz. the Kingdoms cause and ends of our engagement, assist herein?

We are not absolutely against a treaty, your wisdoms judging it meet as the
case stands; in whom we acquiesce: but that you should resolve to treat before
those things necessarily praevious to a treaty be concluded upon, we would
gladly see a reason for it, that we might be satisfied with it: For though we
hold our selves bound in conscience to satisfy our selves with vour judgment
in things disoutable and controversall; troversall; yet in things obvious and
plain, we expect to have better' satisfaction then the vote of the Houses,
especially themselves having so sully informed us about the absolute necessity
of those things.

We are not ignorant, but that you may lawfully vote, and revoke, and re vote
again, order, un order, and re order, ordain, repeal, and re ordain the same
things over and over, all conducing in your best apprehensions to the common
safety; yea that Religion, reason, peace, justice, safety, and faithfulness to
your trust may require you so to do, because it is the end, viz. Common
safety, and not the means, viz. Your Votes, Orders, Ordinances, etc. must
prostrate and command you; yea, and as the case may stand, we may be bound in
conscience to acquiesce therein: but when you have praepossessed our reasons
and judgments not by bare Votes, Orders, and Ordinances, but by strong and
vigorous reasons, debates and arguments against such and such things (not only
affirmed, but argued to our full conviction) as bringing upon you the blood
that has been shed in these Wars, yea as plucking up the foundation of any
hopes of ever settling a peace with the King, which shall be both just and sure;
yea tending to the apparent destruction of the Persons which have engaged, and
loss of the ends for which both Kingdoms have engaged in this War. Blame us
not if we cannot rest satisfied in your doing such things, which in your own
judgments are so conducing; you may happily persuade and argue down your
reasons which have seized upon us, but you cannot order and vote them down; we
can prostrate our opinion, but not our reason to your determination; Neither
do we take upon us to judge what is meet to be done for public good, having
chosen you to judge for us; but we rather rest in your judgments enforced by
arguments, then evidenced by mere votes, there we have your reason, here your
will; we cannot presume you would have us content our selves with your mere
will and pleasure, though to the apparent destruction of the well affected of
the Nation, contrary to all principles of reason and equity. You that have told
us that a Kingdom must not be ruined at the mere will of the King, have taught
us to infer, that neither should it be sacrificed to the mere pleasure of the
Parliament, if it be not even salus regis, much leffe then can it be volun^as
Parliament, but salus populi; that is, suprema lex. Surely that God that did
never appoint the lives, liberties and estates of millions to be at the mere
will and pleasure of the King, did never ordain likewise that these should be
at the mere will and pleasure (contrary to express judgment and reason) of
the Parliament: It is very possible that your Honors have very good reasons,
and that to satisfaction for what you do, touching your resolution of a
personal Treaty with the King before satisfaction and security given: if so,
we humbly crave to see them, and we have done.

But if not, we beseech you consider, How base and DISHONORABLE a thing it
would be for the Houses of Parliament, being in that condition they are, to
treat under the Gallows, to treat as traitors, their cause being not
justified, nor their Declarations against them as rebels recalled; and how
FOOLISH a thing would it have been, being possessed of the Sword according to
their right, not to secure it from the Kings claim to the contrary to
themselves and posterity, before they treated of any thing, to the end that
neither they nor their posterity might be put to play another another bloody
game for the same thing? Will you do things sentenced by your selves for base
and dishonorable? Have you wrested the Sword from him and them that would have
forced you to the Gallows, and after all this will you be treated to the
Gallows? Have you not judged it a FOOLISH thing, that having possession of the
Sword, according to your right, not to secure it to your selves and posterity
before you treat? Or must your selves and posterity either resolve for ever
hereafter to let the Sword be always held over your necks, to keep you under,
or else to play another bloody game for the same thing? You could not be
cudgel'd into a treaty, and will you be caiol'd and chanted into a treaty
before security and satisfaction given? We beseech you inform us (for our
judgments lie freely opened to receive any impressions of reason from you)
has there not been so much innocent blood of his Majesty's good subjects shed
in this war by his Commands and Commissions? Were not Irish Rebels brought over
into both Kingdoms, as also Forces from foreign parts? Was not the war in
Ireland fomented and prolonged by his Majesty, whereby the three Kingdoms were
brought near to utter ruin and destruction? Were not these strong reasons
heretofore why you should conceive, that until his Maty had given satisfaction
and security there should be no treaty? Have you not many times attempted to
prevail with the King by several advices and petitions, which were not only
without success, but that has followed, which no ill counsel has in former
times produced, nor any age has seen; namely, those several Proclamations and
Declarations against both Houses of Parliament; whereby your actions have been
declared treasonable, and your persons traitors? Did not the King set up his
Standard against his Parliament; whereby he did put the two Houses of
Parliament, and in them the whole Kingdom out of his protection? Did he
volu^tarily take down his Standard? Has he recalled his said Proclamations and
Declarations, making you and all that stuck to your traitors and rebels? If
not, will you treat with him before he has done it? we are not insensible of
your present distractions through the great defection, and almost incredible
revolting of several parts of this kingdom, some ships at Sea, and especially
of several in the City of London, and many great zealots in the kingdoms
cause, striking hands with Malignants, in promoting their designs, motions,
and petitions, to the apparent prejudice of the Parliaments cause, and the
kingdoms interest, most strangely and hypocritically pleading conscience of
Covenant, and yet breaking the express letter of the sixth Article of the
Covenant, wherein they have sworn, not to suffer themselves directly or
indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided and
with drawn from this blessed union and conjunction, whether to make defection
to the contrary part, or to give themselves to a detestable indifferency or
newtrality in this cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good
of the Kingdoms, and the honor of the King, but have sworn that they shall
all the days of their lives zealously and constantly continue therein against
all oppositions, and promote the same according to their power, etc.

We observe likewise the most base, abominable, and horrible defection of some
Scots, that have invaded this kingdom, to the everlasting stain of their
nation, and abhorring and hissing at them for a most detestable, dishonorable,
and dissembling people by all the nations round about them, to the perpetual
scandal of Religion, and the profession thereof, and the sottishness,
baseness, un- Englishnesse of many of our English Nation, who most stupidly
suffer a most false and treacherous, covetous and covenant breaking people to
bring their wives and children, and drive out the English out of their houses
and possessions, as if these (poor souls) came out of mere piety and love to
help up reformation by an army of profane wretches, commanded by known
Cavaliers and Malignants, and to settle the King in a sufficient posture to
destroy the Parliament, according to their Covenant, and by his authority to
establish Presbytery, which his soul abhorres according to the covenant, to
maintain a firm peace between the two Nations by a bloody war, according to
covenants and treaties, etc. We are not, we say, unmindfull of these
distractions thus befalling you, which we confess may not only put you to
many straits and difficulties, but provoke you to resolve, that since the
people will be deceived, they should be deceived; and since they would be
enslaved, after God by the Parliament and their forces had freed them from it,
they should be enslaved, etc. But give us leave humbly to reply.

First of all, if the people for want of wisdom and conscience to themselves
and posterity, should resolve to enslave themselves, since they cannot do it
but by your Concurrence; will your wisdom and consciences suffer you to
consent thereunto? Is it their sin so to do, and your virtue to help it on
by your resolves? Are not you the Fathers of the Kingdom, and will you consent
to the childrens madness: and because they will destroy themselves in a
peltish fit, you will vote them a power to bring it about? Put the Militia into
their own hands, that they may effect their own destruction. Will they not
destroy you as well as themselves: and must they be enabled to do all this by
authority of Parliament? Do you not see that men are mad, else would they do
as they do? spread their garments and palm-branches, and cry hail to them that
do thirst for their blood? and attempt with swords and staves to apprehend and
crucify them, viz. the Parliament and Army, that under God have been their
Saviors? And will you put the sword into mad men's hands that would destroy all
but their enemies; will not our neighbour-Nations that are lookers on, say we
are all mad? Have not you been fighting all this while for the Militia; and
having gotten it by Victory, will you loose it again by Vote? Shall the
Militia of the City or Counties be put into the hands of real Malignants,
though some of the second Edition, who are the most dangerous, because
degenerate and desperate? If a froward people will bring their own blood, and
the blood of the Kingdom: upon themselves, let themselves by themselves bring
it about, and let not our Parliament join with them in that unnatural act.

Secondly, Had you not always a party against you, yea as great, as strong, as
mal gnant as now appears; though they are more daring, bold, and visible; were
you not in a worse posture many a time since these wars began, then even now
you are in? Petitions appear out of Surrey, Kent, Essex, etc. showing their
malignancy: but notwithstanding all arts and tricks to get subscriptions. Look
upon their numbers, and see whether you have not as great a cause to judge a
better, a more united and resolved party for you, then against you?

As for the Seas, is not God the God of the Seas, as well as of the Land? does
not he exercise his wonders for his people in the deep as well as on the dry
ground? does not he as well hold the waters in the hollow of his fist, as
weigh the mountains in a balance? Did not he as well lead Israel through the
Sea, as through the Wilderness? Has he not road his circuit round the
confines of the Kingdom for you: and can he not, or will he not, think you,
ride upon the proud waves of the Sea for you, if you trust in him? Is not the
Sea his as well as the Land? Or can you think that our God is the God of the
Land, and your enemies God the God of the Seas? And that as our God has had
his day by Land, so will theirs have his day at Sea? Is not the Sea sinful as
well as the Land: and may not God be now a purging the Sea, as well as he has
been in purifying the Land? Can we think that he that has punished the
tyranny of Kings and Nobles by Land, will now indulge the pyracie of Princes
and Traitors by Sea? It cannot enter into our hearts, that those that have
escaped the righteous vengeance of God by Land, shall be now able to revenge
themselves on God by Sea? He that has slain the Dragon by Land, has power
enough to deal with the Leviathan by Sea? If you believe, you shall see the
glory of God by Sea as well as by Land. Be not discouraged; If you do not
decline and revolt from your just Cause, God will account with your Revolters
both by Sea and Land, and their revolting shall be their repentance, and your
perseverance and courage, your rejoicing.

Thirdly, will you have no work for your faith to act upon? Has not God driven
back your enemies hundreds by your tennes; has he not often times divided the
red Sea for you, broken the head of Dragons for you, caused mountains to be
made plains before you, thrown down the walls of Jerico for you, redeemed you
out of six troubles, and out of seven? Has he not delivered you many a time
out of your distress? Look back we beseech you upon your several Orders and
Ordinances for days of Thanksgiving, and the causes thereof: and remember
what Balaack oftentimes consulted, and Balaam answered from Mount- Pisga to
Mount- Peor from time to time. Shall your hands now hang down, and your knees
wax feeble, and your hearts wither like grass, causing you to throw by that
Cause with which God has so frequently appeared for you. Review all Scripture
stories, and other authentic writings, and compare all with these days of
Gods appearances for you, and see if our eyes have not seen the Almighty
renewing his works of old for you, and now will you faint? What, have all your
Experiences, and all your Sermons begot no greater a faith, but that you should
be ready to faint and fall at your present troubles? Has your faithful God
after all your experiences of his truth and goodness so little credit with
you?

Vide Article 4. of the solemn league and covenant.
4ly. Do your enemies multiply? who is the cause of it? Is it not your
indulgence to them? Have not you saved many a thief from the Gallows, that is
now striving to cut your throats? Did you not vow and swear with hands lifted
up to the most high God, that you would with all faithfulness endeavor the
discovery of Incndiaries, Malignants, and evil Instruments, etc. that they may
be brought to public trial, and receive CONDIGN punishment. And have you
done thus? what means then the beating of poor sheep in many Counties against
the oppressing Malignants, admitted for Deputi-Lieutenants: yea into several
Committees, where they have vexed your friends for their faithfulness to you.
Are not these the men that prove goades in your sides, and thorns in your eyes?
Does not God seem to resolve to reject you from retaining your wonted authority
in the Kingdom, as he did Saul from being King: And is it not for the same
cause, viz. your sparing of Agags, whom you should have hewn in pieces by the
sword of Justice for that blood which they have shed, making many women
childlesse in this Kingdom? Shall the fear of the people deter you as it did
him from doing Justice? Is not God to be feared more then the people? Does not
the cry of blood, Irish-blood, Scottish-blood, and English-blood make a noise
in your ears? Will not God make inquisition for blood? Was there ever so much
blood spilt, and so little inquisition made for blood as there has been since
this Parliament began? And have you not just cause to fear, lest your lives
should go for theirs? Considering what Promises and Covenants you have made,
to bring such bloody Delinquents unto condign punishment: and what
opportunities have you had to perform the same. Shall not Agag, and the fattest
Malignants be only spared against all laws of justice and equity: but must
these have swords put into their hands again? Will they not hew you in pieces
before the Lord, for sparing them contrary to Gods command, and the express
letter of the Solemn League and Covenant? We beseech you consider, were there
ever such horrible things committed: so many Riots, Rebellions, Treasons,
Murders, and bloodshed, perpetrated in this Kingdom and so little justice
done upon such Delinquents, as there have been since you have had the
government of the Kingdom in your hands? It Is true indeed, before this
Parliament, those were smitten, which should have been spared: and since this
Parliament, have not many been spared, which should have been smitten? Then
the righteous were condemned, and now are not the wicked justified? And is not
the one as well as the other an abomination unto the Lord? Did not punishing
the innocent by our former Rulers make them and their government despised of
God? And does not sparing the guilty by our present Rulers, make them and their
government scorned of men, and displeasing to God? And can these be long lived
that are rejected both by God and men? Look upon your Petitioners, especially
the capital among them of Kent, Essex, Surrey, and send for an information of
those grave and well-affected Citizens, that you hear of, so frequently
soliciting the Common Counsel of London to Petition you for a Personal Treaty
at London: and enquire who in the said Common Council are such sticklers for
the said Petitions, and you will easily find who they are that trouble you: and
whether your indulgence to Malignants, and those that are yours, and your
Armies enemies are not the great cause of your present troubles both from
Scotland, and in our own Kingdom. Were those cast out of the Common Council
upon whom the plain characters of malignancy are stamped, viz. 1. Those that
did not contribute voluntarily for the service of the Parliament, according to
their Propositions. 2. Those that have been disarmed. 3. Those that have been
imprisoned for Malignancy. 4. Those that have had a hand in the Treasonable
engagement. 5. Those that have been, and are most notorious enemies to your
Forces, contrary to their solemn Vow and Covenant. 6. Those that did abett the
horrible force upon the two Houses, etc. You should quickly see another face,
both upon the Common Council, and whole City, then now you do: Neither
should such lying Pamphlets, scurrillous Ballads, scandalous Libels, and
slanderous Papers, made on purpose to cast dirt into the face of the
Parliament, be suffered to be sold in the most public places, even at the
Exchange, and elsewhere as now they are; never was there such contempt cast
upon Authority as is now, even in the great City it self: And no marvel,
since the quondam awful authority of Parliament it self is so scorned and
abused, and no justice done upon offenders in this kind, insomuch that it is
almost dangerous for a man to plead for the Parliaments authority, and for a
Parliament soldier that fights for their Cause, to ride through the City: and
who can wonder at it, when no man suffered for that horrible force made upon
the Houses to the amazement of all beholders. Nay, it is to be wished that there
were not of those reverend gown-men that encouraged those villains in that
Rebellion, sitting in Common Council, and contriving their ruin. If you will
suffer your authority thus to languish, the peace and welfare of the whole
Kingdom will also languish and perish.

Are not Murders, Felonies, Treasons, Burglaries, Mutinies, Insurrections,
committed even in the great City, so that blood lies upon it, and disquiets it
(though we mind not the cause of our present troubles) and no justice at al
done: A noise we hear of a Commission of Oyer and Terminer for the trials of
those horrible things, as also of votes making such as rise up fomenting a new
war in the several Counties, guilty of high treason, that those that invited
the Scots into this Kingdom, are traitors, etc. But though you have several
in your hands, yet the worst that comes to them is, that they are secured in
prison (it may be but for some few days neither) from the hands of the
Soldiers that would give them their due if they could meet them in the field;
so that your Votes, and Orders, and Ordinances, and Declarations threatening
such and such things against Delinquents, what are they but Fulmina bruta, the
crackling of gun-pots, and no more regarded; paltry Pamphlets, profane
Ballads, to the dishonor of God, scorn and scandal of the Parliament, sold
and sung in open streets. Is not the Parliament made the Drunkards song, tossed
up and down in the lewd lips of idle tiplers, in every Taphouse and Tavern?
whereas in several Countries you shall scarce hear a man to open his mouth
against the Parliament, the reason is, because they are presently snapt up by
order of some diligent Committee or other. Were the same course taken in the
City, would not the same effect follow thereon? Neither can it be said that
you cannot execute justice, the people are so tumultuous, etc. for the longer
you suspend it the more unable you will be for it, and if you do well, who
will harm you? Is not justice Gods ordinance, and will he decline his own
ordinance? Did he ever deny his assisting you in the execution of justice (at
least if you did exercise that authority and power in doing it as you might?
Was not the Parliament of England the dread of Princes, and is it not now the
scorn of Pesants? Did not the execution of justice even upon Princes, make them
the dread of the one, and the neglect of justice even upon peasants (rogues and
vagrants abusing you in open streets) make you the scorn of the other? Nay,
would you even now blind your eyes to all carnal fears, and discouragements,
and fear not the face of man, profess and practice, we say again, PRACTICE
principles of justice and righteousness in the Kingdom, God would subdue the
people under you, and your friends would multiply and love you, your enemies
would moulder away, and fear and tremble before you, and you would yet cause
the peace and welfare of this kingdom (which is now withering under your hands)
to flourish and prosper, and both our present times, and ages to come, would
call you Blessed.

FINIS.

