A Perfect Description of VIRGINIA: BEING, A full and true Relation of the
present State of the Plantation, their Health, Peace, and Plenty: the number of
people, with their abundance of Cattle, Fowl, Fish, etc. with several sorts
of rich and good Commodities, which may there be had, either Naturally, or by
Art and Labor. Which we are fain to procure from Spain, France, Denmark,
Swedeland, Germany, Poland, yea, from the East Indies. There having been
nothing related of the true estate of this Plantation these 25 years.

Being sent from Virginia, at the request of a Gentleman of worthy note, who
desired to know the true State of Virginia as it now stands.

ALSO, A Narration of the Country, within a few days journey of Virginia,
West and by South, where people come to trade: being related to the Governor,
Sir William Berckley, who is to go himself to discover it with 30 horse, and
50 foot, and other things needful for his enterprise.

With the manner how the Emperor Nichotawance came to Sir William Berckley,
attended with five petty Kings, to do Homage, and bring Tribute to King
CHARLES. With his solemn Protestation, that the Sun and Moon should lose their
Lights, before he (or his people in that Country) should prove disloyal, but
ever to keep Faith and Allegiance to King CHARLES.

London, Prind for Richard Wodenoth, at the Star under Peter's Church in
Cornhill. 1649.

These things that follow in this ensuing Relation are certified by diverse
Letters from Virginia, by men of worth and credit there, written to a Friend in
England, that for his own, and others satisfaction, was desirous to know these
particulars, and the present estate of that Country. And let no man doubt of
the truth of it, there be many in England, Land and Seamen that can bear
witness of it. And if this Plantation be not worth Encouragement, let every
true Englishman judge.
1 THat there are in Virginia about fifteen thousand English, and of Negroes
brought thither, three hundred good servants.

2 That of Kine, Oxen, Bulls, Calves, twenty thousand, large and good, and they
make plenty of Butter and very good Cheese.

3 That there are of an excellent raise, about two hundred Horse and Mares.

4 That of Asses for burden and use, there is fifty, but daily increase.

5 That for Sheep they have about three thousand, good wool.

6 That for G^ates there number is five thousand, thrive well.

7 That for Swine both tame and wild (in the Woods) innumerable; the flesh
pure and good, and Bacon none better.

8 That for Poultry, Hens, Turkies, Ducks, Geese, without number.

9 That they yearly plow and fow many hundred Acres of Wheat, as good, and
fair, as any in the world, and great increase.

10 That they have plenty of Barley, make excellent Malt.

11 That they have Six public Brewhouses, and most brew their own Beer,
strong and good.

12 That their Hopps are fair and large, thrive well.

13 That they sell their Beef at two pence half penny a pound, Porke at three
pence a pound, plentifully.

14 That their Cattle are about the prices in England, and most of the Ships
that come yearly hither, are there V^ctuall'd.

15 That they have thirty several sorts of Fish, River, and Sea, very
excellent good in their kinds, plentiful and large.

16 That they have five and twenty sundry sorts of Birds and Fowls, Land and
Water abundance, and for food not amiss.

17 That they have twenty kind of Beasts, whereof Dear abundance, most sorts
to be eaten; creeping Creatures many also.

18 That they have fifteen kinds of Fruits, pleasant and good, and with Italy
they will compare for delicate Fruits.

19 That they have five and twenty sorts of Trees, large, good and fit for
Shipping Housing, and other uses.

20 That they have Roots of several kinds, Potatoes, Sparagus, Carrets
Turnips, Parsnips Onions, and Hartichokes.

22 For Herbs they have of all kinds for Gardena, nd Physic Flowers.

23 That their Maize or Virginia Corn, it yields them five hundred for one,
increase, ('its set as we do garden Pease) it makes good Bread and Furmitie,
will keep seven years, and maults well for Beer, and ripe in five Months,
set in April or May.

24 That they have store of Indian Pease, better then ours, Beans, Lupines, and
the like.

25 They have store of Bees in their Woods, make plenty of honey and wax and
also tame Bees in hives about their Houses.

26 Indic^ begins to be planted, and thrives wonderfully well, grows up to a
little tree, and rich Indies made of the leaves of it, all men begins to get
some of the Seeds, and know it will be oftentimes the gain to them as Tobacco
(and gain now carries the Bell:) their hopes are great to gain the Trade of
it from the Mogulls Country, and to supply all Christendom, and this will be
many Thousands of pounds in the year.

27 Their Tobacco is much vented and esteemed in all places, yet the quantities
so great that is made, that the price there is but three pence a pound. A man
can plant two Thousand weight a year of it, and also sufficient Corn and
Roots, and other provisions for himself.

28 They begin to plant much Hemp and Flax which they find grows well and
good, only hands are wanting to this and other works.

29 Iron Ore and rich Mine are in abundance in the Land, fit streams and waters
to erect Iron Mils, woods never to be destroyed to burn Coal, and all this
lie on great Rivers banks, easy for transportation of Wood and Ore, and there
is Stone fit to build the Furnaces with; trial has been made of this Iron
Ore, and not better and richer in the World; his work Erected would be as much
worth as a Silver Mine, all things considered: not only to make all
Instruments of Iron for the Plantations Uses, but for Building, Shipping, there
being wanting in that Country no other Materials to that Work; Then the
casting of Ordnance, and making them, will abound to serve all the World; so of
Mussquets, Armor, all kind of Tools, and Manufacture of Iron Works will be
produced in abundance, so that it would become speedily the Magazine of Iron
Instruments in every kind, and at cheap rates; so that no Nation could afford
them half so cheap, and all men know, that Iron will command better Mines.

20 Skillful Iron-men for the Works sent out of England, with the assistance of
as many more able laborers there in Virginia, housing and victual ready
provided for them; (fitting places for Erecting, the Mills found out already,
and Oxen for draught at hand,) the Work in fix Months time would be
effected, and four hundred pound charge to transport the twenty men to
Virginia, with all tools and necessaries for the Work would do it: and these
Men for their encouragement to have half the gain made of the Iron to be
yearly divided betwixt the Undertakers and Workmen, the profit and gain
would be to the enriching of all.

30 They have 4 Wind-mills, and 5 Water-mills to grind their Corn; besides many
Horse-mills of several kinds, and Hand-mills for several uses: A Sawing mill
for Boards is much wanted; one mill driven by water, will do as much as 20
Sawyers etc.

31 There comes yearly to trade with them above 30 sail of ships, and in these
not so little as seven or eight hundred Mariners employed, (some say above a
thousand, this is a considerable thing) and they return laden home in March;
(this is a good seminary for Mariners.)

32 The Commodity these ships bring, is Linen Cloth of all sorts, and so of
Woollen Cloth, Stockins, Shoes, and the like things.

33 Most of the Masters of ships and chief Mariners have also there
Plantations, and houses, and servants, etc. in Virginia; and so are every way
great gainers by Freight, by Merchandise, and by Plantation and P^pe-staves,
Clap-board, choice Walnut-tree-vvood, Ceader-tree-timber and the like, is
transported by them if Tobacco is not their full lading.

34 They have in their Colony Pinnaces, Barks, great and small Boats many
hundreds, for most of their Plantations stand upon the Rivers sides or up
little Creek^, and but a small way into the Land, so that for transportation
and fishing they use many Boats.

35 They make Pitch and Tar* (and there is materials in the Woods for
abundance.) Also for Pot and Sope-ashes, Woods most proper and store: hands
want.

36 That for Mulbery-trees, the natural and proper food for Silke-wormes, they
have abundance in the woods, and some so large that one tree contains as many
leaves as will seed Silke-worms that will make as much Silk as may be worth
five pounds sterling money, this some French men affirm. And now they desire
Silke-wormes-seed which is sent them* and their hopes are good of the thriving
of it: A Commodity that may soon enrich them all with little labor, care or
pains; all Materials so plentiful and at hand, the food in abundance, the
Climate warm, and the work done in five weeks time, and within doors, by women
and children as well as men, and at that time of the year in May, that it
hinders not any other work or planting, sowing, or the like employments; such
an advantage, that had the Dutch the like in any of their Plantations, they
would improve it to the certain gain in the trade of Silk from Persia and
China, which we fetch with great charge and expense and hazard, and enrich
Heathen and Mahumetans greatly; but to these things lack Public and State
encouragements to begin the work: but more of this in an other place, it
deserves a full handling.

37 Vines in abundance and variety, do grow naturally over all the land, but by
the birds and beasts, most devoured before they come to perfection and
ripeness; but this testifies and declares, That the Ground, and the Climate is
most proper, and the Commodity of Wine is not a contemptible Merchandise; but
some men of worth and estate must give in these things example to the inferior
inhabitants and ordinary sort of men, to show them the gain and Commodity by
it, which they will not believe but by experience before their faces: And in
Tobacco they can make 20. l. sterling a man. at 3d a pound per annum; and this
they find and know and the present gain is that, that puts out all endeavors
from the attempting of others more Staple, and Sollid, and rich Commodities,
out of the heads and hands of the Common people: So as I say, the wealthier
sort of men must begin and give the example, and make the gain of other
Commodities as apparent to them, by the effecting them to perfection, or it
will not (as it has not hither unto) go forward.

38 That they have health very well, and fewer die in a year there, according
to the proportion, then in any place of England; since that men are provided
with all necessaries, have plenty of victual bread, and good beer, and
houseing, all which the Englishmen loves full dearly.

39 That the Passengers also come safe and well: the seamen of late years
having found a way, that now in 5, 6, and 7 weeks they sail to Virginia free
from all Rocks, Sands, and Pirates; and that they return home again in 20 days
sometimes and 30 at most: the Winds commonly serving more constantly, being
Westerly homeward, the Easterly outward bound.

40 That the mouth of the two Capes of Land, Cape Henry on the South, and Cape
Charles on the North; the entrance in is in 37 degrees: that the first River up
the West is James River, where most of the Plantations are settled and Towns:
the second is Charles river on the North of it; and the third called by the
Indian name Tapahanuke, the 4 river Patawoenicke, the 5 river Patuxant, the 6
Bolus, the 7 Saquisahanuke: at the head of the great Bay of Chespiacke, into
which Bay these 7 rivers from the West side of it do all enter and run into,
and so the mouth of the Bay issues out due East into the main Sea between the
two aforesaid Capes: the Baylies North and South, and has a Channel in draught
of 140 miles, and in depth between 5, 6, and 15 fathomes in some places. The
wideness of the Bay is from the West side which is the great Land, to the East
side of the Land which joins upon the Sea called the Acamake-shore; the
wideness and breadth of this Bay I say, is about 9, 10, and 14 miles broad in
some places of it; and these 7 Rivers have their mouths into the Bay, not above
20 miles, each River is distant from the other: But this in Smiths Map is more
at large described.

41 That some English about a thousand are seated upon the Acamake-shore by
Cape Charles, (where Captain Teardley is chief Commander) now called the
County of Northampton.

42 That they have Lime in abundance made for their houses, store of Bricks
made, and House and Chimnies built of Brick, and some Wood high and fair,
covered with Shingell for Tyle, yet they have none that make them, wanting
workmen; in that trade the Brickmakers have not the art to do it, it shrinketh.

43 That since the Massacre, the Savages have been driven far away, many
destroyed of them, their Towns and houses ruinated, their clear grounds
possessed by the English to sow Wheat in: and their great King Opechaukenow
(that bloody Monster upon 100 years old) was taken by Sir William Berkely the
Governor.

44 All kinds of Tradesmen may live well there, and do gain much by their
labors and arts, as Turners, Potters, Coopers; to make all kind of earthen and
wooden Vessels, Sawyers, Carpenters, Tyle-makers, Boat-wrights, Tailors,
Shoemakers, Tanners, Fishermen, and the like.

45 Young youths from 16 years and upward, for Apprentises and Servants for
some years, then to have Land given them, and Cattle to set up. Thousands of
these kinds of young boys and maidens wanting.

46 That the Government is after the Laws of England, (that is well for men
before they go, to know under what Laws they shall live:) A Governor and
Council of State; and yearly general Assemblies* men chosen and sent out of
each County, (there being 12 in Virginia;) these men Vote, and by the major
part all things are concluded; and they are Elected to those places by the most
voices in the County for whom they are chosen, and by whom sent.

47 They have 20 Churches in Virginia, and Ministers to each, and the Doctrine
and Orders after the Church of England: the Ministers Livings are esteemed
worth at least 100. l per an. they are paid by each planter so much Tobacco per
Pole, and so many bushels of Corn: they live all in peace and love.

48 That for matter of their better knowledge of the Land they dwell in, the
Planters resolve to make a further Discovery into the Country West and by South
up above the Fall and over the Hills, and are confident upon what they have
learned from the Indians, to find away to a West or South Sea by land or
rivers, and to discover a way to China and East Indies or unto some other Sea
that shall carry them thither; For Sir Francis Dr^ke was on the back side of
Virginia in his voyage about the world in 37 degrees just opposite to Virginia,
and called Nova Albion, and by the Natives kindly used: And now all the
question is only how broad the Land may be to that place from the head of James
River above the Falls, but all men conclude if it be not narrow, yet that there
is and will be found the like rivers issuing into a South Sea or a West Sea on
the other side of those Hills, as there is on this side when they run from the
West down into a East Sea after a course of 150 miles: but of this certainty M.
Hen. Brigs that most judicious and learned Mathematician wrote a small
Tractate, and presented it to that most noble Earl of Southampton then
Governor of the Virginia Company in England, Ann. 1623. to which I refer for
a full information.

And by such a Discovery the Planters in Virginia, shall gain the rich trade of
the East India, and so cause it to be driven through the Continent of Virginia,
part by Land, and part by Water, and in a most gainful way and safe, and far
less expenceful and dangerous, then now it is.

And they doubt not to find some rich and beneficial Country, and commodities
not yet known to the world that lies West and by South now from their present
Plantation.

49 That the Swedes have come and crept into a River called Delawar, that is,
within the limits of Virginia in 38 degrees and 30 min. it lies, and are there
planted* 100 of them drive a great and secret trade of Furs, which they trade
for with the Natives: it is but 2 days journey by land from our Plantations,
and a days sail by Sea from Cape Charles.

50 And again, the Hollanders have stolen into a River called Hudsons river in
the limits also o^ Virginia (and about 39 degrees) they have built a strong
Fort there, and call it Prince Maurice and New Netherlands, they drive a trade
of Furs there with the Natives for above ten thousand pounds a year.

These two Plantations are between Virginia and New England on our side of Cape
Cood which parts us and New England.

Thus are the English nosed in all places, and out-traded by the Dutch, they
would not suffer the English to use them so: But they have vigilant States men,
and advance all they can for a Common good, and will not spare any
encouragements to their people to discover.

But it is well known, that our English Plantations have had little
countenances, nay, that our Statesmen (when time was) had store of Gondemores
gold to destroy and discountenance the Plantation of Virginia, and he effected
it in a great part, by dissolving the Company, wherein most of the Nobility,
Gentry, Corporate Cities, and most Merchants of England, were Interested and
Engaged; after the expense of some hundred of thousands of pounds: For
Gundemore did affirm to his Friends, that he had Commission from his Master
to ruin that Plantation. For, said he, should they thrive and go on
increasing, as they have done under the Government of that Popular L. of
Southampton my Masters West Indies, and his Mexico would shortly be visited by
Sea and by Land, from those Planters in Virginia. And Marquis Hambleton told
the Earl of Southampton, that Gundemore said to King James, that the Virginia
Courts, was but a Seminary to a Seditious Parliament. But this is but a touch
by the way, and for a future Item to our Country not to despise Plantations.

51 The Land in Virginia is most fruitful, and produces, with very great
increase, whatsoever is committed into the Bowels of it, Planted* Sowed. A fat
rich Soil every where watered with many fine Springs, small Rivolets, and
wholesome Waters.

52 The Country is with pleasant rising small Ascents and Descents, Valleys,
Hills, Meadows, and some level Upland: Its Woody all over, but where labor
has cleared the ground from Trees, and this truly is the great labor in
Virginia, to fell Trees, and to get up the Roots, and so make clear ground for
the Plow.

53 Stones, and Rocks, and Quarries of several kinds, and very fit for the
Iron Furnaces (as trial has been made to endure fire) are in diverse places
found in Virginia.

54 There is diverse skins of Beasts for Merchandise and uses, as Beavers,
Otters, Squirrels, wild Cats, and Crystal is there found.

55 Diverse kinds of Druggs, Gummes, Dies, Paints, that the Indians use.

56 There is a kind of Flax the Indians use to make threeds of and strings, we
call it silk grass, i'ts fine to make both Linen and Stuff of it; abundance
in many places of it grows.

57 To the Southward of James River, some fifty miles by Land, and eighty by
Sea, lies the River Chawanok: whither Master Porey went by Land, and reported,
the King there told him, that within ten days Journey Westward toward Sun
setting, there were a people that did gather out of a River sand, the which
they washed in Sives, and had a thing out of it, that they then put into the
Fire, which melted, and became like to our Copper, and offered to send some of
his People to guide him to that place. But master Porey being not provided with
men as he would have had of English, he returned to Sir George Yearly, and
acquainted him with the Relation. But before they could prepare for the
Journey, and Discovery, the first Massacre happened, and so to this day it has
been unattempted. The Company also in England was dissolved, their Patent most
unjustly, against all Law and Conscience, taken from them. Procured by the
Spanish Gold and Faction, and the Colony never looked after, whether sink or
swim; and has now these twenty four years since, labored for life, and
only to subsist with much ado; The Cattle then left, increased to what you
hear, and in all these many years no more People in it, and they having
little Encouragement, and great uncetainties, whether ever to be continued a
Colony, whereby men have had no heart to Plant for Posterity, but every man for
the present, Planted Tobacco to get a livelihood by it.

And had not this present Governor been sent as he was, and continued, who
has done all a Gentleman could do to mainetaine it alive. It had upon this
second Massacre been utterly deserted and ruinated; as things stand in our
own Land. If any demand the cause of this late Massacre, all having been
forgiven and forgotten, what the Indians did the first time; Those that are
Planters there, write the occasion of the Indians doing so wicked an Act, was.
That some of them confessed, That their great King was by some English
Informed, that all was under the Sword in England, in their Native Country,
and such divisions in our Land; That now was his time, or never, to root out
all the English* For those that they could not surprise and kill under the
feigned masque of Friendship and feasting, and the rest would be by wants; and
having no supplies from their own Country which could not help them, be
suddenly Consumed and Famished. The Indians Allaruming them night and day, and
killing all their Cattle, as with ease they might do, and by destroying in
the nights, all their Corn Fields, which the English could not defend. All
this had (as they write) taken full effect, if God had not abated the Courages
of the Savages in that moment of time, they so treacherously slew the English;
who were presently (the Act done) so affrighted in their own minds, that they
had not the heart to follow the Counsels their King had commanded: but to the
admiration of the English, prosecuted not their opportunity, nor were constant
to their own Principles, But fled away and retired themselves many miles
distant off the Colony; which little space of time gave the English opportunity
to gather themselves together, call an Assembly, secure their Cattle, and to
think upon some way to defend themselves, if need were, and then to offend
their Enemies; which by the great mercy of God was done and effected; And the
particulars of all is worthy in some other place to be remembered and manifested
to the World, that the great God may have his due Glory, Honor, and Praise
for ever and ever, Amen, Amen, Amen. And now at this present the Colony is in
good estate (and never a third time to be so surprised by a seeming Friend.)
And they conclude, their conditions are now, such as they may and will greatly
improve the advancement and welfare of the Collony, even by this late sad
Accident; and the Pit there Enemies dug for them, they are like to fall into
themselves, and their mischief will and has assuredly fallen far more upon
their own Pates; since their great King was taken Prisoner.

And in brief, they say in three Letters, that if God please, in mercy, now to
look upon poor England, that it fall not into a second War, nor relapses,
but a happy Peace settled in their Native Country. Then they in Virginia shall
be as happy a people as any under heaven, for there is nothing wanting there
to produce them, Plenty, Health, and Wealth.

58 Concerning New England, that they have Trade with them to and fro, and are
but four days Sail off from Virginia, that they have had many Cattle from
Virginia, and Corn, and many other things; That New England, is in a good
Condition for livelihood. But for matter of any great hopes but Fishing, there
is not much in that Land; For its as Scotland is to England, so much
difference, and lies upon the same Land Northward, as Scotland does to England:
there is much Cold, Frost and Snow, and their Land so barren, except a Herring
be put into the hole that you set the Corn or Maize in, it will not come up;
and it was great pity, all those people being now about twenty Thousand, did
not seat themselves at first to the South of Virginia, in a warm and rich
Country, where their Industry would have produced Sugar, Indico, Ginger,
Cotton, and the like Commodities.

And its now reported in Virginia that Thousands of them are removing (with
many from Summer Islands also) unto the Bahana Islands, near the Cape of
Florida; and that's the right way for them to go and thrive.

Letters came now this March, 1648, relate further.
THAT Opachankenow the old Emperor being dead since he was taken prisoner by
our Governor, there is chosen a new one, called Nickotawances, who acknowledge
to hold his Government under King Charles, and is become tributary to him, and
this March 1648, Nickotawance came to James town to our Noble Governor Sir
William Bearkley with five more petty Kings attending him, and brought twenty
Beavers-skinnes to be sent to King Charles as he said for Tribute; and after a
long Oration, he concluded with this Protestation; That the Sun and Moon
should first lose their glorious lights and sbining, before He, or his People
should evermore hereafter wrong the English in any kind, but they would ever
hold love and friendship together: And to give the English better assurance of
their Faith, He had Decreed, That if any Indian be seen to come within the
limits of the English Colony, (except they come with some Message from him,
with such and such tokens) that it shall be lawful to kill them presently; and
the English shall be free to pass at all times when and where they please
throughout His Dominions.

And the Indians have of late acquainted our Governor, that within five days
journey to the Westward and by South, there is a great high mountain, and at
foot thereof, great Rivers that run into a great Sea; and that there are men
that come hither in ships, (but not the same as ours be) they wear apparel
and have reed Caps on their heads, and ride on Beasts like our Horses, but have
much longer ears and other circumstances they declare for the certainty of
these things.

That Sir William was here upon preparing fifty Horse and fifty Foot, to go and
discover thi^ thing himself in person, and take all needful provision in that
case requisite along with him: he was ready to go when these last ships set
sail for England in April last: and we hope to give a good account of it by
the next ships, God giving a blessing to the enterprise, which will mightily
advance and enrich this Country; for it must needs prove a passage to the South
Sea (as we call it) and also some part of China and the East Indies.

The Governor Sir William, caused half a bushel of Rice (which he had procured)
to be sown, and it prospered gallantly, and he had fifteen bushhels of it,
excellent good Rice, so that all these fifteen bushels will be sown again this
year; and we doubt not in a short time to have Rice so plentiful as to afford
it at 2d a pound if not cheaper, for we perceive the ground and Climate is very
proper for it as our Negroes affirm, which in their Country is most of their
food, and very healthful for our bodies.

We have many thousand of Acres of clear Land, I mean where the wood is all off
it (for you must know all Virginia is full of trees) and we have now going near
upon a hundred and fifty Plowes, with many brave yoke of Oxen, and we sow
excellent Wheat, Barley, Rye, Beans, Pease, Oats; and our increase is
wonderful, and better Grain not in tne world.

One Captain Brocas, a Gentleman of the Counsel, a great Traveller, caused a
Vineyard to be planted, and has most excellent Wine made, and the Country, he
says, as proper for Vines as any in Christendom, Vines indeed naturally
growing over all the Country in abundance: only skilful men wanting here.

That at last Christmas we had trading here ten ships from London, two from
Bristoll, twelve Hollanders, and seven from New England.

Mr. Richard Bennet had this year out of his Orchard as many Apples as he made
20 Butts of excellent Cider.

And Mr. Richard Kinsman has had for this three or four years, forty or fifty
Butts of Perry made out of his Orchard, pure and good.

So that you may perceive how proper our Country is for these fruits, and men
begin now to plant great Orchards, and find the way of Grafting upon
Crab-stocks, best for lasting, here being naturally in this Land store of wild
Crab-trees.

Mr. Hough at Nausamund, has a curious Orchard also, with all kind and variety
of several fruits; the Governor in his new Orchard has 15 hundred
fruit trees, besides his Apricocks, Peaches, Mellicotons, Quinces, Wardens,
and such like fruits.

I mention these particular men, that all may know the truth of things.

Worthy Captain Matthews, an old Planter of above thirty years standing, one
of the Counsel, and a most deserving Common-wealths-man, I may not omit to let
you know this Gentleman's industry.

He has a fine house, and all things answerable to it; he sowes yearly store
of Hemp and Flax, and causes it to be spun; he keeps Weavers, and has a
Tan-house, causes Leather to be dressed, has eight Shoemakers employed in
their trade, has forty Negroe servants, brings them up to Trades in his house:
He yearly sowes abundance of Wheat, Barley, etc, The Wheat he sells at four
shillings the bushel, kills store of Beeves, and sells them to victual the
ships when they come thither: has abundance of Kine, a brave Dairy, Swine
great store, and Poltery; he married the Daughter of Sir Tho. Hinton, and in a
word, keeps a good house, lives bravely, and a true lover of Virginia; he is
worthy of much honor.

Our Spring begins the tenth of February, the trees bud, the grass springs,
and our Autumn and fall of Lease is in November, our VVinter short, and most
years very gentle, Snow lies but little, yet Ice some years.

I may not forget to tell you we have a Free-Schoole, with two hundred Acres of
Land, a fine house upon it, forty milch Kine, and other accommodations to it:
the Benefactor deserves perpetual memory; his name Mr. Benjamin Symes, worthy
to be Chronicled; other petty Schools also we have.

We have most rare colored Parraketoes, and one Bird we call the Mock-bird;
for he will imitate all other Birds notes, and cries both day and night-birds,
yea, the Owls and Nightingalls.

For Bees there is in the Country which thrive and prosper very well there: one
Mr. George Pelton, alias, Strayton, a ancient planter of twenty five years
standing that had store of them, he made thirty pounds a year profit of them;
but by misfortune his house was burnt down, and many of his Hives perished, he
makes excellent good Matheglin, a pleasant and strong drink, and it serves him
and his family for good liquor: If men would endeavor to increase this kind of
creature, there would be here in a short time abundance of Wax and Honey, for
there is all the Country over delicate food for Bees, and there is also Bees
naturally in the Land, though we account not of them.


59 Now these are the several sorts and kinds of Beasts, Birds, Fish, in
Virginia.

Beasts great and small as follows: above 20 several kinds.
1 Lions, But all these four sorts are up in the higher parts of the Country,
on the hills and mountains, few to be seen in the lower parts where the
English are; the Elkes are as great as Oxen, their horns six foot wide, and
have two Calves at a time; the skins make good Buffe, and the flesh as good as
Beef. 2 Bears, But all these four sorts are up in the higher parts of the
Country, on the hills and mountains, few to be seen in the lower parts where
the English are; the Elkes are as great as Oxen, their horns six foot wide, and
have two Calves at a time; the skins make good Buffe, and the flesh as good as
Beef. 3 Leopard, But all these four sorts are up in the higher parts of the
Country, on the hills and mountains, few to be seen in the lower parts where
the English are; the Elkes are as great as Oxen, their horns six foot wide, and
have two Calves at a time; the skins make good Buffe, and the flesh as good as
Beef. 4 Elkes. But all these four sorts are up in the higher parts of the
Country, on the hills and mountains, few to be seen in the lower parts where
the English are; the Elkes are as great as Oxen, their horns six foot wide, and
have two Calves at a time; the skins make good Buffe, and the flesh as good as
Beef. 5 Dear. 6 Foxes. 7 Wild Cats. 8 Raconnes, as good meat as Lamb 9
Passonnes* This beast has a bag under her belly into which she takes her
young ones, if at any time affrighted, and carries them away. 10 Two sorts of
Squirrels* One called a flying one, for that she spreads like a Batt a certain
loose skin she has and so flies a good way. 13 A Musk Rat, So called for his
great sweetness and shape. 14 Hares. 15 Beavers. 16 Otters. 17 Dogs. But
bark not, after the shape of a Wolf, and Foxes smell not: Wolves but little,
neither not fierce. 18 Wolves. 19 Marti^s, Poule Cats, Weesels, Minks: but
these Vermin hurt not Hens, Chickins or Eggs at any time. 20 A little beast
like a Conny, the Foxes kill many of them.
Birds are these, viz. above 25 several kinds.
1 Eagles. 2 Hawks of six several kinds. 3 Parteridges many. 4 Wild Turkies,
some weighing sixty pound weight. 5 Red Birds, that sing rarely. 6
Nightingales. 7 Blue Birds, smaller then a Wren. 8 Black birds. 9 Thrushes. 10
Heath Cocks. 11 Swannes. 12 Cranes 13 Hernes. 14 Geese. 15 Brants. 16 Ducks. 17
Widgeons. 18 Dottrells. 19 Oxeyes. 20 Parrots. 21 Pigeons. 22 Owls.
Many more that have no English Names; for one called the Mock bird, that
counterfeits all other several Birds cries and tunes.

Fish are these in their kind above Thirty sorts.
1 Codde. 2 B ass. 3 Drums six foot long. 4 Sheepsheads, this Fish makes
broth so like Mutton-broath, that the difference is hardly known. 5 Conger. 6
Eeles. 7 Trouts. 8 Mullets. 9 Plaice. 10 Grampus. 11 Porpus. 12 Scales. 13
Sturgeons, of 10 foot long. 14 Stingraes. 15 Brets. 16 White Salmon. 17 Soles.
18 Herring. 19 Conny-Fish. 20 Rocke-fish. 21 Lampres. 22 Cray Fish. 23 Shads.
24 Perch. 25 Crabbs. 26 Shrimps. 27 Crecy-Fish. 28 Oysters. 29 Cockles. 30
Mussels. 31 St. George Fish. 32 Toad-Fish.
Trees above 20 kinds, and many no English names.
1 Oaks red and white VVood. 2 Ash. 3 Wallnut, two kinds. 4 Elmes 5 Ceadar. 6
Cypres three fathomes about. 7 Mulbery Trees great and good. 8 Chestnut Trees, 9
Plum Trees of many kinds. 10 The Puchamine Tree. 11 The Laurel. 12 Cherries.
13 Crahes. 14 Vines. 15 Sassafras.
Fruits they have, Strawberies, Gooseberies, Raspices, Maracokos, Puchamines,
Muskmillions, Pumpions; And for Fruits brought thither and planted. Aples,
Pears, Quinces, Apricocks, Peaches; and many more kinds excellent good, etc.

FINIS.

