Another BLOODY FIGHT AT SEA Between the English and the Dutch; and the manner
how the Lord Admiral Vantrump with threescore Men of War, engaged Sir Geo:
Ayscue and the Parliaments Fleet upon the Downs, on Saturday last.

With the particulars thereof, disputed with great gallantry on both sides; the
playing of Grenades; the blowing up of the Decks; the number of ships sunk,
fired, and taken; the tacking about of the Parl. Navy, to the protection of
Dover Castle; and Vantrump still riding upon the Downs.

Also, the desperate Resolution of his Navy; and a Declaration concerning the
cutting down of the Banks, Dams, and Sea-walls, and drowning of the Country:
Together with the concluding of a peace between the K. of France, and the K. of
Spain, by the K. of Scots; and the setting up of the Royal Standard.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.

Another bloody fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch, on Saturday
last: With the true particulars thereof; and the manner of Vantrumps engageing
the English Fleet upon the Downs, with threescore Men of War.
Sent in a Letter from Captain Pack, to a Member of the Council of State, on
Monday, July the Twelfth, 1652.
Right Honorable,
SInce the last Defeat given to the Hollander, Vantrump has selected
Threescore Men of War, and has made a desperate Attempt against your Fleet
upon the Downs; where the Dutch maintained a very sharp dispute for many hours
together; and great was the loss on both sides: Many gallant ships being sunk
and fired; But by reason of the great might and power of the Enemy; their
number far exceeding ours; it was thought most requisite to decline, and tack
about for Dover Cliff, which we did, with very little loss: So that now we are
secure, and under the protection of the Castle; but expect every hour another
engagement; which is a thing generally desired both by the Seamen and
soldiers; only it is waved for the present, by reason that Vice Admiral Pen
is every minute expected with a Squadron of ships for our assistance, which
will then complete us 30 Sail, gallantly manned, and well resolved.

Vantrump lies three leagues distance; and is resolved forthwith to engage Us;
as captain Vand-Erst informs Us, who has deserted them, and declared for the
Parliament.

He likewise brings intelligence, That the States have given Orders for the
re-inforcing their Maritine Towns and Castles; and have declared to the People,
That our Admiral intends to land some soldiers about the Brill, and Flushing,
with a Resolution to cut down the Dammes, or Sea-walls, and so drown the
Country. The allarum whereof has so exasperated the spirits of many, that
they are exceedingly enraged, and vows revenge.

We hear that there is a general Rising from 16 to 60; and those that do refuse
to to engage, are to die without mercy. They are setting forth another great
Fleet of 200 sail, and the Zealanders have chosen a new Admiral. In our last
engagement, our loss is esteemed killed and wounded about 300. The Enemies far
greater.

There is daily Action between our Scouts, and Trumps; and this morning captain
Peacock, with the Tiger, going to relieve the Guard, was set upon by three
Dutchmen, who maintained a gallant dispute, for the space of half an hour;
which our Admiral hearing of, dispatched captain Watson and captain Tailor to
his assistance, who bearing up close to them, saluted them with several broad
sides, insomuch that one immediately sunk by their sides; the other two got off,
but much battered and torn, as well as ours; some having their legs and arms
shot off; others lamentably shot and mangled. We hear that General Blake has a
design to block up the Zound, which will greatly frustrate and eclipse their
liberty, etc.

Aboard the Rubey in the Downs, July 10. 1652.
Since the receipt of this Letter, further Advertisements are come, That Admiral
Vantrump having received intelligence of additional ships coming to us,
resolved to fight us, and frustrate our conjunction; in order whereunto, he
advanced; but our Scouts maing a discovery of his approach near the Channel,
and forthwith giveing notice thereof to the Navy, great was the preparation
made to receive them; and in pursuance thereof, sir Geo. Ayscue, with the
Fairfax and Triumph, bore up to them, before the head of the Fleet, and gave
them 50 Guns, but was answered with the like salute from Vantrump, and
Vice Admiral Wit, who upon hanging forth their bloody flags, was the signal
for the rest of their Captains to fall on; insomuch, that a bloody fight began,
and after 700 broad sides exchanged, they came to grapling, with a resolution
to board each other; but it proved a work of extreme difficulty; for no sooner
had we assailed each other decks, but immediately the small shot flew so thick
from the murdering pieces, that both parties were often repelled and beaten
off; and the victory for a long time seemed dubious, til at last sir George and
Cap. Lawson with the Rainbow and Fairfax, bore up to the head of the Vantrump,
and his vice admiral; and after several desperate Onsets on both sides,
vantrump declined dispute, and with much difficulty hailed off; the viceadmiral
was sunk with two more; after which, the Redcoats of Col. Goffs Regiment, that
were aboard the Speaker, being engaged with four of the Holanders, seeing no
ways possible to free themselves, resolved to purchase their liberty, with the
price of their bloods, otherwise to sink by their sides; in order whereunto,
they played their Grenades and fireworks, which did great execution, and at
last fired one of their ships; the other three perceiving this sad disaster,
declined engagement; and soon after the whole Navy began to be in a Chaos of
Confusion; for diverse of the English Frigars bearing up close to their great
ships, gave them three shot for one, in which action they performed singular
service. However, Vantrump remains still upon the Downs; and further action is
suddenly expected. The King of Scots is designed for Brussels, to conclude a
peace between the King of France, and the K. of Spain. The K. of Poland has
set up his Royal Standard against the Tartars; and most of his Nobility are to
take the field with him.

Diverse of the Dutch ships have set up the King of Scots Colors; and seem to
be inclining to Monarchy; Although it is apparent, that they are both Traitors
and Rebels to their Prince; and their Provinces and Towns were won by the
heroic Achievements of Englist-men; and probably may again be recovered out
of the hands of those, who deal with England, as the Lawyer did with two men
about the Oyster, eat out the meat, and gave them the shell.

FINIS.

