The TRIAL of the honorable Colonel JOHN PENRUDDOCK of Compton in Wiltshire,
and his SPEECH; Which he delivered the day before he was beheaded in the
Castle of Exon, being the 16. day of May 1655. to a Gent. whom he desired to
publish them after his death.

Together with his prayer upon the Scaffold, and the last Letter he received
from his virtuous Lady, with his Answer to the same.

Also the Speech of that Piously resolved Gent.

Hugh Grove of Chisenbury in the parish of Enford, and County of Wilts, Esquire
beheaded there the same day.

Printed by order of the Gent. entrusted. 1655.

Col. Penruddock being writ to by a friend for an account of his trial, writ
as follows.

SIR,
THough I received your desires something too late, it being but two days
before notice given me from the Sheriff of the day of my expiration, for I
cannot call this an Execution, it being for such a cause; yet in order to your
satisfaction, I have borrowed so much time from my more serious Meditations, as
to give you this short account of my Trial, wherein you must excuse both the
brevitie and imperfections, it being but the issues of a bad memory.


UPon Thursday the 19. April 1655. the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer,
being sat in the Castle of Exon, summoned before them my self, Mr Hugh Grove,
Mr Richard Reeves, Mr Robert Duke, Mr George Duke, Mr Thomas Fitz-James, Mr
Francis Jones, Mr Edward Davis, Mr Thomas Poulton, and Mr Francis Bennet. Being
all called to the Bar, we were commanded to hold up our hands, and an
Indictment of high Treason was read against us: and being asked whether we
would plead guilty or not guilty to the Indictment; in the behalf of my self
and of the Gent* therein charged, I spoke as follows.

Col. Penruddock. My Lords, though my education has been such as not to give
me those advantages which the knowledge of the Laws would have assisted me
with, for the defending my self: yet upon hearing this very indictment, my
reason tells me that it is illegal: and therefore I do demand Council that
may dispute the illegality thereof.


Sergeant Glyn. Sir, you desire that which cannot be granted, therefore give
your answer, whether you are guilty or not guilty of the Treason of which you
stand charged.


Col. Pen. Sir, By your favor, it is that which has been granted to my
inferiors, ( viz) to Mr Lilburn, and to one Rolf a Shoemaker, and I have as
great a right to the Laws as any person that sits here as my Judge; I do
therefore challenge it as my right. Judge Nicholas whom I there see, will tell
you he himself was council for this Rolf: and it is a hard case, if a
freeborn Gentleman of England cannot have the same privilege that his
inferiors have had before him.


Attorney General. Sir, There is a great difference between Treason acting and
acted; the later is your case: therefore flatter not your self, and do not
think your being mute shall save your estate in case of Treason; for if you
plead not to the Indictment, sentence will be pronounced against you, as if you
had been found guilty of the fact you are charged with.


Col. Pen. Sir, I observe your distinction: but all the Logic you have, shall
not make me nor any Rational man acknowledge, that this was either acting or
acted, before it be proved. Sir, It is but a bare suspicion, and I hope you
will not condemn me before I am convicted: I say the Indictment is illegal,
and I do demand Council.


At. Genesis Sir, The Court must not be dallied withal: I do peremtorily demand
of you, are you guilty or not guilty? If you plead you may have favor,
otherwise we shall proceed to sentence.


Col. Pen. Sir, Put case I do plead, shall I then have Council allowed me?


At. Genesis Sir, The Court makes no bargains, refer your self to us. Hereupon my
fellow prisoners persuaded me to plead not guilty* which being done, I demanded
Council, as being partly promised it. Mr Attorney told me: I could have none.
Then I replied;


Col. Pen. Sir, Durus est hic sermo, it is no more then I expected from you;
but rather then I will be taken off unheard, I will make my own defense as well
as I can. The Jurors being then called, I challenged about 24 of the 35 I might
have challenged. The rest of the gentlemen were sent from the bar; I was left
alone upon my trial; and the Jurors were so pact, that had I known them, the
issue had been the same that it was. The Jurors being sworn, and the Indictment
again read, Mr Attorney demanded what exception I could make to it.


Col. Pen. Sir, I except against every part thereof: for I take it to be
illegal in toto ^omposito.


Record. Steel. Sir, It is not usual for any Court to admit of general
exceptions, therefore we expect that you should make it to some particular.


Col. Pen. Sir, I desire a copy of my Indictment, and time until tomorrow to
make my defense.


At. Genesis Sir, You cannot have it; the Court expects you should do it now.


Col. Pen. Then if I cannot have time, if my general exception might have been
admitted, it would have told you, that there can be no high Treason in this
Nation, but it must* be grounded either upon the Common, or the Statute law*
But this is neither grounded upon the Common law, or the Statute: ergo no
treason (against a Protector who has no power according to Law:) neither is
there any such thing in Law as a Protector, for all Treasons and such pleas
are Propria Causa Regis.


Ser. Glyn. Sir, You are peremptory, you strike at the government; you will
fare never a whit the better for this speech* speak as to any particular
exception you have to the Indictment.


Col. Pen. Sir, If I speak any thing which grates upon the present government,
I may confidently expect your pardon: my life is as dear to me, as this
government can be to any of you. The holy Prophet David when he was in danger
of his life, feigned himself mad, and the spittle hung upon his beard: you may
easily therefore excuse my imperfections* And since I am now forced to give you
my particular exception (more plainly) to the Indictment, I am bold to tell
you, I observe in the later part of the Indictment, you say I am guilty of High
Treason by virtue of a Statute in that case made and provided. If there be any
such Statute, pray let it be read; I know none such. My Actions were for the
King; and I well remember what Bract. says, Rex non habet superiorem nisi
Deum; ^atis 5 Tract. de delates cap. Bract. rem. H. 3. 3. chapter 24. Sect.
habet adpoenam, quod Deum expect at ultorem. And in another place he says,
Rex habet potestatem and jurisdictionem super omnes qui in Regno suo sunt: ea
quae sunt jurisdictionis and pacis, ad nulluni pertinent, nisi ad regiam
dignitatem: habet etiam coercionem, ut delinquentes puniat and coerceat. again
he says, Omnes sub Rege, and ipse nullo nisi tantum Deo; non est inferior sibi
subjectis; non parem habet in regno suo. this shows us where the true power
is. You shall find also.

That whoever shall refuse to aid the King when war is levied against Parl.
Roll. number. 7. Rex and consuetudo Parliament. 11 H. 7 Chap. 1.
him, or against any that keep the King from his just Rights, offends the law,
and is thereby guilty of Treason. Again,

All men that adhere to the King in personal service are freed from Treason by
Law: and yet you tell me of a Statute, which makes my adhering to my King
according to Law, to be high Treason. Pray let it be read.


At. Genesis Sir, You have not behaved your self so as to have such a favor from
the Court.


Col. Pen. Sir, I require it not as a favor, but as my Right.


At. Genesis Sir, You cannot have it.


Col. Pen. If I cannot have it, these Gentlemen that are the Jurors have not
affended you: their verdict reaches to their souls, as to my life: pray let not
them go blindfold, but let that Statute be their guide.


At. Genesis Sir, The Jury ought to be satisfied with what has been already said,
and so might you too.


Col. Pen. Sir, I thank you; you now tell me what I must trust to.

Mr Attorney then made a large speech in the face of the Court, wherein he
aggravated the offense with diverse circumstances; as saying, I had been four
years in France, and held a correspondency with the King my Master, of whom I
had learned the Popish Religion; That I endeavored to bring in a debauched
lewd young man, and to engage this Nation in another bloody war; and that if I
had not been timely prevented, I had destroyed them, (meaning the Jurors) and
their whole families. I interrupted him, and said,


Col. Pen. Mr Attorney, you have been heretofore of Council for me, you then
made my case better then indeed it was; I see you have the faculty to make men
believe falsehoods to be truth too.


At. Genesis Sir, You interrupt me, you said but now you were a gentleman.


Col. Pen. Sir, I have been thought worthy heretofore to sit on the bench,
though now I am at the bar. Mr Attorney then proceeded in his speech, and
called the witnesses. Then I said,

Sir, You have put me in a bears skin, and now you will bait me with a
witness. But I see the face of a gentleman here in the Court, (I mean Captain
Crook,) whose conscience can tell him, that I had articles from him which ought
to have kept me from hence. Captain Crook hereupon stood up, and his guilty
conscience (I supposed) advised him to sit down again, after he had made this
speech, (that is to say) he opened his lips and spoke nothing. The several
witnesses now come in, Mr Dove the Sheriff of Wilts, and others; my charity
forbids me to tell you what many of them swore: I shall therefore omit that,
and only tell you that one of our own party (and indeed I think an honest man)
being forced to give his evidence, I said, My Lords, it is a hard case, that
when you find you cannot otherwise cleave me in pieces, that you must look
after wedges made of my own timber. The virtuous Crier of Blanford being asked
what were the words I used in the proclaiming King Charles at the market, he
said, I declared for Charles the Second, and settling the true Protestant
Religion, for the liberty of the Subject, and Privilege of Parliaments.

Then I said to the Attorney General and the whole Court, you said even now,
that I had learned of the King my Master the Popish religion, and endeavored
to bring him in: your own witness tells you, what, and whom I would bring in,
and that it was the true Protestant, and not the Popish Religion, his Majesty
is of, and intends to settle. I urged diverse cases to make the business but a
Riot (as my Lord of Northumberlands) pretending it was for the taking of Taxes,
and that the power was not declared to be where they say it is. I required the
Judges to be of Council for me, and told them it was their duty. Commissioner
Lisle told me I should have no wrong, (but he meant Right) but Judge Rolls and
Nicholas confessed themselves parties, therefore would say nothing. Then I told
the Court, if I had seen a Crown upon the head of any person, I had known what
had been Treason, the Law of England would have taken hold of me out of the
respects it has to Monarchy: there was no such landmarks before me; therefore
I conceive I cannot be guilty of what I am charged with. And my Lord and Mr
Attorney, you here indict me for a Treason committed at Southmoulton in
Devonshire; and gentlemen, ye swear witnesses against me for facts done in
other Countries. Sarum, Blanford, and Southmoulton are not in a parish. You
puzzle the Jurors with these circumstances, pray go to the kernel; and you
Gent. of the Jury, save your labor of taking those notes. Mr Attorney then
addressed himself to the Jury, and to be short, after the space of half an
hour long, gave them directions to bring me in guilty: this being done, I
craved the favor from the Court, that I might speak to the Jury; which being
allowed, I said to them as follows, or to the same effect.

Gent. You are called a Jury of life and death; and happy will it be for your
souls, if you prove to be a Jury of life. You have heard what has been said
to make my actions Treason, and with what vigor many untruths have been urged
to you. I have made appear to you that there can be no treason but against the
King; that the Law knows no such person as a Protector. Mr Attorney pretends
a Statute for it, but refuses the reading thereof either to me or you:
vilifies me at pleasure, and tells you I am a Papist, and would bring in the
Popish Religion: and that if I had not been timely prevented, I had destroyed
you. I hope you are also satisfied of the contrary, from the mouth of one of
the bitterest witnesses. You are now judges between me and these Judges. Let
not the majesty of their looks, or the glory of their habits, betray you to a
sin which is of a deeper dye then their scarlet; I mean that sin, blood,
which calls to heaven for vengeance. Gent. you do not see a hair of my head but
is numbered, neither can you make any one of them; much less can you put breath
into my nostrils when it is taken out: a sparrow does not fall to the ground
without the providence of God, much less shall man, to whom he has given
dominion and rule over all the creatures of the earth. Gent. look upon me, I am
the Image of my Creator, and that stamp of his which is in my vizage, is not
to be defaced without an account given wherefore it was. I have here
challenged, as I am a Gent* and freeborn man of England, the right which the
law allows me; I demanded a copy of my Indictment, and Council, but it is
denied me. The Law which I would have been tried by is the known Law of the
land, which was drawn by the wise consultation of our Princes, and by the ready
pens of our Progenitors. The Law which I am now tried by is no Law, but what
is cut out by the point of a rebellious sword; and the sheets in which they are
recorded, being varnished with the moisture of an eloquent tongue, if you look
not well to it, may chance to serve for some of your Shrouds. If the fear of
displeasing others shall betray you to find me guilty of any thing, you can at
the most but make a riot of this. Pray by the way take notice, that the last
Parliament would not allow the Legislative power to be out of themselves;
seventeen of twenty in this very County were of that opinion, and deserted the
house: they were your Representative: if you should find me guilty, you bring
them in danger, and in them your selves. Have a care of being drawn into a
snare. Gent. your blood may run in the same channel with mine. If what I have
said do not satisfy you, so as to acquit me; if you bring in a special
verdict, you do in some measure acquit your selves, and throw the blood that
will be spilt upon the Judges. Consider of it, and the Lord direct you for the
best.

The Jury after a quarter of an hours retirement, brought me in guilty: the
Lord forgive them for they knew not what they did.

Upon Monday the 23. of April we were again called to the bar, being then in
number twenty six. Sergeant Glyn asked of me first, what I could say for my
self, that I should not have sentence according to Law? Then I said,

My Lords and Gent. you ask what I can say for my self, that I should not have
sentence pass upon me. The Jury found me guilty: if I should go about to make
a defense now, it would signify no more, then as if my friends should petition
for my pardon after I am executed. I could have offered you articles here, but
I thought them inconfistent with this Court. When I look upon my offense (as to
the Protector) I conclude my self a dead man; but when I reflect upon the
favor he has showed to others of my condition, and the hopes I have of your
intercession, methinks I feel my spirits renewed again* My Lords, death is a
debt due from me to Nature; the Protector has now the keeping the bond, and
has put it in suit by his Attorney: if he please to forbear the serving me with
an execution, and let me keep it a little longer, I will pay him the interest
of thanks for it as long as I live, and engage my posterity and a numerous
alliance to be bound for me. So the Lord direct you all for the best. If I have
found favor I shall thank you; if not, I shall forgive you.

This being done, Sergeant Glyn, after a most bitter and nonsensicall speech,
gave sentence against us; ( viz.) to be drawn, hanged and quartered. A pretty
exchange for unworthy Crooks Articles for life, liberty and estate; which I
can prove, and will dye upon. My trial held at least five hours. This is as
much as at present I can remember of it; excuse the errors.

One of the Jury being asked by a Gent. why he found me guilty; answered, He
was resolved to hang me, before he did see me.

Witness one Bennet and Stroud, who in open Court confessed to be guilty of
all they proved against me, yet Mr Attorney gave the Jury directions to find
them not guilty.
I observe treason in this age to be an individuum vagum, like the wind in the
Gospel, which blows where it lists; for that shall be treason in me to day,
which shall be none in another to morrow* as it pleases Mr Attorney.

The 3 part. Inst. pa. 22. a part. Inst. page 47. 48. Princes case 8 reports.
Judges are sworn to do justice according to the Law of the Land, and therefore
have miserably perjured themselves in condemning me contrary to Law: And (not
so contented) must cause the Jury (so* wise they were)* through their false and
unjust directions, to destroy their own rights and properties, and set up a new
Arbitrary and Tyrannical government.

The Judges would not give me their advise in point of Law, (as was their duty)
because they said they were parties; yet could si still on the Bench in their
Robes, to countenance (and approve of) my sentence.

Hobart folio 120. Doct. Bonams case 8 part of Cooks reports.
No man can be a Judge where he is a Party in the same cause; therefore my
trial was contrary to Law.

The Judges being parties, ought not to sit upon the bench* (but stand by;)
therefore my trial was illegal: the rest being no Judges, but the Protectours
immediate servants, so could not be my Judges in case of High Treason; for none
but the sworn Judges of the Land are capable of it by Law.

One thing of Colonel Dove the reverend Sheriff of Wilts, who that the Jury
might be sufficiently incensed, complaining of the many incivilities (he
pretended) were offered him by our party, being upon his Oath, said, that one
of our men did run him through the side with a Carabine. Surely it was a very
small one, for the wound is not discernable.

A great deal of pains every man in his place took for the carrying on their
Masters work.

Be merciful unto me, O Lord, be merciful unto me: under the shadow of thy
wings will I hide my self till this Tyranny be overpast.

Glory be to God on High, in earth peace, good will toward men; and so have
mercy on me, O Lord.


JOHN PENRUDDOCK.

Mrs. Penruddocks last letter to her honorable and dear Husband.
MY DEAR HEART,
MY sad parting was so far from making me forget you, that I scarce thought
upon my self since, but wholly upon you* Those dear embraces which I yet feel,
and shall never loose, being the faithful testimonies of an indulgent Husband,
have charmed my soul to such a reverence of your Remembrance, that were it
possible, I would with my own blood cement your dead limbs to life again, and
(with reverence) think it no sin to rob heaven a little while longer of a
Martyr. Oh my dear! you must now pardon my passion, this being my last (oh
fatal word!) that ever you will receive from me. And know, that until the
last minute that I can imagine you shall live, I will sacrifice the prayers of
a Christian, and the groans of an afflicted wife. And when you are not, (which
sure by sympathy I shall know) I shall wish my own dissolution with you, that
so we may go hand in hand to heaven. It Is too late to tell you what I have (or
rather have not) done for you; how turned out of doors, because I came to beg
mercy: the Lord lay not your blood to their charge. I would fain discourse
longer with you, but dare not; Passion begins to drown my Reason, and will rob
me of my devoire, which is all I have left to serve you. Adieu therefore ten
thousand times, my dearest dear; and since I must never see you more, take this
prayer: May your Faith be so strengthened, that your Constancy may continue;
and then I know heaven will receive you, whither grief and love will in a short
time (I hope) translate

My dear, Your sad, but constant wife, even to love your ashes when dead,
Arundel Penruddock.
May the 3. 11 a clock at night. Your children beg your blessing, and present
their duties to you.
The last letter from the honorable Colonel Penruddock, in answer to his
virtuous Lady.
MY DEAREST HEART,
I Even now received thy farewell letter: each word whereof represents unto me
a most lively Emblem of your affection, drawn with thy own hand in water
colors, to the figure of a deaths head. My dear, I embrace it, as coming first
from God, and then from Man: for what is there done in the City that the Lord
has not permitted? I look upon every line of thine, as so many threads twisted
together into that of my life, which being now woven, my meditations tell me,
will make a fit remnant for my winding sheet. Upon the reading thereof, I may
say with the Prophet, I should have utterly fainted, but that I believe verily
to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. As this is mine, my
dear, so let it be thy consolation. When I think what a wife and what children
I go from, and look no further* I begin to cry, O wretched man that I am! But
when my thoughts soar higher, and fix themselves upon those things which are
above, where I shall find God my Creator to my Father, and his Son my Redeemer
to my Brother, (for so they have vouchsafed to term themselves;) then I say
aside those relations, and do of all love, my dear, desire thee not to look
toward my grave, where my Body lies, but toward the heaven, where I hope my
Soul shall gain a Mansion in my Fathers house. I do steadfastly believe that God
has heard the prayers of my friends, and thine, and mine: and how know
thou, O woman, whether thou have not saved thy husband? Let those
considerations raise thy spirits, I beseech thee; and that for Gods sake and
mine. though I ly among the children of men, which are set on fire against me;
yet under the shadow of the Almighties wings I will hide my self till this
tyranny be overpast. The greatest conflict I have had in this extremity, was
my parting with thee: the next encounter is to be with Death; and my Savior
has so pulled out the sting thereof, that I hope to assault it without fear.
Though the Armies of men have been too hard for me, yet I am now listing my
self under the conduct of my Sovereign, and an Army of Martyrs, that the gates
of hell cannot prevail against. My dear, I have now another subject to think
on; therefore you must excuse the imperfections you find here. I have formerly
given you directions concerning my children, to which I shall refer you. May
the blessing of Almighty God be upon thee and them, and may there not want a
man of my name to be ready to be a sacrifice in this cause of God, and his
Church, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure. I shall now close up all,
with desiring you to give a testimony for me to the world, that I die with so
much Charity as to forgive all my enemies. I will join them in my last prayers,
for my friends: Amongst which, you and my children are for my sake obliged to
pay a perpetual acknowledgement. To Mr Rolls and his Lady, and my cousin Mr
Nota been. Mr Sebastine Isack although he seemed very sollicitous for Col.
Penruddock in his life, since his death has been very unworthy to his memory,
(contrary to his promise to the said Col. in his life,) and has done contrary
to the will of the dead, the trust reposed in him, the principles of honor,
and much unbecoming a Gent.
Sebastine Isack, for their great solicitations on my behalf. If I should
forget this City of Exeter for their civilities to my own self in particular,
and indeed to all of us, I should leave a reproach behind me. I will give them
thanks at my death, and I hope you and yours will do it when I am dead. My dear
heart, I once more bid thee adieu, and with as much love and sincerity as can
be imagined, I subscribe my self

Thy dying and loving Husband, Jo. Penruddock.
Exon, May 7. and the Note, when this letter was writ, Colonel Penruddock did
not know other then that he was to die the same day.
last year and day of my date, being the year of my Savior 1655.
The Speech of the Honorable Colonel Penruddock, the greatest part whereof he
delivered upon the Scaffold in Exon Castle the 16. day of May 1655. the whole
he left with a Gent. and friend of his, written with his own hand; which is as
follows.
Together with the manner of his being beheaded.
As he was ascending the Scaffold, baring his knees, and humbly bowing himself,
he used these words, This I hope will prove to be like Jacobs ladder; though
the feet of it rest on earth, yet I doubt not but the top of it reaches to
Heaven.

When he came upon the Scaffold, he said,

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? I
thank God who has given me victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Then with abundance of Christian cheerfulness he spoke to the people as
follows.

GENTLEMEN,
IT has ever been the custom of all persons whatsoever when they come to die,
to give some satisfaction to the world, whether they be guilty of the fact of
which they stand charged. The crime for which I am now to die, is Loyalty,
(but) in this age called high Treason. I cannot deny but I was at South-moulton
in this County: but whether my being there, or my actions there amount to so
high a crime as high Treason, I leave to the world and to the Law to judge.
Truly, if I were conscious to my self of any base ends that I had in this
undertaking, I would not be so injurious to my own soul, or disingenuous to
you, as not to make a public acknowledgement thereof. I suppose that diverse
persons, according as they are biassed by their several interests and
relations, give their opinions to the world concerning us. I conceive it
impossible therefore so to express my self in this particular, as not to
expose both my judgment and reputation to the censure of many which I shall
leave behind me. Because I will not put others (therefore) upon a breach of
charity concerning me or my actions, I have thought fit to decline all
discourses which may give them a capacity either to injure themselves or me. My
Trial was public, and my several examinations (I believe) will be produced
when I am in my grave: I will refer you therefore to the first, which I am sure
some of you heard, and to the later, which many of you (in good time) may see.
Had Captain Crook done himself and us that right which a Gentleman and a
Soldier ought to have done, I had not now been here. The man I forgive with
all my heart: but truly Gentlemen, his protesting against those Articles he
himself with so many protestations and importunities put upon us, has drawn so
much dishonor and blood upon his head, that I fear some heavy judgment will
pursue him. Though he has been false to us, I pray God I do not prove a true
prophet to him.

Nay, I must say more, that coming on the road to Exon, he the said Captain
Crook told me, Sir Joseph Wagstaffe was a gallant Gentleman, and that he was
sorry he was not taken with us; that then he might have had the benefit of our
Articles: but now (said he) I have beset all the Country for him, so that he
cannot escape, but must be hanged.

He also questioned me as I passed through Salisbury from London, whether he
had given me conditions. Which I endeavoring to make appear to Major Butler;
he interrupted me, and unwillingly confess't it, saying, I proffered him four
hundred pounds to perform his Articles: which had been a strange profer of
mine, had I not really conditioned with him. And I told him then (having found
him unworthy) I would have given him five hundred pounds, believing him to be
mercenary. To make it yet farther appear, I injure him not by stiling him
unworthy, after these Articles were given, he proffered to pistol me, if I did
not persuade another house to vield, which then were boldly resisting. To which
my servant John Biby (now a prisoner) replied; I hope you will not be so
unworthy, as to break the Law of Arms.

Thus much I am obliged to say to the honor of the Soulderie, that they have
been so far from breaking any Articles given to others, that they have rather
bettered them then otherwise.

It is now our misfortune to be made presidents and examples together: but I
will not do the Protector so much injury, as to load him with this dishonor;
since I have been informed, that he would have made our conditions good, if
Crook, that gave them, had not abjured them.

This is not a time for me to enlarge upon any subject, since I am now become
the Subject of death: But since the Articles were drawn by my hand, I thought
myself obliged to a particular Justification of them.

I could tell you of some soldiers which are turned out of his troup for
defending those conditions of ours: but let that pass; and henceforward, in
stead of life, liberty, and estate (which were the Articles agreed upon) let
drawing, hanging and quartering, bear the Denomination of Captain Crooks
Articles.

However, I thank the Protector for granting me this honorable Death.

I should now give you an account of my Faith. But truly gentlemen this poor
Nation is rent into so many several opinions, that it is impossible for me to
give you mine without displeasing some of you. However, if any man be so
critical as to enquire of what faith I die, I shall refer him to the Apostles,
Athanasius, and the Nicene Creed, and to the testimony of this Reverend
gentleman Dr Short, to whom I have unbosomed my self: and if this do not
satisfy, look in the thirty nine Articles of the Catholic Church of England;
to them I have subscribed, and do own them as authentic.

Having now given you an account concerning my self; I hold my self obliged in
duty to some of my friends, to take off a suspicion which lies upon them: I
mean, as to some persons of Honor, which upon my examination I was charged to
have held correspondency with. The Marquess of Hartford, the Marquess of
Winchester, and my Lord of Pembrook were the persons nominated to me. I did
then acquit them, and do now second it with this protestation, That I never
held any correspondency with either or any of them, in relation to this
particular business, or indeed to any thing which concerned the Protector or
his Government. As for the Marquess of Winchester, I saw him some twelve years
since, and not later; and if I should see him here present, I believe I should
not know him. And for the Earl of Pembrook, he was not a man likely, to whom I
should discover my thoughts, because he is a man of a contrary judgment.

I was examined likewise concerning my Brother Freke, my Cousin Hastings, Mr
Dorrington and others. It is probable their estates may make them liable to
this my condition: but I do here so far acquit them, as to give the world this
farther protestation; that I am confident they are as innocent in this
business as the youngest child here.

I have no more to say to you now, but to let you know, that I am in charity
with all men; I thank God, I both can, and do forgive my greatest persecutours,
and all that ever had any hand in my death.

I have offered the Protector as good security for my future demeanor as I
suppose he could have expected: if he had thought fit to have given me my life,
certainly I should not have been so ungrateful as to have employed it against
him. I do humbly submit to Gods pleasure, knowing that the issues of life and
death are in his hand. My blood is but a small sacrifice: if it had been saved,
I am so much a Gent* as to have given thanks to him that preserved it; and so
much a Christian, as to forgive them which take it. But seeing God by his
providence has called me to lay it down, I willingly submit to it, though
terrible to nature: but blessed be my Savior, who has taken out the sting; so
that I look upon it without terror. Death is a debt, and a due debt; and it
has pleased God to make me so good a husband, that I am come to pay it before
it is due. I am not ashamed of the cause for which I die, but rather rejoice
that I am thought worthy to suffer in the defense and cause of Gods true
Church, my lawful King, the liberty of the Subject, and Privilege of
Parliaments. Therefore I hope none of my alliance and friends will be ashamed
of it; it is so far from pulling down my Family, that I look upon it as the
raising it one story higher. Neither was I so prodigal of nature as to throw
away my life, but have used (though none but honorable and honest) means to
preserve it.

These unhappy times indeed have been very fatal to my family: two of my
Brothers already slain, and my self going to the slaughter: it is Gods will,
and I humbly submit to that providence.

I must render an acknowledgement of the great civilities that I have received
from this city of Exon, and some persons of quality, and for their plentiful
provision made for the prisoners. I thank Mr Shreiff for his favor toward us,
in particular to my self,; and I desire him to present my due respects to the
Protector, and though he had no mercy for my self, yet that he would have
respect to my family.

I am now stripping off my clothes to fight a duel with death, (I conceive no
other duel lawful) but my Savior has pulled out the sting of this mine
enemy, by making himself a sacrifice for me: And truly I do not think that man
deserving one drop of his blood, that will not spend all for him in so good a
cause.

The truth is, Gentlemen, in this Age, Treason is an individuum vagum, like the
wind in the Gospel, it blows where it lifts: So now Treason is what they
please, and lights upon whom they will. Indeed no man, except he will be a
Traitor, can avoid this Censure of Treason. I know not to what end it may
come, but I pray God my own, and my Brothers blood that is now to die with me,
may be the last upon this score.

Now Gentlemen, you may see what a condition you are in without a King: you
have no Law to protect you, no rule to walk by; when you perform your duty to
God, your King and Country, you displease the Arbitrary power now set up: (I
cannot call it government.) I shall leave you to peruse my trial, and there
you shall see, what a condition this poor Nation is brought into; and (no
question) will be utterly destroyed, if not restored (by Loyal Subjects) to
its old and glorious Government. I pray God he lay not his Judgments upon
England for their sluggishnesse in doing their duty, and readiness to put
their hands in their bosoms, or rather taking part with the Enemy of Truth.
The Lord open their eyes, that they may be no longer lead, or drawn into such
snares: else the Child unborn will curse the day of their Parents birth.

God Almighty Preserve my Lawful King Charles the second, from the hands of
his Enemies, and break down that wall of Pride and Rebellion, which so long
has kept him from his just Rights. God Preserve his Royal Mother, and all his
Majesty's Royal Brethren, and incline their hearts to seek after him. God
incline the hearts of all true English men to stand up as one Man to bring in
the King; and Redeem themselves and this poor Kingdom, out of its more then
Egyptian slavery.

As I have now put off these garments of cloth, so I hope I have put off my
garments of sin, and have put on the Robes of Christ's Righteousness here,
which will bring me to the enjoyment of his glorious Robesanon.

Then he kneeled down and kissed the block, and said thus: I commit my soul to
God my Creator and Redeemer, Look on me, O Lord, at my last gasping: Hear my
prayer and the prayers of all good people, I thank thee, O God, for all thy
dispensations toward me.

Then kneeling down he prayed most devoutly, as follows.

O Eternal, Almighty, and most merciful God the Righteous Judge of all the
world, look down in mercy on me a miserable sinner. O blessed Jesus Redeemer of
Mankind, which take away the sins of the world. Let thy perfect manner of
obedience be presented to thy Heavenly Father for me. Let thy precious death
and blood be the Ransom and satisfaction of my many and heinous
transgressions. Thou that sit at the Right hand of God, make intercession
for me. O holy and blessed Spirit which art the comforter, fill my heart with
thy consolations. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity be merciful to me,
confirm my faith in the promises of the Gospel, revive and quicken my hope and
expectation of joys prepared for true and faithful servants. Let the infinite
Love of God my Savior make my love to him steadfast, sincere, and constant.

O Lord consider my condition, accept my tears, assuage my grief, give comfort
and confidence in thee: impute not unto me my former sins, but most merciful
Father receive me into thy favor, for the merits of Christ Jesus. Many and
grievous are my sins, for I have sinned many times against the light of
knowledge, against remorse of conscience, against the motions and opportunities
of grace. But accept I beseech thee, the sacrifice of a broken and contrite
heart, in and for the sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction of thy Son Jesus
Christ. O Lord receive my soul after it is delivered from the burden of the
flesh, into perfect joy in the sight and fruition of thee. And at the general
resurrection grant that my body may be endowed with immortality, and received
with my soul into glory.

I praise thee O God, I acknowledge thee to be the Lord. O Lamb of God, that
take away the sins of the world, have mercy on me. Thou that sit at the
right hand of God, hear my prayer. O Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man, Mediator
betwixt God and Man, I have sinned as a Man, be thou me c^su^l to me as a God.
O holy and blessed Spirit, help my infirmities with those sighs and groans
which I cannot express.

Then he desired to see the Axe; And kissed it, saying, I am like to have a
sharp passage of it, but my Savior has sweetened it unto me.

Then he said, if I would have been so unworthy as others have been, I suppose
I might by a lie, have saved my life: which I scorn to purchase at such a rate.
I defy such temptations, and them that gave them me.

Glory be to God on high: On Earth peace: Good will toward Men. And the Lord
have mercy upon my poor soul. Amen.

So laying his Neck upon the block, and after some private Ejaculations, he
gave the Heads-man a sign with his hand, who at one blow severed his head from
his body.

The Speech of that piously resolved. Hugh Grove of Chassenbury in the parish
of Enford and County of Wilts Esquire, beheaded the 16. day of May, 1655. in
the Castle at Exon.
Good people,
I Never was guilty of much Rhetoric, nor ever loved long Speeches in all my
life, and therefore you cannot expect either of them from me now at my death;
All that I shall desire of you, besides your hearty prayers for my soul, is;
That you would bear me witness I die a true son of the Church of England, as
it was established by King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and
King Charles the first of ever blessed memory, That I die a Loyal subject to
King Charles the second, my undoubted Sovereigne, and a lover of the good old
Laws of the Land, the just privileges of Parliaments, and Rights and Liberties
of the People; for the re-establishing of all which I do undertake this
engagement, and for which I am ready to lay down my life: God forgive the
bloudy-minded Jury and those that procured them; God forgive Captain Crook for
denying his Articles so unworthilie: God forgive Mr. Dove, and all other
persons swearing so maliciously and falsely against me; God forgive all my
enemies, I heartily forgive them. God bless the King and all that love him,
turn the hearts of all that hate him; God bless you all, and be merciful. to
you, and to my Soul. Amen.

And so meekly laying his neck to the block, and giving a sign, his head at
one blow, and a draw of the axe, was severed from his body.

FINIS.

