A Perfect DECLARATION OF THE ARMY Agreed upon at their late Rendezvous.

Sent up to the Parliament by Sir Thomas Fairfax, on Thursday last, and certain
Propositions or particulars, wherein the Army desire to be further satisfied.

With the Protestation of Sir Thomas Fairfax. And his Orders for the security
of his Majesty's person.

Also the Copies of two Letters from the new Commissioners coming from the
Parliament to the Army, and of the further treaty, and the Soldiers Resolution.

London Printed for B. A. 1647.

PAPERS FROM THE ARMY
SIR,
I Believe before this will have the happiness to come to your hands, you will
hear that the King is come to Newmarket, which intelligence may unto you in
respect of distance of place fore-run that which was precedent in point of
time, viz.

The Declaration of the Army which by the next you will receive at large. At
the last Randezvouz the Soldiery entered into a solemn Engagement, and a kind
of League, which tends only to get grievances redressed, at which time we
understood not that the Parl. had proceeded so far, as we since are
advertized they have, for had the Army received certain knowledge of the late
Declaration upon the Oroinance of Indemnity, and some other things, there had
at least bin something altered, if not left out of the papers which were then
agreed on, and since presented to the House.

On Wednesday last his Maj. attended with two Regiments of horse went from the
L. Cuts her house near Cambridge to Newmarket, where his Maj. did earnestly
desire to reside, for though he says, he was carried from Holmby against his
mind, yet would he not return thither again, except he were forced. Whereupon
the Genesis desired to be advertised by the Commissioners, who were all sensible
of the inconveniency of the place wherein his Maj. now recided; yet said, they
could not give any advice in this business, for that their powhr was extinct
at his Majesty's being taken away from Holmby, and after some further debate
between the Commissioners, and his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax the said
Commissioners showing an approbation to his Maj. removal to Newmarket, and his
Excellency gave order to Col. Whalley, as follows:

Col. Whalley, I desire you to attend his Maj. and the Commissioners with your
own Regiment and the Lieutenant Generals to Newmarket.

Given under my hand at Cambridge, June 8. 1647. T. FAIRFAX.

Another Letter from the Army.
SIR,
AT his Majesty's coming to Newmarket, by the way as he marched thither from
the Lady Cuts house, in some Villages as he past, the people strewed the ways
with boughs, green rushes, and the like, making some acclamations of joy.

The Earl of Nottingham and all the rest of The Commissioners from the
Parliament are expected at Cambridge this night, and the General has
appointed a Randezvouz of the whole army on Triple Heath to morrow where the
whole matter of the proceeding of the Army will be set forth to the
Commissioners: there has bin great question made about the Kings being fetched
from Holmby, and some have not stvck to tell Cornet Joyce that he deserves to
lose that about his shoulders, for presuming to act what he did in that
business, the whole matter being examined before his Maj. and the Commissioners.

The General fearing some inconveniency might happen, in case his Majesty went
through Cambridge, sent to Colonel Whalley as he was on his march, to go some
other way, which was done accordingly, and His Majesty and the Commissioners
came safely thither the same night, where they found all things prepared, (as
the time would admit) for entertainment of persons of that quality.

Cambridge June 7. 1647. at 9 at night. Yours, J. H.

Certain Heads of the Soldiers Declaration and Propositions, whereof the
Papers at large were sent up to the House, enclosed in a Letter from Sir Thomas
Fairfax on Monday last.
FIrst, that they have with great hazard and difficulty faithfully discharged
their duties (as soldiers) to this Kingdom in its greatest extremity. 2. That
they desire to prevent suture inconveniences, and that there may be peace in
the Kingdom.

3. That their grievances being redressed, they shall willingly and readily
disband, or be otherwise disposed of, according to the pleasure of the two
Houses of Parliament.

4. That what has bin already acted by them this way, is for the good of the
Kingdom, and their own safety.

5. That what was agreed upon, as the Resalt of the whole Army, they will not
receed from, but that it shall be binding as the unanimous act of every man.

But more particularly the Declaration and Engagement of the army, unanimously
agreed on, is in these words, viz.

WHereas upon the Report made to the house of Commons on Friday May 21.
concerning the grievances of the Army. That house was pleased to pass several
Votes seeming to tend toward the satisfaction of the Army in some particulars,
and on the Tnesday following May 25 to pass diverse Resolutions upon a Report
from the Committee at Derby house, concerning the disbanding of the fo^^ of
this Army, We humbly declare, that the said Votes of Friday do come far short
of satisfaction to the desires proposed by the Officers in the conclusion of
their Narrative.

On Monday last, the General protested as in the presence of Almighty God,
that for his own part he knew not of the design of bringing the King from
Holmby, until notice thereof came from the Randezvouze.

FINIS.

