THE PETITION OF THE LORD MAYOR, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of LONDON in
Common Council Assembled.

Presented to the Right Honorable House of Peers, June 10th 1647.

With their Lordships Answer to the same.

Die Iovis, Iunii 10. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Petition and Answer be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Ioh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentor.

London, Printed for Jo. Wright at the King's Head in the Old-Bayley. 1647.

decorative flourish DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM TO The Right Honorable the Lords
assembled in the high Court of PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common Council
assembled.
Humbly shows,
THat as your Petitioners acknowledge the Parliament of England to be the
supreme Judicature of the Kingdom, from whom the Subjects of this Nation have
found shelter in danger, and relief in distress; So now your Petitioners
having (with the whole Kingdom) a great share and interest in these
Privileges, do therefore at this time humbly, yet earnestly present these
their important desires to this Honorable House.

I. That all Honorable ways and means may be used to prevent the further
effusion and shedding of Christian blood, and to that end that all just
satisfaction may be given to the Army and all other Soldiers who have
adventured their lives for defense of this Parliament and Kingdom; that though
the condition of your affairs do not enable you to give full satisfaction at
present, yet that their Accounts may be justed, and put into a certain way of
payment to the quieting of many thousand discontented persons; which we humbly
conceive will be much to the glory of God, the honor of the Parliament, and
quiet of the Kingdom.

II. That according to our Allegiance, the Covenant and agreement of both
Nations, his Majesty's Royal Person may be preserved, and so disposed of,
that the Parliaments of both Kingdoms may have free access unto him, that
thereby a right understanding may be obtained between them; and this tottering
Church and Kingdom after all our fears, sorrows and sufferings, may enjoy
the blessing of a well-gounded and long desired Peace, whereby this Kingdom
may be the better enabled to send speedy relief and help to miserable bleeding
Ireland.

III. That for the better defense and security of the Parliament and City, in
these tumult^ous and troublesome times, this Honorable House will be pleased
to renew so much of an Ordinance of Parliament of the 17th of January, 1645. as
concerns the raising, maintaining, and ordering of Horses, and power of
making searches (a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed) whereby the Committee of
the Militia of London, and Parishes mentioned in the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, may be the better enabled to suppress all Tumultuous Assemblies,
and to prevent any dangers that may happen to the Parliament and City. And as
this City from the beginning of these troubles have faithfully adhered to the
Parliament, so we are resolved by the blessing of God never to desert the
same, but with the utmost of our lives and estates will stand and fall, live
and dye, with the Parliament of England, according to our Covenant.

And the Petitioners shall pray.
Die Jovis, 10 Junii, 1647. THE Answer of the Lords in the High Court of
Parliament, to the Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the
City of London, in Common Council assembled.
THe Lords acknowledge the constancy of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons,
in the Common Council assembled in the City of London, to have been such, as
that you have never been alienated from your fidelity to the Parliament, by
the changes and alterations that have been in the condition of their Affairs;
They likewise do acknowledge this, your care has been the principal means
next under the Providence of the Almighty, for the upholding of the Honor and
Authority of the Parliament; And likewise for the preservation of their safety
in times of most pressing and imminent dangers; The great realitie and good
affections thus seasonably expressed by you, who represent this renowned City
of London in this your Petition: The Lords receive with gladness, and have
commanded me to return you their heartiest thanks, assuring you, that as to
the particulars of your Petition, they will put them into such a way as they
doubt not but will give full satisfaction.

Io. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

FINIS.

