A PETITION FOR PEACE, Directed both to the KING and the PARLIAMENT,

Written by One, to be subscribed by All, MEN and CHRISTIANS, as it shall
appear agreeable to MAN'S Reason, and CHRIST'S Word;

The fittest Sword (without all controversy) to decide all the Controversies
of these times.

He that loves life, and would feign see good days (again) let him refrain
him tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.

Let him eschew evil and do good.

Let him seek Peace and ensue it.

London, Printed for Francis Coals. 1642.

The first Rudiments of a Petition for Peace, most humbly beseeching his
Majesty and his Parliament,
Article 1.

Reason. Germany, then as flourishing as secure, should surely come to ruin,
because these sins were publicly winkt at by the Magistrate, and committed by
the People. Muscul. tract. de iuramento post Psalm.

Scripture. Amos chap. 1, and 2. especially transgressions known and allowed, 1 Samuel 3.13. by name those of swearing, drinking, and whoredom, of which God
complains, and for which the Land mourns, Hosea 4.2, 11.

Article 2.

Reason. Bulling. Decad. 2. sermon. 9.

Scripture. Matthew. 11.29. Therefore Brethren, you that have the Spirit) if any
be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual destroy not, but restore such
in the Spirit of meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted,
Gal. 6.1. By this mitigating way the people saved Jonathan, when the King
judged him worthy of death: and thus the King pardoned Shimei, whom some justly
thought not worthy to live, 1 Samuel 14.44, 45. 2 Samuel 19.21. on both hands the
interceding of one party abates the rigor of the other. In like cases let your
moderation be known unto all men, Phil. 4.5.

Article 3.

Reason.

Scripture. David smote him, not for threatening violence, but for touching the
Lords anointed; and Shimei is slain in the end for but railing against the
flying King: And if we vilify the King but in thought only, we shall be sure
to answer for it, Eccles. 10.20.

Article 4.

Reason.

Scripture. Sam. 19.11, 12, 23.

Article 5.

Reason.

Scripture. Judah and Israel kept two Armies on foot for seven years together,
they met but once to try it by the sword, and then with such moderate
pursuance, that but three hundred seaventy two were slain by Ioabs men, and
but thirty two by Abners, yet even that called a very sore Battle, 2 Samuel
2.16, 71.30, 31.

Article 6.

Reason.

Scripture. Gal. 6.2. (And in a case of a collection) I will not that some be
eased, and others burdened, but that there be an equallity, 2 Cor. 8.13.

Article 7.

Reason.

Scripture. Mala. 2.7. And after much disputing, in a case of Ceremonies, the
Church of God expected a determining sentence, from the Apostles and Elders,
Acts 15.3.6. The Elders were not Laymen, but Ministers of the word, Feeders of
the Church of God, Acts 20.28. Feeders of the flock of God, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. and,
The first fault of King Saul was but once stepping into the office of the
Priest, for which he was cast out of the Kingdom, and (which more is) out of
Gods favor, 1 Samuel 8.12, 13. as Vzziah for the same trespass smote with
leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26.19.

Article 8. be (according as heretofore) by the suffrage of all the Ministers
of the Land, they being left liable to exception (both of the Choosers and
Chosen) who shall be thought unmeet, for any notorious evil (of faith or life)
not slanderously imputed, but solidly proved against them.

Reason.

Scripture Numb. 16. And David is careful before hand to prevent this doubt,
that none ought to meddle with the Holy utensils, but the Levites, 1 Chronicles.
15.2. etc.

Article 9.

Reason

Scripture,

FINIS.

