A PETITION From the Town and County of Leicester, unto the Kings most
excellent Majesty.

Also an other Petition from the Grand Inquest of the same County unto his
Majesty for the removing of the Magazine

With his Majesty's Answer thereunto. Likewise certain Propositions to his
Majesty by Captain Gray and the Earl of Stamfords Soldiers touching the
Magazin.

Also a Declaration from the Knights, Es-quires, Gentlemen, Grand Iury-men, and
Freeholders, in the County of Leicester.

Ordered to be printed by special command.

London, Printed by A.N. for William Gay, and are to be sold at his shop in
Hosier Lane at the sign of the Axe, 1642. July 30.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty. The humble petition of the Inhabitants
of the Town and County of Leicester. JULY 22.
ACknowledging your Majesty's Princely protestations for defense of the
Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, (which your Highness makes the
justest measure and rule of your royal prerogative, the liberty and obedience
of your subjects as also for the peace of the Kingdom, disavowing not only
intentions of war, as opening an issue to drown your Majesty and posterity, but
also taking care that no posture should affright the subjects.

Yet we cannot but in all humility express our deep sorrows for your Majesty's
long estrangement from, and opposition to your highest and safest Council of
Parliament; on the success whereof the safety, honor, and glory of your
Majesty and happiness of your subjects does depend.

Well, we can never expect while we see Delinquents protected against the
justice of Parliament, promoted to Honor and Offices of high trust and power,
such as M. Henry Hastings, who after he had appeared in an hostile manner to
the great terror of your Majesty's peaceable subjects, and was rescued from
the Minister of Parliament, did notwithstanding (to the greater affrightment of
all and miscarrying of diverse women) came with a troop of Horse and Foot at
midnight to Leicester, demanding the Magazine, and proclayming the Earl of
Stamford and diverse others by name with all their adherents traitors, and after
all this is protected (as we conceive) and made high Sheriff, and an approved
Gentleman cast out for no other cause appearing to us then the discharging of
his duty to your Majesty and the parliament.

We are deeply affected with these proceedings, as presaging the ruin of all
at once.

Therefore we humbly pray that your Majesty's Commission of Array declared to
be so directly against Law (which your Majesty makes the rule of our allegiance
and obedience) may be recalled, That justice may impartially proceed against
all Delinquents, without which a parliament cannot subsist, That you would
cashiere all such desperate persons as would engage the Kingdom in a bloody
civil War, and abandon all the Counselors of Division, That the honor and
innocence of our worthy Knight, and the other five Members impeacht may be
vindicated, That you would join your self to your parliament, as the only way
to save our selves and bleeding Ireland, and that our M^gazine and Militia, may
remain in the hands of the honorable Earl of Stamford, who is instrusted by the
parliament. We stand resolved ever to maintain the true reformed protestant
Religion, your Majesty's person and authority* the Laws and free course of
Justice, together with the high and honorable Court of parliament, as the
Bottom wherein all is imbarqued. We are Enemies to all that divide betwixt
your Majesty and your parliament, or that have or shall affront or cast base
aspersions on that faithful Assembly, and according to our just and free
protestation, we will venture our estates and lives herein, and shall ever pray,
etc.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the great Inquest
for the County of Leicester. JVLY 23.
We do in all humbleness acknowledge that during your Majesty's Reign
hithertowe have enjoyd that which is the greatest blessing that can befall a
Nation, a stable and uninterrupted peace, your Declaration expresses your
Princely desires of your subjects peace and welfare, being therefore the
presages of blood and ruin do impend and hang over our heads, we are forced
to seek a preservative by our addresses unto your Highness, if it may stand
therefore with your Princely wisdom as we judge it stands with the peace and
safety of this County, our humble desire is that there may be a safe
distribution of this Magazine to the several Hundreds in this County to be
dispersed therein according to due proportions, and this to be done immediately
from the Magazine, That since it stands with the peace and safety of this
County it may never be reassumed but by a legal power, that the Keepers
thereof may have their liberty and protection from dangers, for discharching
their trust. Thus shall you dissolve these clouds of calamities that threaten
us and elevate us to higher hopes of peace.

And we shall ever pray, etc.
Propositions to his Majesty from Captain Gray, and the rest of the soldiers
entrusted from the Earl of Stamford, touching the Magazine.
I That there may be a safe distribution of this Magazine to the several
Hundreds in the County to be dispersed therein according to due proportion, and
this to be done immediately from the Magazine.

II That it may never be reassumed again but by a Legal power.

III That the Keepers of it may have their liberty and protection from dangers
for discharging their Trust.

Given at the Court at Leicester, JULY 24, 1642.
HIs Majesty has graciously considered this Petition, and commanded me to
return this Answer, that as the Petitioners have enjoyed hitherto the blessing
of peace under his Majesty's Government, so he has never expressed a greater
love of it, and a care to preserve it, then by his late bearing so many
indignities to avoid all disturbance of it, the which he hopes will have that
effect with his good subjects, that they will hence-forward have as great a
regard to his honor, as he to their peace, of which if all other were equally
tender, no presage of blood, and ruin would hang over their heads. For your
Magazine his Majesty has never looked upon this under any other consideration
then to preserve it for the County whose it is. And therefore upon complaint
heretofore made to him, that some persons had presumed in warlike manner to
leavy it without any lawful authority, his Majesty out of his good affection
to this County gave direction to prevent future mischief, that the same should
be restored to the disposition of those to whom it belongs, and therefore fore
well approves, that it be disposed in such manner and such place as shall seem
best and fittest to the County, in which his Majesty will not intermeddle. For
the freeing and protecting the Keepers of the Magazin or their Seconds, his
Majesty knows not the meaning of the Petitioners, if they have had a lawful
trust committed, and done nothing in discharge and execution thereof but what
is warrantable, they need no other protection but that of the Law, but if in
the violent and forcible removing the Magazine, and in the circumstances of
keeping they have done any done any thing unjustifiable, his Majesty believes
no trust boldly undertaken can excuse them, and therefore expects that this be
immediately delivered by the Keepers to the disposal of the County without
condition.

CHARLES Rex.

OUr will and pleasure is, That all our Officers and loving subjects do suffer
the Bearers hereof to pass quietly to their own houses.

Given at our Court at Leicester, the 24 of July, 1642.
WHereas the Grand Jury at the General Assizes held in the County of
Leicester, did prefer a Petition unto his Majesty for the distribution of the
Countries Magazin to be divided into every hundred, and therein dispersed into
every Town, according to the charge leavied upon them for the providing thereof.

And whereas it was also further in the said Petition desired that the said
Magazine might not be reassumed again. Therefore the Baronets, Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen, Grand Jurymen and Freeholders, etc. do hereby declare.
That whosoever shall go about to reassume or gather into one body again the
said Magazine, or any part thereof by any Authority whatsoever, shall be
adjudged, esteemed, reputed and taken to be an Enemy to, and a disturber of the
public peace of this County. And because no man may plead ignorance in this
behalf, It is agreed by all sorts, ranks, and degrees of persons abovenamed,
That this Declaration be now openly read and published, with an audible voice,
in the face of the County, at this General Assizes held for the County
aforesaid. Dated the 25 of July 1642.

The Copy of that the Grand Jury gave the Commanders of the Magazine.
WE the Gentlemen of the Grand Jury for the County of Leicester, have received
the Magazine thereof from the East gate in the Newwork, and do undertake so
near as we may, that it shall be distributed to the several Hundreds, and
therein dispersed to every Town, so near as we can equally. And that it
shall be never reassumed to our powers. In witness whereof we have subscribed
our names the 25 day of July, Anno Domini 1642. Attested by all the Grand Jury.

FINIS.

