Mr. PETER'S REPORT FROM BRISTOL, Made to the House of Commons, from Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX.

The Articles treated on for the surrender of Bristoll, with the Castle and
Forts, on Tuesday last; and with what Ordnance, Cullers, and Arms.

As also RUPERTS propositions, in the behalf of the Bishops, Prebends, and
Queristers there.

And the particulars of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAXES proceedings since the Siege;
against the false rumors of Malignants.

TOGETHER, With some intercepted Letters from Rupert, and others.

Commanded to be printed, and published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for JANE COE. 1645.

Mr. PETRS REPORT from Bristoll; made to the House of Commons, from Sir Thomas
Fairfax.
MR. Peter's came on Monday last from the Army, being sent up by the General
upon matters of great importance. Upon Tuesday morting he was called into the
House of Commons, and there he spoke to two particulars; viz. First the giving
an Account of the Armies marching to Bristoll: And secondly, what they had done
there, in order; to the taking of that City.

And for the former; There were many inducements (after they had taken Sherburn
and Romney) thither to go, rather then to the West: As, the entreaty of the
people of So^erset, which were strong; the horrid cruelty of Prince Rupert,
who began to burn all the Country behind the Army; the increasing of his
forces, whereby he might with the help of the Malignant incensed Club-men of
Dorsetshire, fall upon the Rear of the Army: Besides, he might have spoiled
most of our Summers work in these parts; and the Army feared to fall into some
other former errors, by only passing through the Country, to leave them in
worse case then they found them. But by taking Bristoll (if God would give that
blessing) the Country would be cleared from them even to Exeter.

Moreover, Rupert was far more considerable then Goring, and of more repute;
and in the West they were very slow in their rising, though all means used;
their own differences many, and if our Army had followed Goring, he had gone
into Cornwall, where the whole Country had been helpful to him, which they
denied otherwise.

To all which may be added, that Bristoll could not be assaulted in a better
time, they wanting all things for food. The Army had lain there 1^. days, and
though the Plague were in the Town, and in every Village round about, not a
soldier was tainted with it, nor above twenty men lost by all the salleys the
enemy have made.

He also reported, that he conceived great hopes (through Gods blessing) for
taking it, they being even ready for the storm at his departure; the Line of
5. or six miles compass, and the military (...) no way able to defend so
much ground; our Seamen by Portshead Fort out off, ready to help also.

The said Master Peter's being the last week commanded to preach to the Clubmen
of Sommers^t^hire, he met there on Merdiffe hill, and there about 4 or 5000.
horse and foot appeared, when he preached twice on horse back, and the issue
was a general resolution to come into us, which the next day they did about
3000. he was persuaded though this was not an omnipotent Army, yet the Lord
would own it and bless it, there being much diligence used for the taking
away evils attending such multitudes, many people mourn and shed tears in
their quarters where they part with our honest Soldiers; we very seldom hear
the least complaint against any soldiers: doubtless God is with them.

Master Peter's humble Petition from the General to the house was, that they
would please to recruit the Army to the first intention of 21000 horse and
foot, and he did hope the State would soon have a good account not only of the
West, but also of the Kingdom, notwithstanding the Kings last march, and our
brethrens departure. He left also some intercepted letters, one blasphemous
going to Oxford which is here inserted. When the iniquityes of the Ammorites
are full, Gods people fall to Canaan, let us wait and see the Salvation of God,
and pray hard for that Army, that is willing to do for you, to their utmost.

There are also some other papers, which Mr. Peter's presented to the House that
were intercepted; by some that came out of Bristoll, and elsewhere; Here
follows the Copies of two of those Letters; one from a a Colonel in
Bristoll, to the Duchess of Buckingham, and the other from Prince Rupert, to
the Clubmen.

A Copy of Colonel Crowches Letter, to the Duchess of Buckingham;
intercepted as it was carrying out of Bristoll, by a Scout of Prince RUPERTS.
MADAM,
THe last Letter I writ to your Grace miscarried but the loss was but little,
to you, seeing their was nothing at all in it worth your care, it was only to
let you know that this unlucky siege, has prevented Godson, and your most
humble Servant, from the happy Journey they intended, and in earnest I think it
will be all the mischief the enemy will do us, though by their staying here,
they may continue their malice, yet if we have your good wishes, I am sure we
can never miscary; and seriously, because without doubt there are above ten
righteous persons in this City. ( Hereby you may see what the Cavaliers fight
for; even for their Popish Mistresses: the receiving of whose blessings, they
think themselves righteous in; to serve whom, they cast off both God and man.
that is such that are wholly dedicated to your service. Pray wish us well, and
I assure you Madam, let the number be never so great, there will be none
amongst them, that is not at your devotion, then your Graces most humble and
most obedient faithful Servant,

W. Crowch.
Bristoll, Wednesday the 27. 1645.
Here follows also a Copy of a letter sent from Prince RUPERT to the
Club-men, before the siege was laid before Bristoll, or they quelled; wherein
we may see how he then carried himself toward them.

GENTLEMEN,
BEing informed of your good inclinations for his Majesty's service, and in
order to your late humble address unto him, I thought fit for me to acquaint
you with such certain Intelligence which I received from good hands, and from
persons of eminent credit, as like wise by Letters lately intercepted, wherein
you are all concerned; least by the delusive lets and subtilties of the
enemies, you may be diverted from those good resolu^ions which you have so
freely expressed, and by their fair invitations involved in an irrecoverable
ruin. The one is, that there is express comm^^d ^^me from the Parliament to
General Fairfax, by violence and force to suppress you, if by fair means he
cannot draw you from your Alegiance to adhere to him, but howsoever to seize
upon the Ringleaders, who shall and must be conceived to be utterly incapable
of their pardon, and with these particuolar expressions, To destroy the seeds
of sedition and rebellion sown by those Hollises of Wil^s in Dorset, for
presenting a Petition to have justice done, condemning injuries done by the
Garrisons to Club-men, (least it enforced them to join with the Kings forces)
which will be a great work, and of at great concern as the victory it self.
Upon these representaions I doubt not, but you will consider of your present
condition, that you cannot disert his Majesty's cause, without violence to
conscience and honor, nor yet partake in their rebellion, but with inevitable
ruin to your persons ^^d liberties, and that to be enforced upon you by those
that now court you most, and that by superior command. At which, I refer to
your serious considerations, giving you assurance that I shall not be wanting,
to do all those good offices, that shall make me really appear.

Your loving friend, RUPERT.
Bristoll this 15th July, 1645. Gentlemen, We have presumed to break up this
Letter, and are not discouraged by it, for our journey. We have speeded it unto
you, and leave it to your considerations.

George Ha^les. William Leigh. John Estmond.




Sir Thomas Fairfax having sent the last summons into Bristoll to Prince
Rupert, on Sunday night September the 7 1645. he having all things in a
readiness to storm; and intending to fall on the next morning, received
propositions from Rupert, that if he would permit him to march away with 10
piece of Ordnanc^, Cullers flying, 20 Cariages Arms and Ammunition, bag and
bagagge, and all the Soldiers and Bishops, and prebends, and Queristers,
Gentlemen and others, with a safe Conduct, that then he would deliver us
Bristoll, with all the forts and Castles, etc.

To this Sir Thomas Fairfax returned answer, that for the terms of honor, he
would do what was fitting for his degree; that is to march away with 3 piece of
Ordinance, Cullers, Arms, etc But for his other propositions viz. concerning
the protection of the Bishops, etc. he desired to be excused.

Sir Thomas Fairfax was resolved if Rupert would not agree as Monday September
the 8. that he would then storm, being resolved to admit of no delay.

Tuesday was the day nominated for the surrender of Bristoll, and Commissioners
of both side were chosen.

FINIS.

