TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader: Thou will wonder perhaps, that this Terrible Narration of a
Colloquie, so full of dread and astonishment (long since had betwixt two Kings
of England, both Deceased) should not sooner have come forth, when (in the
intervall of so Great a tract of Time) it ought rather to have been put to the
Press. But thou must know it was then strangled in its Birth (all ready fitted
by me to have come into the Light) when (the late Kings Blood yet smoking) the
Severity of the times suppressed it; Diverse also were shut up close Prisoners
least the Truth of such strange Prodigies should walk abroad with them, And
the Soldiers largely bribed who watched his Hearse, not to let any thing of
that Quality fall from them; But now it is by Gods infinite goodness (nor
unhappie (as J may say) Midwifrie of mine) that again it Resaluteth the Day,
with recommendation to be Communicatively used by the --: However to my self
the Author who was present at the late Kings Burial, and both Eye and
Earewitness of these wonders, not as vain and only forged things speaking
(like to Poets) give thou Credit and Belief; But as tracing through those Dead
Kings Colloquies (in this Kingdom filled with hellish darkness) the true and
hidden Paths of Gods just vengeance. Farewell, and as thy Brother in CHRIST,
Pray for,

Thy, etc.

NUNTIUS a MORTUIS: OR, A Messenger from the Dead.
THrough the unlimited wickedness of the London. Calvinists (the first of that
Name in England) King CHARLES being taken away, His headless Body (by order of
Parliament (not to the Royal Abbey of St. Peter in Westminster, the solemn
Buriall-place of all the Kings and Queens of England, but to Windsor twenty
miles distant from London, in HENRY the Eight's Monument) was Translated to be
interred. There was no Pomp at all to grace his Funeral, only a few Soldiers
sent to Guard his Body, which some few Nobles (with the Duke of Richmond)
waited on; where his Corpse being put into the Sepulcher, from out the
Penetrall thereof there broke a horrid Sound, which the standers by at first
amazed with much wonder; But by and by a voice attending that Noise, forced
them All into a fearful astonishment. And it is Credible, that even the
Soldiers would have taken their Heels, but that casting away all fears and
Apprehension which they had long since laid aside of either Heaven or Hell;
They resolved to hear the sequel of that Prodigy; J also who (grown Pale
with fear) had begun to fly, Recollected my Spirits, and (comforting my self
with the presence of the Soldiers, not uncovetous of Hearing what would
follow) stood my ground; And with the rest at last discovered that it was the
Voice of Henry the Eight, thus complaining with a Loud and horridly frightfull
Vocifiration.

Henricus. HO! Who is this (with Sacraligious impiety) that dares vex the so
long quiet ashes of a King so many years since deceased. This said, another
voice straight rose somewhat softer, but extremely Doleful, which seemed to be
Kings Charles his, thus Answering.


Carolus. I Am that unhappie King of England your Successor, the undoubted
Heir of Sixty two Monarchs whose Scepters sometimes swayed these Nations, and
who my Self have (now these twenty years and upwards) worn the Kingly Diadem.


Henricus. As though thou indeed had worn the kingly Diadem? Why thou have
no Head at all whereon to put it, Man.


Carolus. But I had one (oh my Grief) and very lately, though my Subjects have
rebelliously taken it from me.


Henric. Have thy Subjects then thus cruelly handled thee, oh the hatred of
both God and Men! How I pray you came these things to pass? And what
wickedness had thou done so execrable which has transported thy Subjects to
that Madness.


Garol. That Sir, I am totally ignorant of; but this I dare with confidence
affirm, That I have violated no man's Bed, have not offered force unto any on's
Daughter, driven no man from his house or Lands; of all which, yet Henry the
Eight my Predecessor is held guilty through the total universe. Let these say
who have brought me hither whether in any thing I have belied the Truth? then
paused a while as though to hear what they would say, whilst the Soldiers
(with their looks cast down) consented by their Silence to these verities. And
most true it is (indeed) what has been said; for never King since the worlds
Creation was more wicked then that Henry I speak of, as who (counseled by one
CROMWELL of those Times) either violated all Divine and humane Laws, or gave
the example to his successors of doing so. But as for Charles who is so lately
deceased (only abstracting from the Blot of Herisie) no King ever (not only of
his time) nor Private man was either naturally more equitable, more holy, or
endowed with greater Virtues, who (not finding what he said opposed) in this
manner followed on his Narration; I was criminated for defending with Arms what
peaceably (but in vain) J had endeavored) those very Laws the which my
Ancestors had left to me, and which Sixteen and upwards of years, I had
uncontroledly Ruled by and Reigned. Hereupon were there Judges appointed (by an
usurped authority of Parliament) who should sit and determine of my Head,
witnesses against me sworn and examined, who had conspired to take away my
Life; The day set down and forces brought the which should carry me to be
arraigned before their Dire Tribunal, and though I called both God and men to
witness their violation (in this proceeding) of the Laws, and that no Power on
earth was capable of judging me; as also that I took not up Arms, before that
Arms had first been actually taken against me; yet Judgment or rather the
shadow thereof) was given by which J suffered the decollation of my Head.


Henric. Oh wickedness, even seared to impudence, and of which as ages past are
wholly ignorant, so those to come will hardly ever give credit to. We have
heard perhaps of Kings and Potentates, who have suddenly been oppressed by the
Fury of a Raging and incensed multitude; But that any one (a Prince of such
High majesty) should be brought to death by the cruelty of his Subjects (all of
one and the selfsame Religion) under the color even it self of justice, and
be obtruncated by the public Hangman, (but especially not found guilty of any
crime, unless propugning his Paternall Rights.) Since Kings had being was yet
never heard of. For (that Mary Queen of Scots that Neice of mine, was most
cruelly and inhumanely Beheaded) that Elizabeth my unhappie daughter Queen of
England (and in hatred of Religion not the unnaturalness of her Subjects
brought to pass; and therefore all men have that Izabell or rather Jezabell in
veneration, as though indeed a Martyr.


Carol. Least I should seem too much to stand upon my innocence, I confess I
was to blame (although not charged therewith) when I assented unto Straffords
dying (not least guilty on my knowledge of his Charge) through the lenity of
my Nature (though unwillingly) wherefore respecting that strict Father of
justice (whose dominion is juster over Kings, then that of Kings over other
mortals) I cannot wail my Blood so spilt unworthily, who ( Pilate like)
subscribed another death, having declared him first wholly innocent in my
judgment.


Henric. Had this been the cause of thy Calamity, those other rather much
should have been punished with the loss (by Heavens just vengeance) of their
heads who Thee being innocent made thus guilty by their prejudice, and (however
against thy will and Relucting) as by the shoulders forced thee headlong
forwards into that most horrid iniquity of their judgment. Therefore some
thing there must necessarily be more which have caused this so execrable fate
to thee; nor know I why thou should here be more obtruded on me, thou thy
self can tell me any just cause why thou were stripped out of this miserable
Life by so shameful and opprobrious a death; if thou came (as such thou
boasts thy self) of Kings, had it not been meeter thou had laid thy Bones
amongst thy ancestors then trouble here my rest and quiet?


Carol. I earnestly (indeed dying) desired to have been buried in the Tomb of
my Father, but who spoiled me of my life denied that boon to me. Fearing I
believe least lying so near them, that the voice of my Blood would cry more
loud to them. But in this they have not only been inhumane to me; Many other
and most grievous indignities have I suffered in my shameful way of Dying. At
Westminster where my Self and my Ancestors (the Kings of this Nation) were
Inaugurated, was I forced to hear the Sentence of my Life from the mouth of a
silly Petty-fogger, when according to the municipall Laws, no Noble man can be
judged but by his Peers. At St. James his was I keep'd close Prisoner, whilst
my Enemies did determine of my Head, wholly cast upon their Arbitrary judging
me; a Place above all others loved by me, through the memory of my past there
Childhood, where my youth also had been harmlesly entertained with many
innocuous and most innocent oblectations. The Scaffold for my death appointed,
raised directly before the Court of my house, unto which that I might come with
more regret and also shame, even through those rooms they dragged me, where
(to honor Foreign States Ambassadors) with Royal pomp, I used and Masks
to recreate them. I beheld also (but with what sense of indignation?) his head
covered, and Eyes sternly fixed on me, Oliver Cromwell one of ordinary
extraction and (abstracting from what Fortune has reared him to) much more
despicable then the meanest of my Nobles (how much short then of the majesty of
a King) sitting umpire of my life and death. But though these things were very
grievous and deplorable, yet that one was even then death it self less
tolerable to me, when my ears (the Blood yet spinning out my veins)
swallowed in that fatal mandate from the Crier, that it should be death to
call my Son or Prince of Wales, or destine him to be his Fathers successor.
And then indeed it truly appeared, as conjectured by the wiser in the
beginning, that not the King so much as Rule displeased the Rebels, who
conspired so unanimously my death, to the end that That as well as I should be
extirpated. Yet this one thing very much consolates my Griefs, that (at least)
I have been destined to this Place, where I cannot doubt of your more courteous
reception of me, as being Nephew of your Sister the Princess Margaret, her I
mean who marrying James the fourth of Scotland, bore that Mary of whom so
lately you made mention, and she James my late Father since deceased, unto
whose Scepter she gave both England and Scotland, unto which James, I Charles
the first (as Heir unto my Father) have succeeded.


Henric. Hom, what is that J hear, and art thou that Charles then the Son of
James, to whom from me by Elizabeth that Kingdom is divolved by Succession?
art thou I pre-thee that self same Charles, and can not see how all these
evils have oppressed thee? But it seems thy eyes yet very well see not (newly
come into into this region of Darkness) No! had thou remembered how a long
while ago I drew from out that yoke my neck which in the Church I had full
20. years drawn in, after first I was anointed King; I, and defended with
both Sword and Pen too, thou would less wonder that (after 20. years
Reign) thy Subjects should have so departed from thee; Thou can not be
ignorant that amongst all the Christian Kings J was the first that ever
arrogated the Supremacy and would be cal'ed The Head of the Church, which
Titles that I might knit them to my Crown with a knot that should never be
untied, Oh! what Blood have I not shed of Martyrs? This sin of mine so long
since committed, being to be expiated by the blood of a King, both this Scepter
and monstrous Head together were at once to perish; this was long ago decreed
by the Fates, as we may judge now it is come to pass. But more then all this J
will tell you; There was a Person of great note during my Reign, of whom many
things thou can not choose but have heard, whose Name was called Thomas
Moore. This man (adorned with virtues so transcendent many ages could not match
his worth) from a Pleader (at the Bar) of the Law, and (having regard unto
his merit and Learning) I called to be Lord Chancellor of England. But I seemed
only thither to have raised him, that I might depress him from the greater
Hight; For when (following the dictamen of his Conscience) he would not own me
the Head of the Church; I commanded forthwith His to be cut off; So that
whilst Playing Calisthenes he fell into the hands of Alexander. Go thou then
now (Head of the Church) and complain, that by the Sentence of a pitiful
Lawyer Thine is also cut off from thy Shoulders. Or rather see thou not
plainly in these Prodigies the Tenor of Gods admirable Judgments? It was
grievous to thee to be a Prisoner at St. James his; where thou have so
innocently in thy youth disported thy Self; but thou minds not that I formerly
(by violence and Sacraledge) snatched those Houses from the Church, as not long
after all the Goods of the Monks, the Carthusians, Bernardins, Cestersians,
Canon Regulers, and so of all the rest; But more especially of those of St.
Benedict, whose houses and Estates I confiscated, being the most Splended and
Opulent of all the Kingdom, by an injustice till that Time not ever heard of;
wherefore as I (for that they owned me not their Head) cast in Prison many
innocent Religious, and from their Houses made them hve unto the Gallows, so
then had for thy Prison (where thou sufferedst) a house that had been
heretofore Religious, I hanged up several Abbots at their doors to give a
terror (by their sufferings) to the Monks. And what wonder, if (to the
astonishment of Kings and Kingdoms) thou have suffered at the doors of thy
Palace, an ignominious and opprobrious Death? But know thou not (over and
above) that this very Palace (the House of thy abode) was the dwelling place
of the Bishops of York, which I extorted from Cardinal Wolsey; A man
sometimes highly advanced by me, whilst serving my unbridled Lust; but whom
afterward I utterly Confounded, when I judged it for the avail of my Avarice.
Nor profaned I only the Episcopal houses to ungodly and Nefarious uses, but
Compelled ev'm themselves the Bishops (from their Obedience to the Roman Sea)
into an acknowledgement of my Jurisdiction in Church affairs, unless only who
presided over Rochester whom when neither with fair words nor menaces I could
draw into the defection of the rest, I beheaded to complete my Sacraledge.
Behold therefore if or not it were fatal and most agreeable to the Heavenly
justice, that this Head of the Church (so Admentitious) should have been cut
off before the doors of the Bishop? To give Promotion to the affairs of my
Primacy; I made me a Vicar of one CROMWELL of those Times, a man of very mean
extraction, unto whom (and he of Lay condition) both the Bishops and
Archbishops were as underlings: Now another of that name (and like descent)
Rules as absolute over all thy Nobles, and Guides the minutes of thy Life and
Death. The very same I made my Principal instrument of keeping from their
means the Church its children, and of bringing on the Baine of that Religion
so long practiced in the Times of my Ancestors) which I would call The
Reformation of the Church; I entered to this Kingdom (from my Father) when it
was Blemishless, entire, and truly Regal; nor in any thing unto any one
obnoxious, only (as fitting, in things that were Spiritual) paying submission
to the Vicar of CHRIST. Thou received'st it when strengthless and wounded,
rent, and torn from the yoke of St. Peter, (so just, so sweet and so amiable)
wholly slav'd unto the Vicars of the People, chose to govern by the votes of
the multitude.


Carol. Too too true (by the loss of my Head) have I found those very things
which thou have said to me, and now lately (unless by others allowance) that I
had nothing either of Life or Kingdoms, which was not wholly in the hands of
the Parliament, since puffed up with fond pride and contumacy (by thy Example)
I have swarved from the Church; yet feared I not the qublique Hatchet would
have struck me by the hands of Rebels, with such pomp and seared impudence at
my death, but much more dreaded Secret councels and impoisonings.


Henric. But of that thou should the least have been afraid; for the
punishment would not have answered the offense. Public sins must have
public Expiations, nor sought I corners in which to perpetrate my
wickednesses, but sinned boldly after once I had begun, only I drew indeed the
masque of justice upon the Face of my iniquities; the Supremacy (as though my
due) of the Church, unto my Self I arrogated, calling a Parliament by a Decree,
whereout I quite abolished the Roman Seas authority; I repudiated (by pretense
of Right) the woman that was my lawful Wife; the Possessions (likewise wholly
of the Clergy) under the same color, I occasioned to be confiscated;
whosoever was averse to my Supremacy (as though guilty of High Treason) I put
to Death. Wheresote when our sins (for which we worthily are punished) are
covered over with the veil of justice, no wonder if the self same vizard
likewise veil us when our selves at last we come to suffer.


Carol. But these Audacities (from their Subjects unto Kings) are the effects
of most unheard of wickedness.


Henr. I confess it, but with how much greater wickedness are those
insolences by our selves deserved? Such sin only against a mortal Prince, but
we Princes against an aeternall Deity. But you (Sir (unless a marked out
Sacrafice God so willing) for your sins enormities) could you not have
mocqu'd that arrest of Popular judgment, by your Prerogative in dissolving of
the Parliament?


Carol. I did what I could to dissolve it, but I pray hear what followed after
my so doing. The Scottish men (my natural Subjects) in hostile sort invaded
England with their Armies, whom opposing in their march at York, an humble
Book came to my hands by Kymbolton, under written by certain Noble men of my
Kingdom. --


Henric. King Henry hearing Kymbolton named after fetching first a very deep
sigh. Oh, Katherine (says he) (...) Kymbolton (that Woman of all other most
dear to me) as excelling all her Sex in virtue, whom I Banished (Heaven
forgive me) from my Bed to make place therein for that Strumpet Anne of Bollen,
afterward publicly beheaded (for Adultery) has exchanged this so hated
Life! This Divorce (against both heavens and humane Laws (to the end that I
might make it firm) made me usurp unto me the authority of the Church, when
(unless with so horrid a Sacraledge) I could not uphold the impiety of that
villainy. Hence broke upon our selves and both our Kingdoms, the inundation of
all these pressing miseries.


Carol. When (holding forth Kymboltons Book) from this says he, as by one
wave of a Deluge has also flowed the total Sea of my disasters; for
unadvisedly (O my grief) I condiscended (they so craving) to a Treaty with the
Scots, in which J bound my self firmly to make Good what in my name, should
(by my Delegates) be agreed upon. These Deputed (O imprudent Drones or rather
indeed perfidious Traitors) gave concessions to the insidiating Scots to take
strong Holds into their hands within my Kingdom, till such time as by my Kingly
authority the Parliament (then dissolved) should be revoked. Writs therefore I
accordingly issued forth, The Scots are most Liberally gratified, nor do they
suffer them sooner to leave England, then that first J had engaged my Princely
Faith (by a writing under my Hand and Seal (this Hamilton also unhappily
Counseled me, that unfortunate kinsman of mine) not to anull the said new
Sessions of Parliament, till such time as they should all thereto assent.


Henric. Oh, stupiditie or rather extremest Madness. Did thou not see when
to thy stiffe-neck'd People thou Granted this, that thou putt'st a final
Period to the sway of thy Kingly Authority? This was one and the self-same
thing, as if thou had given into the hands of the Parliament thy Scepter and
thy Princely Diadem; on condition not to have them again until such time as
they should please to restore them Thee; But much otherwise should I have
handled mine; Though now it is as clear as noone day, that the measure of my
Sins has been made-up in Thee, by Thy unhappie Participation of my Schisms,
and that (by blinding the eyes of thy mind (in Propitiation of the offended
Dietie) Gods just vengeance has brought on Thee destruction. -- Whom God will
destroy he takes away their Right understanding. But when once it was come to
that pass, Thou should have gained (at least) the Parliaments votes unto
Thee, by giving Honors to them and other vast Largitions.


Carol. Even that in what I could I attempted. But much otherwise (God he
knows) it come about; For my Catholic Nobility and Bishops (whose votes I
most relied on in Parliament) were ejected by the adverse Faction. They were
both indeed very Passionate for my good; the Catholics as hoping I would
mitigate the asperity of the Laws in Force against them, by Queen Elizabeth's
and my Fathers constitutions; The Prelates also as probably expecting a
conservation of their Means and Benefices (then threatened in another way)
From this Head of theirs (O God) how ridiculous! Having lost thus in the House
of Lords (for the Lower was of little consideration to me) more then twenty and
upwards of Suffrages, who remained more indulgent and Firm to me, were
intimidated (thereto Books cast abroad) by the tumultuousness of the
Apprentices and Tradesmen, which Seditions the adverse party of the Parliament
with all the eagerness that they could, fomented. At Westmiaster also
scandalous Books were written against me, at the pleasure of those
Parliamentary Rebels, which (their Emissaries far and near dispiersing them)
by some Provincials (thereto courted) were Subscribed, and exhibited suddenly
after to the Parliament, as though (nothing on their part suggested) the whole
matter had by the People been exacted.


Henric. The very selfsame Fraud and Collusion did I practice to the Church
its ruin; For first of all (by writs and declamations) who were Refractory of
the Clergy I indulged, in doing whereof I pretended Reformation, and not ruin
which was really my Design (like your Rebels, who in the beginning of their
Defection even by Oath and Public Faith obliged themselves, not to attempt
against your Person, Realms or Church, but to defend them with their utmost
power) though however of some Defects in Church and State (by removing from you
certain evil Counselors) they seemed to pretend a Reformation. And least any
thing should have the face of Oppression which I did, I procured certain
Books to fly abroad with whose Sense I was very well pleased, which the Monks
in their own names should write to me, near according to this following
Tenor. --

SInce the goodness of GOD (with your Highness concurrence) has so wrought,
that in these Later days (the Darkness of Times past dispierst) a new and
veritable Light has appeared unto us; We heartily and humbly make Request,
that you will free us from this Cloistered slaverie (the very path unto most
certain Perdition) and restore us to our Spiritual liberty; for which doing
(to express our Gratitude) we (freely and not any ways enforced, whom nor
fear nor yet collusion Draws thereto) Give you all our Houses, Goods and
Lands, nay Jurisdiction to be your own for ever. -- These Books I dispierc'd
through all the Monasteries, and Commanded that every one should subscribe
them, who would not to be forthwith hanged. But especially all the Abbots and
Superiors, that the rest might by their suffering be intimidated; so that
diverse through the fear of death (as though really from their proper motives)
were induced to underwrite these Papers.


Carol. I have signed also many things constrainedly, and (what is worse) been
forced to swear I did so willingly. But so far was this my easiness from
availing me (especially about the City of London) that (after all whatsoever
they asked me I had given them with a full compliance) they still more and more
increased their tumults; and observing all my Castles, Strengths and Navy,
taken from me (with the total Militia) it was then (when no means else were
left me) that I betook my self first unto Atmes, whereby to Guard my life, my
Crown, and my Dignity; wherefore (setting up my Kingly Standart) the most
faithful of my Subjects fly to me, whose numbers in short time so increased
that I waged seven war with the Parliament. During which time it was
Remarkable to see how (more then others) the Roman Catholics flocked to me,
and (for my good) exposed their Lives and fortunes. Those to wit who were
formerly traduced (by the obloquies of most slanderous Calumniators) as
suspected to both King and Kingdoms, for refusing of the oath of Allegiance)
in which point they never yet were found defective) though falsely therefore
called Recusants, but which also exacted from their Consciences an abjuration
of the Popes authority, and an acknowledgment of my Spiritual Supremacy, these
very men I say, though they took not that Oath, yet (unsworne) they never
stuck at any thing in the which they might be Loyal to me and faithful. But
the Covenanters (call them Protestants or Puritanes (what did they (though
against their Oaths, and highly abjuring any such kind of Practice) but even
Tooth and nail bend all their forces to deprive their King of Life and
Dignity. Nor wanted these their Plots at last success; For (money falling short
to pay the Soldiers (whom I therefore was constrained to dismiss) being my
Self of all things destitute to extremity) I was glad (as to my very last
refuge) to betake my self wholly to the Scots. But (oh unheard of and most
shameful perfidiousness!) those sold me to who would give most for me, by
which means thus tossed from Prison to Prison, these miseries as you see have
overwhelmed me.


Henric. I wonder not (by the Parliaments authority and insinuations) that some
of thine have left thee; But how comes it, that thy Countrymen the Scots
have taken Arms against thee, joining with thy Enemies?


Carol. This threefold defection (by the Scots) was indeed my utter ruin and
overthrow; for if only I had contested with the English (by the aid of other
faithful of my Subjects (more in number very many then the Rebels) as well in
England as also in Ireland, I should easily have made good my Prerogative. But
the Scots (on this occasion) fell from me. I fancying (forsooth) as Head of the
Church, that it belonged most peculiarly unto me, that not only the same tenor
of Faith, through the extent of my whole Dominions, but the same Service also,
Rights and likewise Ceremonies, should be uniformly in the same observed (the
Archbishop thereto most of all exhorting me, whom I Reverenced as though indeed
some Patriarck) I commanded the Book of Common Prayer (a Form of thy Son
Edwards first composing) and the Surplice to be used by the Scots, who had not
any either Public form of worship, or other decency of Ornaments in their
Church, but (as now it is the fashion at Geneva) every one Babbl'd as he
pleases his own impertinencies; strictly threatening with Exemplary punishment
who thereto should not yield due obedience; which the people of Scotland
observing, and that already it was put in practice, cried out Popery is now
violently Forced upon us. Then tumults day by day increased, which the Calvanist
Ministers fomented, who consulting the Puritanes of England (especially Hambden
the chief of that faction) jointly brought in the Scots upon this Nation (then
in Peace) who with their Armies invaded it. This incursion (so rebellious) of
those Traitors (like a River when its Banks are broken down) overflowed my
total Realms with Sedition.


Henric. Is it not as clear then (tell me Charles) as Noone day, that our
(...) affecting Church Supremacy has confounded us (...) which now thou see


Carol. Very true it is nor void of reason for so being; yet do I not reach
how all those evils rather ceiz'd not thee (the first invader of the English
Primacie) who (conventing all the States of thy Kingdom, caused this Title of
chief Head of the Church to be confirmed upon thy Self and thy Successors)
Then poor me who have but keep'd (and that too peaceably) what my Ancestors
by their wills had left to me.


Henric. Oh Charles, how art thou grossly deceived if thou think J do not
share in thy misfortunes? No Sin yet ever escaped unpunished, nor was impunity
ever allowed to wicked persons. And to pass by what now at present I suffer)
what tortures did not then distort me, when my Executioners were those three
Manspillers Avarice, Cruelty and Lust. -- And as for avarice so unsatiably it
reigned in me, that having subverted 376. Religious houses, and snatched away
their Lands and Goods (by an Edict to that purpose which I made) scarcely one
year had yet been fully gone about, before I vexed with such high Taxes all my
Subjects as had never been before from them exacted, by which morsel now made
keen and fleshed (as it were) not long after (oh how rich and Opulent!) I
confiscated what remained o'th Church revenues, in the interim I gave hopes
unto the Laytie that those goods of the Church would go so far with me, as
to free them for ever from exactions; a Hearing so grateful to the People,
that they impensly for it favored my abreptions? But so fooled they were in
these their expectations, that I alone a little after more oppressed them, then
in fifty years before my Predecessors, after I had spoiled and razed a
thousand Churches taken all unto my use that belong unto them, all their Coin,
and Sacred vessels robbed them of, Brass, Lead, Shards, Seelings, nay even the
very Rubbish set to sale (with all else vendible) besides two Chests from out
the Church of Canterbury (so massy scarce four men could carry one of them)
so well cramb'd they were with Gold and precious Stones) after all (I say)
these things had been thus robbed by me, J was reduced unto such very great
indigence, that whereas I mixed at first but two of Brass only, with ten ounces
(by my Edict) of good Silver, I afterward with two of current Silver mixed ten
ounces of adulterate Brass; thus tortured (as you see) with endless Avarice;
nor less roughly by my cruelties handled; -- For full 20. years at least
together (whilst I lived in the Communion of the Church) no one ever of the
Kings shed less Blood, in all which time two only suffered of my Nobility; But
afterward when I fell from the Church (not more thirsty of Gold then of Blood)
of all conditions, all Ages, and all Sexes I exhibited a most fearful
Massacre. And that upon no other Demerit but that only they withstood my
voluptuousness. Four Queens (with either Steel or Imprisonments) I took
away which were the Consorts of my Bed, two young Princesses, and also two
Cardinals (proscribing in his absence, the Third) who was very near in Blood
to me allied. Dukes, Marquesses, Counts or Sons of Counts at least a dozen I
put publicly to death; Barons, Knights Bannerets, or Knights to the number of
20. wanting two, Abbots and Priors 13. Priests and Religious 77. of lesser
rank and of the vulgar infinite. And (whilst belching thus on all sides my
cruelties) the faithfullest of my Subjects most feared me, as witness that most
horrid Catastrophe of Cardinal Wolsey, of Cromwell, and the Bullens, of the
Howards, of Norrice, and lastly Compton. But as for Lust so very insatiably was
I lost in it, that divorcing my best and lawful Wife, I saw not any thing of
that Sex the which I burnt not for, nor scacely did I lust that woman whom I
one way or other did not violate. Was it not also for the punishment of my
Sins, that your Father and your Self have reigned in England? Who left nothing
on my part unattempted, which I could think of to hinder your succession, that
I might fix it by a masculine Birth unto the house of which my Self was
descended? Two wives I forced unjustly from my Bed, and as many made to quit
this Life; The fifth (who fell in troublesome Labor) I commanded to be ripp'd
up alive, to the end to save the Infant which she went with, thus barbarously
and inhumanely adding; That it was easier to get more wives then children. The
6.th I also afterward married (whom when thinking to have spilt, my self J
perished). Yet (for all this my caring for Posterity (during fifty years time
of my Life) no one ever lived long of my Survivors. A Boy indeed (of Nine
years old) succeeded me in the usurped Supremacy, little knowing how to
Govern himself, but much less the helm of Church jurisdiction, who had also
first departed this Life before attaining to his youthful age. Mary also my
legitimate Daughter (who cast out Herisie) entered afterward to the Crown, of
whose Child I could have very well hoped (five years married to the Catholiqe
King) But that God (the just revenger of Homicides, Rapes, Incests and likewise
of Sacraledge) barred my seed from inheriting the Earth, nor in vain are his
words or to be laughed at (thus importing) that the days of the Sons shall be
cut shorter for the Fathers offenses, -- She dying soon after without issue,
this Empire was translated into thy Line; But Elizabeth that illegimate
Daughter of mine (begot in incest, and judged incapable of Governing by the
Parliament, and my Self thereto assenting) stepped however into the Kingly
throne, and would be called forsooth) the head of the Church by my example,
under whose womanish Popeship at least a thousand suffered death for being
Priests. But ridiculous is that Head which has no Tongue; and a Woman (as the
Apostle averreth) is not allowed to speak in the Church, yet is it admirable
to see with what audacity she took upon her to usurp the Church of God, who
Missioning (with a womanish solicitude) her Ministers for the Planting of the
Gospel, sowed the seeds (as yet we see here in England) of a multiplicity of
sowre-levened Herisies. And (after 17. years keeping her Prisoner) she had
cut off the head of thy Grandmother, doing acts of most unparalleled cruelty by
the example of my former Tyrannies, she descended without into --. Thus (in the
first Generation) ended my Progeny, so true it is what the Kingly Prophet
said, That the seed of the wicked shall perish, Psalm. 37. and accordingly in
another place, Their fruits shall be extirpated from the Earth and their seed
from the Sons of men. I have been admonished by very woeful experience of the
truth of this Prophets saying. So (to wit) it has pleased the Almighty to
laugh at the Councels of men. And this Reason the same Prophet superaddeth, For
they contrived Councels which they could not make good, Ps. 29. For there is no
Council which will stand against God, Prove. 21. -- as too too late (and to my
cost) I have found true, would thou yet be more confirmed of these sad
verities? Unto Edward (when I died) my Son, I left twelve Turors all reputed
Catholics, and (abstracting from the Supremacy only (which I desired he
should keep in his hands) commanded he should be otherways bred up
Catholic. All Herisies this only excepted by my Will I wholly excluded and
abolished. But (as violating the Wills of my Ancestors, and subverting what they
built and Consecrated, (so many Temples and monuments of Religion) I deserved
not that my own should be observed; Amongst the rest the Duke of Somerset was
one (Uncle to Edward the sixth by the Mother) who (at my Death) I did as
Guardian prefer to him. He infected (and my Son by him, with Herifie) brought
in that (which most I Hated) of the Sacrament, which Queen Elizabeth (after
both) Confirmed. A Monument I appointed for my Ashes much more sumptuous then
ever any of my Ancestors, and yet hitherto I have failed of the same; (though
alone of all the Kings of Great Britain; Three children have in order
succeeded me; Nor need I fear (now those are dead) to be forgotten, who (for
my wickedness) shall aeternally be remembered. I am the mark of all men's hate
of all conditions. To the Catholics by good reason odious, cutting England
from the Communion of their Church; abominated no less worthily by the
Religious, as whose Families I have destroyed and sold their Goods. Equally
execrable to the Church and Laytie; as first raising over the whole Body of the
Catholics, that Persecution which to this hour afflicts them. The
Heriticks even to death detested me (still pursuing them with fire and sword)
Luther called me a stall-fed Ox, and very often a most inhumane Tirant; Calvin
drew out the sword of his Pen against my Title of the Head of the Church, which
(so monster-like) to my Self J had arrogated; and marked me out by the Dint of
his writings, as one destitute of both fear and shame, in relation to both God
and men. All the Literate will perpetually hate my memory, that I should root
out and totally destroy so many monuments of Antiquity and Learning, such as
scarcely in the world are to be Paralelled. To conclude whilst I lived, the
most did hate me, every one feared me, and scarce any one loved me. In my Later
days (by the Furies of my Conscience agitated, like to Orestes) I would feign
have incorporated with the Church all those Kingdoms which I had torn from
its Obedience (and in whatsoever I was able) I endeavored a reparation of
those wrongs I had done my wife. This at last in some sort I provided for,
giving caution by my last will and Testament, that (if Edward my Son should dye
issuelesse) my Daughter Mary whom I had before dis-inherited (borne of
Katherine) should succeed me in these Kingdoms. Oh, how often have I talked
with my Familiers, about this first (to wit) of bowing to his Holiness, and
being received again into his Grace and Favor? But having formerly cozened
diverse by those Arts, none would trust me (as being by all suspected) whom they
eluded (as though seeking to entrap them) Thus abandoned and forsaken by every
body, I departed out of the Communion of the Church (these last words before my
Death ingeminating) All is marred, -- All is marred, -- Monks, -- Monks, --
Friars, -- Friars, -- my Burial was just like that of Achab, in the ruins of
a Religious house; for when my Body was conveyed hither (even a Dunghill
through over-eating and Oppletion) the Lead (in which it was wrapped) unhappily
unsawdering, as it was set down within the Ruins of this house, where while a
Plumber (in all have, to help it) ran this way and that way for materials) his
Dog licked up my Blood most greedily. A revenge for that of Priests and
Religious which I shed (Oh God) how just and deserved a one? Do thou not see
Charles how in my Person thus suffering, God has warned thee that I departed
not unpunished?


Carol. These are things very grievous indeed, and which deserve to be well
pondered to all aeternity.


Henric. But though these things may seem to mortals very grievous, yet (in
comparison of what I suffer in Hell) they are mere trifles, and not worthy to
be commemorated. For (besides what I have merited by my own) whatsoever I have
sinned against another, what innovations I have forced upon Religion, superadd
unto the increase of my torments; inasmuch as (by my usurping the Supremacy) I
opened a Gap to all the mischiefs of Heresies. Wherefore as
(superadditionally) I am here tormented, by the arrival of any new come
Ghosts, so is it just (since the afflicted comfort the afflicted) that those
very same, should have a share in my punishments who have maintained and keep'd
on foot my Errors, as thou have done; who (though the scourge of heavens just
Ire, has these ten years through three Kingdoms closely followed thee, and
that too chiefly (for thy hatred to Religion) yet have thou breathed (with thy
last Breath) a disobedience, to the authority of the Sea of Rome (thy Bishop so
of London persuading thee) nay moreover not the Primacy only which I left thee
(but new Errors (introduced by Queen Elizabeth and thy Father) did thou
strive to uphold (of Prince Edward I here wittingly am silent) and (if other
things be true which J have heard) thou stampd'st thy Coin also with the
inscription of Protestancy.


Carol. Oh Heavens, that That fatal Protestancy had never been hatched at
least not come unto my Ears! It began (about thy time) in Germany when (the
followers of Luther were called Protestants) whence it afterward passed into
England. And as Queen Elizabeth (oh Henry) and my Father, were the first of all
those that went before them who protested thy Religion in these Kingdoms,
whereupon has come this name of Protestant. So (soon after) rose the Puritan
faction, or the Calvanist, who impugned both the other, and our Rituall (or
Book of Common Prayer) set in force with the 39. Articles. Which (subverting
all Episcopal jurisdiction) does yet glory in being called Protestant.
Afterward springs a Sect of Independents which protests against the three that
went before, these are divided into hundreds of other ^^^e^te^malion and
new-broach'd Opinions, which yet all will needs be termed Protestants, and
perhaps as many more there will yet rise (from out the Hydra of this unhappie
Reformation) which will always be impugning one the other. Heaven grant that
with the milk of my mother I had also sucked in the Religion of my Ancestors;
for my Grandmother not only dyed Catholic, but shed her Blood in the defense
of that Religion. But, as others may condig'nly have been punished, for
introducing or promoting of Errors; For vexing with much cruelty the
Catholics, and usurping or maintaining this Supremacy, I certainly never
innovated Religion, of all others have bin mildest unto Catholics, nay even
next of all acceded to their Tenants. In fine I have exerciz'd this Supremacy,
with a moderation surpassing all the rest, and (by reason I did not judge it
fitting, or becoming any Lay-mans undertaking) The whole charge thereof (at
least the greater part) J recommended to the Archbishop of Canterbury.


Henric. But have thou not observed that (of the whole English Episcopacie)
only Canterbury in these troubles lost his head? (both Documents of the highest
instruction!) Thou, for Kings; and, that Patriarch, for Prelates; who (if their
Heads they would have stand upon their shoulders) must not make themselves
Heads of the Church (by hereafter prejudicing the Roman Jurisdiction) but what
availed it thee to have approximated unto Popery, unless thoroughly thou had
embraced that Faith; for it suffices not to stand in the Portch, unless thou
enter into the bosom of the Church. Moreover many (in these gulfes below the
Earth) are much more grievously Tormented and vexed, because they knew but have
not exerciz'd the Truth; that (in some things) King Agrippa was a Christian,
was not sufficient to work his Salvation; No (for that thoroughly he was not
converted by Paul) he now burns with me in aeternall flames, did I not my
Self sometimes profess that Faith in all particulars (only abslracting from
the Popes Supremacy) but Sinning in that one sole defection, I am guilty of all
those other Abominations. But he that spared not Paul his incredulity (doing
things of which he then was ignorant) will not spare this most execrated Head
of mine, who have wittingly, nay and willingly perished. But how frivolous is
that which thou pretendest to extenuate the malice of thy crime, when thou
faist thou did not exercize the Supremacy, only left it unto Canterbury to
do it. As though indeed thou had not Exerciz'd that charge whereunto thou
had deputed another? Nay more, I hold that Strafford lost his Head (so
Provided by the aeternall Justice) for that also He then carried thine (as
being thy Vicar) in the Church of Ireland.


Carol. As I have not wholly been exempt from all fault, so having (proceeded)
much more moderately in the Supremacy, and promoted more the Peace of the
Church, then all these others (who have passed before me) I would feign know
why I am the most of all punished?


Henry. Thou have not observed (it seems) that jealous God (who punishes in
the Child the Fathers faultiness) how he scourges the impieties of the wieked,
to the third and also fourth Generation, least (if only he should scourge us
in our selves) we might think that any enormions impiety, would be easily and
more suddenly expiated, nor deferres he to punish till so long after, that his
memory who sins should die, but least it should be forgotten that he was
punished for sinning; Thou art the third now (from the cradle of Schism) who
has reigned King, in which Generation thou suffer; For though my two
Daughters (first Mary then Elezabeth) have Successively inherited the Crown,
yet those two with their Brother King Edward (who was my Son) make up but one
Generation; if you number therefore either the Kings or Generations; -- Edward
me, James him, and thou James, have successively and in order followed; nor
has it happened (but by the hand of God) that the heavenly vengeance should
have fallen upon thy head (the most innocent and moderate of all the rest) To
show that not so much thy private Sins have been chastized by his Rod of
Justice, as the Hereditary evils of thy office, with what impieties still
attend thy Titles, -- as it is said, -- The fathers have eaten sower Grapes and
the Teeth of their children have been set on edge, Ezekiel. 18. Which take not as
though Children entirely innocent should be overwhelmed by their Fathers
faultiness; For the Soul that sins it self shall Dye. But that such who are
less faulty, nay even innocent (as it were) in comparison of their Fathers
crimes) do yet suffer often something of their merit. For if that punishment
had happened in the time of any wicked and luxurious Prince, I should not have
sought for its infliction any where else; then from the crimes of such a
Trus'd-up Potentate. But that my Subjects (who style themselves Protestants)
should (by taking off thy head) thus punish thee whom thy very Enemies cannot
asperce with any crime, came not indeed by any other way to pass, but through
that Capital transgression of our Pride, in presuming to be Heads of the
Church; and as I was the last of my name both King and also Head of the Church,
so thou (Oh, too too unfortunate Charles) art the first of thy name that ever
Reigned, and the last that shall be Head of the Church.


Carol. I feel indeed the judgments of God to have fallen very heavily upon
me, for as out of one false Principle in Faith many absurdities arise of
Opinions, so out of one unhapple Apostacy from the Church, many others have
followed after at the heels, which the newer and more recent that they are,
the more dangerous, and more to be took heed of. Thou began'st others increased
that Sacraledge, which when (afterward) some had fully perfected, I at last bore
the Heft of all, Thou (tearing from the Roman Obedience thy people and Bishops
of England) would be accounted (J, and were) independent; and the Head of
the reformed Church? Now a Sect of Independants has broke out (God revenging
so the Sin of thy Sacraledge) who regarding neither King nor Bishops, first
took off my Spiritual head, then my own Cut and severed from my shoulders;
one Cromwell in thy time then lived (of thy Cabinet and most secret Councels)
who persuaded thee (a King) to spoil the Church; now another of that name (and
not unlike him) forced the People to destroy their King; Oh how just are the
judgments of God and his ways inscrutable. For (if not sooner in our selves)
in our Posterities, shall we at last be punished in that very kind in the which
we have offended. Oh, God that whilst I lived in this world, I had seriously
pondered these things, at the least (when so much leafure sometimes served me)
in the time of my most tedious imprisonment! Happy man had I paused upon the
series of Gods judgments (from above so threatening me) in the ama^itude and
bitterness of my Soul; I had leisure (indeed) to dally with my Pen, and write
a Book of other things, a whole one, as my Armies how they came to be
destroyed, of the miseries and distresses of my Life, and the insolences those
especially of the Soldiers, but never once called to mind those very things
which I should most of all have printed on my thoughts. Oh, Juxonius (so I
called the Bishop of London) or else Lawd my faithful Counceller and friend,
why have neither of you admonished me of these things, either by Letters, or
Friends that did commune with me; for being three years a Prisoner before my
Death I had time enough to think of all these things, But they had Eyes and
they could not see. Oh, how Blind were all these that saw me, and well may
what follows be applied to us; At Length we Phrigians (but too late) grew wise.


Henric. This also I would have men duly Ponder, how the Parliament (the very
name whereof's so Idol'd (especially by the effacinated English) is devolved
now into a Lower house, both the Bishops and the Lords Ejected) in whose Votes
was once the total Authority, the House of Commons being not any thing
regarded. A just punishment indeed for their flattering me into a presumption
of being Head of the Church, who themselves are now all trodden under foot
(sometimes sitting as the Heads of Parliament) And this by that third Order
(without order, unto which they are so shamefully subjected). For England (as
now plainly it appears) from a Paradise is translated into a Hell, in which
no Order but perpetual horror inhabiteth, where A man strong in Arms keeps
our Court and holds peaceably his usurped Possessions. This third Order being
grown to that height, that Kingly Government which had its Period in thy Fate,
unless by Miracle can never hold up its Head. -- Hence learn O ye Kings to
be wise, and take instructions you that Judge the Earth.

The Soldiers (then at hand) of CROMWELL, understanding this hard fate of
Monarchy, which should hardly ever rise from out its Ruins took good heart,
and (with great noise and laughter) ran in crowds from out the Church of
Windsor, each one glad that he had lent a hand (by cutting off this head of the
Church) to the execution of the Heavenly justice. But not knowing or less
(happily) Ruminating, that the Father (oft-times) burns the Rod with the which
he does chastise his Child.


IN MALEVOLOS HUJUS Narratiunculae obtrectatores.
ZOILE, ne laceres morsu mea scripta canino,
Neve meris dicas omnia suta dolis:
Extimus historiae cortex (volo) fictus habetor;
Vera sed huic intus ligna subisse scies.
Istaque corporeis licet auribus invia nostris,
Mentis at internis sensibus hausta putes.
Eia, age, mendacem me, carptor inepte, Poeetam
Occine: narranti res dabit ipsa fidem.
R. P.
ZOILVS desist (with Currish Teeth) to tear
This work of mine. Nor it as (merely) jeare,
Made up of Frands. The outmost Bark (indeed)
Is Fiction. But Truth dwells in the inside.
And what The Ear struck not outwardly, That (know)
Our Minds most inward sense both Heard and Saw.
Cease Critic then, nor sing my Book has Ly'd
That story will find Faith, which Truth does write.
G. T.
An Extract out of the 8. Centurie of Michael Nostrodamus his Prophesies,
Stroph. 71. Printed the year, 1603. in the beginning of King James his Reign,
Father of King Charles late deceased, touching the Government now at present in
England.

A Warrier not a King shall England awe,
One Low-Borne shall by Force that Empire Sway:
Loose, Faithless, Lawless, shall the earth begore,
Whose Time's so near at hand; I sigh therefore.
Glory be to GOD.
FIN.
1660.
CaroLVs Del GratIa AngLIae ReX SVCCefsIVe seCVnDVs RegnabIt seCVrVs et tVtVs.

Crouogramma Restaurationis CAROLI Secundi hoc ipso Anno 1660. -- E Numericis
Alphabetae Literis ex eodem Diductis. --

CCCCC.D.D.LL.X.VVVVVVVVV.IIIII.

1660.

Auspiciis Adsit Numen vivatque Reversus.


