THE PETITION OF THE General Council OF OFFICERS Under the Command of His
Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, To the Right Honorable the COMMONS of ENGLAND
assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the total and universal taking away of
Free Quarter, and other burdens of the Commonwealth, and for the Relief of
Ireland.

Together with the ANSWER and several VOTES of the Parliament to the same.

Also a List of all the Officers at the General Council when the Petition was
read and approved of.

SIgned by the Appointment of the General Council of Officers of the Army,

JOHN RUSHWORTH, Sect'



London, Printed for John. Playford, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Inner Temple, March 3. 1649.

Mr Speaker,
THe Petition herewith sent, being unanimously agreed unto by the Council of
Officers of the Army under my Command, and finding the things therein to be
just and necessary, in order to public good, J thought fit (with my
concurrence in it) to present it to you, desiring you would take the
particulars into a speedy and effectual Consideration; J remain,

Your most humble Servant, Tho. Fairfax.
Queen Street, 2. Mar. 1648.
For the honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Right Honorable the
Commons of England assembled in Parliament.
To the right honorable the Commons of England assembled in Parliament;
The humble Petition of the General Council of Officers of the Army under the
Command of his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax.
HAving observed (with much satisfaction) how God has desposed your hearts to
accomplish diverse things (of greatest consequence in reference to his glory and
the public good of this Nation) for which we have long waited; and that
himself has also owned you therein, which we do with all humility and
thankfulness acknowledge: And having had a due and serious regard to the
greatness of those works you are now about, and a care also, lest we might seem
unthankful, or impatient, upon endeavors so constant and eminent; And being
(indeed) most desirous, that those things which relate unto our selves
(although very nearly) should yet bring up the rear of our desires to you: We
have hitherto been very tender in re-minding you of any further particulars in
order to the Peace and Settlement of the Commonwealth, or Army, lest by that
means we should either hinder or distract your Proceedings. But whilst matters
of public Justice and near concernment to the Nation, have been put in
execution by you, we conceived that we should be much indebted to the duty we
owe unto God, and our native Country, if we should neglect the consideration of
some things (comparatively) more remote, yet of much concernment also: Now, as
we humbly conceive those things that are most necessary for the easing and
removing the present burdens of the Commonwealth, and for the satisfaction of
those that have served you faithfully, are most properly, safely, and
satisfactorily to be provided for by you, who are the supreme Authority of the
Nation; so we could not find any way to avoid the imputation which might
justly be cast upon us, if (by our neglect, and omission of any things
necessary for us to represent) any ill consequence should have followed; We
therefore humbly offer these following particulars to your serious
consideration.

1. That Free Quarter may forthwith be totally and universally taken away. 2.
That a speedy and effectual provision may be made of constant pay for the Army
(whilst they are kept up,) whereby the Soldiery may be enabled to live upon
their pay, and avoid that pest of Free Quarter, which (without any other Enemy)
must unavoydably ruin the Commonwealth. 3. That all persons, of what degree
or quality soever, who have been employed in public Receipts of Money, Plate,
or Goods, and are any way chargeable and accomptable to the Commonwealth, may
be brought to a speedy and exact Account; and that persons of known integrity
and ability may be appointed for that purpose, which (we humble conceive) may
be one expedient for the ends aforesaid. 4. That the many great abuses which
the whole Nation, and we in particular daily suffer by clipped money, may be
speedily redressed, and that all those who make it the practice to buy up such
money underhand, and then put it off at the full value, may be brought to
exemplary punishment. 5. That the Accounts of all the Officers and Soldiers,
who faithfully served, and constantly adhered to the Commonwealth in this or
any other Army, County and Garrison, since the beginning of this War, may be
speedily stated, and Debenters given out, which Debenters we desire may be as
fully allowed of as the money which has been lent upon the Public Eaith of the
Nation. 6. That these Accounts so stated, visible security may be given out of
Deans and Chapters Lands, or otherways, wherein we refer the way, time and
place of payment to be limited and ascertained by you, and that the Officer or
Soldier may not be prejudiced by destructive delays and attendance, so that the
money due may not satisfy the expenses and loss he may be at in procuring the
same. 7. That whereas diverse Soldiers have (through extraordinary Duty and
Service) lost and spoiled their horses, some course may be taken for the
satisfaction of all such whose horses were slain in the field, or taken in
fight in the last Summers War upon due proof thereof, and that satisfaction
has not been already made, and that future provision be made for such horses
as shall be so lost in the Service of the Commonwealth. 8. That some effectual
course may be taken for a just and suitable supply to maimed soldiers, and the
widows of such as have been slain in the service of the Parliament. To which
end we humbly propose, that the Rents and Revenues of SUTTONS Hospital, and
other donations for the like good and charitable uses may be examined and
regulated, and the full improved value may be disposed of to the ends
aforesaid; which we the rather urge, because those Rents have been constantly
freed from Taxes and Assessements, and yet have (by the corruption of the
Officers) been abused, and not disposed of according to the will and intent of
the Donors. 9. That the sad and distressed condition of our Brethren in
Ireland, may be immediately considered, and (ere it be too late) such
seasonable supplies sent thither as may regain the English honor and interest,
for which work we humbly offer, and earnestly desire, that such Forces as are
already raised and can be spared, which we conceive will be, with some little
addition, a considerable strength, may be forthwith appointed for that service,
with such equal provision for maintenance, as the Forces here shall have
provided, and under such Conduct and conditions as may encourage faithful men
for that employment, by which means you will probably in a great measure
secure this Nation, in part ease the people of their pressures, and, by the
blessing of God, recover that Kingdom out of the hands of the Rebels. 10.
That diverse Gentlemen, Officers, who for their constant fidelity to the public
interest suffered long imprisonment, loss of great estates, and places, and
were ejected out of their commands in Ireland by the perfidious INCHIQUIN, and
are thereby now reduced to miserable extremities, may have their pinching
necessities immediately relieved, least they perish for want of bread, which if
so, would tend to the great dishonor of the Parliament: The faithfulness and
worth of these Gentlemen deserves a special eye of regard, and recommends them
as most fit persons for further employment in the service of that Kingdom,
because of their experience in that War.
All which particulars being of so immediate concernment to the public, we
humbly lay before you, with assurance of a timely and effectual accomplishment
of them, and whatsoever else you in your wisdoms shall find necessary for the
safety and settlement of the Commonwealth.

March 1. 1648. Signed by the appointment of the said Council of Officers,
Joh. Rushworth Secr.

Present at the general Council of Officers held at White Hall, when this
Petition was read and approved of, March 1. 1648.
The Lord General Fairfax.
Sir Hardresse Waller. Col. Whalley. Col. Hewson. Col. Barkstead. Col.
Twistleton. Col. Okey. Col. Desborough. Col. Horton. Col. Reynolds. Col. Goffe.
Col. George Twistleton. Lievt. Col. Venables. Lievt. Col. Bowen. Lievt. Col.
Cobbet. Major Blackmore. Major Swallow. Major Barton. Major Brown. Major
Coleman. Major White. Major Haynes. Major Berry. Major Audley. Major Creed.
Major Disney. Capt. Brown. Capt. Pretty. Capt. Wolf. Capt. Drury. Capt.
White. Capt. Penyfather. Capt. Disher. Capt. Winthorpe. Capt. Messervey. Capt.
Smith. Capt. Barrow. Capt. Goddard. Capt. Affirm. Capt. Clark. Capt. Scotten.
Capt Billers. Capt. Lawrence. Capt. Banes. Capt. Percivall. Lieutenant
Chillenden. Lievt. Newman. Lievt. Lloyd. Lievt. Frank. Lievt. Southwell. Lievt.
Deane. Lievt. Byfield. Lievt. Comes. Lievt. Owen. Cornet Wallis. Cornet Tracy.
Cornet Lewis. Cornet Lockyer. Cornet Thompson. Cornet Melling. Ensign Gravey.
Quartermaster Emerson. Quartermaster Cook. Quartermaster Antrobus.
Quartermaster Salter. Quartermaster Whiting.
Die Veneris 2. Martii 2648.
THe House being informed, that there were diverse Officers of the Army at the
door, they were called in, and Colonel Whalley told Mr. Speaker, that the
General Council of the Officers of the Army had sent these Gentlemen and
himself to present the House with this Petition, which the General had
likewise recommended by his Letter; and that it is their desire, that the House
would take it into their serious, effectual and speedy consideration.

The Petitioners being withdrawn, the Letter from the General dated 2. Martii
1648. and the said Petition were read.

Resolved upon the Question by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that the
matters contained in the said Petition presented from the General Council of
the Officers of the Army, be taken into immediate consideration.

Resolved, etc. That Mr. Speaker do return thanks to the Petitioners.

The Petitioners being again called in, Mr. Speaker gave them this Answer.

Gentlemen, The House has read the Letter of the General, and your Petition,
and looked over every part of it: I must needs say (and you would wonder at it
I should tell you so) This day will be a day of much discontent, I mean to all
the common Enemies of you and us: But as to all good men that have engaged to
carry on the good of the Kingdom with us, it will be a great rejoicing and
satisfaction by this your modest and discreet Petition; and as in your selves
it shows your moderation, so all those whose mouths are open to malice and
detraction, will see that both the Army and Parliament are so unanimous in
promoting the public good. The things themselves they consider as matters of
great concernment, and intend, and have resolved to take them into immediate
consideration.

And as you have showed your selves in former services (for all that you and we
do is but service) forward and faithful, so for these your discreet and and
serious Representations, they have commanded me to return you the heartiest
thanks I can; and accordingly I do give you the hearty thanks of this House,
and desire you likewise to return the like hearty thanks from this House to
the General, and to the whole General Council of the Army.

Hen. Scobell Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

