

A MESSENGER From the DEAD, OR, CONFERENCE Full of stupendous horror, heard
distinctly, and by alternate voices, by many at that time present.

BETWEEN THE Ghosts of Henry the 8. and Charles the First of ENGLAND, in
Windsore-Chappel, where they were both Buried.

In which the whole Series of the Divine Judgments, in those unfortunate
Islands, is as it were by a Pencil from Heaven, most lively set forth from the
first unto the last.

London, Printed for Tho. Vere, and W. Gilbertson, and are to be sold at their
shops, at the sign of the Angel, and the sign of the Bible without Newgate,
1658.

The Messenger from the Dead: OR, The dreadful Conference between the Ghosts
of HENRY the Eighth and CHARLES the first, King of England.
Henry. SAy! Who art thou that presumest by a Sacrilegious Impiety to disturb
the ashes of a King, which so many years have been at rest?

When Henry had spoken these words, there immediately was heard another voice
in a softer, but most doleful accent, which seamed to be the voice of King
Charles, expressing himself after this manner.


Charles. I am that unhappy King of England, the undoubted heive of sixty and
two Monarchs, and who did wear my self the Royal Crown two and twenty years,
and longer.


Henry. What you a King! Did you ever wear a Crown on your head, who have not a
head on your Shoulders?


Charles. I have not always wanted a head, my Subjects, woe is me, did lately
bereave me of it.


Henry. Your subjects! How could that be? What heinous crime have you
committed, that could enforce your subjects to so great a violence?


Charles. I know not well what; but this I am most confident of, that I never did
Commit adultery with any woman, nor ever defloured any Virgin, I never axpelled
any man from his House, or Lands, of all which Henry the Eighth my Predecessor
is condemned to be guilty by all the World; Here Charles made a little pause, to
see what answer that Henry would return to him; But when he perceived him to be
still silent he thus did prosecute his Discourse; My Father being dead strange
Rumors were spread of it; not long afterward I married with the Daughter of
France, and in the beginning of my Reign made two unfortunate Wars, the one
with the Spaniard, the other with the French, a Parliament being called at
Oxford I lost the love of my people, for dissolving it at that instant when the
Duke of Buckingham was questioned for having a hand in my Fathers Death; At
this I perceived that the people did repine, but I was too constant always to
my own Counsels, and although many Parliaments were afterward called, I
dissolved them all. This enforced me to put unusual taxes upon my people; by
which and by the enertainment of the Queen Mother of France (a Lady most
extremely hated by the Generallity of the Nation) I wonderfully increased their
evil opinion of me; At the last we did proceed to Arms (the Parliament then
bearing sway, by me not suddenly to be dissolved) and the War not thriving
with me, I was brought to London, a Court was called, not before heard of, and
I protesting against the unlawfullness of it, and that there was no Power on
Earth by which I was to be tried, they passed the sentence of Death on me,
according unto which I suffered.


Henry. The greatest prejudice that can arrive unto a Prince, is the loss of
his peoples love. And thus my Niece Mary Queen of Scotland, having lost the
affections of that Nation, amongst other things suffered for that Indiscretion
by the loss of her head in England; but if you are descended from such Kings as
you do boast you are, had it not been better for you to have your bones to rest
amongst them, then here to interrupt my peace at Windsor?


Charles. I dying did desire to be buried at West-Minster, but my stars which
did shine but Clowdily, and obscurely on me, in my life, were as inauspicious
to me at my Death. I suffered many things grievous to relate. At West-Minster I
received my fatal sentence where my Predecessors were accustomed to be crowned;
At Saint James I was kept in Custody, a place much beloved of me by reason of
my Childhood spent there, and the many innocent recreations of my youth; At
White Hall I was Beheaded, the Scaffold being erected before the Doors of the
Court, and I passed through that place in which I was accustomed to be present
at Masks and Shows, and at the entertainment of the Ambassadors of foreign
Princes.


Henry. Are you Charles the son of King James, and do you not yet perceive
wherefore you are oppressed with such a weight of affliction? do you not
plainly perceive the admirable course and tenor of the Divine Justice? It was
grievous to you to be in custody at S. James, because in your tender years, you
did there delight your self with innocent pastimes. Do you not call to mind how
heretofore I seized upon that place by violence? As indeed what place was free
from my cruelties and oppressions, you are not ignorant how most unjustly I
brought unto my Exchequer, to satisfy my own avarice, all the Estates of the
Carthusian, Bernardine, and Cistercian Monks, and of all the other Orders, but
especially of the Order of Saint Benedict, whose Lands and revenues were the
greatest, and whose Covents, and houses were the fairest? How many innocent men
have I imprisoned, because they would not be subject to my will? It was I that
caused some Abbots to be hanged before their own doors, to become a terror to
the other Monks. Do you not know that even your own Palace, was heretofore the
House of the Archbishops of York, which I extorted from Cardinal Wolsey, whom
I advanced to great honors and riches, whiles I found him a profitable
Minister to my lust, and afterward crushed him to pieces when I found it to be
expedient for my avarice; It was I who although I never started from the
obedience of the Church of Rome, but only in one particular to satisfy my
lust; did afterward compel all the Bishops of the Land, to subscribe to what
I commanded, the Bishop of Rochester only excepted, whom because I could not
overcome, neither by threatenings, nor persuasions, I made him shorter by the
head.


Charles. But I was never accused of such enormities; Must I suffer for the
offenses of others, the stedfastness and unaltered Resolution of my Spirit, was
never prejudicicall unto any.


Henry. Yes, unto your self, and to all that had relation to you; Besides,
Flatter not your self, He who receives money of a Judge for the seat of
Judicature, perverteth Justice. You need not to fear that any private designs
or Combinations should dispossess you of your life, for so the punishment
would not answer the offense, it is expedient and necessary that public sins
should be publicly expiated. I afterward that I began to offend, did not act
fearfully, nor did seek out Corners, for the commiting of Iniquity, but made
pretenses of Justice for my Impiety. I divorced my self from my lawful wife,
and pretended Law for it. On the same account I brought the goods of diverse men
into my Treasury, whosoever opposed me, I impeached them of Treason, and caused
them to suffer accordingly for it, therefore when I did acts of
unrighteousness, and pretended Law, I ought not to wonder if I my self should
suffer punishment in the same nature.


Charles. Should a King suffer by his Subjects?


Henry. We deserve greater punishments, because we commit greater offenses,
they offend against a mortal King, we against a King immortal; but could not
you (unless by the divine providence you were destined to be a Sacrifice, for
the expiation of the Crimes of your predecessors, and your own) could you not
by your own power dissolve the Parliament, and so bring about your own
Counsels, for the managing of the affairs of the Nations, according to your
own will?


Charles. I told before that I had dissolved many sever all Parliaments, but
underst and what followed; My native Subjects the Scots did by force of Arms
invade England, and whiles I staid at York to carry on with more vigor the
Affairs of the War, the Lord of Kimbolton did present me with a Petition, to
which twelve of the Nobility had set their hands.

When king Henry had heard the name of Kimbolton, he fetched a deep sigh, as if
from the bottom of his heart, and said,


Henry. Ah! At Kimbolton it was, that the most excellent Mirror of her sex and
the Example of all Virtues my first wife Queen Katharine dyed, whom I divorced
from my bed that I might bring into it Anne Bollen an incontinent woman, whom
not long afterward being taken in adultery I caused to be beheaded by the
common Hangman; That this divoree from my first wife contrary to all laws both
divine and human might remain unquestioned, being not able to defend one
wickedness but by another, I did assume unto my self to govern this nation, by
an Arbitrary power, which was the original of all the calamities that have
since befallen, either to my self, or you, or to our unfortunate Kingdoms.


Charles. Having rashly (as I have said) estranged my self from the love of my
English Subjects, and finding the Scots to grow more and more upon me, I was
enforced to make use of those Counsels which I thought most expedient for my
present safety, I observed that my dissolution of so many Parliaments, (called
to give redress to the sufferings and complaints of the people) was one of the
greatest reasons that at first did pull upon me their suspicion, and afterward
their hatred, they feared also that I would introduce amongst them an
Innovation of Religion, which laying a force upon their Consciences they
accounted the greatest tyr any that could be in the world, therefore to give
them a plenary and a thorough satisfaction on the one side, and to be
discharged of the Scots Army on the other side, I gave order that a Parliament
should be called again not to be dissolved by me without their own liking and
approbation; To this many of the most apparent of my Counsel did readily
agree with me, and amongst others my own kinsman, the unfortunate Duke of
Hamilton.


Henry. You were more tame (believe me) then I would have bin, had it bin in my
time, my subjects should have found I would have dealt more roundly with them,
but I most plainly do perceive that the measure of my iniquities was completed
in you my successor, and the divine vengeance did mark you out for
destruction. The houses got by me, by violence and rapine, must be plucked from
you, to be established on another that is more worthy of them. Were you so
weak, that when it proceeded so far you could not with largesses and honors
procure and confirm unto your self a strong party even in that Parliament?


Charles. I did indeed attempt it, but all things did fall out cross to my
Expectation, for all the Bishops and the Catholic Lords, who were faithful to
me, were cast forth by the adverse party, who were more powerful and numerous.
They used their utmost Endeavors to promote my Interests. The Catholics hoped
that I would mother ate that severity of the Laws which were made against them
by you and Q Elizabeth, and King James my Father, laying a great penalty on all
those who would not acknowledge them to be the supreme Governors, in the
Territories of their Dominions. The Bishops and Prelates were eager to maintain
my cause, that so they might preserve their own Dignities, and Fortunes, that
is their Bishoprics, and Benefices, which seemed otherwise to be in a most
ruinous Condition. Having by this means lost above forty voices in the upper
House; those who remained were more flexible, and did conform themselves to
the temper and resolution of the rest.


Henry. But could you by no printed papers, insinuate into the minds of your
Subjects, how much you stood devoted to their safety and prosperity? When I was
resolved to use my Arbitrary power, that I might appear unto the world to
undertake nothing by force, I caused books to be dictated according to my own
pleasure, which were presented to me as if they came from the Monks themselves.
If any refused to subscribe unto them I caused them to be hanged up, especially
the chiefest of them, to be a terror to the rest. Thus when I was pleased to
exercise my will, I caused diverse for fear of Death, to subscribe to what I did
propound unto them, and that so handsomely, as if it had been their own motion.


Charles. But I did deal more gently, nevertheless being resolved at the last to
have recourse to Arms, I did betake my self to the Northern part of my
Kingdom, and having erected the Royal Standard, not far from Notingham, the
most faithful of my Subjects, did from every part of the Kingdom resort unto
me, whose number in a short time was so great that they hold out a War for
above the space of seven years against the Parliament; It is remarkable to see
with what resolution, above all the rest, the Roman Catholics did adventure
their lives, and their fortunes for me, and that not only in one field, but
wheresoever their War made trial of their valor; but the Army of the
Parliamen prevailed, and I being driven to the greatest extremities did betake
my self unto the Scots, as to my last refuge, amongst whom I did not long
continue but I was delivered to some of Note in the English Army, who carrying
me from one place to another, have at last brought me hither in this sad
Condition wherein you see me.


Henry. The English were always much addicted to their Parliaments, in which
they found a constant redress for all their greivances, it is therefore less to
be admired that they revolted from you; but how came it to pass that those of
your own Nation the Scots should make war against you?


Charles. The Revolt of the Scots was the chiefest cause of my Ruin, for if I
had to deal only with the English, I could have kept them in obedience, or
have reduced them to it by the assistance of my faithful Subjects, both im
England, and in Ireland; But the Scots fell off from me upon this account; It
was my desire that throughout all my Dominions, there might not be only the
same form of faith, but of Rights, and Ceremonies, and that the Liturgy of the
Church of England, together with the Surplice might be used by the Ministers of
Scotland. This I must confess I did by the persuasion of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, whom I did reverence as a Patriarch, which when the people of
Scotland understood, and perceived that it began to be put in practice, they
presently cried out that Papistry, and the abomination of Rome began be
introduced, hereupon seditions began to increase which were much fomented by
the Pulpits. At the last the Scots were resolved to defend their Religion by
Arms, and as already I have made mention they invaded England, and possessed
themselves of New Castle.


Henry. It is cleerer then the noon day, and you see all along, what it is to
govern by an Arbitrary power.


Charles. Too late I perceive it, but I do not yet understand wherefore those
Calamities did not overwhelm you, who did first practice it with so much
constancy and so much cruelty.


Henry. Ah Charles you are much deceived, if you think me free from punishment,
punishment does always follow sin, neither was there ever any one that has
got clearly off, and not paid for his Impiety. Not to speak of the torments
which I do now endure; What pangs did I not feel within me whiles I was alive
being perpetually scourged with rods of knotted steel by the three Beadles of
Avarice, Cruelty, and Incontinency.

In the first place, my Avarice was so unsatisfied that after I had overthrown
three hundred and seventy fix Monasteries, and with one Edict taken away all
their Goods and Lands, one year was not fully expired, before I oppressed my
Subjects, with greater taxes then before. Being palate-taken by this first
Morsel, not long afterward, I brought into my treasury all the other
Monasteries of the Kingdom, it is not easy to comprehend how many and how rich
they were. Whiles I made havoc of these, I did feed my Subjects with vain
hopes that the goods thus gotten would so cram my treasury, that they should
never have need to fear any more Subsidies, which news was so welcome to the
people that they were greatly pleased, and much applauded what I did; But they
were so deluded of their expectations, that after this I exacted more upon them
then all my Predecessors had done in five hundred years before. After that I
had Plundered and levelled to the ground, about one thousand Churches, and
converted to my use the goods appropriate to them, after that by force I had
seized upon their gold, their silver, and consecrated vessailes, and sold the
brass, the lead, the stones and timber belonging to them; and out of the Church
of Canterbury alone, had taken two great Chests so full of gold, and precious
stones, that four men could hardly stir either of them, I was driven to so
extreme a penury, that whereas at first by my Proclamation, two ounces of
brass were to be mixed with ten ounces of silver, I afterward gave order that
two ounces of silver, should be mighled with ten ounces of brass; After this
manner was I tormented by my Covetousness, neither did I suffer less by my
cruelty.

Secondly, for the first 20 years before I exercised any violent and arbitrary
power, no King before me did shed less blood; In all that time there were but
two Noble men that lost their lives, but after that I began to show my self in
my own colors, I was as greedy of blood as I was before of gold, and made a
great laughter of all ages, sexes, and orders whatsoever, and for no other
trespass but that they opposed my pleasure. Four Queens that successively had
bin married to me, did lose their lives, either by the Axe, or by a grief as
fatal as the Axe. I proscribed two Princesses, two Cardinals, and the third
who was not only my Kinsman, but at that time out of the Kingdom. I did put
to Death by the common Hangman 12 eminent personages who were either Dukes, or
Marquesses, or Earls, or the Sons of Earls, two and twenty Barons, and Knights,
sixteen Abbots and Priors, seventy seven Priests and Religious men, and others
of a lower rank almost not to be numbered. And in this so black a cruelty I was
feared by none more then by the most faithful of my won friends, as the Events
of Wolsey Norris, of the Family of the Bullens, and of the Howards, have
declared.

Thirdly, Moreover I did so prostrate my self unto Lust, that after the divorse
of my best and my first wife, I saw no Lady handsommer then other, with whom I
not presently fell in love, neither made I love to any whom I would not enjoy.
Was it not for the punishment of my sins, that you and your Father were crowned
Kings of England, when I left nothing unattempted, that I might hinder you from
the possession of the Kingdom of England, and by some heir of my own might
confirm it in my own house. Two wives I did drive out of my bed, and two out of
the World, the fifth I caused to be ripped up alive, being then in labor and
full of her childing throws, that her child might be preserved, adding to the
cruelty these barbarous, and inhumane words, that Wives could more easily be
found then Children. I married the sixth wife, and entertained thoughts of
taking her our of the World, when not long afterward I was taken out of the
World my self. But in this great care of mine, and iudeavour for posterity, not
any of my race lived threescore years after my Death; It is true that a child
of mine, of nine years of age, did succeed me in the Government, but not well
able to govern himself, much less the Kingdom, and who departed out of the
World, before he departed out of his nonage, My Daughter Mary, did afterward
receive the Crown, but rejected the Religion of her Brother, I might well
expect to have had issue by her, being five years Married to Philip, the
Catholic King of Spain, but God the Revenger of so many Murders, and
abominations committed, would not that my Race should inherit the Land; for
he is not to be mocked, neither does his word fall upon the ground, which
says, For the sins of the Fathers the days of the Children, shall be
shortened. She therefore in a short time dying without issue, the Kingdom is
translated unto you. It is true that my Daughter Elizabeth succeeded my
Daughter Mary, but being never Married she also without issue descended into
the sleep of Death.

Thus do I find true what the Kingly Prophet did foretell me. The seed of the
wicked shall perish, Psalm. 37. and in another place. Thou shall destroy their
fruit from the Earth, and their seed from the sons of men, Psalm. 12. By woeful
experience, I do say, I have proved the truth of his prophecy, for it pleased
God to laugh at the vain counsails of men, And the same Prophet gives this
reason of it, For they imagined Counsels which they could not bring to pass.
Psalm. 21. For their is no Counsel against the Lord. Pro. 21. As now too late
I have learned. Will you have me yet further to confirm the truth of this unto
you. When I was dying I did leave unto my Son EDWARD twelve Tutors, all of them
Catholics, as I conceived, and commanded them to bring him up in the Catholic
Religion, the Supremacy of the Church only excepted, which I would have him to
continue, and to reserve unto himself, but I who violated the testaments of
others, and overthrew so many Monuments of Piety, did not deserve that my own
should be kept; Of so many Tutors the Duke of Somerset Uncle to Edward, by his
mothers side, after my Death was Tutor alone unto him, and brought him up in
that Religion, which I forbad him, and hated. I commanded also that a more
sumptuous Monument should be provided for me, then was ever raised for any of
my Predecessors, and as yet I have no Monument at all, although of all the
Kings of England, not one of them had three children that successively swayed
the Scepter but my self. But, alas, I need not fear that I shall be ever lost
in the memory of men, I have purchased to my self an everlasting Name, by my
enormous offenses. All sorts of men do strive as it were in emulation who shall
hate me most. I am become justly odious to the Catholics because I divided
England from the Communion of the Church of Rome. I am abomination to the
orders of the Religious, because I have extinguished their Charters and
themselves, and have sold their Lands, and houses. I am detestable both to the
Clergy, and the Laity, because I have raised a persecution, against even the
whole Name of Catholics, which continues to this day. The Protestants hate
me, because through all the course of my life, I did pursue them with fire and
Sword; Luther named me a big-bellied Beast, and a Tyrant; Calvin has written
bitterly against me, and brandeth me in his books, as destitute of all fear of
God, and the shame of men. All Lettered men will evermore curse my memory,
beause I have utterly destroyed such excellent Monuments of Learning and
Antiquity that the Christian World can hardly parralell. Finally whiles I was
alive, most men hated me, all men feared me, no man loved me. In my last days,
like Orestes, I was tormented with the Consciousness of my sins, and desired to
reconcile my self to the Church, and to make some amends for the injury offered
to my wife, the latter I did in some part perform, for I provided in my will,
that my Daughter Mary born of Queen Katharine, whom before I had disinherited,
should succeed in the Kingdom, if my Son Edward should dye without children.
Oh how often have I discoursed with my friends of the first, but as I deceived
many of them, heretofore by the same artifice, so now I my self became
suspected to them all, and they grew to be jealous of me, and to shun me, as
diving into their secrets. And thus being abandomed by all, I dyed without the
Communion of the Church, repeating oftentimes in my last hour these words, We
have lost all. Being dead, I had the same end as Ahab, and it is the more
remarkable because it was in the Ruins of a Religious house, for as my Corpse
nasty with excessive fatness, and too great a Belly, was on the way tobe
convaied hither, the Coffin of Lead in which it was put did crack by chance,
and opened; To soder which, a Plummer being sent for, my Corpse was set down in
the said ruins of the house, there, whiles the Plummer was running from place
to place, being very busy at his work, his dog most greadily did lick the
blood that issued from me. A Revenge from God for the effusion of so much
blood, which in my life time I had soilled. Charles, Do you not now see
sufficiently how God has scourged me in my own person; Never think that I have
eseaped unpunished!


Charles. This is a sad story indeed, and most worthy to be remembered, and
seriously to be considered of by all posterity.


Henry. But these things which I have rehearsed, although they seem grievous to
the ears of the living, yet they are but mere Delights, if they be compared to
the Torments which I endure amongst those who inhabit the Regions of Darkness,
for besides those punishments which I have pulled upon me by my own sins,
whatsoever evils that my posterity has committed by my Example, it does
increase my sufferings by a new addition.


Charles. I would to God that Flattery had never been heard of in the Courts of
Princes, would to God that I had never heard that we are above the Law, and are
to give an account to God only for what we have committed upon Earth,
nevertheless it does administer some comfort to me, that I have made no
innovation in Religion, I have been above my other Predecessors most gentle to
the Catholics, and came nearest to their Religion, and used my Supremacy with
the greatest moderation. And because in my apprehension it was not fit for a
Layman, I committed almost the whole Exercise of the Ecclefiasticall affairs
to the Archbishop of Canterbury.


Henry. And have not you observed in these late troubles, that none of all the
Bishops of England, but the Archbishop of Canterbury, alone did lose his head?


Charles. Was I guilty of it? By his Instigations indeed I showed more
countenance to some practices of the Church of Rome, then either my Father did,
or the Queen your Daughter that reigned before him; I confess my self not to be
altogether without fault, nevertheless I would fain understand, being more
moderate then any of my Predecessors, and more forward then they in the
promoting the peace of the Church, wherefore I am visited with far more grevous
punishments then any of them all?


Henry Are you still to understand that the jealous God who visits the sins
of the fathers. on the children, does most usually exact the punishments of the
most enormous offenses on the third of fourth Generation, for if the should
inflict present punishment upon all sins, men would be apt to believe that they
were quickly, and easily expiated, neither does the defer the punishment unto
so many Generations, that the memory of the offender may perish from the Earth,
and that we could not know for what enormity the pushment was inflicted. You
are the third King from me, and do suffer punishment in the third Generation;
For although my two Daughters Mary and Elizabeth did reign successively, yet
they do make but one Generation with Edward their Brother and my Son. If
therefore you do number the Generations or the Kings, Edward succeeded me, James
succeeded him, and you succeeded James. Neither do I believe it is without the
providence of God, that so direful a revenge has fallen on you, the most
moderate, and the most innocent of them all, that so all might understand that
not so much your sins, as the hereditary Evils, and the wickedness annexed to
your Crown and your titles, are taken vegeance of in your person, according to
that of the Prophet; The Fathers have eaten a sour bunch of grapes, and the
teeth of the Children are set on edge. Ezekiel. 18. Which is not so to be
undestood, that children altogether guiltless and innocent should be
overwhelmed in the punishments of their most ungodly fathers, For the Soul that
sins shall dye, but that Children not so guilty, and as it were innocent in
comparison of their fathers, are oftentimes involved in their punishments; for
if this punishment had come to pass in the days of some luxurious and wicked
King, I should have looked to further for the causes of it, but on the Crimes
of so dissulute a Grovernour; But that your Subjects who do call themselves
Protestants, should affict upon you so ignominious a Death as by making you
shorter by the head, when your Enemies can accuse you of no gross offense, must
certainly be imputed to nothing else, but to the Capital sin of my
misgovernance, in which though not so visibly, others and your self, no doubt
have partaken with me.


Charles. O how just are the Judgments of God, and his ways past finding out?
For in whatsoever a man finneth, he either sooner or later shall be punished by
it, either in himself, or in his posterity. I would to God when I was alive and
in my prosperity, or that in the time of my Imprisonment when I had leisure
enough, that I had seriously thought on these things. O that in the bitterness
of my soul I had observed the proceedings of the divine Justice, ow slowly it
came on, and how long it did hang over my devoted head. An incomparable
Scholar, and highly esteemed in the days of my Father and Q'een Elizabeth,
has left recorded that God does most for Kings, and Kings, again do least for
God. But be wise O you Princes, and learn righteous Judgment, O you Judges of
the Earth; O that the flattery of being obove all Laws had never sounded in my
ears; O that I had never been accused of Arbitrary Government; O that I had
known that my highest Prerogative had been the love and the obedience of my
Subjects! I had leisure enough to write and to compose a whole Book on other
Anguments, as on the overthrowes of my Armies, on my own miseries and
calamities, and on the insolences of other men; But these things which I ought
to lay most near unto my heart, and on which above all things I ought most to
meditate, did never enter into my thought. I would to God that the Bishop of
London, honest Juxon, for so I was accustomed to call him, or he who entirely
loved me, and was to me a faithful Counsailer in all other things, and who
laid down his life for my sake, William Laud, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
had advertised me of these things either by Letters from himself, or by words
of mouth from his friends; he had before his Death, the tedious leisure of
three years Imprisonment, to meditate and to ruminate on them. But they were
hid from their eyes. O how blind were my seers! But,

Jam sero sapinus, sed sine fruge Phriges.
True Trojans we, whose hapless Fates,
Is to grow wise when'tis too late.

Henry. You do confess that you came more near in your Religion to the Church
of Rome, the either your Father or Queen Elizabeth, if you had been absolutely
a Catholic I do believe it had been better for you; for what does it profit
you to have inclined to the Roman Catholic Faith, unless you altogether did
profess it. It does not suffice to sit down in the porch unless you enter into
the Church. It was not sufficient to Salvation for King Agrippa that he was
almost a Christian, nay because he was not wholly converted when Paul preached,
he is now howling with me in the Kingdom of Darkness. You acknowledge that you
were more inclined to the Catholic Church, then either of your two Predec
effors that immediately swayed the Scepter before you, had you been wholly
devoted to it, it is likely that it might have been better for you.


Charles. It is likely that my Armies were the more unfortunate, because I was
so indulgent to it. The super stition of the Papists, and the most petulant
probhaneness of the other part of my Army, have rendered me a greater Subject of
Calamity and Contempt then I believe I should have otherwise appeared to the
World. I have bled enough already. Think not to give new wounds unto me by
striking at me in my Religion. What the sacred Authority of the Word of God,
and the light of my own Conscience has convinced me unto: What neither the
frequent solicitations of foreign Princes, nor the hourly Importunity of my
dearest Wife, could dissuade me from; What (dying) I commanded my children to
embraces, I shall never after Death be induced to retract. In this resolution I
do expect the day of a joufull Resurection, the Morning air whereof I do
already feel refreshing me. The unrighteous shall then tremble at the sound,
and the summens of a Trumpet from Heaven; they shall wish that the Rocks and
the Hills might cover them, that sobeing hid from the presence of the Lamb,
they might lie for ever confined to the dull peace of a Grave.


The End.
In malevolos hujus narratiunculae obtrectatores.
ZOile me laceres morsu mea Scripta canino,
Neve meris dicas omnia suta dolis,
Extimus historiae cortex (volo) fictus habetur,
Vera sed huic intus ligna subesse scies.
Istaque corporeis licet auribus invia nostris,
Mentis at internae sensibus hausta putes.
Fia, age, mendacem me, carptor inepte, Poetam
Occine; narranti, res dabitipsafidem.
R. P.

DEtractor, tear not with a dogged tooth
These leaves, nor yet upbraid them with untruth,
Though counterfeit the bark without be found,
Know that the Tree within is good, and sound.
And what is not obvious to the outward ear,
More deep Impression in the mindn does bear;
The tax me not that Poet-like I faign,
This Story, to its Speaker, truth will gain.

