THE White Minister's DECLARATION: Or, the Meaning of the White SCARF, AND
Girdle, Explained.
WEREAS many thousand of people in London, Oxford, Gloucester, Bristol, Bath,
etc. do wonder what is the meaning that I wear a White Scarf and Sash, when as
all other Divines wear Black. This is the true reason to distinguish me from
all Hirlings. For whearas most other Church Men Preach, Prav, etc. for Hire or
Reward, I have Bound my self by a Religious Vow to do these Offices of a Divine
Gratis, or for Nothing, as Christ Commanded the Apostles saying Matt, 10. v. 8.
Freely ye have Received, Freely Give.

All Orders and Degrees of Men are Dishinguished from each other by some Badg
of their Profession. Judges and Magistrates have their Furs and Hoods, Caps
and Gowns to Diinguish them by. Now the White Robe is the proper Badge of my
Profession, which is to do the Work of GOD Freely, and therefore Sincerely, And
therefore ^ought to Wear the Color of Sincerity, which is White. Black is an
Emblem of Sorrow and Heaveness; White of Joy and Gladness. Black signifies
Death: White Signifies Life. Let these that are Dead in Sin and Serve not the
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belleyes, and Preach not for the Honor of
GOD, but for Filtlhy Lucre Wear the Black Robe as fittest for them: Let all
those that are Alive from the Dead, and Preach only for the Honor of GOD and
the Salvation of Souls, Wear the Whire, as a Badge of their Sincerity. Let all
Hirelings that Adulterate the Word of GOD, Wear black to Distinguish them from
the true Pastors: Let all true Pastors who Preach the Sincere Milk of the Word,
Wear the Color of Milk, as a Badge of their Sincerity, and to Distinguish them
from all Hirelings. Let all Righteous Persons Wear the Robe of Ritousness, and
the Girdle of Sincerity: Let all Hiporites and Hirelings, Wear the Color of
Hell and Death even the Robe of Iniquity and the Girdle of Hypocrisy.

I hope there are many Clergymen that Wear the black Scarf and Girdle, who for
their Integrity and Sincerity deserve the White. I my self Wore the black Robe
about twenty Years, and three Years since I made this Vow, and had always
Worn it, had I not been called a Hireling, and a Journey-Man Curate. And then
I thought 'twas high time to stand up in my own just Defense, and by Pubsick
Manifesto, as it were, to Disclaim, what I was wrongfuly Charged withal. This
justifiing our selves, when we are Falsely Accus^d is always Necessary, faith
Bishop Sanderson. And certainly it highly concerns a Divine to stand Clear in
the Eye of the World in that behalf: For who will give any Credit to the Words
of a Hireling? Therefore it is that St. Paul does so often clear himself from
the Suspicion of Coveteousness: I have Coveted no Man's Silver, or Gold, or
Apparel. Neither at any time used we a Cloak of Govetousness -- I seek not
yoars but you. Not seeking my own Profit, but the Profit of many that they may
be saved --

I know the Hinelings are furiously Enraged against me for Wearing the White
Robe, and some have preswaded me to leave it off: and Some have Threatened to
Tear it off. They are Afraid that my White will expose their Black, and my
Angelical Sincerity render and expose their Diabolical Hypocrisy. They would
have me to be like them: Like to like, and some have asked me if I was not
Ashamed to Wear this White Scarf: To whom I readily gave this Answer whereas I
was Ashamed to Wear a Black one, because that did not distinguish me from
Hirelings: And that I scorned such Baseness as to Preach and Pray for Lucere or
Reward.

I desire the World to take notice that I have Preached 7 or 8 Hundred times
for these Ungreatful Hirelings, who never gave me any reward, -- And now when I
profess I profess I am ready to Preach freely for them as long as I live, they
will not admit me into their Pulpits: And wheareas I have nothing to Support me
and my Children by, but my Latin Muses, These Maliclous Hirelings, have done
their utmost endeavors to hinder me from getting a Penny by my Books of
Poetry, as they did at the Bath, and in many other Places. If any of these
Hirolings, that Mudd the pure Fountains of Helicon, that is disparage my Latin
Poetry, can make so good Verses I will pardon their Slandring. But if they
cannot make so good-let them take care that they dishonor not the bright Image
of God, by Flinging Dirt in the Face of a Divine poet. And let all those that
deny me the use of a pulpit, for fear I should Preach more truth then they are
willing to hear, when they receive the Sacrament, tremble at these Words.

Therefore if any of you be a hinderer of Gods Words, or be in Envy or Malice,
etc. Repent, or else come not to this holy Sacrament, But because the Church of
England will allow me none House to live in, nor Church to preach in, nor hear
my words, nor allow me Food, I do hereby Wipe off the Dust of my Feet as a
Witness against her, and take my leave of her.

Loripedem rectus derideat Aethiopem Albus. Juuenal
To the HIRELINGS.
BY bribes of Silver Priest is hired to Preach:
Take away those, and he will no longer Teach.
Alas! it is Money makes him Eloquent.
His Voice is gone when Golden hopes are spent,
Actors and Fiddlers, Songsters, Pleaders do
Their Voices sell, and so do Preachers too.
One Prophet vile and scorned has reguard.
To the Office only; not to the Reward.
The Sun's bright Flames to Mortals freely Shine:
And whilst I preach for Nothing so do mine.
Note, That this invective against Hirelings, is not designed only against
those Hirelings, that are in the Church, but equally against all of that Sect
or Proffession soever that Take upon them the Office of a Teacher for the sake
of gain. These Teachers that are thus mercenary and tinsincere, God Almighty
turn their Hearts. Which is the earnest Prayer of

Jos. Perkins.
If any Hireling be offended at this Paper, Let me bear all the Blame.


Jos. Perkins.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR, 1699.


