A PETITION Humbly presented to his HIGHNESS the LORD PROTECTOR, AND TO THE
High-Court of PARLIAMENT, THE Supreme Governors of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, with the Dominions thereunto belonging. BY DIVERSE
MINISTERS FOR THE Establishment of themselves and others their Brethren (for
their own Lives) in the places to which they were admitted to officiate (as
Ministers of the Gospel) without Institution or Induction from the Bishops.
WITH Reasons thereto annexed whereof the CONTENTS are set down in the Page next
after the PETITION. And at the end of the Book an Epistle to the Sincere and
Pious Preachers of the Word of God written before the beginning of the
Parliament By PHILOTHEUS PHILOMYSTES.

ACTS 1.24. And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord which know the hearts of
all men, show. whether of these two thou have chosen.

LONDON, Printed for Edw. Brewster at the Sign of the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLIV.

To his Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, AND To the High Court of PARLIAMENT, The
Supreme Governors of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and of
the Dominions thereto belonging.
The Humble Petition of diver Ministers of the English Nation for themselves
and others their Brethren.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners (by Authority of Parliament) appointed to preach the
Gospel in diverse Congregations, from which the former Incumbents were by the
same Authority removed for their scandal and disaffection to Reformation both
Civil and Religious, have by them and the people (leavened by their unsound
doctrine and prevaricating practice been harshly entertained and injuriously
dealt withal by manifold both personal and real wrongs, and some of us may
truly add to our complaint the threats and attempts of some of them to take
away our lives; For none other cause that we can conceive, but 1. for that in
the great divisions of our Nation, our judgments and consciences divided us
from them and their party. 2. Because we disuse the Service book and other
superstitious formalities (especially customary and promiscuous Communions at
Easter, and Christmas Holidaies as they commonly call them;) and 3. for that we
press the precise and pious observation of the Christian Sabbath or Lords Day,
and the days of occasional Humiliation and Thanks giving, as alone obliging
the conscience under the state of the Gospel. And lastly, because they take us
to be but unlawful intruders into the Rights of their outed Ministers, for that
our tenure determines not with our own but with their lives; and we are ordered
to pay a fisth part of the Sequestered Benefices, toward the maintenance of
their Wives and Children, as part of their Revenue; for if the Delinquents were
dead, whereby their Widows and Orphans might have more need, no part or portion
should be assigned unto them, though they were not guilty of such scandalous
offenses against God and man as their Husbands and Fathers have been.

May it please your Highness and this most Honorable Senate, weighing the
Premises with the Reasons hereunto annexed, in such a way as your prudence and
goodness shall direct you, to trke a course for a redress and remedy to the
grievances forementioned; so that so many of us (your Petitioners) as have
continued constant to our Ministerial duties both for preaching and practice,
and faithful to the cause of Religion, and the peace and welfare of our Nation,
with others our Brethren, who by the great Seal or the authority of private
Patrons have been admitted to ministerial Offices since the deposition of
Bishops, may be confirmed in the places where we reside and officiate, for term
of our natural lives (unless we deserve by any manner of miscarriage to be
cast out of the favor and protection of public Authority) and may be invested
with the like power and privilege both to require and recover the sights of
our personal Incumbencies, which others have enjoied upon their presentations
to them by them by the Title of Patronage, and institution and induction by
Bishops in former times.

And your Petitioners shall humbly pray, etc.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Following DISCOURSE.
SECT. I. A necessary Caution premised against the conceit of partiality to our
selves and injury to others, four Reasons for the Minister settlement where the
Parliament placed him; The first drawn from the Parliament, Reason 1.
the second from the people to whom he is sent, Reason 2.
the third from himself; the fourth from the evil effects of his removal,
Reason 3.
in regard of others both goed and bad. Page 1. Reason 4.
SECT. II. The fifth Reason against the present Ministers dissettlement by the
Patron, Reason 5.
taken from the practice of primitive antiquity most contrary to it. p. 5.
SECT. III. The Sixth Reason taken from the distinction of Parishes, Reason 6.
when and by whom it was made. p. 7. SECT. IV. The seventh Reason taken from
the Original right, Reason 7.
privilege and duty of Patrons, and from the corruption of many Patrons, and
their abuse of Patronages, particularly in England, both before the Parliament
summoned by the late King, and since. p. 8. SECT. V. The respect due to
Religious Patrons, with advice for a Conscientious discharge of the trust
reposed in them; wherein some passages in Mr Prinnes late Book (of the Right of
Patronage) seeming to prejudice our cause, are proposed and answered. p. 13.
SECT. VI. The Conclusion briefly recollecting the chief contents, of what is
before more largely delivered. p. 20.
REASONS Humbly offered to the pious and judicious Consideration of his
Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, and of the High Court of PARLIAMENT, why an able,
painful, and faithful Minister (placed by the Supreme power of this Nation in
the room of a Delinquent Sequestered for Scandal and disaffection to the State)
should not after the Delinquents death be displaced, upon pretense of the right
of Patronage, to present another in his stead, if (until then) he have
persisted in a sincere and conscientious execution of his office.
SECTION I.
A necessary Caution premised against the conceit of partiality to our selves
and injury to others, four Reasons for the Ministers settlement where the
Parliament placed him; The first drawn from the Parliament, the second from the
people to whom he is sent, the third from himself; the fourth from the evil
effects of his removal, in regard of others both good and bad.

THough we conceive such a Minister (as abovementioned) ought to be confirmed
in his Incumbency during life (his own life, not another) yet as we would not
have him stand upon the fickle terms of durante bene-placito: (either in
respect of the people or of any person claiming privilege above them) so we
desire not that any of us should enjoy any public maintenance or countenance
any longer then Quam diu bone se gesserit.

2. We profess we are not of their mind, An exact relation of the Proceedings
and transactions of the late Parliament who were dissolved December. 12. 1653. p.
18. Printed 1654.
Who say, that Patrons Presentations are one of the strong holds of Satan, and
who when it was The true state of the Case of the Commonwealth, and in
reference to the late established Government by a Lord Protector and a
Parliament, p. 19.
propounded (in an equitable way) that persons of eminent piety and fidelity
might be appointed to judge of such Ministers as should be presented by
Patrons, would admit of no regulation (but running out into the extreme) voted
away the whole right of presentation by Patrons.

We desire not to debar them or any of our Brethren of this Nation, of their
rightful properties or just rights, which the Law does give and conscience may
take, as we were not willing (without our demerit) to be voted out of our
Ministry; Ibid. p. 16.
or out of our right as civil men; The name of Patron where it is not (as the
Popes Holiness) titulus sine re, is to us acceptable and venerable; and for
those who are worthy of it and act according to it, we honor them, and they
may well deserve that honor by their faithfulness and zeal in promoting the
Gospel of Christ, protecting and countenancing the true Ministers of it, and
him against those that oppose or despise them.

But withal we crave leave (in a matter so much importing the great good or
hurt of souls (as Patronage does, thereafter as the title and authority is used
well or ill) to deal with all plainness and fidelity, and to show (for
caution) what we find amisle, and to be amended or removed, as well as what
(for use) we think may be approved and maintained.

This premised to clear our intentions from all partiality to any of our Tribe
(who make defection from their duty whether ministerial or Christian) and from
injurious impeachment of any lawful privilege that any Patrons may have, if it
be used lawfully; We trust our just desires may find acceptance with his
Highness and the Parliament for these Reasons ensuing; which though they be of
several sorts, some of them pleading the piety, justice and equity of the
Ministers establishment, where he was placed by public authority (upon the
displacing of the former Incumbent) some of them showing the contrary evils
that any other Patron should (without any just exception against him for
insufficiency, idleness or scandal) be allowed to eject him when the outed
Minister dies, who underwent a civil death (before) by his Sequestration.

The first Sort of Reasons.
Self-denying Ordinance.

Obj. But though they might depart from their own Right, or suspend the
exercise of their own privilege, they could not give away other men's: But that
other Patrons might still be free (upon the death of the precedent Person) to
present another in his stead as they see good.

Ans. 1. A Patron (if he be true to his trust) shall gain nothing (in point of
profit by a new Presentation, and therefore (in that respect) he loses nothing
by confirming the present Incumbent for term of his life.

2. For the liberty of presenting another man, the Patron might have it allowed
him, in making a new choice, when the successor of the former Minister dies,
who though he come into the Benefice later, may go out of the world sooner then
his Predecessor, and that may prove a privilege rather then a prejudice to him.

3. If the Parliament (without such compensation or amends) had made a vote for
continuation as well as for collation of the Sequestered Benefice, upon the
Minister of their own choice (as we humbly conceive they ought to have done) no
Patron (that was not a Parliament man) would have presumed to gainsay it, since
he might see the exercise of Parliamentary power in a far greater matter, viz.
in depriving his Clerk of his livelihood by their Sequestration, and might feel
more himself then the suspension of his Patronage (for one turn only) in the
payment of the military Sessement, and in other sorts of submission to the
present power.







SECT. II.


1. IT is contrary to the primitive practice of the purest times for the godly
Christians (of old) made the choice of a Minister one of their chiefest
bnsinesses of Religion, for as an eminent Non est ullum praestautius aut
sautarius Dei. donum, quam sincerus verbi divini minister: vero dona Dei non
possunt aliter, quam per preces obtineri. Gerard. L. Com. Tom 6. p. 136.
Writer observes;) and (to the like purpose) speak the Reverend There being
nothing (under heaven) of greater importance then the preaching of the glorious
Gospel of Jesus Christ, you cannot but be very senfible of what weight and
concernment it is to take a right estimate of all that offer themselves, and to
pass a due approbation of such only as Christ himself would have admitted to
that great emploiment. Merc. Politic. from Thurld. April 13. to Thursd. April
20, 1554; Numb. 201. p. 3415.
Commissioners for approbation of public Preachers, there is not a more
excellent and salutary gift of God (he means by the Ministry of men) then a
good and well qualified Minister to Christian People; Now the gifts of God
(says he) are to be sued for by prayer to him who makes able Ministers of the
New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. and therefore the Church (in the Apostles time) used
(upon this occasion) to address their supplications to God, as Act. 1.24 and
13.3. and 14.23. According to this pattern has been the constant practice of
those (who were entrusted by the Parliament for trial of Ministers to be sent
(as supplies) to the places whence Delinquents were removed; for they always
began their examination with prayer, and they and the godly people (if there
were any such in the Parishes whither they were sent) joined their prayers to
God for the same purpose, and so received such Ministers as was sent unto them
by God for their good, whereby they and their people as joined together by God
in a religious way, they should not by men be put asunder, Mat. 19.6. in a mere
secular way, which has no savor of Religion in it, we may say (in respect of
some) in a very sinful way, as we shall show in the practice of diverse Patrons
in the fourth Section.

2. After the Apostles times (for many hundreds of years) the Monopoly of
Patrons was not heard of in the Christian Church; for even Bishops were
ordinarily Marc. Anton. dc Dominis de Reipubl. Eccl. l. 3. c. 3. p. 41.. 40.
chosen by the Clergy and People, which Spalatensis proves by 33. Testimonies,
which are founded on this Axiom of Reason and Justice, That which is of common
concernment ought to be proposed to common consent, and not to be left to the
Quod ad omnes pertinet, quod omnes tangit, ab unius arbitrio pendere neutiquam
debet. Gerard. l. Com. Tom 6. p. 136. Co. 2. p. 137. Col. 1.
arbitrary pleasure of one alone, which In eligendis Episcopis diu sua populo
libertas fuit conservata, nequis obtruderetur, qui non omnibus aecceptus fuit,
hoc igitur in concilio Antiocheno v^tilum est, nequis invitis ingereretur quod
and Leo primus diligenter confirmat. Ep. 90. c. 2. Calv Instit. l. 4. c. 4. p.
417.
Calvin also affirms (and confirms it) by a Canon of a Council at Antioch,
and an Epistle of Leo the first.

Obj. Against this the Bellar. de Chricis c. 7. Tom. 2. p. 309. in 8. Estius in
l. 4. Sent did. 24. Eckius de primatu Petri, l. 3. c. 28.
Papists take many exceptions upon pretense of reason and testimony, their
Reasons are many of them feeble and frivolous, and their Testimonies of small
authority, only one (of each sort) is worthy of notice and answer: The reason
is, that popular Elections are turbulent and tend to Sedition and Faction: The
Testimony is that of the Council of Council. Laodicen. Can. 13. (...) Tom. 1.
Council. p. 298. Edit. Bin. Lutet. Paris. p. 1636.
Laodicea (which sat about the year 320.) and would not permit the people to
make choice of Bishops or Ministers, which Fateor in Concilio Laodiceno optima
racione constitutum, ne turbis Electio permittatur; vix enim unquam evenit ut
tot capita. etc. Calv. Instit. l. 2. c. 4. p. 418..12.
Calvin not only confesses but commends, because (says he) it very rarely
(or scarce at any time) comes to pass that so many heads do agree in one
sense well to compose any matter; But for this inconvenience there was (says
he) good remedy; For

1. The promiscuous multitude were not permitted to manage the Election, and
that was it which was forbidden in the forecited Canon of the Council of
Laodicea, the same (in effect) is asserted by the m The Divine Right of the
Gospel Ministry, par. 1. c. 8. page 125. where they propose and prove, That the
Election of a Minister does not belong wholly or solely to the major part of
every particular Congregation.
Provincial Assembly of London in their late Learned Book of the Divine Right
of the Gospel Ministry.

The This term Clorgy we use only because it is best understood, not as
misapplied by Papists or any other who appropriate it to themselves, to the
prejudiee of the just privilege of all true believers who are clear (or the
Lords lot and portion) as well as the Priests under the Old Testament, or
Presbyters or Ministers of the New.
Clergy by rule and order, that the Election might be orderly, made the first
choice, and proposed the Elected person to the Magistrate or Senate (if they
were Christian) if not, to the people who were professed Christians; if they
had any just exception against the party proposed, another was offered, and if
the people made choice of any, the Clergy were to judge of their sitnesse or
unfitness, and to approve or dislike of them as they saw cause; So that the
last or complete Election was not left to the people alone, nor they left out,
or any one obtruded upon them without their consent, and that they might
consent to receive such a man as did merit their acceptance, they were docendi
and ducendi to be taught and lead by those who were better able to judge then
themselves, and who were (by no means) to suffer themselves to be misled by
popular ignorance or perverseness: thus (in effect though in other words) have
Calv. Instit. ubi ante.
Calvin, Spalat. de Reipub. Eccles. l. 3. c. 3. p. 414.. 52.
Spalatensis, Duaren. de Sac. Ecc. minist. l. 3. c. 11. fol. 59. a.
and Duarenus the Dr Reynolds Yhes. 5. p. 650. added to his conference with
Heart.
famous Lawyer (as D. Reynolds set him forth) resolved, and thereby have
avoided the Popish Objections beforementioned.

SECT. III.


3. FOr a great part of this time there was no distinction of Parishes, and
until they were distinguished there was no Patron that had any such privilege
as is now assumed.

Tooker of the Fab. of the Church and Church Livings p. 44.
D. Tooker and Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. p. 33.3.
M. Hooker refer the Original of Parochial Partitions to Pope Evaristius
Anno Christi 112. but neither of them quote any authority for it; They that do
name the Book called the Pontificiale of Pope Damasus who was Bishop of Rome,
about the year 367. but that (say Baron. Annal, Tom. 4. ad An. 384. number. 22.
Baronius and Possea. Appar. Tom. ^. p. 410.
Possevine) was not the Book of that Damasus (but of another) nor was it the
Book of any Damasus at all, but of Anastasius Bibliethecarius says Bellar. de
Ecc. Script. p. 123.
Bellarmine, and whose Book soever it was, it is (for diverse untruths)
disapproved by Baron. ubi supra.
Baronius, and Bin. Tom. 1. cou. p. 61. col. 2.
Binius; Others refer the Original of this distinction to Pope Dionyfius
Anno 261. as Bin. ibid. p. 191. col. 2.
Binius accounts, but Baron. Tom. 2. number. 17.
Baronius reckons Anno 270. But this Baron. ubi auio.
Baronius reports rather as a Renovation in his time, or by him, then a new
Institution: Howsoever, Mr Seld. Hist. of Tithes, c. 9. p. 254, 255.


4. Whether the division of Parishes were Anno 112. 261. or 270. or any time,
before the Year 700. (if made by a Pope or any Prelate of inferior degree) it
makes nothing for the sole privilege of Patrons hitherto; for until the Year
700. (as M. Seldom observerh) the Ministers lived with the Bishops (who
received the revenues of the Church within the compass of their diocese for
themselves and them) and were sent out (by them) to preach and administer the
Sacraments in several places (as was thought most expedient) in this no Patron
had any thing to do either with the Office or Benefice of a Minister.

SECT. IV.
England, both before the Parliament summoned by the late King, and since.

5. THE Learned and prudent Author of the History of the Council of Trent
conceives, the division of Parishes in many places to have began with the
people, thus, Hist. of the Counc. of Trent. l. 6. p. 498.
When a certain number of Inhabitants (having received the true faith) built a
Temple for exercise of Religion, they hired a Minister, and did constitute a
Church, which by the neighbors was called a Parish, and when the number was
increased, if one Church and Minister were not sufficient, those who were most
remote did build another and fit themselves better.

M. Seldom ib. p. 259. Of this see also M. Priune de Jure Patronat. page 10.
Mr Seldom makes the like Observation, When Devotion (says he) grew firmer,
and most Laymen (of fair Estates) desired the Country residence of some
Chaplains that might be always ready for Christian instruction of them, their
Families and adjoining Tenants, Oratories, and Churches began to be built, and
were endowed with peculiar maintenance from the Founders for the Incumbents
which should there only reside.

6. From this foundation or maintenance allotted to the Minister, the Founder
or Benefactor had a Joh. Call. Medul. lexici jurid. p 808. Col. 1. Jus Cansuic.
tit. 38. c. 25. col. 498. Jus Greg. 23. Edit. an. 1616. Justiniani Novel. 123.
Council Trident. Sess. 14. c. 12. Tom. 9. p. 391. Cowels Interpret. verbo
Patrov. Duaren. de Sacr. Eecl. Minister. l. 5. fol 63. p. 6.
Right of Patronage, and was called a Patron, rather a Patron then a Lord
(says Dua en. Ibid fol. 64. a.
Duarenus) because be was to be a Protector of the Church. See Mr. Prinne de
Jure Eatronat. p. 4 r.
by Plea, by intercession, by his tongue, by his pen, by his purse, and by his
sword, and for both these Reasons be had a double privilege, the one was to
See the Authors torecited; and add to them M. Prinne de Jure Patronat. p. 10,
11, 13.
present a Clark when the Church was void, the other was Patronus houoraudus
and ab Ecclesia sundard, sustentandas stegeat, Loc. com. in jus canonicum ad
fin. Corp Juris canon. verb Patronus.
to be relieved out of the revenues of the Church, if he (who was so
religiously liberal, should (which was very rarely and seldom seen) come to
need the liberality of others.

7. These privileges are held by Est autem jus Patronatus personale, nec
personam egredatur, nisi (...) sit ratio quae in (...). Joh. Calv. Ned. lex
jurid. p. 808. (...). 1. Nemo cujusvis dignitatis Ecclesiastica vel secularis)
quacunque ratione (nisi beneficum aut capellam, de nove fundaverit, out erectam
sufficicute dote de suis proprijs and patrimonialibus bo^is competenter
dotaverit) jus Patronatus imprtrare aut obtinere possit. Coc l. Trid. Ses. 14.
c. 12. To. 9. p. 391.


some only person not hereditary, and so not to be transferred to^^ man's heir (
unless fox the same reason that was in the Predecessor, that is): unless he
be a Founder or Benefactor also as he was; Others hold that the right of
Patronage may pass from one to another (as Lands of Inheritance) as Notandum
quod (mortus Patrono) idsus. ad-haeredem ipsius tranfire, and si plures
existunt Haereder in solidum Patroni eunt non pre partibus hereditarys. Fr.
Duaren. de Eccl. Sacr. minist. l. 5. c. 4. fol. 64. a.
Duarenus resolves, and (with him) diverse others, whose testimonies we shall
no need to relate, fince we of this Nation have many Laws and long practice,
for an hereditary right to a Title of Patronage, as well as of mere secular
possessions, yet

8. The practice of diverse Patrons has been such as has showed them to be
rather titular then real, many ways Contra detestabilcm corruptelam
Patronerum, qui (rectoribus Ecclesiarum defunctis) Ecclesias spoliant. Council.
Salisburg. An. Domint 1420. Tom. 7. par 7. p. 1147. col. 1.
for some (When the Rectors have been dead) have robbed their living Successors
of their Rights and Revenues, Nonnulli Eccles. Patroni pueros infantes and
alios in Ecelesiis (in quibus jus Patronatus obtinent) violenter intrudunt.
Conc. Palentin. An. 1332. Tom. 7. par. 2. page 960. col. 2.
and some have intruded children, yea, Infants in stead of able Pastors, who
could do no duty that others in their Names might take the dues belonging to
the Labourer in the work of the Lord, and those who are guilty of these crimes
will make no scruple (though it be a great sin) to commit Quoniam in
quibusdam locis Alamaniae fundatores Ecclesiarum, aut ipsorum Haeredes
potestate abutuntur, clerices Simoniace praesentantes, etc. Council. Gerunden.
Ann. 1225. Tom. 7. Conc. part. 2. can. 9. page 834, 835.
Simony whereby they make a Minister to buy an insupportable burden (the
charge of souls) at such an unreasonable rate, as (if he live long) he shall
never thrive or save by it, and (if he die soon) he is like to be a great
loser, by his hard bargain with his greedy Patron. Besides what his loss may
be at his account in another world, which is seldom thought of (by such
Simoniacal chapmen) until it come upon them to their confusion.

9. We could wish that these complaints were (all of them) to be confined to
foreign and Popish Patrons; But our condition is not so happy, for with us
Protestants (such Protestanrs as the Patrons of whom we now speak are Patrons)
the sin of Simony is more allowed then it is among the Papists: For 1.
Append. ad Conoil Later. 3. Conc. par. 2. p. 673. Azor. Inst. par. 3. page 12.
c. 10. col. 1690, Ibid.
They forbid and condemn the sale of the right of Patronage. 2.o If a man sell
any thing to which a Patronage is annexed, they judge it Simony to take any
more for the purchase (with respect to the Patronage) then if there were no
Patronage to pass along with it.

3. Benesleium (untequans vacat) nec dandum, uec promittendum. Fr. Duaren. de
Sac. eccles. minist. l. 5. c. 12. fol. 74. p. 6.
They prohibited not only the sale of Advowsons but the gift or promise of any
place before it be void, whereof the Nulla Ecclefiastica ministeria ceu
Beneficia tribuantur alicui, ceu promittantur, ne defidenare quis mortem
proximi videatur, iu cujus locum and beneficium se crediderit successurum.
Decret. Greg. l. 3. tit, 8. col. 389.
Canon Law renders this reason, lest he should desire his death in whose place
he had hope to succeed; and the Bishop of Hist. of Council of Trent. l. 8. p.
764.
Conimbree (in the Council of Trent) speaking at large against expectations and
advow. sons, enforced his reason to a furtherdegree of danger then the desire
of death, and said, they make the Incumbents death not only to be desired but
some times to be procured.

But (with us) Patronages are bought and sold, not only as Appendices to other
things that are purehased, but singly and by themselves, and the selling of
advowsons avowed as vendible Assets, So M. Pryn calls them de Jure
Patronatus, p. 14. The word Assets is nothing but the French word Assez i.e.
satis. It signifies in our common Law goods enough to discharge that burden
which is cast upon the Executor or, Heir, in the satisfying of the Testators or
Ancestors debts or legacies. Cowels Interp. ver. Assets.
Assets as well as either lands or chattels Of this See the Copy of a Letter
written on that occasion at the end of this Book.
, and that had been so decreed by Ordinance of Parliament, and by their
practice confirmed, if some men's votes might have prevailed to so ill a
purpose, and with us the Sale of Benefices (actually void) has been so
frequent and ordinary, that there was need of a Can. 40. of the Convocat. held
1603. the Oath is in these words following, 1 N. N. do swear, That I have made
no Simoniacal payment, contract or promise, directly or indirectly, by my self
or by any other, to my knowledge or with my consent, to any person or persons
whatsoever, for or concerning the procuring and obtaining of this
ecclesiastical dignity, place, preferment, office or living (respectively and
particularly naming the same to which he is to be admirted, instituted,
collated, installed or confirmed) nor will (at any time) hereafter perform or
satisfy any such kind of payment, conduct or promise, made by any other
without my knowledge and consent. So help me God through Jesus Christ.
very strict Canonical Oath to withhold Ministers from buying of them, and as
great need was there, and greater reason to put an Oath upon Patrons; that they
should not sell them for the M Prinne de Jure Patronatus, p. 18.
forfeiture of one turn only of presentation (which is all the punishment our
Law inflicteth upon a Simoniacal Patron) is too little, the Canon Law doometh
him to no less a loss, then (for his Lindwood. Prove. constit. l. 5. fo. 202.
p. 6.
whole life) to be deprived of the power of presenting, but their privilege
has found too many Patrons (hitherto in the Parliament) so that (as a choice
darling) by whom it has been too much cherished to be restrained from all
offense, and too many friends in Courts of justice to be punished when abused,
thence it is

10. That Patrons have put in so many unworthy Ministers who deserved (by the
Parliament to be put out again, and that they have sometimes presumed (by force
of Arms) to pull those out of their possession, At Astbury in Chesh. An. 1658
whom both the Houses of Parliament have (by their express approbation) chosen
and placed in the room of displaced Delinquents, and that some have outed
Ministers of eminent note and public approbation, to make room for those who
(for their disaffection to the State) have been expelled out of other places,
and that others (as bad as they) have been (by Patrons) obtruded upon the
people, and so (as they well deserved) have been again removed by authority: In
these and other kinds (very criminal) we doubt not but diverse instances of
miscarriage of Patrons may be produced, which may be worthy both of the
cognizance and correction of the Supreme authority of this Nation.

11. The office of a Patron being to protect both the Incumbent and people
against injury (so far as he is able) without any expectation of advantage to
himself, it is his duty to do what he can that the Church may be well supplied
M. Prinne de jure patronatus. p. 7, 11, 13, 13, 15, 21, 35.
in case of lawful avoidance by death, resignation, translation, deprivation,
or otherwise, but not to make it void when it is well supplied already, by
putting out an able and learned Minister, that he may show his power and act
his pleasure by imposing another upon the people.

Nor is there or can there be any thing in his privilege (if rightly stated
and not corruptly exercised) which may countervail the least of the evils
(before remembered and complained of) against the glory of God, the honor of
the Government, the Right of the people and Minister appointed by the one and
accepted by the other (at least by the godly party) for their spiritual guide
in the Ministry of the Gospel.

And in this case we conceive their privilege (such as it is) should be less
prevalent for the expulsion of a good Minister who abused it before in the
choice of a bad one, so bad that he deserved to be expelled for dis-service to
the Church and State, and therefore put a necessity upon the Superior powers to
put him out and to choose another, who (continuing true to his undertaking)
should be continued in his place for the carrying of the work of Reformation,
as it was designed by the Supreme authority of this Nation, which is deserted
and obstructed by permitting a private Patron to drive an able, faithful, and
painful Preacher from the Church to which he was sent (by the highest
authority, upon due and orderly trial of his sufficiency and sincerity) and to
put in another (of his own Nomination) to succeed the dead in his Title and the
living in the Office and Benefice annexed to it, which a faithful and godly
Patron would not do if he might, and an unfaithful and wicked Patron should not
be permitted to do if he would.

SECT. V.
The respect due to Religious Patrons, with advice for a Conscientious
discharge of the trust reposed in them; wherein some passages in Mr Prinnes
late Book (of the Right of Patronage) seeming to prejudice our cause, are
proposed and answered.

WE do not by all or any of this we have said, intend any prejudice to such
Patrons as (by Law) are allowed to take care and provide a well-qualified
Preacher for a People that want him, and who show themselves conscienciously
careful to promote the glory of God and the spiritual good of Christian
Congregations, preferring them before their own temporal interest; Such a
Patron we take for a Patron indeed, that is, a Accipitur Patrouns pro defensore
little quos in tutela habet. And. Altiat. de verb. signif. Commont. leg. 52. p.
129.
defender, which implies as M. Prinne de jure patronatus, p. 4.
M. Prin holds, not only a Patronage Protection, or defense of the Incumbents
and Churches cause, when there is need in Courts of Justice, by way of plea or
intercession, as an Advocate does, but also their defense and Patronage, by the
sword, in the field when assaulted by openarmed adversaries, sacrilegious
Church-robbers, or blourly persecutors; by pen, when invaded by heretics and
Schismatichs; Such a Patron well deserves to be honored (as the Civilians
Primum locum (post patrem apud clientem) obtinere patronus debet. Ibid.
teach us) next unto a Father; and we conceive he may be of good use for the
choice of a meet Minister, and for his comfortable Incumbency (when he is
chosen) as also for the prevention of discord, and for quiet composing thereof
(if it arise among the people about the Election of a Minister) and that when
such a one as is not liable to any just exception, (for insufficiency or ill
carriage) is by such a Patron seasonably offered to the people (that is, when
the place becomes void by death, resignation, etc.) as has been said of him
who officiated to them before, he should rather be cheerfully received, then
waywardly rejected by them, which has Peccant Ecclesiae quae personam a
Patrouis nominatam, testimonio consistorij comprobatam, donis ad doccndum
necessarijs instructam, etc. recipere reeusant, urgentes ut plures una personae
praesententur in arbitrio enim Patrouorum positum, an unam vel plures personas
nominare velint, nes absolutae necessicatis est, ex pluribus fieri electionem,
sed suffieit ad legitim an vocationem si accedat Ecclesiae consensus: -- a
Patrono nominaium and a consistorio comprobatum populus denegare non debet,
nisi ob graves ac praegnantes causas, doctrinam vel vitam praelentatae personae
concernentes. Gerard. loc. com. vol. 6. c. 3. Sect. 6. col. 137.
sometimes been the peoples fault, who have refused such as have been worthy to
be accepted, because singly proposed by the Patron without others out of whom
they might take their choice of him they like best.

Which disrespect of a worthy and well-meaning Patron is deservedly disliked
and condemned by a Learned Author forementioned; for it is very considerable
which M. Prinne de Jure pat. p, 10, 11.
M. Prinne has in his late Book of the Right of Patronage (though in all
points we agree not with him, and in some particulars conceive we have just
cause to except against him) in these words, Now because both the soil whereon
these Churches were built, together with the Churchyards thereto annexed for
interring the dead, these Fabrics of the Churches, with the Parsonage-houses,
Rectories, Glebes, Revenues, and Tithes thereto annexed, for the Ministers
maintenance, proceeded originally from these Founders Piety and Donation, and
no way from the Parishioners who were but the Founders Tenants Servants or
Children, and held their Lands from by or under them, charged with such Tithes
as they first granted out of them to the Ministers (still allowed to them in
their Leases, Fines, Purchases, in all succeeding ages by a proportionable
defalcation, according to their ordinary valuation) both by the common, Canon,
and civil law, to the Laws of our own and other Realms, and the very dictates
of Reason, Justice, Equity, held it reasonable, just, equitable, that these
pious, bountiful Founders and Benefactors should reserve the full and absolute
power of bestowing, conferring the Rectories, Tithes, and profits of these
Cburches (upon every avoidance by death, resignation, Cessein seems to be
allied in signisication to Cessor, and Cessor is he that so long cease or
neglects to perform a duty belonging to him, as that by his cesse or cessing,
he incurreth the danger of Law, and has or may have the Writ Cessavit brought
against him. Old not. brev. p. 126. Cowels Interp. verb. Cessor.
Cessein, translation, deprivation, or otherwise) on such Incumbent Ministers
as themselves, their Heirs and Assigns, should nominate and make choice of for
their Ministers and Chaplains, it being held both unjust and unreasonable,
unconscionable, injurious and ungrateful, that the Parishioners or other
strangers (who contributed nothing toward the Fabrics Soil or Endowments of
these Churches, and paid no Tithes but what originally proceeded from the
Patrons Grants, allowed to themin their Fines and Purchases) should deprive
them of or intercommon with them, in their Right of presentation, upon any
avoidance, it being the Founders mere courtesy, piety, favor, to admit them
and their posterities free access at all times to these Churches, which they
founded not, and to reap the spiritual benefit of these Ministers and
Ordinances which they maintained not at their own free cost, but these Founders
and Patrons only; As it is (at this day) a mere grace and favor in our Innes
of Court, Colleges, and some Noblemen and Gentlemen in the Country, to permit
their Neighhours and Strangers free access to their private Chapels in their
houses to the Ordinances here dispensed by their own hired Chaplains and
Preachers, So far M. Prinne.

We have reported his opinion of the Patrons Right and power in presentations
at length; That it may appear we do him right, in what he says well, and that
we do him no wrong when we except against that wherein (we conceive) he has
said amiss.

For we grant the Right of a Fundamental Patron, or of a Patron that is a
Founder of or a great Benefactor to a Church, is much in that Church so founded
and endowed by him, but we do not couccive that they who were never such as
either of them, cannot have a full and absolute power of bestowing and
conferring Rectories, Benefiees, Tithes, and profits of Churches, upon every
avoidance, on such Incumbent Ministers as themselves, their Heirs and Assigns
alone shall nominate and make choice of for their Ministers and Chaplains,
neither do we think there is as good justice and equity for his propriety of
Right for sole Election who is neither Founder nor Benefactor, as for his who
builded a Church or house upon his own Land, at his own cost, and endowed them
with glebe-lands, and Tithes to dispose of them to whom he thinks meet, without
the License of any others who have no interest nor Inheritance therein, as M.
Prinne de Jure pat. p. 11, 21.
Mr Prinne affirms: Nor can we imagine that so good and learned a man, so
good a Friend to godly and learned Ministers, as Mr Prinne, would be advocate
for any Patrons who would not rather use his power to confirm an able and
Religious Minister in his place, then to eject him (upon this pretense) that by
the Law he has a peculiar and singnlar Right so to do.

For 1. (as M. M. Prinnc de Jure par. p. 21.
Prinne himself Ibid. p 35.
confesses) the Patrons Right is not absolute but limited by law to the choice
of a fit person, a Ibid. p. 27.
convenient Minister, when the Church is void.

2. That fitness is to be judged of by others, as himself (in effect)
acknowledges, where he says Ibid. p. 27.
that the evils and corrapt Contracts are sufficiently prevented by the Laws
already made against them (we wish it were so) and a vigilant care of
Governors and Presbyteries, to admit none but able, godly, and Orthodox
persons.

3. Those who founded Churches and endowed them out of devotion, gave them to
God, and in regard of his Interest in them could not dispose of them, could not
dispose of them as a man might do of a private or partieular house which he
buileeth for a civil use.

4. That the people have some more right in Churches then at the courtesy of
Patrons, appears by this, they are by the Laws of the Land to repair the body
of the Church at their charge, as the Rector or the Parson is the Chancell at
his charge, which could not be expected, nor would it be performed without (at
least) an implicit acknowledgement of a Right to make use of it.

Obj. But though they have a right to make use of the Church, they have no
right to make choice of the Minister who is to officiate in it, and if the
power were put into their hands (says M. Prinne) 1. It would M. Prinne do Jure
pat. p. 27.
cause faction and division in every Parish upon every vacancy. 2. Ibid. p. 28.
The generality of the Parishioners and people (in most Parishes) are so
ignorant, vicious, irreligious, injudicious, profane, neglectful of Gods
public. Ordinances, and enemies to all soul-searching and soul-saving
Ministers, who would seriously reprove and withdraw them from their fins and
evil courses, that we may sooner find an hundred conscientious, religious, and
godly Patrons (careful to present and encourage such Ministers) then one such
Parish wherein the generality and swaying part of the people, are so
well-affested and qualified as such Patrons.

Answ. 1. The right of the people (as we have already showed) is more in the
admission of the Minister then in possession of the place where he performs
his Function, and a right of so much more moment, that it were better for them
to hear a good Minister in the open Air (as at Paul's Cross the use has been
heretofore) then a bad one under the shelter of a seeled or leaded Church-roof.

2. As it would go ill with Religion if the choice of Ministeers were to be
swayed by the choice of the generality of Parishioners, or the major part: so
we fear it would not go very well with it if there were an absolute power in
the generality of Patrons, to Place what Ministers they please over our
Christian Congregations, and to displace them at their pleasure, Theresore

5. As we would not have the Patrons power absolute, especially not so far as
to be able to displace an able and worthy Minister set over a people by public
authority, so we would not have the rude or irreligious Rabble, to interpose in
so pious an interest, nor the godly (who are best able to judge) waywardly to
contest with the Patron, when he proposes such an one to them as neither by
lack of learning, utterance, diligence, and godliness of life, is liable to
exception. Nor would we have such a Minister to slight the favor of the
Patron (because he is placed by a power fuperiour to his) but rather by all
ingenuous observance of him, and respect unto him, to endeavor the obtainment
of his consent to his settlement, and his countenance and his protection in the
execution of his calling.

And that Patrons may be more free from desert of complaints against them then
many heretofore have been, we wish them to take heed of taking gain for
godliness, as some do, 1 Timothy 6.5. and rather to think godliness is gain, as
the Apostle would have them, v. 6. and then they will not (for filthy lucres
sake) make sale of that which should be freely given. The Emperor Alexander
Severus (no professed Christian Christo Templum condere voluit, cumque inter
Deos recipere, cumque Christiani qui locumquendam qui publicus fuerat
occupassent, and popinarij dicerent sibi eum deberi, rescripfit, melius essc
quomodocunque illic Deus colatur, quam locus popinarijs dedatur. Bueolz, Ind.
Chron. ad An. 224. p. 171.
though a favourer of Christ and Christian profession) would not allow of the
Necesse est ut qui emit vendat, ego non patiar mercatores potestatum, quos si
patiar soudemuare non possum, erubesco enim punire illum bominem qui emit and
vendit. Elias Lamprid. de Alexandr. Sever. part. 3. Hist. August. p. 376. Edit.
Boxborn.
sale of secular offices, lest they who bought their power by wholesale,
should sell their consciences by retail in the exercise thereof, wherein the
injury could be but (as the office was) secular (relating only to the bodies,
goods, or good name of another) but buying and selling spiritual offices may
produce so much worse effects as the things are the better and more precious
(the glory of God and the souls of men) most prejudiced by such Simoniacal
merchandise.

Therefore Patrons should do well, to take the good counsel of h M. Hooker
(though no Precisian) he calls it a Request and most earnest Suit, in these
words, That they who have a Right to Patronage, have power to present to
spiritual livings, and may in that respect much damnifie the Church of God
(for the ease of their own acccunt in that dreadful day) would somewhat
consider what it is to betray (for gain) the souls which Christ has redeemed
with his blood, what to violate the sacred bond of fidelity and solemn promise
given (at first) to God and his Church, by them from whose original (together
with the self Title of Right) the same obligation of duty is likewise descended.

This grave and godly advice as it behooves all Patrons seriously to consider
and constantly to practice, so it lays so much the greater Engagement upon
Academical and Collegiat Patrons, as the In case of recusancy, Popish Patrons
(during their recusancy only) are disabled to present or grant any avoidance of
any Churches or Ecclesiastical Livings after conviction. cook 10. Rep. P. 55.
and their right of presentment granted to the Universties of Oxford and
Cambridge. 3. Idcob. cap 5. cited by M. Prinne de iure patron. p. 18.
greater trust is reposed in 'them, and as they have the more choice are better
able to judge, and are more obliged to look directly to the gracious and
glorious ends for which the Ministry is ordained, and for such Patrons though
heretofore (conferring Benefices rather by tale of years then weight of parts)
they too frequently sent forth unworthy men to take upon them tae charge of
souls, yet in the worst of times they were seldom guilty of the sin of
Simony (as most other Patrons were:) but now there is less fear of that, and
more hope that for time to come collegiat presentations will be swayed not by
seniority but sufficiency, and not by Learning alone by Religion likewise, not
to deprive a people of a good Minister when they have one, but to supply them
with a good one when they want, not by mere imperious imposition upon the
people, but by a Christian and courteous compliance with their good likings,
when just and reasonable things will give them content, and so it will be
matter of great advantage to the Church, that such pious, judicious, and
meek-spirited Patrons be still continued in their trust.

SECT. VI.
The Conclusion briefly recollecting the chief contents, of what is before more
largely delivered.

1. IF the Parliament, professing and acting Reformation of matters amiss in
Church and State, be justly to be reputed more circumspect and careful, what
Pastors they set up over Christian Congregations, then ordinary Patrons may
reasonably be presumed to be.

2. If when the Parliament has made a good choice of a Pastor for such a
people, and they have accepted of him, and are desirous to have him continue
with them, they should not be deprived of him at the will and pleasure of one
man.

3. If the Minister appointed to officiate by the Parliament be exposed to the
hatred of the outed Minister and all his party, and to all the injuries and
indignities they can do him, for his faithful and constant cleaving to the
Parliament, and for his conformity to their Ordinances against sinful
profaneness and superstitious formality.

4. If when the Sequestered Minister dies, the thrusting out of such a one by
the Patron that he may put in another whom he pleases in his place be to give
him up to misery, among them that hate him, and to make him the principal
mourner at his chief enemies death, and this to the grief of the godly, the
rejoicing of the wicked, and to the great Reproach and Impediment of the
Reformation professed.

5. If the primitive Christians (of the purest times) made the choice of an
Evangelicall Minister not a matter (merely or principally) of humane
management, but one of the chiefest businesses of Religion, to be guided and
ordered by an especial providence of God, and that to be sought for and
obtained by prayer.

6. If for many hundreds of years after Christ the Church had no such
presentative Patrons as in later ages have born all the sway, but that matters
of common concernment in the Church (as the choice of a Minister is) were to be
carried on by common consultation, and as much as may be also by consent.

7. If when Patronage began, such only were rightly so called and accounted, as
were Founders of Churches, and enowed them with competent Revenues, or were
(some way or other) great benefactors unto them.

8. If the office of a Patron be to be careful to supply a Congregation with a
good Minister, when there is want of one, and not to deprive the people of a
good one when they have him, and by all good ways and means to uphold and
countenance him in his office, and to maintain the Rights and Privileges of
the Church committed to his care.

9. If a Patron may not sell either a presentation or an advowson, nor make any
secular advantage of his Right or Trust, as a true religious Patron will not
though he might gain never so much by the bargain.

10. If Suspension of a Patron from one turn of presenting only at the death of
the former, may be recompensed by permitting him to present at the death of the
later Incumbent, and that in all likelihood by a speedier return, when an
ancient man is placed in the room of a younger; or if (without such
compensation) one turn were wholly lost to him, the inconvenience were nothing
so great as the mischiefs sore-mentioned on the Ministers part, and theirs who
are interested in him, if he should be ejected, because it is the Patrons
pleasure to have it so.

11. If the Prevarication of diverse particular Patrons, and the abuse of their
power and trust, have been such in this Nation (especially by the sin of
Simony) as to need severe Laws and Ordinances to restrain it.

12. If so many, set up for Overseers or Watchmen for the safety of souls, by
such Patrons (though all were not such, for diverse were rather unhappy then
ungodly in the choice of their Clerks) deserved to be put out for
insufficiency, idleness, scandal and disaffection to the Parliament, and those
whom they have sent to succeed them in their places, continue constant in the
duties of their callings, both general as Christians, and particular as
Ministers, and as Subjects to the Supreme Governors of this Nation; Then we
trust that their wisdom duly weighing all the premises (which before have
been proposed and proved) will conconclude our Request to be reasonable, and
their goodness will resolve to take us so far into their honorable and
powerful protection, as to secure us in our Incumbency while we live, and
endeavor sincerely and conscienciously to discharge our duties to God and his
people, from the reward of such as like unsavory salt deserve to be cast ont,
and to be trodden under foot of men, Mat. 5.13. which though we conceive no
Patron (who can justly challenge the Title, and truly persormeth the trust of a
Patron) will think us worthy of, yet since we have no ground of hope that the
most are such as they should be, we may have just cause of fear lest it may be
the lot of diverse among us to be hardly dealt withal, if we fall into some of
their hands (specially theirs who in their Principles and practice as far as
they dare, are as opposite to the present Magistracy as to our Ministry) for of
such we may expect to suffer both for their sakes and for our own; Sure we are
we have the more enemies, and our enemies are the more spightfull against us,
and more ready to wrong us by all the ways they have in their power (as in
part we have touched in our Petition,) Because 1. We adhered to the Parliament,
while they so far as their power and courage carried them, opposed it, and
obeyed the authority thereof in submitting to such commands as are rather
conformable then contrary to the Word of God, which they deny and disobey as
boldly as if the government that is over them, had nothing to do with them but
to protect them in a privilege to say and do what they please. 2, We do not
admit of such promiscuous Communions as make no difference between the clean
and unclean, as there should be Eze. 22.26. to which confusion the common
people have been so accuftomed (especially at Easter) that they think we do
them more wrong in denying them the Sacramental bread and wine at that time
(though for gross ignorance or open scandal) then they can do us though they
defraud us of our dues throughout the whole Year. 3. We do not officiate by the
Service Book, which diverse of them so much dote on, that we fear it would
offend them more to be deprived of it then if the Bible were taken from them.
4. We are more strict in our doctrine and practice, concerning the Sabbath, and
other points of Christian piety, and are more zealous against the Superstitious
and profane observances which meet together (though otherwise opposite) in
their unchristian Christmas Revellings then our Predecessors have been.


By all which as we are made the objects of a deeper degree of hatred by our
advesaries, so we hope (for the same causes) we shall be accounted the more
capable of his Highness and the Parliaments compassion for prevention of that
evil which may befall us if we survive our Predecessors, and succeed them not
in the favor of the Patron, to settle us where (by authority of Parllament) we
were formerly placed.

The Copy of the Letter mentioned in the 4th Section at the Letter (t) in the
margin of the 2d Alphabet.
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
I Shall first desire to represent my most affectionate and humble sense of the
favor your Lordship shows me, and of the honor you do me, in that (at so
little leisure as your many and weighty affairs will allow you) you are pleased
not only to bestow so many lines upon me at once, but in them both to instruct
me what to think, and hope of our present Optimates, and to cheer me up in my
many conflicts with the Pessimates of these; by a promise of more frequent
exchange of Letters with me in time to come: Though I shall not be so
presumptuous (in taking your word) as to expect a commerce with you (in this
kind) upon even returns, but only as it shall please your Lordship to take the
occasion and make the proportion. Next because you refer me to the Diurnals
for common intelligence, I shall crave leave to present you with some thoughts
and doubts I have concerning a report in the moderate, as the Authors miscals
his News-Book of this last week, in the last page of it, which he delivers in
these words, An Act for Sale of all Ecclesiastical Promotions in the gift of
the Crown, great Seal, etc. which was twice read and committed; If he relate
aright, somewhat (as I humbly conceive) is wrong, at least in the design of
some, which if it should proceed to accomplishment (unless it be lessened with
so many limitations as would bring it next to nothing) would east a greater
reproach upon our Reformation, then could fairly be cleared by the most able
Apologist; for the Sale of Ecclesiastical Offices is condemned by Scripture, by
reason, by humane constitutions of all sorts, by the godly in all ages, and the
better sort of both Religions, Protestant and Papist. In the Title of this Act
(as this man sets it down in contrary terms of sale and gift) there is the
confession of a fault (at least implicitly) and a profession (in ance) of a
more corrupt administration of Ecclesiastical matters then in the late Kings
time, in setting that to open sale which has been and should be bestowed
merely as a gift: there is something in our Laws I confess (as your Lordship
better knows then I) which permits the sale and purchase of Ecclesiastical
Patronages, and of advowsons; and so they permit Duels, Pluralities,
Non-residence, but I hope the abolition of such Laws will be a further degree
of our departure from the corruption of Popery and Papal prelacy, and if the
State will allow of such scandalous traffic (but I hope it will never do so)
their next act must be command them that have bought Ecclesiastical Benefices
to give them freely to those that are to officiate in the Church; as Dionysius
Dionysius victoriolas aureas, and Pateras coronasque simulachrorum tollebant,
etc. ferunt haee quae dixi sublata de fauis, in forum protulisse and per
praeconem vendidisse, exactaque pecunia edixisse, ut quod quisque a sacris
baberet, id (aute diem certam) in suum quidque fanum referret. Cic. de Not.
deor. l. 3. p. 255. number. 63.
when he had spoiled the Heathens Temples of their riches, and ornaments, and
had (by Proclamation of a Crier) sold them in the market, and received money
for them, gave charge to the buyers to restore them to the Temples from whence
they were taken, to which Edict the Orator that reports it adds this
Epiphonema, Ita ad impietatem it Dcos, in homines adjunxit injuriam. Ibid.
so to impiety against God he joined injury against men, and how shall those
two be separated in the sale of such things as (appertaining to Religion)
should be freely given for Religions sake? And if they ratify their sale so
far as to allow men to sell that which they have bought, that is a doubling,
yea, a multiplying of the impiety, as often as the alienation of such things
passes from hand to hand, which must needs amount to a greater guilt then of
Dionysius; for he (for ought we find upon record) offended but once in that
kind, and presently retracted the wrong done to Religion, by a Decree of
Restitution of his Temple-spoils (though he restored not the money to them that
bought them) as conceiving it to be a lesser crime to be injurious toward men
then sacrilegious toward God, wherein in Thesi he did not err, though in
hypothesi (I grant) it was worse so to defraud men then to take away the goods
from such Idol-gods, supposing he took them for mere Idols and not for true
gods whom he robbed; Your Lordship (I trust) has read thus far with
patience, since you know it is a service of duty and charity to do all we can
to prevent the evil of sin, Lev. 19.17. I must now leave it to your Lordships
prudence, to make such use of this advertisement as just cause and fit occasion
may produce, hoping that if such as are wise epsy any error in this
plain-dealing of mine, they that are also pious will overlook it, with liking
of that sincerity which goes along with it, and shall ever accompany both the
dictates and endeavors of

Your Lordships most humble and heartily devoted Servant, N.Y.
May 29. 1649.

It is probable this Letter might be some occasion, of putting to a nonplus
this scandalous motion for the sale of Patronages, because it was written to a
person of a public spirit, and of very eminent abilities, and of great
authority, by whose means it is like it was stopped, for after the date of this
Letter we no more heard of it.

TO THE Sincere and Pious Preachers of the Word of God, whether ordained
Ministers or gifted Brethren (Expectants or Probationers) for the Ministry of
the Gospel.
Reverend and welbeloved Brethren,
HOw much and how many of you are concerned in the Contents of these Papers
(now presented to the public view) though I do not certainly know, nor have
either mind or leisure curiously to enquire, I may probably guess, that all
of you (who have been admitted to Ministerial emploiment in diverse
Congregations since the deposition of Bishops) may find your interest
considerably touched in them, though in a different degree: and albeit it be
our principal duty to labor uncessantly, preaching in season and out of
season, 2 Timothy 4.2. that the Lord may be magnified, Psa. 35.37. His people and
faithful servants multiplied, that daily there may be added to the Church such
as should be saved, Act. 2.47. yet is it neither unlawful nor unbeseeming the
office of the ablest and holiest Minister, by all warrantable ways, to secure
his own condition and his Brethrens also (so far as he may be assistant to
them) from unjust molestation, especially at such a time as this, when many so
bestir themselves to reduce the Ministry to such a despicable poverty as may
degrade an Evangelical predicant into a Friar mendicant: To this purpose
(besides the busy malignity of the Levelling spirit against Ministers in
general) there has lately been discovered a new device of men (in other
things their passionate opposites) against some Ministers in particular, viz.
by a formality of Law, to eject those who were placed in sequestered Benefices,
by Authority of Parliament: which of late necessitated M. Y. of K. in
Leicestershire, to fly for refuge to his Highness the Lord Protector, and to
the same Asylum, many more had just cause to betake themselves, not only for
that they are liable to the like disturbauce but (besides that) to the peril
of expulsion upon the death of the outed Ministers, if the Patron please not to
settle them in their places.

And this being the common condition of many Ministers of England, it cannot
but appear very consonant to equity and reason, that they should jointly
address their complaints and Petitions where they may hope to find remedy,
and our hope (at the time of the first consultation of some of us about it) was
only in his Highness the Lord Protector, with his honorable Council; But now
the Parliament nearly approaching before we have perfected our address in that
way. we know not whether his Highness (were we as ready as we should be) would
not transmit our cause to the hearing and determination of that venerable
Senate, which if he did we should have the better hope of good success in our
suit, if withal he would vouchsafe (upon our humble Request) to commend it
with favor to their consideration.

In this and other particulars of importance your Brother and Servant (the
penman of these rather serious then curious dictates) would gladly be advised
by you, and had rather be guided by your Judgment (if he might be so happy as
to know it) then offer to lead you by his own; yet conceiving a business of
this nature cannot advance to the consent of many, if it do not commence from
the motion of some one, having waited a good while, and as yet in vain for an
inceptor to set it on foot, whose footsteps I might follow, and fearing that
the longer we delay to Petition for favor or justice, the more prejudice may
grow against our prevailing therein, as in the case betwixt the Israelites and
Amorites, Judge. 11.26. (though in a different proportion, according to the time
of forbearance and silence) and not knowing for how short a while I may have
opportunity to serve my generation; I thought it was my duty now to do
something in this kind, and to present it to you (my Brethren) for your
animadversion or approbation (as you think most meet) I am not so sond as to
imagine that in these days (wherein dissenting conceits make many like beads
dropped from a broken string and running out several ways one from another)
that all whom I desire to gratify by mine endeavors herein, will be ready to
entertain it with equal acceptance: that were to expect a miracle, like that
which is written of mauna in the book of Wisdom, c. 16. v. 20. viz. though it
were but one kind of meat, it was able to content every man's delight, agreeing
to every taste, or like that language which (though but one spoken by the
Apostles, Act. 2.6.) So in the Annotations of the Old Bible (called the Bishops
Bible.)
became the same to every hearer, which he understood (as some by Greg. Nazian.
Orat. 44. in Pentecost. Tom. 1. p. 715, 716.
different pointing give the sense of the words, though by a right pointing of
them ( Non inscite dixit eruditus quidam, aptam distinctionem Commentarij genus
esse. Erasm. de Recta Latini Gracique sermonis pronunciat. p. 63.
which in some cases serves instead of a Comment) the meaning be otherwise, so
far otherwise, that it is a Relation no less then ridiculous, which the
Papists give out of Francis Xaverius the Apostle of the Indies (as they call
him,) viz. So in the lives of the Saints gathered of Ribadeneira and Villegus,
and published by Edw Kinsm. par. 1. p. 34. printed Anno 1623.
That diverse times it happened while he preached there, that men of diverse
Nations heard their own tongue in one Sermon; But from the diversity fore
mentioned I may expect there may be many who have no mind to have a hand in
this matter, though upon several grounds, on which I will make no conjectural
descant that may offend them; I will now take notice only of one rather doubt
then Objection of some godly Brethren, which is, Whether it may not be thought
an impeachment of the just Right and Privilege of Patrons, to petition for our
settlement by any authority but their own? But this was their doubt while yet
they were acquainted only with the Petition it self, without the Reasons,
Limitations, and Cautions annexed to it, and when they had read the Case
stated, explained and proved, they confidently conceived there was no just
cause by this redress for any Patron (if competently qualified to deserve the
honor of that denomination) to be displeased with us, especially since a good
part of the plea which we make for our selves, is an Apology for them against
those who would have their interest in the choice and admission of a Minister,
laid level with theirs who are of lowest rank (it may be also their Tenants or
Servants) in a Parochial Assembly.

Besides this (I confess) some scruple may be taken at some particular
relations, which are known but to few, it may be only to the writer of them,
and perhaps to some mistakes of his the misprisions of the Printer may be added.

But for all that, the substance of the Petition and Reasons may be sound, and
assent is required to no more, and if the Petition it self be held right, it
will be no wrong to the rest to allow of it alone, yet if any one of better
abilities will be pleased to undertake the cause, and carry it on in such a way
as may be capable of more general compliance, I shall account it honor enough
to be his forerunner, to prepare the way for his more gracious acceptance, by
testifying of him, as John Baptist did of Christ (though neither of us both be
worthy to be compared to either of them) He that comes after me is mightier
then I, Mat. 3.11. and both of us may be more likely to prevail then one alone,
though if my self should come out single without any attestation (which yet
has not been my lot, albeit I have been thrice before now put upon such a
service as this in the way of printed publication) it shall not discourage me,
since as my chief aim has been to promote the glory of God and the common
good, not only of my contemporaries but of the generation to come, so have I
(in the present address to the superior powers) sincerely directed my course
to the same port with the less looking at mine own particular, though in some
respects my case be the same with many of yours, because I want not fair hopes
of the lawful favor of potent friends, to wind my self (single) out of the
personal sense of our principal aggrievance; which if it should fail I may
find another of you. But the Apostles description of Charity by this property
with others, that it secketh not her own, 1 Cor. 13.5. Verba non quaerlt quae
sua sunt, sic intelliguntur, quia communia proprijs, non propria communibus
anteponit. Estius in 1 Cor. 13.5. ex. Aug.
that is, prefers a common before a peculiar good, not e contra, both
enjoyneth and enclineth me to joy more in the sociable participation of a
public benefit with the rest of my Brethren, then as a private favor to
obtain a grace or indulgence for my self alone. This is the mind of him who
heartily prays to God for you all, that in all necessary points of faith,
piety, and charity, you may be of one accord, of one mind, Phil. 2.2. that you
may speak the same thing and be perfectly joined together in the same mind and
the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. and while thus you live, love, and join
together (as Brethren) God will own you as his children, and if children then
heirs, heirs of God and joyut heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. in this high, holy,
and happy communion, it is his only ambition to have a share with you, who
while he lives resolves to remain

Entirely yours, In all the offices of a loving Brother, and humble Servant,
Philotheus Philomystes.
Aug. 1. 1654.
FINIS.

