THE PETITION OF THE LORD MAYOR, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London, in
Common Council assembled; UNTO The right Honorable the Commons of ENGLAND in
PARLIAMENT Assembed, With the Answer of the Parliament thereunto: And also, The
Petition of diverse well-affected Citizens of the City of London, Presented unto
the Common Council, humbly desiring their concurrence therein.

Published according to Order.



LONDON, Printed by Matthew. Simmons, June 6. 1645

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BURGESSES of the Commons
House of PARLIAMENT, The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Commons of the City of LONDON in Common Council assembled.
Shows,
THAT the Inhabitants of this City, and parts adjacent, are generally most
deeply sensible of these pressing miseries, under which they and the whole
Kingdom now groan: And that imminent ruin which is coming upon both through
the relieving of Chester, the unexpressible loss of Leicester, the barbarous
cruelty executed there, the danger of the rest of our Garrisons, and
well-affected thereabouts, and the increasing and prevailing of the enemy by
Sea and Land, like a mighty Torrent; That (among other causes which have had a
deep influence upon this most sad posture of our condition) the said
Inhabitants apprehend, that the not completing of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army
(according to an Ordinance of Parliament in that behalf,) the want of such a
Committee in that Army, as may give our Commanders in chief, power and
encouragement to improve all present advantages without attending commands and
directions from remote Councels. The calling back of Lieutenant General
Cromwell, and Major General Brown, when they were pursuing the enemy; The not
advancing of our brethren of Scotland into these Southern parts; The great
decay of Trade, and discouragements of Merchants for want of a constant convoy,
His Maties publishing his sense of the proceedings at the late Treaty, and the
Parliament not publishing their sense thereof. And their resolutions against
free trade by Sea to such Ports as are or shall be in the power of the enemy,
have been the chief; That great numbers of those Inhabitants have lately
expressed their earnest desires (by Petition and otherwise, to the
representative body of the City, in common Council assembled,) That this
their deep sense and apprehensions might be forthwith made known to both
Houses of Parliament, Their humble suit that the remedies may be speedily
considered of, and effectually executed; and their resolutions, according to
all former expressions, that they will not think their lives, nor any thing
they possess, too dear to hazard for your encouragement and preservation.

Thereupon the Petitioners (for prevention of further miseries, inconveniences,
and the utter ruin of the Parliament, of this City and Kingdom, make it their
humble request to this houourable House, That care may be taken for the speedy
recruiting of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, and for his encouragement, That such
a Committee may be sent with that Army, as may give our Commanders in chief
(of whose faithfulness the Kingdom has had so large testimony) power and
encouragement to improve all present advantages aforesaid: That the said Army
(or such part thereof as in your wisdom shall seem meet) may be ordered
forthwith to march toward our enemies in the field, as well for the regaining
of Leicester (if it be possible) before it be made impregnable by
fortifications; as also for prevention of the enemies further surprising of
other places of strength, and destroying the rest who have appeared in defense
of the Parliament, and for preservation of the kingdom. That our brethren of
Scotland may be more earnestly pressed to march Southward; That Lieutenant
General Cromwell may presently have power to raise and command the
Association, until such other course be taken, as may tend to the safety of
those Counties, and of this City and Kingdom. That the Navy may be so
ordered, as may encourage Merchants, and advance Trade, by having constant
Convoyes. That the proceedings at the late Treaty may be forthwith published by
the Parliament, and their resolution against free Trade, as aforesaid.

And the Petitioners, as in duty, shall pray, etc. Vera Copia. H. Elsing, Cler.
Parl D. Com.

Die Mercurii Junii 4. 1645.
Resolved, etc.
THAT the answer to the Petitioners shall be, That the House will take the
particulars of the Petition into serious consideration. And do return them
thanks for their good affections. And as to their desire of leave to present
the like to the House of Peers, this House leaves it to themselves, and to
their own discretion.

H. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

TO THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE OE Commons assembled In PARLIAMENT. The humble
Petition of diverse wil-affected Citizens of the City of London.
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners being full of a deep Sense of these pressing miseries,
under which this City and Kingdom now groans, and that imminent ruin which
is coming upon both, through the unexpressible loss of Leicester, The danger
of the rest of our Garrisons thereabouts, and the increasing and prevailing of
the Kings forces like a mighty torrent,: And withal humbly conceiving, that
amongst other Causes and Reasons, which have had a deep influence upon this
most sad posture of our condition, The not completing of Sir Thomas Fairfax
his Army, according to an Ordinance of Parliament in that behalf; The not
advancing of our Brethren of Scotland into these Southern parts have been the
chief.

Most humbly pray, That Sr. Thomas Fairfax be ordered with all speed, to march
with his Army toward the King: And that due care be taken for his recruite and
encouragement; And that Leicester (if possible) may be regained, before it be
made impregnable by fortifications: That our Brethren of Scotland may be more
earnestly pressed to march Southward: That Lieutenant General Cromwell may
presently have power to raise and to command the Association; and that our
Commanders in chief, who have given large testimony to the Kingdom of their
faithfulness and valor, may have power to improve all present advantages,
without attending commands and directions from remote Councels.

The Premises considered, they humbly pray may be speedily debated, and
effectually executed, and your Petitioners (according to all former expressions
of themselves to you) shall for the future, think neither their lives nor any
thing they possess too dear to them to hazard for the encouragement and
preservation of you.

And (as in duty bound) shall daily pray.
FINIS.

