SEVERAL PROPOSITIONS PRESENTED To the Members of the Honorable House of
COMMONS, by Mr. PETER'S, Minister of the Gospel of Jesus CHRIST; Concerning the
Presbyterian Ministers of this KINGDOM.

WITH A Discovery of two great Plots against the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND:

THE FIRST, By the QVEEN, and the English Runagadoes in FRANCE.

THE SECOND, By the Lord Hopton, Col. Cartwright, and diverse others in the
Island of JARSEY.

ALSO, A Declaration of His Highness the Prince of WALES in FRANCE.

LONDON, Printed for J. G. December. 1. 1646.

Mr. PETER'S REPORTS TO The Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms; concerning
the speedy reducing of the Irish Rebels.
FIrst, he desires, that there may be a speedy course taken for the settling of
the poor, distressed, and bleeding Kingdom of Ireland, in peace and unity, and
that there may be some painful and religious Ministers (both Presbyterians and
others) forthwith expedited for that service.

Secondly, that all possible care may be taken for the sending over provisions
and other necessaries for relief of the poor distressed Protestants.

Thirdly, that all Commanders whatsoever that are under the Command of the
Parliament of England, may forthwith be sent over, for the performance of the
Great Trust reposed in them, that so the Cause of Ireland may be no longer
detarded, but with all faithfulness and expediency performed for the easing of
our distressed Brethren from the heavy oppressions which they have for many
years groaned under.

Thus having given you (in brief) the effect and substance of the Propositions
or Report of (the renowned Worthy of our Times) Mr. PETER'S, upon Friday last,
concerning the managing of the Affairs for the Kingdom of Ireland; I will in
the next place communicate unto you, the dangerous estate and condition of this
our native Kingdom of England; by reason of the manifold Plots and Conspiracies
which are daily acting and contriving (by the Enemies of GOD) against the
Worthies of England, the High and Honorable Court of Parliament: Yet all their
Machavillian Plots, and horrid conspiracies have been frustrated, and taken no
effect; For when they were in the height of their pride, and (almost) upon the
finishing of their wicked Conspiracies, it pleased God to discover and bring to
light all their barbarous and inhumane intentions: Yet these great and
malicious Instruments, which have been for many years together, the chief
Disturbers of the Peace and Tranquillity of England, whose hearts have bin
inveterate against the Proceedings of our Renowned Parliament, are now
studying, complotting, and contriving how to bring their most wicked and bloody
Designs once again to perfection, and to set footing within this our Realm of
England,

But because I will not detract time, nor trouble the Readers patience with too
much superfluity of former experiencies, I will confine my self, and proceed
to the ensuing subject, which may be termed, Englands vigilant Scout, giving
Her an Alarm of the warlike preparations that are now beyond the Seas, not
only by a foreign Enemy, but by Her Native Branches, which I will here
insert, and faithfully communicate, as follows:

The Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom of England, which for a long time had
so inveterately engaged themselves in a desperate war against the Parliament,
are very active beyond the Seas in the Kingdom of France, and other Parts, and
are complotting and laying their heads together, how they may contrive and
raise a new war in England, using their utmost endeavors, (by way of entreat)
for the gathering of an Army together: And to that end, the greatest part of
the Nobility and Gentry, together with all the Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels,
Majors, Captains, and other inferior Officers, which were Runagadoes from
their Native Country, having formerly had the honor of great trust and eminent
places reposed to their Charge, began to recollect their memories, and to
bethink themselves of the gallant days which they once enjoyed within the
Realm of England; and therefore, having ever since their departure from this
Kingdom bin much perplexed in mind, jointly concluded, that if it were possible
for them to raise a Party, and some certain sums of money, they would venture
once again to steer their Coast toward the Confines of England; And for the
better effecting of their Design now in agitation, the Queen does endeavor to
use her utmost power for the effecting of it, as formerly she has done.

But it is very probable that their Design will be soon frustrated, and all
their Plots and Conspiracies utter confounded; for one storm has already
appeared against them, and no doubt, but many more will suddenly arise) so that
there is small hopes of their attempting any thing against this Kingdom, by
reason of a Controversy and Disputation that has lately arose between the
Queen and her Confessor at St. Iermans, who at a late meeting, told her, that
her proceedings were not well approved of, and that he thought She began to
incline toward the Church of England, and to desert the Church of Rome: At
which words, her Majesty being somewhat displeased, replied and declared her
self in this manner: That for her Religion, which She was always brought up
in from her Infancy, She were resolved to live and dye in; And for his
Objections against her, in being pleased to say, that it was not allowable for
Her, to permit or suffer any of Her servants and followers liberty to associate
themselves with the Heretics in any public place or meeting whatsoever; to
which her Majesty answered, That She were resolved to grant them free liberty
of Conscience; intimating, that when she were in England, all her followers in
geral^ had liberty and tolleration to use their own ways and consciences,
without any disanulment or interruption at all, and in consideration thereof,
she were resolved to grant the same liberty to Her Royal Sovereigns ^^iends,
and Hers, in France, as they fo^merly have had in England. Thus having
expressed her self so resolutely unto her Confessor, he took his leave, and
being much perplexed in mind retired out of the room, being in a great fury:
what the issue of this Discord and Contention may arise to, I cannot as yet
assure you. Therefore, in the next place, be pleased to take notice, that his
Highnesso the Prince of Wales is very much perplexed in mind, and cannot
approve of the French fashions nor ways, but declares himself in opposition
against them.

Thus having given you the chiefest Observations and remarkablest Passages that
have happened within the Kingdom of France, somewhat reflecting upon the Peace
and Tranquillity of England, I cannot but put you in mind of another business
of great concernment, worthy of your observation, and has some reference to
the former. But drawing to a period, I will only give you a hint of it and
briefly intimate unto you, as follows:

From Iarsey we are advertised, That the Lord Hopton, Colonel Cartwright, and
diverse other Commanders are very active in the said Island, both in furnishing
of themselves with Ammunition, and also in keeping their men together (which is
supposed for some design against the Parliament of England.

Hopton has caused two or three Powder Milles to be made, and are continually
in action with them.

They keep several strong Holds about the Island, and are supposed to be about
two thousand strong, all completely armed, being gallantly experienced in the
Discipline.

The Holds that they keep are of great strength, most of them being situated
upon great Rocks, and encompassed with the Sea; so that it is to be feared, it
will be a long time before they are brought to the obedience of the
Parliament; unless upon composition.

But why these Garrisons should be maintained and kept in a defensive and
warlike posture against the Parliament, is not as yet known: but we may
conceive (and it is too apparent) that they have some Designs in agitation
against the Parliament of England; for who can be so deluded, as to think that
they will still keep these Holds in defiance, and to endanger both lives and
fortunes, but only they have a secret Conspiracy amongst themselves; and no
doubt, but their horrid Plots, and desperate designs, will at the last be
brought to light, and to their everlasting shame, be made manifest to the whole
world.

They are very vigilant, and will not suffer a Fisherman to go to the Sea,
without severe examination and diligent search.

Hopton has again renewed his inveterate malice against the Parliaments
friends, and has disarmed all the well-affected throughout the whole Island.

FINIS.

