THE SCRIPTURES STABILITY. OR, The Scripture cannot be BROKEN. Proved,
Explained, and several ways applied, whereby all Scripture may with singular
advantage come to be IMPROVED. Very seasonable and useful in these last and
worst days, wherein the Authority and Truth of the Scripture is now much
oppugned, and by few so improved as it ought.

By ROBERT PERROT, B. M. and Minister of Gods Word, at DEANE in BEDFORDSHIRE.

For ever O Lord, thy word is settled in Heaven,

Psalm. 119. 89. (...) etc.

2 Pet. 1. 19. Verbum dei and Caelo praevalet and terrae,

Bernard. Scriptura pura absque omni cummixtione falsitatis, stabilis, etc.

Rivet. in Orat. ante Isag. ad S. Sacram. LONDON, Printed by S. G. for John
Rothwell, at the Fountain in Cheap Side, and John Hancock, in Popes-head-Ally,
1658.

TO The truly PIOUS and Worthily Honored Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Alston, wife
of the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Alston, Baronet, Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
MADAM,
THose many and great Obligations, wherein I stand engaged to your Ladyship,
for those many Favors, and Respects, vouchsafed to me, since the happiness of
my first acquaintance with you, have made me very studious, of taking all
occasions, whereby I might testify my sensibleness thereof; and well knowing,
there was nothing, in which I could do it more acceptably, than in the tender
of that, which might any ways contribute to your Ladyships spiritual
advantage, I have made bold, to adventure to make tenders of this (what it is)
to your Ladyship. Truly Madam, I know not to give flattering titles to any, in
so doing, my Maker would soon take me away: But this I must needs acknowledge,
to Gods glory, and your Ladyships own encouragement, yea, and for the happy
imitation of others of your Ladyships Rank, that my self, and all that know
you, have much cause to bless God upon every remembrance of you, when we
consider your exemplary piety, adorned with such remarkable humility; Magna and
rara virtus est, ut magna licet operantem, magnum te nescias, and manifestam
omnibus, tuam, tibi, solum latere Sanctitatem. Mirabilem te apparere, and
contemptibilem te reputare, hoc ego ipsis virtutibus mirabilius judico. Bernard*
your so singular pretiousness of spirit, and yet being withal so poor in
spirit; your steeliness as to the truth, and yet tenderness both to, and for
sin; your great care, and unwearied pains to promote Religion in your Family,
yea, and in the place where you live, having a heart to bewail, what according
to your Ladyships earnest desire you cannot see reclaimed, and to mourn for
what to your Ladyships great grief you cannot see amended; your countenancing,
and so much encouraging God's so much despised Ministry, in these last and
worst days; God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and labor of love,
which herein you have showed, and made manifest toward his name. Blessed be
God for your love of, firm stedfastness to, and zeal for his truth, and against
whatever is opposite thereunto, in these times wherein so many have left their
first love, and are fallen from their stedfastness, being like Children, tossed
to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine: But blessed be God,
who has kept you firm; the Lord confirm and establish you still unto the end.
Madam, I have the rather Dedicated what here follows unto your Ladyship,
because it is that which indeed does so much, and so many ways, make for your
Ladyships comfort, and encouragement: for if the Scripture cannot be broken (as
indeed it cannot) then your Ladyship has chosen that good part, that shall not
be taken away, having chosen that part of which the Scripture so affirms; And
if the Scripture cannot be broken, then your Ladyship is indeed blessed, being
among those, whom the Scripture pronounces blessed; then does your Ladyship
lean on a firm and strong prop, having made that word which cannot be broken
your stay; then what infinite cause has your Ladyship to bless God, that
through grace, you should have hopes, upon good grounds, of entrance into the
Kingdom of heaven, the Scripture that cannot be broken affirming, that a rich
man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of heaven; and the Scripture elsewhere,
thus speaking, you see your calling brethren, how that not many noble are
called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. And has not God chosen the poor of this world, Rich in
Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom? James 2. 5. the poor of this world.

And yet that your Ladyship should enter into the Kingdom of heaven, when such
of your Ladyships Rank, do so hardly enter, hardlier than others, as the
Scripture which cannot be broken, does affirm, such having greater temptations,
and hindrances than others Plenitudo and abundantia temporalium, oblivionem,
and inopiam facit aeternorum. Bernard.
, though greater Obligations to God, and that though not many noble are called,
yet that your Ladyship should make one; That though orta e magnis* yet ^na e
paucis.
and that though the poor of this world are such, as God usually, and for the
most part has chosen rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, yet that the
Lord should choose you though rich in the world, to be rich in Faith too, and
an Heir of the Kingdom; and that, that happy conjunction, which is so desirable,
but so exceeding rare, should yet unite in your Ladyship, that grace, and
place, should meet together; and godliness, and greatness, should kiss each
other: Truly this Madam, is the Lords wonderful, and gracious doing, and should
be mavelous in your eyes, it should be matter of praise, and admiration,
continually here; and it will be so to all eternity hereafter, and all little
enough. In a word, if the Scripture cannot be broken, O what a River of
consolation does hence then flow to your Ladyship, the streams whereof, I hope
shall much make glad your heart! But I shall not longer at present detein your
Ladyship, but humbly refer you to that which follows, which that it may
contribute to your Ladyships comfort, and spiritual benefit, as also to the
benefit of others, yea of all who shall read it, is, and shall be the Prayer of
him, who is

MADAM, Your Ladyships humble and much obliged Servant in the Lord, ROBERT
PERROT.

TO The CHRISTIAN READER.
Reader,
THou may probably wonder, as I do my self, that in these days, wherein such
throngs of Books still daily come forth, some of which, indeed, are of so great
and singular worth, though others do (but as it were) weary, and oppre^^ the
Press, that I, if thou know any thing of me, of what I know very much my
self, namely of my own unworthiness, that I after so many already come, and
still daily coming forth, should appear amongst them; truly there were several
things, that long retarded what I have been at length prevailed with to do, as
the multitude of Books, that still daily come forth, Quis leget haec? min' tu
istud ais? Ncmo hercule nemo, Aut duo vel nemo, etc. Persius Sat. 1.
the tediousness of transcribing what I had Preached, the brand of Ambition to
be in Print (which together with Avarice) is that which has (it is to be
feared) set too too many a work in this scribbling age Quis expedivit Psittaco
suum (...)? etc. Idem in prologo ad satyras.
, the being silent of so many others, far better able to write, yea, and the
well knowing what censures and calumnies not only my self, but better far
deserving than my self, should in these days be lyahle to, that should thus
adventure. Truly, these and the like considerations did for some time, and had
well nigh altogether impeded, and detained this work in the very Birth; out
whether the forbearing upon these, or the like considerations, could
countervail the loss of that good, and benefit, which, through the blessing of
God, souls might gain by what is done. I shall leave to others to judge, And
only give thee some account of the grounds, and reasons, of what I have at
present undertook.

ex professo, of this subject; and this rarity is not only observed by my self,
but has likewise been acknowledged to me by others.

the Scripture than we do? how would threatenings more awe us, promises, and
prophecies more cheer us? and in a word all Scripture more advantage us?



first to read, and then judge; and my souls desire, and Prayer to God, shall
be this, that all who shall read what is here written, may find that profit by
it, that others have done in its preaching, and that instead of carping at it,
or cavilling against it, they may have cause for ever to bless God for it, and
so I rest,

Thine and the Churches to serve in the things of the Gospel. ROBERT PERROT.

The Contents of the ensuing Treatise of the Scriptures impossibillity of being
broken.
THe occasion of this discourse upon these words. The coherence scope and
explication of the words themselves. The Doctrine, the Scripture cannot be
broken. The proof of the point. 1. By Scripture. 2. By reason; the Scripture
cannot be broken. 1. Because all Scripture is given by divine inspiration. 2.
Because it is the Scripture of that God, who is a God of truth, and
faithfulness, and cannot lie. 3. Of that God who is Jehovah, and so gives being
to what he speaks. 4. Of that God, who is unchangeable. 5. Of that God, who is
every way able, and has all sufficient power to effect what ever he speaks. 6.
It appears, and is proved from experience, and by an induction of several
particulars. 7. Because it was not, nor could not be broken, no not in
reference to Jesus Christ himself, as concerning what ever it had foretold he
should suffer. 8. Because if it should be broken, it would much and many ways
redound to the dishonor of God.

Five several respects and particulars, wherein the Scripture cannot be broken.
1. In respect of its Power and Authority. 2. Prophecies. 3. Promises. 4.
Threatenings. 5. In respect of what ever it affirms of persons and things.
Two objections answered. 1. As concerning the Commandments, which are part of
the Scripture, and yet are said to be broken. 2. As concerning the threatenings,
which are part likewise of the Scripture, and yet many times have not been
accomplished.
The application of the point. 1. Use of information, and instruction. If the
Sripture cannot be broken, then there are several Truths of great consequence,
and concernment, that this point does inform us of, and instruct us in, as, 1.
This informs us, and gives us to see, what a desperate hazard most people run;
and what a desperate course most people take, who if the Scripture cannot be
broken, must certainly and unavoidably continuing such, be broken. 2. Who are
indeed blessed, and who cursed, and who are indeed happy, and who miserable,
namely such, whom the Scripture says and pronounces to be so, for that cannot
be broken, and hence we may come to know and discern, whether or no we be
blessed. 3. What a firm Prop such rest and rely upon, that make the word of God
their stay, for they rest and rely on that which cannot be broken. 4. How
exceeding abundant God is in his goodness, who has given us not only his word,
though that cannot be broken, but his Oath likewise. 5. Whence it is, there is
yet in the world a Church and Ministry. 6. It informs and gives us to see the
blasphemy and desperate folly and madness of those, who profanely deride at the
Scripture, and scoffingly question the fulfilling thereof.

2. Use of humiliation, that the Scripture being that which cannot be broken,
we have so often, and so many ways at least really made, as if it could be
broken, several ways instanced in. 3. Use of Exhortation. If the Scripture
cannot be broken, then there are several duties, which from hence we are to be
exhorted and stirred up unto, as, 1. Much to read it, and often to exercise our
selves in it. 2. To believe this, that the Scripture cannot be broken. 3. To
live continually in the sense of it, which would be of singular use and
advantage. 4. To seal then, and assent to what ever it says, and that really.
5. To labor so to see and discern things as the Scripture says of them, for
that cannot be broken, that cannot err or mistake. 6. To be much in blessing
and praising God, the Scipture being that which cannot be broken. 1. That God
should contrive and find out a way for man to be saved; and yet what he had
said and threatened upon man's sining be salved, and not be broken, which if he
could not have done, he would never have saved him, etc. 2. That those things
which are of so great importance, and of such infinite concernment, and afford
so great cause and ground of comfort, yea, upon which our whole happiness and
comfort depends, are according to Scripture, which cannot be broken. 3. That
the Lord has brought any of us into such a state and condition, as that we may
be saved, and the Scripture not be broken, nay, in which if we should not be
saved, the Scripture would be broken.
7. To try all doctrines by the Scripture, for that cannot err or be deceived.
8. To judge so of things, as the Scripture says of them. 9. Not to be
offended, not scandalized at the sufferings and afflictions of the Church and
people of God. 10. Several other duties which from hence we are to be exhorted,
and encouraged unto.
4. Use of warning, and admonition, to take heed of continuing in such an
estate, in which there is no being saved, except the Scripture be broken.A five
fold state, in which continuing therein, there is no being saved, except the
Scripture be broken. 1. A state of spiritual blindness, darkness, and
ignorance. 2. A state of unregeneracy. 3. A state of unbelief. 4. A state of
impenitency. 5. A state of fruitlesness, and unprofitableness.
5. Use of terror and trembling. 1. To all wicked and ungodly men in general.
2. To several in particular.
6. Use of Consolation to the Saints, and all such as are Heirs of the promises.

THE SCRIPTURES STABILITY.
-- John 10. 35. And the Scriptures cannot be broken.
The occasion of this discourse on these words.
THese words are brought in here only occasionly, and are as it were but a
Parenthesis, and yet I think I may safely say of them, that they are such as
are (as I hope afterward to make appear) of as great consequence, and of as
infinite concernment, as any whatsoever; Nay, what indeed were all other
Scripture? were it not for what is said of it, in this Scripture, what is this,
but that which gives life, and, being to all that it speaks, whether it ^e that
which it promises, or that which it threatens, or that which it foretells, or
Prophesies, that what ever it be, it is that which cannot be broken, but shall
certainly come to pass* and therefore expounding upon John, and meeting with
this Scripture* and finding, on a more slender view thereof, to be of so
singular use, and concernment, I afterward resolved, for to take a more through
view, and to frame a more large discourse thereof, which accordingly I did, and
that I must needs acknowledge, not without much acceptance, and I hope not
without some success; and so much briefly for the first occasion of this
discourse*

The coherence scope and explication of the words themselves.

It is said in the 31. verse, then the Jews took up stones again to stone him,
again to stone him, -- they are at their old trade as formerly, John 8. 59.
they Haben^es corda lapidea, ad lapides currebant and (...) lapidem ^ngularem
imping^b^nt. Tossan* in locum.
had* stony hearts, and the stones in their hearts, were they which put the
stones into their hands against him who is the corner stone, v. 32. Jesus
answered them, many good works have I showed you from my Father, for which of
these works do you stone me? as if Christ should have said, seeing you can
justly object no evil against me, for what good is it, that you thus deal with
me? many good* works have I done, for which of them is it that ye stone me? and
thus may God say to every impenitent sinner, that goes on still by his sins, as
it were to stone God, and to vex and grieve him, and even as it were to cu^ him
to the heart, as Psalm. 95. 10. Forty years long was I grieved, or vexed, and
cut with this generation, as some render the Hebrew, they did as it were (...)
cut the Lord to the heart, and now may God say, for which of my kindnesses,
for which of my good works, do you thus deal with me? behold I at first made
you, and gave you your* being, and ever since have I preserved you, and
sustained you, and taken care of you, daily multiplying my benefits upon you,
and for which now of my good works do you stone me? O me thinks the serious
consideration hereof, should help to melt the hardest hearted sinner. Jer. 18.
20. Shall evil be recomp^nced for good? Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do you th^s req^it^ the
Lord, O foolish people and ^nwise? etc. Prove. 19. 6. Every man is a friend to
him that gives gifts* Romans 2. 4. or despisest thou the riches of his goodness?
etc. Even sinners do good to those that do good to them, Luke 6. 33. Many good
works have I showed you from my Father, or as some of my Father, whereof my
Father is the first Author, I, many good works indeed has Christ showed us of
his Father, many good works, or excellent, glorious works, as the Greek
signifies, as his work of election (...)
to life and salvation, before the world was, his work of infinite great and
unparalleld love, in giving ^is only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, etc. his work of justifying us freely from our sins, of
reconciling us to himself, of adopting us to be his Sons and daughters, of
sanctifying us by his Spirit, of glorifying us for ever with himself* good
works indeed, yea stupendous, such as will be matter of admiration, and
exultation to all eternity.

But it follows, v. 33. The J^^s answered him saying, for a good work we stone
the^ ^ot, but for blasphemy; and because that thou* b^ing a man, make thy
self God. The fowlest practices want not a show of fair pretenses; But v. 34,
35, 36. Jesus answered them, is it not written in your law, I said ye are Gods.
If he called them Gods unto whom the word of God came, and the S^ript^re cannot
be broken; Say ye of him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the
world, thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God? Princes and Psalm.
^ ^. 6*
Magistrates are said in some sense to be Gods, not truly and properly, but
allusively; not by nature, but by office, and because of their superiority; and
being styled Gods, surely it beseems them to act as God; and now that Princes
and Magistrates are in some sense Gods, Christ here proves it, because the
Scripture says so of them, and being that which cannot be broken, it must
needs be so, that in some sense they are Gods.

But to close with the words themselves: And the Scripture cannot be broken, in
which as considered of themselves, we have two things observable. 1. The
Subject. 2. The Predicate. 1. The subject or thing spoken of, and that is the
word of God, called here, and elsewhere, (...), Scriptura, the Appellantur
divinae literae nomine communi (...), Scripturae aut Scriptura, (...) nam etsi
quicquid scribitur, scriptura vocetur, hoc tamen commune nomen, scripturis
sacris aptatur, per excellentiam, Rivet. in Isagoge, etc. Page 1.
Scripture, or writing, and that (...), by way of eminency, and excellency, as
if it was the only writing; and indeed, what are all other writings in
comparison of this? or but as they tend, to explain this, or as they refer to
this? the word of God is the writing, the main, the chief, the prime, the
principal, the writing of writings, it has the preheminency of all writings,
in comparison whereof others deserve not the name of writings, this is the
writing which contains in it great things* Hosea. 8. 12
, excellent things Prove. 8. 6. 22. 20.
, admirable things Psalm. 119. 18.
, even such as the Angels desire to pry into 1 Pet. 1. 12.
, this is the writing, that Kings are commanded to write a Copy of, and that it
shall be with them, and that they shall read therein, all the days of their
life Deuteronomy. 18. 17.
, yea, and the more any search into this writing, the more does it enoble them
Acts, 17. 11.


2. The Predicate, or what it is that is spoken of the Scripture, and that is
this this, that it cannot be broken, (...), non potest solvi. He does not say,
should not be broken, or ought not to be broken, no, but cannot be broken, our
Savior puts an impossibility upon it, and the Scripture cannot be broken -- be
broken, that is according to the Greek, unloosed, dissolved, or destroyed, thus
the word is rendered elsewhere, John 1. 27. (...) -- to unloose, John 2. 19.
(...) destroy, 2 Pet. 3. 12. (...), shall be dissolved, etc. and thus the
Scripture cannot be broken, that Non potest solvi scriptura, hoc est, Minime
fieri posse quin impleatur. Pet: Martyr in Romans 9.
is, unloosed, dissolved, destroyed, violated, or made void, as to that it
says or affirms, but continues most firm, and shall certainly be fulfilled;
other things indeed shall be dissolved, even the firmest, and solidest that
are, the heavens and the earth, 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12. Seeing then that all these
things shall be dissolved, -- wherein the heavens being on fire shall be
dissolved, but the Scriptures never can, nor shall be dissolved, unloosed, or
destroyed. Or secondly, The Non falsum esse potest quod in divinis literis
proditum est. Eraimus. Nihil absurdi dixit, nihil falsi babet. Aretius.
Scripture cannot be broken, i. e. It cannot be mistaken, it cannot err, or be
deceived, so Rollock on the place, and Ferus, non potest solvi, hoc est non
errare potest, that is, it cannot err, it cannot be deceived, or be found false
in what it says, it cannot lose its truth, as the Dutch Anotat: expound in
part.

The Doctrine.
Now the words being thus opened, and explained, are as you see an entire
proposition of themselves, and that proposition, in the verysame words that it
is, being explained as you have heard, shall be the point which I shall at the
present prosecute, viz. this, that

The Scripture cannot be broken, it cannot be unloosed, dissolved, or
destroyed, the word of God cannot become void, neither can it mistake, err, be
deceived, or prove false; no, look whatever the Scripture says, or affirms of
persons, or things, certainly so they are, as the Scripture says of them, for
the Scripture cannot be broken; if the Scripture says of Princes, or
Magistrates that they are Gods, certainly in some sense so they are, because
the Scripture says so of them, and that cannot err, Deus non projicit v^nas
ampullas neque efflat sermonem aliquem fine effectu, sed exequitur quicquid
Mandavit suis Prophetis.
or mistake* and look whatever the Scripture speaks, either by way of
Prophecy, Promise, or Threatening, it shall certainly come to pass, it shall be
fulfilled, and cannot be disanull'd, or broken, no, what God has written, he
has written, he will not change, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his
mouth: what is said of God himself, that may be said of his word, with it is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning, neither Calv. in Zach. 1. 5. 6.
is there any possibility of its being dissolved, no, we our selves indeed
shall be dissolved, we shall be broken, our James 1. 17.
bodies and souls shall separate, and fall asunder each from other, for we know
that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Yea
those very parts which are most compact, and most of all firm and vital shall
fail, shall suffer a dissolution and be broken, the Silver Cord shall be
loosed, and Eccl. 12. 5.
the Golden Bowl be broken, the Pitcher shall be broken at the Fountain, and
the Wheel stall be broken at the Cistern, yea all flesh shall resolve into
dust, but the Scripture still endures, and stands firm, and cannot be broken,
all flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the Isay 40. 6. 7, 8.
flower of the field, the grass withers, the Quaemvis evanescant homines, vel
tolla^tur post exiguum tempus, e medio tamen caelestis doctrina semper est
stabilis, and retinet suum effectu^. Calv. in Zac. 1. 5 6.
flower fades, but the word of our God shall stand for ever; men they are
frail and infirm creatures, they and their designs quickly fail, and are
frustrate, but Gods word still stands firm, and inviolable, my Counsel shall
stand says God, and I will do all my pleasure, the Counsel of the Lord
stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations, Psalm. 33. 11.

The proof of the point. 1. From Scripture. And here I might multiply many, but
three or four shall suffice, besides those I have hinted already, 119. Psalm.
89. for ever O Lord thy word is (...)
settled in heaven, or stands, continues, Stans, Permanet: Montan:
abides, is established; how ever things go in earth, or what ever changes, and
alterations there are in the world, Gods word is for ever settled in heaven; thy
word is for ever settled in heaven; however the effects thereof, through the
over-cloudings of manifold troubles, and temptations, may not sometimes appear
on earth, yet O Lord for ever thy word is settled in heaven, there its
established, and is not subject to those It a amplum ut omnes terminos and
metas superet, and ad omnia tempora, and aetates, se extendat, id est ut sit
durabile, firmum, and perpetuum, nec unquam aboleri queat. Moller: in locum. --
Ita ut finis illius vider^ non potest, i. e. infinitum, (...). Junius.
mutations, as things on earth are, so Psalm. 119. 96. I have seen an end of all
perfection, but thy Commandment is exceeding broad, or large, that is, it
lasts for ever, it reaches, and extends to all eternity; I can see an end
of all other things, even the perfectest that are, I can see they shall have an
end, but I cannot see an end of thy word, that shall never have an end, that is
so broad as it reaches beyond all limits and bounds, and perpetually abides
so, Matthew. 24. 34, 35. verily I say unto you this generation shall not pass
till all these things be fulfilled. You may probably think, that what I have
spoken, shall not come to pass, at least in all the circumstances thereof, but
there are some now alive, shall see every whit fulfilled, that I have spoken,
as concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, heaven and earth shall pass away,
but my word shall not pass away; Promissi^num certitudo constat verbo dei quo
nihil potest esse constantius aut firmius. Pet: Mart. in Romans 4.
these words may be taken, and understood, as spoken, either comparatively or
possitively.

1. Comparatively, the heavens and the earth shall sooner pass away, than any
of my words pass away, or prove false; and so Luke expresses it, Luke 16. 18.
and it is easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one tittle of the Law to
fail.

2. Or secondly positively; thus, heaven and earth shall indeed pass away, as
at the end of the world, as the Apostle Peter expresses it, 2 Pet. 3. 10. but
the day of the Lord will come, as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away; and verse 12. wherein the heavens being on fire shall
be dissolved, and v. 11. seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved,
he speaks of the heavens, and the earth, and the works that are therein, these
all shall pass away, P^^. 75. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 31. 1 John 2. 17.
and be dissolved, but the word shall not pass away, or be dissolved, but shall
have its full and perfect accomplishment; The earth says the Prophet Isay is
utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved
exceedingly, the earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be
removed like a Cottage, etc. Isay, 24. 19, 20. But now the Scripture never is,
nor can be broken at all, or dissolved, or be removed, but remains most firm;
Thus the Scripture, the word, that which God has said, is more firm than the
Fabric of heaven and earth it self, and shall remain firm and inviolable for
ever, for the mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be
removed says the Lord that has mercy on thee, Isay 54. 10. So Isay 55. 11. So
shall my word be that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return to me void,
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it; I will accomplish and make it good, it shall not be without
effect, nor fall to the ground. God may as well cease to be, as his word be
broken, disanull'd, and not effected; and hence are those frequent expressions
in Scripture, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken, Matthew. 1. 22. 4. 14.
8. 17. 12. 17. 13. 35. 21. 4, etc. implying, that God will have what he has
spoken fulfilled.

2. From Reason. The Scripture cannot be broken.

Tim. 3. 16. is (...), divinitus inspirata, given by the inspiration of God, it
is divine, as is likewise expressed elsewhere, Heb. 1. 1. God who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, mark, it was God who spoke by them, so Hosea 8. 12. I have written to
him, it is Gods writing, so 2 Pet. 1. 21. Luke 1. 70. Acts 4. 24. 25. And
therefore it cannot be broken, or made void, because it is divine; and that in
a proper and more peculiar sense, being immediately revealed from God; what
indeed is humane, is subject to mutation and change, as man himself is, its
like himself, his breath goes forth, he returns (...) Hic titulus etsi omni
veritati, de quacunque re sit* significatione largiori possit tribui, quoniam
spiritus est in hominibus, and inspir at io omnipotentis dat intelligentiam,
Job 32. 8. attamen immediate a Deo revelata doctrina, merito titulum illum sibi
proprie vendicat. River. in Isagog. page 9.
to his earth in that very day his thoughts perish; but the Scripture being
divine, and that which in a proper and peculiar way, is the writing of God,
that cannot alter, or change, or be dissolved.

2. Because as it is given by inspiration of God, so it is the Scripture of
that God, who is a God of truth, and faithfulness, and cannot lie, 1 Tit 2. In
hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world
began; and therefore the Scripture cannot be broken, being the Scripture of
such a God who cannot lie, whose Psalm. 36. 5* 57. 20.
faithfulness and truth reaches unto the clouds, and is great unto the
heavens, yea above the heavens; that is, it cannot be traced: who though we
believe 2 Timothy 2. 13.
not, yet abides faithful, and cannot deny himself, and also the strength of
Israel 1 Samuel 13. 29.
will not lie, nor repent, for he is not a man that he should repent; and thus
David makes the Stability of Gods word, to depend on the Stability of Gods
truth and faithfulness, because he is most faithful, his word is most stable
and firm, Psa. 119. 89, 90. thy word for ever O Lord is settled in heaven, thy
faithfulness is unto all generations; Gods truth and faithfulness being firm,
his word is so likewise; thus the Scripture cannot be broken, because of Gods
truth and fidelity which is infinite, yea he is truth it self.

3. Because it is the Scripture of that God, who is Jehovah, who is the Lord,
as he proclaimed his name before Moses, Exodus 34. 6. and the Lord passed by
before him, and proclained Jehovah, Iehovab, which we render the Lord, the
Lord; now this name properly belongs unto God, and is not communicable to any
creature in heaven or earth, and as it does denote as concerning God, that he
has his being of himself, as also that he gives being to all creatures, so
likewise that he gives being to what he speaks, and does fully accomplish and
make good the same, that he is most true in his promises, his threatenings, and
in his Prophecies, and makes them as really in their time to be, as if they
were already; as himself is, so he makes all to be, and to be brought about
that he speaks, and hence it is an ordinary thing in Scripture, that when the
Lord promises, or threatens any great matter, he uses to adjoyn thereto this
name Jehovah, as a firm Seal and pledge of performing it, as in the 31. Ier. it
is observed that in that Chapter, where are made many great and precious
promises, the name Jehovah is used above twenty times, and so often do we meet
with these expressions, thus says the Lord, and, I the Lord have sp^ken it,
and, for the Lord has spoken it, and, ye shall know that I am the Lord, ^zek.
6. 10. and they shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have not said in
vain, that I would do this evil unto them; a word is then in vain, when it is
not fulfilled, but thus shall none of Gods words be, but shall be accomplished,
because the Lord has spoken them, so v. 13. 14. So 7, 4, 9, 27. 21. 17. 24.
14, 27, etc.

Mal. 3. 6. for I am the Lord, I change not Deus semper idem, and idem perpetuo
manet.
; and as God himself is unchangeable, so all that is in God, is unchangeable;
for this says one, is an attribute, that like a Silken string through a Chain
of Pearls, runs through all the rest; God is un changeable in his essence, in
all his divine attributes, in his purposes and decrees, yea, and in his
promises and threatenings, so as they cannot but be performed; for I am the
Lord, I change not; men they change, their minds alter, they are of one mind it
may be to day, and of another to morrow, and so what they purpose, is many
times not performed; but it is not so with God, he changes not, nay, with him
says the Apostle, James 1. 17* is no variableness, nor shadow of turning, he
is still constant, and continues the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; and
therefore he will perform, and bring to pass, what he has spoken, both
according to his promises, and according to his threatenings, I am the Lord, I
change not, therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consume^, which some interpret
thus, ( b) though ye Sons of Jacob (a) Duplex potest elici expositio, quamvis
nondum ^stis consumpti, ego tamen non mutor; vel supersti^es manetis quia
rationem habeo naturae meae potius quam rependere vobis quod meriti estis.
Calv. in Locum.
are not consumed, yet I change not, I am the same Lord, and ye shall find so
in the end, however, because I forbear you long, you may deem otherwise, but at
length know ye, that all shall come to pass, and not one thing shall fall to
the ground, howsoever it be not so speedily as you think executed, yet it shall
in its time; others thus* you have deserved over and over again to be consumed,
and considering your demerits it may seem a wonder I have not done it, but that
it is thus, it is because of me and my nature, that I am Jehovah, and change
not, and so will perform what I have promised, be as good as my word; and this
Balaam himself is forced to confess, Numb. 23. 19. God is not a man that he
should lie, neither the Son of man that he should repent, has he said, and
shall he not do it? has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? for he is in
one mind, says Job, and who can turn him? and what his soul desires even that
he does; this notes the Job. 23* 13
stability, and unchangeableness of God, he is always like himself, fixed and
constant to his own purposes, and to the dictates of his own will, and wisdom;
and therefore the Scripture, being the Scripture of that God which is
unchangeable, it cannot be broken; but as he continues still the same, so
likewise does that.

God, who is every way able, and has full, and all-sufficient power to
accomplish what ever he speaks, be it matter of promise, or matter of
threatening, what ever it be, he is I say, every way able to accomplish it; is*
any thing too hard for the Lord? (ah Lord God says Jer. 32. 19
the Prophet Ier.) thou have made the heavens and the earth, by thy great power
and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee. I know says
Job, that thou can do every thing, and that no thought can be withheld
from thee, Job. 42. 2. that is, thou do not want power to bring to pass, what
ever thou have said or decreed, no, be it what it will, seem it never so
difficult, thou art able to bring it to pass, and no thought of thine can be
hindered, (i. e.) thou can not be hindered from doing what ever thou purposest,
or intendest to do, no, the Council of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts
of his heart to all generations, for the Lord of hosts has purposed, and who
shall disanul it; and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?
Isay 14. 28. Men indeed many times purpose, and resolve, and say what they will
do, I but cannot effect it, cannot bring it about, why? because they are frail
creatures, and want power, or are hindered by a greater, so that their hands
cannot effect what their heads have contrived, a greater than themselves
disappoints them, Job. 5. 12. he disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so
that their hands cannot perform their enterprise, in the 23. Acts 12* we find
there certain of the Jews banding together, and binding themselves under a
curse, saying, that they would neither eat, nor drink* till they had kill^d
Paul; and there were more than forty which had made this conspiracy. I but
their hands could not perform their enterprise; if they had not eaten, nor
drunk, till they had killed Paul, they must have starved, why? because a
greater force than themselves* rescued, and delivered him out of their hands,
but who can deliver out of the hands of God? none, as the Prophet Isay
expresses it, Isay 43. 13. yea before the day was, I am he, and there is none
that can deliver out of my hands, no not all the creatures in heaven and in
earth, should they join their power, and force together; and it follows, I will
Work, and who shall let it, or turn it back, or reverse it? who indeed?
certainly none, no, all the power in heaven and carth cannot in the least
hinder him from accomplishing his work, what he has spoken in his word; no, he
is above all obstacles of men or devils, there is no putting of a bar in his
way, so as that there should not be an accomplishing of his word He has broken
the gares of Brass, and cut the bars of Iron assunder, Psa. 107. 16. Amos. 4.
5 Isay 40. 17.
no, I will work, and who shall let? none could ever take up this challenge,
and say, I I will let, no, for lo it is he who forms the Mountains, and
creates the wind, and declares unto man, what is his thought, that makes the
morning darkness, and treads upon the high places of the earth, the Lord the
God of Hosts is his name, all Nations before him are as nothing, and they are
counted to him less than nothing and vanity; so that by the greatness of his
might, for that he is strong in power, not one of his words shall fail; the
greatest Mountains, before him shall become a plain. Psalm. 2. 6. there was a
great combination of the Princes, and potentates of the earth, to keep Christ
from the throne, yet (for all that says God) I have set my King upon my holy
Hill of Zion. And secondly, as men are frail, so they quickly fail, and so
their enterprises fail with them, Psalm. 146. 4. his breath goes forth, he
returns to his earth, in that very day his thoughts perish; and therefore put
not your trust in greatest, in Princes, for what ever their thoughts, and
intentions, promises, or purposes may be, to do this or that, alas their breath
goes forth, and they immediately perish; and therefore cease ye, says the
Prophet, from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be
accounted of, or what can he do? his breath goes forth, and he soon perishes.
But now the Lord, as he is the mighty God, so he is the living God, I lift up
my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever, Deuteronomy. 32. 40. He lives for ever to
see what he has said accomplished; and therefore says the Apostle, it is a
Heb. 10. 30
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, as an adversary, as
one against whom God threatens indignation, and wrath, vengeance, and woe; why?
because he is a living God, and so for ever lives to execute what he has
threatened; as Gods eternity, his living for ever, does exceedingly sweeten, and
make precious, and most comfortable the promises, so it makes as terrible his
threatenings; thus the Scripture cannot be broken, because it is the Scripture
of that God, who is of so great and infinite power, every way able to
accomplish what he speaks; and this was the ground of Abraham's not staggering
at the promise of God through unbelief, his being fully persuaded, that what he
had promised, he was able also to perform, Romans 4. 20, 21. he staggered not at
the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory unto
God; and being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able to
perform; and upon this ground, happy is he pronounced, that has the God of
Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in the Lord, because of his power, and
ability, as well as his truth, and faithfulness, to perform what ere he
promises, Psalm. 146. 5, 6.

particulars; this is that which experience in all ages has, and still does
evidence to the truth of, to which we may appeal; As concerning that
destruction of the old world, did not God do what he said? was he not as good
as his word? so concerning bringing Israel out of Egypt? that is very observable
to this purpose, which we read, Exodus 12. 40, 41. now the sojourning of the
Children of Israel, which dwelt in Egypt, were 430. years; and it came to pass,
at the end of the 430. years, even the self same day it came to pass, that all
the Hosts of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt. So I might instance, as
concerning Iudahs bringing into Babylon, was not God as good as his word, as
themselves were forced to acknowledge? Lam. 2. 17. the Lord has done that
which he had devised, he has fulfilled the word he had commanded in the days
of old; and Lam. 4. 12. the Kings of the Earth would not have believed the
enemy should enter into the gates of Jerusalem, but no matter, for that God
having said it, though they would not have believed it, yet it was
accomplished; And so for Iudahs bringing out of captivity out of Babylon, which
he promised, Ier. 29. 10. And this seemed so difficult, and a thing so hard to
be effected, that the Lord appeals to his own heart, the more to assure them of
it, v. 11. for I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord,
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end; and Psalm.
126. 1. when the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them
that dream; we could scarce believe we were delivered, though we were
delivered. I but how difficult, and unlikely soever it seemed, yet being
promised it was performed; and so as concerning the ruin of Jerusalem
afterward, Luke 19. 43, 44. was not all fulfilled?

Thus the proof of this point is proved by long experience, Scripturae si verae
fuerunt praedictiones rerum futurarum ut eventus comprobavit, cur vera non sint
rerum praesentium testimonia? Rivit. page 20. Isag. etc.
it was never yet known in any age, but what God spoke came to pass, there is
no instance to be given to the contrary; and this is that which indeed God
himself appeals unto, Zachary 1. 5, 6. your Fathers where are they, and the
Prophets, do they live for ever? this seems to be spoken by way of concession
Quod dicit patres vestri ubi sunt and prophetae an in perpetuum vivunt, per
concessionem positum est, quasi diceret, fateor and patres vestros and
prophetas meos jam mortuos esse, sed verba mea an mortua sunt? distinguit (in
summum) deus naturam verbi sui ab hominum condition, quasi diceret, hominum
vitam caducam esse and finiri paucis annis, sed doctrinam suam nunquam
intermori, Calv: Zach. 1. 5, 6. Quum ergo effectu^ doctrinae meae senseritis in
vestris patribus, cur non statuitis apud vos quum idem semper sim, non posse
fieri ut hodie verba mea frustra diffluant and careant omni effectu? Idem
ibidem.
, your Fathers indeed, as also the Prophets are dead and gone, they have made
their beds in the grave, I but mark what follows, v. 6. but my words, and my
statutes, which I commanded my servants the Prophets, did not they take hold of
your Fathers? and they returned and said, like as the Lord of Hosts thought to
do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so has he
dealt with us, q. d. your Fathers indeed are not, and the Prophets are not, no
they are dead, I but did my words dye with them? they failed indeed, but did my
words fail with them? or rather have they not all been fulfilled? was I vain in
my threatenings? did I not put in execution what I spoke by my Prophets? felt
not your Fathers the effect of my words? the word notes to take hold, or (...)
overtake, and catch them as hunters their prey, or as one enemy another in
(...)
flight, they would have escaped, indeed they sought means to make an escape,
but they could not, and this they were forced to acknowledge at last; and they
returned and said, Like as the Lord, etc. and so shall all at length be forced
to say, they may think to make an escape, but one time or other, Gods words
will catch them; very observable to this purpose, is that in the 21. Josh. 45.
there failed not ought of any good thing, which the Lord had spoken to the
house of Israel, all came to pass; and concerning this, Joshua appeals to
Israel, Chap. 23. 14. and behold this day I am going the way of all the earth,
and yea know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, not one thing has
failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you, all
are come to pass unto you, and not one thing has failed thereof; Joshua he
appeals to what they knew in all their hearts, and in all their own souls, that
not one thing failed, he does not say, that but some things, or a few things,
but not one thing failed. So Psalm. 116. 11. Ask David's experience, and he
says, that God to him was as good as his word, Psa. 119. 65. thou have dealt
well with thy servant O Lord, according to thy word; I said indeed in my have
(says he) all men are liars, Samuel, and others, yea all who in Gods name
promised me the Kingdom; I the Kingdom? no, I am like rather to be cut off; I
but this was in a fit of inconsiderate passion, and temptation, and this he
confesses as a fault, and infirmity, for in the very next verse he breaks out
and says, What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
he was so much the more comforted, and excited to thankfulness, by how much the
more improbable that seemed which was effected.

Thus the word of the Lord is tried, Psa. 18. 30. It has the trial of several
ages. Experience has still at all times, and in all ages proved it most true;
thus it is said, 1 Samuel 3. 19. and Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and
did let none of his words fall to the ground Decidere in terram, i. e. perire,
evanescere, non impleri, metaph: ducta a re quapiam (puta a vitro) quae e manu
decidens corrumpitur-Piscat. in locum.
, or not one of all his words, i. e. the Lord performed effectually, whatsoever
he had foretold by Samuel; to fall to the ground, is as much as to come to
nothing, a metaphor from things, which by falling perish, as glasses, or water
spilt on the ground, for words cannot properly be said to fall to the ground;
hereby is meant, that what he spoke, or prophesied, came to pass, and proved
true in the event, and nothing vain, and of no effect; again, Acts 13. 32, 33.
and we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto
the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same to us his Children, etc. And this made
Solomon bless God, because there had not failed one word of all his good
promise, which he had promised by the hand of Moses his servant, 1 Kings 8. 56.
blessed be the Lord, who has given rest unto his people Israel, according to
all that he promised* there has not failed one word; and so in the 15. verse.
And he said, blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which spoke with his mouth unto
David my Father, and has with his hand fulfilled it, So v. 24.

Luke 18. 31, 32. then he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, behold
we go up to Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the Prophets,
concerning the Son of Man, shall be accomplished, for he shall be delivered to
the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and spitefully ^^treated, and spit on, and
they shall scourge him, and put him to death. Now these were very heavy and sad
things for the Son of God to suffer and undergo, what? for the eternal Son of
God to be mocked, to be spitefully entreated, to be spit on, to be scourged,
etc. I but as heavy and as sad as they were, the Scripture having foretold
them, they shall all, says Christ, be fulfilled; so Luke 24. 44. And he said
unto them, these are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with
you, that all things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me; and these things, says
Peter, Acts 3. 18. Which God before had showed by the mouth of all his
Prophets, that Christ should suffer, he has so fulfilled; and when says Paul,
they had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him down from the
Tree, etc. All, nothing was abated, God spared not his own Son, as concerning
any thing, no not the least thing or circumstance of thing that the Scripture
had foretold, and all is said still to be done, that the Scriptures might be
fulfilled, all which shows that it cannot be, but the Scriptures must be
fulfilled, they cannot be broken, hence we often read, this was done that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, and that, and the other, as Matthew. 26. 55, 56*
and Mar. 14. 49. But the Scriptures must be fulfilled, and hence is it said
such and such things must be done, as concerning Christ, he must suffer this,
and that, John 3. 13. So must the Son of Man be lifted up, so Matthew 26. 21.
From that time forth, began Jesus to show unto his Disciples, that he must go
unto Jerusalem and sufter many things of the Elders, and chief Priests, and
Scribes, and be killed, and raised again the third day, so Luke 22. 37. For I
say unto you, that this that is written, must be accomplished in me; and why
must it? why? surely upon this ground, and for this cause among others, because
the Scriptures had said it, had foretold it, and they cannot be broken* no,
rather must the Son of God himself be broken; and this had Christ a special eye
unto, think thou, says Christ to Peter, Matthew. 26. 53. that I cannot now
pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than 12. legions of
Angels? but how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be?
Verse 54. Implying, they must be fulfilled, they could not be broken, no, he
must rather be broken himself; and surely, if they were not, nor could not be
broken, as in reference to him, they never can, nor will be broken, as in
reference to us; if God for fulfilling of Scriptures, that they might not be
broken, did not spare his Son, much less will he spare others; surely if it
could have been dispensed withal for any, it would have been dispensed withal
for him, especially when he was to suffer such horrid things, but not being
dispensed with for him, surely it cannot be dispensed with for any.

is dearer to him than that, as it is written, My glory will I not give unto
another, Isa. 42. 8.
and now it was against his honor, if he should not perform what he speaks, if
he should not make his Word good; why? it is a dishonor, and a discredit to a
man to break his word, not to be as good as his word, not to perform what he
promises, and how much would it be to Gods Dishonor, whose Fidelity, and Truth
is infinite, if the Scripture should be broken? it would be a dishonor to all
Gods Attributes, to his power, to his wisdom, to his goodness, to his
faithfulness, yea and to his righteousness; for one special part of Gods
Justice and righteousness appears, and is manifested in keeping his word, and
performing his promises, Nehem. 9. 8. And have performed thy words, for thou
art righteous. And if we confess our sins, he is faithful, and just, to
forgive us our sins; i Joh. 1. 9.
Why faithful and just to forgive them? because he has promised to forgive
them, and it is but faithfulness and justice, having promised, to perform what
he has promised; so that if the Scripture should be broken, and Gods Word
fail, it would be a dishonor to his faithfulness, and justice, and
righteousness, not that confession of sins, according to Gods justice, deserves
forgiveness of sins, but justice requires, that even a Man performs that which
he has promised, hence David prays, Psalm 141. 1. In thy faithfulness answer
me, and in thy righteousness, and 2 Pet. 1. 1. Through the righteousness of
God, i. e. his truth and faithfulness, and constancy in keeping promises, that
at his coming in the flesh, he would effectually call some of the Israelites,
so Micah 7. 20. Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham,
mark it, it was mercy to Abraham to make the promise, but truth to Jacob, to
perform what was promised; so that if the Scripture should be broken, Gods
faithfulness, and righteousness, and truth, yea, and all his Attributes must
suffer, and his honor in all these; And therefore upon this, and all the
former grounds, the Scripture it cannot be broken.

In what respects and particulars the Scripture cannot be broken.

1. More generally, in regard of its 1. In regard of its power and authority.
power and authority, so it cannot be broken nor dispensed with. O there is a
wonderful and dreadful authority, for which it ought to be believed and obeyed,
which depends not on the Testimony of man, but wholly on God, the Author and
giver thereof; it is the Word of God, as the Thessalonians are said to receive
it, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. And thus now in respect of this, the Scripture cannot be
broken, i. e. it cannot be dissolved, loosed, frustrated, nor made void, none
can weaken or violate it, no, look what power and authority it had, it still
has, and shall have, and therefore should accordingly be received, believed,
and obeyed, Psalm. 110. v. 4. Thou have Commanded us, etc. There Is a great
Emphasis in that pronown Thou, it has the stamp of Gods authority in it, and
this authority is ever the same, and cannot be dispensed with by any. And in
this respect the Scripture cannot be broken, i. e. lose its power, So the Dutch
Annotations interpret it in part.
none can dissolve or abolish the authority of it, or free and disoblige us
from it.

Again 2. and more particularly, in regard 2. Prophecies.
of its prophecies, so can it not be broken, but what ever it foretells, it
shall certainly be fulfilled, whatever it prophesies, it shall certainly be
performed. How was that ancient prophecy prophesied long before as concerning
Judas fulfilled? Act. 1. 16. Men and Brethren, this Scripture must needs have
been fulfilled, etc.
Rev. 1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein, for the time is at
hand; That is, when these things shall begin to be fulfilled; thus when the
Spirit of God speaks of the destruction of Babylon, it is said, there came a
great voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the Throne, saying, It is done,
Rev. 16. 17. i. e. it is as certain, as if it were already done, that Babylon
shall be undon. Adeo vera sunt quae Deus praedixit, ut prius mundi machina
casura sit quam verbis ejus aliquid defuturum, Aretius.
So Rev. 21. 6. And he said unto me, It is done, I am Alpha, and Omega, the
beginning, and the end, that is, all that has by the prophecies been foretold
of the Churches deliverance, and the destruction of her enemies, shall as
certainly be done and accomplished, as if already done, Rev. 22. 6. and he said
unto me, These sayings are faithful and true, etc. Hoc non tam in gratiam
Johannis dicitur acsi ipse dubitasset, quam totius ecclesiae. Tossan. in Loc.
which may much comfort us, both as concerning whatever prophecies remain yet
to be fulfilled, as to the weal of the Church, as also as to the downfall, and
destruction of all its implacable enemies.

3. In regard of its promises, so the 3. Promises.
Scripture cannot be broken, no, look upon all the promises through out the
whole Book of God, as indeed there are very many, yea, and exceeding great and
precious promises, they shall all be performed; there shall not any thing fail
of all the good things which the Lord has spoken, for all the promises of God
(says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 1. 20. in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the
glory of God by us, i e. they are all constant, and sure in him, and shall be
performed all by him, the promises are as infallible true, as God is true, and
as Christ is true; God shall as soon fail, and Christ shall as soon fail, as
any promise made in the Gospel; Romans 9. 6. the Apostle speaking of the word of
promise, which God made to Abraham, says, not as though the word of God, i. e.
the promises of God, made to Abraham, and his posterity, and relaced every
where by the Prophets, had taken none effect, the Greek is (...), should fall,
or be fallen to ground, so the Dutch Annot. and it is opposed, or set against
standing, or remaining, in the 11. verse, by which is signified firm stediness,
when the effect follows the promise; so that to fall, or fall to the ground, is
to be frustrate, become void, and of none effect, when the promise is not kept,
like as an earthen Pot, or Glass, being let fall by any, is broken apieces; but
this cannot be, as to Gods promise, for it follows, they are not all Israel, i.
e. true Israelites, to whom Gods promises properly had respect, which are of
Israel, that is descended from Jacob, q. d. Q. d. quicquid hic obstrepant
judaei, impossible est promissionem excidisse; exciderit, pro factus sit
irritus; opponitur (...), v. 11. firmum ratum manner, quo sensu, 1 Samuel 3. 19
dioitur, verbum Jehovae nullum cecidit super terram, asseritur ergo dei
veracitas and constantia in servandis promissis, impossible enim est Deum qui
ipsa est veritas mentiri, aut verbum ejus excidere, hoc est impediri ne
consequatur eventum. Caelum and terra transibunt, verbamea non transibunt; haec
sit basis fidei, and consolationis nostrae. Pareus in locum.
however the Jews may murmur, and complain against God, charging him with
breach of promise (if they were cursed, and separated from Christ) yet it
cannot be, that God should be unfaithful, or his word fail, or fall to the
ground, no, it is absolutely impossible, it was kept to the true seed of
Abraham, the true Isralites; and that was sufficient to vindicate the truth, in
that the promise was fulfilled to the elect, however many thousands of others
were lost; so 1 Cor. 15. 54. there it is said so, when this corruptible shall
have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then
shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, i. e. the promise, the
comfortable saying; and thus shall all the saying that are written, be brought
to pass, and many sweet and comfortable sayings there are, which is, and may be
matter of singular comfort, and support to the people of God, both as in
reference to the Church in general, as also themselves in particular. O how
many exceeding great and precious promises do we find in the word, and in none
of them, can the Scripture be broken! there is a comfortable promise, as to
these present times, Matthew. 15. 13. every Plant, which my heavenly Father has
not planted, shall be rooted up; and was ever a Nation more overrun with
plants, which are not of our heavenly Fathers planting, than England is at this
day? O how many plants have sprung up amongst us alate, which are not of Gods
planting, but the devils planting! such are all false Doctrines, Errors,
Heresies, Blasphemies, and the broachers, and defenders of them; and how are
our Churches overrun with them? may not God say to England, as sometimes to
Judah? Jer. 2. 21, yet I Isaiah 5. 2
had planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned
into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine unto me? I looked it should have
brought Deuteronomy. 32. 33.
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes; their Vine, is of the Vine of
Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrha; their grapes are grapes of gall, their
clusters are bitter; their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom
of Aspes; which may be understood of evil, and noisome Doctrines; but now this
may comfort us, that there is a promise, that every plant, which our heavenly
Father has not planted, shall be rooted Eccles. 3. 2
up; there is says Solomon, a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which
is planted, Satan has had a time to plant, and God according to his promise,
will have a time to pluck up that which he has planted, So 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. Now
as Jannes, and Jambres, withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth, men
of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith; But they shall proceed no
further, for their folly shall be manifest to all, as theirs also was. So
another comfortable promise we have, Matthew. 16. 18. I will build my Church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; so for our own particular, Heb.
13. 5. for he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, Romans 8. 28.
and we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to
them who are the called according to his purpose, John 10. 28. I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out
of my hands; and so I might instance in many others, but of these, I shall
speak more hereafter, in the application of the point.

4. In regard of what it threatens, so 4. Threatenings.
the Scripture cannot be broken; and indeed, there are many sad and gricvous
threatningsin the word, against wicked, and ungodly men, Psa. 9. 17. the wicked
shall be turned into hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psa. 11. 6.
upon the wicked, he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest, etc. Isay 3. 11. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for
the reward of his hands shall be given him; So 1 Samuel 2. 9, 10. the wicked
shall be silent in darkness; and the adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to
pieces, Psa. 68. 21. But God shall wound the head of his enemies; and the hairy
scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses; and now in these, and
very many others, that I might mention, the Scripture (they continuing such)
cannot be broken.

5. In regard of whatever it says 5. What it says, and affirms, etc.
, or affirms, of persons, or things, thus the Scripture cannot be broken, i. e.
it cannot err, mistake, or be deceived; no, look what ever it says, or affirms
of persons, or things, so they certainly are, as the Scripture says of them,
and they cannot be otherwise, than as the Scripture says of them; thus the
Scripture cannot err: as here, Christ proves Princes, and Magistrates in some
sense to be Gods, why? because the Scripture says, and affirms so of them, and
the Scripture cannot be broken, err, or mistake; so look what ever the
Scripture says, or affirms, as concerning God Ex. 34 6, 7. Genesis 17. 1. Psa.
73. (...) Nahum 1. 7. Psa. 84. 11 2 Cor. 1. 3. 1 Pet. 5. 10. Acts 7. 2. Psa. 8.
3. Psa. 103. 13 etc.
, as concerning Jesus Christ Cant. 5. 10. Psalm. 45. Hagg. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 4
, as concerning the Holy Ghost Psalm. 1. 3 10. Job 15. 16.
, as concerning Angels Heb. 1. 14. Psa. 34. 7.
, as concerning men Psalm. 144. 4. etc.
, Satan 1 Pet. 5. 8. Rev. 12. 9. etc.
, sin, the world, and worldly things, the word of God, the ways of God, Hell,
Heaven, or what ever else, look what ever it be that the Scripture says of
them, or any of them, so certainly they are, as the Scripture says of them in
every respect, thus the Scripture cannot be broken; do you think, says the
Apostle Jemes 4. 5. that the Scripture says in vain, the spirit that dwells
in us lusts to envy, no, it is true enough, too true, that the spirit that
dwells in us, lusts to envy, that we are much carried out toward envy; our
corrupt nature, does much bewray it self that way; the Greek is (...) vainly,
i. e. that this should not be so, yes, it is certainly so, as we find by sad
experience.

The 1. Octjection answered.
But after all that has hitherto been 1. Object: answered.
said, as concerning the Scriptures impossibility of being broken, how can it,
may some say, be affirmed, that it should not be broken, when as the
commandments, which are part of the Scripture, are so often said to be broken,
so that if the Scripture in some part of it should not be broken, why in this
very thing the Scripture, in what it says, would appear to be broken? for how
often does the Scripture make mention of Gods Commandments being broken, yea,
and much complains thereof? Matthew. 5. 19. whosoever therefore shall break on of
these least Commandments, then they may be broken, thou that make thy boast
of the Law, through breaking the Law, dishonourest thou God? Romans 2. 23, 25.
and Psalm. 89. 3. if they break my statutes, and Ezra, 9. 14. should we again
break thy Commandments? etc. And what is sin indeed, but in some sense a
breach of Gods Law? 1 John 3. 4. for sin is the transgression of the Law. And
how can it be affirmed then, that the Scripture cannot be broken, except we
will make the Commandments to be no part of the Scripture?

To this I answer.
That if we indeed take breaking of Gods Commandments, for disobeying Gods
Commandments, for transgressing, and going beyond the bounds, and limits of
them, for not keeping within the Compass of them Thus the word (...), properly
signifies transgressio, digressio, aberratio, M^taphor: sumpta sen a lineasive
a via recta, a qua ad latus declinare vitium est, Par^us in Romans 2. 23.
, so its true, that the Commandments may indeed be broken, yea, and are too
too frequently broken; alas, we have too too sad experience of this; which
indeed, did break David's heart, and it was well, if it did more affect, and
afflict, ours, for this is it, that has so broken our Nation, and broken our
Churches, and broken so many in their estates, in their limbs, in their
lively-hoods, yea, in their lives, this broke David's bones, that the bones
which thou have broken, may rejoice, and Jerusalems, Lam. 3. 4. my flesh, and
my skin, has he made old, he has broken my bones, this made Jerusalems
breach, and so has it ours, Lament. 2. 13.
great like the Sea, the Lord heal it, this was it that broke Jesus Christ
himself, he was wounded for our transgressions, he Isaiah 53. 5. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
was bruised for our iniquities; this is my body which is broken for you, for
your sins, for your transgressio^s; yea, God himself complains, that he is
broken, Ezekiel. 6. 9. because I am broken with their whorish heart, which has
departed from me, etc. and it was well, it more brake our hearts, that in this
sense, the Law, and Commandments, which are part of the Scripture, are so much
broken.

But if we take breaking of Gods Commandments, for disanulling them,
dissolving, loosing, and destroying them* for abrogating them, for taking them
away, or frustrating them, and making them void, so the Law, and Commandments
cannot be broken, no the Scripture is express to the contrary for ever, O Lord,
thy word is settled in heaven, concerning thy Testimonies, I have known of old,
that thou have founded them for ever; and thy word is true from the beginning,
and every one of thy righteous judgments endures for ever, Psalm. 119 89. 152.
160. Matthew. 5. 8. for verily, I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one
jot, or one tittle, shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled,
one jot, or one iota, this is the least Letter of the Greek, as jod of the
Hebrew, whereby Christ would say, that even the least thing which is written in
the Law shall not perish, or one title, i. e. stroke of a Letter, or point, not
the least letter, or particle of a letter shall fail. Men indeed have been
mineing at Gods Commandments, and have assayed to make some of them null, and
void; the Papists dispense with the second Commandment, and the tenth, others
with the fourth; but what ever men assay, Gods Commandments do continue still
the same, without either addition, or substraction; that which God once made,
and Commanded as a Law, and Rule to walk by, that continues so still, there is
no change, or dissolution in Gods precepts, but they are still one and the same
in themselves, and have the same obligation upon us; thus the Commandments in
this sense, cannot be broken, though wicked men they labor indeed, and do as
much as in them lies, thus to break them, namely to destroy them, abolish them,
make them void, as David complains, Psa. 119. 126. It is time for thee Lord to
work, for they have made void thy Law, they have indevoured it, they have done
it as much as in them lies; and what they intended, and drove at, is charged
upon them, as if effected; but in vain do they attempt this, it cannot really,
and indeed be abolished, or made void, no, all his Commandments are sure, and
they stand fast for ever, and ever, Psalm. 111. 7, 8. it is easier for heaven
and earth to pass, than one tittle of the Law to fail; and thus the
Commandments cannot be broken; and I might add further in another respect,
that though the Law be broke by sinners, in regard of their disobedience to it,
yet shall it certainly be fulfilled, in regard of the penalty, and punishment,
threatened by it to such as so break it, either by them, or their surety, one
way, or other, if we do not take hold of the preceptive part of the Law by
obedience, the Penal part of the Law will take hold of us for our disobedience.

The second objection answered.
But there is another objection yet in 2. Objection answered
our way, and that is this, How can it be affirmed, the Scripture cannot be
broken, when as we find the threatenings which are part of the Scripture, have
not many times been fulfilled, nor accomplished, but in that sense broken; as
among many, to instance only in one as most remarkable, that in the Prophecy of
Jonah, we find there the Prophet Jonah sent to Nineveh, with this direct
threatening against it, Jonah 3. 4. and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and
Niniveh shall be destroyed; and yet we find afterward this threatening was not
fulfilled, God did not do what he said he would do, for it is said, verse. 10.
that God repented of the evil, that he said he would do, and did it not; and
how then can this place, and other the like, and the point in hand be
reconciled? how can it be said, the Scriptures cannot be broken, and yet the
threatenings, which are part of the Scripture not be fulfilled, nor be
accomplished, but in some sense be broken? yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be overthrown, and yet not overthrown.

To this I answer.
That this and the like places, and the point in hand, may very well be
reconciled: for this threatening was conditional, as all other threatenings are
of the Law Deunciatio ypotheti^, prout ^nt minae, ^y promisiones legis, ^y
confirnant se^uentia, Junius. Intelligenda conditionaliter, nimirum cum ^ac
exceptione, nisi egerint paenitentiam, Piscat: in locum. So Genesis 20. 3. Behold
thou art but a dead man, sub condition, ^isi mulierem hanc restituas. So Isay
38. 1. God said to Hezekiah, Set thine house in order, for thou shall die, and
not live. Denunciati^* ista non intelligenda simpliciter, sed cum tacita
condition, nempe nisi Hezek: vitam diuturniorem is deo petiverit idque ^o modo
qu^ petivit.
, and though in this place it be not expressed, yet is it to be understood, else
what needed the Lord to have sent the Prophet unto them? he might have
destroyed them without that sending, and warning, but he sends Jonah, that by
his warning, they might* speedily provide for their own safety by timely
repentance, hence it is said, verse. 10. and God saw their works, that they
turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he said he
would do unto them, and he did it not, i. e. he recalled his sentence, which
was but conditional in his decree, and mind, though he gave little, or no
notice thereof to, and by Jonah; thus God he did not change properly, but
Nineveh changed, the change is in man, not in God; when that which God
threatens conditionally concerning man is changed, he is still the same, and
his word, and all the change is in man.

The application of the point.
But to come to the application of the point, and now to build upon this
foundation thus laid, which is indeed the life and soul of Sermons, when sacred
truths are brought home to each man's particular conscience, and case; and this
is indeed the main, which in all this discourse, I drive at; and truly there is
(as I think, I may safely say) no one point, as in reference to the Scripture,
of greater use, nor any of which more singular improvement in the application
thereof may be made, than of this one; indeed the right improvement of this one
point, as concerning the Scripture, that it cannot be broken, is the way to
improve all Scripture; I may say of this point, as to the usefulness of it,
what is said of Joseph in another case, Genesis 49. 22. that it is fruitful bough,
or rather a fruitful Tree, even a fruitful Tree by a well, whose branches run
over the wall; But all that I shall speak, as to the application of this point,
I shall reduce to these six uses in general.

1. Of Information, and Instruction. 2. Of Humiliation. 3. Of Exhortation. 4.
Warning, and Admonition. 5. Of Terror, and Trembling. 6. Of Consolation.
Of Information, and Instruction; if Use 1. ^f Infor^ation.
the Scripture cannot be broken, but what it speaks shall certainly come to
pass, then 1. This it informs us, and gives us to see, what a desperate hazard
most people run, and what a desperate course most people take, even all who
still persist, and go on in their sins, for if the Scripture cannot be broken,
but what it speaks shall certainly come to pass, then certainly such continuing
so, must be broken, and must perish, and be destroyed; for this is it the
Scripture speaks, and holds forth, Psa. 68. 21. But God shall wound the head of
his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one that goes on still in his
trespasses, Job 31. 3. is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange
punishment to the workers of iniquity? Prove. 10. 29. the way of the Lord is
strength to the upright, but destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity.
Prove. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15. A naughty person, a wicked man, walks with a froward
mouth, he winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with
his fingers, frowardness is in his heart, he devises mischief continually, he
sows discord, therefore (mark that) shall his calamity come suddenly, and
suddenly shall he be broken without remedy, 1 Samuel 2. 10. the adversaries of
the Lord shall be broken to pieces, out of heaven shall he thunder upon them;
and now the Scripture cannot be broken, that is the point we have proved, and
abundantly confirmed, it is easier for heaven, and earth to pass, than one jot
of the Scripture to fail, and not be fulfilled; and what a desperate hazard
therefore do such run, and what a desperate course do such take, who still go on
in their trespasses? for they must* needs be destroyed, they must be broken,
for the Scripture cannot be broken; and therefore it is blessed Counsel, for
such to break off their sins by repentance, or else their sins will break them
body and soul for ever; this is the Counsel given by Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar,
Dan. 4. 27. wherefore let my Counsel, O King, be acceptable unto thee, and
break off thy sins by righteousness, etc. that is, by repentance, showing forth
the happy signs and fruits thereof; and how often does the Lord call, and
invite sinners to this, not only as being most acceptable to him, but as
knowing full well how much it concerns themselves? Prove. 1. 23. Hosea 14. 1, 2.
Isay 55. 7. Ezekiel. 33. 11. turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways, for why will
ye dye? God doubles his call, for they must, if they do not turn, inevitably
dye, and that eternally; and therefore, why will ye be so sottish, as through
your wilful impenitency, to bring eternal destruction upon your selves? for if
ye still go on, as you have begun, nothing can betide you, but that you must
needs dye, and perish in your sins.

Balack said of Balaams blessing, or cursing, I am sure, I may truly say of
this Book's blessing, or cursing, of the Scripture^ blessing, or cursing, Numb.
22. 6. for I wot that he whom thou blessest, is blessed, and he whom thou
cursest, is indeed cursed; so may I truly say of the Scripture, he whom the
Scripture blesses, is indeed blessed, and he whom the Scripture curses, is
indeed cursed; and therefore O it is good getting among the number of
Scripture-blessed-ones, the Lord make us of the number of those blessed ones
and keep us from being among the number of Scripturecursed-ones; for they whom
the Scripture pronounces blessed, or cursed, are indeed so, the Scripture
being that, which cannot be broken; as the Apostle James says in another case,
so say I, Do not err, my beloved Brethren, nor mistake, as concerning who are
blessed, for 1. Who are blessed? not such, who it may be think, and apprehend
themselves blessed, no, men may think themselves blessed, and happy, and yet be
miserable enough, as Christ tells the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3.
17. thou say thou art rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked; and that rich man, in the 12th. of Luke, he no doubt thought
himself wise and happy; but God called him fool, and shows him, that he was
miserable, verse. 20, 21. A man may bless himself in his own heart, though he be
such a one, as against whom God threatens all the curses that are written ^n
his Book, Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19, 20. And therefore he is not the blessed man, who
merely thinks, and accounts himself so; he blesses the covetous whom God
abhors, Psalm. 10. 3. and Malachy 3. 15. and now we call the proud happy,
etc. And men will praise thee, when thou do well to thy self, says the
Psalmist, as the men of the world count well, do well, or do good, that is,
pamperest, cherishest, make much of thy self, so good is sometimes used for
worldly pleasure, and emoluments, Psalm. 4. 6. Ainsworth. I but what follows?
though whilst he lived, he blessed his soul, and men will praise thee, when
thou do well to thy self; it follows, Psalm. 49. 19. he shall go to the
generation of his Fathers, they shall never see light, he shall go whither
wicked men are gone before him, and shall never see the light of life, the
light of glory.

Thus it is not that we account our selves blessed, or others account, or call
us so, that indeed speaks us so, but it is, when the Scripture calls, and
pronounces us so, when we are among* the number of the Scripture-blessed-ones,
for that cannot be broken, that cannot err, or mistake, so that if we be but
indeed and in truth, such as that does pronounce blessed, we are indeed
blessed, for we are sure, that the judgment of the Scripture is according to
truth, and therefore as not he that commends himself is approved, so not he
that blesses himself or others bless is blessed, but he whom the Scripture
blesses.

Now the Scripture pronounces several blessed; and it is good observing who they
are, and never to rest till we come to be, and to be in truth of the Number of
them, for the Scripture being that which cannot be broken, such, and indeed
only such are truly blessed. Now the Scripture pronounces such blessed

1. Who find wisdom, and who get understanding, Prove. 3. 13. Qui sapi^ntiam
veram inveniunt and qui intelligentiam factis exprimentes coram and in medium
afferunt, Cartw: in loc.
i. e. true wisdom, who attain to the saving knowledge of God in Christ, and
produce it into practice, so as to fear God, and depart from evil. Job 28. 28.

2. Who believe in Christ, who close with him, and put their trust in him. Psa.
2. 11. blessed are all they that put their trust in him, or that shroud
themselves under him, that rely confidently on him, or that betake themselves
for refuge and safety to him, so Ainsworth (...) Est recipere se aliquo,
tanquam in locum ^^tum, and deinde etia^ in ^o secure conquiescere.
, and where indeed is their safety, but only in him? Acts 4. 12. So Gal. 3. 9.
So then they which be of Faith are blessed, with faithful Abraham; now to be
of Faith, it is to believe, and apply the promise of Righteousness, and life,
and Salvation by Jesus Christ, and to rest on him alone for Justification, and
Salvation; as* they are said to be of works, who look to be justified by works,
so they are said to be of faith, who believe in Christ, and look to be saved,
and justified by Christ alone. So Psa. 72. 17. men shall be blessed in him,
that is in believing in him, and so in getting interested in him, who is the
blessed one, and in whom the promise of blessedness, and all blessings is made,
these the Scripture pronounces blessed living, and these the Scripture
pronounces blessed dying, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead, which dye in the
Lord, from hence forth, yea, says the Spirit, they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them.

3. Who are turned away from their iniquities. Acts 3. 26. Unto you first God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his iniquities; then are people indeed blessed, and that with
the blessedness of Christraised from the dead, when they are turned from their
iniquities.

4. Whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Psalm. 32. 1,
2. blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered,
blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, etc.

5. Whose God is the Lord, who have an interest in him and his favor. Psalm.
33. 12. Blessed is the Nation, whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he
has chosen for his own inheritance, Psalm. 144. 15. happy is that people, whose
God is the Lord, Numb. 6. 23, 24, 25, 26. speak unto Aaron, says the Lord to
Moses, and tell him, on this wise shall ye bless the Children of Israel saying,
The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine on thee, and
be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenancs upon thee, and give
thee peace.

6. Who fear the Lord, and walk in his ways, and delight in his Commandments.
Psalm. 128. 1. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his
ways, and Psa. 112. 1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and
delights greatly in his Commandementt.

7. Who trust in the Lord. Psalm. 34. 8. blessed is the man that trusts in
him, Psa. 40. 4. blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust, and
respects not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies, Psalm. 84. 12. O Lord
of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee, Jer. 17. 7. Blessed is the
man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is, for he shall be as a
tree planted by the waters, that spreads out her roots by the Rivers, and
shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be
careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

8. Who hear the word of God and keep it, who hearken to it so, as to obey it.
Luke 11. 2, 8. But he said, yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word of
God and keep it, James 1. 25. But who so looks into the perfect Law of
liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer
of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed, John. 13. 17. if ye know
these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

9. Who have a part in the first resurrection, Rev. 20. 6. blessed and holy is
he that has his part in the f^rst resurrection, on such the second death has
no power.

10. Whom God corrects, and withal instructs, whom he chasteneth, and withal
teaches out of his Law, Psa. 94. 12. blessed is the man whom thou chastenest,
O Lord, and teach out of thy Law.

In a word, we have in the fifth of Matthew, a whole Catalogue of such summed
up, whom Christ in the Scripture pronounces blessed, Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, Blessed are they that mourn, Blessed are the meek, Blessed are
they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, Blessed are the pure in
heart, Blessed are the peacemakers, etc.

So the Scripture pronounces several cursed; as 1. Such as trust in man, and
make flesh their Arm, Jer. 17. 5. 2. Such as enjoy precious means, and yet bear
pernicious fruit, thorns and Briers, Heb. 6. 7, 8. 3. Who are deceivers, who
have in their flock a Male, and vow and sacrifice to the Lord, a corrupt thing,
etc. Mal. 1. 14.


In a word, the Scripture pronounces all wicked and ungodly men cursed, all
proud and impenitent Persons, who customarily, and contemptuously do err from
Gods Commandments, Psa. 119. 21. thou have rebuked the proud that are cursed,
which do err from thy Commandments, or cursed are they who do err, etc. but
the difference is of no great moment, it being through pride, and for want of
having their spirits made humble and low, that men wander, and go away from the
rule, as Psa. 10. 4, 5. the wicked through the pride of his countenance, will
not seek after God; his ways are always grievous.

Thus I have given you a view of several of those which the Scripture
pronounces blessed; and so a view of some whom the Scripture pronounces cursed;
and now the Scripture being that which cannot be broken, those whom the
Scripture pronounces blessed, must needs be blessed, and so those whom the
Scripture pronounces cursed, must needs be cursed; and therefore as ever we
would be found among the number of such as are truly blessed, O let us never
rest, till we come to find our selves among the number of those whom the
Scripture pronounces blessed; and as ever we would not be found among the
number of such who are indeed miserable or cursed, let us take heed how we be
found among the number of those, whom the Scripture pronounces miserable or
cursed, for such are indeed so.

Do not think thy self blessed, because thou art rich, or great, or honorable,
or set up in high place in the world, or because thou have health, and
strength, and art at ^ase, when others it may be are sick and weak, and in
pain, for where does the Scripture pronounce such blessed, blessed are the
rich, blessed are such as are great, and high, and honorable in the world,
blessed are such as are at ^ase, and in health? produce if thou can one
place, one Scripture, it is that I could never yet see or find, or meet withal
my self, nay, I have found rather the contrary, Luke 6. 24* but ^wo unto you
that are rich, for you have received your consolation, etc. not that this woe
belongs to all that are rich, but people may be rich, and yet their case woeful
enough; and so do not think thy self miserable or cursed, because thou art
mean, and poor, and base, and contemptible in the world, because thou art
sickly, it may be, and crazy, and weak, for where does the Scripture pronounce
such miserable? produce one Scripture if thou can, nay, some that are poor,
and afflicted, are pronounced blessed, and happy, Luke 6. 20, 21, 22. blessed
be the poor, etc. behold we count them happy, which endure, etc. James 2. 5. 5.
11. and therefore as ever you would be blessed indeed, labor to be such, whom
you can find Scripture for, that you are blessed. Remember me O Lord says
David, with the favor of thy people, Psa. 106. 4. and so pray, remember me and
mine O Lord, with the blessedness of the Scripture, O bless us with that
blessedness, which the Scripture counts and calls blessedness; and then shall I
and mine be blessed indeed, for that it cannot be broken. O bless me in
inabling me to find wisdom, and to get understanding, in inabling me to
believe, and close with Christ, in turning me away from mine iniquities, in
forgiving my transgressions, and covering my sins, etc. and then shall I be
indeed blessed, for such does the Scripture pronounce blessed, and that cannot
be broken. Thou have says David, dealt Psa. 1 19. 65.
well with thy servant, O Lord according to thy word. I shall but only allude
to it here, and apply it in this sense, O it is a blessed thing, when the Lord
deals well with us, and blesses us according to his word, I mean in this sense,
as his word Judges and determines, as concerning dealing well with, and
blessing, and this is not when merely he gives us wealth, and riches, and
abundance, or when he gives us health or ^ase, when we are not in trouble as
other men, nor plagued like other men; this indeed the world counts the only
dealing well with, but it may be ill enough with us, and we may be far enough
from being blessed for all this, Psa. 73. 3, 4, 12. Zach. 1. 15. that rich man
in the 12th. of Luke, he no doubt thought it well with himself; and therefore
he sings a requiem to his soul, v. 19. because he had heapt so much wealth
together, Soul thou have goods laid ^p for many years, take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry; But what says God to him, thou fool, this night thy soul
shall be required of thee, then whose shall those things be, which thou have
provided? so is he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward
God. Thus for God merely to give us wealth, and riches, or health and ease,
this is not to bless us according to his word; but then the Lord blesses us,
and deals well with us according to his word, when he gives us himself, his
Son, his Spirit, his Grace, his Favor, when he makes his face to shine upon
us, and teaches us his Statutes, as David prays, Psalm. 119. 135. make thy face
to shine upon me, and teach me thy Statutes; when he gives faith, forgives us
our sins, turns us away from our iniquities, makes us rich toward himself,
with 2 Cor. 8. 9.
those riches, which Jesus Christ became poor to enrich our souls withal, then
God deals well with us, and blesses us according to his word, and that is a
dealing well with, and a blessing indeed, for the word cannot be broken. It Is
said in Isay 65. 16. that he who blesses himself in the earth, shall bless
himself in the God of truth. O it is a blessed thing, when we ground our
blessedness upon God, and his truth, I am blessed, because I am such a one,
whom Gods truth, whom Gods word which cannot be broken pronounces blessed, I,
such are blessed indeed; And so I might add, that this point informs us, and
gives us to see, who are indeed excellent, and honorable, and noble; and so
who are indeed base, vile, and contemptible; namely such whom the Scripture
says, and affirms to be so, for that cannot err, or mistake; and therefore
such as the Scripture says are excellent, are indeed excellent; and such as
the Scripture says are vile, are indeed vile; Now the Scripture says and
affirms, that the Saints are excellent, Psalm. 16. 11. Prove. 12. 26. that such
as search the Scripture are Noble, Acts 17. 11. that such as are precious in
Gods sight, are honorable, Isay 43. 4. and these now are indeed excellent,
noble, and honorable, the Scripture so affirming, and we can never indeed be
truly such, till we come to be of the number of these; the very heathens
themselves had a kind of notion of this Claudius his Motto, Generis virtus
nobilitas. is virtue, not Scutchions, or images of Ancestors makes men noble.
Aemilias Motto. Non gens, sed men's, non genus, sed genius, ^ot race, or place,
but grace, truly sets forth a man; and Very observable to this purpose, is that
of Juvenal Satyr: 8. Stemmana quid faciunt, quid prodest Pontice longo Sanguine
censeri, pictosque ostendere vultus Majorum, etc. -- Tota licet veteres
exornent undique cerae Atria, Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus.
So the Scripture says and affirms of the wicked, that they are vile, though
otherwise never so great high and honorable in the eyes of the world, Psa. 15.
4. 12. 8. when the vilest men are exalted, vile, though exalted; thus
Antiochus, though otherwise great, is called a vile person, Dan. 11. 21. And
man in honor, and not having a saving understanding in the things of God, is
like the heasts that perish, Psa. 49. 20. Hence God is said, to tread down the
wicked, even as mire in the street; and to put them all away like dross, the
Hebrew is (...) Scorias drosses, that is vilest dross, Pro. 10. 20. the heart
of the wicked is little worth, it may be his House, Lands, or Revenues, are
somewhat worth, but his heart is little worth.

And so I might likewise add, that this point it informs us also, who are
indeed wise, and who foolish, namely, such whom the Scripture says and affirms
to be so, for that cannot err, or mistake; and therefore such as that affirms
to be wise, are indeed wise, and such as that pronounces to be foolish, are
indeed foolish; now the Scripture says such are wise, That fear God, and
depart from evil, Job 28. 11. Psalm. 111. 10. That understand, and consider
their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. That hear Christ's sayings and do them, Matthew.
7. 24. that walk circum spectly, Ephesians. 5. 15. That foresee the evil, and hide
themselves, Prove. 22. 3. That win souls, Prove. 11. 30. Dan. 12. 3.

And so the Scripture says likewise of all wicked men, that they are foolish,
Psa. 5. 5. Job 5. 3. Prove. 9. 6. 10. 23. And so I might give you many other
places, but they are every where obvious, more particularly such as hear
Christ's sayings, and do them not, Matthew. 7. 26. That reject the word of the
Lord, Jer. 8. 9. that leave off to do good, Psalm. 36. 3. That lay up treasure
for themselves, and are not rich toward God^ Luke 12. 20, 21. that trust in
their own heart, Prove. 28. 26. And thus I might further dilate; but this at
present shall suffice.

3. Again, Cannot the Scripture be broken? then this further informs us, and
gives us to see what a firm and strong prop, such lean and rely upon, that make
the Word of God their stay, that there trust and hope, and bear up themselves,
that can say as David, For I trust in thy Word, and but I hope in thy Word,
Psalm 119. 49, 81. I say, if the Scripture cannot be broken, if it cannot be
unloosed or dissolved, what a firm and strong prop do such lean and rely upon,
even such as cannot fail, as is more firm than Heaven and Earth it self? for
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, says Christ, but my words shall not pass
away, For ever O Lord thy Word is settled in Heaven. Solomon tells us, the rich
man's wealth is his strong City, and an high Wall, but it is but in his own
conceit, Prove. 18. 11. For he that trusts in his riches shall fall, Prove. 11.
28. But so shall never such do, who trust in the Word, no, for all flesh is as
grass, and all the glory of Man as the flower of the grass, the grass
withers, and the flower thereof falls away, but the Word of the Lord
endures for ever; The Words of the Lord are pure Words, as silver tried in a
furnace of earth, purified seven times, that is, many times, ^ully,
sufficiently, seven being a perfect number* 1 Samuel 2. 5. The baren has born
seven* that is many, all contained therein is firm and solid, there is not in
them the least dross of vanity or falsehood, David seals to this, Psalm. 119. 65.
Tho^ have dealt well with thy Servant O Lord* according to thy Word, (as if he
should have said) O Lord, I have found thee as good as thy Word to me, thou
did not fail in performing what thou promisedst, what thou spakest came to
pass, thy Word was not violated, or made void, and hence says David* Psa. 56.
4. In God will I praise his Word, and again in the 10. Verse, in God will I
praise his Word, in the Lord will I praise his Word, that is, as I suppose we
may ^^terpret it, among other things in God, that are so observable* and
praiseworthy, I will praise his Word. I will observe and take notice of that,
and praise and extol that which is so true, so firm, so solid, so indissoluble;
this Faith especially, looks at in God, and there leanes and relies, and well
it may, it being so firm, being that which cannot fail, hence says David,
Psalm 119. 74. They that fear thee, will be glad when they see me, because I
have hoped in thy Word, I, and well they might, there is great cause why we
should rejoice and be glad, when we see such as hope in Gods Word. O that there
were more such that did it in truth, because such hope well, they fix their
hope upon what is most firm, upon what will hold, and they cannot place their
hopes better, such shall never be ashamed of their hope; Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but that Word in which they hope shall never pass away; for the
Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on thee. God may break his peoples estates, he may break
their relations, yea, he may break their bones, break their limbs, break their
loins, break them with breach upon breach, as he did Job, Job 16. 14. God
brake his estate, his relations, laid waste his family, made desolate all his*
company, Job 16. 7. 29. 5. 1. 18, 19. and brake his body, 7. 5. So Isay 38. 13.
I reckoned, says Hezekiah, till Morning, that as a Lion so will he break all
my bones: from Day even to Night, will thou make an end of me. But though God
break all else, he never does, nor will, nor can break his Word; and therefore
says Job still, though he slay me, yet I will trust in him, Job 13. 15. And
Hezekiah, Isay 38. 16. O Lord, by these things men live, i. e. by the promises,
and therefore as Elizabeth told Mary, Luke 1. 45. Blessed is she that
believes, for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her
from the Lord, thus Elizabeth by the instigation of the Holy Ghost, pronounces
Mary, and all such as believe and rely on Gods Word, blessed, upon this ground,
because the Word of God cannot be broken, but shall certainly be performed,
Blessed is she that believes, yea, blessed are all that believe and rely on
the Word; but woeful is their estate that rely on any thing else, for they
shall come down wonderfully* we may say of all other things that people trust
in, or lean on, let them he what they will, as is said of Egypt, they trust
but in the staff of a broken reed, whereon if a man lean, it will go into his
hand and pierce it; so are all other things to all those that trust in them,
and lean on them, but the word is most firm, and abides for ever; and
therefore on a most firm prop, do such lean and rely, that stay themselves
thereon.

4. Again, cannot the Scripture be broken, nor Gods word therein fail, or be
found false? then this it further informs us, and gives us to see how exceeding
abundant God is in his goodness, and gracious condescension to his people
Consideranda and exosculanda dei immensa (...), quasese ad nostram infirmitatem
in tantum demisit ut quasi aliquis nostrum verbis suis (...), etiam jure
jurando a^thoritatem conciliare voluerit. Pare^s in Locum.
, and how exceeding tender he is of their comfort and consolation, who as
concerning what he has promised, has not only given his people his word,
though that cannot be broken as you have heard proved* but has likewise added
his oath, has not only spoke, but sworn, O how abundant herein does appear the
goodness of God, and his tenderness of his peoples comfort, and consolation? as
the Apostle expresses it, in the Heb. 6. 17, 18. wherein God willing more
abundantly to show unto the h^irs of promise, the immutability of his Counsel,
confirmed it by an Oath, That by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled
for refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us, In Deo tam dicere, quam
jur are, immutabile est, hominum long alia est ratio, etc. Sermo vero dei
certa est veritas, (...), cum vero additur jus jurandum, quasi c^mulus ad
plenam mensur^m a^^^dit, hinc nobis valida consolatio, quod deus qui fallere
lo^ (...) ^o^ potest, promittere non contentus, etiam jurat. Calv. in loc. For
God says Calv. to add his Oath to his promise, is as when a heap is put to a
full measure.
by two immutable chings, that is, his immutable promise, and his immutable
Oath, we might have strong consolation; God would have his people joyful, John
15. 11. and their consolation strong; the ground there of being so firm, and
strong, and solid; O let us admire, and adore Gods wonderful goodness, and
gracious condescension herein, that we should have two such immutable things,
that God should both say and swear; God cannot lie nor deceive, whether he say
or swear, his nature makes it impossible; and yet he is pleased to do both,
both to say, and swear, such is his wonderful goodness and condescension, and
if yet notwithstanding both these, we shall so far dishonor God, and be
wanting to our own comfort, as not to believe; and rely on both these, how sad
and unworthy a thing will it be? how derogatory to Gods glory, as well as to
our own comfort? Nudis ejus promissis fidem haberi oportuit, etc. we ought
(says Pareus upon the place) to give credit to his bare promises, because he
is truth it self, and goodness it self, wisdom it self, and power it self,
wholly void of all falsehood and fraud; yet because by reason of our infirmity,
he has not doubted to his most true promises, over and above to add his Oath,
and that, that we might be thoroughly persuaded in our hearts of his immutable
truth, and great kindness toward us, and from thence might have strong
consolation, both in life and death, it would be more than barbarous
inhumanity, and ingratitude for us, by our infidelity, not to give credit to
his promises, being so confirmed.

5. Cannot the Scripture be broken? then from hence are we further informed,
and given to see, whence it is, that there is yet a Church and Ministry in the
world.

1. A Church; surely from hence it is, because there are in the Scripture so
many gracious promises, as concerning its continuance, and being upheld, and
the Scripture cannot be broken, as that in the 16. Matthew. 18. that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it, i. e. neither the power, nor policy of hell,
neither the force, nor subtilty of the devil, nor all his instruments. For in
former time, the gates were the Seat both of strength and counsel, the
Senate-Houses and Fortresses being there; so that, that there is yet a Church
in the world, it is not that Satan, or his instruments have been wanting, to
exercise all their power, and policy to subvert it, and utterly to overthrow
it, but because Gods word cannot be made void, because this and other the like
Scripture-promises cannot be broken, the Scripture cannot be broken; and
therefore let the Churches enemies associate themselves, and they shall be
broken Isay 8. 9, 10.
apieces; let them gird themselves, and they shall be broken a pieces; and
again, let them gird themselves, and they shall be broken apieces, let them
take Counsel together, and it shall come to naught, speak the word, and it
shall not stand, because the word of the Lord, that must stand, and cannot fall
to the ground.

So in the 12. Zach, the Churches preservation there, and victory over all her
enemies, is notably, and most elegantly set forth under a threefold Metaphor of
what she should be to all her enemies. First, a Cup of trembling, Secondly, a
burdensome Stone, Thirdly, as an hearth of fire amongst the wood, and a Torch
of fire in a sheaf, Verse 2, 3, 6. behold I will make Jerusalem a Cup of
trembling unto all the people round about, when they shall be in the Siedge,
both against Judah, and against Jerusalem; and in that day I will make
Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all the people, all that burden themselves
with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered
together against it. And v. 6. In that day will I make the Governors of Judah
like a hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and
they shall devour all the people round about on the right hand, and on the
left, and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in
Jerusalem; these are Metaphors, and all exceeding apt, and appropriate for to
show and illustrate, not only how bootless and fruitless, but likewise how
pernicious to themselves all the enemies attempts should be against the Church;
it is not for me at present to stand to open, and explain each of them, it
would take up too long time; and therefore to speak only a little of the second
of them, v. 3. and in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all
the people, all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though
all the people of the earth be gathered together against it; the enemies of the
Church are here compared to such, who going about to show their strength, by
lifting up some great and heavy stone, that is above their strength, come to be
overborn, and crushed by its weight Comparat at hosts Jerosolymae homini qui
lapidem tollere conatur ubi vires non sufficient, ille ergo concidit sibi
nervos, etc. Calv. in locum.
; and so shall it be with all those, who go about to subvert, and overthrow the
Church of God, they shall find it too burdensome a stone for them; and instead
of overthrowing that, shall be destroyed, and overthrown themselves Ecclesia
huc usque tanquam scopulus, ad quem undique fluctus maris alliduntur, perstat
firma, and immota, nec delebitur unquam.
; it is supposed to be a Metaphor, borrowed from an exercise, or game frequent
in days of old, viz to take up a great round stone to try their strength,
lifting it up from the ground sometimes to their knees, sometimes to their
middle, sometimes to their shoulders, and sometimes as high as their heads, at
which sports in so lifting, they did sometimes grievously hurt themselves; but
what ever it be the Metaphor is borrowed from, the meaning is this, that all
the attempts of the Churches enemies, be they never so many, or mighty, be they
what they will, or of whom they will, they shall all certainly not only be
vain, and invalid as to the Church, I mean as to the utter overthrowing, and
ruining thereof, but pernicious, and destructive, as in reference to
themselves, the Church shall be too burdensome a stone for them all, and all
their attempts, whether by power, or policy, by strength, or stratagems they
set upon it. O how many have still in all ages been heaving at this stone,
trying by all ways, and means, for to evert it; the devil has still in all
ages found such fools, as to be lifting at it, some by their power, others by
their policy, some one way, some another; but blessed be God, it has hitherto
been too heavy and burdensome a stone for them all, and so shall be to the end,
for these and the like, are Scripture-promises, and the Scripture cannot be
broken, Psa. 129. 1, 2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may
Israel now say, Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have
not prevailed against me Est hactenus mirabiliter defensa, and servata
ecclesia, and servabitur de inceps frustra frementibus and contra niten^ibus
diabolis and toto mundo* Moll^r: in loc.
, it has still been indeed the way of the devil, and his wicked instruments
in all ages, to afflict the Church, and their endeavor in all ages, to destroy
the Church, I but yet they could never effect it, yet they have not prevailed
against me, faith the Church.

2. From hence we are informed, and given to see, whence it is that there is
yet a Ministry in the world, surely it is from hence, because there are in the
Scripture so many gracious promises made, as concerning the continuing and
upholding the same, and the Scripture cannot be broken, and therefore, is not
at this day the Ministry broken and utterly extinct, because the Scripture
cannot be broken. Truly it is mavelous, and may seem strange, that there
should be yet a Ministry in the World, considering, First, the many Enemies on
every hand that it still has, both open, and secret, potent, and politic;
Atheists, and Papists, and Apostates, and Schismatics, and Sectaries of all
sorts, as Quakers, Ranters Anabaptists, Familists, and what not? however they
may in some things disagree among themselves, yet herein have and do all agree
for to oppose the Ministry. And secondly, considering how many ways and
means have been, and still are attempted to ruin it, what stones have been
left unturned; what designs unassayed, to overthrow it? many of which have
notably of late been held forth Jus Divinum Ministerij Evangelici Preface.
as 1. By railing upon, and reviling the persons of Gods Ministers, and raising
all manner of Reproaches against them, etc. Secondly, Crying down the present
Ministry as Antichristian, etc. Thirdly, By taking away their maintenance,
or at least attempting it. Fourthly, By setting up the basest and meanest of
the People, and such as have no Arts nor Knowledge in the Tongues to be
Preachers, that thereby they might make the World believe, that the Ministerial
Office is of all other, the lowest and easiest. Fifthly, By denying the very
Office it self; these with diverse others of the like nature, have been, and
still are the vvayes and means whereby many seek to ruin the Ministry.

And if to all these we add, the Worlds woeful undervaluing, and contemning of
the Ministry, treading that under their feet, which they should wear as a
Crown upon their Head, I Rev. 12. 1.
mean the Ministers and their Gospeldoctrine, O how much more wonderful will
it appear, that there is yet a Ministry in the World? but the Scriptures
cannot be broken, made void, and therefore though it be wonderful, yet it is
so. Thus that there is a Ministry yet in the World, it is not that the Devil,
together with his instruments of all sorts, have been wanting to overthrow it;
It is not that the ungrateful World has not demerited the removal of it; but
because Gods Word cannot be made void, I mean as to a Ministry somewhere,
though not it may be here or there, in this or that place, but in some place;
Thus that the Ministry of the Word shall continue to the end of the World, is
clearly held forth, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists; and some Pastors, and Teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the Body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ: Till we all come, that is here to be marked
and observed, that the Ministry is to continue to the end, the use of it being
to the end while we are in the World-Look as while a house is not fully built,
the Workmen may not be dismissed; So until the House of God have every
Believer, every stone of it laid, the Builders of it must be continued; hence
this Ministry of the Pastor and Teacher, is called an enduring Ministry, a
Ministry that remains, 2 Cor. 3. 11. For if that which was done away was
glorious, much more that which remains is glorious.

Thus the Lord has always had Pastors and Teachers in his Church, though they
have not always been so apparent, and so will have to the end of the World,
maugre all the malice of Satan and his instruments, thus it is said, Revel. 12.
6. That the Woman, i. e. the Church, fled into the Wilderness, where she had a
place prepared of God, that they should feed her there, a thousand two hundred
and threescore days. The Church here, is in an obscure, afflicted, and
solitary condition, in the Wilderness, and yet she has a place prepared of God
that they should feed her, they, who? this seems to refer to the 2. Witnesses,
Chapter 11. 3. Gods faithful Ministers they should feed her there, for it falls
out in the same time, as appears by the number of days, Chapter 11. 3. An
Allusion to the feeding of the Israelites in the Wilderness. Gods faithful
Ministers are those that feed the Church, Jer. 3. 15. John 21. 15. Acts 20. 28.
And these here are sent forth by God for this very purpose, to feed, maintain,
and uphold the Church of God, Now all the while she is in the Wilderness, in
her obscure, retired, afflicted, and solitary state and condition; So that the
Church has still in her obscurest state, had her Pastors and Teachers that
feed her, and so shall have to the end of the World.

So 1 Cor. 12. 28. And God has set some in the Church, First Apostles,
Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly Teachers, etc. Set (...), constituit, settled,
confirmed, established, and if God have established them, who shall extirpate
them? and Revel. 2. 1. Christ is said to hold the Stars in his right Hand, and
this being Scripture that cannot be broken, who should pull them thence, where
can they be safer than there? it notes Christ's Love to them, and care of them,
to keep them safe; so Matth^w 28. 20. And lo I am with you always to the end of
the World, and if God be with us, and for us, who can be against us? truly many
may be, and are against us, but not so as to carry it, there is no Wisdom, nor
Counsel, nor Understanding against the Lord, that is effectual, that is able to
prevail against the Lord; As Gamaliel said, Acts 5. 38, 39. For if this
Counsel, or this work be of Man (speaking of the work which the Apostles did
act and carry on) i. e. ordained of Men, and taken up merely by humane
authority, it will come to naught, it will be broken, the Greeks is loosed,
(...), but if it be of God, i. e. ordained and appointed by him, undertaken,
and carried on by his authority and command, ye cannot overthrow it, (...),
dissolvere, break it, loose it, lest happily ye be found to fight against God, --
or beware, take heed, lest ye be found to fight against God, so Beza, and
videte ne etiam cum Deo pugnare comperiamini, as if he should say, it is vain
and impious to fight against God, and folly to think ever to prevail against
that which is of him.

Thus we see whence it is, that there is yet a Church and Ministry in the
World, that they are not utterly overthrown and broken, it is, because these
and the like Scriptures cannot be broken; and how comfortable is this to think,
that let Hell break loose, and the World never so much rage, yet God will still
have a Church and Ministry in the World, both those that shall teach, and
others that shall be taught, even to end of the World, for the word affirming
it, it cannot be made void.

6. Again, cannot the Scripture be broken, but what ever it speaks shall
certainly come to pass? then this further informs us, and gives us to see the
Blasphemy, and desperate folly, and madness, of those who walking after their
own lusts, profanely deride at the Scriptures, and scoffingly demand, as those
in the 2 Peter 3. 4. Where is the promise of his coming? i. e. the fulfilling
of the promise, and prediction of his coming, for since the Fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were, from the beginning of the creation:
thus they scoffingly demand, and this demanding is no better than denying, and
what Blasphemy, yea what desperate folly and madness is it thus scoffingly to
question and deny that which being Scripture cannot but come to pass? for the
Scripture, as has most fully and abundantly been made good, cannot be broken;
why? the very Devils themselves in this shall condemn these, for they believe
and assent to the truth of this Scripture, that the Lord will come, yea, and
are so affected with it, and so much under the dread of it, as that they
tremble at it, James 2. 9. The Devils believe and tremble, (...) Horrescunt,
Contremiscunt, The word seems to imply an extreme fear and horror, which
causes not only trembling, but also a roaring, a shricking out.
or quiver and shake; what do they believe? why this, the truth of Scripture,
among other, that Christ will certainly come again, and that there will be a
day of Judgment, which will occasion more torment unto them, and therefore
they tremble because of the fearful Judgments of God, whereunto they are
reserved, 2 Peter 2. 4. And O what desperate folly and madness is this, to be
below even the very Devils, to be such as even they shall condemn? as all such
profane Scoffers are, who laugh, and slight, and make light of that, which the
very Devils themselves believe, and are so far under the dread of it, that they
shake, and quake, and thou art stupid, and senseless, they believe and fear the
promise of his coming, and thou jeeringly demand'st where is the promise of his
coming? this is not only to come short of Felix, for it is said, he trembled
when he heard of this Doctrine, Act. 24. 25.
but of the very Fiends; the Psalmist says, Man that is in honor, and under
stands not, is like the Beasts that perish, Psalm 49. 20. But not to believe,
this is to below the Devils, they shall condemn such at the great day. Lord,
these came short of us, that which we believed, and trembled at, that they
denied and laughed at, and what blasphemy, and desperate folly and madness is
this?

Of such we likewise read, Isay 5. 18, 19. Woe unto them that draw iniquity with
cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a Cartrope, that say, let him make
speed that we may see it, and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel draw
nigh, and come, that we may know it. O horrid Blasphemy, and desperate madness,
thus in a jeering flouting way, as it were to mock at Gods word, which cannot
possible be made void; as if they should have said, you have often told us of the
holy one, what he would do, but when comes he, when shall we see his work?
threatened men live long; You threaten us, but we see nothing effected of what
you threaten; but certainly such shall see it soon enough to their cost, for
the Scripture cannot be broken; and then they shall discern whose word shall
stand, Gods or theirs, as the Lord tells those in the 44. Jer. 28. That is,
they shall find shortly to their smart, and by woeful experience, the truth, and
stability of my word, which shall undoubtedly, and unavoidably take effect, and
be fulfilled, as also the folly, and vanity of their own presumptions, which
shall be frustrated, and disanulled, as God tells those in the 5. Ier. 12, 13,
14. they have denied the Lord, or belyed the Lord, and said, it is not he,
neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see the sword, or famine;
And the Prophets shall become wind, i. e. their Prophecy shall never be
accomplished, nothing shall come of them, they are but wind, the threats which
they utter shall never hurt us; but mark what follows in the 14. verse.
wherefore thus says the Lord God of Hosts, Because ye speak this word, behold
I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall
devour them; such as esteem the word of God but wind, shall find it to be fire,
and such as will not believe, and give credit to it, so as to be warmed by it,
shall be consumed by it; and they shall know says God, Ezekiel. 6. 10. that I am
the Lord, and that I have not said in vain, that I would do this evil unto
them. But we are sure, says the Apostle, that the judgment of God is
according to truth, against them that Commit such things; it is so, if we
interpret it of Gods adjudging to punishment, as all profane scoffers shall at
length find, these things have thou done says God, and I kept silence, and
therefore thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy Psa. 50. 21,
22.
self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes,
consider this therefore, ye that forget God, and profanely slight, and make
light of his word, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.
They who now most Question, and scoff at what God in his word threatens, shall
be forced another day to say as those, Lament. 2. 17. the Lord has done that
which he had devised, he has fulfilled his word that he had commanded in the
days of old, and as those, Zach. 1. 6. like as the Lord of Hosts thought to do
unto us according to our ways, and according to our doings, so has he dealt
with us, and as Dan. 9. 12. he has confirmed his words which he spoke against
us.

Again, is the Scripture that which Use 2. Humiliation.
cannot be broken? then from hence is matter of much Humiliation, that the
Scripture being that which cannot be broken, we have so often, and so many
ways made, as if it could, or would be broken, that we have not walked, nor
lived up to this truth, that our behaviors, carriages, and demeanors, have
been such as have as it were contradicted the truth of this point, and made as
if the Scripture were that which might be broken, or did err, or mistake; it
may be verbally, we have assented to it, and acknowledged it, but really and
practically have denied it; and how exceedingly should it humble us, that we
can give credence to the word of a man, that we can really seal, and assent to
what they say as truth, make their word firm; if they promise* we can rely upon
it; if they threaten, we can dread it; but we make as if the word of God would
fail, as if that were not firm? the fool, it is said, has said in his heart,
there is no God, and so Psalm. 14. 1.
how often have we, and do we say in our hearts, and say in our behaviors,
there is no truth as it were in Gods word? we make as if it was of no force, of
no effect, and how sad is this? shall man be more credited than God? a creature
more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever? if we rec^ive says the Apostle
John, the witness of men, the 1 John 5. 9.
witness of God is greater; but how do we make it less? how long says the
Lord, will this people provoke me? how long will it be ere they believe me? O
it much provokes the Lord, when he is not believed, when we make at least
really, as if his word was not true, but did lie; and what do we less, when
God threatens, and we do not fear, neither are affected therewith, or warned
thereby? O Lord says the Prophet Habakkuk, I have heard thy speech, and was
affray'd; he ^^ally assented to what God by his word threatened; so when we
profess our selves to be heirs of the promises, and yet do not rely on them,
nor comfort our selves in them, what is this, but really to make, as if what
God speaks should never come to pass? O there are many ways (as I might show
you) and O that it might humble us, that we really at least cross, and
contradict this truth, and make as if the Scripture could be broken; as to
instance in some.

As first, when we do not fear, no^ stand in awe of God, but go on to provoke
him, what do we but really make, as if the Scripture could be broken, and as if
it were not true, as concerning what it says and affirms of the absolute and
irresistible power of God, of his infinite Majesty, greatness, and
dreadfulness? 1 Cor. 10. 22. Heb. 12. 29. Matthew. 10. 28.

So when we do not love God, and are not much in praising of God, and still
give thanks to God, what do we less than really make as if the Scripture could
be broken, as if it did err, and was false, as concerning what it says, and
affirms, of the bounty and great goodness of God, and of his beauty,
amiableness, and sweetness? Psalm. 145. 9. Zac. 9. 17.

So when we do not depend, nor rely on God, when we do not cast our care on
him, what do we less than really make as if the Scripture was false, as
concerning what it affirms of his care for us* and of that respect which he
has to us? 1 Pet. 5. 7. Matthew. 6. 30.

So when we do not walk before God, and are upright, keep close to him, and not
turn aside from him, what is this, but really to make as if the Scripture did
err, as concerning what it says of Gods all sufficiency? Genesis 17. 1.

So while we make not God our happiness, and chief good, what is this, but to
make as if what the Scripture testifies of his being so, was not true?

So when we love and embrace this present world, what is this, but to make as
if the Scripture did err concerning what it speaks of the vanity of it, and the
danger of adhering to it? and so when we do not hate and abhor sin, what i^
this, but to make as if the Scripture did err concerning what it speaks of its
vileness? so while we refuse to walk, or do not delight in wisdoms ways, what
is this, but to make as if the Scripture did err, as concerning what it says
of their pleasantness, and peace? Prove. 3. 17. So while we do not make out
after heaven, nor dread hell, what do we but make as if the Scripture was
false, as concerning what it assirms of the glory, and excellency of the one,
and of the horror, and terror of the other?

In a word, while we neglect Faith, Repentance, Regeneration, Holiness and the
like, what do we but really make as if the Scripture was not true but false, as
concerning what it affirms of the indispensable necessity of these? John 3. 36.
8. 34. Mark. 16. 16. Luke 13. 3, 5. John 3. 3, 5. Heb. 12. 14. And so I might
dilate my self, and run forth into many other particulars, but these shall at
present suffice; and O that they might suffice exceedingly to humble us; for
which of us have not in some of these ways crossed, and contradicted this truth,
and made as if the Scripture could be broken? yea, and many other ways; but I
shall leave it to your own meditations, to enlarge herein.

Again, cannot the Scripture be broken? then there are several duties, which
from hence, we are to be exhorted, and stirred up unto, as

1. Cannot the Scripture be broken, Use 3. Exhortation.
can it not err, nor mistake, nor be deceived? then let the consideration
hereof engage us, and prevail with us, much to read it, and often to exercise
our selves in it, why? why because it cannot be broken, it cannot err, or
mistake there is nothing in it but what is true, nothing that is false, or
erroneous; and this is that which prevailed with David, so much to love it, and
delight in it, and exercise himself in it, Psa. 119. 140. thy word is very
pure, therefore thy servant loves it, it is clear from all mixture of falsehood,
the Hebrew word which we render pure, signifies tried, purged, or purified, and
so renderd in the margin, Tzerufhah a (...) He melted Metal, or he purified, or
purged in the fire, as Goldsmiths do Gold, etc.
tried, or refined, and Ainsworth renders it, thy saying is fined vehemently,
Iunius Purgatus est Sermo tuus valde, and so Piscator, a metaphorical
expression, implying, there is not the least mixture, or dross of falsehood, or
deceit therein, suitable to that in Psalm. 12. 6. the words of the Lord are pure
words, as Silver tried in a Furnace of Earth, purified seven times; and Psalm.
119. 160. thy word is true from the beginning, etc. A principio id est a
seculo, quasi dicat semper verbum tuum fuit verum.
i. e. The whole Scripture from the beginning to the ending, is nothing but
truth, truth, and all truth, is the short sum of it, or since thou first
spakest, or promisest, even to the end, all thy sayings are true; hence David
did so love them, and delight in them, and still converse with them, and
exercise himself in them, he made them the men of his Counsel, verse 24. thy
testimonies also are my delight, and my Counseltors, Hebrew, men of my Counsel
(z), they (...) Viri consilii mei.
with whom I still consult; here was no deceit, or falsehood; men's writings
indeed are many times full of falsehood, and error, and for the most part, are
but mixed; but here is all truth, and nothing but truth; and how should we then
be provoked much to use them, and often to converse with them? O let not God
have cause to complain of us as sometimes he did of Ephraim, I have written to
him the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a strange thing, Hosea
8. 12. they slighted them as if they did not concern them, they scarce looked
into them, but delighted more in their own fancies, and devices; other Books
and writings of men, we may indeed read, but it is sad, when the multitude of
them hinders from reading the Scripture, which is that, which is so infinitely
above all other Books and writings; memorable to this purpose, is that which I
have sometimes read of Luther, that he said, he could wish those Books set out
by himself utterly abolished, because that he feared, that by reading of them,
some might be hindered from spending their time in reading the Sacred
Scriptures, but this they should not do, the Bible should be too us, above all
other Books, and more perused than any other Book or Books, for that cannot be
broken; we have also says the Apostle Peter, a more sure word of Prophecy,
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, (...). I, we do well indeed, while we
take hced, and converse much with that sure word which cannot be made void, ye
do well, or worthily, famously, honorably, Acts 17. 11. these were more noble
than those of Thessolonica, for they searched the Scriptures daily, that man is
pronounced Psa. 1. 1, 2.
blessed, who delights in the Law of the Lord, and meditates in it day and
night.

2. Again, cannot the Scripture be broken, let us then believe this, as
concerning the Scripture that it is that which cannot be broken; we have heard
how abundantly it has been proved, both by Sc^ipture and reason, and from
experience, and therefore let us after all, I say, believe this, that the
Scripture is that which cannot be b^oken; O that we could in truth say, as the
Apostle Paul does, Act. 24. 14. That we believe all things which are written in
the Law and the Prophets, there is great cause we should do so, being that which
cannot be broken; And therefore our Savior sharply reproves those 2.
Disciples, for their slowness of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken, Luke 24. 25. O Fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the
Prophets have spoke; Fools, because slow of heart to believe, it being that
which must be, and cannot be broken.

3. And Thirdly, Let us not only believe this, but walk daily and continually
under a sense and apprehension of this, with this firmly fixed upon our Spirits,
and still in our minds, that the Scripture cannot be broken; and surely there
is no one thing as concerning the Scripture that would or could be of greater
use, or more singular advantage to us than this, to believe and daily to live
in the sense and apprehension of this truth of the Scriptures impossibility of
being broken; O what a singular, and sovereign way and means would this be to
bring us much to profit by all Scripture, by Prophecies, by Promises, by
Threatenings, yea, by what ever it says or affirms.

As the Scripture says, and affirms, yea, as good as swears, that except a
Man be born again, born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, John 3. 3, 5. And now this being Scripture, and so that which
cannot be broken, did we but believe this, and were our hearts but thoroughly
persuaded of this, and did we but daily walk in the sense and apprehension of
this, could we neglect this great work of Regeneration of being born again, as
we do? And so I might instance as concerning Knowledge, Isay 27. 11. Concerning
Faith, John 8. 24. 3. 36. Mark 16. 16. Concerning Repentance, Luke 13. 3, 5.
Concerning holiness, Hebrews. 12, 14. John 13. 8. O did people but believe,
that in what the Scripture says of the necessity of these it could not be
broken, could they slight and neglect them as they do?

So when the Scripture affirms, that every idle word that Men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of Judgment, Matthew 12. 36. O did
Men but believe this, and walk continually in the sense and apprehension of
this, that in this the Scripture cannot be broken; Would they not be more
circumspect in their words? Would they be vain and frothy in their discourses,
as many times they are? so when the Scripture affirms, that we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor.
5. 10. Would they not have a greater Care what they did?

So the Scripture says, straight is Mat. 7. 14. 1 Peter 4. 18.
the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find
it, and the righteous scarcely are saved, and now the belief and persuasion of
this in the Heart, and sense of it upon the Spirit, would it not make people
more studious and more industrious to be saved? So it says, that a rich Mat.
19. 23
Man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and were there a belief,
and sense of this upon the Spirit, that herein the Scriptures cannot be broken,
would Men be so studious and desirous to be rich as they are? or having riches,
would they be less solicitous of entering into the Kingdom of Heaven than
others, who can hardlier enter in than other men?

And so I might very much enlarge my self herein, to show and demonstrate unto
you, of what singular use and advantage it would be unto us, did we believe,
and withal walk in the sense and apprehension of this truth, that the
Scriptures cannot be broken* how would Threatenings more startle and terrify
the wicked? and how would Promises more comfort and cheer the godly? The God of
hope, says the Apostle, fill you To. 15. 13.
with all joy* and peace in believing; I, this is the way indeed, for
Christians to have their souls filled with* joy and peace, as concerning the
promises, by believing them, and by walking in the sense and apprehension of
this, that they are such as cannot be broken; this was the way indeed to suck
and draw out the sweetness of them. But of this I shall speak more afterward in
the use of Consolation.

4. Cannot the Scripture be broken, can it not err or be deceived, but is every
thing so as the Scripture says and affirms? Let this prevail with us then, to
seal and assent to what ever it says, though it seems never so strange,
unlikely, or improbable to carnal sense and reason, or cross and contrary to
our own corrupt judgments, and opinions, for the Scripture cannot be broken,
as that in Luke 16. and the 31. verse. It is said, if they hear not Moses, and
the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead.
No, the world thinks otherwise, O did but a Man rise from the dead, did but a
wicked man come from Hell, and tell others what he there suffers, and what they
were like to suffer, if they did not mend their manners, O this would prevail
with them, by this they would be persuaded; no, they would not, for the
Scripture says, and that cannot be broken, if they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead, such as
are not persuaded by the Word preached, such would not be persuaded, though one
rose from the dead. So Isay 27. 11. There it is said, It is a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them, will show them no favor. Now the World thinks otherwise, O
say they, he that made us, will save us, but let this prevail with us, to seal
to this truth, because it is Scripture, and cannot be broken. So Matthew 19.
23. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, Verily I say unto you, that a rich Man
shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And again, I say unto you, it is
easier for a camel to go through, etc. So 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. For ye see your
calling, Brethren how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called, etc. So Matthew 16. 25. Whosoever will save his life
shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it. So
Mark^ 10. 29, 30. Verily I say unto you, there is no Man that has left house,
or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands,
for my sake, and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this
time, houses, and Brethren, and Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands,
with Persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life. Now these, and many
the like, are Paradoxes to the World, but what ever they be to the World, let
this prevail with us, for to seal to them, they being Scripture, and the
Scripture being that which cannot be broken. And let us seal to these and the
like, not not only Verbally, but really, not only in point of Judgment and
opinion, but of practice; as when it is said, Straight is the gate, and narrow
is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that find it, Matthew 7.
14. And the righteous shall scarcely be saved, 1 Peter 4. 18. i. e. not without
much difficulty, and ado, not without great labor, the Greek (...) is used of
such things, as with much labor are brought about, as Acts 27. 7. Now it being
certainly thus, let us really and practically seal to the truth hereof, by
laboring so much the more to be saved, and to enter in at the straight gate.

Thus when it is said, What is a Man profited if he shall gain the whole world
and lose his own soul? i. e. a Man is no whit at all profited; let us really
seal to the truth hereof, by more minding our souls, and less regarding the
profits of the World, so that we must appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. by laboring that we may be accepted of him, and found in
peace. To that, that Satan goes up and down like a roaring Lion, etc. 1 Peter
5. 8. by being as the Apostle exhorts, the more sober and vigilant.

And so I might instance as concerning what the Scripture says of the upright,
Psalm 84. 11. 37. 37. Of Godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Hebrews 12. 14. Of Christ
washing us, of Christ being in us, John 13. 8 2 Cor. 13. 5, Let us really seal
to these, by laboring so much the more to be upright, to be godly, to have
Christ wash us, and to get Christ in us, etc. And thus should wecome to reap
the fruit and benefit of Scriptures, those happy ends would be made good for
which they were written.

5. Cannot the Scripture be broken, can it not err, or mistake, or be deceived,
but are things so as the Scripture affirms of them? if the Scripture says,
that Princes are Gods, in some sense are they so, as our Savior here affirms,
and proves, because the Scripture cannot be broken; then let us labor so to
see, and so to discern things to be, as the Scripture says of them, as the
Scripture affirms concerning them, why? why because the Scripture cannot be
broken, it cannot err, and therefore they most certainly are as the Scripture
says of them; and therefore let us labor, yea, and never let us rest till we
come so to see them, and so to be able to say of them, as the Scripture says
of them, till we and the Scripture come to be of a judgment and opinion, and
that however at present, they may seem quite otherwise; but as the Apostle
says, (give me leave a little to Romans 3. 4*
allude to it) let God be true, but every man a liar, i. e. let God be confessed,
and acknowledged true, so let his word, let the Scripture be acknowledged, and
assented too as true, for that cannot be broken, but all contrary thoughts, and
apprehensions of things, looked upon as false, and lying, for as the same
Apostle affirms, we are sure the judgment of God is according to truth, his
sense, and sentence of things, and so the sense and sentence of the Scripture,
of his word, we are sure that is according to truth, that cannot be broken,
that cannot err, or mistake; and therefore never let us rest, till we come to
see things, as that says of them, and then we shall certainly see things
aright, see things as they are indeed.

As to instance in some particulars, the Scripture says and affirms of God,
that he is good, it says and affirms so often, Nahum 1. 7. The Lord is good,
Psa. 106. 1. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever; and so Psalm. 107. 1. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is
good, etc. And now he is so, for the Scripture cannot be broken, cannot err;
and therefore let us labor to see him so, and never rest till we come so to
see him, till we be able from what we our selves see, and experience, to say as
David, Psalm. 86. 5. For thou Lord art good, etc. and how great is his goodness,
and how great is his beauty, Zach. 9. 17. and O taste and see that the Lord is
good, blessed is the man that trusts in him, Psa. 34. 8.

So the Scripture says of Jesus Christ, that he is most precious, that he is
fairer than the Children of men, that he is the 1 Pet. 2. 4. 6. 7. Psa. 45. 2.
Hag. 2. 7.
desire of all Nations, that he is altogether lovely, and the Scripture saying
so of him, and it being that which cannot be broken, O let us never rest, till
we come so to see him, till we can say from what our selves see and perceive,
as the spouse in Cant. 5. 10. my beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of
ten thousands, his mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely; he is
more precious than Rubies, and all the things that can be desired are not to be
compared to him. O as that Martyr G^le^cius Caracciol^s.
said, None to him, none to him, and as that noble Italian Marquess, let their
Gold and Silver perish with them, who count all the gold and silver in the
world worth one days communion with Jesus Christ.

So the Scripture says of Gods testimonies, that they are wonderful perfect,
pure, holy, just, and good, Psalm. 119. 129. thy testimonies are wonderful,
therefore does my soul keep them, and 18. verse, open thou mine eyes, that I
may behold the wonders of thy Law, and Psalm. 19. 7. the Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul, Romans 7. 12. wher^fore the Law is holy, and the
Commandment holy, just, and good.

Of Gods Ordinances, that they are amiable, and desirable, Psalm. 84. 1. 27. 5.
etc. How amiable are thy Tabernacles? etc. -- To behold the beauty of the Lord,
etc.

Of Gods Grace; and of such as are gracious, that they are excellent, 1 Cor.
12. last. Psalm. 16. 3. Prove. 12. 26. And yet show I unto you a more excellent
way, -- And to the excellent, etc. The righteous is more excellent.

Of wisdoms ways, that they are ways of pleasantness, and of her paths, that
they are paths of peace, Prove. 3. 17.

Of man, that he is vain, yea at his best estate altogether vanity, Psa. 39. 5.

Of fin, that it is vile, bitter, filthy, foolish, bootless, fruitless, James
1. 21. Jer. 2. 19. Psa. 28. 5. Romans 6. 21.

Of the world, and all worldly things, that they are vanity, yea, vanity of
vanities, vainest vanity, 1 Eccl. 5. Prove. 23. 5. Eccl. 5. 16. And so I might
instance in many other.

And now the Scripture thus saying and affirming of them, and it being
certainly so as the Scripture says of them, it being that which cannot be
broken, O lets labor and never rest, till we come thus to see them, for we are
sure that what the Scripture says, is according to truth; thus Psalm. 19. 10.
the Scripture there says, of the judgments of the Lord, that they are more to
be desired than Gold, yea, than much fine God, and sweeter also than the honey,
and the honey -- comb: and thus David saw them, thus they were to him, Psalm.
119. 72. The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of Gold and
Silver, ver. 103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste? sweeter than honey to
my mouth. Shall I look upon things, and judge of things, rather as my own
corrupt, and erroneous judgment fancies of them? and not rather according to
the unerring sentence of Gods word; no, let God be true, let his word be true,
yea, it is most true, and unerring; and therefore let all contrary opinions be
looked upon, as false, and erroneous.

O let us never rest, as concerning what the Scripture says, and affirms of
things, till we be able to say, as the Queen of Sheba said in another case to
Solomon, 1 Kings 10. 6, 7. and she said to the King, it was a true report, that
I heard, and behold the half was not told me; so the reports I heard out of the
Scripture were true reports, what out of the Scripture was reported, and made
forth unto me, of the goodness of God, and the loveliness of Jesus Christ, of
the beauty of holiness, of the Amiableness of Gods Ordinances, of the
pleasantness of Christ's ways, of the vanity of the world, of the vileness of
sin, O they were all true reports; and behold the half was not told me.

Thus lets never rest till our judgments and the Scripture agree, till we and
it come to be of an opinion; not we and the world, but we and the word; this
was the prayer of Paul, in behalf of the Philippians, that they might approve
things that were excellent, Phil. 1. 9, 10 Est sapiens cui res sapiunt prout
sunt, cui vero ipsa jam in se prout est sapientia sapi^ is non modo sapiens sed
etiam beatus est. Bernard.
That such things as were indeed excellent, according to the unerring account
of the Scripture of them, they might so see them, discern them, understand
them, and accordingly approve them; thus David says in one place, thy
testimonies are wonderful, Psalm. 119. 129. And in another he prays, v. 18.
open thou my eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law, that I may
see them as they are; and so let us pray, thou art good O Lord, the Scripture
so says of thee, and that cannot be broken, Lord make me so to see thee, that
from my own experience I may say so too, etc. So Jesus Christ is lovely, he is
most precious, the chiefest of ten thousand; Lord make me so to see him, so to
apprehend him, that he may be so to me that I may say as the spouse, a bundle
of Mirrh is my wel-beloved unto me, and my beloved is unto me a Cluster of
Camphire, he is so in himself, and so he is to me, I so see him, apprehend him,
experience him That we may never rest, till we come to say as Job in another
case, Job 42. 5. I have heard of thee, by the hearing of the ear, but now mine
eye sees thee, so I have heard of thee, and heard of Christ, and heard of
other things, by the hearing of the ear, Ministers have made such and such
reports of them, and now I see them to be so indeed, as the Minister said of
them, I can from my own experience say now as he said, and as the Scripture
says, now I believe his reports; and truly we shall never believe the reports
of the word, till the Arm of the Lord be so revealed, as that we come indeed,
not only to hear of them, but to see them, Isa. 53. 1. Who has believed our
report? etc. And therefore, blessed are their eyes, who see, as our Savior
says in another case, who so see, and apprehend things to be as the Scripture
says, and affirms of them, for so indeed they are, and must be, the Scripture
being that which cannot be broken, which cannot err, or mistake.

6. Again, cannot the Scripture be broken? then from hence should we be
exhorted, and provoked to be much in blessing, and praising of God. First, That
God should find out a way to save man, and yet what he had threatened for man's
sinning, be salved, and not be broken, etc. -- Secondly, that those things,
which are of so great importance, and concernment, and that afford so great
cause and ground of comfort, and on which our whole happiness depends, are
according to Scripture, which cannot be broken. And thirdly, that the Lord has
brought any of us into such a state, and condition, as that we may be saved,
and the Scripture not be broken, nay, in which if we should not be saved, the
Scripture would be broken.

First, I say, let us be exhorted to be much in blessing, and praising of God,
yea, and in admiring, and adoring his infinite wisdom, mercy, and goodness,
that the Scripture, being that which cannot be broken, he should contrive, and
find out a way, so as for man to be saved, and yet his truth, the Scripture,
what he had said upon man's sinning be salved, and not be broken; man had
sinned, and man must dye for sin, according to what God had said, Genesis 2. 19.
for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye, i. e. not only
spiritually, and temporally, but eternally; and now God out of his infinite
wisdom, and according to his infinite goodness, contrives, and finds out such a
way by his Son becoming man, that as man had sinned, so man he does dye for
sin, his Son becoming man, and dying, yea, suffers what was equivalent to the
second death, even to eternal death, and the pains of hell for ever, the whole
wrath of God due to the sin of man, being poured forth upon him; and those
sufferings, though only for a short time, yet being the sufferings of such a
one, of him who was God, as well as man, were more than if all the world had
suffered for ever, and did countervail everlasting death and damnation.

And thus man is saved, and yet Gods truth salved, and his justice satisfied,
the Scripture not broken; and this it was the Lords own doing, the contrivement
of his wisdom, and the product of his goodness, and mercy; and it is that which
should be very mavelous for ever in our eyes, and provoke us to be much in
blessing, and praising of his name. And the more to provoke, and stir us up
hereunto, consider but these few particulars.

1. That according to what God had said, we were all upon sinning, in a lost
and undone condition, etc.

2. That if God could not have saved us, and withal have salved what he had
said, but that must have been broken, he would never have saved us, no, he
would rather break a whole world, yea, were it ten thousand worlds, than have
his truth broken, he is Jehovah, and cannot but give being to what he speaks.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but his words cannot pass away. Again

3. Consider that it was beyond the Wisdom and contrivement of all the
Creatures in Heaven and in Earth, to find out such a way as that Man might be
saved, and yet withal, what God had said be salved, the Scripture not be
broken. We find in the 6th. of Daniel, that Darius there signs a Writing and a
Decree, That whosoever should ask a Petition of any God or man for 30. days
save of him, should be cast into the Den of Lions; and Daniel yet, when he knew
that the Writing was signed, prayed as he did aforetime, thrice a day; And now
when the King hears of this, he is sore displeased with himself, and sets his
heart on Daniel to deliver him, and he labeured, it is said, Verse 14. till the
going down of the Sun to deliver him, but his Statute and Decree being that
which might not be changed, he could not do it, but Daniel is cast into the Den
of Lions. No more could all the Creatures in Heaven or in Earth have found out
a way for Man to have been saved, and Gods Word be verified, no, but he must
for ever, had it been left to them, have been cast into Hell, the redemption of
their Souls, though never so precious, must have ceast for ever; as concerning
such Wisdom, we might say as Job 28. 12. Where shall it be found? and where is
the place of it? man knows not the price of it, neither was it to be found in
the Land of the living, the depth says, it is not in me, and the Sea says, it
is not in me, etc. And then consider,

4. Fourthly, that God now after all this, should find out a way so to save
man, as that what he had said should not be dissolved nor violated, O what
thanks can we render unto God for this? that he should do it, when all the
Creatures in Heaven and Earth could never have done it, and yet when as if it
had not been done, if such a way had not been contrived, man must have been
undone for ever, and that God should now do it, O what thanks can we, I say,
render to God for this? how admirable should this be in our eyes? especially if
we consider the way he contrived, and took to do it; that we might be saved,
and the Scripture not be broken, he is pleased to break his Son, to bruise him,
Isay 53. 10. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him; he has put him to grief,
etc. That he might spare us, he did not spare him, no, not his own Son, his
dear Son, his beloved Son, his only begotten Son, but delivered him up, he
comes down from Heaven, becomes Man, and being found in fashion as a Man,
humbles himself, and becomes obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross,
and all, that we might live, and Gods truth not be violated; For God so loved
the Word, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him,
should not perish but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. And in this was
manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the World, that we might live through him, thus by the grace of God,
as the Apostle speaks, Hebrews 2. 9. Jesus Christ he tastes death for every
man, i. e. for all sorts of men, for every of the Elect, for every one who
believes, for every one who has life and salvation, he tastes Death, he dies
for them, in their place, and in their stead, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed
us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, his Soul was in our
Souls stead, when he told his Disciples, it was troubled, and when he cried,
What shall I say? Father, save me from this Joh. 12. 27.
hour: but for this cause came I to this hour? and my Soul is exceeding
sorrowful Mat. 26. 38
even to Death; And when he was in Luc. 22. 44
such an Agony, as his sweat is said to be as it were great drops of blood
falling to the ground, then I say he was in our sted, surely he has (...)
borne as a Porter bears an heavy burden.
borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows, it was for our transgressions that
he was wounded, and for our iniquities that he was bruised, they were laid upon
him, or else they must have lain upon us, and sunk us to all eternity. But by
the grace of God, that the Scripture might not be broken, in our being
delivered from everlasting breakings, Christ he is broken, and dies, and by the
grace of God his death stands for ours, and his pains, though for a short time,
yet being of such a one, frees us from everlasting pains; and hence himself
says, if a man' keep my sayingt, he shall never see John 8. 51 52.
Death, nor taste of Death, that is, eternal (for that only indeed deserves
the name of Death) why? because Christ has tasted Death for him, his Soul has
been in his Souls stead, and so Gods Word comes to be salved, and man saved;
And how can we now but cry out, O the depth of the riches of the Wisdom of God,
and of the grace of God, how unsearchable is his Wisdom and Grace, and the
ways thereof past finding out! this love indeed we may admire, but reach its
demensions we never can, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, Psalm.
107. 1, 2.
for his mercy indureth for ever, let the redeemed of the Lord say so. I they
have infinite cause indeed so to say. I shall conclude this first part of this
6th. use with that of the Apostle Jude, Now to the only wise God our Savior,
be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Amen.



As that Christ died for our sins, it is according to the Scriptures, and that
he was buried, and that he rose again the third day, is according to the
Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. For I delivered unto you first of all, that which
also I received, how that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the
Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day,
according to the Scriptures, mark, according to the Scriptures. For that he was
delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our Justification, Romans 4.
25. And that he ascended, and now sits at the right hand of God, and there
makes intercession for us, is according to the Scripture, John 20. 17. Romans
8. 34. And now what can be matter of greater comfort or sweeter consolation
than this? nay, is not this that on which all our comfort and happiness
depends? that Christ died for our sins, and that he rose again, and now sits at
the right hand of God, and there makes intercession for us, is not this I say,
the sum of all our comfort? and now blessed be God, these they are according to
the Scripture. So 1 Peter 2. 6. It is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I lay
in Syon a chief cornerstone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him
shall not be confounded; so he that believes on me, as the Scripture has
said, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living Watter, John 7. 38. And so
the Scripture says, whosoever believes on him shall not be* ashamed, Romans 10.
1. So it is written, it is Scripture, that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9.

So that God is merciful, and gracious, Exo. 34. 6.
long-suffering, is according to Scripture.

That he forgives iniquity, transgression, Verse. 7.
and sin, is according to Scripture.

That he will sub due his peoples iniquities, Mich. 7. 19
and cast their Sins into the depths of the Sea, is according to Scripture.

That he delights in mercy, and to Mich. 7. 18 Jer. 9. 24.
exercise loving kindness in the earth, is according to Scripture.

That he will heal his peoples backslidings, Hos. 14. 4.
and love them freely, is according to Scripture.

That such as come unto Christ, he will Joh. 6. 37
in no wise cast out, is according to Scripture.

That a bruised Reed shall he not break, Mat. 12. 20
and smoking Flax will he not quench, till he send forth judgment unto
victory, is according to Scripture.

That he will give the Holy Spirit to Lu. 11. 13.
them that ask him, is according to Scripture.

That they that wait on the Lord, shall renew their strength, that they shall
Isa. 40. 31.
mount up with wings as Eagles, that they shall run and not be weary, and walk
and not faint, is according to Scripture.

That he said unto the seed of Jacob, Isa. 45. 19.
Seek not me in vain, is according to Scripture.

That he will gather the Lambs with Isa 40. 11.
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, etc. is according to Scripture.

That the gates of Hell shall not prevail Mat. 16. 18
against the Church, is according to Scripture.

That Christ holds his stars in his right Rev. 2. 1.
hand, is according to Scripture.

That he is with them always even to Ma. 28. 20
the end of the World, is according to the Scripture.

And now the Scripture being that which cannot be broken, what a comfort is it,
and what cause have we to bless God, that these, yea, and innumerable more,
which are of like importance with these, and make so much for our comfort, are
according to Scripture which cannot be broken?

indeed believe, and repent of thy sins, and art fruitful in good works, thou
may then be saved, and the Scripture not be broken; nay, let me tell thee to
thy comfort, that if being such an one, thou should not be saved, the
Scripture it would be broken, it would not be fulfilled, for that such shall be
saved, it is every where according to Scripture.

1. That such as are regenerate and holy shall be saved, is according to
Scripture, Matthew 5. 8. Romans 6. 22. John 3. 3, 5. And what does this imply,
but that if a man be regenerate and born again he shall enter into the Kingdom
of heaven?

2. That such as do indeed believe shall be saved, is according to Scripture,
Acts 16. 31. Romans 10. 9. 16. Mark 15. 16. Heb. 10. 39. 1 Pet. 1. 9. John 3. 36.

3. That such as repent shall be saved, is according to Scripture, Ezekiel. 18.
30. Acts 11. 18. 2 Cor. 7. 10. Job 33. 23, 24. Prove. 28. 13.

4. That such as are fruitful in good works, shall be saved, is according to
Scripture, John 5. 28, 29. Romans 2. 7. Matthew. 26. 21.

Thus if this be thy condition indeed, if God has brought thee into such an
estate as this is, if he has done so great things for thee, as these, thou
may be saved, and the Scripture not be broken; nay, let me tell thee again,
as I told thee before, if thou should not be saved, the Scripture would be
broken, which the point tells thee cannot be; and O how happy art thou then to
be brought into such an estate and condition, as that if thou should not be
saved, the Scripture would be broken! how much should thou be in blessing,
and praising God, and confess with David, thou have dealt well with thy servant
O Lord; I, well indeed, he has dealt better with thee, and done more for thee,
than if he should have made for thee, and given to thee many worlds; and
therefore be thankful unto him, and speak good of his name, Col. 1. 12. giving
thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. But we are bound always to
give thanks to God for you brethren beloved of the Lord, because God has from
the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again,
unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

7. Again, Cannot the Scripture be broken? can it not err, mistake, or be
deceived? is it an infallible, and unerring rule? then lets be exhorted from
hence, to try all doctrines and opinions by Scripture, to bring all to this
touchstone, to this adaequate measure of all divine truth, for that cannot err,
2 Timothy 3. 16. all Scripture, says the Apostle, is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine; it being given by divine inspiration; and so
being that which cannot err, it is profitable to teach us what is truth, and
what is error, what is sound doctrine* and what is false Scripturis tuto inniti
passumus, ne^ est, quod fraudem ullam metuant, qui harum lucern^m sibi
proponunt; and revera impii, qui adversus ^as disp^tare audent.
.

This is the true touchstone, and public standard, as it were, for the
trial of all doctrines, set up for this end, to reveal truth, and discover
error. And this is that unto which God himself does demit us, and send us to
try opinions, for the finding out of truth from error, and discovering error
from truth, as you may see, Esaias 8. 20. To the law, and to the testimony, if
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them;
to the Law, etc. To the Scripture, as to the touchstone whereby you are to try
all doctrines, that cannot be broken, that is unerring, infallible, immutable,
unalterable, ever the same, truth it self, and the standard of truth, such a
rule as cannot deceive; and therefore whereas the Apostle bids us prove, or try
all things, we must bring them to this touchstone, what says the Scripture?
this man it may be says this, another that, a third the other thing; I, but
what says the Scripture? that must determine, the Bible must still be the
umpire, all are to be examined by this, we are sure the judgment of that is
according to truth; As it is said of those, Acts 17. 11. These were more noble
than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things were so; and
search the Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. Christ tells the Saduces, Ye do err, not
knowing the Scriptures; they did not search, nor enquire there; for if they
had, that would have discovered to them their error; and by this it is, that
the Church has still tried, and condemned all Heresies, as the Arrian, the
Pelagian and others Solis divinis literis ver^ doctrina a falsa discerni
potest. Pet. M^r^. in Rom 16. 17.
; and this the Apo^tle Peter makes (...), a more sure word, and way to evidence
truth, than a revelation from heaven, as 2 Pet. 1. 19. we also have a more sure
word of proph^cy, whereunto you do well that you take heed, as unto a light
that shines in a dark place, until the day d^w^, and the day star arise in
your hearts; the Apostle in the three verses immediately going before, had been
speaking of a revelation from heaven, and that the clearest that ever was
revealed, namely that in the transfiguration of Christ, of which the Apostles
themselves were eyewitnesses, and heard that voice from heaven then uttered;
and yet verse 19. we have (says he) a more sure word of Prophecy, than Gods
own audible voice in the Mount, i. e. more sure as to us, of greater
perspicuity, and certainty, besides inspiration, it being both written, and
sealed, for the former vision, and revelation, being from God, was in it self
most sure, and therefore some interpret it a most sure word, or very sure, a
comparative, for a superlative, hence the Scripture is called, a Canon, or
Canonical, that is, as much as a rule, and the use of a rule is to discern that
which is right, from that which is distort, and crooked. Recto (i. e. canone,
nam (...) and rectum idem sunt) and ipsum rectum, and obliquum cognoscimus,
regula namque judex est utriusque, and this is most true of the Scripture, that
in this sense, is a canon, or canonical, per excellentiam, by way of
excellency; and therefore let us upon all occasions, have still recourse to
this, as an unerring rule, or canon, to try all Doctrines, and opinions by Hoc
universae Scripturae tribuend^m est, quod sit linea regula and amussis ad quam
omnis de fide and moribus doctrina est examinanda, referenda, comformanda and
judicanda, sicuti ad legem in republica civium mores and negotia sunt
referenda, constituenda, exigenda and dirimenda, ad quam propterea tanquam ad
Lydium lapidem fidei ac vitae Christian^ documenta omnia probanda sunt. Rivet.
in Isag. ad scripturam sacram.
.

Judge not; says our Savior, John 7. 24. according to the outward appearance,
but judge righteous judgment; and then we judge righteous judgment, when we
judge of things, according to the righteous, and unerring judgment of the word
of God (for we are sure, that is according to truth) and not according to the
world, or outward appearance. There is a woe denounced against them, that c^ll
evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isaiah 5. 20. That
call that evil, which the Scripture calls good, and call that good, which the
Scripture calls evil, that put that for darkness, which the Scripture calls
light, and that for light, which the Scripture calls darkness, that put that
for bitter, the Scripture calls sweet, and that for sweet, the Scripture calls
bitter. Woe to such, because they say of things quite contrary to the
Scripture, which cannot be broken, which cannot err; and so judge not righteous
judgment.

According to outward appearance, such as are poor, seem miserable, and so the
world judges of them; but now let us judge of such, as the Scripture says of
them, for that cannot err; and judging according to that, we may judge of them,
as such as may be happy for all their poverty, Luke 6. 20. Blessed be ye poor,
for yours is the Kingdom of God, Jam. 2. 5. Hearken my beloved, has not God
chosen the poor of this world rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he
has promised to them that love him? So according to the outward appearance,
and as the world judges, such seem the only happy men, who are rich, and great,
and in high place, and in health, and at ease; but now judge we of such as the
Scripture says of them, which cannot err, and that tells us, they may yet be
miserable enough for all their riches, and outward greatness; as Luke 6. 24,
25. But woe unto you that are rich, etc. James 5. 1, 2, 3* Go to now ye rich
men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you, your riches are
corrupted, etc. Job 20. 22 in the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in
straights, etc. Zach. 1. 15. And I am very sore displeased with the heathen
that are at ease, etc. So Amos 6* 1, 4, 5, 6. Job 20. 6* 7. 5. 3. etc. So
according to the outward appearance, and as the world judges, it seems long
before the Lord fulfills his promises, prophecies, threatenings, but now judge
hereof according to the Scripture, and it is but a little while; for yet a
little while, and he that shall come, will come, etc. Hebr. 10. 37. surely I
come quickly, Rev. 22. 20. Romans 16. 20. And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan
shortly under your feet, Rev. 1. 1. -- which must shortly come to pass; and v.
2. for the time is at* hand. Psalm. 90. 5. for a thousand years in thy sight,
are but as yesterday, when it is past, and as a watch in the night. Psalm. 37.
10. for yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be. So Job 20, 5. 24. 24.
So according to outward appearance* and as the world judges, such seem enemies,
that reprove others, and it is deemed hatred, but let us judge of such, as the
Scripture judges of them, and that speaks them friends, and that their reproof
is love, and the contrary hatred, Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother
in thy heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him.

So to cause offenses, to lay stumbling blocks in peoples way heavenward, to
scandal such as are weak, and infirm, this seems as the world judges of it no
great matter, but let us judge of this, as the Scripture judges of it, and that
says, woe to such a one; and it was better a Millstone were hanged about his
neck* and he cast into the Sea, than that he should offend any of Christ's
little ones, Luke 17. 1, 2.

So to be saved, to go to heaven, this as the world judges of it, and as men
generally think, is no such great matter, it is no such difficult thing, what
needs all this ado say some? I, but let us judge hereof, as the Scripture
judges, and says of it, and then we shall see it is otherwise, for that says,
strive to enter in at the straight gate, for many, I say unto you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13. 14. and if the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the sinner and ungodly appear? scarcely, not but that the
righteous are wholly and altogether saved, saved to the utmost, Heb. 7. 25. but
the meaning is, not without much difficulty, and much ado, not without great
pains, labor, and lassitude, not without many trials, and afflictions, the
Greek (...), is used of such things, as not without much labor, and
difficulty, are brought about, as Acts 27. 7. and scarce were come over against
Guidus* scarce, the Greek is the same as here, (...), scarce, and signifies not
without a great deal of labor and difficulty, so H^b. 4. 11. let us labor
therefore to enter into that rest, labor (...), the word is very emphatical,
let us labor, or study, it notes both care, labor, and expedition, setting
our heads a work* and hands a work, and all a work, and with all expedition
too; So Luk* 21. 36. Watch yea therefore, and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all those things that ^^all come to pass, and to
stand before the S^^ of man, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Know ye not, that they which run in
a race, run all, but one receives the prize; so run that ye may obtain. So that
there must not be only running, but such running.

9. Again, cannot the Scripture be broken? then let us be exhorted from hence,

Many are the afflictions of the righteous, Psa. 34. 19. and we must through
many tribulations, enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14. 22. and in the world
you shall have tribulation, John 16. 33. yea, and all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. and if any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.

And the rather we should not be offended, nor scandalized at them, not only in
regard that the Scripture which cannot be broken has foretold them; but
likewise in that the Scripture which cannot be broken has spoken so much of
the good, and comfort, and benefit of them, Romans 8. 28. and we know that all
things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the
called according to his purpose, Heb. 12. 9, 10. furthermore, we have had
Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we
not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits and live? for they
verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure, but he, for our
profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness* Phil. 1. 19. for I know
that this shall turn to my salvation through your Prayer, and the supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 119. 67. before I was afflicted, I went astray,
but now I have kept thy word; and 71* it is good for me, that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes.

1. The Scripture speaks of them, as tokens of Gods love and favor, Rev. 3.
19. Heb. 12. 5, 6. Prove. 3. 11, 12. as many as I love, I rebuke, and chasten,
etc.

2. As dealing in afflicting of them as with Sons, Heb. 12. 7, 8. if ye endure
chastning, God deals with you, as with Sons, etc.

3. As being to purge iniquity, and to take away sin, Isa. 27. 9. by this shall
the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is the fruit to take away his sin.

4. As being but to try and ercercise their graces, Job 13. 10. Ps. 66. 10.
James 1. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 7. 4. 12. Rev. 2. 10. when he has tried me, etc.

5. As furthering, and promoting grace here, and as augmenting glory hereafter,
Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. Iam. 1. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 4. 17* tribulation works patience, etc.

6. As preventing sadder things, which shall befall the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32.
-- we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

perilous times are come, and many deceivers are gone forth, and deceive many,
for these are no other, than what the Scripture long since foretold, and the
Scripture cannot he broken; not that the Scripture foretelling them, was the
cause of them, but being to come, the Scripture has foretold them, that so we
might not be scandalized at them, the Scripture being that which cannot be
broken; thus the Scripture in diverse places has foretold them, Matthew. 24. 4,
5. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you,
for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many;
and so again, in 11, 12, 24, 25. verse. many false Prophets shall arise, and
deceive many, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
last times, some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits,
and doctrines of devils, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. this know, that in the last days
perilous times shall come, for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, and so on, 2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were
false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers
among you, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, 1 Cor. 11. 19. For
there must be Heresies among you, etc. as by reason of Satan's Malice, man's
corruption, Gods just judgment, and wise counsel, who draws light out of
darkness, and that they which are approved, may be made manifest, and the like
so, because of the frequent predictions of the word.



1. To love God, to which the Scripture that cannot be broken, has made so
many great and precious promises, as Romans 8. 28. all things shall work together
for good to them that love God; and 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive what God has
prepared for them that love him; and 1 James 12. Psa. 91. 14, 15. John 14. 15,
16, 17. 21, 23. God has promised them the Crown of life: he will deliver them,
etc. Such shall be loved of the Father, and Christ will love them, and manifest
himself to them; and both will make their abode with them, etc. and many other
places, that speak what God will do for them that love him.

2. To fear God, -- Psalm. 25. 14. 34. 9. 103. 13, 17. 115. 13. The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him, etc. there is no want to them that fear
him: he pitties them as a Father his Children: he will bless them both small
and great.

3. To trust in God, -- Psa. 32. 10. 125. 1. Isay 26. 3. Ier. 17. 7. Mercy
shall compass such about: they shall be as Mount Zion, etc. God will keep them
in perfect peace: he is blessed, and shall be as a tree planted by the waters,
etc.

4. To ask, seek, and call upon God, Luke 11. 9, 10. and 13. verse 5. John 16.
24. James 1. 5. Psalm. 145. 18. Ask, and it shall be given you, etc. how much
more, shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit, etc? he gives to such
liberally, and upbraideth not.

5. To wait upon God in his ways, Isa. 64. 5. Isay 45. 19. Matthew* 18. 20. Psa*
63* 2. 73. last. Psa. 84. 10. God meets such, they shall not seek him in vain,
etc.

6. Being weary, and heavy laden to come unto Christ, Matthew. 11. 28. John 6.
27. to such he will give rest, and will in no wise cast out.

7. To follow Christ, John 12. 26. Matthew. 19. 28. such shall be where Christ
himself is, and shall sit upon thrones, etc.

8. To part with any thing for Christ, Matthew. 16. 24, 25. Mark 19. 29, 30. such
shall receive an hundred fold here, etc. and in the world to come eternal life.

9. To suffer for Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 12. Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 12. 1 Pet. 4. 13, 14.
Luke 22. 28, 29. etc. Such shall reign with him, are pronounced blessed, and
the Spirit of God, and of glory, rests upon them, etc.

10. To overcome our spiritual enemies, Rev. 2. 7. 11. 17, 26, 27, 28. Rev. 3.
5. 12. 21. 21. 7. Such shall eat of the tree of life, etc. shall not be hurt of
the second death, shall eat of the hidden Manna, etc. shall be clothed with
white raiment, etc. shall sit with* Christ in his throne, etc. shall inherit
all things, and God will be their God, and they shall be his Sons. And so I
might instance in diverse others, but these you may observe, and take notice of
our selves.

Again, cannot the Scripture be broken, Use 4. Of Admonition.
was it not, nor could it not be broken, no not in reference to the Son of God
himself, no not in the least circumstance of those sufferings which it had
foretold he should undergo, but in every thing, were they all perfectly
fulfilled?

Then it being a thing so sure, that the Scripture cannot be broken, O be
admonished and warned from hence, to take heed of continuing in such a state
and condition in which you cannot be saved, except the Scripture be broken, or
in which if you be saved, the Scripture must be broken; I say, be admonished,
and warned, of continuing in such an estate and condition; and is there not
infinite cause and ground, when as you have heard, and had it made out so
abundantly unto you, that the Scripture can by no means be broken? and
therefore to continue in such an estate, in which you cannot be saved, except
the Scripture be broken, is indeed to continue in such an estate, in which
abiding, you cannot possibly be saved; For the Scripture cannot be broken,
that is the point in hand, and that which has been so abundantly proved. No,
God never did, nor never will break one jot or tittle of his Word, were it to
save a whole World, yea, ten thousand Worlds, were there so many extant, yet
will he not to save them, break his Word, and hereof has he given full and
certain assurance unto all men, in that he suffered not any thing to fall to
the ground, or to be broken, that was foretold as concerning those heavy and
grievous breakings of his dear Son, but all were fully undergon by him: And he
that would not have the Scripture broken or dispensed with, for his Son, his
dear and blessed Son, will he have it broken or dispensed withal for thee? no,
never expect it, he that would not have the Scripture broken, no not for Jesus
Christ, he will never have it broken for the Creature, he that would not have
it broken for the Son of his love, for him in whom his Soul delighted, will
never have it broken for thee, with whom he is daily provoked; if he did these
things in a green Tree, that the Scripture might not be broken, O what shall be
done to the dry Tree, rather than the Scripture be broken? And therefore O how
much does it concern every one to see to it, that they do not continue in such
an estate, in which they cannot be saved, except the Scripture be broken, the
Scripture being that which cannot be broken!

But you will say, what estate is that in which I cannot be saved, except the
Scripture be broken, in which, if I must be saved, the Scripture must be
broken? I shall instance at present only in five, that the Scripture makes
mention of.

1. First, if continuing in a state of spiritual blindness, darkness, and
ignorance, you be saved, the Scripture must be broken; You cannot, continuing
in such an estare, be saved, except the Scripture be broken; for the Scripture
in several places speaks quite contrary as to such continuing such being saved,
Isa. 27. 11. It is a people of no understanding, and therefore he that made
them, will not have mercy on them, (but will destroy them) and he that formed
them, will show them no favor, because a people of no understanding, such as
were blind, and ignorant, that knew neither God nor themselves, nor any thing
of God as they should and ought; Pray observe it, that which poor Creatures are
wont to make use of for to plead for themselves, and to produce in favor of
themselves, as because they are ignorant, and not Book-learned, as they term
it, therefore they think to find mercy and favor at Gods hands, but that here
God produces against them, It is a people of no understanding, therefore, etc.
Their ignorance aggravates their woe, and is a bar to the mercy and favor of
God, and then its said, he that made them will show them no mercy, whereas this
uses to be a poor ignorant Souls plea, God that made me, will have mercy on me,
and he that formed me, will show me favor, I am his Workmanship; I but no
matter for that, if thou continuest still in a state of blindness and
ignorance, so live and so dyest, if he that made thee has mercy on thee, or
he that formed thee, show thee favor, the Scripture must be broken; so 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. It is there said, The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven
with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God Ex defectu notitiae Dei sequitur Dei contemptus, and tandem Mors, Calv. in
Loc.
i. e. aright, so as his Word has revealed him, as they ought, so as to love
him, honor him, trust in him, and obey him Verba notitiae in Scriptura and
affectus comprehendunt.
. Now we are ready generally to think when Christ shall be revealed in such a
way as this from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, and in flaming fire, O then
woe be to Cain, who slew his Brother, to Judas, that betrayed his Master;
these, and such like as these, Christ will take vengeance on; I but the
Scripture says he will take vengeance on thee, that know not God, I and
thou continuing such a one, as is ignorant of God, and know not God, if
Christ should not when he shall so be revealed take vengeance on thee, the
Scripture must be broken; and therefore when the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
That God will have all men to be saved, i. e. some of all sorts, he adds as the
means conducing thereunto, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth, and
when Paul is sent to the Gentiles that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance amongst them which are sanctified, the way is, by opening their
eyes, and turning them from darkness to light, and for this end has the
dayspring from on high visited us, to give light to them that sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet in the way of peace, Luc. 1.
78, 79. And if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 3. And my people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, Hosea
4. 4. So that Ignorance is a far greater evil than people ordinarily are aware
of; It is so great an evil, that if thou continue such, thou can not be saved
except the Scripture be broken; and therefore how should we labor after
Knowledge, saving Knowledge? that the Soul be without Knowledge, says Solomon
Prove. 9. 2.
, it is not good, nay, it is not only not good, but exceeding evil and
pernicious; For without Knowledge we cannot be saved, except the Scripture be
broken; And therefore it is good as Solomon speaks, to cry after Knowledge, and
to lift up the voice for Understanding, Prove. 3. 4.
to seek her as Silver, and to search for her as for hid treasures; and how
much better is it to get Wisdom than Gold, and to get Understanding rather than
choice Silver? and Wisdom is the Pro. 16. 16 4. 7.
principal thing; therefore get Wisdom, and with all thy gettings get
Understanding; Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace, so shall good
come Job 22. 21
unto thee. There is (says Elihu) a Spirit in Man, and the inspiration of the
Almighty gives them Understanding; Job 32* 8.
Go to God therefore for it: For it is he that is a God of Knowledge, 2 Samuel 2.
3. There is a promise, the earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as
the Waters cover the Sea. O desire the Isa. 11. 9.
Lord to fill thy Soul with Knowledge.

2. Again, Secondly, if continuing in a state of Unregeneracy thou be saved,
the Scripture must be broken, you cannot, continuing in such an estate, be
saved, except the Scripture be broken; for the Scripture in several places
speaks quite contrary, as to such being saved, continuing such; As John 3. ^.
And again the 5. Verse, Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say
unto thee, except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; and
except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; I say unto the^, I, who am the Amen, the faithful and true
Witness, yea truth it self, and cannot lie, I who came to open, and give an
entrance into the Kingdom of* God, yet I say, yea, he does as good as* swear,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a Man be born again, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God; So Heb. 12. 14. Without Holinsse no Man shall see the
Lord. No Man, no, without being sanctified, there is no being saved; Blessed,
indeed, are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, but without purity
there is no seeing God; No, however it may be at present thou may scoff at
Purity and Holiness, and call it Preciseness, yet know, it is that, without
which thou can never be saved, except the Scripture be broken; And rather than
the Scripture should be broken, God will break ten thousand such as thou art,
the Scripture cannot be broken, And therefore can not thou but be broken
continuing such. So John 13. 8. If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me,
i. e. If I make thee not clean from thy sins, freely pardoning them, and
sanctifying thee, if I wash thee not from sinsguiltiness by my blood, and from
sinsfilthiness by my Spirit, thou have no part with me in Heaven, in eternal
happiness, in glory, in everlasting life, in that celestial Paradise; And
therefore let such harken to that sovereign counsel of the Apostle, in Heb. 12.
14* Follow Holiness, (...), follow hard, press with an eager pursuit after
Holiness; as one, who will not leave, till he has what he follows Est magno
studio annit ut assequaris, to follow, as a Hunter his pr^y who persues it till
he take it.
, and is there not cause, when as if ever without it we see God, the Scripture
must be broken?

3. Again, Thirdly, if continuing in a state of Unbelief, if not coming to
Christ, and believing on him, you be saved, the Scripture must be broken, for
the Scripture absolutely and indispensably requires Faith in all that are
saved, and excludes all such from salvation who do not believe, Mark 16. 16. He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not,
shall be damned, and that though he be baptized, so John 3. 36. He that
believes on the Son, has everlasting life, but he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, and he that believes
not, is condemned already* verse 18. and John 8. 24. If ye believe not that I
am he, ye shall dye in your sins, a sad threatening, Rev. 21. 8. The Unbelieving
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the Second Death, so that if thou, continuing still in Unbelief, should see
life, or be exempt from the wrath of God abiding on thee (which is a burden so
exceeding grievous and intolerable,) or should not be damned and dye in thy
sins, the Scripture must be broken, if continuing* shut up in Unbelief, thou
should not be shut out of Heaven, and have thy part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second Death, the Scripture must
be broken; and therefore harken to that blessed Counsel our Savior gives, Jo.
12. 36 Whilst you have light, believe still in the light, while ye have the
light of the Gospel, believe in the light who is the Son of God; while ye have
the light of the Word of God, believein the Word which is God; let these beams
lead you to that Sun, these streams to that Ocean, this is the great
Gospel-work, Ioh. 6. 29. and the great Gospel-command, 1 Ioh. 321. This is the
great business, both of the light of life, Joh. 11. 26. and the light of the
Gospel, and except while we have the light, we believe in this light, we must,
unless the Scripture be broken, be cast into utter darkness.

4. Again, Fourthly, if continuing in a state of impenitency, you should be
saved, the Scripture must be broken, for the Scripture is absolutely and
indispensably for repentance in all that are saved, and affirms, except we
repent, we shall certainly perish, Luke 13. 3. Except you repent, you shall all
likewise prish; and again, V. 5. Except you repent, you shall all certainly
perish, aut poenitendum aut pereundum, there is no way but repenting, or
perishing, according to what the Scripture holds forth; we must either repent
of our sins, and turn from them here, or burn in Hell for them for ever
hereafter; So that though you now it may be make a mock of sin, you must come
to mourn for it, though you now it may be sport with it, you must come to be in
pain with it, and for it, or else if you do not perish, the Scripture must be
broken, though thy heart now be never so stony, never so hard and impenitent,
yet this stony, hard, and impenitent heart of thine, must come to relent, must
become an heart of flesh, it must come to be broken for sin, and from sin, or
else, if ever thou be saved, the Scripture must be broken. And therefore
sovereign Counsel is that which God gives to sinners, Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent and
turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your
ruin, else it will, and James 4. 8, 9, 10. Cleanse your hands you sinners, and
purify your hearts ye double-minded, be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, etc.
And that of the Apostle, Acts 3. 19. Repent ye therefore and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord; This made John the Baptist, and our Savior, and his
Disciples so much to preach and press Repentance, making it the Sum of their
preaching, because though Christ came into the World to save sinners, yet
except they come to be penitent sinners, they cannot be saved, though they be
not saved for it, yet neither can they be saved without it: and hence I say did
our Savior, and his Disciples, so much press it, as Matthew 3* 2. Repent, for
the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, and 4. 17. From that time Jesus began to
preach, and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mark 6. 12.
And they went out and preached that men should repent, Acts 26. 20. Paul showed
first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of
Judea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to God, etc.

5. Again, Fifthly, if continuing fruitless and unprofitable, you should be
saved, the Scripture must be broken, for the Scripture holds out destruction to
all such continuing so, Matthew 7. 19. Every Tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire; though thou be not profane, nor
such a notorioussinner, as some are, yet withal if thou be not pious, and
bring not forth good fruit, thou will certainly perish, or the Scripture
must be broken, for that here says, that every Tree, not only that bears evil
fruit, but that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the
fire, as we our selves cut down unfruitful Trees, such as bring for^h no good
fruit, though they bear no dangerous fruit, Matthew 3. 10. And now also the axe
is laid unto the root of the Trees, therefore every Tree which brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire, and John 15. 2. Every
branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away; Every branch, i. e. every
professor of Christian Religion, every Member of the Church; in me, i. e. that
seems to be in me, that makes a profession of being in me, that makes himself
or others believe he is in me, that is, that he has Faith, and belives in
Christ, not that truly, and really he is in me, for then he could not but bear
fruit, neither could he be taken away; that bears not fruit, i. e. good
fruit, he does not say, that bears evil fruit, but that bears not good
fruit; he takes away, (...), tollit eum, i. e. aufert, amputat, he cuts off,
takes away, by destroying, abolishing, he brings to eternal destruction, casts
into the fire of hell, adeo abjicitur in ^eternum exitium.

So that however thou may seem a branch in Christ, and go for a branch in
Christ, be taken for a branch in Christ, yet if thou do not bear fruit, good
fruit, if thou be not taken away, i. e, cut off, and destroyed, the
Scripture must be broken, Matthew. 25. 30. and cast ye the unprofitable servant
into outward darkness, there shall be weeping, and knashing of teeth Inutiles
servi frustra se excusabunt, and pessime mulctabuntur paenis ^ternis. Tossan.
in loc.
; the unprofitable servant, he who though he did not waste his Masters goods,
yet did not improve them; and therefore let such hearken to that Sovereign
Counsel of John the Baptist, Matthew. 3. 8. bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance, etc. For without fruit, there is no way, but to the fire, except
the Scripture be found false.

Thus if continuing in any of these estates, if continuing in spiritual
blindness, and ignorance, if continuing unregenerate, and unholy, if continuing
still in unbelief, if going on still impenitently in your sins, if continuing
still barren, fruitless, and unprofitable, under the means of grace, you ever
be saved, the Scripture must be broken; but the Scripture as you have heard,
can no ways possibly be broken, no, God will break all, before he will break
one jot, or tittle of his word, it was not in the least broken, no, not for the
Son of God himself, and how should it then be broken for others? and therefore
how should thou continue one moment longer in such an estate, in which yet
thou can not be saved, except the Scripture be broken, which yet can never be
broken? O how can thou give sleep to thine eyes, or slumber to thine
eyelids, till thou have got out of such an estate Potes hoc sub casu ducere
somnes? Psalm. 39. 5. Job 7. 6, 7. Prove. 27. 1 James 4. 14.
? especially considering how short, and uncertain thy time is here, and not
knowing how suddenly God may call for thee away hence; That fool in the 12*
Luke, that counted of so many years, God tells him, This night thy soul shall
be required of thee, which made Austin say, he would not for the gain of a
whole world be an Atheist for one hour, because he knew not, but God might in
that very hour call for him: And so know thou how suddenly God may call for
thee? and what will become of thee, if thou be found in such an estate, in
which thou can not be saved, except the Scripture be broken? why? thou can
not then be saved, for the Scripture cannot be broken; and therefore sit down,
and consider, and bewail the sadness of thy present condition, and make thy
moan to God; Lord what a miserable poor creature am I? being in such a
condition, as wherein I cannot be saved, except the Scripture be broken, and
that cannot be broken, and how sad then is my condition? Lord pity thy poor
creature, and have compassion on me, in this so sad a condition, thus in the
sight and sense of thy present sad condition, go unto God, and cry, and make
thy moan unto him, who can perform all things for thee, who Psa. 57. 2.
can bring thee into such an estate, in which thou may be saved; and the
Scripture not be broken; yea in which if thou should not be saved, the
Scripture would be broken; he can inlighten thee Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.
, and regenerate thee Eze. 36. 26.
, and work faith in thee Col. 2. 10.
, and give repentance to thee 2 Timothy 2. 25.
, and make much fruit to be brought forth by thee Hosca 14. 5. 2 Co^. ^. 17.
; if any man, says the Apostle, be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things
are past away, behold all things are become new; so if ever thou be saved,
thou must become a new creature; old things must pass away, and all things must
become new: but mark what follows, v. 18. and all things are of God, etc. and
therefore go to this God, and cry unto him, and never rest till he has
brought thee out of such a condition, in which thou can not be saved, ekcept
the Scripture be broken; for the Scripture cannot be broken; and therefore
break off sleep from thine eyes, and slumber from thine eyelids, till thou
have gotten out of such an estate; de necessariis, we say, non est
deliberandum, necessary things fall not under deliberation, if a man was
falling into the fire, or into the water, would he stand to deliberate, whether
he should recover himself, yea, or no; no he would not, and thou art in such a
condition, as that thou art falling into the fire of hell, into everlasting
fire, and will thou stand to deliberate whether thou should get out of such
a condition, or no? no, what thou do do, do speedily, lest thy self be broken
before thou gettest out of that estate, in which thou can not be saved except
the Scripture be broken.

Again, cannot the Scripture be broken, Use 5. Of Terror.
but what ever it speaks, will it certainly come to pass? then here is matter
and ground of terror and trembling.

First, to all wicked, and ungodly in general, to all such as are enemies to
God, and persist, and go on still in their sins; for if the Scripture cannot be
broken, then look what ever the Scripture threatens against them, they
continuing such, it shall certainly be fulfilled upon them, and made good to
them; and truly the Scripture threatens such heavy and sad things, which being
such, they continuing such, as cannot but be fulfilled, ( for the Scripture
cannot be broken) may well fill their hearts with horror, and amazement. As
there is great cause, why the Saints (the Scripture being that which cannot be
broken) should be comforted, in regard of what is promised; so upon the like
ground, there is as great cause, why the wicked should tremble, and be
terrified, in regard of what is threatened, it being that which shall as
certainly be fulfilled, as if it were already fulfilled. We find in the
prophecy of Hab: that Hab. 3. 2.
the Prophet there, though he had matter enough of joy in the Lord himself, yet
he fears and trembles at what was threatened against others, for their
invincible obstinacy in their sins, O Lord, I have heard thy speech, and was
afraid at thy threatenings, and v. 16. when I heard, my belly trembled, my lips
quivered at thy voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my
self, etc. here are various expressions, to show how deeply he was affected,
and afflicted with Gods threatenings, and why? because he knew they would be
fulfilled; and if the holy Prophet thus trembled, and was affected, how much
more cause was there for the sinners themselves to tremble, and be filled with
terror, upon whom they were certainly to be fulfilled?

O let all wicked, and ungodly men, take a survay of the threatenings God has
made in his word, let them look over them, and that from one end of the Bible,
to the other, and look how many, or grievous soever they be, they continuing
such, they shall none of them all fall to the ground, but shall all certainly
be performed, and fulfilled, which might well fill their hearts with terror,
and amazement, so as to cause with Belshazzar, the joints of their loins to be
loosed, and their knees to smite one against another. And they shall know,
says God, that I am the Lord, and that I have not said in vain, that I would
do this evil unto them, no, but I will do it, I will not leave what I have
threatened unfulfilled; and Eze. 12. 25. for I am the Lord, I will speak* and
the word that I shall speak* shall come to pass; some expound these words, I
am the Lord, as being an asseveration, or an Oath, and the sense to be this, As
sure as I am Jehovah, the Lord, that have my being of my self, and give being
to all others, so sure will I give being to my promises, and threatenings; so
that not only heaven and earth must pass away, before any tittle of any truth
of the Lords shall fall to the ground. But even the Lord himself must cease to
be before his word shall be without effect.

If the Scripture cannot be broken, then many sorrows shall be to the wicked,
for this is part of the Scripture, one of the Scripture threatenings, and so
cannot be broken, Psalm. 32. 10.

If the Scripture cannot be broken, Pro^. 11. ^1.
then, though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished. Then it
shall Eccl. 8. 13.
not be well with the wicked; nay, it shall be ill with the wicked, the wicked
shall 1 Samuel 2* 9, 10.
be silent in darkness, and the adversaries of the Lord, shall be broken in
pieces, out of heaven shall be thunder upon them.

Then destruction shall be to the workers Prove. 10. 29. 11. 3. 19* 16* 29. 1.
of iniquity; and the perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.

Then he that despises his ways shall dye.

Then he that being often reproved, h^rdneth his neck, shall be suddenly and
that without remedy.

Then God shall wound the head of his Psa. 68. 21.
enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses.

Then upon the wicked, he shall rain Ps. 11. 6.
snares, fire, and brimston, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the portion
of their cup.

Then the wicked shall wring out* and Psa. 75. 8.
drink the dreggs of that cup that is in the hand of the Lord, the wine of
which is red, and full of mixture.

Then the wicked shall be turned into Psa. 9. 17.
hell.

Then as the tares are gathered, and Matthew. 13. 40, 41, 42.
burnt in the fire, so in the end of the world, the Son of man shall send forth
his Angels, and shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and
them which do iniquity, and shall cast them in a furnace of fire, there shall
be wayling and gnashing of teeth.

For the Scripture cannot be broken, and all these are Scripture, and therefore
cannot but be fulfilled: and so I might instance in many others, but these may
^uffice, to let all wicked and ungodly ones see what matter of terror, and
trembling this truth is to them, that the Scripture cannot be broken, for if it
cannot, then these, and all other threatenings in the Word against them, shall
certainly be fulfilled, they not getting reformed.

Indeed at present, they are as secure as if they had made a Covenaut with
Death, and as if Hell and they were at an agreement; and they promise
themselves, when as the overflowing Scourge shall pass through, it shall not
come unto them; for they have made lies their refuge, and under falsehood have
they hid themselves: but God tells such, their Covenant with Death shall be
disanulled, and their agreement with Hell shall not stand; No, but Gods Word
shall stand, for it is said, when the overflowing Scourge stall pass through,
then they shall be trod down by it, and it shall take them, Isa. 28. 15, 18, 19.

And as this (that the Scripture cannot be broken) is matter and ground of
terror and trembling to wicked men in general, so to several in particular, As,

1. First to all unregenerate ones, for if the Scripture cannot be broken, then
all such continuing such, cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, for this is
Scripture, that except a man be born again, he cannot ^nter into the Kingdom of
God, John 3. 3, 5.

2. To all unbelieving ones, for if the Scripture cannot be broken, then all
such continuing such, must dye in their sins, shall be damned, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on them, yea, they are condemned already,
for this is Scripture, this, and much more does the Scripture affirm concerning
such, John 8. 24. Mark 16. 16. John* 3* 36* 18, etc.

3. To all impenitent ones; for if the Scripture cannot be broken, then they
must certainly perish, for this likewise is Scripture, John 13. 3, 5.

4. To all unfruitful and unprofitable ones; for if the Scripture cannot be
broken, they continuing such, shall be hewn down and cast into the fir^, cast
into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and g^ashing of teeth* for this
likewise is Scripture* Matth^w 7. 19. 25* 30.

5. To all sensual and secure ones* for if the Scripture cannot be broken, they
continuing such, the Lord shall come in a day when they look not for him, and
in an hour when they are not awar^ of, and shall cut them assunder, and appoint
them their portion with the Hypocrites, there shall eb weeping and gnashing of
teeth, for this likewise is Scripture, Matthew 25. 50, 51.

6. To all worldly and earthly minded ones, that sow to the flesh; for if, etc.
then such shall reap corruption, and their end is destruction, for this
likewise is Scripture, Galatians 6. 7, 8. Philippians 3. 19.

7. To all cruel, hard-hearted, and unmerciful ones; for if, etc. then shall
such have judgemtnt without mercy, then shall the King say to them at the last
day, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels* Matthew. 25. 41. James 2. 13.

8. T^ all hypocritical ones; for if the Scripture, etc. then, 1. Such heap up
wrath, and, 2. Their life is among the unclean, or Sodomites, i. e. their end
is alike, with the filthiest of sinners, for this is Scripture, Job 36. 13, 14.
3. Then woe upon woe belongs unto them, for there are 8. woes denounced against
them, in Matthew 23. 13, 14, 15. 4. Then their portion, of all portions, is the
heaviest and dreadfullest, for thus the Scripture, which cannot be broken, sets
it forth; for when Christ would threaten the worst of portions, he threatens, a
portion with the Hypocrites, Matthew 24. 51. -- And shall cut him assunder, and
appoint him his portion with hypocrites, implying that of all portions, their
portion is like to be the saddest and dreadfullest, for it is made the measure
of others; Hypocrites are (as one glosses upon the Text) q. e. the Freeholders
of Hell, whereas other sinners are but as inmates with them, and have but a
portion of their misery, they are the chief of sinners, their dissembled
sanctity is double iniquity, Simulata san'titas duplex iniquitas.
and theirs is the chief of misery. 5. Then they shall not come before God,
they shall not enjoy the least glimps of his face and favor, or the comfort of
his presence, for this likewise is Scripture, Job 13. 16. And 6. The Lord shall
lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, with openly profane persons, for
this likewise is Scripture, Psalm 125. 5.

9. To all Apostates and Back-sliders; for if the Scripture cannot be broken,
then 1. Gods Soul shall have no pleasure in them, and how sad is their
condition in whom God has no delight? nay who are loathsome unto God, it is a
(...). 2. Such shall be filled with their own ways, with the fruit of their
own ways, or with their own ways, i. e. with backsliding, they shall have
backsliding enough, when they are backsliden into Hell. 3. Then it had been
better for such not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they
have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, for
these and many other threatenings are Scripture, Hebrews 10. 38. Pov. 14. 14. 2
Pet. 2. 21.

10. In a word, if the Scripture, etc. then here is matter and ground of terror
and trembling to all those the Apostle reckons up, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. as
Unrighteous, Fornicators, Idolaters, effeminate, abusers of themselves with
mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortiones, for if the
Scripture cannot be broken, then such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, for
this is Scripture, Verse. 9. 10.

As also those the Apostle reckons up Philippians 3. 18, 19. viz. such as are
enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their
shame, who mind earthly things, for if the Scripture cannot be broken, then
their end must be destruction, for that the same Scripture affirms, whose end
is destruction; So also those reckoned up Revel 21. 8. The fearful,
unbelieving, abominable, Murderers, Whoremongers, Sorcerers, Idolaters, and all
Liers; for if the Scripture cannot be broken, then such, continuing such, must
have their portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the second death; Verse 8.

Cannot the Scripture be broken, but 6. Use of Consolation,
look what ever it speaks, shall it certainly come to pass? what ever it
promises, shall it certainly be performed? then here is matter and ground of
singular Comfort and Consolation to the Saints, to all such who are indeed
Heirs of the Scripture-promises, as the Scripture speaks of some, Heb. 6. 17.
Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of promise the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath? I say, if the Scripture
cannot be broken, then here is matter and ground of singular Comfort and
Consolation, to all such, and that in all estates and conditions whatsoever;
Hoc (quod Verbum Dei non excidere potest) est basiis consolationis nostrae,
Pareus.
why? why, because seeing the Scripture cannot be broken, then the promises
which are a main and choice part of Scriptur, of which they are Heirs, cannot
be broken, but shall certainly be performed and made good, and what a River of
Comfort then does from hence flow to all such, the streams whereof may
exceedingly rejoice and make glad the City of God? viz. the hearts of those who
are Heirs of the promises; this truth that the Scripture cannot be broken, may
to such be as a box of precious ointment, opened and powered forth, the sweet
odor and fragrant savor whereof, may fill and exceedingly refresh their Souls.

I may say of this point, as to the Heirs of promise, what the Spouse says of
her Beloved, Cant. 4. 15. It is as it were a Fountain of Gardens, a Well of
living Waters and streams from Lebanon, it is as a whole bundle of Mirrh, and
a full cluster of Camphir. O assure but this, that thou art an Heir of the
promises, and such are all who are Children, and if Children, then Heirs, Romans
8. 17. That believe in Jesus Christ, and love and fear the Lord; I say, assure
but this, and then in the serious consideration of this sovereign truth, thou
may sit down and say, it is enough: for view the promises, look over them
all, and that from one end of the Bible to the other, and see how many so ever
they be, or how great and precious soever they be, they shall all certainly be
fulfilled, be performed, and made good; My Covenant will I not break, nor alter
the thing that is gone out of my mouth, Psalm 89. 34. God has spoken, says
David, in his holiness I will rejoice, i. e. he has promised so and so, and I
will rejoice, I, and there is great cause, for what ever God has spoken and
promised, it shall certainly be performed, it shall certainly be full filled and
made good, it shall not fail, no, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but Gods
Word shall not pass away; Psalm 119. 89. For ever, O Lord, thy Word is settled
in Heaven. Here was David's Comfort, how ever things went on Earth, how moveable
or unsettled soever they were, Gods Word on which he fixed his Faith, was for
^ver settled in Heaven, that was a sure rock still to bear up his Faith, that
would never fail, what ever else did; And this kept up his spirit* Psalm. 27.
13. I had fainted, unless I had belived to see the goodness of the Lord in
the Land of the Living. And therefore the People of God should remember God of
his promises, and urge him with them, and sue them out, as Jacob, Genesis 32. 9.
Have not thou said so, and so? and is it not Scripture Lord? and the Scripture
cannot be broken; thus David does often in the 119. Psalm, verse 41. Let thy
mercies come unto me O Lord, even thy Salvation, according to thy Word, and 49.
Remember thy Word unt^ thy Servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope, and
76. Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be to my comfort, according unto
thy Word unto thy Servant, and 107. I am afflicted very much, quicken me O Lord
according to thy word, and 116 uphold me according to thy word, that I may
live, and let me not be ashamed of my hope; and thus he pleads 2 Sa. 28, 29.
And now O Lord God, thou art that God, and thy Words be true, and thou have
promised this Goodness; therefore now let it please thee to bless the House of
thy Servant, that it may continue for ever before thee, for thou O Lord God
have spoken it, etc. Whatsoever things says the Apostle, Romans 15. 4. were
written before time, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scripture might have hope Scriptur a Consolationem assurt cum
promissiones innumeras de dei praesentia auxilio and fiberatione ab aerumins,
de salutari malorum exitu, de gloria denique in C^lis reposita nobis proporit.
Par. in Romans 15. 4.
; And how does the Scripture more work Patience, and cause comfort, than in the
consideration of these promises wchit propounds* And, in regard of this that
they cannot be broken? O if the Scripture cannot be broken, how many ways may
this comfort and cheer the hearts of the People of God? Give me leave a little
to instance in some of them, and as it were but to open this box of so precious
ointment, that so you may the better resent the fragrancy and sweetness
thereof, and that your spirits may be the better cheered and refreshed
therewith; as,

1. If the Scriptures cannot be broken, then the People of God shall not want
any good thing; for this is part of the Scripture, it is one of the Scripture
promises, Psalm 34. 10. 84. 11. They that seek the Lord shall not want any good
thing; no good thing will he withold, etc.

2. If the Scripture cannot, etc. then all things are theirs, for this likewise
is Scripture promise, 1 Co^. 3. 21, 22. All things are yours, etc.

3. Then they shall not be forgotten; for this likewise is a Scripture-promise,
Isay 49. 15, 16. Jer. 29. 10, 11. Yet will I not forget thee, etc. For I know
the thoughts that I think toward you, etc.

4. Then shall they not be left, nor forsaken; for this is, etc. Hebrews 13.
5. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee.

5. Then is, and shall Gods Grace be sufficient for them; for this is, etc. 1
Cor. 12. 9. And he said, My Grace is sufficient for thee, etc.

6. Then shall all things work together for their good; for this is, etc. Romans
8. 28. That all things work together for good, etc.

7. Then shall they be upheld and sustained in their greatest weakness; for
this is, etc. Isay 40. 11, 28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Cor. 10. 13. Lam. 3. 31, 32. He
shall gather the Lambs with his Arms, and carry them in his Boseme, etc.

8. Then shall nothing be able to separat them from the Love of God which is in
Christ Jesus their Lord; for this is, etc. Romans 8. 35, 38, 39. John 13. 1.

9. Then they shall never perish; for this is, etc. John 10. 28.

10. Then sin shall not have dominion over them; for this is, etc. Romans 6. 14.

11. Then Satan shall shortly be bruised under their feet; for this is, etc.
Romans 16. 14.

12. Then there is no condemnation to them; for this likewise is, etc. Romans 8.
1.

And so I migh add, then will God be with them, when they pass through the
waters, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow them, and through the
fire it shall not burn them, etc. For this is a Scripture-promise, Isay 43. 2.
Then in 6. troubles shall they be delivered, and in 7. there shall no evil
touch them; for this is, etc. Job 5. 19. Then shall they shortly be received to
Christ, and be where he is; for this is, etc. John 14. 3, 17. 24. 12. 26.

And thus I might still further run forth, and abundantly enlarge and expatiate
my self; but this I shall leave for the further enlarging of your own
Meditations and Observations, having shown you the way.

Thus, that the Scripture cannot be broken, is matter and ground of singular
comfort to the People of God, ^or if the Scripture cannot be broken, then the
promises which are a main, and chief part thereof cannot be broken; And as this
is matter and ground of singular comfort to the People of God, so let them
improve it, and make use of it for their comfort; let them suck out the
sweetness of it, and cheer themselves with it; Seeing the promises cannot be
broken, neither let your Faith, nor your hopes be broken, seeing the one cannot
fail, neither let the other fail, stagger, or ^efoiled but feal to the firmness
and steadiness, of what God has premised, which shall certainly be performed,
by the firmness and steadiness of your Faith, say as David, Psalm 42. 5. Why
art th^^ cost down O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in
God; ^e will certainly be as good as his Word, make good what he has said; the
Scripture says it, and I will believe it, and comfort my self in it, for the
Scripture cannot be broken; Let us do as Abraham did, the Father of the
Faithful, it is said of him, Romans 4. 20. He staggered not at the promise of
God through unbelief, but was strong in Faith; giving Glory to God; As the
promise was firm, so was his Faith; as the one could not fail, so neither did
the other* In God says David, I will praise his Word: Let us do it really; by
relying thereon; and so comforting our selves therein. O what a singular means
would this be to fill our Souls with joy? as Gods promises are firm, and cannot
fail, so to have our Faith firm, to rest assured, and fully persuaded of the
accomplishment of what God has premised, why this is the very life of the
Soul, Is. 38. 16. O Lord by these things men live, and in all these things is
the life of my spirit; by these things; what things? why? by, or in, and
through the pro^ises, and therefore some read it by these words, and in all
these, is the life of my spirit, i. e. the joy and comfort of my spirit, the
joy of the spirit being indeed the life of the spirit, and the Dutch Anot do
therefore interpret it, a merry, and a quiet life, while I believe them, seal
to them, rest assured, and am fully persuaded of the accomplishment of them;
thus it is said, the just shall live by Faith, Hab. 2. 4. God having promised
deliverance after such a time, as appears in the foregoing verse, it might be
demanded, but what shall the just do in the mean time? do? why? they shall in
the mean while live, i. e. they shall still be comforted, and cheared; but how?
by Faith, by a sweet and firm dependence on God, for the fulfilling of what he
had promised in due time, by sealing to what God had said, by believing, and
relying on the promises; thus the just should live, comfort, and cheer
themselves, and stay up their souls. And thus David lived, this was that which
bore up, and supported him in all his troubles, he lived by faith in Gods
promises, and a blessed sweet, and comfortable life this is indeed, Psa. 119.
50. this is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has quickened me, i. e.
what thou have spoken, and promised, and unless thy word had been my delights,
I should then have perished in my affliction, v. 92. and so often, Psa. 27. 13.
I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord, in the
Land of the living, Ps. 28. 11. the Lord is my strength, and my shield, my
heart trusted in him, and I am helped; so the people of God, what comfort, and
help, might they still have, did they but trust in God, and rely on his word?
The divine promises are says Bernard, panis cordis Promissiones divine panis
sunt cordis and Scriptura sacra demulset animi affectus. Bernard.
, they are the bread of the soul, and by Faith it is, we do as it were feed on
this bread, and so come thereby to have our hearts strengthened, Cant. 2. 5.
stay me, says the spouse, with flagons, comfort me with apples; now, what are
these flagons, or apples, but the precious promises, and comfortable doctrines
of the Scripture? and then do these flagons stay, and support us, when by
Faith, we do as it were drink of them, and then do these apples comfort, and
cheer us, when by Faith, we do as it were eat them.

And therefore to conclude this use, yea, and this whole discourse; that which
the Apostle prays for, in behalf of the Romans, that shall I pray for, in
behalf of you Christians, Now the Romans 1^. 13.
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace, in believing, that you may abound
in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost, why? the Scripture-promises are
full of joy, and peace, and they are such as cannot fail, but are firm, and
shall certainly be performed; and now the God of hope fill you with all joy,
and peace in believing; for this is the way Christians, to be filled with all
Joy, and peace, to draw that joy and peace, that is in the promises upon your
selves, it is to believe them, to be thoroughly persuaded of the truth of them,
and to rest fully assured of the accomplishment of them, that they cannot be
broken, and the Scripture cannot be broken, otherwise though the promises be
full of joy, and peace, we may have little enough, if we do not believe, and
seal to the truth of them, if we believe 2 Timothy 2. 13.
not says the Apostle, yet he abides faithful; I, but we may abide
comsortless; you know what the Prophet Isay said to Ahaz, and his people, Isay
7. 9. If ye will not believe, ye shall not be established; if ye will not
believe, i. e. the promise of God, which I preach unto you, if ye will not rest
and rely on his good and gracious word, whereby he ingages himself unto you,
surely ye shall not be established, but your hearts and minds will still remain
unsettled, and disquieted, though Gods word be for ever settled, and
established in heaven, yet if you do not believe, your hearts shall not be
established; much to the same purpose, is that of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chro. 20. 20.
believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established, believe his
Prophets, i. e. the truth of that word they deliver you from the Lord, so shall
you be established, so shall you prosper. And O fools, says our Savior, ^^a
slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spok^n. O in being slow to
believe, what God has said, and promised, is great folly; for God hereby does
not only lose of his honor, but we likewise of our peace and comfort; what a
foolish thing is it, that God should say so much, make so many sweet and
gracious promises, for to comfort, and uphold us, and we for want of believing
them, should both cause God to lose his glory, and we our selves lose that
comfort which otherwise we might have by them? that he in and by the many
gracious promises, which he has made, should provide so abundantly for his
peoples comfort and peace, and they lose it for want of belief? hence all the
promises of God are said in Christ, to be yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory
of God by us 2 Cor. 1. 20. Sicuti dixerat in Christo deum sanxisse omnium
suarum promissionum sidem, it a nunc nostrum officium esse admonet ejusmodi
sanctioni accinere, quod fit dum certa fide in Christo acquiescentes,
subscribimus and signamus quod dens verax idque ad ejus gloriam, quia hic finis
est quo referri debent omnia. Cal^. in locum.
, i. e. while we believe them, and seal to Gods truth in them, else they are
neither to the glory of God, nor our comfort, as it is said, Romans 4. 20.
concerning Abraham, he not staggering at the promise of God through unbelief,
but being strong in faith, gave glory to God Quod addit dedisse gloriam deo in
eo Notandum est, non posse deo, plus honoris afferri quam dum fide obsignamus
ejus veritatem, Rursum nulla re gravins inhonorari quam diffidentia and
incertitudine. Calv. in Romans 4. 20.
, believing that God would, and could do, what he had promised; and so setting
to his seal, that God is true; and indeed as Calvin observes upon the place,
God cannot have more honor brought him, than while by faith, we seal to his
truth, and in nothing is he more dishonored than by diffidence, and unbelief
De promissionibus dei dubitare non aliud est quam deum, vel mendacem, vel
infirmum facere. Pet. Martyr in Romans 4. 21.
.

The God of hope therefore fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that
the word being that which cannot be made void, for want of believing, God may
neither lose his glory, nor you your comfort, but that by believing, and firmly
relying on those promises which cannot fail, but shall certainly in due time be
fulfilled, God may both have his glory, and you live comfortably here, till you
come to live eternally hereafter, Amen.

FINIS.
Some of the most material Faults escaped are thus to be corrected.
PAge 1 l. 2. for Scriptures read Scripture* p. 54. l. 10. add a. p. 72. l. 21.
for Stemmana, r. Stemmana in the Margent, 72. p. for Aemilias, r. Aemilians. p.
79. l. 16. for people joy full, read peoples joy full. p. 91. l. 22. for Greeks,
r. Greek. p. 93. Margent, for (...), r. (...). p. 93. l. 24. leave out the. p.
94. l. 25. add to to be. p. 130. l. 3. for for, r. s^. p. 147. l. 11. after is,
add all. p. 167. l. 21. ^ur our yet. p. 177. l. 8. for eb, read be.


