The full and Last RELATION, Of all things concerning BASING-HOUSE: WITH,
Diverse other Passages; represented to to Mr. SPEAKER, and diverse Members in the
House.

By Mr. PETER'S, who came from Lieutenant General CROMWELL.

ALSO, How there are strange and hideous Cries, heard in the ground.

Commanded to be Printed, and published according to Order.

London Printed, by JANE COE. 1645.

THE Rifeling of Basing: OR, Mr. Peter's report to Mr. Speaker, and other
Members of the House of Commons.
ON Wednesday the 15 of October 1645. Mr. Peter's came from Bazing upon some
special concernments of the Army, and upon Thursday morning early was in the
House with the Speaker and diverse Members, and according to their desire, gave
a full relation of some things concerning B^zing, not mentioned in the
Lieutenant Generals Letters, which was to this purpose.

That Mr. Peter's came into the house of Bazing, some time after the storm: on
Tuesday the 14 of October 1465. and took a view, first of the works which
were many, though not finished, and of too great a compass, for so few men to
keep. Sir Robert Peake the Governor swearing to him that they had but 300
fighting men in all, the circomwallation being above a mile and a halfe-about,
there were in both houses 16 cornyards great and small; the old house had
stood as it is reported 2. or 300 years, a nest of Idolatry, the new house
surpassing that in beauty and stateliness: and either of them sit to make an
Emperors court.

The rooms before the storm (it seems) in both houses were all completely
furnished; provisions for some years rather then months, 400 quarters of
wheat: Bacons diverse Rooms full, hundreds of flitches of bacon, Cheese
proportional, with Oatmeale, Beef, Porke, Bear diverse sellers full, and that
very good.

A bead in one room furnished that cost 1300l. Popish books many, with Copies
and such utensils that in truth, the house stood in its full pride, and the
enemy was p^rswaded that it would be the last piece of ground that would be
taken by the Parliament, because they had so often failed our forces, that had
formerly appeared before it. In the several rooms, and about the house, there
were slain, in view 74. and only one woman, the daghter of Docter Griffith,
who came forth railing against our soldiers for their ruff carriges toward
her father, who indeed did remember to him his former malignancy, there lay
upon the ground flaine by the hands of Major Harrison (that godly, and gallant
Gentleman) Major Guffle a man of great account amongst them, and a notorious
Papist, and Robinson the player, who a little before the storm, was known to
be mocking, and scorning the Parliament, and our Army, 8. or 9. Gentlewomen of
rank running forth together were entertained by the common soldiers somewhat
coursly, yet not uncivilly, they left them with some clothes upon them, their
plunder continued till Tuesday night in this manner,

1 For the goods, the soldiers seized upon the first goods of which there were
several sorts; one soldier had sixscore pieces in gould for his share, others
plate, others Jewels, amongst the rest one got 3. baggs of silver; who (being
not able to keep his own council) it grew to be common pillage amongst the
rest, the fellow himself had but one half Crown left for himself at last.

There were some Cabinets of Jewels, and other rich treasure next to that, the
soldiers sold the wheat to the Country people, and the p^ey held a while to
the Country People, but afterward the market fell, and there was some
abatements for have.

After that they sold the household stuff, whereof there was good store, and
they loaded away many Carts; and continued a great while fetching out all
manner of household stuff till they had fetched out all the stools, Chaires,
and other lumber, all which they sold to the Country people, by peecemeal
which was admirable: that in all these great houses there was not one Iron bar
left in all the windows, save only what was in the fire before night.

And the last work of all was the lead, and by Thursday morning, they had
hardly left one gutter about all the house.

2. For the fire, what the soldiers left the fire took hold on, joy was more
then ordinary, leaving nothing but bare walls and Chimnies in less then 20
hours, and occasioned by the neglect of the enemy in quenching a fire ball of
ours.

We know not how to give a just account of all that was within, for we have not
200 Prisoners, and it may be 100. slain, whose bodies some being covered with
rubbish, came not to our view, only riding to the house on Tuesday night, we
heard diverse crying in valts for quarter, but our men could neither come to
them, nor they to us.

But amongst those that we saw slain one of their officers lying on the ground
seeming so exceeding tall was measured: and from his great toe to his head
cronw was 9. foot in length measured by a Gentleman of an ordinary size, who
was then present, There was in all (in the house) about 500. besides some that
before got out of the house.

And it is reported there are some vaults that are far under ground for their
popish priests, of which cattle there were diverse, but none came to our hands,
how many of them we killed we know not.

3. Mr. Peter's spent some time in conference with the Ma^ques of Winchester,
and Sir Robert Peake the Governor, one of Mr. Peter's neighbors when he lived
in the parish of Sepulchers.

The Marquis being pressed by him, by way of argument, broke out and said that,
if the King had no more ground in England but Bazing house; he would adventure
as he did; and so maintain it to his uttermost; (meaning with those papists)
and the Marquis said himself that Bazing house was called Loyalty. But he was
soon silenced in the question between the King, and Parliament, only hoping
that the King might have a day again.

4. We see who are his Majesty's deer friends, and trusty, and well beloved
cosens, and Councellers; the Marquis being the popes devoted vassal.

5. And thus the Lord was pleased in a few hours to show us, what mortal
seed all earthly glory grows upon, and how just and righteous the ways of
God are, who takes sinners in their own snares; and lifts up the heads of his
despised people.

1. This is now the 20 Garrison, that has been taken in, by this Army this
summer; and I believe most of them the answer of the prayers, and the trophies
of the faith of some of Gods servants.

2. The Commander of this Brigade, having spent much time with godly prayer,
the night before the storm, and seldom fights without some Texts of Scripture
to support him; And this time he rested upon that blessed Word of God written
in the 115. Psalm, and the 8. verse. They that make them are like unto them, so
is every one that trusts in them. Which with some Verses going before was now
accomplished.

3. Whereas the House had ordered, that the Country people should carry away
those buildings, God Almighty had decreed that before hand, nothing remaining
but a blast of Wind, to blow down the tottering Walls and chimnies.

Doubtless this providence of God has a double voice, the one unto the Enemy,
the other unto us, the Lord h^lp us with skill to improve it. I hope by this
time the State has a penny worth for a penny, and I hope they will have full
measure, and running over. I wish that the payment and recruiting of this Army,
may not be slighted. It is an easy matter to grieve God in our neglests
toward him, and not heard to weary one another.

Quer. What if the poor soldier had some remembrance (though small) to leave
as the acceptance of this service, which is already begun, by Master Maynard.
a worthy Member of the House, who has appointed some Models to be made of
gold, to be bestowed on those that ventured on the greatest difficulties.

Mr. Peter's presented the Marquesses own Cullers, which he brought from Basing;
the Motto of which was: Donec pax reddit terris. The very same King Charles
gave upon his Coronation money, when he came to the C^own.

But our only God does usually attemper such pleasant Cups unto us; for the
close of this glorious Victory, the death of Major Bethel was brought unto us,
shot at Bristoll where he lost 8. ounces of blood, and tired through want of
sleep, he is gone into the bosom of the Lord Jesus, whom he loved so deerly
whilst he lived, I wish he may not go unlamented to his grave, who was so full
of God, and the fairest flower of the City amongst us, lived without pride,
and died full of faith.

The Armies tears over Major Bethel.
Thou (gallant Charger) do thou wheel about
To shable shades? or do thou rather post.
To Bethel (Bethel) there to make a shout,
Of the great Triumphs of a scorned host.
Or blessed soul, was it unworthy we,
That made thee weary with such dust to be?
Or tired with our new reforming pace,
Tasting some sips of heaven, do therefore have,
To fuller draughts, of that eternal grace,
Fearing thy spirit might be here embraced.
Farewell deer soul, thy great deserved arrears*
We Will pay in others blood, or our own tears.
Only let after Ages when they tell,
The unexampled tale of forty five,
Yea when these Records to their glory swell,
And be completed by the Saints alive.
When Naseby, Langport, Bristoll named they hear.
Let them all say sweet Bethel he was there.
Bear a part in these lamants*
Every soul that longs for peace,
Truly who with God indents,
Here to have thereof a lease,
Enters with himself a war;
Lean on things that truly are.
FINIS.

