A SERMON Lately Preached AT COURT, Before His MAJESTY, In Ordinary Attendance:
BY WILLIAM PETERSON, D. D. And DEANE of EXETER. Chaplain to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Butter. 1642.

A SERMON Preached before His MAJESTY.
JAMES Chap. 5. ver. 13. Is any amongst you afflicted? let him pray: Is any
merry? let him sing Psalms.
HEre have we a double Question propounded, with a double Answer; a Direction
both for prosperity and adversity; for the mourning weed, and the wedding
Garment; Pray and Sing. First, Is any one afflicted? let him pray; here is a
restorative against sadness. Secondly, Is any merry, because of Peace within
his walls, or plenteousnesse within his Palaces, or because his corn and his
oil is increased? let him sing; here is a preservative to continue these
Blessings.

The first Proposition it is of affliction, a theme most suitable with these
sad and discontented times, and therefore I mean to make it the only subject
of my ensuing discourse.

We find the Proposition to be indefinite, no person appointed, no time
defined, no place enjoined, but it concerns all men, at all times, and in all
places, whosoever, howsoever, whenever, and wheresoever afflicted he must
pray.

First, whosoever, the poor as well as the rich, and the rich as well as the
poor, for whilst we are in this world, we are all subject to sundry
imperfections, griefs of body, defects of mind, our bodies being the Anvils
of pain and diseases, and our minds the hives of unnumbred cares; yea, what
dangers at any time are imminent, and what evils at this present hang over our
heads, God himself does know and not we. We see by daily experience, that
those calamities may be nearest at hand, readiest to break in suddenly upon
us, which we in regard of time and circumstance may imagine to be farthest off,
for our whole life it is nothing else but a mixture of good and evil; and joy
and sorrow in this life are so woven one within the other, that (says Plato)
to look for one without the other, were to aim at things impossible; for as
impossible is it in this life to have an estate without all trouble, as to have
a fair day without some clouds: So that this present life of ours, it is
nothing else, but the beginning and end of a Tragedy, a pursuit of many
miseries, inchained one within another. One cries out My belly my belly, with
the Prophet; another My son my son, with David; another My father my
father, with Elisha; Every child of God has some complaint or other to make
his cheeks wet, and his heart heavy. Esaias had serram, Christ himself had
crucem, John Baptist securim, and Stephen lapidem; haec est conditio veritatis.
The Sodomites make Lot their Tabret, and the wicked make songs on David; Christ
he does not broach his best wine first for his Disciples, but tells them
plainly, that they must first drink of those bitter waters of Marah, before
they can drink of that ever-living well, of which whosoever drinks shall
never thirst more. For as gold (that most valued and restorative metal)
passes seven times the flame, before his purification be accomplished; so it
is the will of that unconfined Spirit, that all those that he highly prizeth,
should seventy seven times enter the hot furnace of affliction, that so they
may be purified and made clean from the filth of sin: And thus we see how
our pilgrimage here on earth, is like Isreal's journey through the wilderness,
sometimes fiery serpents, sometimes want of water, sometime enemies do
oppress us. It is like the passage through the red Sea, we have the waters on
the right hand, and the waters on the left hand, and therefore we had need to
stand upon our guard to watch and pray lest we fall into temptation. Let us not
then neglect this happy means of our deliverance, both from present and
approaching evils, but let us with all fervencie and humility, pour out our
Prayers and Supplications unto God, to desire him to divert those heavy
judgments, which at this present seem to threaten our danger in great
proportion, and that he would be pleased to put a period to all those untimely
differences and discordances now amongst us, that so this little Island of ours
which stands divided from all the world, may by this happy conjunction, live
in peace and unity within it self. And thus for the generality of the person,
All of us are subject to diverse inconveniences, and therefore all must pray.

Now follows the second circumstance, Howsoever afflicted we must pray:
howsoever, either for manner or for measure. First, for manner, howsoever
afflicted, either in soul or body, either with sickness or poverty, either
for want of any good thing, or the repulse of any bad thing, here is thy
remedy, pray, either for affliction happened, or that will happen: Is there any
good that thou desire? Call to God: Is there any evil thou detestest? Pray
against it; whether it be malum poenae, or malum culpae: Does any evil of
sin trouble thee? Call to God: Does any evil of punishment vex thee; either
corporal or spiritual? He can help thee, either in turning it away before it
come, or removing it already come, or else in lessening or extenuating it. Cum
duplicantur lateres, tum venit Moses, when the Israelites burdens were
greatest, then came Moses to help them; and when the righteous man's case is
most dangerous, then stands God most ready to support him. And thus for the
manner of our afflictions, Howsoever afflicted we must pray.

Secondly, for the measure of our affliction; Howsoever likewise afflicted we
must pray. We must not complain that our affliction is greater then we can
sustain, for every one shall have a burden according as he can bear, Venison
for sick Isaac, Genesis 27. Milk for young babes, 1 Cor. 3. Herbs for the weak,
Romans 14. And strong meat for men of age; the bruised reed God will not
break, and the smoking flax he will not quench. The righteous must expect a
greater trial then another, because God has given him a greater measure of
faith then other. For as a workman when he espies a strong piece of timber, he
makes use of it, and puts it to be the underpropper of the house or palace he
has to build; but as for other pieces that are cracked, and able to support no
weight, he paints them over, and places them only for ornament and show: So
the Founder of this fair fabrique, when he finds a soul able to undergo and
undertake things of weight, he lays as heavy a burden upon it, as it is able
to stand under, but as for softer spirits, he lets them lie idle, as not being
able to support any thing for him, nor yet of strength sufficient to do him
any acceptable service. Admit I could say, that I knew nothing at all in my
conscience whereby I should deserve any affliction, calumny, or disgrace to
fall upon me, shall I therefore presently murmur and repine, and call Gods
Justice into question? surely no, I will rather lay my hand upon my mouth, and
attend with patience the farther manifestation of his good will and pleasure.
It may be these troubles that are fallen upon us are sent of God, for the
exercise of our humility: This I am sure, that all things work together for
the best to them that fear God: For as it is in faces, if you examine them
part by part, you may perhaps not find one good face amongst them all, but
exceptions may be taken either at the breadth, or narrowness of the forehead,
or else at the color, or dimnesse of the eye, or else at the sharpness of the
chin, or the length of the nose, or thinness of the lip; But take all these
parts together, and they may do very well, and help to make up a seemly and
well-composed countenance: so in those things which are sent unto us of God, if
we examine them severally, part by part, we may perhaps find just matter of
complaint, and think that there may be disorder and injustice in the things of
God; but if we take them all together, we shall find the composition admirable,
and of excellent use and benefit unto us, and we shall see, that God neither
effectually works nor permissively suffers any thing to be done unto the
righteous, but only for their good, and their amendment, and therefore to
murmr or repine against God, or to expostulate and ask the question, why God
does afflict one man more severely then another; thou may with as much reason
move the question, why God loves one man better then another: Tell me why the
Physician prescribes thee a greater proportion of Rubarbe then another, because
he does experimentally find that such a one will be moved more with one dram,
then thou can be with three. Some man is sooner moved of God by the loss of
his crop of corn, then another by the burning of his house, by the loss of
his wife and children. For though the consciences of some be such, as oil and
butter may supple them, yet the most part are so overgrown with hardness, as
they require strong and potent corrasives to make an entrance into them. And
thus for the manner and measure of our afflictions, howsoever afflicted we must
pray.

Now follows the third circumstance, Whenever afflicted we must pray:
whenever, that is, so often as we are afflicted, so soon as we are afflicted,
and so long as we are afflicted.

First, so often as we are afflicted, for Gods ways are not like wans ways: If
a beggar come once or twice to our doors, we may perhaps be so charitable, as
to relieve him and give him alms; but if he hant our house, we withdraw our
bounty, and give no longer: But God is always ready to bestow his blessings,
(says Saint Augustine) but that the perverseness of man does hinder. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, do thou bear witness, how often would Christ have
gathered together thy children, as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, but thou would not? For as a father pitties his only son (says
David) so God shows compassion on those that love and call upon him. Yea, Gods
love is so great, that nothing can be compared with it; for what love shall I
compare unto his love? the love of a woman? It is great indeed, but yet the
love of Jonathan to David is greater then it: To the love of a mother? Here is
a greater degree then the former; but yet this is not so certain and
infallible as Gods love. Can a mother forget her child, and not have
compassion on the son of her womb? as some may be, yea some we know have
been so unnatural, yet will not I forget thee, says God to his disconsolate
and afflicted Sion. And therefore until you find whom ye may compare with
God, you shall never find any love to be compared with his love; for as it is
in it self without beginning, so it is toward all others without ending; and
though his mercy be above all his works, yet it does prostrate it self to
the least of his works: yea, so great is the love of God to mankind, that I
remember some of the Schoolmen make it one of their curious questions, Whether
the love of God to the world, or his love to his only Son be greatest. I
find him in holy Scriptures sometimes compared to a Father, sometimes to a
Mother, sometimes to a friend, sometimes to a husband, that so by these
familiar speeches, we might aspire unto some sense and knowledge of his
indulgent and compassionate nature. He is Pater amoris, (says Saint Jerome)
and will help; and he is Pater potestatis, and can help us. Faint not then
under any temptation or trouble, but howsoever afflicted either in soul or
body, either with sickness or poverty, or any other calamity whatsoever, if
thou pourest out thy Prayers and supplications unto God, it is his own promise
that he will hear thee; for as the oil did not cease until they wanted
vessels to receive it, 2 Kings 4. so there is no end of Gods mercies toward us
till we want faith to apprehend it. Say not then desperately with Cain, that
thy sin is greater then can be forgiven, for no sin is so great but God can,
such is his power, and God will, such is his goodness, forgive the same. It is
not simply thy sin committed, but thy impenitencie added unto thy sin, that
makes it irremissible in event. Have thou been an Idolater? so was Manasses:
have thou been lewd of thy body? so was David; have thou been overtaken with
wine? so was Noah; have thou denied thy Lord and Master? sodid Peter; have thou
persecuted him in his members? so did Paul: All these obtained pardon by prayer
and humiliation; they could plead nothing else but mercy, and this may thou
plead as well as they. Let us then possess our souls not in patience only, but
in comfort, and so often as we are afflicted let us pray.

Secondly, so soon as we are afflicted we must pray. Thou must not put off thy
prayers and devotions unto Almighty God, upon the account of many days, lest
with that foolish rich man thy soul be fetched away this night. Thy body is now
strong and lively, trust it not too far. Memento, mare vertitur; the tide may
soon turn a ship, (says Seneca) may play upon the Sea with a fair gale, and
yet be drowned the same day, for a day, an hour, a month is enough to overcome
those things that seem to have been founded and rooted in Adamant. Let our
souls be dressed then, like the Lamp of the Tabernacle, at least twice a
day, that is, every morning and every evening with prayer and humiliation, and
let us account that day wherein we have neglected either Gods Word or Prayer,
to be unhappy; for how can I answer such strange neglect, when God shall be so
near me as within me, about my paths, and about my bed, (says David) if in a
whole day I do not so much as once speak to him, or he to me? But the reason
why oftentimes we defer our prayers, is, because we are afraid lest God should
hear our prayers too soon; for there are none of us but are wedded to some
one beloved sin or other we are loath to part with; we keep it close within us,
as a child does sugar (says Solomon) under his tongue, and swallow it down by
little and little. Thus Saint Augustine (before his conversion) prayed to God
for chastity; but yet as he writes of himself in his Confessions, he was
afraid lest God should hear his prayer too soon, desirous to have his lust
yet a little better satisfied before it was quite extinguished. And this is the
condition of us all; With the Samaritans we could be content to serve God, so
as we might our Images too: We are loath to make an integrall separation of our
selves from our sins, saying with Naaman the Syrian, God be merciful unto me
when I go into the house of Rimmon. Thus Lot, though armed against the sin of
Sodom, yet unarmed against another sin. Thus Herod, though in other matters he
could hear John Baptist willingly; yet look thou speak not of Herodias: But
thus to give close and secret entertainment to these forbidden guests, is a
matter of dangerous consequence; for it is in sin, as Tacitus tells it is in
Treason, Qui deliberant, desciverunt, To admit any the modestest terms of
parley with Gods enemies, is utterly to forsake him. Whilst it is called to
day, then let us embrace salvation; for there is nothing more dangerous then
delay: Nay custom of sinning will so endeare thee unto sin, that it will be
death to part with it; like a soft and gentle poison, the venom whereof being
insensibly pernicious, works death, and yet is never felt working. Put not
off thy devotions then as Foelix did Paul, Go thy ways for this time, at a
more convenient time I will send for thee; or as Cato did the learning of the
Greek tongue, till seventy years old, but as in the corporal, so in the
spiritual disease of our souls, let us use prevention, and so soon as we are
afflicted let us pray.

Thirdly, so long as we are afflicted we must pray. We must resolve with holy
Job, though the Lord should kill me, yet would I wait on his leisure. Admit
thou find not presently help, in thy first or second vexation or trouble, yet
we must learn to strengthen our faith by that experience we have had
heretofore of Gods goodness toward us, by those things we have known
performed: let us learn to hope for those things that are promised. Do I for
my own particular acknowledge to have received much, why, let that make me
certain to receive more. Habenti dabitur, to him that has, more shall be
given. When I doubt what I shall have, let me search what I have had at the
hands of God; Let me make this reckoning, that the benefits he has bestowed,
are bills obligatory, and sufficient sureties, that he will further his present
mercy, and it is still a warrant of his future love, because Whom he loves,
he loves unto the end. Abraham, we know, as he did multiply petition upon
petition, so still he got more advantage at the hands of God. At first Gods
promise was to spare Sodom for fifty righteous men's sake, at last he brought
him from fifty unto ten: Moses must not be weary in lifting up his hands, nor
we in making our Prayers and supplications unto God. Naaman, we know, did wash
seven times in Jordan before he was cleansed; and shall we think then with the
men of Bethulia to wait but five days only, and then give over? No, but as we
must pray so soon as we can, so we must pray as long as we can; The first will
cross the devils nimis cito, and the other his nimis sero; We must not then
give over at the first encounter, but we must solicit God again and again,
and the sixth time. And so so long as we are afflicted we must pray.

Now follows the last circumstance, Wheresoever afflicted we must pray. Peter
must not deny his Master in the High Priests hall, nor the Eunuch forget him in
the Chariot, nor Paul and Silas, though in place of despair, nor Jonas in the
Whales belly, nor Daniel in the Lions den, but every where we must pray. The
places Christ most frequented for Prayer, we read they were these four: In
Templo, in Deserto, in Horto, in Crucem. From whence I will gather these
especial Conclusions how to pray: First, in Templo, publicly in the Church,
in the midst of the congregation: For albeit the true worship of God be to God
in it self acceptable, wheresoever it be, who regards not so much in what
place, as with what affection he is served; yet notwithstanding the majesty and
holiness of the place where God is worshipped, has (in regard of us) great
virtue, force and efficacy, in that it serves as a sensible help to stir up
devotion, and in this regard, no doubt, bettereth our best and holiest actions
thereby. And therefore although I exhort every where to worship God, yet me
thinks there is no exhortation so fit as that of David, O worship the Lord in
the beauty of holiness, Ps. 39. for every place is not so fit for Divine
Service: Ye shall seek the place that the Lord shall choose, and thither shall
ye bring your burnt offerings and sacrifices, and eat before the Lord, Deuteronomy.
12.5, 6. Moses built a Tabernacle for God, and Solomon built a Temple; God must
have his Synagogue, his Temple, where he may be called on; and of that place it
may be said, as Jacob spoke of the place where he slept, God is in this place.
And yet I would not have you think, that I do confine God in a circle; God
dwells not in Temples made with hands; Templum Domini will not serve the turn,
unless Dominus Templi be there: For God as he is not (...), a respecter of
persons; no more he is not (...), a respecter of places; but as it was said,
where Helen is, there is Troy, and where the Emperor, there Rome; so where but
two are gathered together in his name, there he will make the third; for Gods
ears are open in all places; Moses in the midst of the sea, Job on the
dunghill, Jeremy in the mire, the three children in the fiery furnace calling
to God, were heard, as Saint Basil notes; And yet notwithstanding we must
account his house of Prayer his especial place of service; and therefore
Chrysostom and some other of the gravest Fathers did plainly teach, that the
house of Prayer it was a Court beautified with the presence of celestial
powers: there we pray, we sound forth hymns unto God, having the Angels
themselves intermingled as our associates; and that with reference thereunto,
it is that the Apostle does require so much decency to be had in the Church of
God, for the Angels sake, 1 Cor. 11. And therefore they which forsake the
Temple of God, and betake themselves to private conventicles and meetings,
truly they may have zeal, but not according to knowledge, whose experience
has not found what confusion of Order, and breach of that sacred bond of
Peace, is caused by these private meetings; how they have rent the body of the
Church into diverse parts, and divided the people into diverse sects; how they
have taught the Sheep to despise their Pastors, and alienated the Pastors from
the love of their flocks. To declaim against the swarm of evils issuing of
private Conventicles, is an easy labor. I wish rather I could prescribe
effectually a remedy, whereby a sore so dangerous might be cured: For
certainly, if some speedy course be not taken to suppress this growing
mischief, it may be feared, that in some short time, God will be turned out of
Churches into barnes, and private houses, and from thence again, into the
fields and Mountains, and under the hedges. This I am sure, that these
unlawful meetings, have occasioned such altercations, and disputings in points
of Doctrine and Government, that I think there is not greater variety of
faces, then there is of fancies and opinions in points of Religion now amongst
us; nay, I think there were never so many Sects and Schisms amongst the
ancient Philosophhrs, as is to be found in this little Island of ours, amongst
us Christians, every contentious and ignorant person, clothing his fancy with
the Spirit of God, and his imagination with the gift of Revelation; so as when
the truth which is but one, shall by this means appear unto the simple
multitude no less variable, then contrary to it self, the faith of men will
soon die by degrees, and all Religion held but in scorn and contempt. But
there are another sort of men, which refuse to communicate with us, and those
are seduced Recusants; it is their idle boast, that their Religion has built
all our Churches: If it be so, the more is our grief, that our Founders should
be like the carpenters of Noah's Arc, who building and preparing for others,
refuse to save themselves in it when they have done. But let them urge their
claim, and make a religious, conscionable, and peaceable entrance; For what is
wanting in our Churches, that Christians would desire to have? Here have we
Christ and him crucified; would they feed on on Christ? Behold, here in his
Supper, his very body and blood, as he ordained it. If they can be aquilae
(says Saint Chrysostom,) not graculi, Eagels to fly aloft, and not Jayes to
seek their food on the ground. Here have we Baptism by water, and the Word,
the Scriptures most uncorruptly published, the Law, the Gospel, the same Pater
noster they brag off. What should aile them then, but that they should join
with us in one accord, and sing cheerfully that heavenly Hallelujah, Glory to
God on high, peace on earth, good will toward men? And thus you see how we
must pray, in Templo, publicly in the midst of the congregation.

Secondly, we must pray likewise in Deserto, privately. When thou prayest,
says Christ, enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut the door, pray
unto thy Father which is in secret. Saint Augustine, I remember, expounds these
words Allegorically: Enter into thy chamber, (says he) that is, into thine
heart, and inhabit there, and become a fearful witness to thy self, of thine
own secret evils, and shut the door, that is, cleanse thine heart from all
wicked and wandering cogitations, that may distract thy soul in her most
retired meditations. But these words may be taken as well literally; for this
holy and religious duty and service toward God, concerns us one way in that
we are men, and another way as we are joined as members of that visible
mystical body which is the Church. As private men, then it is at our own
choice, both for time, place, and form, as the exigencie of our occasions
require in private; and he that does not set apart some select time of the day
for the performance of this duty, is infinitely wanting to himself, and
careless of his own salvation. But as we do perform this duty as members of
a public body, it must be public, and this is thought by some so much
worthier then the other, as a whole society exceeds the worth of any one
person. For every Prayer, (as considered singly and solely by it self,) it is
like a little stick of juniper, that sends forth a small perfume, but many of
these together like a faggot, that sends forth whole pillars of smoke, and
therefore must needs make a far sweeter smell in the nostrils of God.

Thirdly, thou must pray in Horto, in the Garden; that is, in the midst of all
thy pleasures and delights; and not to be like the wild Ass, that never
brayeth but when it wants fodder; or like the ungrateful Israelites, to
forget God, whilst thou sit by the fleshpots of Egypt; or like Jobs young
Hindes, that growing up, and waxing fat, go forth, and never return unto
their dammes. For many there are, who never think on God, but when they find
themselves in great extremity and fear; like little children, (says
Chrysostom) who when they perceive any imminent danger, run presently under
the wing of the mother: But thus never to seek after God, but when the crib or
the whip shall constrain, is a brutish servility. And certainly, it is
greatly derogatorie from that which is most predominant in man, if we have not
sometimes a voluntary access unto God, all other inferior considerations
whatsoever laid aside; and therefore as in our greatest necessity we must beg
for supply of those things we want, so in our greatest abundance and plenty we
must pray for a continuance of those we have received, and never entertain a
benefit at the hands of God without a thankful acknowledgement of his
liberality and goodness, by whose providence it is enjoyed.

Fourthly, we must pray in Cruce, that is, in the time of affliction and
persecution: Many there are who can be content to pray, and are mindful of God
too, so long as they may stretch themselves upon beds of Ivorie, and have all
their hearts can wish; but if they be constrained to lie down in the waves of
sorrow, if affliction do assault, why then they are ready presently to turn
their backs, starting aside like a broken bow; but a true Christian (says
Saint Angustine) he must be like a stone that is square, that stands howsoever
you turn it: he must not be like Hezekiahs sun to go backward, nor like
Josuahs sun to stand still, but like David's sun, who like a Bridegroom comes
out of his chamber, and like a Giant rejoices to run his course; and though
he walk through the valley of tears, yet no other resolution must possess
his mind then this, O my God thou art just, O my soul thou art happy. The
heathen man could tell us, that afflictions they are tributa vivendi, the
tributes of the living; and therefore we ought to bear them man-like and
resolvedly, and not as those whining soldiers do, qui gementes sequuntur
Imperatorem, but rather embrace them as those Virgins in Eusebius did their
martyrdomes, running thereunto tanquam ad nuptias, as if they were to meet
their Bridegroom: For the godly are purged indeed, but it is to be made the
better: Is gold the worse because it is refined? or wheat because it is fanned?
the light would not be so acceptable, were it not for that usual intercourse
of darkness. Too much honey does turn to gall, and too much joy, even
spiritual, may make us wantons: Thou may a while be tossed up and down in
this troublesome world, like Noah's Ark, amongst the waters, but yet the Lord
will at length remember Noah, and then all these waters shall be abated. The
Romans we know did never fight and triumph both in one place, their battails
were commonly fought in Africa or in Asia, but their place of triumph it was in
Rome: so we must not look to contend and receive a Crown of victory both at
once; our time of suffering is here in this world, our crown of reward that
comes hereafter: for when our souls immortal shall be once separated from our
mortal bodies, and disposed of God, then comes beauty for ashes, oil of joy
for mourning, garments of gladness for this spirit of heaviness; so that the
contemplation of this future happiness, must interpose it self betwixt us and
our afflictions: and certainly the troubles and afflictions of this present
life, are evermore mingled and allayed with many delights and comforts. Here we
are sorrowing, as Saint Paul speaks, but yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor. 6. For
there is a Spirit of comfort within us, always helping our infirmities: If we
be buffeted or beaten for the Gospel of Christ, then this Spirit tells us that
it is an honor to suffer for the name of Jesus: If poverty oppress us, then
the Spirit teaches us to be content with what we have. What if Benjamin have a
double portion? some others, worldly riches more then I? perhaps it is all the
portion these men can hope for to inherit. What if I be made here on earth one
of the less honorable members of Christ's body, the foot, and not the hand or
the eye? it is sufficient for me that I am a fellow heir with the noblest
members of the body, and perhaps God will recompense this present want of mine
hereafter with more abundant honor. If the death of some dear friend, the
loss of thine office or estate, or any such thing be thine affliction, why the
Spirit is able to teach and instruct thee, that all things we enjoy in this
present life, they are but lent us, and therefore we must account of them all
but as things borrowed from some friend or neighbor, who may call for them
back again at their pleasure. Neither must it trouble us what instruments are
used for the fetching home of these earthly commodities, whether fire or water,
thieves or sickness, no more then if thy neighbor who has lent thee a saw or
a hatchet, or any other household thing, should appoint some foolish or
dishonest servant to bring it home again, and to re-mand it.

Let us learn then in all dutiful obedience to submit our selves to Gods good
will and pleasure; For though our troubles be great and many, yet I have an
assured confidence, that God will never suffer his strength and spirit utterly
to forsake us, or give us altogether over to the rage and madness of those
that hate us. For this is Gods constant method of proceeding, he does either
protect and keep the righteous out of all calamities, or else if they fall upon
him, he conducteth him safe through them, and permits them not to be
miseries; He either gives him honors, and promotions, and wealth, or else more
benefit by wanting of them, then if he had them all at his own will and
pleasure; he either fills his house with plenty of all good things, or else
makes him a sallet of green herbs, more sweet then all the sacrifices of the
ungodly. Let us not then with the ungrateful Israelites, murmur against God
for any affliction sent unto us, for God knows whereof thou art made, he sees
how thy nature stands inclined. If thou should always hear the sweet tune
of pleasure and delight, as it were the melody of Nebuchadnezzars instruments,
perhaps thou would presently fall down and worship this Babylonish Idol. The
Prophet David was even at the point of clean forgetting himself, and so
straying from his right mind, but that thy rod (says he) has been my
supporter. And the holy Apostle Saint Paul, if he had not had the corrasive of
sharp and bitter strokes, his heart would have gone near to have swollen with
that great abundance of heavenly revelations; for we are prone by nature to
forget our selves, and therefore we had need of some buffetings of Satan to
make us reflect upon our own weakness. The children of Israel whilst they
lived in prosperity at home, would neither hearken nor obey; but being in
banishment, and under captivity, then whilst they sat by the waters of
Babylon, they could weep to remember thee, O Sion. For there is not any
affliction, how short soever, but does more truly inform a man's understanding
in a day, then all the grave speeches, and subtilest disputations of the
Philosophers in a year; Then we begin to remember that there is a God, and
that we our selves are but men; Then we admire no man, and despise no man,
seeing by the condition of our own frailty, that no man is so secured of his
riches, his honors, his life, or his possessions, but that he may be deprived
of these, or any of these, the very next day, or hour to come: for it is not
the height or eminency of place or means that can exempt us from casualties
or inconveniences. Tall men (we know) are as subject unto fevers, as men of
lower stature; and great Empires and Kingdoms we see by woeful experience are
as easily disturbed, as the State of pety Princes. For those who are advanced
to the highest pitch of honor, I cannot better compare then to the first
letter of a Patent, or limbed book, which we know has great and large
flourishes, yet still it is but a letter: So those kind of men, they may have
large flourishes, high and swelling Titles, great Honors and preferments, yet
still they are but men, mortal men, incident to every disgrace, grief and
infirmity as well as others; and thus we see afflictions are the only
sovereign means to bring us to a right sense and knowledge of our selves; and
therefore whatsoever our condition or estate be, let us learn therewith to be
content; for this world is a kind of stage play, where there must be Actors of
all sorts; one man acts a King, another a Lord, a third a cripple, a fourth a
beggar: Now one of these Actours am I, and therefore whatsoever part it shall
please the great God of heaven and earth to assign me to represent, I must
perform it with cheerfulness and alacrity; If my lot be to act a beggar, or a
cripple, whilst another man acts a Prince or a Lord, why, the will of God be
done, all my care shall be, to act my beggars or my cripples part, with the
best grace and comeliness that I can; knowing that the change of fortune here
on this great Theater, is but like the change of garments on the less; for
when upon the one and upon the other every one wears but his own skin, the
Players are all alike. And thus we see how we must pray, in Cruce, in the time
of affliction and persecution. And thus we find this last circumstance to be
verified, that is, wheresoever afflicted we must pray.

But because we may offend in doing those things which we ought to do, as the
Scribes and Pharisees we know did offend in their Fastings and Prayers, it will
not be amiss, I think, to show what Prayers must be avoided. They must be
neither temerariae, timidae, nor frigidae. First, temerariae, rash or unadvised
prayers, either for matter or for manner. First, for matter; we must not pray
for those things that are unlawful; nay in those things which are good and
lawful in themselves, we must put a difference; for all Gods gifts I may not
unfitly reduce to these two heads, either spiritual, which God proposes to us
as the last end of our endeavors, or else temporal, which he sends unto us
as means and helps, the better to strengthen us in our weak endeavors. Now
then in suing for these, we must pray diversely; for in praying for temporal
things, we must ask upon condition; but in praying for spiritual things, we
must ask without exception. Jacob may pray for food and raiment, Solomon for
wisdom, Job for his children; but yet as it is Jam. 4. If God will: So that
the clause which our Savior in the Prayer of his Agony did express, we in
Petitions of like nature must ever imply, Pater, si possibile est, If it stand
with thy good will and pleasure: For oftentimes when we reflect only upon our
selves, and our own inordinate appetites and desires, we fasten upon God those
unseasonable offices which please him not, and think often times we crave fish,
when indeed it proves a serpent. And therefore as it comes to pass in weighty
and massy bodies, that they have certain trepidations and waverings before
they fix and settle; so in all our Petitions and desires for these temporal
things, because we may so easily err, and be deceived, before we fix and
settle our resolutions to beg this or that at the hands of God, we should have
certain trepidations and waverings, and revolve again and again within our
selves, whether the things we ask for may be allowable in the sight of God. And
thus we see for the matter of our prayers, it must not be rash or unadvised; we
must not pray for those things that are unlawful.

Secondly, for the manner of our Prayers, they must not be rash neither, but
upon due and mature deliberation; it being a thing monstrous even in the course
of nature, to have any thing conceived and borne both in one instant. Consider
but the irksome deformities and manifold confusions, which are occasioned by
these endless and senseless effusions of indigested Prayers, so that the
worthiest part of our Christian duty toward God, is by this means oftentimes
in most miserable manner, both disgraced and abused; for if speaking to an
earthly Prince, we utter nothing rashly, but upon deliberate counsel and
advice; how much more ought we to be careful, standing in Gods presence, in his
Temple, the place where his honor dwells, and speaking in the hearing of
God, men, and Angels? and therefore they cannot be excused, that so far abuse
the valuation of prayer, as if there were no difference betwixt praying and
selling of Doves in the Temple, and instead of polishing the chief corner
stone, dawbe it up with nothing else but filthy untempered mortar; never
framing their Prayers by meditation beforehand, but contriving them all on the
sudden, expecting in the very instant that God should miraculously (as to that
widow of Sarepta) multiply their little oil for the discharge of so great a
duty. Hence it is that all set form of Prayer, is almost brought clean out
of taste, because we make God like unto our selves, and judge him by our own
bellies, imagining that God does loathe to have the same supplications often
reiterated, even as we do loathe to be every day fed without alteration or
change of diet; but if it be so, why then did God himself leave unto his
Priests the very speech wherewith they were to bless the people? Number. 9. Or
why did our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ leave unto us a Prayer of his own,
whereby to frame all other Prayers with efficacy, yet without superfluity of
words? For in very deed, if our best and most considerate desires, have some
things in them to be pardoned, it must needs be held a most unreasonable
presumption to think that rash and unadvised Prayers, can be meritorious or
worthy to be rewarded. And therefore to except against set order and form of
Prayer, does savor of much pride, and but little charity; for how many poor
souls are there in the world, who not being able upon every occasion to frame
Prayers anew for themselves, by this means should be abridged of all helps and
comforts they might receive from others?

Secondly, our prayers they must not be timidae, we must despair nothing at
all of Gods bounty, knowing his ability still the same to perfect his power in
weakness: For shall the hand of little David, (O thou most mighty) if a
ravenous bear break into his fold, and steal away a sheep; or if a roaring
Lion sallie out of his den, and rent away a lamb from him, be able to deliver
them both from the mouth of the bear, and pawe of the Lion, and shall not thou
be much more able to rescue the sheep of thy fold, and the lambs of thy flock?
surely yes, if David delivered his lambs from the pawe of the bear, thou
deliveredst David from the mouth of the lion; if he loved his flock by which he
lived, why then thou must needs love thine for whom thou dyedst; sunt terque
quaterque beati, they are thrice and four times happy, who make God their
shield with David, and the Lord their sure defense with Moses, for he is able
to defend them from the strongest enemy, and to give them victory in the day of
battle.

Lastly, our prayers they must not be frigidae, we must not pray coldly, but
earnestly. If with Hezekiah we pour out our prayers unto God in the
bitterness of our hearts, then we shall be heard: but if we do nothing but
chatter like a swallow, and think to be heard through our vain babbling we much
deceive our selves: For God regards not so much verba dicentis, as corda
orantis; and therefore there were two faults which our Lord and Savior
himself especially reproved in prayer; the first when ostentation caused it to
be open; and the other when superstition made it to be long: The things which
God regards is, how virtuous their minds are, and not how copious their tongues
in prayer; how well they think, and not how long they speak; for the words,
be they never so few, may beget too many, when they benefit neither the speaker
nor the hearer: but he that speaks no more then edifieth, is undeservedly
reprehended; it is not oration that prevails with God; but oration sancti: and
therefore as Pliny makes mention of a certain precious stone, that has many
virtues in it, yet being put into a dead man's skull, loses all: So Prayer,
though of it self very effectual, yet coming from a dead heart, it helps as
little as the gate, the cripple, that was called beautiful. Be merciful unto
me O God, says devout Bernard, for there I commit most sin, where I should
least offend, in thy Temple, at thine Altar, even in thine own presence. When
we pour out our Prayers and Supplications unto thee, we make it only a matter
of form and custom, we speak with our lips, but our hearts are far from
thee; and thus we make a mockery of God, desiring him to attend that which we
our selves are not willing to attend; we turn that to poison, which might be
our food; we lay foolishly those eggs, out of which our woeful overthrow is
afterward hatched. And thus we see what prayers must be avoided; they must be
neither temerariae, timidae, nor frigidae. And thus have I gone through the
particulars of this Text; there remains nothing besides, but that we put this
duty of prayer into practice and execution, to desire of God a blessing upon
these weak endeavors, that they may be to his glory and your own comfort,
which God of his infinite mercy and goodness grant unto us, and that for
Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the Father and blessed Spirit, be all
honor and glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

