THE Cordial Tincture, PREPARED BY CHARLES PETER CHYRURGEON, AT HIS
Bathing-House IN St. Martins-lane near Long Acre:

June 12. 1686. This may be Printed,

LONDON, Printed for the Author. MDCLXXXVI.

THE CORDIAL TINCTURE.
MY Reputation is so secure, that I fear not the Malice of some, nor the
Emulation of others; and I bless God, that has placed my Condition above
Contempt. There is no Man that knows me, but knows, I do not this for need.
This is one way to show the World I am willing to do good, and not to hide so
great a Light under a Bushel. He that has felt the intolerable Pain of the
Stone and Colic, cannot but commiserate the like condition in others. And he
that has miraculously been eased, and that often, by this Noble Medicine, can
do no less than endeavor to free Mankind from such tormenting Maladies.

Who then can say, I detract from my self, by exposing this Noble Remedy, which
in one Hour has eased me of the most violent Colic, and has brought from me a
prodigious quantity of Gravel and small Stones? Laus Deo.

Many which have been helped by the powerful effects of this Cordial Tincture,
have obliged me to prepare greater quantities, that I might be able to furnish
those that daily require it of me. And not a few have offered to certify the
wonderful effects wrought on them by it; but it is below me to accept of so mean
a thing; my own authority being sufficient to give Credit to this, or any other
Medicine.

But some will say, What need I put it in Print, for it is sufficiently known
among Persons of Quality; and for the unthinking Crowd, they are not worth the
saving?

Yes, Gentlemen, the very Poorest shall not want this Remedy; no Age nor Sex
but shall have Comfort by it: Nor will any wise Man be without it, since it is
not only powerful in Curing, but admirable to Prevent most Diseases; it is not
only Profitable but Pleasant.

And now if some malevolent Detractor shall dispraise the Grapes he cannot
reach, or say, Have we not Medicines sufficient in our Dispensatory? Have we
not Learned Physicians, and Faithful Pharmacopeans? What need have we then of
any new Medicine? I only answer.

What Medicine is like this, adapted to every Age and Constitution, and to most
Diseases; and then so pleasant, that the most nice Pallat cannot disgust it,
nor the weakest Stomach reject it? And if I prove it more Natural to the Body
of Man than any other Medicine, who then can dislike it? As for Example.

The Body of this Cordial Tincture is no hotter than Wine, and many of the
Ingredients are so cool, that the whole Composition is of equal Temper.
Whatever ill Humor it meets with, it moves so gently, that it makes no Emotion
of the Spirits, but comforts and refreshes the Body.

It Is so natural to the Body, that there cannot be a more refreshing Cordial;
and so kind to Nature, that it absolutely corrects all Morbifick Matter,
without any trouble or molestation of business. It Is a proper Vade mecum, being
a Friend at all times, and in all places; insomuch that I will never stir from
home without it.

And now, Reader, know, thou have not to do with one that will copy a Weekly
Bill for the Names of Diseases, and appropriate the Cure of every Distemper to
some invalid (or no) Medicine: But know, I abhor all such mean and Quacking
Tricks.

I who have been so long (not the meanest) Son of Aesculapius, and who may
boast of the Happiness to have long conversed with the greatest Masters of
Medicine, will not now act so much below my self, as to insert any thing here,
but what is most exactly Truth.

This CORDIAL TINCTVRE Cures the COLIC in the Stomach, Guts, Kidneys, etc
Take Seven or Eight Spoonfuls as soon as the fit takes you, and if you have
not ease in half an Hour, take Seven or Eight Spoonfuls more, and then depend
upon it. If possible, get some Chicken-broth and drink after it. The Cordial
will drive down the Wind and sharp Humor, and will work by Urine and Stool;
and by giving Ease, will cause Sleep. A day or two after, it will be convenient
to take three or four Spoonfuls at any time, either Morning or Night, which
will carry off whatever remains of ill in your Body.

NEPHRITICK PAINS.
Whereby is caused violent Pain in the Back, Loins, Bladder, etc. with frequent
Vomiting, and all the Symptoms of the Stone, and is scarcely known from the
Stone.

Take five or six Spoonfuls of this Cordial Tincture, and drink Chicken-broth,
half an hour or an hour after, and you will be helped. Twelve hours after, take
three or four Spoonfuls of the Cordial, if you are not cured by the first Dose,
assure thy self the second will not fail thee.

STONE in the Kidneys, Vreters, Bladder, and Neck of the Bladder.
I need not name the Symptoms; every unhappy Mortal, who has felt this
Distemper, knows to their cost how great the Torment. Yet, God be praised, this
Cordial Tincture can clear the Body from Stones, brings away great Quantities
of Gravel, hinders the coagulating of Gravel and slimy Humors, (which generate
Stones) hinders all retention of Humors in the Kidneys, Ureters, Bladder, and
prevents Stoppages in the Neck of the Bladder.

Pray observe, That in this Distemper you are to take but two or three
Spoonfuls of the Tincture at a time, and that you take two or three Spoonfuls
every two hours in a violent Fit, and be sure to drink some Chicken-broth
between every Dose, or for want of the Broth drink warm Ale, which will be the
better, if you add to half a Pint of Ale, one Spoonful of Oil of Sweet-Almonds.
And pray observe, so soon as the Stone has passed, then you need not take above
one Spoonful of the Tincture in a day; and let your Diet be Water Gruel, or
Barley-Gruel, or Chicken-broth. Moreover it would be very proper for those who
can dispense with the Charge, to Bathe with the Tincture in their Bodies, after
the passing of the Stone. But above all, take heed of too violently
precipitating the Stone, which has proved dangerous to many: But fear not this
Medicine, using the foresaid Directions. But in those fits which are more mild,
you need not take the Medicine above twice a day; and in more moderate Cases,
once in a day three or four Spoonfuls. And or those Bodies who are only subject
to Gravel, twice a Week may be sufficient, to clear the Body of that, which
upon the least Cold may prove more troublesome than they imagine.

Admirable for the LVNGS.
Helps Difficulty in Breathing, cleanses from putrid Phlegm, and enables
Expectoration; sweetens the breath, by carrying away all putrid Phlegm from the
Lungs, in a word, is a Balsamic Liquor, that both cleanses, and heals, and
fortifies; which will be proved, by taking two Spoonfuls in a Morning, and then
either going about your Business abroad, or using some gentle Exercise at home.
This Noble Liquor will open your obstructed Vessels, and Evacuate whatever
Humor offends, both by spitting up much soul Matter, and carrying the rest
down by Urine and Stool, without any hindrance of Business. But for those who
have long been afflicted with Diseases of the Lungs, it will be convenient for
them to take this Tincture, not only in the Morn, but at Noon, about an hour
after Dinner, one Spoonful, and at Night one Spoonful more, and so to continue
for the space of one Week, which will give certain Relief. It Is most deplorable
to see how many are lost daily (for want of taking care in time) of Distempers
of this nature: For it is well known to the Ablest Physicians, that few call for
help in this Case, until by continually coughing some Vessel is burst, so that
they are many times nigh bleeding to death. Others underge the Malady till
their Lungs are ulcerated; that if they would but in time take this precious
Tincture might easily overcome the Disease. Englishmen ought to consider, that
they live in a Place where Distempers of the Lungs are scarce to be avoided and
nothing is so proper as this Tincture to preserve For it fortifies by its
Comfortable Quality, by it Aperient Quality it makes way for Nature to throw
off offending Humors, and by its Balsamic Quality it eases the inflamed and
raw Parts, as they well know, who have sound succor from it, it taking away
soon the roughness and soreness of the Aspera Arteria.

Cures the SCVRVEY,
Which is become universal, and not only afflicts by its own (and those too
many) Symptoms, but being complicated with other Distempers, makes them more
difficultly admit of cure. And indeed so very common this Disease is among us,
that (...) might almost spare the labor of repeating any of its Symptoms: For
who does not daily see many languish away, being enervated by the cruelty of
this Distemper? Their Faces become livid, their Voices lost, the whole Body
emaciated, almost every Part of the Body discolored by blue or else brown
Spots, like Tetters, appearing in many Parts, and in some, causing Pains like
the Venereal Disease. What is there then can root up such a Malady, but this
famous Cordial Tincture, which absolutely eradicates all Scorbutic Taints, by
opening Obstructions, evacuating the offending Humor, and corroborating the
Parts lately affected? And this it will do, if you take of it five or six
Spoonfuls at a time, either Morn or Evening, three times a Week.

Cures the DROPSY.
By evacuating the Watery Humor, both by Urine, Stool, and Pores of the Skin.
It not only brings down the great Swellings of the whole Body, but it
strengthens the Liver, and amends the ill quality of it, refreshing all the
Noble Parts, making the Body lively, and more apt for Exercise, carrying off
all Crudities that hinder the perfect Concoction. Pray observe, That this
Distemper is seldom perfectly cured, by reason the Liver being once
debilitated, is continually subject to relapsing. Now this Noble Tincture has
a particular Quality to restore and amend the ill-tempered Liver, by which
means the Cure becomes perfect. And therefore you must in this Case take of the
Medicine every day five or six Spoonfuls in a Morn, and one or two at Night,
for ten days together, drinking at Meals Wormwood-Wine, (the poorer sort
Wormwood-Beer.) You may drink Coffee, Sage, or Tea after it, if you please; and
may observe, That as your Distemper goes off, you may decrease the Dose.

Cures MELANCOLY.
Whereby the Body is dis-spirited, and become unfit for Action, the Flesh
wasted, Sleeps disturbed with horrid Dreams and frightful Imaginations, which
makes even Life it self uneasy. The multitudes of Accidents attending this
Distemper, are too many here to repeat; and what dismal Accidents have happened
by reason of it, are so much known, as may save my labor in this particular.
But let all those who are under this Indisposition, take this Chearing
Tincture, which will give Spirit to the Body and Ease to the Mind, by
refreshing the Spirits both Animal and Vital, removing all black and foul
Choler from the Vessels, opening all Stoppages, and evacuating the offending
Humor, by taking of it twice a Week, four or five Spoonfuls at a time, and
following your usual Occasions, as if you had took nothing.

Helps the SPLEEN,
A most troublesome, and almost universal Disease, which few or none are
without, and yet scarce any will own; a Distemper always complicated, ushering
man other Diseases into the Body, whose various effects would swell to a
Volume, should I recount them The anxiety of the Mind is it self enough to
torture any, but the oppression caused by the pent up Wind is intolerable, the
uneasiness of the Body, takes away the enjoyment of the Mind Nor does Friends,
Relations, a hearty Bottle, or any thing else, give relief, like this wonderful
Cordial Tincture. Three Spoonfuls of this Liquor does immediately dispel the
Wind, chears the Heart refreshing all the Faculties, and carries off the cause
of the Disease. Let all those who would live free from this troublesome
Disease, be often taking of this famous Tincture, which will not only give
relief in the very height of this Disease, but by the frequent use of it, will
eradicate the very worst of it.

This CORDIAL TINCTVRE
Is most admirable for those Men, who either by Discontinuance, or by
Distemper, or by the ill Constitution of their Bodies, become debilitate in the
Conjugal Duty. For one Spoonful or two, taken once in a day, does carry away
all cold indigested Humors, stirs up the Native Heat, and by creating a good
Stomach, and helping Digestion, gives Spirits to the Body, and restores the
Generative Faculty.

DISEASES of WOMEN
Are cured by this Liquor; for it helps all Indigestions and opens
Obstructions, causing a fresh and lively Color in the Cheeks and Lips, and
takes away the stoppages. It cleanses the Womb from all cold and indigested
Humors, which causes Barrenness (and sometimes turns the Womb into Stone, as I
found in a Person of Quality, who I opened in the presence of Doctor D. of St.
Martins-lane, and found her Womb petrified, and that so hard that my Knife
could not penetrate it.) This Lady had been three times married, and always to
strong likely Men; but had Hercules been her Husband, she had been still
Childless; and no doubt this was occasioned by some cold humor falling on the
Womb which by degrees turned it to Stone; and no doubt but the same may, or has
happened to others, but not discovered for want of Dissection. Now I advise all
Women that are not blessed with fruitfulness, that they use this Tincture once
in three (...) four Days, three or four Spoonfuls, which has power to carry
away all crude Humors, to restore the languishing Spirits, to quicken and stir
up the native heat, and to prevent those Accidents which make them reproached
even by their own Sex.

WORMS,
In Persons of all Ages, for it is well known man are afflicted with this
Disease besides Children, it may be observed by the gnawings and tortions of
the Guts, which some ignorant People think only the Gripes, but indeed are
Worms, which if not speedily removed, destroy the miserable Patient Which
danger may be prevented by taking of this Tincture four or five Spoonfuls,
which will carry a way the Worms, together with all Viscous Humors, of which
they are generated; and for little Children, let their Mothers or Nurses give
them (...) this Noble Cordial, forty or fifty drops in some Hartshorn
Posset Drink, once in a day, for three or four days together, and they will
find comfort by it especially if they rub a little of the Cordial upon the
Navel and Belly of the Child, and to Children (...) two or three years old, two
or three Spoonfuls must be given once in two days.

Nor need the Good Fellow lie Puking in a Morn after the enjoyment of a hearty
Bottle; for two or three Spoonfuls of this Liquor taken the Morning after a
Deboish, carries away whatever offends the Stomach. In a word, this is the
Cordial fitting to be took after a Surfeit, either of Wine or Victuals.

The GOVT,
Although this Liquor has so many Noble Qualities, yet I dare not say it will
cure the Gout, for I well know some Gouts are incurable, and most are so
stubborn, that they daily baffle choice Medicines, so that few or none have got
Reputation by attacking this Disease; and most conclude the best way is to
meddle least, this Distemper chiefly requiring Patience and abstinence; yet I
must affirm that I have helped many in raging Fits, by Bleeding some in the
very Part, and others in Parts remote from the Pain; many I have relieved by
Blistering, either in the very Part, or near it; but I cannot boast of
absolutely curing many: Yet for the Benefit of mankind, this I assert, That the
best Remedy in the World (...) prevent the Gout, is this Cordial Tincture; and
(...) doubt not but the using it, will eradicate such Gouts as are not become
inveterate. As for Example: All Men know, the Gout is in some a tough viscous
Humor, in others a thin, acrid, gnawing Humor, and in many so very crude,
that in time it becomes Chalky, and by clogging the Tendons and Nervous Parts,
it destroys Motion, making the Patent a miserable Cripple.

Now those that would be free from this woeful Malady, let them accustom their
Bodies to this Tincture, which will certainly preserve those that ^et are free,
(and as I said before) cure those whose Gouts are not already confirmed. For
this Tincture cleanses the Joints from all slimy Humors, carries away
Choler, Phlegm, and all acrid Juices, as sweetens the Blood to a miracle; and
therefore is proper Remedy for the Gout of any sort, either take Night or
Morning, once in three days, four or (...) Spoonfuls at a time, keeping a low
Diet.

KINGS EVIL
Is helped by the frequent Use of this Tincture. (...) may be observed, That of
all Ages, Sexes, and Constitutions, some are afflicted with this Evil; but
(...) major part of these Patients are Children, (...) Phlegmatic Persons: And
it is to be noted, (...) Children, as the natural heat increases, do by ^^grees
throw off the Malignity of the Evil; and (...) Ulcers which formerly would not
yield to (...) Noble Medicines, yet at last are easily cured. (...) among
others the Case differs: For some (...) Blood are vitiated, all the Humors
corrupted (...) still worse and worse, notwithstanding the fruit (...)
Endeavors of their ignorant Undertakers. (...) he that would cure this
Disease, must amend (...) Blood by such Medicines as are Specificks. (...) this
admirable Tincture does help to digest the f^^^est of the Sores; for it
encourages the Nat^^^^ Heat, animates the Spirits to throw off Infecti^^ and
purges all phlegmatic and glutinous Juice^ most proper to take three or four
Spoonfuls, t^^ a Week, in this Disease: And if the Parts affe^^^^ were fomented
with this Liquor, the Patient (...) find it worth his Labor.

VOMITING and GRIPING of the GVTS Is most certainly Cured by this Tincture.
Five six spoonfuls taken immediately, stops the Vomiting, and soon Purges
downwards the Humor that disturbs the Body. Fear not to take it, because your
Gripes has given you many stools; for this will carry away the sharp Humor,
and comfort the Bowels to a Miracle. If you are not Cured in an hour, take six
or seven spoonfuls more, which will not fail you. I could insert the Names of
many, Cured by this Tincture, when no man expected any thing but Death.

Let all those that drink the Waters, be sure to prepare their Bodies, by
taking three or four times of this Tincture. And those with whom the Waters do
not pass according to their Expectation, let them take four or five Spoonfuls
of the Tincture, which will comfort the Stomach, and help the Expulsive
Faculty. And after a Course of Waters, there is nothing like this Tincture, to
carry off whatever ill the Waters have left.

I could say much more of the Virtues of this Excellent Tincture; but I think I
have obliged the World sufficiently in this.

It Is to be observed, that this Cordial Tincture will retain its Virtue many
Years, if kept close stopped, and will not be altered by any Climate. How good
it is for Seamen in long Voyages, is sufficiently known.

To show the World I am not Covetous, I have allowed this incomparable Tincture
at half a Crown a Bottle, each Bottle containing exactly half a Pint.

This Cordial Tincture, is sold at my House in St. Martins-Lane (being the
BATHING-HOUSE) near Long-Acre. Those that live distant from me may send by the
Penny-Post, or otherwise. I have sealed up each Bottle with the Arms of my
Family.

And for the Convenience of Persons more remote I have caused this famous
Tincture to be sold, By
MRs. Ade, in Auburn. Mr. Edward Duck, Barber near the Mark house in
Marlborough. Mr. John Sherfield, Shopkeeper in Barnet. Mr. John Hamling, in
Hungerford. Mr. Church Simons, Bookseller at the Bridge-Foot Newbury. Mr.
Thomas Biddle, Shop keeper in Sun-Lane, Reding. Mr. Joseph Stevens, Barber in
Henly. Mr. William Bates, Shopkeeper in Maidenhead. Mr. John Old, at the
Kings-Arms in Vxbridge. Mr. Gabriel Sheath, at the Green-Dragon in VVhetst^^
Mr. James Ramridge, Barber-Surgeon in St. Alba Mr. Joseph Faircloth, Grocer in
Hatfield. Mrs. Mary Hebs, Draper in VVoburn. Mr. James Rhett, Barber in
Amthill. Mr. George Maddy, Grocer in Bedford. Mr. John Clark, Iron-Monger in
Stony-stratford. Mrs. Anne Poundall, Barber-Surgeon in Buckingham Mr. Edmund
Potter, Iron-Monger in Bicester. Mr. Peter Francklin, Barber-Surgeon in
VVoodst^^^ Mr. William Cheyney, Shopkeeper in Abington. Mr. James Nichols,
Jun. Barber in Oxford near (...) Conduit. Mr. Francis Penstone, Woolen-Draper
in VVant^ Mr. Thomas Knighton, Grocer, in Langborn.
FINIS.

