A PACK OF PATENTEES.

OPENED. SHVFFLED. CVT. DEALT. AND PLAYED.
LONDON, Printed in the year 1641.

A PACK OF PATENTEES.

Coals. Feign would I write, but that I quake with cold,
The seasons of the year, are bought and sold
By Patentees: yet underground like Moles
They have their cells. The devil trades for Coals,
For Brimston's very scarce (all fiends by kind)
I Will blow my nails, and then I Will write my mind.
I doubt not but in gameing we may jump,
For all the knaves were lately turned up trump;
Which now are in the stock; nor can they pass
For current cheats, except they went to grass,
And change themselves to Rams, live still in fear,
Yet fire was very cheap, but Coals are dear:
Which makes me feed so coldly, who can tell,
What projects best to bring 'em out of hell?
Perhaps they are but sunk into the sands,
Which do resemble Hell, I Will warm my hands
On better terms ere long, but ah must I
Sit thus a cold until the Sands be dry?
No, no, the spring tide comes, which in a day
Will kiss the banks, and drive the sands away.

Soap. Where Is Sapo now? he is gone to look his rent,
He cannot speed, he would have his tenants shent,
And he a Pursevant to fetch 'em in;
His horns are cut, and sorrows do begin
To creep upon him: yet, he gaping stands,
Craving a fee when I should wash my hands:
I paid him weekly, but I Will pay no more,
His ware does stink like him; that quits the score.
It spoils my skin, if linen cannot be
Kept clean and sweet without a Patentee,
Weel go like Turks. But Smigmee he will bring
Content to you, and profit to the King;
If you will take his word: for he is the chief,
I wish at last, he may not prove a thief,
To Prince and Subject: If he does he must
Hold up his head; nor shall he go untrust.
The Laundresse will come in when he is tried,
And frame her plea, The Countries curse beside
Will light upon him: with a common scoff,
For all his Soap he came not cleanly off.

Enter Starch. STay, who goes there in such a serious March?
One that will soon grow stiff; because his Starch
Does hang upon his hands; his outward skin
Is frighted from the flesh, he must come in
And lay the Shipskin down for his abuse;
His dainti'st wares grown stale for want of use.
His white, his russer, and his purest blew
Is powdered up with branne; he is nothing new
But tidings of his cheat; He had revealed
(If he had got but once his Patent sealed)
A way for yellow starch. This golden Itch
He caught of Lucifer, or of the Witch
That first devised it. He (like them) pretends
The good of others, when his private ends
Are to enrich himself, but he may learn
What two ends be when one shall serve his turn.
I paint him but behind; but know ere long
His looks will speak him, when he holds his tongue.
I leave him as I found him, full of care;
Easing his purse being pesterd with his ware.

Exit. Enter Leather. Another Patentee? what is he? for Leather,
Bring in his Roules, and lay 'em up together.
He feeds upon the skin; 'tas been our manner
To blame the Shomaker, and then the Tanner,
Cause Boots and Shoes are dear, and we are feign
To use our selves to hardness, purchase pain,
To tame our legs, our Boots being full of holes,
We wear the hoof to save a pair of soles.
Poor John the Cobbler we did banish hence,
Who would not sole 'em under sixteen pence*
But we repent; for since he changd his stall,
His last, his bunch of bristles, and his ^^^ll
Are all at pawn. But Pellio rides in state,
To gain the Cities and the Country's hate.
Pray let him crisp his locks; for he has blades
And braver Gallants than the knave of Spades
To wait upon him; if he goes too far,
Though late for us, too soon for him a bar
May stop his pase: In earnest this a jest;
Though we went barefoot while he filled his chest;
The Lock is picked by Law, and he shall find
His shame new bottomed when his skins unlinde.

Exit. Enter Vinum. IF I were able to direct my line,
I Would soon find out the Patentee for Wine:
But he was shriev'd before, and did confess
The wrong was none of his; but I Will express
My barren fancy: I am feign to pay
For tithe at least three halfe-pence every day:
Which makes the Spaniard proud, and he does nurse
The French man's folly while he picks my purse.
The drunkards punished most, but he will gain health,
And save his money now. The Commonwealth
Is bound to praise his wit, if he can fill
A chest of Gold or two, he in his Will
Will leave it all to others, who for him
Will dig his grave and leave him at the brim:
Then in their tears, their love shall be expressed,
Except he dies a mile from London, West.
I Will mix my Wine with water, till I find
The parchment canceled, and his haughty mind
Made like flos liberi, then may his dust
In forma pauperis, take a grave on trust.
His Motto's this; Death saucily begun
To rack up forty shillings in a Tun.

Exit. Salt White Salt. Well, now Salarius comes, a seasoned man,
With Justice made in wax, but if he can
He Will broach some life into it; If he were free
He Would prove his arms at large, and you should see
His pedigree displayed; how he would thrive,
His seasons past, and now he stinkes alive.
His colors white, but he is black within
Being frighted from the seal, he will now begin
To bate the price to neighbors; sell his store
For single gains, his patent cost him more.
But hungry time has eat it out of shape,
It gave him color to commit a Rape
Upon the harmless body, his state
Sweld like a Maggot in a pudding fate,
Which now has gathered wings; and in a while
It Will fly abroad. I cannot choose but smile
To see these Locusts creep in every place;
Selling their credit they do buy disgrace.
Their word will be Sallitus (in the street)
Qui sapit omnia could not keep them sweet.

Exit. Enter the Hop. DIspatch the Hopman next, he cannot stay
To take his Bill, except he hops away,
He will betray the Pack, why may not he?
His wit is levelled with his honesty.
His wares have lost their sweetness, sent, and hue,
The old are off his hands, as for the new
The times have spoiled their sale, yet he could sell
His Patent dear enough to those in hell.
But they can brew no drink in stead of bear,
They have each minute every one a tear.
His shame brews grief, when danger finds no stops,
It Is boiled, tuned, purged, and it needs no hops
To give its relish, he would feign be shift
Of what he su'd for, but it is the drift
Of all his Chapmen that do live in Town,
To keep up Hops and let the man go down.
Conceit has filled his purse, but he will find,
Although he went before, he came behind;
It Is easly known to what his gain amounts,
But very hard to cast up his accounts.

Exit. Enter Tobacco. NOw Fumus comes alone; for he has raised
Great profit out of naught; and he would be praised
For his Industry, cause he loves the King,
He Will turn Impostor or be any thing
To show his service to him, he will make
You buy your livelihood, or he will take
Your liberty away; He lately made
A Law by word of Mouth, to take your trade
A prisoner to himself, to keep his pride
Lay down your fine, and pay your rent beside:
Believe him it is his due; but all this while
I hear Saint Kit. Virginia does beguile,
And he deceives us all, he is discontent,
His saucy tenants will not pay him rent.
For that which turns to smoke, nor chop with those
On whom he spits his strength, or does impose
His secrets in by weight, thence tried he is cause
As Contra bonum, and against the Laws,
His projects made with weeds, and empty breath,
By such another he may catch his death.

Exit. Gold Wire. THen came Auriligus to try his strength,
He has a Seal to draw you out at length,
If you will be pliable, resign your purse,
He Will Wyer-draw your wealth, and give a curse
To make up weight, or if you want a grain,
This Knave puts in himself to make up twain.
He does but fine your pride; why may not he
Take custom for your sin (pay but your fee
And he will remit your fault) as well as those
Which men pay for kissing? proving foes
To men with empty purses, yet this slave
Has gained no more than what will buy a grave,
To bury all his worth, what needs he more?
For he was dead in both his ends before.
Poor men must live to labor, they must give
Him tribute for their lives, and he must live
By their undoing. Now he'as lost his prey,
It Is keeper slips aside, he runs away.
Pray charge him with disgrace, then quit the stage,
His Golden days wore out an Iron age.

Exit. War Horns. BEware the Horner comes, he can transport
The Calves defense, the O^e, or any sort
Which are within his List, this Beast is free,
He Will suffer none to trade in horns but he.
Speak, will you have them rough? then they are put
In universal terms; If they are cut
He Will change them into Combs, with privy theft
He Will barrel shame, he'has a Coxcombe left,
Which he will use himself, his ware does stink,
The Devils horns are short, and he does think
To trade with him by wholesale, then he may
Be carried hence, he need not run away.
He must have room, though he be built for store,
An Ass behind, is like an Ox before.
His fortunes hard, nor can he hold his tongue,
He keeps his Patent, and his Horns too long,
Which render him a Beast, so let him pass,
He shall be kept at House, not put to grass,
Till he has shed his Coat, then like a Dear,
He Will cast his Horns, but cannot every year
Increase again, new Cornigenus must
Restore men right, which he did keep on trust.

Exit. Butter. NOw here is a slippery Merchant, hold him fast,
His Patent sealed with Butter, at a cast
He Will venture all his worth, he would be rich,
And make ten thousand pay for it; but his itch
Is somewhat cool, which formerly did burn,
A Rope with Butter's like to serve his turn:
His grease begins to melt, a running sore
Is broke behind, because he robbed the poor.
The richer sort might let his project pass,
He Will bring 'em back a gilded looking glass,
To trim their folly by: but ah! poor I
Am never well but when my sauce-pans dry.
To feed the Flemings he would starve his friend,
Time has bewraid his plot, and crossed his end.
He must be basted ere I have my wish,
I Will buy a Ferkin now, whereas a dish
Was used to serve me, let this scraping gull
Be salted up himself, his Tubs are full
O'th Anagram of Dirt, so foul his case
Does now appear, but if a Farmers place
Were sealed unto him, he might trade again,
In stead of Ferkins he would have Hogsheads then.

Exit. Rags. THe Rag-man's come at last, who proves his plot
To be but Kennell deep, and yet this sot
Is deeper in the shame than he which groans
His length from earth, or nastie marrow-bones.
Some sweep their houses, others rake the street,
To make his pack, and if he does but meet
One that has robbed the Gutters, he is the taker,
For he was truly borne a dung-hill-raker.
His servants wear his cloth, who ere you find
With little Dung-rakes, and with bags behind,
Can blaze his Arms at large, he makes his brags
That he is grown whole, and they do shift their tags
Six times a week, but once a month he bets,
They Would have the linen which the Hangman gets,
But that his Patent was not wisely drawn,
To hold in Law; his brames were laid to pawn
For Country Tom's old linen (to begin)
Except the shroud which he was buried in.
Pray view this tottered patch, as he appears,
His Coat is shed, and he may shake his ears.

Exit. The rest shuffled up together. We Will shuffle up the pack, those that
before
Did play at post and part must play no more;
For they are of a suit. A Courtiers face
Would face out all, but that he wants an Ace.
The former lost their stakes; were they no^ gone,
(Their games being played) they might be lookers on.
But Marrow-bones must shuffle, he begins,
Who (...) forgot the stock; yet challenged Pins
To prick them in the middle: not agreed,
In shuffling one another, they proceed
To take the Dice, and end it with a throw;
Pins was above, and Marrow-bones below:
Had broke Tobacco-Pipes, had he been dried,
New-Corporation betting on his side,
Did make Gold waights his partner, and Bone-lace
Would play with Pins, who quickly gave him place.
Their faults were shuffled in, and every man
Will deal 'em to his partner if he can.
They dodg in the beginning, all are vexed,
The Cards are shuffled now, the Cuttings next.
The Cutting. THey lift for Dealing first, Gold waights would fight,
(who cut a knave) cause Pins was least in sight,
And got the Dealing, then they raised their spleen,
Waights had a cut that all his faults were seen.
The spirits being laid, they change their place,
And Marrow-bones must deal, he cut an Ace.
They give each other names: who had the deal
They called the Goose, and Lace they styld the Veale,
Gold waights the bragging Turkey, they did pass
On Pins that lost the deal, the Prick-ear'd Ass.
The Gamsters altered; they be few, were men
Now changed to beasts and foul, they cut again.
Veale bleats an oath, Goose creaked out a curse,
Who did but pick, they scorned to cut a purse.
Then Prickeare brayed, the Turkey stretched his neck,
But he that was to deal, did give a Beck
On ears to cut the Cards, who cut so low,
He turned the pack, that stander by might know
The turning Card that Veale with dealing rubs,
First came the Ace, and then the knave of Clubs.
The Dealing. Well now he deals about, and yet their game
With free allowance had not got a name.
The Cards prove bad, they are mad at what they do,
They Are every one a scurvie trick or two:
And all are like to loose: one he will have
Another deal, and play at Noddy-knave.
To which they did agree; but yet at last
New-cut must be their lift, and then they cast
The knaves for partners, which are now to seek,
They had not wit enough to play at Gleek.
Their Patents lay at stake, and they that win
Must cast the shame away they are settled in.
To play a night away, for fear the Sun
Should note their way, they having but begun;
Their brains were thick, they played at six and seven,
New-cut but dealt, they broke up at eleven.
Now three-Card noddy having changed his place,
Must be the Game, but they mistook the case,
In putting out fifteens, but now ye may
Work up your wits in jest and see 'em play.
The Playing. THe Pursevant sits by, he will be their Scribe,
And reckon just, unless he takes a bribe.
When three were flush of four, eldest hand
Had got a great pair Royal; he did stand
Upon his privilege, and cast a plot
To win the Game; but he was out a spot.
But having spied a Courtier, up he starts,
The while his partner turned the knave of Hearts
For Noddy knave, who took another in,
Which made a pair, and yet he could not win.
The third had double Sequents, and a way
To have a double game, but's foolish play
Has dashed his hopes, the last had six fifteens,
With changing Cards, who thought that Kings and Queens
Would bear him out in being at a stand,
They Would gladly part their stakes at even hand,
The Officer writes -- nor can he see,
A bribe come to him, nor a single see.
The Gamsters break, and part, they sat enough;
For justice challenged them to play at Rough.
She has her eyes, though Painters paint her blind,
She made them run, and leave their stakes behind.
FINIS.

