THE PETITION OF THE Committee of Kent CONCERNING TITHES, PRESENTED To the
Honorable House of Commons. WITH The Speakers Return thereto.

Printed in the Year 1646.

To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament
assembled, The humble Petition of the Committee for the County of Kent,
Shows,
THat Your Peritioners do with all humility and thankfulness bless God for
the present fruits of your unwearied labors, in the great work of
Reformation: particularly, in the removeall of many and great obstacles, and
hindrances thereof: And for the present pledges of your pious intentions, and
care for the sending abroad of an able, pious, and painful Ministry, upon the
well settlement whereof, udner God, does rest the stability and firmness of
that great and weighty work.

The serious thoughts hereof give occasion to your Petitioners to bewail the
sad condition of this County, in respect of the uncertain, floting and
miserable condition of our Ministry, occasioned by the very nature, manner,
and adjuncts of their subsistence by way of Tithes, which the experience of
thus many ages does plainly evince to be miserably attended with these ensuing
mischiefs, viz.

That for the nature of this subsistence, It is a very mystery and and secret,
not easily without much art, and industry attained unto: Namely for the
Minister to know his dues, demandable, or the Parishioners their duties
payable; whence arises, that multitude of scandalous and vexatious suites, and
brabbles between Minister and People, which does fill almost all the Courts at
Westminster, and of late the Justice-sittings in the Country likewise with
causes of this kind.

For the manner of it, respecting either the collecting or paying thereof, it
is a mutual scourge in the hand of Minister and People each to other; If
either or both (as too often happens) be covetous or cross.

For its adjuncts, the mischiefs of them will appear innumerable, if the
pregnancy of only one be but considered, namely the unreasonable disproportion
of Livings, or values of Churches to which they are belonging, whence arise
these inseparable evils;

1. That most unworthy persons, who by favor or friendship, or any sinister
ways can get into the greatest Livings, being once invested with a legal
right of freehold for their lives, securely fleece the flock, and feed
themselves, without fear or care, more then to keep themselves without the
compass of a sequestration, whilst others both painful and conscionable
serve and sterve.

2. That for obtaining of those Livings, we see such sordid compliances with
such persons as have the fattest benefices (as they count and call them) in
their dispose, such artifices in contriving, making and coloring over
Symoniacall and sinful bargains, compacts and matches, such chopping of
Churches, and restless change of places, till they get into the easiest and
warmest, and other such like practices, not to be named, nor yet to be
prevented, or removed, otherwise then by plucking up the very root which
naturally brancheth out it self into these foresaid mischiefs, so obstructive
and destructive to all Reformation.

All which considered, your Petitioners out of their unfeigned desires of the
happy progress of this great work of Reformation, whereof without a godly and
well settled Ministry we can have no hopes, do humbly submit to the
consideration of this honorable House, the Propositions hereunto annexed.

Humbly praying, that thereby or by such other ways and means as this
honorable House in their wisdom shall think fit, a timely provision may be
made for the peaceable and comfortable support of a pious and painful
Ministry in lieu of Tithes within this County, otherwise in danger thereby to
loose what has been already wrought therein toward a Reformation, and
speedily to degenerate into the murmuring temper of that mixed multitude among
us, so lately driven out of Egypt against their wills; and whether their return
will not be prevented without a timely provision for a settled, unentangled
godly Ministry, whose subsistence and support to be such as may with all due
encouragement leave them free to serve the Lord without distraction, and to
give themselves to the Word of God, and Prayer; And to be only employed to
make ready a people prepared for the Lord, which is the only way of
facilitating to your hands what God has and shall put into your hearts, for
his glory and his Churches, and this poor Kingdoms good.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
Propositions humbly presented unto the honorable House of Commons, for
settling a maintenance to the Ministry in the County of Kent in lieu of Tithes,
viz.
1. THat there be a Commission of inquiry of the yearly value of every Living,
propriate or impropriate, within the County, what the Tithes and Profits
thereof are reasonably worth, communibus annis, arising from the Parish,
excepting the Glebe Lands.

2. That in the same inquiry, a distinct return be made of the yearly value of
the Glebe Lands in every Parish, and to whom they do belong, whether
impropaiate or otherwise.

3. That according to the said estimate of the yearly value of the Tithes and
Profits so returned by such inquiry, the like yearly sum in lieu thereof be
annual^^ taxed and leavyed by way of Sesse upon the particular Farms and Lands
within each Parish; wherein no Land now exempt from payment of Tithes, or
chargeable with any certain sum of money in lieu thereof by particular
Customs, to be charged otherwise then according to the said Customs.

4. That the said yearly fumme so taxed and leavy^^ be paid halfe-yeerly into
one Common Treasury within the County, to be committed into the hands of
special Trustees to be thereunto appointed.

5. That out of the said Common Treasury be issued forth by halfe-yearly
payments, to each Impropriator such annual sum, as upon the said inquiry and
estimate, his Impropriation shall be found to amount unto; first deducting the
halfe-yeerly value of his Glebe Lands according to the said estimate thereof
returned upon the said inquiry; and also deducting the half-yeerly value of
such annual pensions and allowances, as are paid by the said Impropriator to
the Incumbent Minister in the said Impropriate Parish.

6. That out of the residue of the said common Stock be likewise issued forth a
halfe-yeerly allowance, so far as the same will extend, to each Incumbent
Minister within the County by the said Trustees, due regard being therein had
to the deserts of the person, and his Family-charge.

7. That what additionall provisions shall be thought fit by the House to be
made for the supply of incompetent Livings within the County, whether out of
the Revenues of Deans and Chapters, or by buying in of Impropriations, or
otherwise, be likewise brought into the Common Stock and Treasury, and from
thence issue forth to Incumbent Ministers, like respect being had to the
difference of their persons and their conditions, as in the last p^^^^ent
clause.

8. That (...) said Common Stock shall extend, a due provision may be thence
made in case of death, of the Incumbent Mi^isters for the supply and
maintenance of wife and children.

The Return of the SPEAKER to the Committee of Kent,
WHo, by order of the House of Commons, did give the Petitioners (the Committee
of Kent) thanks for their former services, and took notice of their good
affections to the public; and did acquaint them, That the great businesses of
the Kingdom are now instant and pressing upon them, and that they will take
the Petition into consideration in due time and that in the mean time they take
car^ (...) Tithes may be paid according to L^.

FINIS.

