A PETITION Of the Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders of the County of FLINT,
Presented to His Majesty at YORK, AUGUST the fourth, 1642.

With His Majesty's most gracious answer thereunto.

ALSO His Majesty's Speech to the Gentlemen of York, on Thursday the fourth of
AUGUST.

LONDON, Printed A. Norton. 1642.

August 12.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of the Gentry,
Ministers, and Freeholders, of the County of Flint.
Presented to His Majesty at York, the fourth of August, 1642.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners do with all due submission thankfulness, and joy of
Heart acknowledge the happiness they have enjoyed of a long peace under your
Gracious Government, and your goodness in yielding to a ready Redress of such
grievances as have grown in that time of ease and security, and in enacting
such Laws in this Parliament as your Petitioners hope will prevent the like
for the future.

They are further tenderly apprehensive of Your Majesty's transcendent
goodness, in Your free condescending to give your People so full and clear an
account of your Actions and intentions, and rest thoroughly persuaded of the
sincerity, and constancy of Your Majesty's Resolution to Maintain the true
Protestant Religion in it is Primitive purity, the Laws of the Land in their
genuine sense, The just Privileges, Freedom, and frequency of Parliaments,
with the property and liberty of the Subject thereupon depending, and Your
Majesty's willingness to join with Your great Council, in granting or
enacting any other good Laws, that may be for the public Weal of Your people;
Who, as they have ever flourished and been most happy, and secure in all Acts
and Ordinances, passed by the three Estates; And most peaceably governed, under
the known Laws of the Land.

So it is the humble prayer of us, Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects
(prostrating at your Majesty's feet, our persons, and estates) For protection,
(according to your Oath) From those dangers we should be driven into, by being
bound by any Rule, Order, or Ordinance; Whereunto Your Majesty, together with
both Houses of Parliament shall not assent.

We also further Supplicate Your Majesty so to maintain us in that ancient and
necessary privilege, as not to suffer us to be governed, but by the known and
established Laws of the Land.

And Your Petitioners as in duty, and by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy
they conceive themselves bound, shall not only pray for the preservation of
Your Majesty's Sacred Person, Honor, Estate, and Lawful Prerogative, But
shall be always ready to hazard their Lives and Fortunes, for the mayntenance
and defense of the same, against all powers and persons whatsoever.

Subscribed by the Hands, of the Knights, Gentry, Justices of the peace,
Ministers and Freeholders, of the County of Flint.

His Majesty's Answer to the Petition of the County of Flint.
HIs Majesty has commanded me to return this Answer to this Petition, That
His Majesty is much pleased with the duty and affection expressed by the
petitioners, and with so evident a testimony, that the grievances he has
redressed, the Laws he has passed, and the Declarations he has made, have
produced the effects for which they were intended, The satisfaction, gratitude,
and confidence of his good Subjects, which he doubts not, but the whole course
of his Government Will daily increase, That His Majesty is no less pleased to
see them, so sensible of what has and ever will best preserve their happiness
and security, and that therefore they desire only to be governed by, that rule,
which He is resolved only to govern by the known and established Laws of the
Land, assuring them that according to his Oath, he will always protect them
from the invasion of any other assumed Arbitrary power whatsoever, as long as
he shall be able to protect himself, being resolved of nothing more, then to
stand and fall together with the Law. And that he will not expect they should
be any longer ready to express their duties to him by the hazard of them
selves and fortunes for the preservation of his Person, Honor, Estate, and
lawful Prerogative, against all powers and persons whatsoever, then his
Majesty shall ever be mutually ready to discharge his duty toward them by the
hazard of himself and fortune for the preservation and defense of the Religion
and Laws established, of the just privileges and Freedom of parliament, and
of the liberty and property of his Subjects, against whomsoever they shall
endeavor either to destroy or oppose them.

Falkland.
At the Court at York, Aug. the fourth 1642.
His Majesty's speech, to the Gentlemen of Yorkshire, on Thursday the fourth of
August.
Gentlemen,
WHen I directed that Summons should be sent out for your meeting here this day
my principal end was, That I might give you thanks for the great forwardness
and expressions you have made of your affections to me since I came into this
Country, and to assure you* That as the whole Kingdom has great reason to
value you exceedingly for it, so I shall be very unsatified with my self; till
I have found some way to fix a mark of favor, and estimation upon this County,
and this people, which may tell Posterity how good Subjects you have been, and
how much Gentlemen; and I am confident the memory of it will grow up with my
Sons too, in a just acknowledgement. This was the most I intended to say to you
but there is an unquiet Spirit abroad, which every day throws in new accidents
to disturb, and confound the public Peace. How I was driven from London, when
I chose this place for my safety, is so notorious, that all men know it, who
know any thing; with what strange violence, and indignities I have bin pursued,
since I came hither, needs no other Evidence, then Sir John Hothams behavior
at Hull, who now arrived at that insolence, That he will not suffer his treason
to be longer confined within those Walls, but makes fallyes out of the Town,
upon his fellow Subjects, drowns their Land, burns and plunders their houses,
murders, and with unheard of cruelty torments their persons; And this with so
much delight, That he would not have the patience to wait, what Answer should
be sent to my just demands, though in that respect I engaged my self to forbear
to use any force, and kept my word; but chose the night before that came, (as
if he well knew what Answer I was to receive) to act those outrages.

You see the sad effects of Fears and Jealousies, the miseries they have
produced; No man can tell you the least good they have brought forth or the
least evil they have prevented: What inconvenience and burden my presence
has bin here, what disturbance it has brought upon the public, or grievance
upon any private person, your selves are the best Judges; And what ever
scandal some men have pleased to cast upon the Cavaliers (which they intend
should reach all my Retinew, and by degrees shall involve all Gentlemen) I am
confident, there has not bin any eminent disorder or damage befaln any man, by
any person of my Train, or under my protection,

I am sure my directions have been very strict in that point, and if they had
not been observed, think I should have heard of it by nearer complaints, then
from London; I pray God the same care may be taken there: I am sure it has not
been. And to give you the fullest testimony of my affection to you, and to the
peace of this County, and to show you that no provocation shall provoke me to
make this place to be the seat of the war, I have for your sakes, passed over
the Considerations of Honor; and notwithstanding the reproaches every day laid
on me, laid ho siege to that place, that they may not have the least pretense
of doing you mischief, but resolve, by Gods help to recover Hull some other
way, for that I will ever sit down under so bold and unexcusable a Treason no
honest man can imagine. But it seems other men are not of my mind, but resolve
to make a War at your own doors, whatsoever you do, or I suffer. To what
pu^pose else is their new General armed with an authority to kill and destroy
all my good subjects; their levies of Horse and Foot, some (...) and the
sending so many new soldiers into Hull, when there is no approach made toward
it, but to sally out, and to commit Rapine, and by degrees to pour out an Army
upon you: In this I must ask your advice, what you would do for your selves,
what you would have me do for you, you see how I am stripped of my Navy at Sea,
which is employed against me, of my Forts and Towns at Land, which are filled
with armed men to destroy me; my money and provisions of my house taken from
me, and all my subjects forbid and threatened if they come near me, that may by
famine or solitariness be compelled to yield to the most dishonorable
Propositions, and to put my self and Children into the hands of a few
Malignant persons, who have entered into a Combination to destroy us: And all
this done under pretense of a trust reposed by the people. How far you are
from committing any such trust, most of the persons trusted by you, and your
own expressions of duty to me, has manifested to all the World; and how far
the whole Kingdom is from avowing such a trust, has already, in a great
measure, and I doubt not will more every day appear, by the professions of
every County: for I am wholly cast upon the affections of my people, and have
no hope but in the blessing and assistance of God, the justness of my cause
and the love of my Subjects, to recover what is taken from me and them, for I
may justly say they are equal losers with me.

Gentlemen, I desire you to consider what course is to be taken for your own
security from the excursions from Hull, and the violence which threattens you
from thence: I will assist you any way you propose. Next, I desire you, out of
the public Provision, or your private Store to furnish me with such a number
of Arms (Muskets and Corslets) as you may conveniently spare, which I do
promise to see fully repaid to you: These Arms I desire may be speedily
delivered to the custody of my Lord Major of York, for my use, principally
from those parts, which by reason of their distance from Hull are least subject
to the fear of violence from thence.

And whosoever shall so furnish me shall be excused from their attendance and
service at Musters, til their Arms shall be restored; which may well be sooner
then I can promise, or you expect. I desire nothing of you but what is
necessary to be done for the preservation of Gods true Religion, the Laws of
the Land, the Liberty of the Subject, and the very being of this Kingdom of
England: for it is too evident al these are at stake. For the completing my Sons
Regiment for the guard of my Person under the command of my Lord Cumberland, I
refer it wholly to your selves, who have expressed such forwardnes in it.

FINIS.

