A TRVE RELATION OF THE PASSAGES OF Gods Providence in a VOYAGE for IRELAND.

WITH The additionall Forces sent for reducing of that KINGDOM by his MAIESIE,
and PALIAMENT.

Wherein every Day work is set down faithfully by H. P. an Eyewitness
(...), under the Command of ALEXANDER L. FORBES, Lieutenant General under the
L. BROOK for that Service; from the 29. of June to the 29. of September. 1642.

LIKEWISE, Several Observations concerning that KINGDOM, and the Wars
there: As also, the Interception of the Enemies LETTERS.

It is ordered by the Committee of the Commmons House of Parliament concerning
Printing this 20. day of October. 1642. that this Book entitled, A true
Relation of the Passages of Gods providence in a Voyage for IRELAND, be
forthwith printed and published.

John White.

LONDON, Printed by LVKE NORTON, for HENRY OVERTON. in the Year. MDCXLII.

A TRVE RELATION OF THE PASSAGES OF Gods Providence in a VOYAGE for IRELAND,
With the additionall forces sent for the reducing of that Kingdom by his
Majesty, and Parliament.
HIs Majesty and the State making it appear by an act of Parliament, that in
the highest strength of their desires, they labored the quenching that fllame
broke out upon the 23. of October 1641. in that miserable Kingdom, and
manifesting the great concernments of England wrapped up therein. The good
subjects made ready to concur in the advancement of so pious a purpose, and
(proportions of Rebels lands propounded) diverse Adventurers appeared some for
land service only, some for the sea, that the Rebels (for so they are
proclaimed by his Majesty, and are so in truth) might not have fuel brought
from foreign parts to maintain the fire, and as there was an undertaking for
five thousand foot and five hundred horse, forthwith to be added to the other
thousand sent over by the State, so there were appointed for addition to the
ships, (sent to guard the coast) fifteen sail of ships small and great, with a
thousand land men under the command of Alexander Lord Forbes, Lieutenant
General under the Lord Brook, and by the care of a faithful Committee of the
City, they were made ready in the beginning of June, in preparation whereof,
great was the care and pains of the said Committee, who in fourteen days
time compast this work for the maine and hardest parts of it, such expedition
not usual in such expeditions: sed vincit amor patriae.

The Names of the Committee.
Sir Nicholas Crisp. Knight. Maurice Thompson. Thomas Chamberlain. Gregory
Clement. Richard Waring. John Wood. Thomas Rainsborough. Richard Hill. Richard
Shute. George Thompson. William Pennoyer. Thomas Vincent. William Thompson.
William Willoughby. Samuel Moyer.
The Names of the chief Commanders by Land:
Alexander Lord Forbes, Lieutenant General. John Humphrey, Sergeant Major.
Major Beton Quarter master. Land Captains. Captain Crispe. Weldon. Price.
Hull. Long. Anderson. Kempson.

Sea-Commanders.
Captain Benjamin Peter's of the Speedwell, Admiral. Captain Thomas
Rainsborough Zant-man, Vice Admiral. Captain Thompson of the Good-hope,
Rere-Admirall. Zachery. Richardson. Simondson. Clarke. Thompson. Andrews.
Dorrington. Chickener. Richardson. Daniel. Seaman. Eucrist.
The 29. of June the wind came fair, June 29.
and after the public meeting (it being a day of fasting and prayer, we set
sail, and had the wind at East, the weather very fair, and our whole fleet
together off of Dover.

The next day the wind at east blew very hard, 30.
and foul weather, we having ten barges, for landing men, and rowing into
rivers, lost 2. of the in that storm.

The wind as before, Captain Rainsborough and two small vessels went for the
Isle of Wight, July 1.
to take in Captain Longs men, and Captain Andrews for Falmouth, for
Captain Hull and his, Captain Symondson for Weymouth, for Major Humfrey and
his, so then we were left ten in number, and that evening having chased some
Englishmen bound for France, we came up with the Lizard, the wind skanting,
we had a Counsel aboard the Admiral what to do, and left all for that night
to Gods providence, in disposing the wind the next day whither to go into
Falmouth, or keep our course.

The next day (Captain Richardsons barge being almost stav'd) we turned into
Mounts-bay to repair her, 2.
having no wind to lay it along, the day was very fair, at ten of the clock
in the night we set sail again.

Being hardly able some of us to weather the rock at the bay the next day, but
forced to turn out as we could thorough an earnest desire of all hands, 3.
to gain the Irish coast, we then met one of the Kings ships coming with many
poor people, come from Limrike-castle newly taken, which had been commanded by
Captain Courtney, and not to say what the several apprehensions of men were,
concerning the causes and consequences of that loss, it most certain, if that
supply of Ammunition sent them by the Parliament had bin delivered, they might
have preserved it to his Majesty's use long, which now will make Limricke the
strongest hold of these Monsters, this we found too evident that the Parliament
had not their noble intentions answered by them, in persons, or things as might
be made appear in too many parti^ulars.

The next day fair weather, Sylley bearing South ten leagues off, some of our
fleet, 4.
fell among the seven stones, and were in much danger but came off well.

The fifth day we had the wind at west, and got about fourteen or fifteen
leagues from the Lands-end, 5.
the weather fair, we chased two Bristoll-men, laden with salt, and changed a
man or two with them, who told us of some French bound for Ireland.

The next day the wind W. S. W. Captain Weldon was sent to Cork, with a
letter to my Lord President, 6.
which was as follows,

Much honored Sir,
Since his Majesty and both Houses of Parliament have thought fit for reducing
the Kingdom of Ireland to their due obedience, to grant Commission to my Lord
Brook, and certain well affected Merchants, and Citizens of London, for
sending some additionall forces by sea, and land to relieve our distracted
brethren that are besieged, and to hinder any foreign supplies from the
Rebels, over which additionall forces (which may consist of a thousand land
Soldiers at present) and five or six hundred Seamen. The Lord Brook, and
those that have the aforesaid Commission, have nominated and appointed me to be
Lieutenant General, and now seeing (through Gods mercy) we are in readiness
to come to assist you, waiting ouely the opportunity of a fair wind, I have
thought good to send this bearer to crave your advice, what places you would
have us, either to relieve, or assault: First, where we can do good, and those
who are to be instrusted it with the charge of the best service. If I had not
been afraid to be i^bayed, I would have gladly come, and salute you my self,
but I hope we shall have the occasion to meet ere long, in the mean time I
entreat you send me your free advice with this bearer, whom you know and may
trust, to whose sufficiency remitting all further, I rest, as I desire to
remain,

From Mount-hay Road, July 2. 1642. Your affectionate friend to serve you. For
Sir William Saintleger Lord President of Munster. FORBES.


The next day we had the wind west, 7.
and west and by North, much wind we lost part of our fleet, viz. Captain
Richardson, and Captain Thompson the younger.

We had the wind west very fresh, 8.
and after tempestuous, we lost sight of Captain Clark, who had brought us
news of the land he had made, which was Dongarvan.

The wind South west, 9.
and west South west, thick weather, we saw the high land, and at night we
were only five left of our fleet, Captain Zachary left us the day before, and
so did Mr. Daniel.

Being Sabbath we kept as we might, 10.
thick weather and stormy, the wind West South West, one of our small vessels
made land again.

This day in the morning we discovered the head of Kinsale, though our
Rendevous were long in land on Baltamore-hay, 11.
yet not able to fetch either, we went in that morning to Kinsale, where we
found the Swallow and the Bonaventure, of the Kings Captain Kettleby commanding
in the Admiral, and Sir Henry Stradling in the Vice Admiral, the day grew
foggy, and rainy, and such weather is very frequent in that cuntry and coast,
we went on free to the castle, and spoke with the commanders there, three
companies we also found appointed in that Town by the Parliament for a
garrison, there every where we had spectacle sad enough, the greater part of
the Town Irish, and under much just suspicion, others fled thither living in
miserable holes and huts, there we found Captain Zachary, Richardson, and
young Thompson of our fleet, there we spoke with some of Bandon being 8. miles
from Kinsale, and with some of Cork also, by which we intimated our arrival:
thither came Sir Edward Denny by whom we heard of his defeat at Trelee, where
in landing he lost forty or fifty men, and was forced to retreat, and craved
our aid.

My Lord Kynalmachy one of my Lord of Corks sons Governor of Bandon, 12.
came to see my Lord Forbes, and promised to come again next morning to speak
further for the attempting something about Bandon, since God by his providence
had called us to these parts, who by his Letters desired help of us.

(13.) This day my Lord Kinalmachy came early and then was a Sermon preached by
the Preacher of our Fleet, 13.
after which Consultation was taken to march with our men to Raph-barry where
one Mr: Freake with many English were beseiged and in great danger, wanting
Food and Ammunition etc. and we being possessed with our duty though six of our
Vessels were not yet arrived, not to be wanting in any thing wherein such
Forces as we had might be useful, and not knowing Raph-barry to be further
than five miles beyond Bandon we were willing to strech our men's legs, though
we suppose we marched near 25. miles out right of English miles.

(14.) We marched to Bandon with 8. 14.
Colors and about 600. men whereof 100. Seamen commanded by the Captain of
the Admiral, this whole number went to the work most cheerfully, two small
brass Pieces, and our Ammunition with some Victuals were brought up by our
Barges near Bandon, and so by Cart brought to the Town, where that night we
were received with much joy, and great acclamations, houses and hearts open
unto us, and the rather because with our Fleet the Parliament had sent that
Town a good portion of Ammunition and provision for the Town; there were 7000
Souls and many ministers, and very many poor, they had four Companies of
Foot and one Troop of Horse whereby they had not only held their own but had
taken 4. or 5. Castles from the Enemy; The Town is walled about and a fresh
river runs thorough it, but commanded by the hills about it, three gates it has
beyond, what greater Cities have for statelines and strength, the water
abounding with Salmon and other fish is no small refreshing to the Inhabitants,
by which and Mr. Pennoyers care we found the Town in a cheerful way.

This morning we intended early to march, 15.
but were hindered partly with our own provision not coming early enough,
partly through want of horse and accommodations to draw our Cannon and Baggage,
so that we marched that day but two miles from the Town, and when it was late
in the day, we were in some measure fitted for our march but we drew to
Council (the next day being Sabbath) what we should do, and it being
considered what a burden we might be to the Town, so full of poor, and some
of our Officers urging the dishonor of retreating, being engaged, that it was
thought meet to proceed, especially since we were entreated by my Lord
Kinalmaky and Bandon, thither to come and do something for the enlargement of
them, and their comfortable saving their harvest, and Macchanty Reugh
threatening the beleaguering of them that week, our marching into the Country
might be very useful; that night we had some horse from Bandon and two
Foot-Companies, and in the safest order we could we continued that night upoin
a boggy hill.

The next morning we set forward in a great fogg, and resolved to leave an old
English Town called Clonotikelty on the left hand, and so on to the relief of
Rafe-Barry; but upon the way some of Bandon advised us of a great prey of
Cattle at that Town which we should miss (if we stopped it not in our
back-returne) because the Country would soon be upon knowledge of our passing
that Town, and heard of 5 or 6 hundred of the Enemy lying in the way, the
chief Leaders of them were Maccharty-Reugh, Tiege Douning, Adonovaut, one
Arundel and some others; but we saw none, though it seems we marched close by
their Cabins: before we came to the Town we found diverse Irish, whom before
their death we examined, by whom we were informed that the aforesaid Army were
bound for the assistance of my Lord Muskerry, against my Lord Encheqine, Sir
Charles Vavasor, and our Army at Mallo, and glad we were that we might so
divert them, when we came to Clono^^kelty we made an halt, and many were taken
and slain; there we found store of Cattle, which were put into a pen, and
after less than an hour we marched on, the Town having only poor people in
it, but a common Rendevous for the Enemy, and those that were not suddenly
surprised, went out of their houses and hid themselves in Corn and bushes, and
tops of houses; we had not marched out a mile out of the Town, but the
Commanders of the Bandon Companies (whose counsel we depended upon, being
strangers) assured us that all our Cattle would be driven away before our
return, by a company of people that attend every Army, and Force that march
out, they call pillagers, who though not soldiers, yet with some light Arms
they follow the Camp on horse and foot, and whilst the Soldier must keep his
order, they run into the houses, lade their horses with what they can get,
drive away the Cattle, and wholy discourage the Soldiers.

These have been the occasions generally of all the loss amongst the English,
these spare neither woman nor child, as we saw before our eyes which sudden'd
some hearts; of these we had above an hundred attending us, our Lieutenant
General made an Order for these, that they should not ride under the command
of a Captain who came to attend his Lordship, one Captain Brooks, who had
lost his Ship of 400. Tun at Kinsale, and had done especial Service upon the
Land, and deserved very well, and now entertained amongst us for the leading of
our little Trope: but these Pillagers would know no command, but of their own
advantages, and though pressed with many arguments, scattered at pleasure, stripped
the slain, made havoc of all, and most of them staid behind us at Clonokelty
attending their prey: which known and observed by our Bandon friends, they
persuaded we should leave one Company behind to attend the Cattle, for of them
our selves had need, not having our Ships of Provision come to us: it was
objected one Company was too little, because the Enemy might fall on, we
having still heard something of them as we went, my Lord commanded three
Companies back, Bandon men assuring us it were too much, and that no Enemy
would look upon such a number.

Captain Weldon was sent back with his Company, which was about 60. men, the
rest of them not come; Captain Price with his being about 80. diverse of his
being not well abbard the Ship, and a Company of 80. more of Bandon commanded
by one of their Lieutenants, with advice given them to keep in a Body, or take
some Church or strong house if assaulted: they returned, we marched on, and
took about 100. Cattle, four or five hundred sheep, and diverse horses, and
brought them to Ralfe Barry to Mr. Freake, who met us with much joy, where we
came to see many English pent up in a considerable Castle; and after praising
God and prayer, we refreshed our selves with such food as he had; and our
Soldiers began to make ready sheep, hoping they might have quartered there all
night.

But as soon as we had dined, we had three Posts came to us from our three
Companies, that the Enemy was in view; and a fourth, that they had skirmisht:
thus we were soon taken from any thoughts of ease, and Horse and Foet made
ready to return; and though many might well be wearied with such a tiresome
march, yet they would go to the help of their friends, and truly this I must
affirm, more couraged know not where to find then I saw that day, leaving
with the Gentlemen of the Castle near 20. men with Ammunition for his present
relief and the Castle aforesaid, we marched back, and in the way met many that
told us all our three Companies were destroyed; more came to us still, and some
even naked of those pillagers we had left behind, even to appall us, that it
was impossible for us to fight it through; some of us told them of their
Barbarism in the morning when they were slaying the children, blood would have
blood again: some of us were thoughtfull about the day being Sabbath, to
which, and other objections necessity and present danger afforded some answers,
and on we went, seeing the hills on both sides full of Horse and Foot, and
(which was mercy even to wonder) that afternoon proved clear and fair,
whereby we were abundantly comforted, coming within a mile of the Town we
saw two Colors, one of ours; another of Bandon in a piece of ground cast up
round like a bull-warke, though not so high, it proved to be Captain Price,
who most valiantly with his worthy Leivetenant (...) and some of his company,
were defending themselves against^ 1000. Varlets who had beleaguerd them, on
the right hand we saw the Enemy in a square Battle upon a plain piece of
ground near the (...) and (...). Coniours flying standing in very exact order,
but that their Commanders sat upon very good Horses in the Reere (which it
seems is their Cowardly custom) Upon velwe of all this my Lord approved
himself a good Christian and a very stout and skillful Soldier, and won all
our hearts by his wisdom and courage, of whom much might be said, could I
avoid the suspicion of flattery by reason of near engagements, but certainly
let whom it concerns be advised, that religion in these choises especially at
these times gain the first place, little do you know the advantages thereby.
My Lord forthwith ordered a body to encounter the enemy, and gained his ground
close by the water, that he could not be intercepted, and this he led himself,
then left a good reserve in the rear, either to answer assaults, or second
him, if put to the vvorst, the two small copper pieces stayed in the rear with
the baggage, because they could not be drawn over the plowed land, where he
was forced to march in the front, the horse we had, he commanded to attend the
right fllanke of the enemy, who then had the sea on the one hand of them, and
the horse on the other, the small cannon he gave order upon his march should be
shot, to try if thereby Captain Price and the Bandon-company might be
relieved, all which was done, my Lord, and Major Beaton follovving him, led,
and drew, giving the challenge as it were to the enemy, and being ask't by the
minister how his heart stood, professed courageously that he was persuaded God
would give us the day, the Pieces were fire^, and Price was freed, and the
rest, and joined to us, and after our men had thrown up their caps for joy
that they should fight, the enemy at the turning of an hand, fled and
scattered, their colors were given to horsemen, our horse pursued and made
slaughter of them, the multitude of horse and foot spread upon the hills were
vanished, many killed in the water, amongst them Arundel and his sons with diverse
of note, two ventured and swam over, three or fourscore carried out with the
tide, and thus the Lord was pleased to glorify himself, that the least number
to speak in faithfulness that fell of them that day, was betwixt five and six
hundred, that night we marched beyond Clonokelty, a mile or two, getting the
advantage of a dry hill, not only to rest on, but also to secure our selves,
in regard of ambushments, and other disadvantages, which they wholly attend,
and there with a prey of two thousand sheep, above an hundred cattle, and fifty
horses of that Country, we continued that night.

But if you shall ask me what became of Captain Weldon and his company, and
what they did whilst we were absent at Ralph Barryy; to satisfy, I got this
answer following, under the hand of Captain Price, who in the word of a
christian assured me of the truth of it to his utmost knowledge.

Three companies of us being left at Clinokeltey, my Lord gave order that
Weldon being the eldest Captain, I should assist him, with charge to give
account of the pillage, till he return, we set our guards upon every point of
the Town, and took full view of the Town, how we might be upon defense and
offense, whereupon Weldon answered that we were to guard three streets, I told
him that was the next way to overthrow us, but he would not hear, so I viewed
the Town my self, and found three places fit for offense and defense, viz.
Sir Will. Hulls-house, or the Churchyard, or the hill betwixt Rafe-barry and
the Town, which after all I retreated unto, but he had not an ear open to
counsel. Then I marched to an Island my Lord had sent me unto, for 1500.
Sheep and other Cattle to keep a guard on it, which I did with twenty
Musketteers, I met thirty horse of the enemy, and sixty foot marching toward
the Town, I marched and charged them, they ran away, so then from the
island, I brought off fifteen hundred sheep, twenty cattle, and thirty
horse, twenty two hogs, and brought them to the Town; by that time the enemy
approached upon the hill, rounding the Town, being five or six thousand in
three companies to come down upon the several streets. I advised Weldon and
the other officers as before, to which all agreed but himself, his own
Lieutenant said that else we were undone, where upon he said we were all
cowards, and of the three streets, I wished him to take his choice, and he
should not find us cowards, I marched out toward the enemy, my soldiers
flung up their caps and gave a shout, and gave fire bravely with a brace of
bullets, and made their foot and two troops of horse retreat without any loss
of ours, but some hundred of theirs, as themselves after confessed. Then they
assaulted Bandon men, which when I saw, I went to their relief, and coming on
their rear, they of Bandon ran away without shooting one shot, and came
through the Town with confusion with diverse pillages, and so disordered us; I,
in the rear with ten Musketeers charged the enemy then pursuing at hand, who
dividing to compass me, forced me to retreat out of the Town, to a little old
brest-worke, and there we gathered in our forces and held them play, till my
Lord brought up his Regiment.

We marched to Bandon in much rain, 17.
and carried our two thousand sheep, horse, and cattle, to that Town, which
was a great refreshing to them, there,

We rested at Bandon the weather being very foul, 18.
and there my Lord received letters from my Lord Inchiquine, and diverse
officers from Don-o-reale, and the letters you may find hereafter marked by
letters, A. my Lords answer B.

We marched to Kilbritton Castle, 19.
three or four miles from Bandon, with two of Bandon companies, with a purpose
to go to Timilege, which we heard was an harbor to our enemies, the Castle
belonging to my Lady ^shafnesse, this night we lodged at Kilobutton, and sent
out for the best intelligence we could get.

We marched to Timelege with assurance from our friends of Bandon, 20.
that my Lady would willingly take in a garrison, when we came, my Lord
summoned the Castle, and she answered we were strangers, but she would yield
it to my Lord Kinalmachy* or Sir William Hull, whereupon we burnt the Town,
brought away near an hundred cattle, and five hundred sheep, and returned
that nigt to Kilbritton.

We marched to Kinsale to our ships. 21


One of our vessels wvich was sent to Baltamore, 22
of which Captain Clark was Commander, came in having taken fourteen Rebels
under color of a Dunkirk, and they coming to buy powder, whereof some were
hanged, some drowned, and three of the chief taken prisoners, one of them
Dermon Mac-Carti, who took in Crook-haven and these parts. That same day, the
Katharin came from Falmouth, diverse passages there were betvveene my Lord
Forbes, and my Lord Consey, Lord of Kinsale, who came himself at last, and
offered to take into his castle a garrison to his Majesty's use and service.

This day being sabbath and fair weather, 23
we kept on shore.

We sailed from Kinsale in the evening, 24
and left some ships to bring away our horses and other things.

We came into Castle-haven in the afternoon, 25
and saw abundance of Rebels about the hills* the chief of them there is
Adonovant.

In the morning our barges went a shore to Adonovants Castle, 26
which they were newly fled from, and fired, where our soldiers burnt many
houses, and a mill of much concernement to them, spoiled corn, fired many
boats, and with one barrel of powder blew up his Castle, dividing it self
into two parts, and was 60. foot high, and very thick, as thick as their
castle it use to be; thereappeared a thousand of the enemy, but would not give
us fight, called us Parliament dogs, Puritan-dogs, said we fought against the
King and the Church, etc. Here my Lord committed a Priest of my Lord
Castlehaven to the custody of Mr. Salmon, the chief man there.

We sailed to Baltamore, 27
and there found Captain Bennet in the Castle with many English, who before
had been with us, and Mr. Salmon of Castle-haven and succored in diverse things
they wanted, the wind North-east, we expected our fleet out of England, and
those left behind us, we sent a shore to view a Castle, and saw many of the
enemies horse and foot. Some of our vessels came from Kinsale.

Our men went a shore, 28
and fired Adriscoles Castle, spoiled much come, and burnt diverse houses.

We manned out our boats to search the islands, 29
and got some horses, hogs etc. this day Captain Rainsborough came to us from
England, and Captain Brook in one of the Kings ships, with letters from
Waterford-side, viz. the Fort of Duncannon my Lord of Cork. C. and my Lord
Corks, to my Lord Forbes, D. then we heard of the story of Captain Astons
loss of sixty men by Don-Cannoun, being cut off in a fogge, we had letters
from Captain Ashly, E. and Captain Willoughby from Galloway, requiring help,
this day we savv Captain Cunstable, Captain Cole and others coming from
Limrike leaving the River wholly unguarded.

This day being Sabbath, 30
we kept it on shore most of us together.

We heard of the Achilles at long island, Aug. 1.
our Sergeant Major coming aboard us, so that now all our first fleet that
came out of the Downs, were on this side and near, but a small vessel sent to
Dublin with a Scotch-man under much suspicion, that his ship was furnished for
the Rebels, of which ship we had a long time no tidings, this day our men were
all mustred, by Captain Rausborough one of the Committee.

We had taken a counsel of War, 1
whither to go to Doncannou or Galloway, and finding by all advise, that if we
took not this season, we could not go to Galloway at all, and Limrike being
altogether left, and Galloway Fort in some distress, that my Lord Forbes would
write to my Lord of Esmond, that he would speed to him as soon as he might,
this other work being done, and Captain Brook assuring us a months time
might be allowed for us to return to Duncannon, my Lord wrote to my Lord of
Esmond as appears, G. and to my Lord Cork, H. the Raph was sent back to fetch
Zachory's ship, and to call at Ralph-Barry, good service done in a Castle by
the way.

Fair weather, 2
little or no wind.

Like weather and wind as the day before. 3


Our Vice Admiral chased a vessel into the Bay of Kilmar, 4
and we were all forced to follow him, which proved Captain Clement a vessel
set out by the State.

We were becalmed. 5


We had a fair wind, 6
a little rain.

We lay of the Isles of Aran, 7
being Sabbath, Wind East, and North East.

We turned up toward Golloway, 8
and could not gain it that night, Wind East, our Vice-admirals boat went a
shore, and took some cattle, burnt some houses, and killed some Rebels.

We came in and anchored before the Town, 9
my Lord sent a letter to the Town, and another to my Lord Clanricard, who is
Governor of Town and County, following his own commission therein, viz. not
to attempt any thing till he had first advised with the present Governor of
the places he came unto, Captain Willoughby came aboard us that night, and
Captain Ashly whom we found lying there to attend the Fort, who seemed to
clear any breach of the Pacification, so far as concerned them. The Town
answered the letter sent them with many protestations, that they were loyal
Subjects, hung out upon one of their Towers the Kings colors, and labored to
persuade us that Captain Willoughby only had broken the trerm'd of
Pacification.

The rest of our fleet came, 10
my Lord writ again to the Town, to let them know that he meant to land his
men, and refresh them, and if they of the Town would send a testimony of their
loyalty by some fresh meats, they should thereby approve themselves, our men were
on shore diverse hours, a counsel was held aboard us, because we saw the Town
at work by the bridge, in which time two came aboard us from the Town, with a
letter from the Town, they still professing their resolution not only to stick
to their loyalty, but also the terms of the Pacification made, my L. Forbes
being earnest to have the matters cleared, they promised that next morning at
eight two of the Town should come to him again.

None coming from them, 11.
my Lord sent his own Ensign to them again, letting them know they dallyed,
that day our soldiers went out for fresh meat, and brought home some, and
burnt a whole Town, that night a letters came from my Lord Clanricard very
well penned, and showing him a man of wisdom and parts, wherein he cleared
Galloway men, and cast the imputation upon Captain Willoughby for breaking the
Pacification, and in the same the Townsmen were confident.

Another letter was sent a shore from my Lord with articles as will appear, 12.
wherein they were charged not to trifle, but to show themselves in their
former allegiance, and to correspond with the Fort. A counsel was held for the
landing our men at an Abbey on the west side of the Town, within musket shot, a
place of singular consequence, and advantage for the design, and so to proceed
if matters were not well composed between the Fort and Town. The Penington was
sent to Sliego to take off a vessel of the Rebels of fourscore tun, and to
attend these parts, as also three vessels sent to the river of Limrike to guard
that, it being left void by Cunstable and Coals departure, especially against
the French, who (we heard) were coming thither with much ammunition for the
River and Town. This night accordingly our men lodged in the Abbey, at the
landing of eleven colors of ours, some sculking varlets in bushes, and some
shot at our men, it being on Eeroonnaght-side, which stands in open
rebellion, as Galloway men did acknowledge. This day my Lord sent another letter
to them, to urge their answer to the Articles, for we durst not take upon us
to be Judges, my Lord of Clanricard being Governor of the Town and County,
and one that had faithfully approved himself to Captain Willoughby in raising
the siege when he was beleaguered, and for refreshing him in his necessities,
which bred much tenderness in us to give him offense; and being excommunicated
by their Church, with his follows for his loyalty and fidelity, since his
arrival into Ireland, which has (...) but very late.

My Lord received a letter from the Town in answer to his about the Articles,
13.
but nothing satisfactory, to which my Lord sent a reply, viz. That if neither
they nor my Lord of Cla^ricard would come to treat, he would write no more:
this day the weather foul and misty, as it is usual in these parts, which
prejudiced our work much, especially time before our winter being so short, for
doubtless had this fleet been forth in April, it had been of extraordinary
consequence.

Being Sab* 14.
we kept it aboard, my Lo: having given notice to the Mayor the day before he
should have that day for rest, and if he heard not from my Lord Clynriceard, he
would begin to work. In the Evening came Letters by the Captain of the Fort,
from my Lord Rennelagh President of Connagh and my Lord Clinriccard, the former
desired forbearance of all hostility, till Wednesday he came to us. This night
order was given that the next day 500. should into the Country of Eer-Conaugh
to burn and spoil, because we had no daylight to burn out.

My Lord and some others dinde a shore at the Fort, 15.
where we found the Bishop of Tuam and his family, 36. Ministers, of which 26.
served as soldiers, and did duty; and this day according to former order the
500. Foot and some Horse marched out, and 80. possessed the Abbey, and by this
time we had two half Culverins mounted or set upon Field-Carriages and all
manner of preparations were made for the assaulting the Town, and great
willingness there was in our men, though the Town be as strong and compact as
most in Europe for house and walls.

Our men returned with about 100. cattle and as many sheep having burnt some
Ireish Towns and corn as they went by the way. 16.
As they came out of a Castle three of our Horsemen were shot at whereof one
dyed which was requited after by our killing six of them and one a Merchant of
quality.

Another Letter from my Lord Clanricard; 17.
that he and my Lord President were coming, but it would be Friday ere they
should be with us. Our men still did maintain the Abbey* though the last night
some of them ran to it, but beaten back by a shot from the Fort, we received
40. Beeves, and 50. Muttons from Donnell Brian, who dwelt on Thomond side, and
professed himself a Protestant and loyal; for the price he referred himself to
my Lord: this day a Council was held, and 36. pieces of ordinance landed,
being resolved to fall on two days after.

The Weather very ill, 18.
misty and rainy, 200. of our men had order to pull down the timber of the
Abbey, to make Platformes, which accordingly they did, but could not make bring
away that night, the weather was so foul, at midnight 7. or 8. Musket shot
from the Town, in the morning they saw 3. Pieces mounted in the Town which
the Enemy cleared.

A very rainy day, 19.
wherein nothing remarkable but that some shot past between the Town and the
Abbey we stood all day in expectation of the Lords who appointed this for the
last day of traveling toward us, and our people growing impatient of all
delays.

The Lords came, 20.
Clinriccard to Terilan a fair house of his on the one side of the Town, and
the president to the Fort with 60. Horse, our men made a guard for him; The
president consulted with my Lord Forbes and Captain Willoughby and offered to
be a mediator and pressing that the faith of the Lords of Dublin were past upon
that pacification, and if that should not hold, how should matters be carried
in any part of the Kingdom or difference made between man and man place and
place, and he departed that night to Terilan to confer with my Lord
Clinriccard and the Townes-men; This day Captain Zacharies ship came from
Kinsale, for himself being shot in the back we left at Banden to be cured, by
whom we heard of Captain Kettlebies removeall from Kinsale, but no man was
certain whither he went: that time there came a Letter from Sir Charles
Coote, who gave us hope we might have his presence with his men; Zacharies Ship
freed the English out of a Castle with one Shot, and put the Reb, to flight.

Being Sabbath, 21.
the President came to us to the Fort, and came to the Sermon which was in the
fields, dined in the Fort with my Lord Forbes, two things are mainly driven at;
first that the Fort should be victualled for eight month, and secondly that
sufficient hostages should be given out of the Town for securing it to the
King. In the afternoon he rid to Terelan with Captain Willougbies
Propositions. The Evening our packet-boat came in called the Rafe, by whom we
had news from Limrick and other parts from my Lords Castle Steward, who writ
for supply, which accodingly was sent him: this night order was given for a
counsel of War next morning.

Four of our Barges were sent to get plank from a rack a mile or two from us,
22.
to make Platformes for our Ordnance. We took 3. Rebels over night, our
officers were early at a Counsel of War, when all both Seamen and others
under-writ to stand to my Lord to the utmost, and it was resolved to try our
strength upon the Town, if the Kings Fort might not enjoy fit conditions.

The President came to the Fort from Terelan, 23.
and my Lord Clynriccard writ that he would also come to my Lord Forbes
thither: but after much expectation he did not, which we suspect fell out
through doubt how matters would stand if we proceeded in hostility, and his
Lordship wanting a sufficient guard for himself being excommunicate by the
Rebels, and told by the titular B. of the place, that not a man there would
draw his sword for him. Then we received Captain Willoughhies Propositions
answered by the Gentlemen of the Country for the supply of the Fort according
to his desire. My Lord Clynriccard being upon his return gave my Lord Forb^ a
meeting a half mile from the Fort, where many things past betwixt them tending
to the public; and my L. Forb^ urging him much to join with and take such a
share as God should allot us, assuring him he should be as safe as himself,
and that his Kindred did but watch opportunities to mischief him, he still
complained of power wanting, and thought we were not strong enough, and was
earnest that pacification might not be broken, assuring us if it were, the
Country would be longer in reducing and with much more charge to the State; My
L. Forbes earnestly pressed my L. President, who had 2500. men from the State,
that he would join with us, or lend us but 500. men, he told us that his men
were almost in a mutiny through want of pay and necessaries; and those he had
were appointed for the safety of my Lord Clynriccard; but but yet if we would
come to Sliego his men should join with us, and then especial service might
be done; Thus these Lords departed, and we returned to a Counsel of War,
where Captain Willoughby persuaded us (he having knowledge of the Town that
we were too weak, most of their houses being like Castles, and the wall strong
and hard to mine; we considered many of our men were then fallen sick of the
Countrey-disease, and that we long wanted of three ships of provisions of all
sorts, that we thought to send presently two Ships to Bristoll for supply
especially of them, we fought for other diet, and took 6. or 700. Cattle at
least. This night all men were desired to consider by the morning what were
best to do by way of counsel: this night secretly dispatched away a Messenger
for Sir Charles Coot and his company which would have beeene 500. or 600. men,
with which help we made no question of gaining the Town, though we had a
strong enemy round about us except to Sea-ward, and as strong within; but that
we looked at our cause, our men's valor, and their cowardice. This night the
Enemy out of the Country fell upon our men in the Abbey, were well beaten, fled
leaving their broges and trouses behind them.

Counsel was taken with the Seamen to go for Sliego and them to join with
the Presidents men, and bring with us 500. or 1000. Scots to dispatch the
business of Galloway; but we found such difficulty in that Northeren though
but 30. or 40. leauges that it was desisted from.

25. Most of this day was spent about 3. of our men that were condemned for
several offenses and pardoned at the Gallows; this night a prize was brought
us by one of our ships a Barhado-man laden with Tobacco and trading with the
Rebels in Limrick River a ship 140. Tunn, These two ruins of Galloway and
Limrick we resolved because we had strong intelligence that the French were
resolved forcibly to bring in Ammunition thither, more Letters came from my
Lord President and my L. Clinriccard to assure us of the agreement to be stood
unto for supplying the Fort, nor have we omitted to present all those Letters
as will appear; This night the Earl Connaghs Rebels fell again upon us with
like loss to themselves and hurt us not a man.

27. The foulnes of the weather hindered us from my work but advising what next
to do.

28. Was the Sabbath which we kept on shore and appointed a Fast for the next
Wednesday.

29. More letters from my Lord Clinriccard to assure us of the pacification to
which it was advised if he would and secure it we would depart but till the
Fort was provided for, we would there stay and lay our bones by the walls of
the Town.

30. Our men were imployde to fetch more Timber for our batteries for want
where of we were much straightened having near 40. Gunns on shore to fit with
platformes.

This day Letters came from the Major to Capt. Willoughby concerning the
pacification answering his objections, and resolving to stick to what they had
promised by my Lord Clinnriccard, in the mean time great were our cares what
to do, lying wind-bound all this time, and that Country being so barren in
comparison of other places; that we were forced to travel further to burn
their Corn and Houses than in other places: Captain Richardson had his Arm
broken unhappily by a Gunner and Boatson of the Artillery though after well
cured and they both gaining their credit by choice Service, we sent to
Donnel-O-Brian a friend for cattle.

31. We kept a Fast.

1. We had Letters sent from my Lord Clinriccard by Ensign Scot, that he
himself was sick; but that Mr. Burk his Kinsman and his own Steward should
come to us and end all controversies between Fort and Town: we then took our
guns aboard; but very unwillingly, our Seamen readier to fall on nakedly, than
forsake the work, and the soldier no way backward; for this testimony I must
give them both, that they have exceedingly honored their Country and the
cause, even to the equalling any of their Progenitors in valor, and all manner
of forwardnes.

2. We grew weary of expecting Sir Charles Coot having promised to stay 8. or
10. days for him; and therefore thought of a sudden departure, principally
because there came a messenger to us out of Limrick River of the sad estate of
the Castles there, since Capt. Constables departure, which emboldened them to
bring down the great Gun, the sight of which affrighted our English out of
their Castles, as witness Asketon that stately Castle unworthily given up
without receiving a shot, and being enforced by Sir Edward Denny who was with
us, that Trelee had but 10. days granted for the delivery of that Castle which
they had defended to admiration, till they were forced to eat hides, etc. We
had this day the Gentlemen from the Lord Clinriccard with papers and
Propositions to satisfy the Captain of the Fort, they brought with them 24.
Oxen, and 60. sheep, which were the first two weeks provision.

3. This day we had 3. or 400. Soldiers went down in some Ships to the Isles
of Arram, where they did singular service, took 300. head of Cattle destroyed
many with very good houses, burnt their corn and Towns, and slew and hung
many of the Rebels: all this day we waited the signing of the Propositions.

Being late, we spent on shore, Letters past betwixt the Fort and Town; we
had an Armorer came into the Town and went to Mass; we took five prisoners,
some of note.

5. We went aboard making all have for Trelee; the Captain of the Fort and the
gentlemen came aboard with all things issued for their particulars, as also two
men that were sent to view the Town for mining which they had threatened to the
Fort. We left a Ship, and two vessels, and a Barge to attend the Fort and
river, and so most ready to depart.

A small vessel came on from Cork, one Lambert Captain, who brought some
more powder to the Fort from Cork assigned by the state of England, into which
went 50. or 60. poor people come out of the Castle in Thomand the which he
carried for Cork.

6. We set sail, but could not get into Limrick River, two or three of our
Ships followed us.

7. We were in like condition beating at Sea.

8. Letters came aboard us at Sea from my Lord Clynriccard with Letters to my
Lord of Essex.

9. We got within Loops-head and came to an anchor near Captain Crosbies
Castle who preserved himself and some hundreds with him stoutly, a very
deserving man, he hung out a flag to us, we sent on shore and brought him
a-board whom we furnished with necessaries who told us we were come too late
and that Trelee, Asketon, Clare, and other Castles were given up, and assured
us of the Victory of my Lo: Enchaquin in Munster over Musgray and his Forces
with the slaughter of many men and taking 3. pieces of Ordnance, which made the
English fly to him expecting daily to be massacred, and professed he had
already 150. which would perish if we provided not for them, all which we
found true to our great grief and trouble and that the Earl of Thomond was in
great danger at Bonnatty.

10. Early in the morning my Lord Forbes writ to Daniel-O-Brian uncle to the
Earl of Thomond who had his Son Captain of the Rebels, and himself
professing a newtralitie or withal the rest that he was the Kings good
Subject, my Lord advised him to meet him at the Earl of Thomonds, by this time
our Fleet came together.

11. Being Sabbath we continued a-board resolving that night to go up with 2.
or 300. men to Bonnatty there we found our Rere-Admirall and the French prize
of 150. Tun laden with Ammunition for the Rebels and taken there by our
aforesaid ship whose owner is Sir Nicholas Crispe, here we hung five of our
prisoners formerly taken, At this time there came abord us one Capt. Usher who
had a Castle near us, and kept it well, by all such men we were given to
understand that without a strong standing garrison in every Province and
Country (if it were possible) little would be done as they conceived, because
the poor English Inhabitants would be exposed to constant danger upon
removal of flying Armies, This River of Limricke promised most unto us of any
place we had seen both for Land and Water.

This night we went up to Bonnatty my Lord of Thomonds Castle with 200. men 4.
Barges 2. Barks and 2, Shallops where my Lord kindly welcomed us and there his
uncle Sir Daniel-O-Brian met us.

12. We spent in consultations with the Earl, who certified us with much
grief that since the River was left without shipping diverse Castles were
taken, whereby the Enemy had bin furnished with 800. Arms and six Barrells of
Powder, and the way they used was by bringing the great Gunne called the
Roaring Meg toward the English Castles, through dread of which the English
yielded; this Gunne one of our ships through want of wind mist in Limrick
River, it being in a boat but took the Carriages in another and we have log'd
this Gunne in a Cricke with one of our ships attending it, there being no
means for them to carry it back but by water.

This night Sir Daniel-o-Brians man was sent to Clare to the Gentry to come to
Bonnattre the next day at nine in the morning, some war me speches past betwixt
some of our Commanders and Sir Daniel which put him into a shaking fit.

13. An answer of the Letter sent wherein the Gentry desired 3. in the
afternoon for their apearance which was granted, but Sir Daniel went away very
early, without taking leave, out of fear and horror doubtless, having been told
that we were desirous he should make good his Loyalty before the Parliament,
over night 100. Rebels lay at my Lords Parke-pale, who (we suppose) waited to
fetch Sir Daniel off; These retardings made us advise and conclude to fall upon
Sir Daniels Houses, and Clare Castle, in which we found my Lord of Thomond
doubtful, and intruth his case is nice, the chief of the County being his
Kindred, and himself without power, saving 50. Horse in his Stable: part of
this day was spent in preaching.

14. We heard the Gentry would come in; but they failed (as their manner:) we
heard this night of 300. Rebels again at my Lords Park which we would have
been upon, and earnestly pressed it; but my Lord of Thomond would have us yet
wait longer on the Gentry, ere we exercised hostility against Thomond. At last
we made our Propositions to the Castle, being about to go down to our Ships,
which came to this, That his Lordship continuing a Protestant and loyal, his
danger must needs be great, and that this Rebellion did not distinguish
Relation nor Greatness, and therefore if he pleased, we would either
continue there with all our force, and join with him at Bonatty, and so try
what we might do in joining with himself to reduce Clare and Thomond: or if
he suspected us too weak, that he might take all he had and was portable into
our best ships, together with his own person, and we would adventure our
selves in his Castle to maintain that place, and infest the Enemy what we
could; this we left with his Lordship.

15. We departed, and a few miles from thence we came to an Anchor in the
River, and landed 300. men on Limrick side, where our men fought both wirh
Horse and Foot, burnt abundance of Corn, and four of their Castles; and
amongst others, killed the foster Brother of Mr. Steevenson: we lost two sick
men, that could not follow their Companies, but had no arms. At night our men
retreated safely to their boats from two thousand of them.

We sailed down lower in the River, and called at Fitz-Gerralds the Knight of
the Valley, or Glyn whom my Lord summoned by writing, our Messenger at landing
met a Letter with a Horseman at the waters side, who had a Letter from my Lord
Clinriccard in favor of his Kinsman the Knight of the Valley: an answer was
sent him, and we departed: my Lord sent to Sir Tege Macmahun, who is a good
friend, but could not come to us in regard of his weakness of body.

This night the Earl of Thomond came to us, and lay aboard the Vice-Admrall,
with whom three of the chief Rebels of Thomond had beeen and promised to come
with the Gentry aboard our Ships.

17. Div^rs Letters came from the shore from Sir Daniel-O-brian, concerning the
coming of the gentry of the Country, who were under much fear by the (...)
of Ships scattered thorough the River.

18. We (...) from the Shore, the Gentry excusing themselves from the distance
of their dwelling. The Knight of the valley sent my Lord present of Beeves
which he would not accept, unless he would appear himself, and show his
loyalty, and to that purpose my Lord went unto him.

19. We stayed in expectation of the Gentry from the shore, who had their time
enlarged two days.

20. We had Letters from the snore from Sir Daniel-O-Brian and th Rebels to my
Lord of Thomond answering the propositions proudly enough, as will appear in
their Letters hereto annexed. We had a counsel wherein it was concluded the
next day to attempt the Knight of the Valley with 6. Vessels, and all things
answerable. It was also agreed that Captain Peter's and Mr. Daniel should carry
away the poor naked people that we found in much distress being about 500.
many of our Soldiers and Seamen grew very sick of the Country disease.

21. We set sail for the Valley, being 3. Leagues up, and coming by the
place in the evening, went beyond a mile or two and anchored.

22. Early we began to land 15. Horse first, and then our Foot, who were
entertained with 30. Musquettiers of the enemy playing upon them, but hurt none
but a boy in the Shoulder. The Enemy fled into Castle two or three of our Ships
played upon the place till we landed two half Cannon. The Enemy in great
numbers appeared on the side of the hill, with whom our Horse fought with the
loss of one of ours, and many of theirs, multitudes of them coming on, we
strengthened our guards, and kept them waking all the night with Demi-culverin
in one of our Ships, the night was very rainy.

23. Our Cannon played up upon it, but none from the Ships, tore down part of
the maine house, and took very good effect, the Enemy shot faintly. After
dinner my Lord resolved to storm it: but first marched round and fought the
enemy on the side of the hill, who appeared in three Bodies of Horse and Foot;
ours put them soon to their wonted posture of flight.

Some commanded, men were appointed to enter, where the seamen had much
honor, they presently came to push of pike at a narrow hole, a gunner of ours
with a cantridge of powder blew off two or three of them, the rest would not
take quarter, one leapt out of the Castle window, twenty five of them were
slain upon the place: this is remarkable that most matters fell out as at the
last siege forty years since, but that we lost fewer men, and won it in less
time, with less means: we took the knights sisters son prisoner, who
acquainted us with the knights flying away two days before, and calling in the
force of the country upon us, not thinking the castle should be taken so
soon. The place is rich pleasant and profitable for all the merchandise of the
river of Lymrike, it having sixteen hundred pounds per annum about it in fair
lands, we found the place furnished with all utensils and provisions for a
family. The plate and silver was gone for Lymrike, which receives most of which
is in Ireland: it seems they wanted bullets in the Castle, by their shooting
window-lead and small stones, in the siege we lost but four men.

25. Being Sabbath we spent on shore, and some of us aboard, the weather was
rainy, and windy.

26. We stripped our cannon, and landed two Sakers for defense of the place.

27. Council was taken what garrison to leave there, and how to dispose of our
sick men.

28. Our men went aboard, and burnt much corn, fought with many hundreds of
the enemy, without any loss of ours, burnt a Town of theirs.

29. A prize brought to us from Sleigo, taken from the midst of the enemy,
laden with tallow and hides, which they were sending into France, or Bilbo for
ammunition, wherein fourteen taken, and three friars by the same ship, diverse
of the Scots relieved, and a Minister with some people brought to us.

At this time another ship from Bilbo taken laden with iron, steel,
ammunition, and provision in Galloway river, his invoyce came to five thousand
pound. We also had certain tidings of another of ten guns gone into Dingle,
which three or four of our ships were sent to fetch out, and have (I hope)
taken long since.

And thus we left our men daily working, and bringing other parts of
Limrike-river, this day my Lord Glenmorris was buried the arch-rebell.

So that to sum up our voyage, it comes to thus much, in two or three months
time has God helped us to take five ships, worth (if sold to value, above
twenty thousand ponnds, we burnt as much corn, as that sum came to, slew of
the enemy many hundreds, fired many Irish Towns, relieved many English in Forts
and Castles, took and spoiled thousands of cattle) burnt and spoiled many
Castles, houses of note, and mills of the enemy, guarded the coast from
Kinsale, almost to Londonderry, blockt up Limricke, and Galloway, and diverted
them still as we went from other designs; fighting with them when ever we
came, and lastly taking in that lovely and useful castle of the Knights of the
Valley, where we left our men ready for further service, which expired for
which our ships and men were hired.

The intercepted Letters mentioned in the title of this Book, are intended to
be printed by themselves, they being so large could not be here inserted.

BRIEF OBSERVATIONS concerning the War, AND The State of Ireland, both for
the raising and laying the REBELLION.
1.
IT is easily noted that the seeds of the ruin of a State are sown in the
days of greatest prosperity; and that peace breeds plenty, plenty breeds
pride, and that brings forth War, and that runs again the former round.

2. Popery suffered among the Irish, and profaneness amongst the English,
have been the Parents of this Monster; though it might have other Midwives and
Nurses.

3. Though we are assured 1000000. English have been murdered, and we hope
many more Irish slain; yet mischief may be so fomented that it may know no
limits nor bounds.

4. Popish delusions carry such strength with them, especially when they meet
with an ignorant spirit, that known truths and common Principles have the
doors bard against them.

5. By all we could gleane in all the providence met with by Sea or Land for
intelligence, we see that the work now in hand and the question is Religion,
and Religion Papist and Protestant, covered under Puritan or Roundhead and
good Subject.

6. An Irish Rebel and an English Cavallier in words and actions we found as
unlike as an egg is to an egg.

7. It is most true, that from the highest to the lowest, from the Regular to
the secular, from the Capitives we had to the Freemen that came to Parley with
us, from the Man to the Woman, from the living to the dying, they professed unto
us they fought by the Kings Order for the Kings Honor, that we were his
enemies not they; which made us profess a new quarrel against them for
profaning his Majesty's name, and entitling him to all their murders and
miscreant practices.

8. Three things are found, are by the Irish as I wish: viz. to have their
Religion free, and their Religion in their own hands, which the wisest we met
with assured us is promised them, and that you shall read in their
Ecclessasticall Parliament held at Kelkenny which is now printing for you,
where you may see their end and their means conducing thereunto.

9. The unfaithfulness of most of our Ministers, the scurrility and monstrous
ignorance of our English, have administered oil to their Flame in abundance,
and brought down wrath from Heaven, nor in our civil Government there without
many sad aspersions from them, wherein Dublin suffers much, not only the
toleration but complyances with Romish Idolaters, has made them impudent and
ours careless; especially many pieces of our worship arising from the same
fountain, and running in the same Sea with theirs as Diocesan Bishops, their
Courts, Officers, Revenews and Attendants, Church Censures, Burialls,
Christenings, Liturgy, Holy Days, Fasts, hallowed Places, Images, Vestures,
Gestures, etc. Truth it is, the continuance of Ireland in its former condition
would have trenched upon Gods honor; where one Minister had 24. Livings, and
the place many times supplied by Ale: drapers at 40. l. per Annum.

11. Without all question, as the long continuance of ignorance there, (the
people being unchatichized) has led in more of this barbarism, so I fear the
former rebellion had never a thorough cure, I will not say that many of the
english planters that went over were de faece; foundation-stones should be
Sapphires, so that is no marvel if many that have fled thence, have left the
country worse than they found it.

12. As our Priests do now more strengthen the rebellion, not, so on our side,
men that call themselves overseers of churches, opened a door unto it, rhat
you may conclude there was never any grand mischeife brooched in the world, but
such as have been marked by clergy-mens fingers, and the war now in Europe
all over is Episcopal.

In the Cure note these things. 1. A bucket of water shall quench that at
first, which many tuns cannot, after lost opportunity. It is not cunctation but
expedition, not Fabius, but Hanniball must still be rebellious.

2. If credit may be given to rebels, they generally professed that two words
from his Majesty's own hand by a known messenger to them, should command
down all their Arms.

3. Had the country risen in any considerable bodies of english at first, and
every man either not given rebels too much credit, or trusted to his own
private guard, it had been ctushed in the egg which is now grown a flying
serpent.

4. The Lieutenant or Generals personal appearing there upon the death of the
former, must needs have given a check to many of their barbarous proceedings,
and encouraged the english there in resistance, want of government makes
english odious, that their very cattle are loathsome to these monsters, one of
their Army spoiling in five days forty seven thousand english sheep, and in
time they would devour one the other, were our necessity capable of so much
patience.

5. If the vast expense of this kingdom had been rightly employed both for
shipping and land forces, this bogge must needs have been dried up by Gods
blessing.

6. Our english coming over fresh and hearty, were better to be hazarded upon
some of the enemies Towns, then there detained to eat our men garrisons, and
most of them perish with the country-disease.

7. If Galloway, Lymrike: Wexford and Waterford were recovered, the whole
rebellion is shaken, which is irisible with half our forces there maintained,
the state here being nine hundred thousand pounds charge already.

8. It may then be reduced when soldiers and commanders there shall rather
attend the present work, than the continuance of their trade.

9. The Irish Lords and Gentry that are found faithful must be encouraged, who
will force about them, accompanied with good marks of authority and trust
from hence, will draw in the common people, who already curse their Priests and
Gentry.

10. Ships and seamen are of singular use, both in sea and land service,
provided that good intelligence be kept from Spain, France, and Dunkirke, in
which work, and much of the land matters, ten honest faithful merchants but
united, shall do more than many Committees of State, who are (through much
other work) taken off from attending ad idem, to which I add the necessary use
of horse, without which little can be done.

11. The Presidents of Provinces and Countries, must be desired not to suffer
great Armies to be kept guarding of their Towns and Demesnes, but employed
about the general work, upon our coming thither, we met with no considerable
man, but had most need of us.

12, One faithful, honest, able minister is worth five hundred men if planted
there, the people being as ignorant of their duty, as senseless of their
misery,

I am bold to think if the present advantage were taken of the Adventurers
ships lying by Lymrike and Galloway, the places might soon be ours, their
domesticke combustions betwixt the old and young merchants, in either being
well known unto us. This only I will add, let England here be quiet, and
Ireland will not long be rebellious, which the good God grant for his Sons
sake. Amen.

FINIS.

