A Petition of diverse Officers of the Army presented to his Excellecnie Sir
Thomas Fairfax at his Head Quarters at Saffron Walden the 23 of this instant
May, Wherein they declare to the World their resolution and readiness to
defend the authority of Parliament; And not to direct or dispute the
proceedings of those by whose power they have acted -- Wherein also they
manifest their reality to his Excellency and Army; that as it has been, so it
shall be their endeavor by all lawful means to promote the honor and
welfare of the Soldiers as their own.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax. The Petition of diverse of your
Excellencies Officers.
AFter their humble thankfulness for those many notable Successes God has
blessed them with, under your Excel. conduct, and acknowledgement of your
eminent diligence, unwearied industry, and exemplary forwardness in the
public Service, They have thought it necessary at this time in all humility,
to present to your Excellency their sensciblenes of some aspersions cast upon
them, as if they aimed more at their private Emoluments, then your Excellencies
and the Armies honor, or the Soldiers advantage; thereby alienating the
affections of their Soldiers from them, and rendering them less capable to
serve the Public.

They therefore humbly beseech your Excellency not to receive any impressions
from these imputations, but that you will be pleased to rest assured, that as
they can be outdone by none, in their fidelity to the Parliament and
constancy to those Principles they first undertook their service upon; so
neither in the high esteem of your Excellencies person and Conduct, nor in
their desires, that the Army be disposed of, with most advantage to the
Kingdom, and with the honor and satisfaction of the Soldiers. Professing
that they will by all lawful means endeavor their good and welfare, as their
own, and as their judgments guide them to believe, they ought to defend, not
to direct the proceedings of those by whose authority they were raised.

Col. Sir Robert Pie Colonel Graves Colonel Sheffield Colonel Butler Colonel
Fortescue Major Fincher Q. M. G. Lieu. Col. Iackson Lieu. Col. Kemson Major
Alford Major Gooday Major Moore Major Mastars Adjutant Genesis Flemin Captain
Nevil Capt. Robotham Capt. Martin Capt. Hall Capt. Farmer Capt. Skirmiger Capt.
Far Capt. Bragg Capt. Peckham Capt. Dormar Capt. Welden Capt. Boyse Capt.
Musket Capt. Highfield Capt. Wayne Capt. Wolf Capt. Barry Capt. Short Capt.
Ohara Capt. Streator Capt. Pooley Capt. Devison Capt. Cox Capt. Bushel Capt.
Howard Capt. Thomas Capt. Young Capt. Lundy Capt. Mollineux Capt. Owogin Capt.
Holcraft Capt. Hampden Capt. Young Capt. Gooden Capt. Fish Lieutenant Bartlet
Lieut. Fitch Lieut. Hall Lieut. Herbert Lieut. Fulchar Lieut. Fry Lieut. Clark
Lieut. Wells Lieut. Parker Lieut. Hooker Lieut. Allen Lieut. Toplady Lieut.
Evend Lieut. Parnor Lieut. Matthews Lieut. Oshamson Lieut. Okewell Lieut.
Slaughter Lieut. Ioams Lieut. Stockam Lieut. Philips Lieut. Heydon Lieut.
Watson Lieut. Davies Lieut. Everet Lieut. Jones Lieut. Read Lieut. Baily Lieut.
Luke Lieut. Faror Lieut. Jones Lieut. Smewel Cornet King Cornet Farmer Cornet
Page Cornet Scroobes Cornet Norcraft Cornet Waterhouse Cornet Bunting Cornet
Philips Cornet Green Cornet Martin Cornet Butler Cornet Coombs Ensign.
Sharplesse Ens. Hope Ens. Marrow Ens. Morris Ens. Wood Ens. Creme Ens. Belmer
Ens. Smith. Ens. Miller Ens. Miller Ens. Burgess Ens. Longridge Ens. Slow Ens.
Kerbis Ens. Layor Qu. Mr. Tyle Q. M. Archer Q. M. Thomas Q. M. Hipsle Q. M.
Weeks Q. M. Destwek Q. M. Tailor Q. M. Collingwood
Besides many more Officers who concur herein, but could not now subscribe by
reason of the the far distance in Quarters, and for want of time.


