A word for the ARMY.

And two words to the KINGDOM.

TO Clear the ONE, And cure the OTHER.

Forced in much plainness and brevity from their faithful SERVANT, HUGH PETER'S.

-- Nunc nunc properandus and acri
Fingendus sine fine rotas --
LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle at
the Westend of Paul's, 1647.

A Word for the ARMY, and two words for the KINGDOM.
THough I have looked upon the Scriblings of this age as the fruits of some
men's idleness, and most men's folly, and therefore should not willingly have
owned my self, if found among that Rabble. Yet when it grows so unlimitedly
high, and impudently brazen, that some men I know, men even above flattery, and
so sleek and smooth, in their uprightness (Among whom I place the present
General and his Second) that I had thought nothing of that kind could stick;
and yet these besmeared by uncircumcised pens.

1. Two things I resolved which now I offer to the World. The first is an
humble Petition to the Parliament, that they would please to try their now
well-backt authority, that some one faithful discreet man may be chosen to
divulge Gazets, Corants, or news: who shall be accountable to the State for
what he prints or communicates to the Kingdom, and that two of each party (for
parties there are) shall undertake for what is Printed on the behalf of
either, that so all scandalous and slanderous personal affronts may be
avoided, and matters worth time and reading may be published; or if none of
these may be gotten, at least men may put their names to their Papers; that
honest men may know where to find an accuser, for si sat sit accusare, quis
erit innocens? I list not to answer objections may be made hereunto, since this
boundless kind of boldness were better curbed to some inconvenience, then
continued to a mischief, even the poisoning the whole Nation: It should not be
a wise man's Qu^^e, what strength, wit, acuteness, etc, runs through such a
paper: but cui bono?

2. My second Resolve is, though not to answer every late Pamphlet punctually,
which rather then do, I might undertake to cleanse the stable in the story:
yea though my Share lies so much in them, that it would be costly to purchase
clean handkerchiefs to wipe off every spattering on my face, and could as
shortly and more truly answer all as he did Bellarmine with thou lie;
knowing no public instrument in no age, in no place can travel without others
dashing and dogs barking: Yet to prevent stones from speaking, and graves from
opening, or some horrid unheard of thing from appearing, to satisfy the
wide-mouthed world, and the black-mouthed Pamphleteers. I shall in plainness
and faithfulness show you the Armies wounds since they put up their sword, and
with them the States diseases; and in humility offer the cure, and leave all to
a wonder-working God.

First, Let me tell you negatively the evils commonly charged upon the Army,
are not the Armies evils. We have generally Causam pro non causa, in which
Mr. Prin was wont to exceed, who spoke much more then he meant to stand too:
the sum of all his is the Armies rebellion: another Pedanticke sounds a
Retreat, who being namelesse will not endure a Charge; the marow of his
Divinity, Non-obedience; another brings the Army to the Bar, where he pleads
with a company of bal'd threatenings, and would fright Fairfax with a sight of a
King at White Hall; One cries they sin against Caesar; another, they have
deflowred the Parliment; another, they have ravished the City; another, they are
Sectaries, enemies to Government, false to God, to man, friends, enemies to
themselves. They have lost Ireland, ruined England; oh! taxes and free quarter;
oh! this trinkling with the Court cries one; oh! their doubtful carriage with
the Court cries another; Cavalliers shall up cries one; we shall never see good
day says another, I do not think Paul heard such a confused noise, when
himself could hardly get leave to speak; That the word Army must answer all
the doubtful mischievous deadly questions in the World. For Example.

Who brings Famine? the Army.

Who the Plague? the Army.

Who the Sword? the Army.

Who hinders Trade? the Army.

Who incenseth Scotland? the Army.

Who hardens the King? the Army.

Who confounds all? the Army.

And if it should be asked the Cavalliers and Malignants who conquered you: they
would answer, the Army. If the Presbyters, who disappointed you? the Army; If
the Independents: who leaves you in the dark? the Army; And if Haman were asked
what he would do with these Jews? we know the Answer: alas poor Army: qualis
de te narratur fabula? But to my purpose; The grand complaint, which, as most
insisted upon, so is most likely to have vulgar acceptance: is the Armies
disobedience to the Parliament, by which the State was endangered to loose all
consistency; In respect of which, the Apprentices routing the House is but duty
or innocence; or at worst a parallel practice.

To which this is my plain and full answer.

It is confessed, they were not willing to disband at Walden, being urged
thereunto, and denied in Essex, when expected and pressed: But consider. 1. It
was required but conditionally, with regard to their security, indemnity, and
Arreare, and none of these performed; It was not such a Monstrum horerndum:

2dly. They were free Englishmen as Soldiers, and must maintain their
obligation to the State, as well as answer the Major and more corrupt Votes of
the House.

3dly. Nature commanded their selfe-preservation, when such Instruments were
sent to disband them, and command them for Ireland, of whose non-integrity they
had good experience.

4ly. When not long before they could not have leave to Petition their
faithful General, how should they expect any thing being disbanded.

5ly. This piece of disobedience (...) not new unto them, when the same
practice was familiar from men more mercenary in the North, and their denial
never counted rebellion: but glibly swallowed.

6ly. I answer, and I desire it may be observed: The first force ever put upon
the Parliament was long before this, and that nearer hand: did not the City
Remonstrance hang like a Petard upon the Parliament door week after week,
and every Ward in course to attend and fire it; speak (Gentlemen of the House)
how you were accosted and saluted, and in what language, till you were forced
to speak pure London.

7ly. I do here offer to make good upon oath, that the Commanding party in the
House, had more force put upon them to disband us, then we put upon the House
in refusing. For proof whereof, Master Anthony Nicholls lately with us at
Kingston before his flight, being urged by my self before an other sufficient
witness, to speak to this point, calling for a testimony from heaven) Professed,
that when the Army offered at first to go for Ireland, he with the other
impeached Members fully condiscended to it, and they gave him the agitation
thereof: but (as he protested) the Ministers in London came to them with
violence, pressing the contrary upon this ground: That this Army would soon
conquer Ireland, fill it with Schisms: and not only command it: but in a short
time give law to England: and therefore would hear of nothing but the
disbanding it, which (quoth he) put us upon that violent course; Now who forced
these Ministers? I do not say, but you see who forced those Parliament Men,
and we know they would force the Army: and upon denial the Army are the
forcers. And if the City- Remonstraters durst speak, they can tell you who
forced them to force the Parliament: and if the Apprentices would break
silence, they could tell you who spet in their mouths, and clapped them on the
back.

In all this I speak not my delight, but my grief, that so many Pulpits
should as plainly witness this force, as History tells us who poisoned King
John. And though we have not been ignorant of this kind of violence (which I
had rather attribute to my Brethrens zeal, then their malice) yet you see how
tenderly we have dealt with those: we knowing many godly amongst them, who
have not yet declared against them, complained of one of them; Nay though this
Army from first to last never had any of these Brethren to offer one Sermon to
us to encourage in dangers, to rejoice with us in our success. Nay, though
they know we want helps, and have been forced to use such help, as they have
reviled us for; and so would have us make brick without straw; Nay though we
know most hard measure met us. I do profess I conceive even Gangraena
himself might have marched through the Army unmolested, though we are not
ignorant: hinc nostri sundicalamitas. The Lord pity and pardon, the Army does.

8ly. Lastly, the Army durst not disband, not seeing a suitable power to stand
betwixt honest men and their dangers; the Garrisons not possessed by men of
trust, and the 5000. horse intended not in such hands as to be wished: and the
best of them might be soon disbanded when the foot scattered.

No, no, this is not the Armies wound or sore; and to answer the Retreaters
grand question, whence are Wars. I answer with the Apostle James; and add
Peace begets plenty, plenty, pride, and pride, war, and war begets peace,
and so round again. The Schoole-boy that helped him to so many Latin ends out
of Tully, can answer a harder Quaere: but since he pretends to Religion, I
wonder this offended Brother does not attend the Rule, Matthew. 18. Why cannot he
as well speak to a brother offending, and so tell him, as to tell all the world
of him; I have been satisfied in mine own spirit, that the godly could not be
much offended with us, since none have taken the liberty of speaking to us,
which I dare say from the General to the meanest Officer, professing
godliness, had not been unwelcome.

But I look upon that Author as great a stranger to the Army, as he is often
to his own principles, and his whole course to be a trade of Retreating, and
leave him to another pen; nor is a general toleration the Armies Gangraena,
when as they never hindered the State from a State Religion, having only wished
to enjoy now what the Puritans begged under the Prelates: when we desire more,
blame us, and shame us. Neither was it the evil of the Army, that being
modeled, they suddenly closed, and marched at that time when the boldest
complainer now, would have given them two parts of what they had to have
secured the third; (Friends) it was not their evil to divide part of their
Force to Taunton, and with another part to fight at Naseby, and after that (by
Gods blessing) to deliver up a free Kingdom to an ungrateful Inhabitant, and
to an envious cruel piece of a Parliament; nor did those honest-hearted so
much asperst Fairfax and Crumwells sin in owning the Army at New Market; nor in
their march from thence toward London; nor in their respects to those noble
Commissioners of Parliament sent to them; nor in their courtesy to those
discreet Citizens from London (who deserve much) nor their condiscending to
their desires to march off upon promise of two things;

First, That they would put out the imperious Reformadoes.

2dly. In securing the House, though neither performed, nor in scattering their
Forces at 200. miles distance, and providing for Ireland; nor in their return
upon those confessed insolences; nor in marching unto, and through the City, to
show their harmless intentions; nor in securing the King in that juncture; nor
in harkening to their Agitators in their just Proposalls; nor in asking money
to avoid free Quarter and other burdens; nor in bringing those of the House
that fled to them, home again; nor in desiring a sound Parliament, and
clearing it from such persons as had shaken their public interest; nor in
propounding wholesome means to the House, and leaving them to their feet to be
enlarged, altered, or explained to the Kingdoms advantage; nor lastly are
complaints against private Soldiers the proper evil of the Army: since when I
speak of the Army, I mainly intend their Council and conduct; For you know in
such a body that sickness in pay causes death in Discipline. But positively
we will turn up our lap, and show you our nakedness, et habebitis confitentes,
reos. We acknowledge we are reaping the ill fruits of our want of action.
Saevior Armis luxuria incubuit victosque ulei vitur.

It may be some of us have had our Lordly dish in Jaels Tent, and our head may
be nailed to the ground; we may think (the war being ended) we may begin to
look to our own comforts, and subsistence, and we are apt to plead, who shall
enjoy honor and other advantages: but those that have won them through
hazards, and think they may be confided in; It may be some of us look upon our
shops and Trades as things below us. We want that communion with God, and one
with another which we had in sad hours: we are forgetful of our mercies: we
may be apt to quarrel one with the other for want of an enemy.

We may have such a neighbor of the Court, as some of us may be Planet-struck,
yet I hope not principle shaken; we may wander too much from our own first
undertakings in the opinion of others.

We are not without varieties of thoughts about the matters of God, which never
appeared when we had no time for talking, having so much to do and act. We
cannot (we confess) live beyond our frailties in many kinds. To be short, we
have prayed more, loved more, believed more then we do. We are grown
effeminate with ease, and are more cowed with a dead dog, then we have been
with a living Lion. We are less in heaven and more in earth, and these truly
are our wounds dear friends.

Some other diseases there are as much considerable among others, which may be
of greater and stranger influence, as

First, All men's unbelief in God for the carrying on his work, he is not
minded in the whole business.

2. Our not designing a government from first to last.

3. Our general, proud, and careless carriages toward the present differences
which make so much noise among us.

4. A selvishnesse and negligence in Committees and men entrusted, behaving
themselves as if they could keep their painted and well-stuft Cabbins when the
ship is sinking.

5. A general want of the fear of God, and that spirit of trembling before
him, which whilst it was upon Ephraim, he was a glorious Tribe.

6. An oscitant and untrust kind of deportment in all men toward public
affairs, the truth is, the want of a public spirit threatens ruin very much.

7. Unwarranted Jealousies of all men and all actions: yea though convinced of
each others faithfulness.

8. Common unthankfulness and ingratitude to God and man, I fear shortly the
greatest error in the Kingdom, will be the famine of Love.

9. Delay to the distressed, making them more miserable then the matter of
their complaints does.

10. A spirit of lying and false witnesse-bearing, reaching to the undervaluing
of our enjoyments, to say England is grown so poor by the War, is false,
excepting what is blasted by some Northern winds, our treasure is yet in the
Kingdom: London as rich as before; witness clothes and diet: witness
marriages and disposing of children, where piety, proportion, parentage take
little place, unless mingled with much red clay; witness the ready money for
purchases if cheap: though shaken Titles in tottering times.

The Cure may lie in these?
The Army (you say) must yet be maintained, and we have thought of
Establishments, etc. to take off all offenses occasioned by the Army; either
you must find action for it, which will answer much, or repartite it upon
several Counties according to proportion, that every County may know their own
men and their charge, by which the Hollanders have kept their Army these 70. or
80. years; I have formerly answered all objections may be made against it.
The immediate pay of the Soldier in every County, as it will cut off many
unnecessary charges, so it will be easy and contentfull to both parties, I
mean the Soldier and the Landlord.

Secondly, Good men, not good Laws must save Kingdoms: not that I would
separate them; therefore I think that the first work to be attended: For as
the Venetians live upon their curious elections: so the Netherlands by keeping
their government in such hands as they do, though perpetuating offices to
them, have proved dangerous. Good Justices, good Majors, etc. had it been our
first work, it would have been our best, and Englishmen can as soon conform to
just and honest government as any other people. See it in the Army, how
serviceable the worst impressed men have been under example, and Characters to be
given out for the Elector, and elected, and for the manageing of chiefer
Burgesses. What if every fifty in every County chose one to choose for them,
etc. most men being ignorant of the worthiest men.

3dly. That all men from the highest to the lowest may know what they may trust
too without delay, and to trust God with the management of it if according to
his will.

4ly. Tithes or something of Analogy to them brought into a common stock in
every County will do two things, viz. keep a good proportion of money ready
in every County, and content the Preacher and his Widow better, when in Towns
200.l. or 150.l. per annum, and in the Parish 100.l. shall certainly be paid,
and 40.l. to the Widow, etc. as in other Countries they do, and hence raise a
stock to set the poor on work in every County, the want of which has been so
much complained of.

5ly. That Salaries may be appointed to all places of trust, that temptations
to deceit take not hold of Officers.

6ly. A Committee for union betwixt all men truly godly; that we may swim in
one Channel (which is in hand) with free and loving debates allowed in every
County, that we may convince, not confound each other, two or three Itinerary
Preachers sent by the State into every County: and a Committee of godly men,
Ministers, Gentlemen and others, to send out men of honesty, holiness, and
parts, into all Countries recommended from their test.

7ly. Three men yearly chosen in every Parish to take up differences, which
may be called friend-makers, as they do in other places with good success.

8ly. That the Customs (by which great sums come to hand) may be in very
choice hands, and their Underofficers in all parts may be presented from those
Ports to them: and out of 2. or 3. so presented, they choose one, if not just
exception against him.

9ly. That my former model for the Navy may be reviewed and accepted, which
was presented about two years since, whereby the Navies debts may be paid, and
two parts of three in the charge saved for future, and the work better done.

10ly. That Merchants may have all manner of encouragement, the law of
Merchants set up, and strangers, even Jews admitted to trade, and live with
us, that it may not be said we pray for their conversion, with whom we will not
converse, we being all but strangers on the Earth.

11ly. That Foreign Nations may have due respect by all fair correspondences
with them, and Intelligencers kept among them, especially that Scotland may be
used in all things as neighbors and friends, though not as Masters and
Commanders.

12. That Academies may be set up for Nobility and Gentry, where they may know
piety and righteousness, as well as gallantry and Court-ship; we commonly
fetch over the dirt of France, rather then their Excellencies, and that shorter
ways to learning may be advance'd; and that godliness in youth give them
place in Colleges before letters and importunity of men.

13. That the work of Ireland may not thus still be made a mock-work: but that
the business may be carried on strenuously and vigorously by men to be
confided; who may take it upon them by the great, or day-work, either of these;
there are good men will undertake it upon them, if fully countenanced with a
good Magazine and some money; for what we send now is but like a worm in a
hollow tooth, it takes up no jaw?

14. That no Magistrate in matters of Religion meddle further then as a nursing
Father, and then all children shall be fed, though they have several faces and
shapes.

15. That all men entrusted, may have set time, place and persons appointed to
give up their accounts unto, of their employments.

16. Since the vast and even incomprehensible affairs of this Kingdom by the
present Council, must have so many agitations and so many varieties pass upon
them; two ways it may be cured. 1. If nothing be taken into the Houses
consideration but res vere arduae, wherein the heart-blood of the Kingdom runs,
and no petty matters.

2. If a Council of State of 10. or 12. honest and godly wellbyast men might
sit near the House, and these, not invested with power, might commend matters
of high concernment to the House, and receive their scruples, and those to
state also government of Churches.

17. That Burgesses of Parliament may be better proportioned, 6. 4. or two for
Shires, and some for great Cities, that they give monthly some account to the
places intrusting them, and that some Laws may be probationers for a month or
two.

18. That some of the Parliament may be appointed to receive such suggestions
from friends for the good of the whole, which they cannot constantly bring in
by way of Petition.

19. That prisoners, especially for debt, may have dispatches, and not loose
heads, hearts and hands as well as heels in Gaoles, and that the Creditour may
maintain them in prison: that poor Thieves may not be hanged for 13.d. ob. but
that a Gally or two may be provided to row in the River or Channel, to which
they may be committed, or employed in drayning lands, or banished.

It were also to be wished that our Gentry find our Callings, and that younger
brothers may be better provided for by their parents, that some of them fall
not on learning and the Ministry as a shift, and some (which is worse) take up
their employments in high ways, or (at best) pester Ireland or Foreign
Plantations; and all to maintain the paintry and glister of the Family, and
too often to keep up the name and honor of it in a sottish and luxurious heir.

20. Quick Justice makes quiet Commonwealths; I look upon that as contenting
the Hollanders under their vast Taxes, and Excises; what they have they can
keep; where (in every Town) you may get Justice as often and as naturally as
their Cowes give milk; The few advocates in Amsterdam will tell you what
little use they make of Lawyers, where I have known a Merchant dealing for
30000. pound per annum, and in seven years not spend 20. shillings in Law.

And if I might not offend the Court and Gentry, I would say the wrapping up of
so many of them in Gowns, and scufling at Westminster, is rather a mark of
their meandness and Jejunenesse, and our slavery and folly, then of any
National glory; That to this day we can neither buy nor sell, convey nor make
Testaments, without great and questionable Parchments? And for Law must jurare
in verba, either of Littleton, Cook, or Casuist, ejusdem farinae, which would
find a Cure in keeping Records in all Counties of all men's estates and
alienations, etc. and those transmitted to a grand or leiger Record at
Westminst: the strength and time spent in Term quarrels, were better bestowed
upon the West Indies to which we have been so often called, and would soon
make an end of Europes troubles by drying up that Euphrates.

I know not what engagements the King has upon any, nor how the intercourse
lies: but before the close of new addresses, I wish the people might have two
things granted them, viz.

1. To understand by some wise Statist what the true English of prerogative,
privilege and liberty is. If these three bawling children were well brought to
bed, the whole house would be quiet.

2. That a certain time might be appointed to choose their Burgesses undenyably
if they please to make use of it, with writs or without: what year this shall
begin I say not: but if not granted, you shall hardly keep tyranny out of
doors.

To close all and cure all; would this Nation but follow the plain foote-steps
of providence in one thing, the work were done.

Let us but consider whither the Lord has not pointed out his work unto us,
viz. putting righteous men into places of trust, making way thereunto, as if
the fulfilling of the many prophesies and the expectation of the just, were now
to be answered. Witness the first and now second gaubling the Parliament, the
like in the City, the same in the Army, not less in the Ministry, as in the
choice of Jesse's sons: neither this nor that must serve but the least, that
the whole Kingdom has been in the refiners fire. The Lord would do us good
against our wills: but we content our selves to give him a Female when we
have a Male in the flock: This broke the Axle-tree of the Jewish State and
Church, and that bought Akeldama.

However I am confident God will carry on this work which is his own, and to
that end I look above all present agitations, knowing if we enter into our
chambers, and shut our doors for a little moment the indignation shall be
over-past.

FINIS.

