The Petition of diverse of the Inhabitants of the City of London, delivered at
their several Courts of Ward-Moot, to the Right worshipful the Aldermen and
Common Council of the several Wards of London the 22 of Deecember, 1645.
To the Right worshipful the Alderman, and Common Counsell-men of the Ward of
Farrington within, at their VVard-Moot, 22 of December, 1645.
A Representation of the humble and earnest Desires of the Jnhabitants of the
said Ward.

I. THat Church Government may speedily be settled within this City, before we
be utterly ruined with Rents and Divisions.

II. That this Government may be that which is agreeable to the Word of God,
and example of the best Reformed Churches, according to our solemn League and
Covenant with the most high God.

III. That no toleration, either of Popery, Prelacy, Schism, Heresy,
Superstition, Profaneness, or any thing contrary to sound Doctrine, or the
power of godliness, may at all be yielded unto, as being against the Word of
God, and contrary to the very Letter of our Covenant.

And these our most humble and earnest desires, which we are obliged and
encouraged also to make, by reason of our said Covenant, we entreat the right
worshipful the Alderman and Common Councel-men of this Ward, to represent to
the right honorable the Lord Mayor, and the honorable Court of Common
Council at their first Sitting, that they would make their further address to
the honorable Houses of Parliament, for the obtaining of these our just and
necessary desires.

The true copy of a Petition presented by the Inhabitants of the Ward of
Farrington within, at their Court Ward Moot, holden the 22. of December, before
the Right Worshipful the Alderman of the Ward, and Common Council then chosen
for the year ensuing, and there willingly approved of by the general consent
of the Inhabitants of the same Ward then present: the same Petition was
likewise presented by the Inhabitants of Farrington without the same day, at
their Court Ward Moot holden before the Right Worshipful the Alderman of their
Ward and the Common Council then chosen, and was likewise approved and
assented unto, and the like Petitions were presented in other Wards in London,
and assented unto.

Printed for Henry Shepherd at the Bible in Tower-Street, and William Ley at
Pauls-Chaine near Doctor^ Commons. 1645.


