A DEFENSE OF CHVRCH-GOVERNMENT, Exercised in PRESBYTERIALL, CLASSICAL, and
SYNODALL ASSEMBLIES; According to the practice of the Reformed Churches:
Touching I. The power of a particular Eldership, against those that plead for a
mere Popular Government, specially Mr AINSVVORTH in his Animadversion to Mr
Clyft. etc. II. The authority of Classes and Synods, against the Patrons of
Independencie: answering in this point Mr DAVENPORT his Apologeticall Reply,
etc. and Mr CAN his Churches Plea, etc, sent forth first by W. Best, and
afterward for this part of it, under the title of Syons Prerogative Royal.


By JOHN PAGET, late able and faithful Pastor of the Reformed English Church
in Amsterdam.

Hereunto is prefixed an Advertisement to the Parliament, wherein are inserted
some Animadversions on the Cheshire Remonstrance against Presbytery: by T. P.

MDCXLI. Printed by H. A. for Thomas Underhill, dwelling at the sign of the
Bible, in Woodstreet, LONDON.

AN Humble Advertisment to the high Court OF PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable, and most prudent Patriots;
IT is the divine observation of Ecclesiastes the Son of David King in
Jerusalem, Eccles. 3.1, 7.
To every thing there is a season: A time to keep silence, and a time to
speak. Truly it has seemed to be a time to keep silence in some bygone
years in England, when the Amos, 5.13.
prudent Ministers of God were necessitated to keep silence through the evil
of the times, having been Isa. 29.21.
made offenders for a word, as if their doctrine had been Amos, 7.10.
conspiracy against the State, and the land not able to bear all their words.
Howbeit for the English Isa. 62.1.6.
Zion and Ierusalems sake, the Lords remembrancers could not hold their peace
nor keep silence in secret: but Isa. 26.20.
entering into their chambers, and shutting the doors about them, to hide
themselves as it were for a little moment, have powered out their complaints and
supplications before the Lord (who is Psalm. 65.2.
a God that hears prayers, and Math. 6.6.
sees in secret) waiting on him till the indignation should be overpast. But
now it seems there is a time to speak in England, (And Prove. 15.23.
a word spoken in due season how good is it?) since 1. Cor. 16.9.
a great door and effectual is opened by a longed-for hopeful Parliament. Oh
how admirable it is, even to amazement! that the hearts and tongues of the
people of God throughout the English nation, have been so graciously enlarged
Hos. 14.2.
in taking words with them, (not only Zach. 12.12, 13, 14.
in their humiliations apart in families, but also) on the days 2. Chron.
20.3.4.
appointed by authority for solemn prayer and fasting; to Ezr. 8.21.
seek a right way for themselves, and for their little ones, and for all their
substance; speaking and crying unto the Lord, Amos, 7.5.
Cease we beseech thee, by whom shall English Jacob arise? for he is small.
Yea, and is it not exceedingly mavelous also? how after supplicating God in
such sort, their Act. 17.16.
Spirits were stirred in them to speak to your Honors of the cure-all-court of
Parliament in their manifold Petitions for Reformation, contributing votes by
thousands of several Counties. And what though 1. Cor. 16.9.
there be many adversaries that do murmur and repine at those Luke 19.39, 40.
wel-approved zelots? May it not be thought that if they had held their peace,
the stones would immediately have cried out?

The blessed tidings of this reviving state of English affairs spreading
abroad in sundry countries, is come also into the United Netherlands, to
refresh (as Prove. 25.25.
good news is wont from a far country) such of us of the English nation, who
have been enforced by home-oppressions to seek for liberty, employment and
livelihood (as the 2. Chro. 11.13, 14.
Priests and Levites in Israel did on somewhat the like occasion) who yet in our
measure Ier. 51.50. Psalm. 137.5, 6.
remember the Lord afar of, not daring through forgetfulness to let go out of
mind our most endeared native country. Psalm. 122.6.9.
Let them prosper that love and seek the welfare of England.

Hence your Honors most humble advertiser convinced of not 2. King. 7.9.
doing well to remain altogether sile^t, readily took hold on the opportunity
of the ensuing treatise (as Luke 19.3, 4.
Zacheus climbed up into a Sycomore tree to see his Savior, because of the
press, and litlenes of his stature) to insert a word, to be as Mark. 12.42.
the widows farthing, some addition to the great stock of more able qualified
seekers of Reformation.

Most noble and right worthy Sirs; It were much to have been wished, t'had
never been 2. Sam. 1.20.
told in Gath, that the Psalm. 12.1. Mic. 7.1, 2.
godly men have ceased, and the faithful failed in England: Woe is us, it is too
notoriously known, how that diverse worthies of the Lord of b. m. 2. King. 2.12.
the chariots and horsemen of the English Israel, who by Psalm. 46.4.
the christalline streams of pure doctrine made glad the city of God, had
their Reve. 11.7.
untimely deaths hastened by sharp tempests of persecution raised against them
by the Hierarchy through their Summoning, Traducing, Reproching, Suspending,
Excommunicating; Depriving, Fining, Imprisoning, and trampling on them as
unsavory salt, or as broken and despised vessels cast to the walls. Others have
been constrained to provide for their breathing as they could by removing into
foreign parts, after much suffering at home, and thereby exposed to the bitter
miseries Psalm. 56.8. Isa. 16.3, 4.
of wanderers, being debarred of the pleasant land of their nativity, ancient
habitations, natural kindred, familiar acquaintance, means of subsistence,
accustomed air, and wonted manners of people; and instead thereof Ezekiel. 3.5, 6.
cast into a land of strangers, and of a strange language, as a greater
aggravation of their most disconsolate condition. Yea and Psalm. 44.17.
all this come upon them, only for their Act. 24.16.
endeavoring to keep consciences void of offense toward God, and toward men;
in refusal of conformity to some superstitious ceremonies, and subscription to
the Canon (albeit they never refused to subscribe according to Stat. Q. Eliz.
13.12.
the law of the land) whereas otherwise they were orthodoxe and painful in
their ministry, and unblamable in their conversation, approving themselves to
the 2. Cor. 4.2.
consciences of their adversaries. Moreover they were such as highly prized the
Church Assemblies of England, and diligently frequented and joined in the
solemn administration of the word, Sacraments, and prayers, so far as they
could free themselves from their own personal pollutions and defilements, as
Mat. 23.1, 2, 3.
our Lord Christ directs in such case.

A true report of some Prelaticall proceedings in Chester Diocese.
May it please your Honors to receive a hint of some Prelaticall proceedings,
exemplified mostly in the particular of your humble advertiser; who was called
to the work of ministry many years agone in such place of Chester Diocese,
where he could execute his function, without such officiating as is usually
required of incumbents, that take the Cure in Parishes. In process of time Now
B. of Durham.
D. Morton became Prelate, who taking knowledge of diverse Non-conformists in
this Diocese, H. Commission pretended ag. Papists in Lancashire chiefly bent
ag. refusers of superstitious ceremonies.
sent out letters missive to summon some of them to the high Commission Court
then kept at Chester. Which being divulged, it pleased God to stir up some of
the eminent and well-affected Knights and Esquires inhabiting in that Diocese,
to consult and agree together to write a letter to the Bishop in these words; A
copy of a letter sent to the B. of Chapter from some worthy gentlemen of the
dioces, in behalf of some non-conformists.
Right Reverend, etc. Whereas we understand that diverse of our painful and
discreet Ministers, are lately by letters missive from your L. and others of
his Majesty's high Commission for causes Ecclesiastical within the Diocese of
Chester, enjoined to appear before you, to answer to such matters as shall be
objected against them: We have thought fitting to acquaint your L. with our
opinions of these our Ministers, whose names are subscribed, for the better
preve^ting (if need require) of such sinister and malicious informations, which
in these cases are frequently stirred up against men of their sort and quality,
sometimes by lewd and profane persons remaining in our own Church, and many
times by the disguised, subtle, and superstitious Romanists, and
Church-papists, whose hearts are wholly against us, all the while their faces
are seemingly with us. First therefore we have observed (so far as we are
able to judge) in these our Ministers, Integrity of life and conversation,
orthodoxall soundnes of doctrine in their teaching, diligence and painfulnes in
their places; sobriety, and peaceablenes in their dispositions, free from
factiousnes. In regard whereof, as also the great good and profit which our
Congregations where they remain have abundantly received from their ministry;
we are emboldned eftsoons to entreat, etc. The letter was delivered to the B.
at The B. had besides his Bishopric the Parsonage of Stocport, being the
greatest benefice in all Cheshire.
Stocport, who having read it, let fall these words. They whom the letter
concerns are the worse to be liked, for the good testimony the Gentlemen give
of them: And then speaking to me, (being one of the Subscribed in the letter)
required a proposal of any argument against the use of the Cross in Baptism;
that so he might instantly discover (as he boastingly spoke) our weakness and
folly in refusing to conform. But I desired to decline disputes with him,
partly since my errand at that time was to obtain his favor for release from
the High C. Court, if it might be procured; and partly since He was to be the
chief judge in our cause, which might prove prejudicial to us in case of a
denied dimission. Nevertheles when he pressed his demand in the presence of
many persons of quality (lest I should seem to betray a good cause in being
unwilling or 1. Pet. 3.15.
unready to give answer, when a reason of my profession was asked) I
propounded an argument, stating it according to the fairest pretense of urging
the sign of the Cross in Baptism, even as the Canon interprets the use of
it: For the dedicating of the party baptized to God. Whence I proved that the
sign of the Cross in Baptism was superstitious, since such dedication
signified by it, is an usurpatio^ of an office besides divine institution, and
consequently unlawful, as Levit. 10.1, 2. Galat. 1.8, 9.
by two texts of Scripture alleged and applied I did evince. After some debate
about this argument, and of a nonsense distinction used by him, viz. A
dedication of consecration, and a dedication of protestation, etc. He then
said, he could not believe that the Canon was so explaned, and therefore sent
for the book of Canons; but being thereby further convinced, and not knowing
what to answer, he passionatly wished, that either it had been otherwise
expressed, or that noe explanation had been added to the Canon. In fine he
ingenuously acknowledged his former neglect to study these controversies,
having hitherto esteemed lightly of them; yet since occasion seemed to require,
he now resolved to apply his studies a while this way. Heerupon he was pleased
to undertake our dismission from the H. C. C. till he should first have assayed
to win us to conformity in a scholasticall way, since he discerned in us (as
he said) some schollership above his expectation. At the same time he ordered
us, severally to set down in writing within the space of the month following
(and then to bring to him) 3 The B. would not dispute at all about the greatest
grieva^ce of the Non-conformists, viz. intolerable subscription unto 5 books
in several points questionable and faulty.
arguments, against the Cross in Baptism, the Surplisse in divine service,
and kneeling at the Lords supper. His order was accordingly observed, albeit a
desired success failed. For some of us shortly after were again summoned by
letters missive, to the H. C. Court, and then dealt with in a vexatious sort. I
was compelled to travel 30 miles from my dwelling, three several times in 14
days. On one of these Court days M. Nichols of b. m. a most pious and learned
Minister, being required to give an account of his arguments he had delivered
to the B. was in open Court by the B. and D. Snell scornfully taunted and
giered, as if what he had written was raw, and should therefore be roasted, when
they were not able to gainsay the wisdom and Spirit, by which he spoke. At
the same time (I having been immediately before sharply spoken unto by the B.
and Commissioners, and deferred to the Court for the week following) one of
the Bs chief Prelates have gentlemen to wait on them, but they are such for
the most part, as are notoriously debauched, as is commonly observed.
Gentlemen, accompanied with two Popish Gentlemen, belonging to a great Earl
then in Chester, plucked me a little aside, and did idly and disdainfully
upbraid me of simplicity, and reproach me as if I were conjuring, because I
looked to the ground, and answered nothing; they therefore also concluded I
should go to Hell, since my looks seemed thitherward. Such their vile language
uttered likewise with blasphemours swearing and cursing, in the hearing of many
thronging about us, occasioned a Gentleman that was present to complain of
their uncivil behavior, and in humane carriage: whereupon they being much
enraged, thrust him on the sudden to the door of the palace, and cast him
headlong down the stairs, to the endangering of his life. When the Court was
risen the B. was privately informed of his man's insolences, who seemed to be
somewhat discontented toward him; yet said, that what his servant had
disorderly done could be noe disparagment to him, that was his master. At my
coming to Chester the week follovving, as I had been ordered, the B. was
not well in the morning of the Court-day, and in that respect kept his
chamber, yet having notice of my attending, sent for me, and lying on his bed
reasoned and expostulated with me touching the Ceremonies a full hour, letting
fall by the way some complaints, that his remiss course with us, had been
prejudicial to his preferment to Lincoln Bishopric, vacant about that time.
So that in great passion he threatened to suspend, excommunicate, degrade, and
make the land too hot for me; asking me what I would do. I ansvvered in the
words of the Prophet, Mic. 7.7.
I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God
will hear me. He retorted, God would not hear a blasphemer, a blasphemer of
his mother the Church of England, and that despised her ordinances. I ansvvered
again, that I desired to fear God, and abhorred blasphemy; and that a
refusal of conformity to superstitious ceremonies, esteemed by the Prelaticall
party to be things indifferent, was neither blasphemy nor contempt. In
conclusion he was pleased to dismiss me at that time without any censure,
save of paying large fees to officers of the Court, toward payment vvherof he
gave ten shillings. Not long after this the said Prelate printed a book in
defense of the 3 nocent Ceremonies, pretending to answer our arguments given
in against them, Abridgm. was given to the B. by M. Midsley son of father
Midsley. They both had been Vicars of Ratsdale in Lancashire, and deprived for
inconformity to Ceremonies. The sone after degradation became a Physician, and
was prosecuted for not kneeling at Sacrament.
and also that unansvverable Abridgment of the reasons of the Ministers of
Lincoln Diocese, so far as it argued against them. But the weakness of his
Defense and pretended answer is fully and effectually discovered by the
learned D. Ames in his printed Reply thereto: And in his Fresh Suit against
humane Ceremonies in Gods worship, or Triplication to D. Burgess his
Rejoinder for D. Morton.

The translation of the said Prelate to Lichfeild near the same time, became
occasion to D. Bridgman, the Parson of Wiggan in Lancashire, to succeed in the
Bishopric of Chester; who for a space moved not much against any, pursuing
rather his vvorldly affairs, save only that he suspended a fevv
Non-conformists, and At Knutesford a market town in Cheshire a Gentleman of
the country being vainly disposed, did cause a bear passing through the
street to be led into the Chapel: which the Bishop hearing of suspended the
Chapel from having any divine service or sermons for a long time, as being
profaned by the bear.
Knutesford Chapel. But when D. Neale the Prelate of Winchester, could not
resist the title of Grace, but was removed to York, and should visit in
Chester Diocese, being in that Province; then the said Prelate of Chester,
pretending fear of the Archb. of Y. in case that at his Visitation he should
find any Non-conformists, and so tax him of negligence or partiality, did
therefore send for and inhibit privately most of the Nonconformists in his
Diocese. About the same time, upon notice given, I went to him at his house in
Lancashire, and desired his favorable conuivency as formerly; which he denied
to grant, lest (as he said) he should hazard the favor of his Prince. Yet he
required to hear at that time what I could say against kneeling at the
Sacrament. I alleged our Savior Christ his argument against it. For Math.
15.9. Mark. 7.7.
he esteems it a vain worshipping of him, when men's precepts are taught for
doctrines; which by a just inference I applied against kneeling at the
Sacrament. Now all the answer the B. gave was that he expected from me a more
learned argument. And then said, He thought I would have insisted in the
gesture used by Christ at the institution, which he would show me what manner
of gesture that was, to convince thereby how unseemly the use of it would be in
the Church. And so he gravely laid himself along on a bench by a table in his
parlour, leaning on his elbow: and then affirmed Christ's posture all the Supper
was such; which he said, I was not able to contradict, especially if I
understood Greek, since the original word used in the Gospells, implied so
much. I replied, that what ever my understanding in the Greek tongue was, yet
undoubtedly the Translaters of the new Testament were skilful therein, and had
rendered it Math. 26.20. Mark. 14.18. Luke 22.14. John. 13.12.
Sitting. Yea and D. Morton, his predecessor, notwithstanding he kept a stir
about the translation, yet confessed, it was a kind of sitting.

About two years after (when 'twas thought the storm of the Archb. Visitation
had been blown over) means was used again to the B. of Chester to obtain
liberty of preaching; but failing, there were procured from Y. 3 writings,
signed by the Register of the H. Com. in the behalf of three of us in
Cheshire, giving way to our going on in preaching as formerly. But within three
months following, attachme^ts were brought from the H. Com. (no letters
missive having preceded) to apprehend and bring us to York, and there to
imprison us till we should give security to satisfy the Court, in all their
dema^ds. In this strait (having had some notice through the good providence of
God, before the attachments could be served, and knowing too much already 2.
These. 3.2.
of the absurd unreasonablenes of that Court) we withdrew ourselves as the 1.
King. 17.5.
Prophet Eliah sometime escaped the fury of Ahab. Howbeit the inquiry of these
H. Com^issi. was not only such, as was after the Ibid. ca. 18.10.
Prophet in publik intimations in our Parishes in Cheshire, and taking the
messengers oath he found us not, but also in so^e kind more malicious: for
they fined us in great sum^es of money, and agravated our fines one Court-day
after another, and then returned them into the Exchequer at London, where they
were extended for the Kings use and then begged by M. Tirill a servant to his
Maj. with who^ we were enforced to compou^d for present money paid in hand to
our great impoverishme^t, as being otherwise liable to greater troubles. I
humbly beseech your Honors to pardon this boldness thus far animated by your
garcious aims and endeavors to vindicate the liberties of your distressed
countryme^: Wherein I should still have remained patiently silent, both in my
own and brethre^s behalf, had our sufferings been all (although the
Hierarchy could not countervaile the dam^age to our King and nation) and had
there not now been an opportunity of some redress. Esth. 7.4.
I crave leave therefore to suggest a few of the woeful fruits and sad
consequents of Prelaticall proceedings. Sad consequents of Prelacy.
For eve^ hence it is come to pass that, I. Some well affected Parents have
been discouraged from training up their hopeful sons in such learning as
should fit to the Ministry. II. Some conscientious young men, having attained
to a good degree of learning, have diverted, and applied their studies
otherways. III. Some in the Ministry concerning the faith have made
shipwreck, or schismed dangerously, entertaining unsou^d, and unwarrantable
opinions and courses, turning to be Anabaptists, Separatists, Semi-separatists,
etc. and others become licentious, or merely formal and careless in the
execution of their calling. IV. Some of the 2. Pet. 2.2.
people have follovved their pernicious and deceivable ways of Anabaptisme,
Separation, Independe^cy, Popularity, and Profanesse, by reason of whom the way
of truth is evil spoken of. Hos. 4.9.
Like Priest, like People. V. But behold greater scandals the^ these; for hence
Ezekiel. 8.3.
the image of jealousy, which provokes to jealousy, even 2. These. 2.7.
the Mystery of iniquity has been more bold to lift up the head, and Ezekiel.
8.12, 16.
chambers of imagery have been raised at the upper end of Cha^cels, and Altars
placed thereon, and worship directed toward the East. VI. Hence In the year 16
17. D. Morto^ B. of Chester framed the directions for the first liberty granted
to sports on the Lords day; at the same time he so eagerly prosecuted the
Non-conformists about Ceremonies.
a wide gap has been opened to Libertinisme, in the audacious profanation of
the Lords day; gross contempt of the faithful ministry; scorning at the
performances of family duties; bolstring of ignorance, the stepdame of
devotio^; countenancing of Wakes, Rush-bearings, Mixt-dancings, May-poles,
Beare-beatings, Stage Plays, Revellings, Healthings, and all manner of the
like disordered courses, with a censuring all strictnes in religion, and
circumspect walking to be foolish precisenes and Puritanisme. VII. Hence have
followed those irregular confusions in the popular and independent government
of the Brownistically affected, breaking in pieces again and again to their
great reproach; and yet discovering thereby, that their Act. 5.38.
new way is not of God, since it does daily come to naught, by their own
disuniting and unchurching of themselves. viii. Judge. 5.15.
Hence have risen those great thoughts of heart amongst brethren, occasioning
bitter contentions, fruitles janglings, censorious words, tart and galling
writings, alienation of affections, strangenes of countenance, breach of
Christian fellowship, interruption of prayers, and neglect of necessary mutual
offices. ix. Yea and hence doubtless has issued (as from the proper original)
that unworthy Remonstrance against Presbytery, represented to the house of
Peers from diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen of Cheshire, as appears by a printed
book under the name of Sir Thomas Aston Baronet, 1641. The grievous sca^dal
and offense whereof may in some part be evinced by these short animadversions
following.

Animadversions on the Cheshire Remonstrance.
I. The title of it; A Remonstrance against Presbytery.

ANIMADVERS. Of the title the same may be said, which was observed Declaration
against Vorstius.
by the great and wise king James of famous memory, touching the title of
Bertius his book de apostasia sanctorum, viz. The title only were enough to
make it worthy the fire. Because I. The holy Scripture approves of Presbytery,
as a divine ordinance both for the 1. Tim. 4.14.
impositio^ of hands, and also for 1. Tim. 5.17.
the exercise of rule and government. II. Presbytery is established in the
neighbor Reformed Churches, which are precious in the eyes of the Lord, and of
all well-affected to the reformed religion in England. III. Prelaticall men are
not wont in their writings to contradict it simply. How comes it then to
pass that some in Cheshire Numb. 12.8.
are not afraid to speak against Presbytery?

II. The pretended occasion of the Remonstrance against Presbytery, alleged by
the contriver and subscribers, is, A Petition; and Positions preached at
Chester, and Knutesford, annexed to the Remonstrance.

ANIMADV. The occasion of the suggested pretense, is but a mere pretense,
having noe just ground at all. For I. Neither the Petition, nor Positions
anexed to the Remonstrance do seek for Presbyterian discipline mentioned in
the positions in greater characters seem to be the words of Remo^st. not of
the Preacher, disaffected to Presbyterian government.
Presbytery, but seem rather to affect a popular government. II. The Patrons
of popular government (contended for in the positions) are for the most part
either Separatists, or Semi-separatists, who are as opposite to Presbyteriall
government, as they are to Prelacy; as is well known to them that know them.
And therefore it behooveth Cheshire men to John. 7.24.
give righteous judgment, when they take upon them to censure, and in-no-wise
confound and jumble together opinions and defenders of them so directly
opposite. For 2. Cor. 5.10.
we must all appear at the tribunal of the Genesis 18.25.
righteous judge of all the world, who will do right.

III. REMONSTR. takes for granted that Provincial and Diocesan B B. are to be
understood by the Remonstr. otherwise nothing is concluded.
Provincial and Diocesan Bishops are of Apostolical institution; Philip. 1.1.
1. Tim. 3.1.
alleging in the margent two texts of Scripture for his proof.

ANIMADV. Neither of the texts alleged do infer an Apostolical institution
of Provincial and Diocesan Bishops. For, I. The original words translated
(...).
Bishops or Overseers, and (...).
Presbyters or Elders, are equivalent names of the same office, and are so
used in the Act. 20.17, 28. 1. Pet. 5.1, 2.
Scripture. II. The pleaders for Hierarchy do grant that Bishops and
Presbyters in Scripture phrase are the same. III. The text in the Epist. to
Phil. 1.1. mentions Bishops in the plural number, that is, such officers as
did oversee the Church at Philippi, and not a Bishop alone, superior to other
officers in degree, or government, according to the opinion of Hierarchicall
men 3. John. 9.
affecting preeminence. IV. The text in 1. Tim. 3.1. mentions also office, as
well as Bishop, which office is described in the 1. Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
subsequent verses to be the office of the Presbyter. And this may appear
further by comparing therewith the Tit. 1.5, 6, 7.
Epist. to Titus. V. It is good to be wise according to sobriety in
understanding some things in 2. Pet. 3.16.
Paul's Epistles and other Scriptures, lest for want of learning and stability
they be wrested to destruction. This is an useful item for Cheshire men and
others also.

IV. REMONSTR. commends Bishops, that they were the great lights of the
Churches; and Martyrs in primitive times.

ANIMADV. There is noe consequence to justify Prelacy hence. For 1. Papists
pretend the same thing, albeit unjustly, in the behalf of their Romish Bishops
and Hierarchy. II. The name of Bishops or Presbyters is oftentimes
indifferently by the Fathers attributed to those great lights, and Martyrs: as
is evident in their books, and sufficiently cleared by Orthodox Writers against
the Papists. III. Such Bishops as hadia superiority in those times, Ierom.
Gomment. on Epist. to Titus.
received it from the Church in humane policy, not by divine institution.

V. REMONST. asscribeth to Prelates the redemption of the purity of the Gospel
now professed in England from Romish corruption.

ANIMADVERS. This assertion seems to want the truth of story. For 1. In the
book of Martyrs alleged by the Remonstr. the reformation of religion is
referred to King Edward himself, and his Counsel, and Parliament. II. King
Edward approved himself better then the best of the Prelates, in withstanding
toleration of Mass to his sister, at the request of the Emperor. III. Archb.
Cranmer acknowledged to M. Cheke that King Edward had more Divinity in his
little finger, then all they had in all their bodies. Let the Remonst. therefore
henceforth take heed of detracting from Kings unjustly, to extol the Bishops
unjustly.

VI. REMONST. observes that diverse of the Prelates have been great assertors
of our religion against the common enemies of Rome.

ANIMADV. I. Diverse of the Prelates have been too great friends to Rome, as it
is famously known, both heretofore, and of late also. II. The Prelates
generally have more vehemently prosecuted the faithful Ministers refusing
conformity to some popish ceremonies, (albeit of the same religion professed
and established in England) the^ the superstitious and idolatrous Papists, the
grand enemies of the reformed religion. II. The Prelates generally do make use
of diverse arguments used by Romanists against Protestants for their
Hierarchicall discipline and Ceremonies. IV. The greatest assertors of the
reformed religion amongst the Prelates make use against the Papists of the
Non-conformists arguments against prelacy and superstition. V. Non-conformists
and Ministers of the Reformed Churches, where Presbytery is established, have
approved themselves oppugners of Antichrist to purpose.

VII. REMONST. urges a continuance of Prelacy, since it is established by the
laws of the land.

ANIMADV. I. It sometimes falls out that 1. King. 12.28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
unjust laws are enacted, and 1. King. 16.26. Mic. 6.16.
continued in a land professing religion, touching both the Ministry and
Ceremonies. II. Parliaments do as well serve to repeal, as to enact laws, as
just cause and occasion shall require. And accordingly English Parliaments have
been wont to proceed.

VIII. REMONST. affirms that in the doctrine of the Prelates generally taught
nothing is found dissonant from Gods word.

ANIMADV. I. The Prelates generally have taught very seldom, so that it
cannot much be taken notice what manner of doctrine they teach. Queen Eliz. is
reported to say, that when she made a Bishop, she marred a Preacher. ii. 2.
Cor. 11.13.
Deceitful workers do sometimes transform themselves into the Apostles of
Christ. III. It is well known that many of the^, and their favorites have
been deeply stained with Popish, and Arminian points. IV. The Prelates
generally have countenanced Arminians rather then any way opposed them.

IX. REMONSTR. suggesteth a danger of tenants preached publicly, and of
printed pamphlets, etc.

ANIMADV. I. Such See above 2. Animadv.
suggestion against tenants intimated, does not at all reflect on the seekers
of Presbyterial government. II. Albeit 'twere to have been desired, that noe
such unwarrantable courses had been held by preposterous and popular zealots,
yet it is noe new thing that Math. 13.39.
Satan by his instruments should sow tares in Gods wheat field. III.
Anabaptists in Luthers time were a great scandal to the begun glorious
reformation, yet not any just ground of prejudice against it.

X. REMONSTR. conceiteth that the 26 Prelates are easily responsall to
Parliaments, for any of their deviations from the rule of law.

ANIMADV. 1. Deviation that is 2. King. 23.15.
wholly devious is not at all responsall either to. God or rational men. Such
a deviation is Prelacy, considered as Prelacy, in the sense of the D. Bilson,
D. Downham, D. Hall.
rigid patrons of it. II. Prelates have not been easily responsall to
Parliaments at any time for their deviations in prelacy, till this present
Parliament. III. There are more then 26 Ordinaries that dispense the Civil and
Canon law, viz. Suffraganes, Chancellors, Co^missaries, Archdeacons,
Officials, Surrogates, Rural deanes, Subdeanes, etc. IV. It is better to Math.
15.13.
root up the plants, which God has not planted.

XI. REMONST. fears future inconvenience may be found in the government of a
numerous Presbytery in England, which may consist of near 40000
Church-governors.

ANIMADV. I. No inconvenie^ce need be feared in establishing of Christ's
ordinance. II. The errors of Presbyteries in their government are responsall to
Classes and Synods. III. It was the honor of the land 1. Chro. 23.3, 4, 5.
of Israel in King David's reign, that there were numbered from the age of 30
years and upward 38000 Church Officers. And would it not be the honor of
England in the reign of King Charles to have 40000 Elders to oversee the Lords
houses in the days of the Gospel? IV. It is much to be feared (such have
been the unhappy fruits of Prelacy) that they that should be chosen to oversee
in Parishes, will be 2. Chro. 29.34.
found too few, so that there will be great need of uniting or combining
several lesser Parishes adjoining into one Presbytery.

XII. REMONSTR. apprehends that presbyterian government may prove to be
inconsistent with Monarchy, and dangerously conducible to Anarchie.

ANIMADV. I. Monarchy in the civil state and Presbytery being both Gods
ordinances are not inconsistent one with another. There may be a Matthew. 22.21.
rendering to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and to God, the things that
are Gods, in one and the same Commonwealth. II. King Basil. dor. Epist. to
reader.
James of b. m. knew and found a consistency of Monarchy and Presbytery
together in Scotland. III. King Charles finds the same in Scotland at this
day. IV. The United Netherlands do find by experience that Presbytery is noe
way conducible to Anarchie. But had the reins of Presbytery been loosed, as
the Arminians affected, what might have ensued may easily be guessed by some
begun commotions of that party.

XIII. REMONSTR. fears that the consequents of Presbytery would be the utter
loss of learning and laws.

ANIMADV. I. There Psalm. 53.5.
are some that often fear, where noe fear is. II. Learning and laws do
flourish gloriously in the reformed Churches, where Presbytery is established.
III. Prejudice and loss of learning and laws have in great part been
occasioned by Prelacy. For 1. Is it not through the default of Prelates, that
there are so many Isa. 56.10.11.
unlearned and unable to preach in the ministry? 2. Is it not by the
negligence of Prelates, that there are so many negligent Ministers, suffering
their gifts to decay by seldom preaching? 3. Is it not from their
qualifications and dispensations, there are so many Nonresidents, and
Pluralists, as that other Scholars of better desert do want encouragme^t? 4.
Does not the Parliament well enough know and understand who are the Seekers of
the subversion of the laws, and of introducing an arbitrary government?

XIV. REMONS. is subscribed by a numerous sort of the Nobles, Baronets,
Knights, Esquires, Divines, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others inhabitants of
Cheshire.

ANIMADV. This is indeed the sad consequent of Prelacy in Cheshire. Ah and
alas, that Cheshire the chief shire.
Cheshire not long agone reputed and deservedly esteemed for the Prove. 12.26.
profession and power of religion more excellent then their neighbors, should
Ier. 2.21.
now turn to a degenerate plant of a strange vine to the Lord! Especially the
Ministry that had their spiritually glorious Exercises at Northwich,
Namptwich, Knutesford, Macclesseild, Bowden, Frodsham, Budworth, Torperley,
Tarvin, Ince, Motterum, etc.
monthly Exercises, and solemn assemblies (besides their blessed Sabbaths)
frequented by sundry of the renowned Gentry; and very many wel-disposed people,
whereby 1. Tim. 3.13.
they purchased to themselves a good degree in Christianity and great boldness
in the faith, which is in Christ Jesus. But yet it may be thought in a
charitable construction, some excuse of the greatness of their error, that
either the most of the^ subscribed the Remonstrance 2. Sam. 15.11.
in their simplicity, not knowing whereto it tended, or else in an inconsiderate
have, being The letters sent to the several Hundreds required a hasty dispatch.
urged to do quickly, what they did, since dispatch was the life of the
business, and noe copies permitted to be taken. However, its not to be doubted,
but that Reve. 2.1.
He that walks amidst the golden candlesticks, Reve. 3.4.
does graciously take knowledge of many names in Cheshire ( 1. King. 19.18.
it may be 7000) that as Hos. 11.12.
Judah do yet rule with God, and are faithful with the Saints.

Right honorable, there is no fear of your abundant wisdoms in discerning of
these grievous Prelaticall maladies, nor of your compassionate faithfulness in
applying seaso^able remedies; since all me^ must needs acknowledge, that its 1.
King. 10.6.7.
a true report, they have heard of your acts and wisdom, exceeding the fame
thereof. Luke 1.68.
Blessed be the Lord God of England that has visited and redeemed his people.
Psalm. 118.2.
Let the Churches of the Saints in England, Scotland, and Ireland, now say, his
mercy endures for ever. Let the Non-conformists ( Psalm. 83.3.
Gods hidden ones in those lands) now say, his mercy endures for ever. Ye
Judge. 6.12.14.
mighty men of valor, the Lord has been with you hitherto, 1. Sam. 17.36.
subduing the Lion and the Bear (even the High Commission court, and Star
chamber) that did prey upon the flock. Go on in this your might to save from
(that uncircumcised Philistin) the oppressing Hierarchy. And let it be 1. Sam.
25.31.
noe offense of heart to your Honors to 2. Pet. 1.12.
be stirred up to go forward, making the word of God the Psalm. 119.24.
man of your counsel. And for your better help and Act. 8.31.
guidance, may it please your Honors to make use of the labors of godly-learned
Interpreters, that have been the excellent lights of the Reformed Churches,
both Calvin, Beza, G. Bucer, Didoclavius, etc.
abroad and also in Cartwright, Traverse, Vdal, Parker, Bayne, etc.
England; observing withal the Apostolical advertisment touching 1. Cor.
11.16.
the Custom of the Churches of Christ, and their Colos. 2.5.
comely order, even of the purest Scots, French, Dutch, etc.
reformed Churches from all Antichristianisme, both in doctrine and discipline.
These Reformed Churches have in their cities, towns, and villages 1. Tim.
4.14.
Presbyteries; 1. Tim. 5.17.
consisting of teaching and ruling Elders, chosen by the plurality of their
voices, consented unto by the Congregation, and approved by the Magistrates and
Classis. These Act. 20.17.28.
Elders do take heed to the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made them
Overseers; They ordain Officers, admit to the Sacraments, admonish and censure
offenders, according to Math. 18.17.
Christ's rule of discipline: and they signify to the Congregation what
belongs to the^ to take knowledge of, either to consent unto the same, or
except against it, as just cause shall require. And in case some difficulty do
appear in the affairs of the Church, that cannot be decided well by the
Presbytery, the^ they have a liberty (and are wont) to appeal Act. 15.2.
and seek help and assistance from the Classis, consisting of neighbor
Presbyteries, (called by some also Presbyteries) with which they are combined
in an equal power and authority, noe One exercising any prelaticall
preeminence. And if the matter controverted cannot satisfactorily be determined
by the Classis, the^ there is a refere^ce to the Provincial Synod, consisting
of the Deputies chose^ by the several Classes, of equal power and authority.
And if yet agreement be not made, then the matter is to be brought to a
National Synod, consisting of Deputies sent from the Provincial Synods. In
their several Presbyteries, Classes, and Synods, Provincial and National,
they have Presidents and Scribes chosen from amongst themselves for the more
orderly menaging of their Sessions. And in Synods some chief Magistrates are
present to see order observed. This way of Christ, walked in by the Reformed
Churches, is the way of peace, liberty, and edificatio^, though carped at by
some Jude verse. 8.16.
that speak evil of what they neither know nor understand. And for the more
clear and pregnant demonstration hereof, the following treatise touching the
power of Elderships, Classes, and Synods may be of singular use; written by an
Math. 13.52.
able, judicious, and pious Divine, instructed to the Kingdom of heaven,
having been well studied, and diligently exercised in the doctrine and
practice of discipline above 30 years together; whilst he was Pastor of the
English reformed Church in Amsterdam; where was special occasion Matthew. 25.20.
to put forth his talent, by reason of the chiefest of the Separatists that
sojourned there at the same time. And albeit the Author lived not to finish,
and review his pains, yet through divine providence, a Timothy 1. Cor. 4.17.
who knew his ways (trained up in the Scriptures, and other good learning in
Schools, and University, and for present 2. Tim. 2.15.
a workman that needs not to be ashamed) has brought the 2. Tim. 4.13.
parchments he left behind him to public use, for the common benefit of the
English nation in a time of need, calling for help 2. Sam. 15.34.
and counsel to defeat the dangerous projects of all Achitophels.

Right honorable, ye are as 2. Sam. 14.17.
Angels of God to discern good and bad, and to speak comfortable words to
your afflicted and banished Countrymen; Ye are the great Counselors, Judges,
and State-physitians of England. Now Isa. 9.6.
the Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince
of peace furnish your Honors more and more with the Isa. 11.2.
Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and might, the
Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 20.4.
and fulfill all your counsels which are for the 1. Cor. 10.31.
glory of God, for the 1. Pet. 2.17.
honor of our gracious King Charles, and for the true Job, 22.30.
welfare of England, Scotland, and Ireland; even so prays

Your Honors most humble advertiser, and devoted observer, THOMAS PAGET.

The Publisher to the Christian Reader.
THere are two staves wherewith the Lord Christ, the great Shepherd of his
sheep, does usually feed his flock; Doctrine and Discipline. By the one he
makes them to lie down in green pastures, and leads them beside the still
waters, replenishing their souls with the food of life; by the other he
guides them and orders them in their going out and coming in, for their
further peace and safety: and both his rod and his staff do comfort them.
If either of these be wanting, the flock is endangered; and if God in his just
judgment cause one of them to fail, the other presently comes to be in
jeopardy. Woeful experience has taught, that where the reigns of Discipline
are slackned or ill guided, there the soundnes of Doctrine does hardly subsist
long: and where the truth of Doctrine is assaulted, there the course of
Discipline is not free from injurious attempts. Though Doctrine justly
challenge the first place, yet seeing Discipline also, to speak properly, is a
part of Doctrine, being only the practice of divine truth revealed concerning
the guidance of the Church; hence it may not without cause share in the
arguments alleged for the necessity and benefit of the other. They both being
so nearly allied, and jointly requisite to the welfare of Gods Church, the
Enemy, ever envying the prosperity, and plotting the ruin thereof, where he
cannot prevayle against the one, he sets on work his mischievous devices
against the other: When he cannot hinder the growth of good corn and sound
trueths, by sowing tares; then he makes so much the more furious onsets upon
the fences and hedges of due order and government. And if his designs may be
effected in the one, he finds a readyer way to the other. But he that has
bruised Satan's head, is not ignorant of his devices, nor slow to resist him in
his enterprises. Christ does graciously provide for the safety of his flock,
against both kinds of evils, by such instruments as he is wont to raise for
the explaining and vindicating the truth of those laws which he has given,
both to direct and maintain his people in the obedience of his will, and to
stop the mouth of all iniquity oppugning the same. His goodness therefore is to
be acknowledged in whatsoever helps to this purpose are affoorded unto us. And
that thou may the better be provoked hereunto, Christian Reader, concerning
the Treatise now presented unto thee, take a brief survey at thy first
entrance, of somewhat may further fit thee unto a more judicious and profitable
perusal of the work it self.

The maine errors touching the exercise of Church Government, may be reduced
unto these two extremes, whereby men swarve from that middle and safe way
prescribed by Christ, the only Prince and Lawgiver of his Church. Some
ambitious of preeminence, making themselves lords over Gods heritage, have
brought in, and seek to maintain a Tyrannical kind of government in the
Church, by engrossing all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction into their own hands,
as the Popes, and Popish Bishops: Against these Usurpers many Worthies have
stood up, and done valiantly, in their Writings, whereof diverse remain yet
unanswered. Others have erroneously fallen into a contrary extreme; while
opposing Hierarchicall Tyranny, they have become pleaders for a mere
Democracy; and not content to reject Provincial and Diocesan Bishops, they
have impugned the lawful combination of Churches in Provincial and Classical
Synods. Against this twofold error the ensuing Treatise is directed. The
former part thereof was written long agone, about the year 1618, upon the
occasion noted in the Introduction. And though it was but a beginning of a
larger writing, neither finished nor polished for public view: yet considering
how little there is extant in this kind, how useful it may be for these
times, and what affinity it has with the other controversy touching Classes
and Synods, by how much the opposers of such joint Presbyteries do seldom
allow the due power of particular Elderships; I thought good to prefixe it
before the other, in such wise as it does now come forth. The second and maine
part of this Treatise discusseth at large (and more fully then any other yet
seen) the question concerning the due power of Classical and Synodall
Assemblies. A controversy, in a manner unknown to former ages, and for the
present scarcely heard of among the Reformed Churches in other nations. For
though the positive truth thereof be manifest from the testimonies of Orthodox
Writers of all times and places; yet hitherto it has not been showed that
ever any Authors of note (I mean either of former ages, or other nations)
have maintained the assertions here opposed, viz. that the power of Classes and
Synods is an undue power, and that all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction must be
confined within the bounds of a particular Congregation. H. Barrow, and those
of that Sect, are noted to be the first that in such sort have opposed this
kind of government. The Arminians indeed have spoken much against the
jurisdiction and deciding sentence of Synods, Censur. Confess. Remonstr. p.
322.326.328. Apol. Remonstr. f. 6. and 282-290.
but upon other grounds; to wit, so far as it takes away that liberty of
Prophecy which they plead for, and describe to be in effect an unlimited
licentiousnes of venting and maintaining almost any thing in matters of
religion. They do so contradict the power of Synods, that withal they
overthrow all Ecclesiastical judgment and censure (at least in matters of
heresy and false doctrine) as well in a particular Congregation as elsewhere.
Herein they differ from the Patrons of Independencie, here disputed against.
These therefore, though they be not all Brownists, yet they must not take it
ill to see this error in the following Treatise sometimes branded with the
mark of Brownisme. especially when the Author deals with Mr Can, a known
Separatist, and hitherto the busiest Disputer for this opinion. Besides, it is
not unknown that this Tenet of Independe^cy has been attended with
Semiseparatisme in diverse of the better sort of those that have held it, both
in Mr Jacobs time, when Orthodox men began first to be stained with it; and of
later years also, when new exorbitant oppressions of the Hierarchy, have
occasioned many to witness their dislike of Prelaticall government, whereof
some eschewing that rock of usurping Episcopacy, have inconsiderately rushed
upon these sands of Popularity and Independency. And these are the points here
discussed.

Concerning the Author of this Defense, not to speak of his other abilities
wherewith he was excellently furnished unto every good work in the Ministry
whereunto he was called, it may be observed how he was specially fitted unto
the maintaining of trueths of this nature. He was not as one of yesterday in
regard of his knowledge, study and practice of these points of
Church Government. Long experience has taught him in these things what he
says, and whereof he affirms. Of those forty years and upward, wherein he
labored in the Ministry, for thirty of them and above, he has been
conversant in the exercise of Presbyteriall and Classical government. During
which time, his abode being in the same place where the ancient and chiefest
opposites unto this Discipline were seated, he had special occasion to be
acquainted with their courses, and to arm himself and others against them.
Besides, it may not be amiss to observe the correspondence which the Author
has had with diverse of the learnedest of our nation, together with the esteem
which they have had of him and his abilities in these points of Divine
learning. I will instance only in these three Worthies, Mr Parker, Mr Sh. the
Author of the Reply to D. Down. and D. Ames; whose names use frequently to be
mentioned in writings of this kind. For Mr Parker, the familiar and loving
acquaintance betwixt him and the Author, is partly noted Page 105.
in the Treatise itself. And though Mr Dav. would make his Reader to suspect it
were otherwise, yet it what he has written Apol. reply. p. 74.75.76.
to this purpose be examined by the rule and square of truth; it will be found
to be only a sinister insinuation, grounded upon unsound reports. The widow of
Mr Par. has of later years before sufficient witnesses protested solemnly
the foul untrueth of that that was laid to this our Authors charge concerning
him. Which charge while Mr D. undertakes to justify, he slightly passes over
the maine thing where with the Answerer, as he calls him, had cleared himself
from that imputation, and instead of due answer, turns aside unto other
matters, neither true nor pertinent, as may be manifested from undeniable
evidences. After Mr Parker removed to Doesborough, to preach to that Garrison
(not to a Leager, as Mr D. has it;) where he died, not about 3 months (as Mr
D. says) but above 8 months at least after he went from Amsterdam; not in the
year 1613. (as Mr D. was informed) but in the y. 1614: from thence he wrote
many loving letters to the Author, wherein he does thankfully acknowledge
sundry kind offices received, and occasionally entreats the performance of
others. Among the rest, being causelessly accused touching some things in his
book de Descensu ad Inferos (which he dedicated to our Author, together with
the other Officers of the same Church) he writes thus, I pray, use the means
which conveniently you can, to clear my innocence, etc. And afterward in
another letter; I thank you for your pains in defending my innocence, which I
would keep if I might, howsoever the success fall out for my return to
Amsterdam, etc. Touching that very matter he writes, I thank you for the
pains you have taken for me, although in vain: at which I am not dismayed nor
any whir moved, being assured that it is come to pass by the will of the Lord,
who I know will be my God as well out of Amsterdam as in it, etc. Whereas the
second part of Mr Sh. his Reply was committed to the Authors trust, for the
overseeing of the press, and some passages were observed, which he conceived
to be prejudicial unto the due maintaining of the cause, Mr Parker being
advertised thereof, returned this answer: I have gone in my De Po^it. Eccles.
third book, to the very point you doubt of, and there left, till I had seem
this book printed. I am not as yet resolved fully about these things: etc.
Being I am not as yet clearly resolved. you may not look I should send you my
judgment therein, save only this, that I incline to your opinion, for ought I
yet see in the specialities by you mentioned, etc. Afterward, having
considered further of those particulars, he approved our Authors judgment, and
says in his next letter, I verily think as you write, that every Congregation,
etc. The matter itself would be too long to rehearse in this place. He advised
him at the same time to qualify the words about which the difficulty was, etc.
who chose rather to send the Copy to Mr P. for the amending or altering of
what they conceived to be amiss. Mr P. returned the Copy, with these words, I
have corrected (as I might) the maine point of your scruple. As for the rest,
although some things might be bettered, or better set down, or altered, yet
(for ought I see) they are not such as should stay the printing, till Mr A.
etc. The liberty thus used about this book was granted by Mr Sh. himself, who
asscribed so much unto our Authors judgment in these matters, that when he
sent the said book to be printed, he wrote thus unto him; I pray you, peruse
and ponder it, add, alter, or detract ad placitum. The author is no such man,
but can easily cast himself doume at, yea under the feet of the Prophets, etc.
and the more you do therein, the more he shall be and will acknowledge himself
indebted to you, etc. In his next letter he says, I heartily entreat you to
help more then ordinary, in correcting, not the faults of the workman with you,
only, but my faults also. Add therefore, I pray, alter and detract therein,
etc. what the Lord shall direct you, etc. Shortly after he wrote again to the
same purpose; Once again I entreat you to peruse all well, and add, alter, or
detract what you see good. Our Author having noted somewhat in the Reply, as
was said before, which he judged to tend to the weakening of the authority of
Synods, and to the strengthening of Mr Jacob in his opposition against them, Mr
Sh. having notice thereof, answered as follows, writing of himself in the
third person, as sometimes before, for better security in those dangerous
times: Concerning the difference betwixt the authors judgment and yours, I
hope it will not begreat, upon second thoughts advised. I am sure his meaning
is not to confirm H. Ia. against whom he disputed by writing, about the
subject you speak of. The author rests fully persuaded of that he has
written, yet refers again (as he did before) his doings to censure, and
that by you, Mr Ames, and Mr Parker, or either of you, to alter, etc. so be
that the adversary he answered. Afterward he explained himself more fully, on
this manner. Had my beloved altered what he deemed untrue or insufficient, he
had done but what I desired, and would have been well pleased with, so he that
it had not weakened the answer. But to come to the particulars. 1. Concerning
the Synods, both their institution and power, what it is, belongs to another
question. neither conceive I how ought from that assertion in the Reply (which
you except against) can be drawn to prejudice the judgment or practice of the
Churches governed by Synods: for I conceive not so of their Synods, that they
rob the particular Churches (whereof Elders there sit to determine of causes)
of the power of government by their Presbyteries. Nay rather, seeing their
Synods have their power, by and from the deputation which the Elders there
assembled have from the particular Churches (if I be not deceyved) it will
follow that the power of government originally rests in them, and not in the
Synods, etc. Observe in these passages of Mr Sh. 's letters, besides what I
intended and mentioned before. 1. His judgment (set down here more plainly
then in any place of his book) touching the power of Synods in the determining
of causes, agreeable unto that which the Author maintains in this Treatise;
considering what he says in his Page 89. 90. 203.
answer to the objections alleged out of Mr Parker. 2. The difference then
acknowledged betwixt Mr Jacob and other Non-conformists, concerning the
authority of Synods, which Mr D. would seem to excuse Apol. repl. p. 236.
by some words of Mr I. wherein he speaks not directly touching this point in
controversy. 3. The Authors care to maintain the due power of Classes and
Synods, even in those times, when there could be no suspicion of his own
advantage, or private engagement therein, wherewith his Opposites do unjustly
Apol. repl. p. 61, 63, 232, 235. Chur. pl. p. 11. 41. 100.
upbraid him, faining it to be the cause of his late pleading for them.
Moreover, whereas the Author has taken the liberty upon occasion, to witness
his dissent from D. Ames, touching certain particulars in this controversy; he
has done no more then D. A. was wont to allow unto all ingenuous Readers of
his writings, and in special unto the Author. When he put forth his first
Dispute against Grevinchovius, which he inscribed unto our Author in his De
Armin. sente^t. Discept. scholast. An. 1613. Praef. ad I. P. Ex memet ipso
judicium faciens, tibi (vir amicissime) sicut affirma^ti facile credo, sic ut
postulanti nunc tande^ cedam. non aegre quide^ adducor. etc. Ibid. p. 57. Vito
doctissimo, D.P. Hoc quidem recte judicas, judiciosissime vir, etc.
Epistles printed with it, where he calls him a most loving, most learned, and
most judicious man, he wrote unto him withal in his private letter; As I leave
it to you, to print mine, or not to print, so also to blotte out, or alter,
what you see amiss. To like purpose he wrote unto him concerning his Reply to
D. Morton. When his book, called the Marrow of Divinity, first came forth, he
sent him a Copy, with this express condition, that he should write unto him
his animadversions upon it. And in like manner, on the other side, when the
Author was to publish his Arrow against the Separation of the Brownists, he
sent the several parcels first to D. Ames, to be perused by him, who answered
sometime on this wise: For this part of your writing unto Mr Ainsw. I find
nothing in it but good. Of another part he says: In it I find much good
pains, and as useful as the subject would permit; no defect of any moment,
etc. And again: I have perused all the rest of the sheets, and find nothing
which I can mend, etc. Your pains have been very great in this business: I
pray God the fruit may answer thereunto. Such was the judgment of these godly
learned and famous men, touching the Author, and his sufficiency for
businesses of this kind. I have set down nothing here but what I have to show
in black and white, as the Author of the Preface to D. Ames his last book
Fresh suit, praef. p. G. 1. b.
says upon somewhat the like occasion.

To come nearer unto the work in hand; the occasion of this writing touching
Classes and Synods, cannot but be accounted grievous unto such as have hearts
to be affected with the dissensions of brethren. But bitter roots do many
times yield sweet and wholesome fruits. God has here also many ways ordered
for good that which in itself was and tended to evil. I need not enlarge about
that whereof they that are desirous, may easily be informed from what has been
heretofore published. In a word, Complaints were made by those whom it least
beseemed. These being divulged, first in written copies, and afterward in
print, gave just occasion unto as public an Answer. Unto this Answer has been
returned a twofold Reply, the one called Apologeticall, by him that had helped
to complain; the other entitled The Churches plea for her right, by a known
Schismatic, standing in opposition to all the Reformed Churches; and in his
behalf, who refused to join as a member unto his Church, when he schismed
from that whereof he was a member when the complaints were framed. These
Replies undertake to handle, besides matters of fact, these two points, that
were at the same time opposed, to wit, the due power of Classes and Synods, and
the lawfulnes of baptising infants, whose parents are no members of a
particular Congregation. The former of these is sufficiently maintained in the
ensuing Treatise. For the other, though the Author have not gone so far in it
as in this; yet he has laid such a foundation, as upon which it will not be
difficult to build what may satisfy for the clearing of that controversy.
Whereof more hereafter, as convenience and public benefit shall require.
Touching personal concernment though I acknowledge my self doubly and trebly
bound to vindicate the Authors reputation, at whose feet I have been brought
up, and from whom I have received far more then by such or better means I am
ever able to requite; and though it were easy to show how his opposites have
offended in many untrueths touching matters of fact, and vain pretenses of
meeknes in the midst of great bitterness, etc. yet I am resolved to pass by,
and to bury these things in silence, unless further cause be given for the
publishing of them. And hereunto as I have been advised by others, so I have
the rather yielded, considering (as they also alleged) that the benefit to be
expected from dealing in these matters, would be but of a narrow extent,
reaching only to the satisfaction of a few, and little concerning the maine
cause; that the Authors good name and blessed remembrance is so deeply
engraven in the hearts of those that are acquainted with his ways and
writings, that no envy nor obloquie shall ever be able to raze it out. Again,
they that will but compare the Answer and Replies together, and distinguish
betwixt plain dealing and groundless surmises, evidence of truth and
uncharitable insinuations, shall hardly need any further help for their
satisfaction; specially if they be mindful of the Rule, 1. Tim. 5.19. from
which these opposites have too too frequently swarved; and in which respect Mr
D. had just cause to entreat his Reader Apol. repl. praef. near the end.
to suspend his censure concerning what he has said, etc. Moreover, that
plausible and colorable name of the Church, used by the Replyers when they
spoke of a few dissenting from the Author, is now further manifested to be
inconsistent with those passages whereunto in such sort it was applied;
forasmuch as they that then complained, do now quietly enjoy themselves and
communion with the Church, in the continued observation of the same orders that
were practiced before: except only W. B. the foreman of the Complaynants, now
a professed Arminian. And of those that once joined with him, some before,
others since the Authors death have plainly signified their better respects
unto him, and given free and full testimony of his well deservings, even of
that Church, both for Doctrine and Discipline.

To return unto his Defense, here published, the greater part of it is in way
of answer to Mr C. who has been the forwardest and largest in this part of the
plea touching Classes and Synods. It seems also that he has not been a little
confident of his pains about this work, by the reiterated editions and sundry
shapes into which this his writing touching Independent government has been
cast. The Printed in the year 1635.
first edition, which the Author here deals with, was seconded with another,
into which he has taken only that which concerns this controversy, adorning
it with this new and fair title, In the y. 1641.
Syons Prerogative Royal. And this has been answered Disput. Theol. de Unione
Ecclesiarum, carumque Regimine in Classibus and Synodis, par. post. Ultraj.
1641.
by the famous and truly excellent Divine of these countries, D. Voctius. A
third edition, it seems, has been put forth with some additions against the
Presbyteries of particular Churches, under another title, viz. The
Presbyteriall Government examined. And this also has been examined and
answered by the Author of the Edinb. 1641.
Assertion of the Government of the Church of Scotland, etc. in the Postscript,
thereunto annexed. Thus the same writing has met with several Refutations,
whereof though this be the last in birth, yet it was the first in conception.
And here the Author, as he took more time, so he has more closely followed
his opposite; and being better acquainted with his condition and courses, has
more nearly applied his answers unto him, for further conviction. However,
August. de Trin. l. 1. c. 3.
it may be profitable to behold several learned men, avouching and pleading
for the same truth: and many blows may beat down an error, that could not
be felld at once. But it may seem strange that Mr Cannes writings, being such
as the several Refuters have observed them to be, should yet have the honor
of three several Refutations. See afterw. p. 145, 146. etc.
Who ever saw such gross Logical mistakes in one that makes such a flourish
with Syllogisticall reasonings? Who ever saw in a serious writing such
abundance of quotations, so generally perverted, or so little to the purpose?
He vainly alleges above an 100 testimonies of Authors, old and new, to
prove that which was never denied by those whom he opposes. And yet on the
other side, who so confident of his own cause, amidst such barrenes of proof,
where there was need of it, either from Scripture or approved Authors? Let
those that seem to hold with him in this controversy, judge whether Mr C. be
not in these respects a Disputer, one of a thousand, as his phrase is Chapter pl.
p. 15.
elsewhere, to another purpose. How comes it then to pass, that they that have
been induced to write in defense of Presbyteriall and Classical government,
have had no other matter to work upon, but what was affoorded by Mr C. or that
the cause of Independencie, which makes so great a noise among some, yields yet
so little to be seen for the maintenance of it? May not we justly doubt
concerning others that seem to favor this way, that their judgments are not
settled in this point; by how much they are so slow to profess, what they hold,
and upon what grounds? If they agree with Mr D. and Mr C. and their grounds and
pretenses be the same with theirs, they may here receive satisfaction. But some
happily will think the Author has been needlessly curious in noting the
manifold gross faylings of Mr C. both in his Reasonings and Quotations. For
answer hereunto, besides that for the most part they be such as in this
thorough kind of refuting, used by the Author, could not be passed over with
silence; it appears that Mr C. stands in need of being told of these faults;
for in his latter edition of the same things, I find not any of these foul
mistakes amended. Herein only he has somewhat corrected himself, that what he
had before Chur. plea, p. 74, 76.
asscribed to Mr Paget, now he attributes it Syons prer. roy. p. 16, 21.
to the Presbyterian governors, and such as stand for Presbyteriall
government: hereby acknowledging that what he had before called Chapter pl. p. 71.
Mr Pagets new doctrine, Ibid. p. 77.
Mr Pagets lately-devised Tenets, Ibid. p. 81.
Mr Pagets new opinion, was neither his device, nor sole opinion, but common
with him to at least all that allow of the government of the Church of
Scotland; from whom that Mr C. might profess his dissent, he has put in the
words Presbytery, and Presbyterian, with Classis, and Classical, seeing the
Presbyteries in Scotland are in effect the same with the Classis, and
Classical, seeing the Presbyteries in Sctoland are in effect the same with the
Classes in these countries.

For the publishing of this Treatise, I had more need to plead excuse for not
setting it forth before, according to their judgment who have frequently
called upon me and encouraged me unto the finishing of this task; rather then
to provide against their displeasure, who are apt to censure as unseasonable
what in this kind is unwelcome unto them. But for the seasonablenes of it, let
the times speak. And for the delay, occasioned partly by the difficulty of the
work, and partly by other distractions, and want of necessary helps for
dispatch, the book itself unto those that are not unacquainted with businesses
of this nature, will give reasonable satisfaction. That which thou here see
touching Classes and Synods, was written by the Author in the latter days of
his pilgrimage, amidst sundry bodily weaknesses, and other necessary
employments. There are now three years expired, since he rested from this and
other his labors, having served the will of God in his own age, and entered
into the joy of his Lord. Being warned some time before by a messenger of death
to desist from the pursuit of this work, he gave way that in convenient time,
as I was able, I should husband these his notes for public use. It were to
have been wished that his own eye and hand might have prevented the charge of
an executour herein. So should thou have had this work far more complete
and refined then now can be expected. But the Almighty, infinite in
understanding, to whom belong the issues of life and death, has ordered
otherwise: and who will say unto him, What do thou? According to the trust
therefore committed unto me, I do now at length set forth this monument of
his godly and painful labors touching this weighty point of
Church Government. I have forborne, as much as might be, to interpose my rude
pencill in this masterpiece. The liberty allowed unto me for the persiting of
what was wanting, I have used no further then was requisite, for the coupling
of the parts together, out of several papers, written at several times, and
for the filling up of a few gaps, specially in Chapter 7. having had the
opportunity to meet with some books which the Author wanted. I have withal
added a small Supplement, for answer unto what remained in Mr Cannes book,
touching this point, according to the first edition, the same which the Author
only saw and followed in this his Defense. And thus I have also cast my mite
into this Treasury, before I opened it for public benefit. If my coin be not
current, let not that prejudice the rich supply that may be had out of the
Authors store; the value whereof will sufficiently discover itself, unto them
that with understanding and unpartiall minds receive it. Howbeit, thou art
allowed and desired according to the Authors meaning, to bring it to the
touchstone of truth, to the Law, and to the Testimony. According this word try
the reasons on both sides, and hold fast that which is good. Farewell, from
DORT: Where a most pregnant and effectual testimony has been given, for the
needful authority of Synods; with which testimony the Author has closed his
writing touching this subject: Where this his Treatise now comes to light;
which we hope may prove useful to direct unto the like remedy, where the like
case may require it. He that has the Stars in his right hand, so guide the
beams of this Candle, now set upon the Candlestick, that it may give light
unto all that are in the house; that the dark corners of error may be further
disclosed, and the luster of his own Ordinances becomes more apparent. With
this suit I again, take leave, requesting thee to join therein with him that
desires to be

Thine in truth, R. PAGET.

THE FIRST PART OF THIS TREATISE, Touching The Power of a particular Eldership.
CHAP. 1.
The occasion of this vvriting, and the State of the Question.
WHereas Mr Ainsworth was desired by the Author Arrow ag. Separ. f. 2. v.
to set down his reasons concerning whatsoever he thought might be a just cause
of refusing communion with that part^^ular Congregation whereof he was a
Minister: Mr Ainsw. in his answer among the rest has Ibid. page 5.
these words; Other things there are, wherein you know we differ from you: etc.
Your Eldership sits and judges matters apart from the Congregation: etc.
Concerning which particular the Author thus Ibid. p. 33.
replied: Though our Eldership for the examination of parties and witnesses,
and for their consultations thereabout do sit apart, as is meet; yet do we not
exclude or debar any from hearing and seeing the conviction of any sin that
is either public of it self or persisted in, when they desire the same: yea
we our selves have often desired their presence to behold the convictions,
admonitions and rebukes of offenders. And further, before any sentence be given
for the cutting off of any offender, we do first propound the matter unto the
whole Church, requiring their prayers, advise and consent, without which never
yet any judgment of excommunication has been executed against any amongst us:
and this also is propounded unto them by diverse degrees, long and often before
any pronouncing of sentence, that so our brethren may have sufficient time,
both to inform themselves of the matter and to deliberate ripely thereof. etc.

Mr Ainsworth in his next having Ibid p. 317.
said, I put you in mind that you have not as yet alleged any one word of
God, for your Consistory, etc. the Author puts him in mind of his own
allowing the same by communicating therewith in some measure, whereof he had
been told Ibid. p. 32.
before, and whereunto he answered not a word, and adds Ibid p. 330.
further: Seeing you have not yet answered, neither the Exp. of Matt. 18.
first nor the Christian plea.
last book of Mr Johnson, wherein he has written against your popular
government, what mean you to call for more? if more be requisite, you may see
that I promised you in my former Arrow ag. Sep p. 33.
writing that when I should receive any arguments from you to prove your
refusal of communion upon these grounds, that I would then give further answer
unto you. The errors which you have published in your Animadversion for the
maintenance of your popular order, and the enormities which in that order are
committed by you in your unlawful excommunications and censures, are so many
that they require a distinct treatise for the refutation thereof: of which I
purpose to say more hereafter as occasion is given. etc. Hereupon and about the
same time was written that which follows, though not happily all that was
intended.

By that which is said it may appear that the Question is not, whether the
power of the keys be given to the Church, or whether the power of
excommunication be in the body of the Church, or whether Church Government
ought to be with the peoples free consent, etc. All this may be granted, and
yet the point in controversy remain undecided. But the difference is about the
execution and judicial exercising of this power: Whether every offense to be
judged or cause to be determined, ought to be brought to the multitude or body
of the Congregation, and they to give their voices therein together with the
Officers of the Church; or whether the Officers being chosen with the public
knowledge and free consent of the Church, have not by virtue of their calling
power to hear and judge matters, to rebuke and censure offenders without the advice of the multitude; yet so that in matters of greater importance and more
public concernme^t (as admissions, excommunications and absolutions of
members, elections and depositions of Officers, etc.) the case be made known
unto and determined with the free consent of the people, according to the
practice above-written. The former of these is denied, the latter affirmed and
maintained in the ensuing discourse.

CHAP. II.
Arguments to prove the power of the Eldership injudging, and ending some cause
without the knowledge of the Congregation.
1. THe titles given by the holy Ghost to Ecclesiastical Offices and Officers
are such as import a power of judging causes; being such titles as do express
and declare the power of judgment, which was in the Rulers of Israel, both
Civil and Ecclesiastical: as for example; 1. A Guide or Leader, (...)
is the title given to Ecclesiastical Officers, Heb. 13.7, 17, 24. and is the
same that in the Greek translation of the Old Testament, agreeable to the
Original, is given to Civil Rulers, Josh. 13.21. Deuteronomy. 1.13. Mica. 3.9, 11.2.
Chro. 5.1. Ezekiel. 44.3. and 45.7. Dan. 3.2. as also in the New Testament, Act.
7.10. Besides it is the same with another word so often given unto Civil
Rulers, (...)
Mat. 2.6. and 27.2. Act. 23.24, 26, 33. 1. Pet. 2.14. etc. And so is this word
also used by other humane writers abundantly. 2. A Bishop or Overseer, the
title given by the H. Ghost unto Ecclesiastical Officers to describe their
authority and power, Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1. 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.7. is the same
word that is given to express the power of Civil Magistrates in the Greek
translation of the Old Testament, Number. 31.14. Judge. 9.28. 2. Kin. 11.15. and
very often in other Writers. 3. An Elder, (...) Nafi.
the title which the Scripture uses to denote and show the office of
Ecclesiastical Elders, Act. 14.23. and 15.2, 4. and 20.17. 1. Tim. 5.17. Tit.
1.5. 1. Pet. 5.1. is the same word which is likewise given to Civil Rulers and
Elders in the gate, Judge. 8.14. Ruth. 4.2, 3. etc. 2. Sam. 5.3. 1. Chron. 11.3.
4. A Prince or Ruler, being the title of Civil Governors in the Commonwealth,
to signify their authority, Number. 7.2. Genesis 25.16. and 34.2. Levit. 4.22. Romans
13.3. 1. Cor. 2.6. is also given to Ecclesiastical Rulers to note their office
and authority, as Act. 23.5. with Exodus 22.28. Mat. 9.18. Luke 8.41. Ioh. 3.1.
Number. 3.24, 30, 32, 35. And hereby it may appear how untrue it is which Mr
Robinson writes concerning the difference betwixt Civil Officers and
Church Governors, when having mentioned some of the titles given to
Magistrates, he says; Justify. of Sep. p. 135.
Ecclesiastical Officers are not capable of these and the like titles, which
can neither be given without flattery unto them, nor received by them without
arrogance: And yet the very first of the titles wherein he gives instance, is
that title which here I show to be given to Ecclesiastical Rulers as well as
to Civil. 5. The title of Heads, Rosch
wherein Mr Robinson Justific. ibid.
instanceth in the second place, that it may not be given to Ecclesiastical
Officers, is yet (if we will regard what the Scripture affirms) given to them
as well as to Civil Rulers. As it is given to Magistrates in Deuteronomy. 1.15. the
place alleged by Mr Robinson, so is it also given to Ministers in 1. Chron.
15.12. and 23.24. and 24.4. and 26.10, 12. 2. Chron. 19.11. Ezra, 8.1, 17.
Nehem. 12.12, 22, 23, 24. 6. The title of Governors or Governments, (...)
which the Greeks are Steph. These. ling. Gr.
noted to use to express the power of Civil Magistrates thereby, by a
Metaphor from pilots, out of Xenophon, Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, etc. is the
same that the holy Ghost also uses to signify unto us thereby the authority of
Church Governors in guiding the ship of Christ's Church. 1. Cor. 12.28. 7. The
title of Rulers, (...)
which H. Stephanus The saur. l. Gr.
shows to be used by Thucydides, Demosthenes, Herodotus, Plato, Plutarch, and
others for the Rulers of Cities, of Armies, and Kingdoms, is that same which
the Scripture uses to describe unto us those Officers that bear rule in the
Church, which is the City of the living God and his spiritual Kingdom. Romans
12.8. 1. These. 5.12. 1. Tim. 5.17. 8 The title of Elohim.
Gods, which is so often used to express the dignity and authority of Civil
Governors, Psalm. 82.1. Exo. 21.6. and 22.8. 1. Sam. 2.25. etc. is also given
to Ecclesiastical Officers to declare and signify the authority that they
have. Though Mr Robinson Justif. of Sep. p. 135.
denies this title also unto them; yet if we diligently weigh what the
Scripture says, we may well discern that this title is also given to
Church Governors and Ministers. for 1. The description of those persons to
whom this title is given, is that they are such, to whom the word of God
comes; such as the Father has sanctified and sent: Joh. 10.35, 36. and
therefore according to the exposition of our Savior, seeing the word of God is
come unto Ecclesiastical Ministers and Rulers, giving them thereby a
commission to administer in his name; seeing such are sanctified and sent of
God, we may hereby see how this title belongs unto them. 2. By the exposition
and application of the Apostle, those who in Moses are called Gods and Rulers,
Exodus 22.28. are showed to be Ecclesiastical Rulers, Act. 23.5. And howsoever
some differ about this title, yet are there of the learnedest that do Iun. and
Trem. Annot. on Ex. 22.28. Iun. anal. expl. Ex. 22 28. Joan. Rainol. Cens. lib.
Apocr. tom. 1. prael. 6.
so interpret these places, viz. of such as have either Civil or
Ecclesiastical administration committed unto them. And if we come unto those
Authors that are so much honored by you, they will also confirm the same. The
Onkelos Targum on Exo. 4.16. and 7.1.
Chaldee Paraphrast upon those places where this title of God is given to
Moses, translateth it Rab, a Master or Doctor, which is such a word as is
given unto Ecclesiastical Ministers. Others Aben Ezra com. on Exo. 22.28.
of the learnedest Iew-doctours do expound that title of the Priests and
Levites, and so apply it to Church Governors. Another Baal hatturim on Exo.
22.28.
Cabalist often alleged in your Annotations does show these Gods mentioned in
Exo. 22. to be all kind of Rulers over the people by his Gematria because the
numerall letters of the words, Elohim, venasi, yield the same number with
these, hu dajan, vecol shehu, signifying Judges of all sorts, the said words as
they are written in their own letters, being compared together either jointly
or severally.


II. If the Deacons may distribute some alms unto the poor without the
knowledge of the whole Congregation; then may the Elders also judge some causes
without the knowledge of the whole Church. But the first is true. Therefore.
etc.

The consequence of the Proposition is proved by this: Because the whole Church
has as much right and authority to dispose of the Church-treasure and alms,
as they have to judge of the offenses that are committed therein. This the
Scripture shows by the examples of sundry Churches, of Antiochia, Macedonia,
Achaia, etc. Act. 11.29, 30. Romans 15.25-28. 1. Cor. 16.3.2. Cor. 8.1.4.19.
Phil. 2.25. with c. 4.18.

The Assumption is manifest, and your own practice confirms it.

III. If Arbiters chosen by consent of some particular persons may judge the
causes of wrong and injury, whether public or private, wherein they strive
against one another; then may the Elders chosen by consent of the whole Church,
judge the causes and offenses that arise, when they willingly submit unto the
same. But Arbiters so chosen may judge the causes referred unto them. Therefore
the Elders may do it also.

The truth of the Proposition appears; because the free and solemn consent of
the Church in any election gives authority unto such persons, either in
general or special works, as well as the choice of any particular men in
their causes. Act. 14.23. and 2. Cor. 8.19.

The truth of the Assumption appears, by the doctrine of the Apostle giving
such power of judgment unto Arbiters: 1. Cor. 6.4, 5.

If you answer hereunto as you H. Ains. Animadv. to Mr Clyfton, p. 43.
elsewhere expound this place: that these controversies to be referred unto
Arbiters, are for civil things of this life; that such are not Church Matters,
nor there to be heard, etc. this is insufficient and will not help you, seeing
it appears by the text that these Controversies in Corinth might as well have
been said to be Ecclesiastical causes as Civil, and belonging to the
judgment of the Church as of the Magistrates or Arbiters. Had their
controversies been touching a wound or stroke given, touching any slander or
theft, which may be said to be Ecclesiastical causes, as belonging to the
judgment of the Church; yet might the Apostle have said unto them thereupon
all that he does, 1. Cor. 6.1-9. for 1. These are businesses which Infidel
Magistrates in those times used to judge, and the general speech of the
Apostle imports as much, v. 1. and 6. 2. The reason which the Apostle uses,
taken from the honor and dignity of Saints in their judgment of Angels and
the world, serves to perswado them to submit the judgment of such causes to one
another mutually as well as any other causes, v. 2, 3. 3. The reason taken from
their shame, as if there were no wise men among them to judge these causes,
serves to reprove them for a want of wisdom in Ecclesiastical things as well
as Civil. 4. The matters of controversy among them were of wrong and injury
done to brethren, v. 7, 8, 9. And these being sins and scandals, belong to
the judgment of the Church, as does the judgment of 2. Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. 1. Cor.
5.7.
all known sins.

This Argument is in effect yielded unto by your self, when you H. Ains.
Animadv. to Mr Clyf. ton. p. 9.
allow the Articles of the Discipline agreed upon in the Reformed English
Church which was at Franckford in Q. Mary's days; for whereas in the 62. art.
thereof, in case of difference betwixt the Governors of the Church and others
it is there concluded, that the body of the Congregation may appoint so many of
the Congregation to hear and determine the said matter or matters, as it shall
seem good unto the Congregation: hereupon in approbation of this Discipline
you observe, that hereby the reader may see what the learned and most
conscionable of the Church of England held heretofore: which if they had
continued in, would have freed them of all Antichristian Prelacy, the bane of
so many Churches. And hereupon I observe further against you, how the reader
may hereby see, that if the body of the Church may appoint so many Arbiters as
they will to hear and determine matters, then may the Elders of the Church
receive this authority as well as any others; then is it no unlawful
usurpation for them to hear and determine some matters among the brethren by
themselves.

IV. If particular persons may lawfully pass by some lesser offenses and leave
them unto the consciences of the offenders, without prosequuting the^ or
bringing them to the Church for any judgment at all: then may the Church also
leave some lesser offenses unto the judgment of the Elders. But the first is
true. Therefore the second also.

The consequence of the Proposition is proved; because God does no more require
the Church to judge of sins made known unto the same, then he does require
particular persons to prosequute and to deal against the offenses made known
unto them: the Scripture speaking as fully and giving unto particular persons
as ample commission and charge to Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Lev. 19.17.
admonish and complain of sin, as it does unto the Church to judge and
censure the same.

The Assumption is proved: 1. By express testimonies of Scripture, that teach
us to pass by some sins and offenses, and not to prosequute them. Prove. 19.11.
Eccl. 7.21. 2. Particular persons being taught to love their neighbor as
themselves, and to do good unto all, Levit. 19.18. Matt. 22.39. Romans 13.9.
Gal. 5.14. Iam. 2.8. are thereby bound to admonish them that are without, those
that are not members of the same Church with them, but of any other either true
or false, or of none. Now if this be to be done, it follows necessarily that
the reproves of many lesser faults are to be omitted; because otherwise men
could never discharge this duty, neither would their time suffice to perform
these duties of admonition to all such as they should find subject thereunto
both within the Church and without. Yea suppose they had no other calling to
attend upon, yet could not the whole age of man be sufficient to testify
effectually and in order against all such transgressions which an intelligent
person might discern to be committed daily before his eyes, both in private
and public. 3. Even yourself seem to acknowledge this also, when touching the
difference of offenses you say, Com. of Saints. cap. 22. 2. and 3.
when offenses arise, it shall be our glory if we can pass them by, as Solomon
has said. But if the trespass be such as we may not but insist upon, both for
the honor of God who is offended, and soul of the sinner which is endangered,
and our own or neighbors good who are endammaged thereby: then are we bound
to admonish the trespasser hereof, etc. Does not this distinction of offenses
and different manner of dealing allowed by yourself, show that for some
trespasses we are not bound to admonish the trespasser, nor to insist upon them.

V. If Magistrates may lawfully pass by the judgment of some lesser sins,
then may the Church also pass by the public censure of some lesser offenses.
But the Magistrates may do it. Therefore the Church also.

The consequence of the Proposition appears, because the Church is not more
strictly bound to judge any sin then the Magistrate is: his commission for
the judgment of all kind of sin, great or small, being as large as the
Churches; he being ordained of God to keep all the words of his Law, to be a
keeper of both Tables, and to judge all evil, according to the nature of it,
as well and as far as the Church is. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. Josh. 1.7, 8. 1. Kin.
2.3. 1. Chron. 28.7, 8. and 29.19. Prove. 20, 8. Romans 13.3, 4.

The Assumption appears likewise to be true, from the first proof of the
Assumption in the former Argument; as also from this that men are sometimes
reproved for bringing their brethren before the Magistrates even in cases of
injury and sin committed against them: 1. Cor. 6.1-8. whereas if they were
absolutely bound to let no small offense pass without judgment, then should
it also be the fault of others not to bring the same unto them; and this
whether they were Christians or Infidels, the like law and charge being given
unto them both.

VI. The ending of some controversies and judging of some public offenses
without the knowledge of the whole Congregation, is by yourself acknowledged to
be lawful in the approbation of that Discipline in the English Church at
Franckford, which was there confirmed by the Church and Magistrate. for whereas
it was there agreed that Disc. of troub. at Franckf. page 115. etc. art. 53.
if admonition with witnesses prevayled not, the offense was then to be
declared to the Ministers and Elders, to whom the Congregation has given
authority to take order in such cases according to the Discipline of the
Church: that Art. 54.
there be three degrees of Ecclesiastical Discipline; first, that the
offendour acknowledge his fault and show himself penitent before the Ministers
and Seniors; secondly, that if he will not so do, as well his original crime,
as also his contempt of the Ministers and Elders who have the authority of the
Church, be openly declared by one of the Ministers before the whole
Congregation: etc. that Art. 67.
if any controversy be upon the doubtful meaning af any word or words in the
Discipline, that first it be referred to the Ministers and Seniors; and if they
cannot agree thereupon, then the thing to be brought and referred to the whole
Congregation. Hereupon after recital of these Articles held by the learned and
most conscionable of the Church of England heretofore, you add as I noted
before in another particular, that Animad verse. p. 8.9.
if they had continued herein, it would have freed them of all Antichristian
Prelacie, etc. And further as you would there have it to be observed by the
reader against Mr Clyfton and Mr Johnson, in your third note upon the
allegation of these Articles, so may we as fitly observe against yourself in
your own words, that if you had looked upon the examples which yourselves
allege, you might have seen your errors resisted by others, against which the
Lord has now called me also to witness.

CHAP. III.
A Refutation of sundry errors, vvhereupon Mr Ainsvvorth grounds their Popular
Government.
The first Error.
YOu seek to build the government of the Church upon unsure foundations, and
these of sundry sorts: First in that you argue from the examples of Civil
Government in the Commonwealth, to demonstrate the power of the people in the
one by the authority exercised in the other. This error is to be observed in
you diverse ways.

1. In your Art. 24.
Confession of faith, and Pos. 8. p. 60.
Apology you describe and labor to prove the power given unto each Christian
Congregation for the cutting off of any member, to be in the whole body
together, from the Law of God mentioning a Civil judgment to be executed by
the people of the Land in killing the man that should give his children unto
Molech: Lev. 20.4, 5. and from the commandment that bound the Israelites to
bring the Blasphemer without the camp, and to stone him to death: Lev. 24.14.
But 1. These judgments were Civil and corporal punishments, not spiritual
censures. 2. These were to be executed on strangers, and such as were no
members of the Church, as well as upon them that were members thereof; Lev.
20.2. and 24.16. 3. These were to be executed on the offenders without
exception, whether they repented or not. By what manner of reasoning then can
the power of Ecclesiastical censures be deduced or demonstrate from such
examples as these?

II. In your Animad verse. p. 28.
answer to Mr Johnson you confess that you alleged Numb. 15.33. and 27.2. and
35.12. to give light unto the Question touching the power of Excommunication,
by showing what was the peoples right then, under the Law, and under the
Magistrate; which may be more, but cannot be less now under the Gospel, etc.
Now those Scriptures and the examples contained therein (even as those before
mentioned) do concern Civil judgments, pleas and controversies; as the
stoning to death of the Sabbath-breaker, the dividing of inheritances and
possessions unto the daughters of Zelopehad, the preserving of him that had
stain a man unawares from the avenger of blood: unless therefore you can show
that the power of excommunication is in all those that have power to execute
the sentence of death, and of the like Civil punishments, you do in vain
allege all these examples and wrest the word of God unjustly for the
maintenance of your own opinions.

III. This error is so much the more inexcusable in you, in that you condemn
it in others, and yet will not acknowledge and see it in yourself. When Mr
Johnson would show the power of the Elders in Ecclesiastical judgments by the
power which the Magistrates had in Israel, you tell him that he Anim. adv p. 14.
streynes too far, and you allege the testimonies of sundry learned men that
disclayme such manner of arguing and say, that to reason Ibid. p. 16.
from the Magistrate to the Minister, from the sword to the word, from the Law
to the Gospel, etc. the leap is so great, that cart-ropes will not tie the
conclusion to the premises: that the argument is not good from Civil
government to Ecclesiastical: and again, that the example is altogether
unlike, of temporal empire and spiritual ministry; between these there is
not, neither ought, neither can a proportion or comparison be rightly made. And
how then comes it now to pass, that the reasoning from the peoples power in
Civil judgments unto their power in Ecclesiastical judgments should not be
as unlawful as the reasoning from the power of Civil Elders unto
Ecclesiastical Elders? or why might not Mr Johnson derive the power of the
Elders in Ecclesiastical matters from Civil, as well as you may derive the
power of the people from Civil judgments unto the spiritual judgments of
the Church?

IV. The excuse which you bring to color this unsound manner of reasoning in
yourself, is that Animadv. p. 28.
the Apostle applies many things from Aarons priesthood Heb. 5.4. and 9.6.7.
and 13.11, 12.
to Christ: yet he makes Christ's priesthood not to be after Aarons order Heb.
7.11, 12, 15.
but Melchizedeks: should men now thus carp at his allegations? But I answer,
1. When the H. Ghost in the New Testament reasons from types and figures in
the Old, such reasoning is authentical and infallible; but when men do reason
by proportion and similitude from types and other temporary ordinances in the
Old Testament, their reasonings serve only to illustrate things proved in
other places of Scripture, but else prove nothing of themselves: and therefore
though the first kind of reasoning may not be carped at, as being divine; yet
the latter may often justly be reproved. 2. Though some things may be applied
from the Civil government to the Ecclesiastical; yet that shows not that
they are like in this point of the persons by whom the power is to be
exercised: even as Aarons priesthood and Melchizedeks, though they be like in
some things, yet not in all. 3. If there be any weight or worth in this
evasion, it may as well serve to excuse Mr Iohnsons reasoning from the Civil
authority of the Magistrates, as yours from the Civil authority of the people;
both of you arguing alike from a Civil power of judgment unto an
Ecclesiastical power.

The Second Error.
YOur second error in the doctrine of Ecclesiastical government is, that you
do not only derive the power of the Church from the Civil authority
exercised in the Commonwealth, but also from such a supposed power of Civil
judgment in the people as the Scripture no where gives unto them.

I. All the places before alleged by you to this purpose do not prove the
same. As for that allegation. Levit. 20.2, 4. where the people of the land are
commanded to kill an offendour; we are thereby to understand both Princes and
Rulers as well as the subjects: and so that the power of judging and giving
sentence is to be asscribed unto the Rulers, as the liberty and duty of
complaining before sentence, and of execution after sentence belonged unto the
subjects. This word people is taken diversely in the Scriptures: sometimes for
subjects alone by way of opposition to Princes, as Exodus 18.21, 22. Number. 11.16,
17. sometimes for the whole body of a nation comprehending Rulers of all sorts
together with the subjects, as Genesis 25.23. Deuteronomy. 4.6, 33. and when any thing is
in general commanded unto the people (taken in this sense) as here, such
commandments are to be practiced according to the several callings of men;
but do not prove the like power of performing those commandments to be in all
the people.

That place, Levit. 24.14. shows that the people did execute the blasphemer
but shows not that they had power to decree that sentence, or to pronounce the
judgment in the first place which they executed in the last.

Those Scriptures, Number. 15.33. and 27.2. and 35.12. do show that diverse Civil
causes were brought before the people as witnesses to hear the same decided,
but not as Judges to give sentence upon the same. Yourself speak but faintly
of the matter, when you Animadv. p. 29.
plead from Ruth, 4.2, 7, 9, 11. that the people were also interested with the
Elders in these affairs: they might have interest to hear those controversies
debated, but what is this to prove the power of judgment to be in the whole
body of the Congregation? Besides, if such a presence of the people to hear
controversies do prove a power of judgment in the people; you might as well
plead that almost all Civil governments at this day are Democraticall, as in
England, France and Germany, where malefactors are brought before the Judges
and before the multitudes of people assembling together at such places.

Other pretenses also you do bring to obscure and diminish the authority of
the Magistrates in Israel, as if they had not power to put a man to death and
to cut off a man from Israel without the consent of the people, etc. but they
are as the former, frivolous and insufficient.

H. AINSVV. Animadv. p. 20.
I know when Gods Law ^^ndemned a man, if it were showed by all or any one of
the Judges, or Priests, or Prophets, yea or Israelites; the people should in
order have executed him. ANSVV. But what order was that for the people being
subjects to take upon them the execution of judgment upon the testimony of any
one of the Judges or Priests, when all the rest both of the Judges and Priests
and Prophets did not assent? What warrant did the law of God in any place give
unto the people to exercise such power of judgments upon the declaration of
any one of the Israelites. when all the Rulers both Civil and Ecclesiastical
did make a contrary declaration, and could not so understand the law of God, as
one of the Israelites had showed it? What is this order but the plain way to
sedition and tumult?

H. AINSVV. Ibid.
Often times the Heads of the people judged for rewards. Mich. 3.11. the Princes
as Lions, the Judges as Wolves devoured them, the Priests polluted the
Sanctuary and wrested the Law. Zeph. 3.3, 4. Isa. 1.23. And then the people of
the land, whose du^ty also it was to look to open wickedness, ( Levit. 20.24.)
were neither to follows the many nor mighty in evil. Exodus 23.2, 7. ANSVV. 1.
Often times the people also were wicked, rebellious, Idolatrous, Apostates, and
presumptuous abettours and maintainers of evil, sometimes as bad, and
sometimes worse then their Governors. Exodus 32.1, etc. Numb. 14.1-10. and
16.41, 42. Judge. 2.11, 19. etc. But what is this to determine the right of
authority? does that vary and change according to the goodness and wickedness of
the persons? we are taught the contrary of God. Though the Roman Emperor in
Paul's time was a Lion, devouring many; 2. Tim. 4.17. yet he teaches submission
unto the authority even of such. Romans 13.1, 2. etc. Though Annas and Caiaphas
and other wicked Priests and Scribes and Pharisees, were wolves, devouring
widows houses, polluting the Sanctuary and wresting the Law, ( John. 18. Matt.
23.) yet we are taught to acknowledge the authority of such. Matt. 8.4. Act.
23.5. 2. Though wicked Rulers are not to be obeyed in their unlawful
commandments, and therefore the servants of Saul did well not to execute his
bloody commandment (1. Sam. 22.17.) wherein for one act he ravened as the
wolf of Benjamin: Genesis 49.27. yet the authority remained in him, and not in
those that disobeyed him. Subjection unto authority is showed, if not by
obedience, yet by patience in suffering according to the will of God, if need
require. 3. But that any of the people which are subjects, should go further
to execute Civil judgments when the Rulers neglect justice, this is not
proved by Lev. 20.2, 4. The people their mentioned are not the subjects
considered apart from their Rulers: but under the title of the children of
Israel there spoken unto, are comprehended principally the Princes of the
people and Rulers of Israel. The other people if they did mourn in themselves
and complain unto others for the redress of such evils, were not to be
blamed, but had the mark of Gods favor upon them. Ezekiel. 8.6. with Ezekiel. 9.4.

H. AINSVV. Animadv. p. 20.
I find how in Naboths case (though it were a wicked fact) there was a
solemn fast and assembly of the people with their Governors. 1. Kin. 21.12,
13. ANSVV. But you find not one word there to prove any power in the people
either to condemn or to absolve and acquit Naboth. The presence of the people
is noted, but the killing of Naboth is asscribed unto the Elders and Nobles of
the city, according to that which Iezebel required of them. Ibid. verse. 9, 10,
11.

H. AINSVV. Ibid.
In Ieremies case, he was accused to the Princes and people, made his defense
to Princes and people, and was acquitted by Princes and people. Ierem. 26.11,
12, 16. ANSVV. This action was pattly tumultuous at the first, not much unlike
that when Paul was so violently haled and accused unto the people, Act. 21.27,
28. And when it grew into order by help of the Princes, it appears that the
authority of judgment was in the Rulers. for 1. The Princes are expressly
named in each part of the action, in the accusation brought to them, in hearing
the defense and in giving of the sentence; and therefore nothing was done
without their authority. 2. Whereas there is mention made of the people
together with the Princes, verse. 11* 16. there some learned Trem. and Iun. in
Ier. 26. See also Corn. Bertr. de Polit. Iud. cap. 6. and 11.
Interpreters do translate it for explication, Seniores populi, that is, the
Elders of the people: and this agrees with the text, verse. 17. where there is
mention of the Elders of the land rising up out of their seats and speaking to
the multitude, as well as the Princes of the Court that came up from the Kings
house, verse. 10, 16. Even in that part of the Government which was
Democraticall and popular, yet were there some Rulers representing the people.
3. Persons accused do sometimes speak to their accusers for refutation of
them, as Jeremy here might do unto a multitude of the people that had dealt so
unjustly with him, verse. 8, 9. and yet without allowing them to have authority
in giving sentence against him.

H. AINSVV. Animadv. p. 20.
When King Saul swear that Jonathan should dye; the people swear the contrary,
and saved him from death. 1. Sam. 14.39, 44, 45. ANSVV. 1. It is not evident
and certain that the people did peremptorily swear the contrary; for according
to the translation of learned Trem. and Iun in 1. Sam. 14.
Interpreters, the words in the text may be read, not by way of absolute
affirmation but by way of interrogation on this manner, as the Lord lives,
ought there an hair to fall from his head? whereby it is understood that the
people did adjure Saul appealing unto his conscience before the living God,
that he would have regard of right and equity rather then of his oath, etc. And
this agrees with the judgment which some are Pet. Mart. on 1. Sam. 14.
noted to have hereof, viz. that the people by entreating and persuading of
Saul did save Jonathan rather then by force. 2. By the people in that place we
are to understand not the common people only, but all the Princes and Rulers
of the people, whose authority in such case is more then of a multitude of
other people; and this is manifest in the text, verse. 40, 41. where in casting
of the lot, All Israel was set on the one side, and Saul with Jonathan on the
other side, so that all the Nobles and Governors of Israel, all beside Saul
and his son were there included under the name of the people. 3. This case
was also extraordinary, the question being not only about the Kings son and
his Eldest son, but such a son, as with whom God had wrought miraculously
at the same time for the preservation of Israel. It was no wonder if upon such
occasion the people did take unto themselves more liberty and power then
ordinary, which at other times in common cases they durst not have done.

H. AINSVV. Animadv. p. ^0.
When the Highpriests and Scribes would have killed Christ, they feared the
people. Luc. 20.19. and 22.2. ANSVV. They feared the people, not because they
should have encroached upon the authority of the people, if they had killed
him; but because of the shame and danger which they feared would ensue upon the
unjust oppression of so holy and innocent a person. Herod feared the people
when he would have put John to death, and yet this argues no want of absolute
and sole authority in himself to execute that judgment when he listed. Matthew.
14.5.-11. And so at this day many cruel persecutours do fear the people, and
their rage is in part brideled, while they have absolute and full authority in
their hands to execute judgment according to the form of their government;
only the shame of injustice and cruelty restraines them: as on the contrary
they are bolder to exercise their authority and cruelty, when they see that it
pleases the people, as Act. 12.2, 3. and 24.27.

H. AINSVV. Ibid.
The people as well as the Rulers, were called before Pilate about Christ's
death, Luke 23.13. and by their voices prevayled, Matt. 27.20, 22, 25, 26. Luke
23.23. ANSVV. 1. The people were called before Pilate with the Priests and
Scribes, as being the accusers of Christ, Luke 23.1, 2, 4, 5. Ioh. 19.12. but
this calling of them proves no part of their power in the judgment. 2. Pilate
being a corrupt Judge, and yet being convinced in his conscience of the
innocence of Christ, partly to show how willing he was to favor and content
the Jews, and partly to stop the clamor and testimony of his own conscience,
does call them before him to try if he could persuade them to stay and cease
their action, using many arguments and devises to that purpose. 3. Moreover
Pilate called the people with the Rulers before him, to know what prisoner they
would have released unto them at the feast according to a corrupt custom among
them. Matt. 27.15. And that very custom it self of releasing one prisoner at
the feast, whom they would, and that upon their request, Mark. 15.6, 8. was an
evidence of the peoples want of power in judgment: for had they had authority
to have judged and determined such matters, what needed they to have petitioned
to Pilate, or what favor had it been in the Roman Governor to have granted
that unto them for one person at one special time, which they might have done
of their own authority at any time? 4. Though it be said, that they prevayled
with their voices, this is to be understood of their importunate request and
voices of petition, as is noted in the same place, and not of their suffrages
or giving of voices with authority in the sentence of judgment: as the
importunate widow prevayled with the unrighteous Judge, Luke 18.5. so did the
Jews prevayle with Pilate, by their importunate requests, cries and clamours
in begging Barabbas of Pilate and desiring him to crucify Christ. Act. 3.14. 5.
This condemnation of Christ was done by the Roman authority; the Jews
confess that it was not lawful for them to put any man to death; Ioh. 18.31.
the scepter was now departed from Judah; Luke 2.1. etc. they acknowledged no
King but Caesar; Ioh. 19.15. and Pontius Pilate a Roman Governor under Caesar
gave sentence of death upon Christ; the people of the Jews were now vassals to
the Romans and had not the power pretended: when you therefore send to this
example, you send us to Rome and to the Romish government, and not unto that
order and policy which God had commanded and planted among his own people.

II. Whereas you say, Animadv. p. 20.
it is not manifested that the Magistrates in Israel had in themselves full and
absolute power to cut off a man or to put him to death, etc. the contrary may
be showed: First, by the example of David, who as he resolved and professed for
himself, that he would cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the
Lord: Psalm. 101.8. so when occasion was given he presently condemned the
Amalekite to death for slaying Saul; 2. Sam. 1.15. he by his own authority
appointed Baanah and Rechab to be slain for killing Isnbosheth, without
gathering any assembly to ask the peoples consent. 2. Sam. 4.8-12. When David
heard from Nathans parable of a rich man oppressing the poor, he forthwith
pronounced the sentence of death against that oppressor, not waiting for the
counsel or consent of the people, though in a rare and unusual case. 2. Sam.
12.5, 6. When the woman of Tekoah makes request for her son that he might be
absolved in judgment and delivered from the sentence of death, David presently
by his own authority decrees that he shall be pardoned, and confirms it with
an oath, he stays not for approbation from the people. 2. Sam. 14.4-11. Again
if we look upon the way of his son after him, we see the same thing, even in
Solomon; and that both in his doctrine, where he teaches that the power of
life and death is in the hand of the King; Prove. 16.14, 15. and 20.2, 26. and
in his practice he confirmed the same, in the judgment and sentence of death,
which he forthwith decreed and pronounced upon Adoniah, and swore to have the
same accomplished presently without asking consent of the people. 1. King.
2.23, 24, 25.

III. If the Magistrates in Israel had not in themselves authority to put a
malefactor to death without consent of the people, then do you unjustly blame
that proportion that might be made betwixt the Elders in the gate and Elders in
the Church, betwixt Magistrates and Ministers; then do you unjustly impugn
the same Animadv. p. 14. 15. 16. 19, etc.
as a disproportion and streyned too far: for if the Magistrates in Israel
did but guide and govern the action in Civil judgments, as Ibid. p. 113.
Mr Robinson in his answer recorded by you does note of the Judges of Assizes
in England and even of the Lord Cheef-Iustice himself with his Bench, wishing
also that the Ecclesiastical Elders, whom he and you oppose, would allow the
body of the Church the like liberty at their spiritual Sessions, that those
Judges allow unto the country or Jury in the judgment of malefactors: if the
Magistrates in the Commonwealth might not decree the sentence of judgment
without consent of the people, no more then the Ministers in the Church without
consent of the Congregation; if the Ministers in the Church might govern the
action and the people in their judgments as well as the Elders in the gate; is
there not then here an even and manifest proportion both of government and
power betwixt the one and the other?

IV. If the power of judgments and giving sentence of life and death were not
in the Magistrates in Israel, then do you contradict the testimony of the
Iew-doctours out of their Thalmud alleged not only by Annot. on Matt. 5.22.
Beza and many others, but by your Animadv. p. 17.
self also in the description of their several Courts and the authority which
they exercised in the same. Yea you do more plainly yet contradict yourself,
when afterward from the testimonies of Scripture alleged by Mr Johnson you do
again Ibid. p. 18, 19.
confess that the Magistrates in Israel had power of life and death.

The third Error.
A Third error in the proof of the Churches power, is in that you derive the
same from other unsound proportions of the ceremonial observation in Israel:
Though you yourself do acknowledge against Mr Johnson that the drawing of
proportions from the government in Israel is one of the Animadv. pref. 1. and
p. 15.
maine pillars of Popery, to underprop the tower of Antichrist; yet the truth
is that neither Mr John's. nor Cardinal Bellarmine himself do gather more
unequal proportions for their supremacies which they plead for, then you do.

I. Whereas you would prove Confess. art. 24. Ap. p. 62. Animadv. p. 20.
the power of excommunication to be in the whole body of every Christian
Congregation, and not in any one member apart, or in more members sequestered
from the whole, etc. and seek to prove this by a proportion drawn from the
government in Israel, because as you argue from Numb. 5.2, 3. not the Priest
only, but the children of Israel were charged to put the Leper out of the
host: This proportion fails, unless you could show that the Priests wanted
authority to pronounce this judgment of excluding a leper out of the host,
until they had the consent of the people. We see the contrary; namely that the
Priests discerning and judging the lepers, and others executing their decree
might lawfully remoove the leper: for 1. The Priest did not only declare by
way of teaching and informing who was unclean (as you Ibid. p. 19, 20.
seem to insinuate) but also by their sentence of judgment, and by their
power to censure; therefore is the Priest said to make him polluted or to make
him clean, Lev. 13.3.6. etc. in such timme, tibar.
phrases as in their full signification do express unto us the judicial
sentence of their remoovall out of the host, as well as a bare declaration of
their opinion in the matter: even as the like use of other phrases in the
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 25.1. Prove. 17.15. signifying to hitsdik. hirshiagn.
) make just and to make wicked do also import the judicial sentence of
absolution and condemnation, and not only a declaration of the Judges opinion
thereabouts. 2. It is noted of the Prieft, that in doubtful cases, in the
trial of the leprosy, he should shut up him that had the plague seven daves:
Levit. 13.4* 5. now as he had the power of suspension in a doubtful case to
shut up for a time; so by your own doctrine it will follow that in a manifest
case of leprosy he had the power of shutting out the leper, until the time
that he was clean. 3. The Lord requires the like submission and subjection
unto the judgment and sentence of the Priests in matters of controversy
between plague and plague, as he does unto the Judge in his judgments: Deuteronomy.
17.8-13. and therefore as the Judges had the power of judgment and giving
sentence Civilly; so had the Priefts power of judgment Ecclesiastically. 4.
Whereas you Confess. art. 25.
show every member of the Church to be subject unto the censure of
excommunication by alleging, 2. Chron. 26.20. you may thereby discern the
weakness of your proportion for the power of the people; for in that storye you
see how the King Vzziah so soon as his leprosy appeared, was hastily remooved
and caused to depart out of the Temple, and this by the authority of the
Priests, without waiting to ask the consent of the people. And therefore if
Ministers and Elders have now as much power to excommunicate, as the Priests
had then to remoove that Leper, then your proportion for the people vanishes
as a smoke. 5. Though the children of Israel be commanded to put the Leper out
of the camp, Number. 5.2. yet is the practice thereof to be understood according
to the diversity of men's callings, namely so that the Priests did put out the
Leper, by giving sentence and pronoucing him unclean; the people by
complaining and bringing the matter unto the Priest in the first place and
helping to execute it in the last place. 6. Whereas you grant a proportion
herein thus far, Animadv. p. 19.20.
that as every Priest then might according to the Law, declare what was
leprosy; so every Minister now may and ought by the law to declare what is
sin and heresy, and this though it be without or against the consent of the
Church and of all the world: your grant herein is nothing worth, while you
grant as much both to the Prophets and people under the Law as well as to the
Priests, and to the Prophets and people now as well as to the Ministers and
Elders. The declaration of sin, the trial and conviction of sin you do
now allow to one as well as to the other. Lastly, as the Lord commands the
children of Israel to remoove the leper our of the camp, so he gives them the
like charge for those that were defiled by the dead or by unclean issues:
Numb. 5.2. And yet who will say that the judgment and daily administration of
these actions did belong unto the multitude of the Congregation, or that they
were bound to come together in a solemn assembly upon such occasions of
remooving these persons and receyving them again at their cleansing? The law
of their purification requires no such things ^um. 19.18, 19. Levit. 15.13, 14,
etc. And therefore howsoever the act of remooving these unclean persons in the
time of the Law may be held as a general type to show the exclusion of wicked
persons from the holy things of God under the Gospel; yet the persons by whom
these Legal and Ceremonial separations were ordinarily administered and
performed, cannot serve for a sufficient proof that obstinate sinners are to
be cenfured and remooved by the whole Congregation assembled for that purpose.

II. Another of your wrested proportions from the practice of Israel, you may
see in your Apology* where you labor to prove that the power of
Excommunication is in the body of the Church by this reason because Apol. p. 62.
the duty of putting away leaven out of their houses at the feast of Passover
and unleavened bread was by the Lord himself laid upon all Israel, and not
committed or enjoined only to the Officers. 1. Cor. 5.7* 12, 13. compared with
Exodus 12.3, 15. Lev. 23.2, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 16.1-4. Here unto I answer. 1. If the
power of Excommunication be in the members of the Church now, as the power of
putting away leaven was in the Israelites of old: then as every particular
Israelite under the Law had power of himself to remoove leaven out of his
house, yea and was bound to do the same whether the rest of the Congregation
consented or not, as appears in the places of Scripture here alleged by
yourself; so now in like manner every particular member of the Church should
have power in his hand to excommunicate and remoove a wicked man out of the
Congregation, whether the rest of his brethren consented or not. 2. If you
further intend that as each Israelite for himself was to put away leaven, so
also he was to look to others that they did the same, this I grant so far as
the means of admonition, exhortation and complaint might reach; but that the
Israelites had all of them judicial authority and power to judge those that
offended herein, (about which authority the question is) the Scriptures by you
alleged do not prove the same. 3. As for that place, 1. Cor. 5.7. where the
Apostle shows that the incestuous person ought to be excommunicate by an
allusion unto the ceremony of purging out the leaven; he therein only teaches
the duty that is to be done, but as for the authority of the persons by who^
the censure was to be executed, though he teach them that also in other verses
of that chapter, yet does he not derive the ground thereof from the ceremony of
the leaven put away: therein is your error to stretch and rack the proportion
too far.

The fourth Error.
IN the fourth place, your warrant and ground for the peoples power is
insufficient, when as you derive the same from that separation which you say
was appointed of God before the Law. This you teach, when as you would confirm
the same unto us from Apol p. 62. pos. 8. with p. 44. pos. 3.
the truth and proofs of the third Position in your Apology, where among
other testimonves of Scripture you would prove your Separation by these
allegations, Genesis 4.16, 26. with 6.2. and 9.27: and 12.1. and 13.6, 7, 8. Exodus
5.3. But these Scriptures do neither justify your kind of Separation, though
they be often perverted by you to that purpose; and much less do they show
unto us that the power of Excommunication is in the body of the Church.

As for Genesis 4.16. where it is said that Cain went out from the presence of the
Lord: 1. It is uncertain whether it was by an excommunication from the place
of Gods word and public worship: Many are said to be caft out of Gods
presence, as we read sometimes of Israel and Judah, though we cannot say that
they were then excommunicate. 2. Kin. 17, 18*20, 23. and Ier. 52.3. etc. Though
the face of God do sometimes signify his all-seeing providence and government
from which none can flee, Psalm. 139.7.12. Ier. 23.24. as you do Annot. on Genesis
4.16.
write; yet your reasoning there is imperfect, because the face of God does
signify diverse other things besides his all-seeing providence and the place of
his worship, as namely his more comfortable presence and providence, etc. Psalm.
30.7. with Job, 29.2, 3, 4. whereof men may be deprived though not by
excommunication. 2. Suppose Cain was excommunicate, yet this proves not the
Separation you plead for. you cannot deny but that excommunication of murderers
and such like is sometimes practiced in diverse Churches, whom yet you will not
allow for a separate people according to your profession. 3. With what color
of a just consequence will you collect that the power of excommunication is in
the body of the Church, from this proof of your third position? how does Cains
separation demonstrate unto us the peoples power in Ecclesiastical censures?

As for Genesis 4.26. when Sheth begat his son and named him Enosh, and when
(according to your translation) men began profanely to call on the name of the
Lord: 1. Your reasoning upon this verse is unwarrantable, when as you say, that
Annot. on Genesis 4.26.
the sorrows of this age were great, as the very name of Enos testifyeth and
the history following in Genesis 6. confirms: for neither is the name of Enos a
witness of great sorrows in that age any more then the name of Henoch, given
both to the posterity of Cain and Sheth ( Genesis 4.17. and 5.18.) is a witness
of the great holiness or catechizing in their age, or the name of Isaac a
witness of the great joy and gladness of that age, or any more then the name of
Enos given to every man is a witness of the sorrows of every age: Psalm. 8.4.
and 144.3. neither does the story following in Genesis 6. confirm unto us the
sorrows of Enos his age and birth, going a thousand years before the same, any
more then the story following in Zedekias his time confirms unto us that
there were great sorrows in the days of David. 2. As for your Separation and
the power of the people in excommunicating, as you note in your Apology, who
can devise or comprehend how they should be derived hence? How can you account
those things proved unto us, for which there is not so much as a show of any
consequence in the places alleged?

As for Genesis 6.2. where it is recorded how the sons of God took unto them
wives of the daughters of men according to their lust; I would feign see how by
any lawful argument you can hence conclude either your Separation, or the
peoples power in excommunicating: when your argument appears in the form of
it, it will then be time enough to shape an answer unto it. In the mean time,
whereas you Annot. on Ge. 6.2.
note that by the daughters of men are meant they of Kains posterity, that out
were of Gods Church, etc. you might as well have said that they had been of
Sheths posterity, which was also degenerate, so that for their wickedness they
were swept away with the flood and destroyed as well as Cains posterity, Noah's
family only excepted. Who can say that the posterity of Cain for more then a
thousand years together were strangers from the Church of God, during the time
of so many Patriarchs; or that some of Sheths posterity also did not cease to
be the Church of God? And if the testimony of your Hebrew doctors were to be
admitted, I might easily show you many of them that tell us of Cains
repentance, and consequently of the receiving of him and his posterity into the
Church of God. Yea if Naamah was the wife of Noah as they R. Solomon com. on
Genesis 4.22.
presume, you might then observe the posterity of Cain living still after the
flood in her that was the daughter of Lamech, on Cains side.

Touching Genesis 9.27. though Iaphet was to be persuaded to dwell in the tents of
Shem, etc. yet how are we to be persuaded thence touching the form of
government among them, and that the power of excommunication was in the people,
rather then in any Rulers among them? These bare allegations of Scripture help
you nothing until you draw some argument from them to show the matter in
controversy, which yet is not done by you.

Touching Genesis 12.1. where Abram is called out of his native country: 1. That
place is strangely abused by you for your Separation, seeing Abram there is
called to travel he knows not whither, unto a land which God would afterward
show and give unto him, ( Hebr. 11.8. Genes. 12.1.) without any mention of
separating or joining unto any Church. And the land of Canaan unto which he
came appears to have been as Idolatrous at that time, and more manifestly
accursed then that of the Chaldaeains from whence he came. Genesis 9.25, 26, 27.
2. With what kind of arguing can you show us the peoples power in judgments
and censures of sin from this ground? This we desire to know and wait for.
Yet to make you more circumspect against that time, consider in the mean while
the error of your Annotations touching this calling of Abram, Genesis 12.1. 1.
When as concerning the time you write that it was Annot. on Genesis 12.
after that Abrams father was dead, Act. 7.4. this your assertion is
unwarrantable and without proof: Though it be manifest from Act. 7.4. that God
brought Abram from Charran after his father was dead; yet this shows not that
the calling mentioned in Genesis 12.1. was after his fathers death. 2. Whereas you
note further upon the same verse, touching the place from which Abram was
called, Genesis 12.1. that it was that country wherein he now dwelt in Charran,
this is also unsound and appears to be contrary to the express word of God,
mentioned by Stephen, who says ( Act. 7.2, 3.) that The God of glory appeared
unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
Charran, and said unto him, Come out of thy country and from thy kindred, and
come into the land which I shall show thee: The words used of God in that
calling, Genesis 12.1. are plainly noted to have been said unto Abram, before he
dwelt in Charran; and who can then without great presumption feign them to be
said at another time and place, having no warrant of Scripture for the same? I
know indeed that R. Solomon Iarchi on Genesis 12.1.
some of your Rabbines (who do so often mislead you) do write that this call
was from Charran, but their authority is too light to rest upon it. They will
have Nun, the last letter of the word In Genesis 11.32.
Charran to be written with the head of it downward and the lowest part of it
upward, contrary to the order, to show R. Sol. ibid.
that the wrath of God burned until Abram. One of your authors according to
his Cabalisticall art Baal hatturim on Genesis 12.1.
tells us that the numerall letters of the word arecha used in the call of
Abram, Genesis 12.1. do yield the same number that begnananim does, which
signifies by the clouds, to teach us that the clouds went before him and
showed him the way in his journey. And the inversion of this Nun haphueah is as
well and as worthy to be observed for matter of meditation and instruction, as
are the great and little letters which you Annot. on Genesis 23.2. and 34.31. and
Lev. 1.1.
mention for like use. You tell us in the same place that the Hebrew doctors
expound the name Charran by Charon aph, that is, wrathful anger, (R. Menachem
on Genesis 12.) as if he were now to depart from the place of wrath, etc. but if
you had alleged the place more plainly and fully, the vanity of that Rabbine
would thereby have appeared, while he says that R. Menachem on Genesis 12.4.
when Abram went to give his influence or abundance unto the higher land, Lot
went with him, for that land was to receive from them both, and the word Lot is
from Levatin (which signifies curses) and this at his going from Charan: the
word charon signifies anger. This is the vain conceit contained in the
allegation which you send us unto, and compare with so many places of
Scripture. And suppose Charan be denominate of anger, yet this will not prove
that the calling Genesis 12.1. was from Charan. Again it appears to be the
opinion of other Chazkuni com. on Genesis 12.1. Aben Ezra on Genesis 11. and 12.1.
Rabbines, that this calling of Abram, Genesis 12.1. was from Vr of the Chaldees,
before he came to Charan. And besides these, the judgment of learned Merc. on
Genesis 12. Trem. and Iun. annot. ibid. Calv. and Musc. com. ibid.
Christians is herein against you, and more to be respected then the Jewish
doctors whom you so much follow. 3. Besides other things, how gross is that
error, when you write Annot. on Genesis 12.5.
that the land of Canaan is a country in Asia the less, etc. It appears not
by the Scriptures that Abram ever came into Asia the less. And had he gone
thither to seek Canaan, he should never have found that land unto which he was
called of God. This your error of misplacing Canaan is reproved not only by
the general testimony of the cheifest Ptol. Geogr. lib. 5. c. 2. Asiae tab. 1.
Strab. Geogr. l. 12. Plin. Hist. not. l. 5. c. 27 Solin. Polyh. c. 43.
Geographers, but also by the evidence of the holy Scriptures, which do often
and plainly distinguish these countries and make it very manifest that Canaan
is not a country in Asia the less, as you say. Act. 2.9. and 16.6. and
20.16.1. Pet. 1.1.

Touching your allegation of Genesis 13.6, 7, 8. we read there of the riches of
Abram and Lot, of the strife betwixt their servants, of the Cananites and
Perizzites dwelling in the land, of Abrams care to avoid strife: but how you
will conclude your Separation from hence, together with the peoples power in
excommunications, who can imagine or comprehend it? we would feign see what
face of an argument you can paynt out unto us from this Allegation.

And as for Exo. 5.3. where Moses and Aaron tell Pharaoh, how the God of the
Hebrews met them, how they desire to go three days journey into the
wilderness to do sacrifice, and of the danger of pestilence or sword to come
upon them if they did it not; by what consequence will you maintain your
Separation from hence? and by what second consequence will you then demonstrate
the peoples authority from this Separation here employed, as you write? These
things do yet lie hid, wrapped up in darkness, that men cannot discern what you
mean thereby. It is a strange folly in matters of so great controversy, so
barely to allege such a number of Scriptures, which seem not so much as to
look toward the point of the question in hand, and this your fault is so much
the greater in that yon can find time and leisure to note and publish so many
other idle and unproffitable things; as when in the explication of this verse
you set down those dotages of Maimony about the Pestilence, Deber, which have
no weight in them, no ground or color of truth. Why did you not rather
manifest your Separation from hence, if it be here taught as you say, for the
clearing of your cause and plucking others out of the darkness and shadow of
death, wherein (according to your profession) they do remain?

CHAP. IIII.
Whether the people be bound to be present at the proceedings against
offenders.
A Another error concerning the government of the Church is this, that you hold
the people bound to be present at the conviction of sinners and trial of
causes. Though Mr Johnson Advertis. of Mr Clyft. p. 41.42.
left it free for any of the people to come if they would; yet you Animadv p.
42.43.
hold not that sufficient, unless they be bound to come and to hear the
proceedings. Against the liberty of being absent or present you allege many
things, and plead as follows.

H. AINSVV. Is not this to divide the body, when the head must be present, and
the shoulders with the other parts and members may be absent? ANSVV. It is no
division in the body mystical, when the head labors for the good of the body,
though some members thereof be absent; no more then there is a division or
disunion among the friends that consult for the comfort of one another, though
not present; no more then there is betwixt the States of these lands and the
people thereof, when the States meet apart to determine some things without the
people; no more then there was a division when the Elders at Jerusalem met
apart without the people. Act. 21.18-25.

H. AINSVV. The Apostle writing to the Church of Corinth, how to do when they
came together for the Lords supper. 1. Cor. 11.18, 33. writes also to them how
when they were gathered together, they should deliver the wicked unto Satan. 1.
Cor. 5.4, 5. We find no difference, but they were bound to come to the one as
to the other. And if they answer, they are bound to assemble for to
excommunicate him, but not to hear, him by the word convinced in the trial of
his cause; they may as well teach the people they are bound to come to eat the
bread and wine in the Lords supper, but not bound to hear the word teaching
and preparing them hereunto. ANSVV. 1. In coming to the Lords supper every man
is bound unto a special and particular examination and preparation of himself,
and by his own knowledge to convince and judge himself: 1. Cor. 11.28, 31. but
in coming to the excommunication of offenders a man may lawfully content
himself with the testimony of others touching their conviction, and so rest in
the judgment of the Church; Deuteronomy. 19.15, 16, 17. and chapter 17.8-13. neither does
the Scripture in any place require more of us. 2. A man may be fitted and
prepared unto the Lords supper, though he do not hear the word of God taught
and preached at the same time when he comes thereunto. True faith and
repentance make men worthy and lawful communicants and able to discern the
body of the Lord, though by some means they be hindered from hearing the Word
immediately before. 1. Cor. 3.21, 22. Ioh. 6.40. And therefore to follow you in
your own comparison; as a man may lawfully come to the Lords supper, though he
have not heard the word before: so may he lawfully come to the excommunication
of a sinner, and consent thereunto, though he have not been present at his
conviction before, but only hear it testified by others. 3. If you find no
difference, but that men are alike bound to come to hear the examination and
conviction of offenders, and to come to the Lords supper; why do you not then
censure those among you that after your Sermon ended do depart, when you enter
upon these convictions and disputations, continuing sometimes until eight,
nine, or ten a clock in the night, as well as those that after Sermon should
depart and refuse to eat the Lords supper with you? Does not your own
conscience and practice reprove you in this point?

H. AINSVV. We do so understand Gods law, that when it commands us any
thing, it does also command us to use all means for the right and holy
performance of it: and all will be little enough. ANSVV. Thus do we also
understand the Law: but the Question is whether all the means for the right
and holy performance of this judgment of excommunication cannot be used,
unless all the members of the Church be present at the conviction of the
excommunicate. The reader is to consider whether this be justly proved by you.

H. AINSVV. The people therefore that were bound to stone an Idolater in
Israel, were bound by that Law. Thou shall not slay the innocent, Exodus 23.7.
to look that he were duly convicted of the crime. ANSVV. But could not the
people know that an Idolater were duly convicted, unless they themselves were
all present at his examination and conviction? By this kind of reasoning, 1.
You condemn the just and lawful war undertaken against the enemies of
Church and Commonwealth: you might as well say that because no soldier may
slay the innocent, therefore every particular soldier is bound to be present
in the assembly of the Rulers, where the cause of the war is tried, and there
to hear the examinations and convictions of the wrong-doers. But how was this
possible in Israel, where so many hundred thousands were sometimes assembled
together unto the war? 2. Chron. 13.2, 3. etc. or how should it now possibly
be observed in our times? how should private soldiers with good conscience go
into the field, unless they may rest in the testimony of their Governors
touching the cause of the war? 2. By that commandment, Thou shall not slay
the innocent, Exodus 23.7. those also are condemned that suffer the innocent to
be slain, having authority and power in their hands to hinder the same: and
thus according to your reasoning, the King or other supreme Magistrates of any
country* that should suffer any person to be slain or punished within their
dominions, should be bound to be present at their examination and conviction in
like manner, contrary to the liberty that God has given unto Princes, in
appointing and sending Governors for the punishment of evil doers. 1. Pet.
2.13, 14. And diverse other the like unreasonable consequences would follow upon
this manner of arguing.

H. AINSVV. And now by this law, Be not partaker of other men's sins: Keep thy
self pure, 1. Tim. 5.22. every soul that is bound to cast out a man condemned
for heresy or other sin, is also bound to see him convicted, lest Diotrephes
cause to cast out faithful brethren. 3. Ioh. 9, 10. ANSVV. 1. The error of
this collection applied to the Question in hand, appears by your own
practice; when those members of your Church who having been sick or absent
while any person is condemned for heresy or other sin, do yet upon the
testimony of the Church reject him as an excommunicate and cast him out of
their society. Here you allow a rejection of offenders by such as have not
been present to see their conviction. 11. Your error in this allegation may
likewise appear in this, that those who are excommunicate by one true Church
are also to be rejected by other true Churches that have not been present to
see the conviction of such persons. Luke 10.16. Matt. 18.18. Ioh. 20.23. 1.
Cor. 5.3. 2. Cor. 2.10. This shows that a man may keep himself pure, resting
in the testimony of others: and that the place, 1. Tim. 5.22. is not to be
applied against them that do upon the witness of a Church reject offenders.
111. As for Diotrephes causing to cast out faithful brethren, 1. There is no
appearance in the text alleged, 3. Ioh. 9, 10. that this was done for want of
the peoples presence: his love of pre-eminence and his tyranny might be
exercised in their presence, as well as in their absence. 2. The reader is here
to mark the contradiction of H. Barrow unto you, and his further error who
will not have this casting out of the faithful by Diotrephes, to be understood
of excommunication, H. Bar. Refut. of Giff. p. 165.
nor to be meant of the abuse of any censure of the Church, etc. 3. For rash
excommunications and actual casting out of brethren, name any true Church
where ever this sin has prevayled so notoriously as among yourselves and the
Anabaptists, where the popular order has been most in use. If you look upon
all the Reformed Churches and their practice, where the people are not bound to
be present at the conviction and examination of offenders, I think your own
heart will tell you and your mouth will acknowledge, that the like rash and
unjust excommunications have not been executed among them, as among yourselves
and other Sects of Separatists that use the same manner of proceeding which you
do.

H. AINSVV. He that stands out to excommunication, will commonly plead his
cause to be just, and complain that the Elders have perverted judgment: with
what comfort of heart can the people now excommunicate him, if they have not
heard the proceedings against him, and yet must execute the Elders sentence
upon him? Let wise men judge whether this be not spiritual tyranny, which the
Elders would bring upon the consciences of the Church. ANSVV. I. They which
consent to the excommunication of a person judged by the Church, and do
thereupon reject his fellowship; may have the same comfort of heart, which your
people ordinarily have when themselves upon diverse occasions being present
neither at the conviction of offenders, nor at the pronunciation of sentence
against them, do yet rest in the testimony and sentence of others; and
thereupon avoid such an excommunicate, though he plead his cause to be just and
complain that the Elders and others of the people have perverted judgment.
II. They may have the same comfort of heart, which diverse of your people have,
being soldiers here in the service of the City, who together with the rest of
the soldiers do at the Magistrates appointment attend upon the execution of
justice of diverse malefactors, as pirates and others; and though they have
not heard the proceedings against them, though they have not been present at
the examination and conviction of such persons, do yet help to execute the
Magistrates sentence upon them, being ready to assist and defend the
executioner, if need should require; even then when the condemned persons do
still plead that they are innocent, and complain that the Magistrates have
perverted judgment against them. Thus you may see how this your kind of
reasoning brings blood upon the head of your people, and so upon your own and
your Churches head for retaining of them. II. They may have the same comfort of
heart, which the Israelites had in avoiding the Lepers, and putting them out of
the camp upon the testimony of the Priests, Number. 5.2, 3. Levit. 13.2-46.
though they had not been present at the proceedings, nor come together to see
the marks and tokens of the leprosy; and this even then when the Lepers did
plead that they were clean, and complained that the Priests had done them
wrong. IV. The manner of proceeding against offenders, both in the Reformed
Churches and in our particular Congregation, is such that any of the people may
sufficiently inform themselves both touching the matter of fact and right in
any question and cause, before the sentence of excommunication be pronounced:
They have liberty and opportunity to deal with the parties accused, and with
the Elders also; and this not only with either of these apart, but also if
they will, to hear the conviction of the offenders before the Elders. Yea the
cause of such offenders is so often publicly propounded to the whole
Congregation, and the people are so often exhorted and stirred up to admonish
and deal with those which are run into scandal, that they may fully discern
the guiltines of such persons before they be cast out; and therefore cannot by
wise men be judged to be under any spiritual tyranny for consenting unto the
rejection of those, whose iniquity and obstinacy they may so plainly
understand. V. If the law of God may be expounded according to those select
interpretations of the Rabbines, which you make special choice of and commend
unto our consideration above others; then are the people to execute the
judgeme^ts of the Elders, though the proceedings therein be kept in far
greater secrecy then we require. for expounding those words, Thou shall not
walk a talebearer, you say thereupon, Annot. on Levit. 19.16.
As this Law immediately follows the former about the Judges; so the Hebrews
apply this precept unto them, saying, It is unlawful for any of the Judges,
when he goes out from the judgment hall, to say, I am he that does acquit or
condemn; and my fellows are against me: but what can I do, seeing they are
more then I. And if he thus speak, he is within the compass of this, HE THAT
WALKS as A TALEBEARER, REVEALS SECRETS: ( Proverb. 11.13.) Maimony in
Sanhedrin, chapter 22. sect. 7. Whereto the Greek version of that place agrees; A
double tongued man reveals counsels (or secrets) in the Synedrion (or
Council.) And so in Prove. 20.19. To practice according to this exposition of
the Jews which without any note of dislike you publish unto us, might justly
be called a spiritual Tyranny, when even the Judges should not be allowed to
testify openly against the oppressions and blood and other iniquities
maintained by wicked men. Such smothering of sin is both against the law of
God, Exodus 20.16. Prove. 14.25. Ephesians. 5.11. Esa. 59.4. Ier. 9.3. Mic. 7.3, 4. and
against the law of nature it self, which taught even the wicked Pilate to take
water and wash his hands before the multitude, and to make public protestation
of his innocence against them that were authors of unrighteous judgment.
Matt. 27.24. Ioh. 18.38. and 19.4. Thus do your writings lead men into
contrary extremities.

THus far for answer unto your own reasons: An argument on the contrary side
brought to show the freedom of the people in coming or not coming to hear the
examinations and convictions going before the censure, and to show that the
people are not bound thereunto, is thus set down, because R. Clyf. Advertism.
p. 42. Romans 12.7.8. 1. These. 5.12, 13. 1. Tim. 5.17, 18. As may come to pass
in great Congregations and when many cases are to be heard, etc.
So it shall not be enough, that the Elders by their Office are bound unto it,
and ought to have maintenance for the doing of it and of the other duties of
their Office: but the men must (without any allowance for it) leave their
trades and callings, the women their houses and families, the children their
schooling and employment, the servants their work and labor and must come
together (though it should be day after day) to hear and judge the cases that
fall out between brother and brother according to Matt. 18.17. for by this
Scripture in 1. Cor. 12. chapter they will have it understood of men, women, and
children that can sorrow and rejoice with others, as before was showed. In your
answer hereunto by a crooked winding you turn away from the argument, and do
not direct your answer unto the point and force thereof, when as you say,
Animadv. p. ^3.
Let them then excommunicate alone, as well as try the case alone: seeing they
have maintenance for both; and let the people be bound to come to neither: no
nor to the Pastors ministering of the Word and Sacraments (if this reason be
good,) because he is more worthy maintenance then the ruling Elders, as the
Apostle shows. 1. Tim. 5.17, 18. For if the Elders were only bound to utter
and pronounce a sentence of excommunication, when the people are gathered to
hear the same; then should the Elders deserve no more maintenance then the
people. If the Pastor were not bound to study all the week and to take pains
to prepare himself for the ministry of the word and Sacraments, but did only
speak the same without labor going before; then could not the double honor
and maintenance mentioned, 1. Tim. 5, be due unto him. Where there is no
special work, there is no special maintenance. And therefore while you do
not require double labor of the Elders in trying cases, but do bind the
people even to the same labor of enquiring, examining and trying matters, how
can you require double honor and such special maintenance for them? But after
this general evasion, you proceed unto some more particular answers, and say
there in your Animadversion:

H. AINSVV. First, they restrain things too much, when they say between brother
and brother: for what if it be a public case of heresy oridolatry, as that
mentioned Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13, 14. etc. will they say women, children and servants
were then, or are now bound to leave their callings, and come together to try
out the matter? Hereunto I reply. I. They restrain things no otherwise then
Christ himself does, when speaking generally of the sundry sorts of sin, he
also notes them to be between brother and brother, saying, If thy brother finne
against thee. Matt. 18.15. Even to public sins of heresy and idolatry, as
that in Deuteronomy. 13. though immediately they are committed against God; yet as
they are scandals and occasions of falling unto others, so are they cases
between man and man, brother and brother, to be censured and judged by them.
Deuteronomy. 7.4. and 13.5, 6, 13. II. If they restrain things too much, then do they
no wrong unto you but unto themselves: then is there more force in the matter,
then their words do make show of. For if it be unmeet to bind all the members
of the Church to hear cases daily between brother and brother even in a
stricter sense, as you would have their words to sound; how much more
inconvenient shall it be, when by a larger bond they shall be required to hear
all cases of sin, both betwee^ brother and brother, and between the Lord and
our brethren? III. What sense or reason have you to make this question, Will
they say etc. whereas it is not they, but you which say and plead by all this
your arguing, that women, children and servants are bound to leave their
callings and come together to try out these controversies?

H. AINSVV. Secondly, many controversies between neighbors, are for civil
things of this life: such are Luke 12.14.
not Church matters, nor there to be heard, but by Romans 13.
Magistrates, or arbiters chosen. 1. Cor. 6.4, 5. REPL. I. Even the
controversies about Civil things of this life, are Church Matters and there to
be judged, seeing all sins are there to be judged. Matt. 18.15-17. 1. Cor.
5.11. 2. Cor. 10.4, 5, 6. If you could prove that men did never make false and
deceitful bargains, nor use false weights, nor any kind of extortion,
oppression, coosenage, etc. then might you exclude controversies for Civil
things from the judgment of the Church. And the controversies about these
things being prosequuted before the Church cannot but require a greater time
for the examination of them, then the callings and works of men, women,
children and servants can well afford: so that the force of the argument by
this exception is not diminished, but further manifested hereby. II. For one
and the same sin God has appointed two judgments, one Civil, another
Ecclesiastical: as for example, if a man should refuse to divide the
inheritance with his brother; this man by the Magistrates might be forced
thereunto; and this judgment is a Civil administration. And this is that
which our Savior remooves from himself, Luke 12.13, 14. Again, the same man
for his deceit, covetousnes and sinful oppression of his brother used in this
controversy for Civil things of this life, might justly be censured by the
Church and excluded from the same; which is an Ecclesiastical judgment and
administration. You cannot show any place of Scripture, that denies this
judgment unto the Church. Moreover our Savior at that time was none of the
ordinary Judges, no not in Ecclesiastical causes. He did not in his life time
erect another judicatory besides that which was already the^ established among
the Jews: and therefore did not use to excommunicate any or cast them out of
the Synagogue. And if Christ did not now ordinarily give sentence, neither in
Civil nor Ecclesiastical judgments, how far is this his example from
proving that controversies for Civil things are to be remooved from the
Church? III. As for Romans 13. showing that controversies for Civil things are
to be judged by Magistrates, this is not contrary to any thing in the argument,
neither does it weaken the same. The causes of Murder, Adultery, Theft,
Coosenage, Slander, as they are to be judged by the Magistrate, so by the
Church also. And if all the members thereof, men, women, children and servants
be bound unto the labor of trying and examining such causes, why have they not
maintenance for the same, as well as either Magistrates or Ecclesiastical
Elders? IV. As for matters referred unto Arbiters, seeing they are oftentimes
matters of sin, of wrong and injury (1. Cor. 6.7, 8.) subject in that respect
unto Ecclesiastical censures; this course of deciding controversies does as
well serve for the ease and help of the Elders, and saves them a labor as well
as the people. And therefore the consideration hereof does help to show that
there is still no reason why Elders should have special maintenance, when
their ease and excuse from laboring is as much as any others.

H. AINSVV. Thirdly, for doubtful cases Ecclesiastical, people are to inquire
the law Mal. 2.7
at the Priests mouth, and to ask counsel of their Elders, severally or
jointly, who are to have their meetings apart for such and other like ends:
Act. 21.18. so many things may be composed without trouble of the Church. REPL.
1. The people are to ask counsel of one another also, as well as of their
Elders, for in the multitude of counselors is health; Prove. 11.14. and all the
brethren are to instruct, guide and support one another: Romans 2.17-20. and
15.14. Heb. 3.13. and by your own confession they are to be used not only in
private, but in Animadv. p. 40.
public consultations also. Yea beside this, you acknowledge further, that
Ibid. p. 39, 41.
the greatest Errors, Heresies, Schisms and evils have both arisen and been
continued by the Elders; that sometimes they are blind guides and without
understanding: and oftentimes they differ in counsel among themselves; and
thus in doubtful cases men become more doubtful by their counsel, and so
have the more need to consult among themselves. If therefore this duty of
giving counsel do lie upon the people and they be bound unto it; this work
alone being common to others with the Elders, could not show the double honor
and maintenance due unto them, unless some other study and work together with
the labor of hearing, examining and judging of causes did require the same.
II. As for Mal. 2.7. the knowledge in the Priests lips there spoken of, was
that which he principally manifested in his office of public preaching the law
of God: Deuteronomy. 33.10. Lev. 10.11. in which office the Elders do not succeed
them, and so have no special maintenance due in that regard. Again, the
knowledge in the Priests lips appeared secondarily in judicial causes, which
they heard, examined and judged. Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9-12.2. Chron. 19.8. Zech. 3.7.
This power you give unto the people now as well as unto the Elders, who
therefore by your doctrine deserve no more maintenance for the same then do
the people in this regard. III. Though we grant that Elders are to have their
ordinary meetings apart for the Church-affaires, yet does not your allegation
from Act. 21.18. prove the same. for that meeting being upon extraordinary
occasion, to entertain the Apostle Paul and those that were with him, who
being new come to Jerusalem, they came together to salute and embrace one
another, to hear tidings of the success of the Gospel and to rejoice together
in the Lord, verse. 19. and then consulted further of such things as tended to
the edification of the Church, verse. 20. etc. You might as well conclude that
strangers of other Congregations should be present in the ordinary assembly of
the Elders, because we do here read of some such who being in Paul's company
were now also present at this special meeting of the Elders in Jerusalem. Act.
21.15, 16, 17, 18.

H. AINSVV. Fourthly, when apparent sinners so convicted by witnesses, are to
be judged by the Church: there is no time more fit then the Sabbath day;
wherein all men are board to leave their own works, ( Exo. 20.10.) and tend to
the Lords, of which sort this is. REPL. I. Though I do not hold it simply
unlawful to judge causes on the Sabbath day, yet that this day is the fittest,
your allegation from Exodus 20. shows it not. Men may then leave their own
works and tend to the Lords, though they hear no controversies pleaded: yea
much more fitly, comfortably and fruitfully may they attend upon the public
administration of the Word, Prayer and Sacraments, and sanctify themselves
thereunto in private both by duties of preparation before, and by duties of
meditation, repetition, conference, etc. afterward, if the minds of Minister
and people be not distracted or hindered by other controversies and contentions.
Psalm. 26.6. Matt. 5.8. Exo. 19.10. and 30.18-21. Act. 17.11. Psalm. 119.11. etc.
That there has been such a disturbance and hindrance among you, it is
testified not only by strangers which sometimes hearing you do complain
hereof, but also by your own Ministers, as Mr Johnson and Mr Clyfton, and your
own people, both such as have left you and even such as still remain with
you. II. As Ecclesiastical judgments are the Lords works, so are Civil
judgments also, which the Magistrates sitting on the Lords throne in stead of
the Lord their God, do administer and execute in his name. 2. Chron. 19.6. and
9.8. And by this reasoning you might make the Sabbath to be the fittest day for
them also.

H. AINSVV. Or if that day suffice not, they may take any other for them
convenient: for etc. REPL. You do hereby yield unto us that you have walked in
an unclean way, and that you have (according to your own doctrine) an
unclean and polluted people. for seeing as Mr Johnson confesses and
witnesses, Treat. on Matt. 18. p. 17.
your wonted manner has been to hear matters on the week day; at which time
there was seldom half the Church together: if now according to Anim. adv. p.
42.
your former arguing from 1. Tim. 5.22. men cannot keep themselves pure from
partaking with other men's sins, unless they see and hear the conviction of
those whom they do reject, then has half your Church together been defiled
many times, while they have consented to the excommunication of such, at the
hearing and examination of whose cause they have not been present.

H. AINSVV. For unto public affairs the Church is to be assembled. 1. Cor.
5.4. Act. 14.27. and 15.4, 30. and 21.18-22. REPL. This your general and
indefinite speech does admit many exceptions: for I. Even the Elders when they
have their meetings apart, as you grant unto them, do consider together of the
public affairs; and there you see then that the Church is not always to be
assembled unto public business. II. If the whole Church and all the members
thereof, men, women, children and servants must assemble to hear the
proceedings against them whom they are to avoid and reject, according to your
plea; and this also on the week days though it should be day after day, as may
come to pass in great Congregations and when many cases are to be heard, etc.
as was R Clyfr. Advert. p. 42.
before objected unto you: what reason is there that the Elders should have
special maintenance in respect of this work, where all the members of the
Church are bound to attend upon the work as well as they? To this you say
nothing. III. Even unto the public administration of the word and prayer, you
do not bind your people on the week day, but leave it free for them to come
or not to come unto the same: And shall the hearing of examinations and
proceedings against particular men have more honor then the word preached? Yea
which is much more, by this your opinion and reasoning you do more bind your
people to be present at controversies even on the week day, then to hear the
word and prayer even on the Lords day: for to be absent from judicial
proceedings on the week day does not only require acknowledgment of a fault,
as does the absence from public worship on the Lords day, but by your doctrine
it does also require a reversing and repeating of the proceedings, or else a
refusal to allow the same in not rebuking or rejecting them who are publicly
censured, rebuked or excommunicated by the Church. IV. As in respect of the
ease and commodity of the Church, the hearing of some public affairs is to be
committed to the Eldership, as has been showed before; so also for the
avoiding of scandal and offense. for example: the examination of each
particular act and circumstance serving for the conviction of offenders in
some unclean and filthy sins, and the open repetition and naming hereof
before the whole Congregation, men and women, young and old, your own people
and strangers that come to hear, cannot but be very offensive, and so is found
to be: for it is a shame even to speak of the things which are done of many in
secret. Ephesians. 5.12. And even shame it self (as it seems) has forced you
sometimes to leave this your practice, which you so earnestly plead for: As
heretofore in the case of H. C. it is testified, that in the examination of an
unclean fact imputed unto him, there were certain men deputed to hear and
examine the cause apart from the Congregation, that the ears of women and
children and of the whole multitude should not be offended therewith. And why
may you not now still by the like reason yield that the hearing and examining
of offenders may be done apart by the Elders which are the Churches deputies
thereunto, as well as heretofore by some other deputies new chosen?

Touching the Scriptures alleged by you, although that which is said already
might serve for answer thereunto, yet this in particular may be further
considered. As for 1. Cor. 5.4. there is not a word of the Churches meeting
together to examine the fact of the incestuous person, but only of giving
sentence after it was sufficiently known. In Act. 14.27. we read that the
Church was gathered together; and so with us both on the Lords day and on one
of the week days there is a gathering of the Church together. What an idle
thing is it to prove that there should be public assemblies of the Church,
which none denies? But this place shows not that the Church was gathered
together to the public examination of scandals and to hear the proceedings
against offenders, according to the question in hand. As for Act. 15.4. the
receiving by the Church there mentioned does not so much as show that the
Church was then gathered together. The Church might be said to receive Paul and
Barnabas and some others with them, and to hear what things God had done by
them, though not in a public assembly met together for that end: even as the
Church of Rome might be said to receive Phoebe ( Romans 16.2.) though not in a
public assembly; and Gaius might be said to be the host of the whole Church (
Romans 16.23.) and consequently to receive the same, though not gathered together
at one time. In Act. 15.30. Luke shows that the Epistle of the Apostles was
delivered to the multitude assembled at Antiochia. So we read that the Epistle
written to the Colossians was to be read in the Church of the Laodiceans:
Colos. 4.16. So the letters and decrees of Princes and States at this day are
often times upon sundry occasions delivered and openly read to the multitude
and people in several cities assembled and called together to hear the same,
even as these decrees of the Apostles and Elders were delivered in sundry
places: Act. 16.4. But do these manner of assemblies prove that no cases of
controversy, scandal or sin may be examined and heard by the Rulers and
Governors without the presence of the people gathered together in such an
assembly, according to the question betwixt us? How can such kind of
collections be ever justified by you?

That place, Act. 21.18-22. is often alleged by you to show the peoples power,
while it is there said, that the multitude must needs come together; touching
which words, though neither the Syriack nor the Arabic versions of the New
Testament have them; though the want of these words from the text in this place
is by Inn. Annot in Arab transl. in Act. 21.22.
some learned men judged not to be unmeet; yet will I not insist thereon. But
1. to take the words as they are in the Greek, the word (...).
translated must needs, does not always signify a duty to be done, but
sometimes only a necessity of a thing coming to pass and done by men, though
they ought not to do it: and so this very word is elsewhere used by the
Apostle, when he says there must be herefies, 1. Cor. 11.19. showing thereby
the necessity of an event, but not the duty of any person to do that thing.
Neither does any thing hinder but that the word here also in Act. 21. may be
taken in like sense, viz. that the multitude would needs come together, though
not bound by duty thereunto. 2. Suppose that this coming together of the
multitude was according to duty, yet seeing that both the occasion was
extraordinary, and that also the form of their coming together is not
specifyed, whether they were to come as hearers only of Paul's doctrine, or as
judges in judicial manner to examine him; how can you now conclude from hence
that all cases of controversy among brethren are ordinarily to be examined by
the multitude of the Congregation in a public assembly?

THE SECOND PART, Touching The power of Classical and Synodall Assemblies.
CHAP. I.
The State of the Question, and the importance thereof.
THe sum and substance of the Discipline or Church Government appointed of
God and practiced in the Reformed Churches, consists chiefly in this; that when
as for the remooving of private offenses private admonition in the first and
second degree prevayles not, or when as the offense is public at first, the
matter be then brought unto the judgment of the Eldership; and so that in
weightier cases, as receiving of members, excommunication, election and
deposition of Ministers, etc. nothing be concluded and executed without the
knowledge and approbation of the Church; likewise that in more weighty and
difficult cases, as the aforenamed or the like, the advice, help and allowance
of the Classis under which they stand, and if need be of the Synod unto which
the Classis is subordinate, be sought and rested in: and this in such manner,
that if any person, either Minister, Elder, or any other, even the least member
of the Church do find any evil to be maintained, either against faith or
manners, either by the Eldership or by the Congregation, it is then lawful for
them for the redress of such evil, to repair unto the Classis or Synod, that
by their authority and sentence, the offense may be censured and the abuse
reformed. As the Eldership of a particular Church consists of Ministers and
Elders chosen out of the same, so the Classis consists of many Ministers and
Elders sent from many Churches, and assembling together to hear and determine
the cases above written.

That the State of the Question may yet more clearly be understood, it is to be
remembered that in this combination of Classes and Synods, I. The authority
which they exercise is not absolute, nor their decrees held to be infallible,
but to be examined by the word of God, and not to be received further then they
do agree therewith. And therefore also Kercke^. Ordeninge Synod. Not. Dordr.
art. 31.36.
there is liberty of appeal from them, from the Classis to the Synod, and from
a Provincial Synod to a National. II. The authority of Classes and Synods is
not Civil, neither have they power to inflict Civil punishments; they Ibid.
art. 30.
judge only of Ecclesiastical causes and that in Ecclesiastical manner,
using no other then spiritual censures. III. In the Classical union and
consociation of neighbor Churches, Ibid. art. 84.
no one Church has any prerogative or power above another, nor any one
Minister or Elder greater authority then another: but their questions are
determined by most voices; and they are all mutually and equally subject unto
one another in the Lord. IV. This government of Churches by Classes does not
deprive particular Churches and Congregations of their liberty and power, but
serves to direct and strengthen them in the right use and exercise of their
power: for example, when a particular Church with their Elders or the greater
part of them agree together to choose a Minister that is offensive or unfit for
them, if the Classis upon due consideration of the matter do disanull their
election and hinder their proceeding, yet do they not hereby deprive them of
their liberty nor take from them their privilege of election, forasmuch as
they do still leave unto them a freedom to choose another fit Minister; they
do not in this case go about to choose for them, or to obtrude upon them
another Minister against their will, but only exhort them to use their power
and liberty aright, and to show more care and godly wisdom in seeking out
such an one as may be more inoffensive and fit for the edification of their
Church.

Against this authority of Classes and Synods diverse opposites have risen up
and have pleaded for a new kind of Discipline, contrary to the order of all
Reformed Churches, and contrary to that Reformation which the ancient
Non-conformists in England have so much desired and labored for. And yet many
of these Opposites do in the mean time in general terms seem to Mr Jacob
in his Auestation of Church-gov. p. 118. and 178. Churches plea. p. 94.
embrace Synods and greatly to approve of the benefit that comes by them. But
herein is the point of difference, that they do limit and confine all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the bounds of a particular Congregation.
Though they acknowledge Synods to be lawful, expedient and necessary; yet this
they hold to be only in regard of counsel and advise, for provocation,
direction and countenance: but do not acknowledge them to have any authority
to give sentence for the decision of causes; they do not allow Classes or
Synods to use any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction or censure in judging the
controversies that arise in particular Congregations. They maintain that
Churches plea. pref. Mr Dav. Reply. p. 229, etc.
every particular Congregation is independent, not standing under any other
Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves.

This opposition of Classes and Synods is made specially by the H. Barrow
Discov. p. 190. 191. Apol. of Brown. pos. 9.
Brownists, and by them have the Ministers of England been reproached for the
respect which they had unto Synods. After them Mr Jacob in his writings often
allowing them for counsel, Necess. of Reform. p. 31, 32, 33
yet denies the power and authority which we asscribe unto them. And in that
book which is entitled English Puritanisme Chap. 2. art. 3.6. etc.
this their opinion is most plainly and peremptorily propounded. And now also
Mr Davenp. though he Apolog. Repl. p. 226
allow a combination of particular Churches in Classes and Synods, and such a
consociation of them as is between equals, and is by way of counsel, or
brotherly direction; yet he says Ibid. p. 229.
that their authority is not a prerogative of jurisdiction, but of aestimation
and reverence rather: because Gods ordinance has limited the former (viz.
jurisdiction) to particular Churches, as his delegates in their own matters,
and it is not in their power to alienate it from themselves: But the latter
(viz. estimation and reverence) is due to Classes consisting of grave, learned,
prudent and faithful men, for their excelent personal gifts, in which respect
their judgment is to be much valued, and receyved with due regard. But if any
do asscribe unto Classes a power of jurisdiction over particular Churches, and
that in things which he calls proper unto themselves, this he says Ibid. p.
230.
is to subject particular Churches under an undue power: this he calls an
usurped power. Now then behold what this estimation and reverence is which Mr
Dav. allows to Classical assemblies or Synods; viz. not so much power as is
allowed to any one man, though it were the most ignorant and offensive that is
a member of a particular Church. for when a controversy arises about the
election of a Minister, the one half of the Congregation giving voices for him,
another half excepting against him as unsound in doctrine and unfit for the^;
if a whole Classical assembly of Ministers and Elders deputed from all the
Churches round about do also except against him as unsound and unfit, and with
one consent judge that he ought not to be called, yet for one voice of that one
ignorant person, whereby the one part of the Congregation comes to exceed the
other in number, is that unworthy one to be received and called. This is that
due regard, that estimation and value which Mr Dav. affords unto this Classis
consisting of so many grave, learned, prudent and faithful men of excellent
personal gifts, while he maintains that all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is
limited to the particular Church: and all the counsel and brotherly direction
of the Classis must be of no authority against the resolution of such a wilful
company, to censure their unjust proceedings and to stay the same. So again
Apol. repl. p. 47.
he pretends Mr Cartwr. his authority, to prove that other Churches have no
power of hindering a faulty election, but by admonition, which power every
Christian has in another, for his good.

The special or only remedy which the Opposites fly unto in such cases is
the help of the Magistrate. But hereby the importance of this Question and the
danger of despising Synods may appear. Though they hold that Christ has not
subjected any Church or Congregation of his, to any other superior
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction then unto that which is within it self, etc. yet
they hold Engl. Purit. cap. 2. 6. and 3.
that if in the choice of Ministers any particular Church shall err, that none
upon the earth but the Civil Magistrate has power to control or correct the
same for it, etc. that in such cases others are to leave their souls to the
immediate judgment of Christ and their bodies to the sword of the Civil
Magistrate, etc. But this help and remedy is weak and insufficient, and that
many ways: for I. The Churches of Christ do sometimes remain under
heathenish Magistrates, that either regard not the cause of the Church, and
refuse to judge their controversies, as Paul and Gallio, John. 18.31. Act.
18.14, 15. or else seek wholly to root out the same. II. The Churches are
sometimes dispersed and sojourne in the countries of Popish Princes and
Magistrates, as the Churches which at this day live under the Cross in Brabant
and Flanders and sundry other places, where they keep themselves as secret as
may be: and what help can they expect from the Magistrates which seek to expel
them out of their territories? III. Other Churches of Christ do abide in such
Popish countries where though they be tolerated to have their meetings, as in
many parts of France, yet it would be in vain for them to seek help of the
Popish Governors that have dominion in some of the places where they have
their abode. IV. In these United Provinces of the Netherlands, where the
Reformed Churches are maintained, yet forasmuch as here is a toleration of many
Sects and Religions, and among the rest of the Brownists, the Magistrates do
not use to judge their Ecclesiastical controversies, and so afford no help
unto those Sects in that kind. When did the Brownists ever seek any help from
them to repress their contentions and schisms? V. That or those Churches which
are secretly gathered in England according to the direction and example of Mr
Jacob, do they not altogether want the help of the Civil Magistrate in their
controversies? He prescribes this remedy, Necess. of Reform. p. 28.
that if people in their Church-elections, etc. will presume to be unruly and
violent, then the Princes next dwelling Officers of Justice may and ought to
make them keep peace and quietness. But durst he or his in any of their
contentions ever seek that remedy? Lastly, suppose that in every country the
Magistrates did seek the wealth of Sion and did use their authority to correct
and punish the disorders committed in true Churches, yet would not this remedy
be sufficient to humble obstinate offenders, God having appointed other means
of Spiritual censure as well as Civil punishment to work upon the consciences
of sinners, of which more is to be spoken hereafter.

The importance of this Question may further appear unto us, if we consider
the manifold and great offenses and scandals which many have the rather fallen
into through their neglect and contempt of Classes and Synods, and through want
of that help which they might have obtained by them. And this is most evident
in the practice and course of the Brownists. In that infamous contention when
Francis John's. the Pastor with his company did excommunicate not only his
brother George Johnson, a Preacher also, but his own father likewise, John
Johnson, coming out of England for this purpose, to make peace betwixt his two
sons: had they used the help of neighbor Churches and permitted them to
judge betwixt them, it might have been a means through Gods blessing to have
preserved them from such extreme courses. Hereof George Johnson often complains
in his book: Discourse of troubles, etc. p. 74. and p. 38.39. and 41.
they will not consent hereunto, they will not be persuaded nor entreated to
let the Reformed Churches hear, try, judge and end the controversy between
them and us. And this is not the complaint of G. Johnson alone, but the
Ministers both of the Dutch and French Churches in Amsterdam do likewise give
testimony thereof, being deputed by the Elderships of both those Churches, and
that upon the request of the father, to see if they could procure Franc. Ioh.
and the Elders of his Church to submit the controversy to their trial and
judgment. This appears in the Testimony hereof given unto the father John
John's. by the Johannes a Vinea, Petrus Plancius, Iacobus Arminius, Simon
Goulattius.
Ministers of these Churches in writing under their hands. Yea and further the
Church of the Separation did so much abhor to have their causes and affairs
submitted unto any censure or judgment out of their own Church, that in the
excommunication of the father, an old man of 70. years, that had undertaken so
hard a journey (as he confessed) for the reconcilement of his sons, and
sought such means from other Churches to end their strife, this was set down
as one distinct and special cause of his excommunication, viz. for laboring
to draw the Church into Antichristian bondage in the the judging the causes
thereof. This appears in the Copy of his Excommunication delivered unto him
and subscribed by Daniel Studley. Stanshall Mercer.
two of their Elders in the name of their Church.

And since that time, when the Brownists have so often schismed and rent in the
midst, as in Mr Johnson and Mr Ainsworths division when they separated one from
the other; when after the death of Mr Ainsworth that company rending again in
the midst, one half followed John de Cluse and the other Mr Can; when after
the death of Mr Robinson, his company also rending in pieces they forsook
their old fellowship together; when Mr Can was first rashly elected a
Minister by the Brownists, when shortly after that election he was censured and
deposed from his office by that half that rejected him and renounced communion
with him: In all these and the like controversies they wanted help and durst
not seek the benefit of Classical Government, nor submit their cause unto such
an order of trial and censure, lest they should enthrall themselves in
Antichristian bondage, as they call it. They that allow not Synods with
authority to decide causes, do yet profess that they are to be approved and
embraced for counsel and advise: but it appears by these and other not unlike
passages among those that are of the same opinion, that they which deny the
power of censure in Classes, do seldom enquire after their counsel.

And although the importance of this controversy does hereby appear plainly
enough, yet do we not hold the same to be so great as some of our opposites
do make it, as if the essence of the Church and our own salvation depended
hereupon. Mr Can calls it Churches plea. p. 77.
a matter of faith, appertaining to life and salvation. Mr Jacob speaking of
this particular Church, wherein this single, uncompounded policy is
maintained, says, Necess. of Reform. p. 5.
This only ought to be allowed and believed to be a true Church by all
Christians: and again, Ibid. p. 6.
This is the only true visible Church of Christ having from him the spiritual
power of order and government in it self ordinarily. The proper Ministers
thereof are the only true ordinary Ministers of Christ. He says further, The
divine begin. and instit. of Christ's true visible Church. pref.
The true form indeed of Christ's visible and ministerial Church is an Inward
thing. It is the Power of a single and uncompounded spiritual polity. He
denies the Profession of saving faith, to be the essential form, and often
inculcates that the form, essence, nature and constitution of the Church
consists in that power of spiritual polity, before rehearsed. He complains
of them that do not practice according to his rule, saying, Ibid. pref.
These truly seem to destroy the conscience and faith of the people, etc. And
he gives this exhortation, that Ibid. A. 4.
All Christians every where ought to frame the visible Church where they live
to this only true form, or else to betake themselves unto some Church so
formed, as they tender their spiritual safety and comfortable assurance in
Christ. But we on the contrary side, though we hold that Classes and Synods are
most necessary and profitable for the well being of the Church, being also
prescribed unto us by divine ordinance, See Voet. Desp. Cause. Pap. p. 65 2.
yet do we not hold that the essence and being of the Church does consist in
this, much less in that form of government commended by them. If a particular
Church of God should sojourne among the Indians or among Heretics, where it
could not obtain fellowship with other Churches out of it self; or if by
violence or other unavoydable inconveniences any Church should be hindered from
enjoying this benefit of combination with other Churches in Classical
government: yet do we acknowledge that notwithstanding this want such a Church
might still subsist and be reputed a true Church. And yet so that we hold every
Church bound to seek this dependency and union with other Churches, as God
shall give opportunity and means, and cannot without sin neglect the same.

To this place belongs the answer unto two of those Questions which Mr Can
Churches plea. p. 33.
propounds upon another occasion.

I. CAN. Whither it be Jure Divino that Ecclesiastical Officers of many
Churches are necessarily bound to determine by joint authority the cases of
many particular Congregations; or whither it be a thing arbitrary and left unto
every man's liberty. ANSVV. That the combination of Churches in Classes and
Synods for judging and determining the cases of many particular Churches by
joint authority, is a divine ordinance and appointed Jure Divino, is that which
I maintain and labor to prove in this Dispute and in the following Arguments.
As it is not a thing arbitrary and left unto every man's liberty, whether he
shall join himself as a member unto a particular Church, if he have means and
opportunity to do it: so it is not a thing arbitrary nor left in the liberty
of particular Churches, whether they shall combine themselves into Classes and
Synods, for their spiritual government, if they have opportunity. All that
neglect to do it sin against the communion of Saints, and walk not as
becomes the members of the body of Christ. Romans 12.5. 1. Cor. 12.25. Ephesians. 4.16.

I. CAN. Whither all such cases and controversies, as are decided by many
Ministers, combined into Classes and Synods; must so stand, as that particular
Congregations may not (if they think fit) reject the same, and practice
otherwise then has been there determined by joint authority. ANSVV. Men are
bound to stand unto the judgments of Classes and Synods, so far as their
determinations are found agreeable unto the Word, and no further. Act. 4.19.
But if any particular Church reject their sentence and determination being
consonant unto the Scripture, then that Church commits double sin, once
for transgressing against the written word of God, and again for despising the
ordinance of God and contemning the joint authority of such as are met together
in his name. Particular Churches are so to respect and stand unto the
determinations of Classical or Provincial Synods, even as particular men and
members of a Church are bound to stand unto the sentence of that Church where
they are members, viz. according to the truth and will of Gods and not
otherwise.

CHAP. II.
The first Argument, taken from the words of the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.8-12.
THe first Argument is taken from the ordinance of God delivered by Moses of
old unto Israel, where the people of God in particular Congregations were
taught to bring their hard and difficult controversies as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil unto a superior Judicatory, unto the Priests the Levites, or unto
the Judge in those days, according to the quality of the cause, for the
deciding thereof. Deuteronomy. 17.8-12. This Order was also reestablished in the days
of Iehoshaphat who placed and settled in Jerusalem an Ecclesiastical Synedrion
or Senate for the matters of the Lord, over which Amariah was President, and
these were to receive the complaints and to judge the causes of their brethren
that came up unto them from other cities and places of their habitation; even
as there was also a Civil Synedrion for the affairs of the King, over which
Zebadiah was President. 2. Chron. 19.8-11. This form of government is
commended unto us of David, as the praise of Jerusalem, when he points out
distinctly these two kinds of Senates, See Iun. Annot. on Psalm. 122.
Ecclesiastical and Civil, thrones of judgment and thrones of the house of
David, whereunto the Tribes, even the Tribes of the Lord did go up. Psa.
122.4.5. As Paul once rejoiced in the spirit to see the order of the
Colossians; Col. 2.5. so David considering the beauty of this order declares
the same to be one special cause of his spiritual gladness and joy in the Lord
witnessed in that Psalm. Hereby it is evident that the Assemblies and
Synagogues of Israel were not independent, but stood under an Ecclesiastical
authority out of themselves; they had no single uncompounded policy; all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction was not limited unto particular Congregations. Now
let us see what our opposites say to this.

I. CAN. Churches plea. p. 43, 44.
He seeks to strengthen the authority of Classes and Synods by the Jewish
polity and government: Now the Papists to establish the Sea of Rome, use the
same argument. And the truth is, if Mr Paget intend to dispute this way, they
will carry it quite away from him. But I think he will hereafter be more
considerate, and speak no further of that manner and form of Church
government: seeing he knows, the most learned on our side do condemn the
Papists for it; viz. Animadv. contr. 1. l. 3. c. 4.
Iunius, Inst. l. 4. c 6. sect. 2.
Calvin, Ag. Whitg. l. 2. p. 614.
Cartwright, Contr. 4. qu. 1.
D. Whitaker, and others. ANSVV. Mr Ainsworth before him speaks much in like
manner to this purpose, he says, Animadv. p. 15.16.
It is a mayn pillar of Popery, to proportion the Church now, in the outward
polity to Israel. The Rhemists would have Rhem. annot. on Mat. 23.2.
the sea of Rome in the new law, to be answerable to the chair of Moses.
Cardinal Bellarmine De Romans Pout. l. 4. c. 1
makes his first argument for the Popes judging of controversies, from the
Priest and Judge that was appointed in the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. etc. And there also
he alleges three of the same witnesses against arguing from the Jewish
policy, which here Mr Can cites again. Mr Davenp. pleads to the same
effect, saying, Apol. repl. p. 254.
The Texts which Bellarmine alleges for the power of Councills in making
laws, are the same which the Answerer sometimes harpeth upon in this case, but
Iunius clearly shows that they make nothing to the purpose. The first is Deuteronomy
17. etc. Hereunto I answer:

I. Though the Papists argue from the Jewish polity, and from the same places
of Scripture alleged by us; yet it is false which Mr Can here says, viz.
that they use the same argument. They argue thence a^^er another manner, make
other consequences and draw other conclusions from those places then we do.
Their abuse of those Scriptures does not hinder us from the right use of them.
for then we might be quickly deprived of the whole Scriptures, wrested by many
unto their destruction. 2. Pet. 3.16. The Bellarm. contr. de verbo Dei. l. 3. c
5.
Papists allege Mat. 18.17. as well as Deuteronomy. 17. to stablish their Romish
authority, yet my opposites think it to be no prejudice to themselves that
argue in another manner from the same place.

II. More particularly, the Papists argue from Deuteronomy. 17. to prove that there
should be one person supreme judge of Ecclesiastical causes, as there was one
High Priest among the Jews. This is justly refuted both by Conf. with Heart c.
6. div. 2. p. 204.
D. Rainolds and by DePont. Romans cont. 4. qu. 7. p. 818.819.
D. Whitakers, showing that the judgment given there was not by the High
Priest alone, but by a College or Senate of Priests noted in that Text. The
Papists argue from Deuteronomy. 17. to prove an infallibility of judgment in this one
Judge, to show that the Pope cannot err. These and such like false collections
from the Policy of the Jews are justly reproved by Orthodox Divines. Had I
used any such reasonings, then had there been cause to have complained.

III. Whereas Mr Johnson used to plead for the power and authority of Elders in
the Church, and to maintain the same from the Civil Policy of the Jews and
from the authority of the Magistrates in Israel; Mr Ainsworth had just cause to
dislike the same, and does Animadv. p. 16.
justly allege against him the Testimonies of D. Whitakers, Iunius,
Cartwright, and others. It is true which they affirm, The argument is not good
from Civil Government to Ecclesiastical: and again, The example is
altogether unlike, of temporal empire and spiritual ministry: between these
there is not, neither ought, neither can a proportion or comparison be rightly
made, viz. in such a confused manner as Mr Johnson has done it. But as for me,
I never pleaded on that manner, I argue not from the Civil, but from the
Ecclesiastical Policy in Israel, to show the lawful government of the Church
by Synods. Mr Can therefore does not rightly imitate Mr Ainsw. in the
allegation of these Writers.

IV. If Mr Can would see who they be that do in special manner offend by
reasoning from the Jewish Policy and government, let him look yet better upon
the writings of the Brownists. There he shall find not only Mr John's.
worthily complained of for Animadv. pref.
wresting a proportion from the Princes of Israel to the Ministers of the
Gospel: for Ibid. p. 14.
streyning too far in proportioning the authority and power of Elders in the
Church with the authority of the Elders the Magistrates: for Ibid p. 19.
matching the power of the Ministers in Spiritual things with the power of the
Magistrate in Civil things, etc. But there shall he also find the rest of the
Separation, so many as do allow their Confession and Apology, pleading from
the Jewish Policy and government to establish and confirm the authority and
power of particular Churches in their administration of spiritual and
Ecclesiastical censures: he shall find Mr Ainsw. proceeding yet further, not
only to reason from the Jewish polity but from an imagined power of the
people in Civil judgments, such a power as was not due unto them by the Law.
These errors have I noted and refuted at large in the Page 7-13.
former part of this Treatise.

V. Whereas these Opposers do often allege that Animadv. pref. and p. 14, 15.
etc.
Moses polity is done away and abrogated; I answer, Though the Ceremonies that
were shadows and figures of things to come, be abrogated; yet the Judicial
Laws are not wholly boargated, but only so much as served to establish the
Ceremonies, or had a peculiar respect to the condition of the Jews, and to
that land of promise given unto them. Otherwise, that part of Moses Polity
which was of common equity, grounded upon principles of reason and nature, and
serving for the maintenance of the Moral Law, is perpetual and not changed.
This is showed at large by Orthodox Divines. Iunius De Poli^ia Mosis. cap. 3.
these. 13, 14, 15, etc.
in special does manifest this, both in general rules and in particular
instances, as in the law of making battlements upon the flat roofes of their
houses; Deu. 22.8. in the law of not putting to death the children for the
offense of the fathers; Deuteronomy. 24.16. in the law of not admitting one witness;
Deuteronomy. 19.15. These and the like Judicial laws in the Polity of Moses are not
abrogated. This is likewise showed by that learned Gersom Bucerus, Discept. de
Gubern. Eccl. p. 51, 52.
Writer who defending the Government and Discipline of the Reformed Churches
against D. Downam, declares such Judicial laws to be ad perpetuam
Ecclesiae(...), for the perpetual good order of the Church. Now our present
controversy is neither about Ceremonial ordinances, nor other Judicial laws
peculiar to the Jews, but only about the liberty of Appeals, from one
Ecclesiastical judicatory to another, from the judgment of a particular
Church unto a Synod Classical, Provincial, or National. This liberty of
appeals being granted, then a dependency of Churches is granted, and then the
single uncompounded Policy is not to be urged upon us. That this liberty of
appeals depends upon common equity and the light of nature, the practice of
all ages and nations generally witnesses unto us.

It was the light of nature that taught this law of common equity unto Jethro,
Moses his father in law, approved of God himself. Exodus 18.22-26. for there (as
Iunius interprets the same) there was a law appointed touching Appeals from
subalterne or subordinate Judges: Analy* Explic. in Deuteronomy. c. 17.
That if any matter did either seem obscure unto them [the Judges] that they
could not determine it, or did appear hard unto the parties [contending] that
they could not rest therein; then they were to betake themselves unto superior
Judges. And again in the same place, comparing Deuteronomy. 17. with Exodus 18. he
writes that according to the sum and substance of that counsel which Jethro
gave, and ex illo fundamento, etc. from that ground Moses here, viz. Deuteronomy. 17.
defines the manner of the appealing of parties, and of consultation to be made
by inferior Judges, when any weighty business should be, etc. Thus does he
expound this law of appealing to a superior judicatory, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, to be among these Judicial laws that are perpetual, arising
from the ground of common equity. In like manner G. Bucerus speaking of these
same judicatories, inferior and superior, and applying that which he had
spoken before in general, unto this particular ordinance, shows that Dissert.
de Gubern. Eccl. p. 65.
the judicatories of the Church at this day are lawfully framed according to
the same form, and that the reasonis, because it clearly appears that this
order being anciently instituted of God and most religiously observed of the
Fathers, did belong only unto the good order of the Church and not unto the
paedagogie of the Law, etc. and therefore was not to be abolished.

Again, it was prophesied of Christ and his kingdom, that he should deliver
the needy when he cries; the poor also and him that has no helper: that he
should redeem their soul from deceit and violence, etc. Psalm. 72.12, 14. But
if liberty of Appeals be now taken away by the coming of Christ; then in
respect of Ecclesiastical government, confessed to be a part of Christ's
kingdom, the yoke of the Law should be more tolerable, sweet and easy in this
point of appeals, then the yoke of Christ: for under the Law the poor being
oppressed in judgment by unrighteous Judges in one place, they cried for help
by appealing unto a superior Synedrion, and there found release, and so were
redeemed from deceit and violence. but now under the Gospel, if it were as our
Opposites hold, that all spiritual jurisdiction should be limited to a
particular Congregation; then might the afflicted and wronged souls cry in
vain and find no helper, there being no Ecclesiastical judicatory to releeve
them and to redeem their soul from the deceit and violence of their
oppressors.

We read of Cranmer, the holy Martyr, how that when he was cruelly handled by
unrighteous Judges he sought to comfort himself by his Appeal from them unto a
free General Council: The form of his Appeal is exactly set down by him,
and he does as it were cry out for it with great vehemence of words, saying,
Ioh. Fox. Acts and Mon. page 1709. col. 1 edit. 1^10.
I desire, the first, the second, and the third time: instantly, more
instantly, most instantly, that I may have messengers, if there be any man that
will and can give me them. And I make open promise of prosecuting this mine
appellation, by the way of disanulling, abuse, etc. But according to the Tenent
of our Opposites it should thus have been answered unto him by them: Seek no
comfort in such Appeals: under Moses Policy they were lawful, but now under
the New Testament they are unlawful: There is no Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
out of a particular Church that may give sentence in your cause, etc. What an
unworthy conceit is this, thus to dishonor the New Testament, as if God had
showed more grace and provided more help for afflicted souls under the Law,
then under the Gospel?

This erroneous conceit is so much the more blameworthy in some of the
Brownists, in that when they plead against the usurpation and injustice of
Elders, they the^ confess this same thing in effect, saying, H. Ains. Animadv.
p. 22.
Is it meet that they should be Judges in their own cases? In Israel when any
complained of wrong in the Synagogues or Cities, there was an higher Court to
control unruly Elders and to help the oppressed. But now 2 or 3 Elders in a
Church, bearing themselves upon their forged ^^thority from Mat. 18.17.20. may
be lawless; and who shall let them in their proceedings? And for proof of this
liberty in Israel they allege Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9. and 2. Chron. 19.8, 10. And why
then cannot Mr Can endure that I should allege the very same Scriptures to a
like end? for, is it meet that particular Churches should be Judges in their
own cases? In Israel if any complained of wrong against a whole Synagogue,
there was an higher Court to control unruly and disordred Congregations, and
to help those that were oppressed by them. And shall now 6 or 7 persons in a
Church (for sometimes there be no more, specially in the new erected Churches
of Separatists) shall those be lawless, bearing themselves upon their forged
authority, falsely collected from Mat. 18? shall there be no means by any
Synod or by any superior Ecclesiastical judicatory to let them in their
proceedings?

Again they confess, that the Ibid. p. 24.
Saints have as much more power and liberty in the Gospel now, then the Jews
had; as the heyr when he is of years, has more then in his childhood; Gal.
4.1, 2, 3. And likewise speaking of the peoples right then under the Law and
under the Magistrate, they say it Ibid. p. 28.
may he more, but cannot be less now under the Gospel, where the Church
ministry has not the power of Magistracy over Gods heritage. What is then
this liberty that the people have? In the offensive controversies arising and
continuing in a Church, the people are either doers of wrong or sufferers of
wrong, either oppressors or oppressed: is it now the right and liberty of
oppressors, that they in their wrong-doing shall be exempted from the
judgment of any superior Church Government to control them? and for the
oppressed, is this their sorry inheritance now under the New Testament, that
they are deprived of this liberty of appealing to any other judicatory out of
themselves, so as to seek any help thereby? What is this else but to diminish
and obscure the grace of the Gospel, and to shorten the hand of the Lord, as
if he did not now stretch it out as far, either in mercy for help of the
oppressed by allowing them the liberty and comfort of appeals, or in judgment
for rebuke of oppressors, by permitting them to be lawless and secure without
danger of further censure after they had once prevayled by an unrighteous
proceeding in a particular Congregation?

D. Whitaker, whom Mr Can often alleges and often perverteth contrary to
his meaning* is very pregnant and full in witnessing this same truth with me,
touching the lawfulnes and necessity of appeals. He says, Contr. 4 de Pont.
Romans Qu. 4. c. 2. p. 470.
Truly appeals are of Divine and natural right, and certainly very necessary
in every society, because of the iniquity or ignorance of many Judges.
Otherwise the innocent person should be undone, if it were not lawful to
appeal from an unrighteous sentence: and seeing many controversies do arise in
causes and persons Ecclesiastical, who can deny that the right of Appeals is
of necessity to be granted? Thus he avoucheth that the denial of appeals is
against common equity, against the law of God and the law of nature. D.
Rainolds also Conf. with Heart c. 9. div. 2. p. 572.575.
agrees with D. Whit. in allowing of appeals in Ecclesiastical causes. As
both of them condemn the Appeals unto Rome, so both do grant liberty of
Appeals unto Synods. Yea and all the Arguments generally both of Greeks and
Latins directed against the appeals made unto the Pope, do yet reserve a
liberty of appeal unto Synods. This may be observed from D. Whit. in his De
Pont. Romans Qu. 4. p. 4 6. and 48^, etc.
large and ample defense of the Arguments of Nilus the learned Bishop of
Thessalonica, as he calls him, and in his maintaining of the Arguments of the
Latins also. And now if these appeals be granted, then is the question
clearly granted and fully yielded unto me: then is not all spiritual
jurisdiction limited to a particular Church; then are not Churches independent;
then is there a superior Ecclesiastical power to judge the controversies of
particular Congregations out of themselves.

Lastly, though Mr Can cannot endure that we should seek to strengthen the
authority of Synods from the Policy of the Jews, yet if he would open his
eyes, he might see (beside those above noted) others also arguing in like
manner. The ancient Fathers have often argued from the Judicial ordinances
delivered by Moses unto Israel, yea they have often alleged this very place in
special, Deuteronomy. 17. to show thereby the practice of Christians in the New
Testament. Cyprian Lib. 1. Epist. 8. ad plebem. p. 94 Epist. ad Pompon. de
virginibus, p. 170. and Epist. ad Rogat. p. 192.
cites it often. and the like might be observed in other writings of the
Fathers. Among later Writers, the lights of this age* Vrsinus Tom. 1. in Expl.
Catech p. 295 and Tom. 3. Iudic. de Disc. Eccl. p. 806.807.
pleads from Deuteronomy. 17. to show the authority of the Church, for the
excommunication of obstinate sinners. Mr Cartwright First Reply to D. Whitg. p.
192.
to show what authority Ministers and Ecclesiastical Governors have now in
the New Testament for the governing of the Church, argues from the Jewish
Policy, and from that Ecclesiastical Synedrion described 2. Chron. 19.8, 11.
which had power to judge the causes of particular Synagogues. Dudley Fenner
speaking of the Presbytery in general, as it contains under it both Classes
and Synods, as well as the Elderships of particular Churches, to show the
authority and use thereof, among other places taken from the Jewish Policy, 8.
Theol. lib. 7. c. 7. p. 276.277.
alleges this also, Deuteronomy. 17.9. with 2. Chron. 19.8, 11. Zepperus to show a
divine warrant for the government of Churches by Synods, Polit. Eccles. l. 3.
c. 8. p. 707. and 709.
alleges these same places of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 17.8. 2. Chron. 19.8. Ruardus
Acronius in like manner in his treatise Cap. 7. with c. 13.
of the Church of God and the government thereof, to teach how the more weighty
controversies were to be brought from Synagogues and from particular
Congregations unto greater Assemblies, he alleges out of the Judicial laws
of Moses this special place, Deuteronomy. 17.8. etc.

To omit many other, how is it that Mr Can does so much forget the practice
of his own Sect? Is it not their manner frequently to allege the ordinances
of the Jewish Policy, to strengthen and confirm that power of the Church and
that order of government that is maintained and practiced by them of the
Separation? Their Confession and Apology is full of such reasonings. But
instead of the rest, consider we at this time the writings of H. Barrow, who to
prove the duty of the Church H. Bar. Disc p. 1.
alleges this place, Deuteronomy. 17.8, etc. To prove the power of the Church in
driving away and keeping out the profane and open unworthy from the table of
the Lord, alleges at once Ibid. p. 17.
the whole book of Deuteronomy. and if the whole book, then this 17. chap. also
that is contained therein. What unreasonable men are these, to eat up and
devour at one mouthfull a whole book of Judicial laws, and not to permit
another to have a crumme thereof, or to allege one of those ordinances? To
prove that Princes for their transgressions are subject unto censure and
judgment, Ibid. p. 14. and 245.
to be disfranchised out of the Church and to be delivered over unto Satan, as
well as any other offendour, he alleges sundry examples, and all out of the
Old Testament, all of such Kings as stood under the Jewish Policy. Can they
from the Jewish Policy prove them to be subject to the greatest censure, and
can they not from the same Law procure them liberry of appeal, when they judge
they are oppressed? Is the Policy of Moses in force to bind them, and is it
then abrogate when they seek releef by appeal unto a superior judicatory?
This is indeed an injury and a misery to Princes and people, to high and low,
to be brought into greater bondage under Christ in the New Testament, then
others were under Moses in the Old.

THese things being duly considered, it may hereby also appear how vain that
is, which Mr Dav. excepteth concerning appeals, or the bringing of causes unto
Classes. Touching that which I had said upon another occasion from Deuteronomy. 17.8.
with 1.12. and 2. Chron. 19.8.9, 10. he excepts as follows.

I. DAV. Apol. Repl. p. 215
The pretended reason, etc. will not help him in the cases questioned, unless
he can prove, I. That the Classes are of the same use by Divine institution,
for the help of Pastor which have the assistance of their Eldership, whereof
that judicatory was for the help of Moses, etc. ANSVV. I. Observe how Mr Dav.
being an Accuser, and an Advocate of accusers, instead of bringing any proof to
justify the accusations, calls upon me for proof of that established order of
government, so long enjoyed in these countries. II. Seeing it appears that the
order of Ecclesiastical government prescribed Deuteronomy. 17. and 2. Chron. 19. was
for the substance of it no part of the Ceremonial law, but of common and
perpetual equity, and that the power of Classes for the receiving of appeals
and judging the causes of particular Churches was included therein; it is
thence also manifest that the power and authority exercised by Classes and
Synods is therefore of Divine institution for the same use, from the same
grounds of holy Scripture. III. What reason had he in describing the use of
Classes to mention this only, that they were for the help of Pastors, seeing
both they and those judicatories, Deuteronomy. 17.2. Chron. 19. were for the help and
benefit of every member of the Synagogues then and the Churches now, as well as
for the help of Pastors? IV. What reason had he also in speaking of Pastors
now, to add these words, which have the assistance of their Eldership, seeing
in the Synagogues anciently their Pastors and Teachers had the assistance of
an Eldership, and Rulers of the Synagogue, as well as now.

I. DAV. It is to be proved II. That the causes in question, which he carried
from the Consistory to the Classis, are of the same nature with those causes
between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and judgments,
which were deferred to the Levites, the Priests, etc. ANSVV. I. It is here also
to be noted, how instead of disproving that which I said, and instead of
showing any dissimilitude of the question brought unto the Classis, from those
brought unto the judicatories, Deuteronomy. 17.2. Chron. 19. he leaves his accusation
without proof. II. As for the proof he requires, it is most plain and evident
from the places alleged: for in them it is manifest, that about whatsoever
cause there was any strife or contention in Israel, it might be brought unto
the judicatories there mentioned. All Ecclesiastical affairs, all matters of
the Lord, were to be brought unto the Ecclesiastical Senate, over which
Amariah was President: All Civil affairs, all matters of the King, were to be
brought unto the Civil judgment, over which Zebadiah was President. 2. Chron.
19.11. And what controversy can there be in any Church or Estate that may not
be reduced to one of these? Iunius in his exposition of these places Anal.
Expl. and Annot. on Deuteronomy. 17.8. and 2. Chron. 19.8, 11.
plainly distinguishes these causes and questions on this manner. Again,
whereas, 2. Chron. 19. verse. 10. there is express and general mention of any
cause whatsoever, about which there might be controversy, between Law and
Commandment, Statutes and Judgments, I would demand of Mr Dav. what cause can
be excepted or exempted from these judicatories? Was there ever any controversy
or any contention in any Church, which has not reference to some Law or
Commandment? And seeing Mr Dav. himself in these disputes, pretends the Law
and Commandment against us, do not these questions therefore, being of such
nature, belong unto such judicatories? Seeing judicatories were therefore
originally instituted, to take away strife and dissension, as in Civil causes,
Deuteronomy. 1.12. so also in Ecclesiastical: Deuteronomy. 17.2. Chron. 19. and withal
seeing the causes in question, etc. have been special means and causes of
discord among us; why should not these matters be brought unto these
judicatories for trial and judgment, as well as others? And therefore whether
those Scriptures above mentioned, have been by me misapplyed or not, I leave to
the consideration of them that are able to judge.

CHAP. III.
The second Argument, taken from the words of Christ, Matthew. 18.15-20.
THe second Argument is taken from that Rule of Discipline, delivered by Christ
unto his Disciples, for the government of his Church in the New Testament, Mat.
18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. From this rule we may reason diverse ways, and
chiefly thus: If this Rule of Christ be the same that was prescribed unto
Israel of old, and be translated from the Jews Synagogues unto the Christian
Churches; then are not these Churches independent, then are they not single
uncompounded policies, then is not all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction limited
within the compass of particular Congregations, then cannot appeals unto
superior judicatories be justly denied. But the first is true. Therefore the
second also.

The Assumption of this Argument is denied by many kinds of opposites. H.
Barrow cries out against it; Refut. of Giff. p. 76.
Is it likely or possible that our Savior Christ would fetch his pattern for
the Elders of his Church and the execution of these high judgments from that
corrupt degenerate Synedrion of the Jews, which by the institution of God was
merely Civil, and not ordained for causes Ecclesiastical, as appears Exodus
18. Number. 11. Deuteronomy. 1. the Priests bearing the charge and having the deciding of
all Ecclesiastical causes: Number. 18. Deuteronomy. 17. But this Council of theirs was
now mixed of the Elders of the people and the Priests, and handled all causes,
both Civil and Ecclesiastical indifferently. Matt. 26.3. Act. 4.5. How
unjustly and ungodly they dealt, may appear by their handling our Savior and
his Apostles from time to time. Now as their is no likeness to collect these
surmises from that place, so is there no one circumstance in that Scripture to
lead thereunto.

Mr Ainsworth would persuade that Animadv. p. 18.
Christ's doctrine in Matt. 18.18. is a new rule which Israel had not: and
thinks it would be good for men to yield unto this persuasion.

Mr Smith, that declined unto Anabaptisme, speaking of the order observed in
the old Testament, says, Parall. Cens. Observe. Sect. 8. p. 75.
The Lord did not then require men to proceed with their brethren in three
degrees of admonition, and so to bring them to the acknowledgment of their
sin and repentance: That is the Lords dispensation for the new Testament. But
the Lords order for those times was 1. reproof for sin, Lev. 19.17. 2. The
party reprooved was to offer a sacrifice, which if he did he was cleansed from
his sin visiblie, Levit. 4.23. 3. If the wilfully refused to hearken, he was
to be promoted to the Magistrate, and put to death for his presumption. Numb.
15.30, 31. Deuteronomy. 17.12. This was the Lords oecconmie for those times: when this
order was violated, then all communion was defiled; whiles it was observed, all
was well in the visible communion. Let any man declare the contrary if he be
able. Thus he challenged all men in the confidence of this opinion, that Christ
gave a new rule.

Mr Jacob speaking of this rule, Mat. 18. says, Attest. c. 8. p. 278.279.
The Jewish Church Government cannot be here alluded unto; much less required
to be kept and practiced by Christians. Concerning which together with all
other Jewish ordinances, the Apostle teaches and confirms unto us that all
those old things are passed away, and that all things (of such nature) under
the Gospel, are made new: 2. Cor. 5.17. and that the same things are shaken
and changed, and remain not now unto us. Heb. 12.27.

Mat. 18.15-20. we have described to us, 1. Three degrees of admonition. 2. A
censure upon contempt of admonition. 3. A confirmation of that censure.

The first degree of admonition is most private, betwixt the person admonishing
and the person offending alone, verse. 15. This is no new commandment, but
taught of old, both generally in the equity of the Law, to love our neighbor
as ourselves, Lev. 19.18. and more specially, to show this love by admonition,
in the rebuke of sin, Lev. 19.17. and that with secrecy. Prove. 11.13. and
25.9. And further, as Christ describes the person offending by the name of a
brother, to show in what loving manner this duty was to be performed to him,
saying, If thy brother sin against thee, etc. so had Moses done before, Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, etc. As Christ requires not only a
simple telling of the fault, but a (...).
convincing of the offendour: so had Moses taught Israel before, hocheach
tochiach.
thoroughly to reprove or convince, and not to suffer sin upon a brother.
Mat. 18.15. with Lev. 19.17. As Christ in the same place to encourage unto this
duty, propounds the winning of a brother; so the Lord in the old Testament,
shows how the fruit of the righteous is a tree of life, and how the wise do
win souls. Prove. 11.30. Thus far it was no new rule.

The second degree of admonition was with witnesses: If he hear thee not, take
with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word may be established. Mat. 18.16. This is expressly taken from and grounded
upon the Policy of Moses, who prescribed the same order for Israel. Deuteronomy.
19.15. Hitherto therefore it is the same rule.

The third degree of admonition was by the Church, being complained unto and
told of the offense. Mat. 18.17. This admonition was also observed in Israel,
when as the Church, or those Ecclesiastical Governors which represented the
Church, either in Synagogues, or (as occasion required) in superior
Judicatories, did teach, inform, and admonish offenders, before they gave
sentence of their obstinacy and presumption. Deuteronomy. 17.9, 10, 11. 2. Chron.
19.10. Herein likewise the same rule was prescribed. And the word thus duly
spoken in his place, or gnal ophnan.
on the wheels of order, in diverse degrees of admonition, that it might run
and prevayle, was like apples of gold in pictures of silver. Prove. 25.11.

The censure which followed upon the contempt of these admonitions was
Excommunication, or rejection of the obstinate offender. Mat. 18.17. This was
no new kind of censure, seeing Excommunication was also an ancient ordinance,
a part of that Ecclesiastical Policy under the old Testament; yea described
by the same phrase of ^^tting off ( Exodus 12.19. Number. 15.30, 31.) which is also
used in the Gospel of Christ. Gal. 5.12. As in Israel they had a censure of
separating from the Congregation; Ezra. 10.8. so in the new Testament, in an
equivalent phrase, the like judgment was signified, by denouncing some to be
accursed, anathema. or separate from the Church of God. Gal. 1.9. And even in
this text, Mat. 18.17. the censure of excommunication being described by
declaring men to be as Heathens and Publicanes, there is not only a manifest
allusion and respect unto the estate of the Jews, but a commandment of the
same order for avoiding the obstinate, by denying civil communion, of eating
and drinking with excommunicates, as they did unto the Publicanes; Mat. 9.11.
Luke 15.2. and both religious and civil communion, both in public and
private, as they did unto the Heathen: Act. 11.2, 3. and 21.28, 29. neither
could this rule be well understood without knowledge of the present practice of
the Jews in this behalf.

The confirmation of this censure, is described in the rule of Christ, by a
threefold testimony and promise. 1. That this judgment of the Church given on
earth should be ratifyed in heaven, either for binding or loosing, Mat. 18.18.
And so Moses setting life and death, blessing and cursing, the judgments of
God before Israel, calls heaven and earth to record for confirmation, to bind
them to reverence those ordinances of God. Deuteronomy. 30.19. and 4.26. 2. As
Solomon, under the Law, at the building of the Temple, did by his prayer
confirm Israel in hope of having their prayers to ascend from earth to heaven;
1. King. 8.30, 31, 32. so Christ here promises that the prayers of those which
agreed touching any thing on earth, should be granted in heaven. verse. 19. 3.
As Iosaphat for the establishment of the Judicial Policy, encouraged the
Judges with the promise of Gods presence and assistance; that the Lord would be
with them in the matter of judgment, that the Lord would be with the good: 2.
Chron. 19.6, 11. so here Christ to encourage his servants in the observation of
this order promises his presence, to be in the midst of two or three gathered
together in his name. verse. 20.

Thus it appears from the enumeration of all the several parts of this rule,
compared with the ordinance of God in the old Testament, that this is no new
rule. Though there were many other Ceremonial and temporary ordinances in the
Law, for the purging of sin and uncleannes: yet so far as concerns this
Rule, Mat. 18. there is no new order prescribed herein; here is nothing
specifyed which was not taught before.

Mat. 18. and specially in this respect, that it was no new rule.

Calvine speaking of this rule and of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
prescribed therein, says plainly, Instit. l. 4. c. 11. 2. and 4.
Christus nihil hic novum instituit, etc. Christ here instituted no new thing;
but followed the custom always observed in the ancient Church of his own
nation: whereby he signified that the Church could not want the spiritual
jurisdiction which had been from the beginning, etc. And this he also applies
unto the jurisdiction exercised in Synods, when he writes, Ibid. c. 9. 2.
If it be demanded what the authority of Synods is from the Scriptures, there
is no clearer promise extant then in this sentence of Christ; Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Mat.
18.20. Again in his exposition of those words, Tell the Church, he says Harm.
Evang. in Mat. 18.17.
The quaestion is, what he means by the name of the Church. for Paul commands
that the incestuous Corinthian should be excommunicated, not by any choice
number but by the whole company of the godly, 1. Cor. 5.5, 6. and therefore it
might seem probable that the judgment is here referred unto all the people.
But because there was then no Church which had given the name unto Christ, nor
such a manner appointed, but that the Lord speaks as of an usual and received
custom; there is no doubt but that he alludes unto the order of the old
Church, even as in other places also he applies his speech unto the known
custom, etc. So therefore he now had respect unto the form of discipline
which was received among the Jews: because it would have been absurd to
propound the judgment of a Church which yet was not. Moreover seeing the power
of excommunication among the Jews, was now in the Elders which represented the
person of the Church, Christ fitly says that those which had offended should
then at length be brought publicly to the Church, if either proudly they
contemned or scurrilously rejected private admonitions. We know that from the
time that the Jews returned out of the captivity of Babylon, the censure of
manners and of doctrine was committed to that chosen Council which they called
Sanhedrin, and in Greek (...). This government was lawful and approved of God,
and this was the bridle to keep in order the froward and untractable. Thus has
he fully expressed himself, that this commandment of Christ, Mat. 18. is no
new rule, but taken from the Ecclesiastical Policy of the Jews.

Beza in like manner confirms this interpretation, saying, Annot: maj. in N.
Test. in Mat. 18.17.
This power and jurisdiction was in those which are therefore called, (...),
Rulers of the Synagogue, Mark. 5.22. and an example of this custom is found,
Ioh. 9.22. and 12.42. etc. And speaking of this word Church, mentioned Mat. 18.
(he says,) It is to be observed that they do foulely err which would prove
from this place that all things are to be referred unto the assembly of the
whole multitude. They say the name of Church is never otherwise taken: which
from this very place is convinced to be false. for certainly it appears that
these things are spoken as of the Jews, at least from this which he adds,
Let him be unto thee as an Heathen and Publicane. But all writers of these
things do testify that the judgments of these matters among the Jews were in
the Elders, and that the whole multitude of the people was not always wont to
be assembled. And certainly unless Christ had applied his whole speech unto
the custom of his times, who could have understood what he spoke? Afterward
again in the same place he adds this, Sed doceo Aristocratiam Christianam
non esse novum aliquod institutum, etc. I teach that the Christian government
of the Church by an Eldership is no new institution, etc. no new rule.

D. Whitaker to prove the authority of Synods, brings warrant and evidence, not
only from the new Testament, but also Cont. 3. de Conc. qu. 1. de necess.
Council. c. 3. p. 15.
from the Church of Israel and from the Ecclesiastical Policy of the Jews
before Christ, in the times of David, Ezekias, Josias and other godly Princes,
by which it appears that he held this part of Church Government not to be a
new ordinance, but a practice common both to Jewish and to Christian Churches.
And besides, from this very place, Mat. 18. he draws a double warrant for
Synods: first from the commandment, given to Peter as well as to others, to
tell the Church. verse. 17. from thence he argues against the Papists, that the
Pope may be judged of a Council. Ibid. de Council. qu. 5. c. 3. p. 169. 170.
If (says he) every particular Church has greater authority in judgment,
then Peter or any particular man; then much more the universal Church, which
is represented in a general Council or Synod. Herein he is directly opposite
to our opposers, who grant a power of jurisdiction to a particular Church, but
none to any Synod whatsoever, further then to counsel and direct. Again he
Ibid. qu. 1. c. 3.
argues from the promise of Christ, Mat. 18. Where two or three are met
together in my name there am I in the midst of them, and applies that sentence
to the maintenance and allowance of Synods, particular or general.

Iunius in like manner, as he is plentiful in giving allowance unto the
authority of Synods, so he derives this authority from this place, Mat. 18.
both from the Animadv. in Bellarm. de Council. l. 2. c. 19. art. 8.
commandment of telling the Church, verse. 17. and from the Ibid. in lib. 1. c.
3.
promise made unto Ecclesiastical assemblies, to be in the midst of them,
verse. 20. while he allows that promise alleged by others to be a just ground
thereof, though he add other warrant also. And further, speaking of the
Council or Ecclesiastical Senate, he shows what reference it had unto the
Polity or government of the Jewish Synagogues; he says, That which
Ecclesiast. l. 2. c. 3.
the Church of the Jews called the Synagogue, that Christ in like manner
called the Church in that place, Mat. 18. for as the Synagogue or
Ecclesiastical Counsel was a certain Epitome of the Church, so also is the
Presbytery.

Mr Cartwright above many other is very pregnant in giving plain testimony,
that this rule of discipline is no new ordinance, and this for that part of the
rule in special which is most controversall. He disputing about the
interpretation of Mat. 18. says, First Reply to D. Whitg. p. 176. edit. 2.
It is commanded of our Savior Christ, that in such a case when a brother does
not profit by these two warnings, it should be told the Church. Now I would
ask who be meant by the Church here: if he say by the Church are meant all the
people, then I will ask how a man can conveniently complain to all the whole
congregation, or how can the whole congregation conveniently meet to decide of
this matter. I do not deny, but the people have an interest in the
excommunication, as shall be noted hereafter; but the matter is not so far
come, he must first refuse to obey the admonition of the Church, or ever they
can proceed so far. Well, if it be not the people that be meant by the
Church, who is it? The^ showing that by the Church one person alone cannot be
meant, he concludes; Seeing then that the Church here is neither the whole
congregation, nor the Pastor alone, it follows that by the Church here he
means the Pastor with the Ancients or Elders. Or else whom can he mean? And
as for this manner of speech, wherein by the Church is understanded the cheef
governors and Elders of the Church, it is oftentimes used in the old
Testament, from the which our Savior borrowed this manner of speaking. For
instances he alleges, Exo. 4.29, 30. Ios. 20.4, 6. 1. Chr. 13.2, 4. etc.
After this he is yet more plain in respect of the censure, saying, Ibid. p.
183.
Now that this charge of excommunication belongs not unto one, or to the
Minister, but chiefly to the Eldership and Pastor, it appears by that which
the authors of the Admonition allege out of S. Matthew. c. 18.17. which place I
have proved before to be necessarily understanded of the Elders of the Church.
And further in the same place, It may be the clearlyer understanded that the
Presbytery or Eldership, had the cheef stroke in this excommunication, if it be
observed that this was the Polity or discipline of the Jews, and of the
Synagogue, from whence our Savior Christ took this, and translated it unto
this Church; that when any man had done any thing that they held for a fault,
that then the same was punished and censured by the Elders of the Church,
according to the quality of the fault, as it may appear in S. Matthew, chapter
5.22. etc. A little after he adds, And if the fault were judged very great,
then the sentence of Excommunication was awarded by the same Elders, as
appears in S. John, cha. 9.22. And this was the cause why our Savior Christ
spoke so shortly of this matter in the 18. of S. Matthew, without noting the
circumstances more at large, for that he spoke of a thing which was well known
and used amongst the Jews whom he spoke unto.

To the same purpose he writes in his answer to the Rhemists, where speaking of
the Governors of the Church, which were set over every several assembly in
the time of the Law, he says, Confut. of Rhem. transl. on Mat. 18.18.
Those governing Elders are diverse times in the story of the Gospel made
mention of under the title of the Rulers of the Synagogue. And this manner of
government, because it was to be translated unto the Church of Christ under the
Gospel, our Savior by the order (at that present) used amongst the Jews,
declared what after should be done in his Church.

Neither does he speak these things touching the Elderships of particular
Congregations only, but applies the same unto Classical and Synodall
Presbyteries also, and does allow of appeals unto them, and thereby
acknowledges a dependency of Churches mutually one upon another. It is to be
observed here (says he) First Reply to D. Whitg. p. 187.
that both in this part of the Discipline, viz. touching excommunication, and
also in all other parts of it (as I have showed) as in harder and difficulter
causes, things were referred unto the Synods Provincial, National or
General, as the case required: so if the Elders of any Church shall determine
any thing contrary to the word of God, or inconveniently in any matter that
falls into their determination, the parties which are greeved may have
recourse for remedy, unto the Elders and Pastors of diverse Churches, that is
to say, unto Synods of Shires, or Dioceses, or Provinces, or Nations, of as
great or of as small compass as shall be thought convenient by the Church,
according to the difficulty or weight of the matters, which are in controversy.
Which meetings ought to be as often as can be conveniently, not only for the
decision of such difficulties which the several Presbyteries cannot so well
judge of, but also to the end that common counsel might be taken for the best
remedy of the vices or incommodities, which either the Churches be in, or in
danger to be in. And as those things which cannot be decided by the Eldership
of the Churches are to be reserved unto the knowledge of some Synod of a Shire
or Diocese: so those which for their hardness cannot be there decided, must be
brought into the Synodes of larger compass, as I shave showed to have been
done in the Apostles times, and in the Churches which followed them long after.
And thus it appears that according to the order and practice of the Jews
under the Law, he allows and maintains a liberty of appeals for parties
greeved, and a superior judicatory above particular Churches, an use of Synods
not only for counsel but for decision of controversies, for censuring of
offenders even unto excommunication, according to diverse instances thereof
given by him in the precedent pages, of which more is to be said hereafter.

Mr Traverse agrees fully with the former, and witnesses plainly that the
Rule of Christ, Mat. 18. is no new rule, but taken from the Jewish Policy, and
this both in respect of the persons judging, called the Church, and in respect
of the censure and sentence of excommunication there described. For the first,
he says, speaking of the assembly of Elders, Eccles. Discipl. p. 87. edit.
1617.
In Mat. 18. our Savior calls them by the name of the Church, because they
rule and govern Church matters under the name and authority of the Church. So
likewise the name of all the Assembly, by Moses is given to the Elders of the
Jews; that is to say, unto certain chosen and picked out men who were
assigned by all the Congregation to the government of the affairs. Thus
plainly it is taken in Numb. 8. where the Lord appoints the Congregation
shall lay hands upon the Levites: but I think no man will say this is to be
understood of all the congregation, that so many thousands should lay their
hands upon them, as are rehearsed then to have been in the host of Israel, but
the Elders and Princes only as Aben Ezra does rightly interpret it. Which is
to be noted the rather, because some will have the word of our Savior to be
expounded of all the Church, whereas according to the manner of speaking which
the Hebrews use, the Consistory or Council of the Church is called the
Church: Where also it is to be observed that together with the name, the thing
it self is translated from the Jews unto us: that look what a Council the
Jews used for the government of the Church, we ought to understand by this
name that such a one is appointed by our Savior to be used in the Church.
Therefore in the same place he attributes to this Council the chief
government of all Church matters; that all such things as cannot otherwise be
agreed and ended be at the last brought unto them, and ended by their authority
and judgment.

As for the second, the censures of the Church, having spoken before of
Suspension and proceeding to speak of Excommunication, he says, Ibid. p. 92.
This part of Ecclesiastical censure, as also the first, were translated unto
us from the Jews; for the Church of Christ in all this matter of Discipline
has received all her laws and decrees from the Jews: for as it has been
showed before, it is plain and manifest that our Savior in Mat. 18.17.
alluded to the manner of the Jews, because that otherwise his speech should
have been very obscure, and such as no man had been able to understand. But
this appears most manifestly by the excommunication of the blind man in the
9. of John, etc. And further, that which he says concerning the government of
a particular Church, he extends also unto the Ibid. p. 98.
Synods for the governing of more Churches, of which there shall be more
occasion to speak again hereafter.

Mr Fenner in his Counterpoyson touching the certain form of Ecclesiastical
government, declares himself to be of the same mind, viz. that the Rule of
Christ, Mat. 18. is no new rule, when as he writes, Part of a Register, p. 479.
Our Savior Christ in setting down the Ecclesiastical Presbytery, speaks
according to the Jews, for otherwise the Apostles could not have understood
him, when he said, Tell the Congregation, or Church, which was the title then
given unto the Ecclesiastical Senate; and his words of having as a Publicane
and Heathen, do manifestly prove he meant to speak according to their custom,
etc. And therefore also in his S. Theol. l. 7. c. 7. p. 276.
general description of a Presbytery comprehending under it as well the
government of many Churches by Synods, as of one particular Church by the
Eldership thereof, for the proof and warrant of one as well as the other, he
alleges this rule, Mat. 18.18. even as he does other places taken from the
Jewish Policy under the Law.

Mr Brightman, when he shows that Christ in his Church has appointed a more
accurate order for remove all of less offenses, then that which the Pharisees
observed, who corrupted the Law with their erroneous glosses, condemning
grosser sins, as murders, and neglecting lesser transgressions; yet for the
form of the Judicatorie he declares that it was such an one as the former
Writers do witness to have been taken from the Jews Policy, when as he thus
describes it Comment. in Cant. cap. 4.
The Synedrion is a Senate of Elders, watching for the souls of that
Congregation over which they are set in things that belong unto manners and
Christian honesty, which Senate because it represents the state (or quoniam
vicem sustineat etc.
bears the place) of the whole Congregation, is called of Christ himself the
Church, saying Tell the Church, Mat. 18.17. and of Paul is called (...)
the Eldership, 1. Tim. 4.14. And again in the next leaf, showing the meaning
of that text, Matthew. 18.15, etc. Only remember thence, that the Church is not
the whole Congregation but a Synedrion or Senate of certain chosen persons.
And for ought that can be gathered from this his exposition, it was no new
rule, but a renewing and confirming of that which had been of old prescribed
unto Israel.

Mr Parker for the maintenance of Classes and Synods whereby many particular
Churches are combined and united together, argues also from Mat. 18. and that
after a double manner. for first, to show withal that the right manner and
form of combination does consist in a mutual obligation of Churches, without
subjection unto the rule or dominion of any one, he reasons thus, Polit.
Eccles. l. 3. c. 22. p. 331
Let us go to the very fountain of combination, which (as Chamierus says
well) is found in Mat. 18. because many Churches are combined together after
the same manner that the prime Churches, viz. particular Congregations, do
grow together in their members into one frame. And he maintains that the form
of this combination and coming together is noted in those words, in my name,
and if they agree together. Mat. 18. v. 19, 20. Thus he derives the combination
of Churches from their mutual consent and agreement. And hence it may appear
further, that as members of particular Churches are united together by the bond
of mutual consent, not only for counsel and advise, but also for the
censuring and judging of their offenses, and this without superiority of one
member above another; so by the like bond of mutual consent many Churches are
also united, not only for counsel, but for the mutual censuring and deciding
of one another causes, and this without superiority of any one Church above
the rest. Otherwise also how could he have applied these things as he does, for
the defense of the Reformed Churches, wherein such authority of Classes and
Synods is exercised?

Secondly, whereas D. Whitgift and others dispute against the Classes and
Presbyteries of Scotland and the Low Countries, where the faults and causes of
particular Churches are judged and censured, and ask for Scripture to prove
and justify such an order of government; Mr Parker in defense of them, besides
other answers and proofs alleges this place, Matt. 18. for the warrant
thereof, and says, Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 24. p. 355.
This proceeding from an Eldership to a Classis, from a Classis to a Synod, is
founded in the institution of Christ, Matt. 18.17. by proportion on this
manner. He commands that from the admonition of one being despised men proceed
unto the admonition of two or three, if that be contemned unto the censure of
the Eldership, if that be despised unto the censure of the whole Church:
therefore why not from one whole Church unto many in a Classis, and again from
many in a Classis unto yet more in a Synod? And having laid this just
foundation he reprooves the opposites further from the confession of some of
them contradicting the other, Ibidem.
Both Sutlive and Downam do interpret the Church, Mat. 18. to be either a
Consistory or a Synod. Behold therefore by the judgment even of Hierachicall
men themselves, a manifest commandment of Christ for Classical assemblies.
for what? Is not the Classis a certain kind of Synod?

Zepperus having spoken of the Ecclesiastical Policy or government in the
Judaicall Church, shows how the same was continued, when he says, Polit.
Eccl. l. 1. c. 16. p. 198.199.
This administration of Ecclesiastical discipline Christ also established and
made to be perpetual, Mat. 18.15. etc.

Gersom Bucerus, that excellent and worthy servant of God, who has given so
full an answer to D. Downam, in defense of the Discipline practiced in the
Reformed Churches, is as full in this point, that the Rule of Christ, Mat. 18.
is no new rule. He maintains that Dissert. de Gubern. Eccl p. 182.
the form of the sacred Polity in the new Testament, ought to be framed
according to the manner of the Jews Polity. To this end he Ibid. p. 48.
brings the testimony of many learned Writers, witnessing with him unto the
same truth.

Philip Melanchthon, as he is there alleged by him, showing what order of
Discipline was appointed by Christ, in those words, Tell the Church, Mat. 18.
says, P. Mela^. comment. in 1. Cor. 15.
This custom was not first instituted of the Messiah, but was the old manner
of the Leviticall Priests, who in their place maintained the discipline by such
judgments, though they had also other Political judgments and punishments.

Victorinus Strigelius, cited also by him, speaks in like manner, Hypom. in N.
T. in Mat. 18.
A new form of judgment is not instituted in this place, but the old manner
is repeated, delivered from the first fathers, the steps whereof have always
remained in the Church. etc.

Pezelius having expressed the form of Government in Israel, writes thus,
Argum. and Resp. Theol. part. 7.8.690.
According to this example of the old Polity, almost the same order of
judgments was kept in the new Testament. etc.

Musculus Loc. co^. de Eccl. c. 5.
, and Aretius Proble^. Tom. 2. loc. de Excom.
, are likewise brought in by him as deriving and describing the Discipline of
the Church, Matthew. 18. from the manner of the Jewish Synagogue.

Bucanus also describing this Discipline, says, Loc. co^. loc. 44. de Discipl.
qu. 12.
Christ has expressly appointed this order translated unto us from the Church
of Israel. And again, Ibid. qu. 22.
Christ does not describe a temporary but a perpetual order of his Church,
Mat. 18.17. where following the custom that had been always observed in the
ancient Church of the Jews, he signified that the Church cannot want that
spiritual jurisdiction, which had been from the beginning.

And lest any should blame us, that we seem to be drawn with the judgment
and consent of late Writers, the same Dissert. de Gub. Eccles. p. 49.50.
Gersom Bucerus does also allege diverse of the ancient Writers, as In 1. Tim 5.
Ambrose, In 1. Tim. 4.
Theodoret, In Joan. l. 6. cap. 20.
Cyrill, In Cant. cap. 6.
Gregorius Magnus, agreeing with us that the Church of the new Testament
succeeding the Church of the Jews has borrowed from thence the form of her
Polity, and the order of jurisdiction. And to these I might add many other,
but that I have further occasion to do it hereafter, in answering the
objections from the perverted Testimonies both of new and old Writers.

It is not here to be omitted, that Mr Johnson, Pastor of the Separatists, who
had been a principal instrument in oppugning this interpretation of Matt. 18.
by whose writings many had been confirmed in their opposition against us, has
yet before his death, after long experience and consideration, confessed his
error in this point, and a in peculiar Treatise publicly revoked the same.
And though in other points touching the order of government prescribed in Matt.
18. he came not to the clear sight of the truth, yet thus far he has
showed his consent with the former Writers, saying, Expos. of Mat. 18.17. C1.
Note here, that if Christ now had given a new Rule of government that Israel
had not, the Disciples to whom it was spoken, could not have understood it by
these words, which were according to the Jews received phrase and practice:
and the Pharisees and other adversaries of Christ would have beneglad, if they
could have had such an exception against Christ, that he had taught contrary to
Moses, and had led the people from the way and order of government which the
Lord himself had prescribed in his word.

Mat. 18.

Some object with H. Barrow the unjust and ungodly dealing of the Rulers in
that time, and reason thus: that it is not likely or possible that our Savior
should fetch his pattern from that corrupt degenerate Synedrion of the Jews,
etc. To these I answer:

I. Though the Governors of the Jews in Christ's time were most of them wicked
men, and abused their authority; yet the form of government it self, and
namely so much of it and so far as it is described in that Rule, Mat. 18.
that there should be a Synedrion or Presbytery for the judging of offenses in
such order as is there specifyed, cannot be showed to be unlawful, nor
contrary to that which God had appointed of old by Moses: And therefore our
Savior might well commend the very same unto his Disciples. Thus Calvine
answers a like objection, Harm. Evang. in Mat. 18.17.
If any man except that all things were corrupt and perverted in the time of
Christ, so as that tyranny could be accounted nothing less then the judgment
of the Church: the answer is easy, Though there was then an adulterate and
perverse manner, yet Christ might worthily commend the order so as it was
delivered from the Fathers. And when a little after he erected his Church, the
corruption being removed, he restored the pure use of excommunication.

II. How great soever the abuses and corruptions of Governors and Government
were in Christ's time; yet were not the godly required then to renounce or
forsake the communion of that Church. Christ himself both by his example and
his commandment taught otherwise, whiles he both communicated therewith
himself, Matt. 26.17, 18. and likewise required others to do the same. Luke
17.14. Mat. 8.4. and 23.2, 3. Now forasmuch as the public worship of God and
his ministry are holy ordinances, as well as the government of his Church;
seeing Christ taught his people to go unto the worship and ministry of the
Jews either in Synagogue or Temple, what reason is there to think that they
should be forbidden to repair unto their government in their Synedrio^ or
Presbytery? Moreover as our Savior taught ordinarily in the Synagogue and in
the Temple, whither the Jews always resorted; John. 18.20. Matt. 4.23. so
there were some righteous and faithful men Governors and Rulers of the Jews
in Christ's time, who though they consented not unto evil and unrighteous
judgments, but testified against them; Luke 1.6. Ioh. 7.50, 51. Luke 23.50,
51. yet were they not required to forsake their offices and their government.
And if they might lawfully retain their office and government, why might not
others resort unto them in their government, and seek redress of offenses, and
so by them tell the Church, according to the rule, Mat. 18.17?

III. For the further clearing of this point, concerning which many are
diversely minded, and many stumble at this day also upon occasion of a like
difficulty, minded, and many stumble at this day also upon occasion of a like
difficulty, doubting what is meet to be done, when corruptions do abound in a
true Church (as the Jews in Christ's time were) when as yet some of the
Ministers and Governors thereof do become oppressors of the godly and
persecutours of the truth; we are therefore to observe diverse rules of
direction according to which both the Jews then and Christians now in such
case are to carry themselves, 1. There is a difference to be put betwixt the
causes and matters of complaint, about which men had occasion to go to the
Jews Synedrion or Eldership. There were some kind of sins, as of open
theft, adultery, extortion, sacrilege, legal impurity, Sabath-breaking and
diverse the like scandals, against which the Pharisees and Rulers of the Jews
were very zealous: Luke 18.11, 12. Romans 10.2. Phil. 3.5, 6. Luke 18.18, 21.
Mark. 10.21. And what should hinder the godly from going unto their Presbytery
to seek redress, and so to tell the Church of such offenses? In other
quaestions touching their traditions they had not the like encouragement to go
unto them. 11. There was a difference to be put betwixt the Rulers of the Jews
to whom they had occasion to complain. As there was a multitude of Synagogues
among them, so there was great variety of the Rulers of those Synagogues; some
of them being more modest, humble and attentive to the Gospel then others, as
we read of Iairus, Crispus, Sosthenes, and diverse of the Priests and cheef
Rulers: Mark. 5.22, 23. Act. 18.8, 17. Mark. 12.28, 32, 34. Ioh. 12.42. Act.
6.7. And to such there was yet the more reason to complain upon occasion. As
for others that showed themselves open and obstinate contemners of the Gospel
and persecuters of Christ, our Savior taught his Disciples to beware of such,
Matthew. 10.17. to fly from them, Ioh. 11.54. and not rashly to cast the pearls
of holy admonition before such as would tread them under their feet, and seek
to rend the admonishers. Mat. 7.6. with Prove. 20.15. and 9.8. Paul sometimes
went voluntarily unto the Jewish Synagogues. Act. 13.14. and 17.2. and 18.4.
sometimes he withdrew himself from such as were hardened and blasphemed; Act.
13.46, 51. and 19.9. III. For the persons admonishing, there is also a
difference to be observed betwixt them; some of them being weak, and some
stronger. Such of them as were weak in knowledge and weak in resolution and
courage, were taught to take knowledge of their own infirmity and not to
presume above the grace given unto them, but to wait until God had further
prepared and enabled them, by furnishing them with such gifts as were meet and
required for the performance of great and hard duties. Matt. 17.9. John.
13.36. Luke 5.36, 37, 38. It was required of them that were to go unto the
Elderships of the Jews, and so to tell the Church of corruptions abounding
among them, that they should be able to argue from the Scriptures and to
convince the gainsayers, in public as well as in private in the first degree
of admonition, Matt. 18.15. and withal to stand constantly as iron pillars
against the faces of unrighteous and cruel men. Ier. 1.18. Esa. 50.7. Peter
being yet weak, and presuming above his strength, did therefore fall so
greevously. Matt. 26.33.74. But for those that are strong, confirmed in
knowledge and godly resolution, they are to gird up their loins for the doing
of that which is not so safe for the weak to enterprise. And as the Apostle
giving direction in other cases, wherein it was also something hard to discern
and determine what was best to be done, requires men to look unto their
resolution and persuasion without wavering or fainting (as in the matter of
marriage, of going to a feast with unbeleevers, and eating of meats then in
question) and describes their resolution in many words, saying, He that
stands fast in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own
will, and has so decreed in his heart, etc. 1. Cor. 7, 37. and If any of them
that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, or as the words
are and ye will go, etc. 1. Cor. 10.27. and Let every man be fully persuaded
in his own mind: Romans 14.5. So in the case of going to tell the Church among
persecuters, every man was and is still to see that he be strong in the Lord
and stand fast in his heart. 1v. Even those that were strongest and most
resolute, were yet bound to distinguish the times, and in all spiritual
wisdom to put difference betwixt occasions. When Paul went bound in the
spirit unto Jerusalem, knowing that bonds and afflictions waited for him there,
Act. 20.22, 23. there was no entreaty, no tears and cries of his godly friends
could persuade him to stay, or hold him from going up thither to tell the
Church and Rulers of the Jews such things as God called him to witness unto
them, Act. 21.12, 13, 14. though he was ready to have been torn in pieces of
that Seditious Church. Act. 23.10. At another time when Paul being bold as a
Lion would have adventured himself among the tumultuous Ephesians for the
defense of his companions in danger, yet not having so express and strong a
call thereunto as in the former example, he yielded to the counsel of others
and suffered himself to be overruled: when he would have entered in unto the
people, the Disciples suffered him not. Act. 19.30. Here is the wisdom, faith
and patience of the Saints; let those that have understanding lay these
examples before them, and labor to apply them unto themselves upon like
occasions. V. Even those that are the weakest also are to put difference
betwixt unadvised going of themselves and a necessary calling. for though men
should not rashly expose themselves to danger, yet being brought by others and
drawn before a Jewish Synedrion, and being examined touching their profession
and practice, it is then required even of the simplest to answer for the truth
with meeknes and reverence, so far as they know and are able, 1. Pet. 3.15,
and not to betray the truth by their silence, but to tell the Church of the
evils to be reformed. Such were and are to remember the promises; that out of
the mouth of babes and sucklings God ordains strength, to still the enemy and
the avenger: Psalm. 8.2. that such are blessed in suffering according to the
will of God. Matt. 5.10, 11, 12. Act. 5.41. 1. Pet. 4.19. And thus according to
these directions in diverse kinds there was occasion to practice in the Jewish
Church that Rule of Christ, Mat. 18.

Some others, as was noted before, to prove that Christ gave a new rule, Mat.
18. do object that H. Ains. Animadv. p. 14, 15.
Christ was to destroy both City and Sanctuary; so to force the Jews to an
end of their polity: Dan. 9.24.26. Luke 19.41, 44. that Christ has abrogated
through his flesh the hatred, that is the law of commandments which stood in
ordinances, etc. that we are built, not upon Moses polity that is done away,
but upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, etc. Ephesians. 2.15, 19, 20.
That H. Jacob. Attest. p. 278. 279.
all those old things are passed away, that all things of such nature under the
Gospel are made new, and that the same things are shaken and changed, and
remain not now unto us, etc. 2. Cor. 5.17. Heb. 12.27. To these I answer:

I. That the Ceremonial law is abrogate, we willingly grant, and some of the
Scriptures here alleged by them do prove the same: and so much of the
Judicial law as had a peculiar reference unto the state and condition of the
Jews, and did not in common equity concern other people as well as them, we
acknowledge in like manner to be disannulled, as we have also noted Page 36. 37.
before. But that the spiritual admonitions and censures by the
Ecclesiastical judicatories, were either any Ceremonial or Typical
ordinances, or such as do not agree with the state of Christian Churches under
the new Testament, this remains for them to show, if they will make good those
allegations of Scripture which they apply to such a purpose. In the mean time
we esteem such allegations to serve our opposites turn no better, then they
do the Anabaptists, who upon a like pretense that Moses polity is abolished,
and that the Law is changed and old things passed away, do thereupon plead
that the Civil power of the Magistrate, and the use of the sword is not to be
exercised by Christians in the Church of God under the new Testament.

II. As for those places, Dan. 9.24, 26. Luke 19.41, 44. where the destruction
of the City and Sanctuary is foretold, they do not prove the abolition of
that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of Synods which we maintain; because this
part of Moses polity, and this liberty of appeals from one judicatory to
another, might have continued even among the Jews themselves, though both City
and Sanctuary were destroyed, and much more may still be retained among
Christians, that are not tied unto the Leviticall priesthood, nor unto any
other legal ceremonies. So the inquisition for murder was an ordinance of
Moses polity: Deuteronomy. 21.1-9. though diverse ceremonies were in Moses time
annexed there unto, this hinders not but that those ceremonies being abolished,
the Judicial law it self for inquisition after murders, being of common
equity, ought still to continue among us.

Again, it is further to be observed how some of our opposites laboring to
find a difference between Moses polity and Christ's rule, have described unto
us such a rule of proceeding in Moses time, as is not to be acknowledged. Mr
Smith, as is noted Page 42.
before, makes this to be the order of proceeding in the time of the Law, 1.
reproof of sin, Levit. 19.17. 2. a sacrifice for the cleansing of the party
reproved, Lev. 4.23. 3. death inflicted by the Magistrate upon the party
reproved, if he wilfully refused to hearken, etc. Numb. 15.30, 31. Deuteronomy. 17.12.
Mr Ainsworth agrees with him in this point, and says, H. Ains. Commun. of S.
c. 22. p. 440.
God commanded this duty in his law, plainly to rebuke our neighbor; Lev.
19.17. that so upon warning and sight of his sin, he might bring his
sacrifice and reconcile himself unto the Lord whom he had offended. Levit.
4.23-28. which if he regarded not, but should do ought with a high hand, he
then was said to blaspheme the Lord, and must be cut off from among his people,
Numb. 15.30, 31. because he despised the word of the Lord, etc. Again he
writes: Animadv. p. 120. 121.
That private men forgave not sins in Israel, so absolutely touching the
Church order or polity, as Christians do now, is evident by the Law, which
bound the offender not only unto repentance and faith in Christ, Act. 15.9,
11. as also to confess his sin, Levit. 5.5. and satisfy his neighbor
offended; Lev. 6.5. but withal to bring a trespass offering to the Priest
(the minister of the Church) that so the Priest making an atonement for him
before the Lord, it should be forgiven him. Lev. 6.2, 5, 6, 7. Now under the
Gospel the law is. If thy brother trespass against thee rebuke him, and if he
repent forgive him: Luke 17.3. neither is such a man bound to go to a Minister
that he may pray for, or forgive him; as the Papists by proportion Bellar. de
Poenit. l. 2. c. 3.
do gather. Now for answer hereunto, and to show how they were mistaken about
the rule of admonition in the old Testament, in teaching that men were bound
upon admonition to bring an offering, and so bound that if they wilfully
refused or regarded not to do it, they were to dye or to be cut off from among
their people, we are to observe that God did not lay such a bond of necessity
upon his people, and this appears by these considerations:

I. The vehebi.
words of the Text, Levit. 4.23-28. being rightly translated do not infer
such a bond. Whereas the words are commonly translated, then he shall bring his
offering, etc. they should rather have been thus translated, and or if he will
bring his offering, etc. or thus, then he may bring his offering, etc. And so
the words being conditional and not imperative, there is no absolute
commandment to bring a sacrifice: but the ordinance of God in that place is,
that if they would bring a sacrifice for their sin, then they must do it in
such manner as is there prescribed. And there is a double reason for this
translation. I. The particle vau is Vau omnium aliarum Conjunctionum
significationem assumere potest. etc. aliquando conditione^ includit* Cevall.
and Bertr. in Galeed, p. 44.
often and very conveniently expounded conditionally by if or and if, as Numb.
5.13, 14. and 12.14. Deuteronomy. 24.1, 3. Exodus 4.23. So the principal Interpreters
do sundry times translate the same: the Chaldee Paraphrasts, both Onkelos and
Jonathan, as also the Greek version, in Number. 12.14. So the ancient Arabic
version of Rabbi Saadias, as also that edition of the Chaldee printed at
Constantinople in Exodus 4.23. So Tremellius and Iunius in Genesis 18.30. Levit.
26.40. Numb. 12.14. So our English translation in Exodus 4.23. Levit. 26.40.
Numb. 12.14. Deuteronomy. 24.3. And to omit a multitude of other interpreters, Mr
Ainsworth himself does sometimes so translate the same, as in those places
before specifyed, Exo. 4.23. Lev. 26.40. Numb. 12.14. and further Annot. on
Lev. 26.40.
notes that so it ought elsewhere to be translated, as in Mal. 1.2. and 3.8. II.
Suppose that the conjunction or particle vau were not conditional in this
place, yet the word turned into the future tense by vau hippuc according to the
Hebrew speech, as other simple See Galeed, p. 117.
verbs future, does not always necessarily imply a commandment, but rather a
permission. Though sometimes they import an absolute commandment, as in the
Decalogue; yet sometimes they are used to signify what we may do, and what we
are permitted to do. This is commonly observed by Translatours, who in their
translation of the very same form of the future verb, do sometimes express
it by a commanding phrase, thou shall do, sometimes by a phrase of permission,
thou may do: for example, in our English translation, Genesis 2.16. Lev.
11.21, 22. Deuteronomy. 12.15, 20, and 20.19. and 23.20, 24, 25. and 24.2. Thou may
eat, Thou may lend, Thou may eat grapes, Thou may pluck, She may go,
etc. Thus are many of these places translated by Mr Ainsw. himself; and thus in
like manner might this place, Lev. 4.23, 28. be fitly translated, Then he may
bring his offering, etc. And being so interpreted there is no such bond of
necessity contained therein.

II. As the words and form of speech in the Text do admit this
interpretation; so the matter it self and the nature of the ordinance does
determine it, and constrain us to entertain this translation, which shows it
to be a permission: because otherwise it had been impossible ever to observe it
in Israel. The sins spoken of in Lev. 4.2, 27. are for the general nature of
them all manner of sins, great or small, except presumptuous sins. The
words of the Text are, If a soul shall sin through ignorance against any of
the commandments of the Lord, concerning things which ought not to be done,
and shall do against any one of them: the word schegagah there used co^taining
under it all sins of infirmity, ignorance, error, forgetfulness or
unadvisednes. Now the holiest men on earth being ready to offend on this manner
every day and hour; if for every daily unadvised word or deed they had been
bound to bring a sacrifice, and no other way to purge their sin, the^ had it
been utterly impossible to have kept this ordinance: I. In respect of the cost
and charges, especially for the poor, described by this argument, that he
hamsucran terumah.
wants an offering, so impoverished that he was not able to bring an oblation.
Esa. 40.20. The poor soul that had but two mites, Mark. 12.42, 44. and the
poor man that had but one lamb lying in his bosom, 2. Sam. 12.3. could not
purge their daily sins with sacrifices for them all: especially considering
that in this sinne-offering here spoken of, they must of necessity bring either
a shee-goat or a lamb-female without blemish: Lev. 4.28, 32. there was no
respect of the poor to spare them or to dispense with them for bringing a
sacrifice of less price, as yet in other cases we see they were dispensed
withal. Lev. 14.21, 22, 30, 31. and 12.6, 7, 8. whereupon the mother of Christ
being very poor (as appears hence) brought a pair of turtle-doves or two
young pigeons, Luke 2.24. which had not been lawful, if she had been able to
have brought a lamb. Now if the Lord had this care to ease the burden of the
poor leper at his cleansing, and of the poor woman at her purification, which
might fall out to be but once in the year, or once in a life time, and to many
never in their life; then how much more agreeable is it to the mercy of God,
that the charges of the poor should have been respected in those sacrifices
which they might have had occasion to offer even every day in the year? but
hence we may gather that this sacrifice was not of necessity imposed upon them.
Yea it had been impossible for the richer sort to have sustained this charge,
especially in the years of dearth or scarsity. All the cattle upon the
mountains of Israel, with the sheep of Kedar and Nebaioth were not so many as
the known sins of Israel, which needed this sacrifice. II. In respect of the
labor and travel, this order was not possible to be observed, when for every
known sin they should take a journey to Jerusalem, many of the Israelites
dwelling diverse days journeys from the Temple. Abraham traveling from
Beersheba in the South to offer his son in the mount of Morijah, where the
Temple was afterward built, 2. Chron. 3.1. came not thither before the third
day, Genesis 22.2, 3, 4. And some others that dwelt in the Tribes Northward from
Jerusalem, were as far again distant from the Temple, as appears by the Cl.
Ptol. Geogr. l. 5. c. 16. tab. 4.
Geographicall description of that country; so that to go and come and to
perform that sacrifice could not be much less then a weeks work unto diverse
of them: and every week in the year they might have occasion to take this
journey, if this sacrifice, Lev. 4. had been exacted of them. Yea as Joseph and
Mary having been at the feast, when they had come a days journey homeward from
Jerusalem, seeking the child Jesus and not finding him in the company did
return back again to Jerusalem: Luke 2.43, 44, 45. so many sinners having
offered this sacrifice and coming homeward, might in the way come to the
knowledge of some new sin, and so be forced to go back to Jerusalem to offer
again; yea and this so often that all their life long they might do no other
work but travel up and down to offer sacrifices. But seeing it was impossible
for the tribes and families of Israel to endure such travel, we may therefore
conclude from hence, that both Mr Ainsworth and Mr Smith have erred in teaching
that Israel was bound unto such a rule.

But against this it may be objected from the interpretation of the Rabbines
alleged by Mr Ainsworth, that these errors for which the Sinne-offering was
to be brought were not so many and common, but few and rare, and that therefore
there was no such impossibility of purging them by sacrifice. Therefore to
clear the Text, and to vindicate the ordinance of God from the absurd
traditions of the Thalmudists, and that it may appear how men have corrupted
the Rules of admonition and discipline, as well in the Old as in the New
Testament, I will briefly point out some of their vain glosses, and show their
contrary extremities about this particular statute.

The errors and sins for which this sacrifice was appointed are in one
extremity restrained too much by the Jew-doctours: I. By expounding them only
of such works and deeds as are distinguished from thoughts and from words.
Because the Text says, shall do, H. Ains. Annot. on Lev. 4.2.
this they restrain to deeds and facts, and therefore they teach that the
Blasphemer because his sin was in word and not in deed, was not to bring this
sinne-offering. This gloss is a vain and false collection: because the H.
Ghost in the Scripture, does ordinarily describe the words, speeches and
savings of men under the phrase of doing, as appears, Psalm. 15.2, 3. with
verse. 5. and Psalm. 50.19, 20. with verse. 21. And what reason is there that the
sins of standering, railing, cursing, perjury, blasphemy, being repented of
should not be purged by sacrifice as well as other heinous facts and deeds? II.
By a second restriction of these errors in deeds and facts unto the
transgressing of negative commandments only. Herein they Ibidem.
show themselves partial in the Law, dividing it into 613 commandments, and
those again into 248 affirmative commandments according to the supposed
number of bones in a man's body, and 365 negative commandments according to the
number of days in the year: and the sinne-offering they require only for the
breach of negative commandments, pretending a reason from the Text, which
makes mention of all the commandments concerning things which should not be
done. Hereupon they say, that no sinne-offering is to be brought for neglecting
of Circumcision or the Passover, because they are affirmative commandments.
And thus at once they cast out 248 kinds of sins, according to the number of
the affirmative commandments, from having any part in the Sinne-offering. And
this their exposition is not only alleged but allowed and approved of Mr
Ainsw. when he says, Annot. on Lev. 5.1,
The sinne-offerings in chapter 4. were for greater offenses, in doing things
forbidden of God, viz. in the negative commandments. And to prevent an
objection that might be made against this distinction, he says, Annot. on Lev.
4.2.
Other sins (viz. against the affirmative commandments) in omitting things
to be done, were expiated by Burnt-offerings, which were offered daily for the
whole Church, or by particular persons, as they would bring them, as is showed
on Lev. 1. Also by the sacrifices offered on Atonement day, whereof see Lev.
16. etc. But how vain is this distinction? what just warrant is there that the
expiation of sins of omission, against the affirmative commandments, should
be restrained and applied with such distinction unto the Burnt-offerings or
unto that one day of Atonement? It is a general rule and received of Divines
that in expounding the commandments the affirmative part should be
comprehended under the negative, and the negative under the affirmative. And
there is ground for this from the word of God, who in his speech sometimes
comprehends all our obedience of the Law under an affirmative commandment,
as Deuteronomy. 5.33. sometimes under a negative, as Deuteronomy. 8.11. with Deuteronomy. 5.32, etc.
III. By a third restriction they do yet further limit and appropriate this
Sinne-offering to the ignorant or negligent breach of such negative
commandments, for the presumptuous transgression whereof men deserved cutting
off by the Law, as is noted Ibidem.
in general by Mr Ainsworth, for the interpretation and illustration of this
ordinance. But that the Reader may the better discern and judge thereof, I
will set down the particular errors: Maimony in Shegagoth, c. 1.
The first when a man did ly with his mother, 2. with his wives mother, 3. with
his mothers mother, 4. with his fathers mother, 5. with his daughter, 6. with
his daughters daughter, 7. with his sons daughter, 8. with his wives daughter,
9. with her daughters daughter, 10. with her sons daughter, 11. with his
sister, 12. with his sister, of his fathers wife, 13. with his fathers sister,
14. with his mothers sister, 15. with his wives sister, 16. with his fathers
wife, 17. with his fathers brothers wife, 18. with his sons wife, 19. with
his brothers wife, 20. with a man's wife, 21. with a menstruous woman, 22. with
a male, 23. with his father, 24. with his fathers brother, 25. with a beast,
26. a woman lying with a beast. And besides these 26 monstrous and unnatural
pollutions, they reckon 17 other transgressions, 1. Idolatry, 2. giving of
their seed to Molech, 3. having a familiar spirit, 4. to be a wizard, 5.
profaning of the Sabath, 6. to work upon Atonement day, 7. to eat or drink on
Atonement day, 8. to eat the remainder, (viz. of the sacrifice on the third
day, Lev. 7.17, 18.) 9. to eat leaven at the Passover, 10. to eat fat, 11. to
eat blood, 12. to eat the abominable thing, 13. to kill holy things without the
court, 14. to offer sacrifice without the court, 15. to make the anointing
oil, 16. to make the sweet incense, 17. to anoint with that anointing oil.
Unto these 43 particular and enormous errors they restrain the
Sinne-offering. As by the former restriction they excluded all the 248
affirmative commandments, so by this of 365 negative precepts they exclude
322. By these and sundry other groundles restrictions they do many ways make
both this and other commandments and ordinances of God of no effect by their
traditions, and as for private persons, so also for the Priest, the
Congregation and Rulers, which being so vain, I will not insist upon further
refutation of them; they being also many ways contradictory unto themselves
about the same.

And as the Jews do thus offend in unjust restrictions, so do they also in a
contrary extremity of extending the words of this ordinance in some other
respects too far: as when it is said according to the translation of Mr
Ainsw. and shall do, of any one of them. Levit. 4.2. hence they gather that
this Sinne-offering is to be brought by such as break any piece or part of
those negative commandments; R. Solomon Iarchi, on Lev. 4.2. R. Moses Mikkotsi
in Sepher mitsvoth gadol, praecept affir. 213.
as for example, if upon the Sabbath one should write Shim of Shimeon, Nah of
Nahor, Dan of Daniel, against such they do apply the words of this
commandment. Now if for so small a transgression as writing with a pen upon
the Sabath but half a word, a syllable or two letters of a man's name, they were
bound to bring this sinne-offering, and so accordingly for other sins of like
nature and weight, what man though the holiest on earth, could have endured the
labor and charge of so many sacrifices as such kind of sins might have
occasioned? Though Bellarmine erred in laboring to Bellar. de Paenit. l. 3. c.
3.
prove auricular confession of sins unto the Priest from the legal
sacrifices, as Mr Ainsworth mentions (though the place be cited amiss, which I
suppose to be the Printers fault, lib. 2. for lib. 3.) yet Mr Ainsw. himself
does err likewise in describing an impossible and unreasonable order in the
Old Testament, as Bellar. does for the New.

Lastly, suppose there had been such a bond of necessity laid upon the Jews of
old, to bring a sacrifice for each sin when it was made known unto them; yet
this proves not that any new duty was prescribed in Matt. 18. which was not
taught in the Law before. We know that the legal sacrifices and ceremonies are
wholly abrogate: yet this hinders not but that the moral duties observed in
the midst of those ceremonies may still remain, when the ceremonies are
abolished. When the Ministers of the Lord in old time entered into their offices
with knowledge and consent of the people, and together at the same time were
consecrated with diverse sacrifices and other ceremonies, Numb. 8.9, 10, etc.
Levit. 8.2, 3, 4, 5. though the ceremonies of consecration be abolished, yet
the peoples right of knowledge and consent is not therefore abolished. The
Brownists themselves allege Confess. art. 23. Apolog. pos. 5. p. 46, 47, 48.
the same places for the continuance thereof: and why can they not observe the
same for the rule in Matt. 18. notwithstanding any ceremonies that had formerly
been annexed unto the practice and observation of some duties contained in
that rule?

Moreover, it may be observed from Mr Ainsworths own words that the Rule in
Matt. 18. and in special that which concerns the third degree of admonition,
was for the substance of it no new rule, but that which was required and
practiced under the Law. In Israel they told the Church two ways: 1. By
telling the Governors that represented the Church, because it then also
chiefly appertained to the Ministers and watchmen of the Church to give the
people warning, to admonish them of their wicked ways, to teach the people the
difference between the holy and profane, etc. Diverse Scriptures are Co^mun. of
Sts. c. 22. p. 450.
alleged by Mr Ainsw. himself for proof hereof, as Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, etc. Ezekiel.
44.23. Ier. 1.10. Hos. 6.5. etc. It was therefore no new rule in the new
Testament when the like order was established for going first unto the
Eldership and seeking redress of evil by them. Mr Ainsw. acknowledges, that
Ibid. p. 451.
the keys of the kingdom of heaven are in more special manner given unto
them; and therefore in special manner ought they to be told and spoken unto
for the reformation of evils: seeing, they were to guide and go before the
people, as in other affairs, so in administering the censures of the Church;
therefore ordinarily matters were to be brought unto them before they were
brought unto the whole Congregation. 11. As it is the ordinance of God in the
new Testament, 1. Cor. 5. and accordingly the practice of the Reformed Churches
in these countries, that the more weighty affairs and censures of the Church
should not be administered without knowledge and consent of the body of the
Church; so that none is either received for a member of the Church, or cast out
by excommunication, but they do first tell the Church; even the whole
Congregation is solemnly and publicly acquainted therewith, and liberty
granted unto them to show their assent or dissent therein: so Mr Ainsw. himself
acknowledges that there was a like order in the old Testament. The Scriptures
which he alleges, and his manner of arguing from them does import so much. Of
Israel he says, Co^mun. of S. c. 18. 8.
Unto all and every of the Israelites, was commended the care and observation
of all Gods statutes; that neither all nor any of them, man nor woman, nor
family, nor tribe, should forsake the Lord, nor suffer among them any root to
bring forth gall and wormwood, etc. Deuteronomy. 29.18. So of the multitude of
believers and people in the new Testament, he writes in like manner, that Ibid.
9.
they were willed to exhort and admonish each other; even the Officers of the
Churches, etc. and to look that no root of bitterness sprung up and troubled
them, etc. Heb. 12.15, etc. Again he says, Ibid. c. 18. 8.
Even the leprous and unclean, though the trial of them apperteyned to the
Priests, Lev. 13. yet all the children of Israel were to look that such were
removed out of the host; yea the care of the Priests purity in their
administration, apperteyned to all the people. Levit. 21.1, 8, 24. And long
after, both in counsels, and in the redressing of public evils and trespasses,
all Israel indifferently, had their hand and presence; as the Scripture
shows. 2. Chron. 30.21, 23. Ezra. 10.1, 9, 12, etc. Then presently he
parallels the course of the Churches in the New Testament with this supposed
practice in the Old, saving, The Churches in the Apostles days had also the
like right and liberty: for the multitudes of believers were both beholders and
actors in the common affairs, etc. Afterward again, speaking of the rules of
admonition and of the censures of the Church, he says, Ibid. c. 22. 12 p. 449.
The keeping of which rules belongs to all the Saints, as the commandment
directed of old to the children of Israel ( Number. 5.2. Levit. 19.17.) and in the
new Testament to all the brethren and Church, does show. Matt. 18.15. 1. Cor.
5. And thus by his own confession, yea even according to his own opinion, in
respect of the Churches power and the peoples right, there was no new rule
given by Christ in Mat. 18.

Whereas it is objected that the Jewish Synedrion H. Bar. Resut. of Giff. p.
76.
by the institution of God was merely Civil, etc. that D. Bilso^, perpet. gov.
chapter 4. p. 21.
Moses appointed neither Judges nor Elders in City or Synedrion, but they were
Magistrates to execute the judgments of the law, and had the sword to chastise
the body and punish with death, etc. The error of this assertion has been
showed Page 34, 35.41.
before from the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 17. and 2. Chron. 19. From these places is
the distinction of Civil and Ecclesiastical judgments maintained by many
learned Writers, as Conf. with Heart, c. 6. div. 2. p. 203, 204.
D. Rainolds, First reply to D. Whitg. p. 192. Second reply, latter part. p.
152.153.
Mr Cartwright, Counterp. in part of Regist. p. 490.491.
Mr Fenner, and the Ibid. p. 522.
Defender of him, and most largely by Diss. de Gub. Eccl. p. 59. etc.
G. Bucerus. As for H. Barrow, he sufficiently resutes himself when he
acknowledges that the Priests did bear the charge and had the deciding of all
Ecclesiastical causes, Numb. 18. Deuteronomy. 17. This they could not do without
judging of them; and therefore it appears hence that they had a double
Synedrion, one Ecclesiastical, the other Civil.

CHAP. VI.
The third Argument, taken from the practice of the primitive Churches, in the
Apostles times.
OUr third Argument is taken from the practice of the primitive Christian
Churches, after the Ascension of Christ, from which we reason on this manner:
That government of the Church which is commended unto us and approved by the
example of the Apostles and Apostolic Churches, is worthily to be embraced of
us. But the government of the Church by Synods, which besides their counsel
and admonition, do also with authority judge and determine the weightiest
causes and affairs of particular Churches, is commended unto us as is above
said: Therefore, etc.

The Assumption of this Argument is proved:

I. By that holy assembly or Synod which is recorded Act. 1.15-26. wherein
there was not only counsel given, but also an exercise of Ecclesiastical
power and authority, and that in such a business as was of great and rare
importance, in the choice of a new Apostle. This Assembly was not an ordinary
Congregation or particular Church, but it was a Synodicall assembly, and
performed such a work as did not belong unto any one particular Church. This
appears diverse ways: I. In respect of the persons of whom this Assembly did
consist, and these again of two sorts; First, of Apostles, who being such
persons as were not tied unto any particular Church, but had an universal
charge; Matt. 28.19. Romans 10.15, 18. This commission was unto them as much as
if they had had a special delegation from many or all Churches, so that their
presence and concurrence was sufficient to make this Assembly in some measure,
as a general or universal Synod. These eleven Apostles having also a peculiar
charge to be at this time at Jerusalem, the place of this Assembly, and to
tarry there for a while ( Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4.) were by divine direction
brought unto this Synod. Secondly, for other persons, the Disciples that were
present at this Assembly, it appears they were from diverse places; some of
them from Galilee, as the brethren of Christ there mentioned, Act. 1.14. with
Mat. 13.55, 56. and how many of them were inhabitants of Jerusalem or Iudaea,
it is not specifyed: so that the 120 persons met together at this time, Act.
1.15. cannot be said to have been a distinct particular Church of persons
dwelling in Jerusalem, but an occasional assembly or Synod upon such ground as
the story of the Scripture does manifest. II. In respect of the business it self
here performed, viz. the election of an Apostle: it was such a work as did not
appertain unto any one particular Church, but all Churches had interest
therein, seeing the care of all the Churches was committed unto the Apostles.
2. Cor. 11.28. All Churches were alike bound to beware of false Apostles, that
could transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ. 2. Cor. 11.13. It had
been a presumption in any one Church, and a wrong unto all the rest, if without
their consent, one alone should have chosen an Apostle: especially considering
there were even at this time a multitude of the faithful in other places whom
this work concerned. Many had been lately converted by the ministry of John
Baptist: Matt. 11.12. and now immediately before the Ascension of Christ we
read of more then 500 brethren at once which were witnesses of the Resurrection
of Christ. 1. Cor. 15.6. These 120 had done injury unto them, save that these
general persons, the Apostles, called of God for the service of all Churches,
did for them by divine appointment appear in this Synod. III. In respect of
the manner of this election, which was made with a threefold limitation, 1.
Unto one of those men which had companyed with the Apostles all the time that
the Lord Jesus went in and out among them, beginning from the baptism of John,
even until that same day that he was taken up from them. Act. 1.21, 22. Now
these Disciples that thus waited on Christ, such as Barsabas and Matthias were,
being no inhabitants of Jerusalem, what power had a particular Church to
determine and dispose of them that were no members of their particular society?
2. There was a restraint from absolute electing of any one of these: they were
only allowed to present two, and to offer them unto the choice of the Lord.
verse. 23.24. 3. The way and means of inquiring the will of God herein, was
determined and restrained unto a Lot, whereby the judgment and definitive
sentence of God was declared unto the Synod that rested therein. And by these
extraordinary directions it pleased God to honor this first Synod of the new
Testament.

It is here also to be observed, that although some Writers have spoken of this
election as made by a particular Church, yet we have sundry learned men
consenting with us in the exposition of this story, who laboring to show the
profit and necessity of Synods, Whitak. de Council. qu. 1. c. 3.
do argue from this place, Act. 1. and affirm that in the New Testament the
Apostles and whole Church did celebrate a Synod for the choosing of Matthias
into the place of Judas. The Professors of Leyden to the same purpose Synops.
pur. Theol. Disp. 49.
allege this example, Act. 1. and call it the first Synod at Jerusalem.

II. The example of that renowned Synod which is recorded Act. 15. is a
sufficient warrant, wherein the use and authority of Classes and Synods is
commended unto us, and this not only for counsel and admonition, but also for
the judgment of causes and for the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
As that which went before the Synod, namely the great dissension about a
dangerous error, with seeking of redress by a solemn deputation of
messengers from the Church of Antioch ( Act. 15.1, 2.) did call for help in the
most effectual manner: so the things done in the Synod are an evidence of the
authority which they used therein, both by a definitive sentence which they
pronounced concerning that controversy which was brought unto them; verse. 28,
29. and by an authentic embassage of chosen men sent from that Assembly of
Apostles, Elders and brethren, both to carry the Epistle that was written, and
by word of mouth to declare the same things, verse. 22, 23, 25, 27. That also
which is noted to have been done after the Synod in the publication of the acts
thereof, does also bear witness touching the authority of those acts, in that
they are called the decrees, ordained of the Apostles and Elders, etc. Act.
16.4. The fruit also which by the blessing of God followed hereupon, in being a
means of great consolation, and establishment of the Churches in the faith (
Act. 15.31. and 16.5.) is to be considered as an argument whereby the H. Ghost
does further commend unto us the authority of such Synods in the right
government of the Church.

Upon this example do generally all judicious Writers build the authority of
Synods, as upon a sure foundation and groundwork.

Calvine says that Comment. in Act. 15.6.
here is prescribed of God the form and order of gathering Synods, etc.

Beza upon this place, Annot. maj. in Act. 15.12. and V. 23.
having showed that here was a (...), or foregoing consultation of the Apostles
and Elders, which was related unto the whole Church, and ratifyed in the common
assembly thereof, he affirms that this was the right form of a lawful and
true Apostolic Synod, etc. And both these are to be understood of such Synods
as exercised authority of Ecclesiastical censure, according to the practice of
those Churches wherein they lived, of which more hereafter.

Bullinger observes here (as is noted by Expos. Eccles. in Act. 15.6.
Marlorate) that this custom was in old time diligently kept of the holy
Bishops in imitation of the Apostles, and complains of the neglect thereof.

D. Rainolds, when as the Papist objected unto him that there must be a chief
Judge to end controversies, to keep the truth of faith, and peace of the
Church, that it be not pestered with heresies and schisms; he answers
thereunto, Conf. with Heart. c. 6. div. 2. p. 206.
that The wisdom of God has committed that chieftie of judgment (so to call
it) not to the sovereign power of one, but to the common care of many. For
when there was a controversy in the Church of Antioch about the observation of
the law of Moses, some Jews teaching contrary to that which Paul and Barnabas
taught: they ordained that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should
go up to Jerusalem, to the Apostles and Elders about that question. Act. 15.2.
And so by their common agreement and decree, the controversy was ended, the
truth of faith kept, and peace maintained in the Church. After which example
the Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 14. and 21. and 22. lib. 7. c. 26. and. 28.
Cypr. epist 6. and. 14, and 31. and 53. and 72. and 75. Council. Ancyr. Gangr.
Antioch. Laodic. etc.
Bishops (that succeeded them) made the like assemblies, on the like occasions:
and by common conference took order for such matters, both of doctrine and
discipline, as concerned in common the state of their Church. So did the
Apostles and Apostolic men provide against schisms and heresies. Their
wisdom reached not unto the policy of one chief judge. Thus D. Rainolds
does many ways acknowledge the authority of Synods: he calls that power
which they have, the chieftie of judgment: he avoucheth that they have it by
divine right, that the wisdom of God has committed it unto them: he pleads
from the forenamed warrant, Act. 15. he extends this power unto matters both
of Doctrine and Discipline: the testimonies which in his margin he alleges
out of the Ecclesiastical history, to show that the like assemblies were kept
in succeeding times, are such as speak of their excommunicating wicked
Heretics, viz. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 14. etc. l. 7. c. 26, 28. etc.
whereby it appears that he allowed unto Synods not only counsel or
admonition, but a power of exercising Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and censure.
Those Councels mentioned and poynted at by him, for instances of this chieftie
of judgment, were such as did not only admonish, but also determine and judge
of causes: The Synod of Barthol. Carranza, Summa Council. p. ^3. etc.
Ancyra in Galatia made most severe Ecclesiastical laws for the excluding of
such as did fall in time of persecution: The Synod of Magdeb. Cent. 4. c. 3.
col. 111. etc. 6. col. 463
Gangris in Paphlagonia exercised Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in deposing
Eustathius. Bishop of Sebastia for his errors: and the like might be noted for
the rest. Whatsoever particular errors were in any of these, yet the authority
and jurisdiction it self is approved of him as proceeding from the wisdom of
God, declared in this place, Act. 15.

D. Whitaker in his disputation against Bellarmine touching Councels lays
down this Text, Act. 15.6. for a ground of that which he takes occasion to
entreat of, and De Council. Qu. 1. c. 1. p: 1, 3, 4, etc.
often repeats that text, applying it to each of the questions which he
discusseth. And whereas our Opposites do grant a lawful use of Synods for
counsel, but not to judge, nor to give judicial sentence for the deciding of
causes; D. Whitak. describing the State of the Question betwixt us and the
Papists, touching the persons that are to be called to a Synod, shows that
Ibid. qu. 3. c. 1. p. 79.
the Papists will have only the Bishops or greater Prelates, to be allowed for
judges, and the Presbyters or inferior Clergy to be only inquisitors,
disputers or consulters, to give counsel, but not to have suffrages in giving
definitive sentences. This is the opinion of the Bellar. Tom. 2. Contr. 1. de
Council. l. 1. c. 15.
Romish Church. Now D. Whit. in the refutation of the Papists, does as well
refute the Brownists and other opposites, while he proves De Council. qu. 3. c.
3.
that all who have a lawful deputation and calling are to be allowed for
judges, and not for counselors only; and that their suffrage is not only for
consultation but for decision, as is hereafter showed more at large. Observe
only at this time, that the first argument in that dispute is taken from this
very place, Act. 15.

G. Bucerus pleads from this same ground of Scripture, and writes Dissert. de
Gub. Ecc. p. 65.
that not only several particular Churches had their proper distinct
Presbyteries, but that the history of the Apostles witnesses, that when
greater controversies did arise which could not be ended in lesser Colleges,
then more Churches under the new Testament did run unto a General Synod.
Act. 15. And what power they were wont to exercise therein, he shows by a
distinction of persons coming to the Synod. As D. Whit. refuting the popish
distinction of greater and lesser Clergy, shows that there was a right and
power of suffrages and judgment in the Synod: so Bucerus Ibid. p. 107. 108.
etc.
confirming the distinction of Iunius, viz. that some persons came to the
Synods as Delegates sent from the Churches, which therefore did give definitive
sentence of matters propounded; that others coming without such deputation and
commission, might give their advise and counsel but without suffrages, does
hereby acknowledge a power of jurisdiction in the Synod, by those that were
peculiarly called to be judges therein.

Zepperus Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 8. de Syn. p. 713. 714. 715. etc.
alleging Act. 15. for a pattern of Synods, declares that after the Apostles
the primitive Church in the new Testament being most studious of this
consociation or combination in Synods, did not only communicate by letters,
but meeting together in National or General Councels, did hear the causes of
Heretics and others that appeared before them, and so convinced, condemned and
excommunicated them, and sent their decrees unto all Churches with the names
and heresies of those that were excommunicate, etc. Thus did he acknowledge the
right of Synods, not only for counsel and admonition, but also for
jurisdiction in censuring.

Piscator These. Theolog. vol. 1. Loc. 23. p. 361-364.
writing of Councels and Synods, and of the seven questions concerning them,
does seven times allege this place, Act. 15. for a ground of direction in each
of them. And for the authority of Synods, he plainly expresses his meaning,
when speaking of the government of the Church in general, he says These. 62,
63.
it consists chiefly in Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and again
distinguishing this jurisdiction into two parts, he says that the one part
consists in the power of making laws, and potissimum spectatur in Conciliis,
that is, it is chiefly seen in Synods.

Bucanus Loc. Co^. Loc. 43. qu. 21, 22, 25, 27.
writes much to the same purpose, and asscribeth unto Synods authority of
making laws, of deciding controversies, and this from the example of that
Synod, Act. 15. often mentioned by him.

Mr Fenner S. Theol. l. 7. c. 7. p. 278-281.
briefly and methodically describing the nature of Synods, the kinds, the use
and authority of them, does derive their authority from this ground, Act. 15.
which even in that short description is more then ten times alleged by him.

Many other such Testimonies might be produced to show the consent of judicious
and learned Divines in this point, of which somewhat more is to be said, when I
come to give answer touching that multitude of Authors which Mr Can alleges
against me. Let us now hear what my Opposites say concerning this Example.

Mr Dav. his Exceptions touching Act. 15. answered.

I. DAV. Apol reply, p. 254. 255.
This Text, Act. 15. is alleged by Bellarmine to prove the binding force of
the decrees of Councills, and by the Answerer, to show the authority of the
Classis: whereunto Iunius gives 2 answers also. 1. Non sequitur ex
particulari, si custodienda fuerint decreta Concilii Apostolici, ergo and
omnium servari oportere. It does not follow from a particular, that because
the decrees of an Apostolical Council are to be observed, therefore the
decrees of all Councills must be so kept. Contr. 3. li. 4. cap. 16.
And whereas Bellarmine affirms that the question there was not defined by
Scripture, but by the voices of the Apostles, Iunius denies that any thing was
ordained in that Council, but from the Scriptures, as he had before
demonstrated, and thereunto refers the Reader. ANSVV. I. It may be observed
here how untrue it is which Mr Dav. pretends in excuse of his large writing,
saying, Pref. to the Reader.
For the help of the Reader in comparing the Reply with the Answer, I have
inserted his own words every where. This has he not done here, nor in many
other places. I showed Answ. to unj. co^pl. p. 88.
how this place Act. 15. had been alleged by another against the Brownists,
and that this his allegation served to condemn both himself and his fellows.
Mr D. has neither inserted mine own words, nor yet the words of him that had
alleged this place. II. In alleging the two answers of Iunius unto
Bellarmine, he wanders wide from the question in hand. I am of the same mind
with Iunius in both those answers: Though the decrees of that Apostolical
Synod were infallibly true and just; yet is it not so with other Synods, many
whereof are to be rejected for their erroneous and unjust decrees. All the
decrees in that Synod, Act. 15. were grounded upon the Scriptures, and rested
not merely upon the suffrages of men. Iunius had just cause so to answer
Bellarmine, that maintained an unlawful and absolute authority of Synods, and
exacted obedience of necessity to all their decrees. Is not this to abuse both
me and his Readers, and to bleare their eyes, that they should not rightly
discern the state of the question? III. That the Reader may better conceive in
what manner an authority and power is asscribed to Classes and Synods, let the
authority of particular Churches be considered, as an example and model of
that authority which is in Synods. My opposites themselves confess that there
is in particular Congregations an authority and power to judge and censure
offenders, and yet they will not deny but that they may err in their
judgments, that they want such infallible direction as the Apostles had, and
that their decrees and Ecclesiastical censures are to be regarded no further
then they are grounded upon the Scriptures. So is it with the authority of
Classes and Synods.

I. DAV. Apol. reply. p. 255.
And, whereas Bellarmine says that the decree of the Apostles was not left to
the examination of the Disciples, but that they were simply commanded to obey,
Iunius charge him with falsely supposing two things. 1. That the Apostles
alone made this order. For the Elders concurred with the Apostles in this
sentence, and the whole Church, all of them being taught by the spirit of
truth to think the same thing. And this he says is the manner of proceeding
in those Councills where Christ is praesident. 2. That the same respect is to
be had to the determination of others, as of the Apostles. Which is an error,
he says, For it was the singular privilege of the Apostles, that they had
immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost, and infallibility in their Apostolical
determinations. so that what they delivered was to be received without
examination, whereas the dictates and sentences of all other are to be examined
by their writings: whereby it appears that the Scripture acknowledges no
such power of making laws to be due to the Classes, unless they can produce
some other texts, which when they shall be alleged, shall be further examined,
if God permit. ANSVV. I. All that Mr Davenp. has here set down is wholly
impertinent, and all being granted, our assertion touching the lawful
authority of Synods and Classes remains firm. We grant with Iunius, Animadv.
in Bellarm. Contro. 4. l. 1. c. 18. 11.
that the Apostles alone did not judge, but the Elder and others also concurred
with them, not only in counsel, but in giving judicial sentence with them.
We grant that there is not the like respect to be had to the determinations of
others, as of the Apostles: we grant that no such power of making laws is due
to Classes, that is, no such power of infallible determinations, etc. and yet
we hold they have a lawful authority of judging and deciding controversies,
etc. The like we hold concerning particular Churches with their Elderships; we
grant they have no such power of infallible determinations, and yet a lawful
power to determine and judge of causes: We grant that there is not the like
respect to be had to the determinations of particular Churches, as of the
Apostles; and yet a due respect not only for admonition and counsel, but also
for power to censure and to give sentence. We grant that the censures,
sentences and judgments as well of Elderships and Churches, as of Synods and
Classes, are in like manner to be tried and examined by the Scriptures, and yet
this grant impeacheth not the lawful authority of either of them, in
exercising a power of judgment. II. For the better direction how to discern
and judge of the actions of the Apostles, and how far their example is a rule
of practice and imitation to the Church of God, it shall not be amiss to set
down a profitable and useful distinction observed by Iunius, Ibid. lib. 2. c.
16. n. 6.
which is, that the Apostles had a twofold manner of Power, Common and Proper.
The Common is that ordinary power which they had together with the Elders, as
they were Bishops. The Proper or peculiar is that extraordinary power which
was for a while given unto the Evangelicall Church at the springing up thereof,
in respect of which the Apostles were above the whole Church. According to that
common power, Peter was (...), a fellow Elder, 1. Pet. 5.1. according to this
peculiar power he destroyed Ananias and Sapphira, Act. 5. By that common power
Paul says, 1. Cor. 5.4. You and my spirit being gathered together in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ: but by that peculiar power he says, what will you?
shall I come unto you with a rod? etc. 1. Cor. 4.20. This he sets down
elsewhere more fully, and applies it to the power exercised Act. 15. saying,
Ibid. l. 1 c. 16. n. 1.
Here the Aposles are said to have used communication: therefore this power was
common to the Church, and not a peculiar action of the Apostles in this Synod
at Jerusalem. We do therefore thus determine distinctly concerning this thing:
All that were furnished with gifts and calling judged in this Synod: first the
Apostles and Apostolic men: then the Elders that labored in the ministry of
the Word, as well they of the place in Jerusalem, as those of Antioch, and if
any moreover were come from other places, etc. Therefore when we allege this
example, Act. 15. to show the authority and power of Synods in judging of
controversies, those that to frustrate and elude this example do plead and
except that the Apostles had extraordinary power, they are here reproved by
Iunius, who shows that though the Apostles had extraordinary gifts in judging,
which might procure the more respect in that regard; yet the power it self by
which they did judge, Act. 15. was not extraordinary and peculiar to the
Apostles, but ordinary, and common to Ministers, Elders, and other Deputies of
the Churches, and therefore commonly and perpetually to be observed and used,
as occasion requires.

Mr Can's Exceptions touching Act. 15. answered.

BEfore he comes to the point, he entreats me to resolve five Questions, the
two latter whereof I have answered Page 34.
before; the other with their answers are as follows.

I. CAN. I. Churches plea, p. 32, 33.
Whither the Assembly, mentioned in Act. 15. there a Synod or Classis. ANSVV.
The Assembly mentioned Act. 15. was a Synod, and not properly a Classis,
according to the usual acception of the word in these places. Classes are
Assemblies of Ministers coming often together out of neighbor Churches within
a lesser circuit: Synods have a larger extent, comprehend many Classes under
them, and come more seldom together.

I. CAN. II. How it can be manifested from that place, that both are divine
institutions, as here is affirmed. ANSVV. This place, Act. 15. or any other
that yields warrant for one of these Assemblies, yields it for both: because
both are of like nature, and differ not essentially, but in circumstantiall
matters of time, place, number of persons. In both these is a superior
Ecclesiastical authority over particular Churches: in respect of both there
appears a mutual dependence of Churches, and that all Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is not limited unto a particular Church, which is the Question
betwixt us.

I. CAN. III. How he can naturally from thence raise this doctrine; viz.
Excommunications and elections of Ministers, are actions belonging unto Classes
and Synods. ANSVV. When I raise such a doctrine from Act. 15. as he mentions,
which I have not done any where, then is it time for me to manifest how the
same arises naturally from the Text. Election of Ministers is an action
belonging to several Congregations, and not to Classes and Synods: but if any
particular Churches do offend in choosing unlawful and unfit persons, then
are Classes and Synods to judge thereof, and to hinder such elections. Had the
Church of Antioch gone about to elect for a Minister among them one of that
Sect which taught the brethren there, Except ye be circumcised after the manner
of Moses, ye cannot be saved; Act. 15.1.5. then had the Synod at Jerusalem
authority to have hindered that election, which appears because they had power
to make a decree against such false doctrine. Act. 15.28. And thence also it
follows, that if any of the Christian Pharisees had stood obstinately in such
errors, tending to the subversion of souls, to the bringing in of another
Gospel, and making Christ become of no effect unto men, Act. 15.24. Gal. 1.6,
7. and 5.2, 3, 4. then after due conviction, that Synod at Jerusalem had
authority as well to censure the person, as to condemn his error, having in
readiness a revenge against all disobedience, 2. Cor. 10.6. with Gal. 1.8, 9.
especially if the particular Church whereof such a person was a member, should
refuse to do the same according to their direction.

I. CAN. To the point now: I do deny that this place Act. 15. proves any such
thing, for which it is alleged. For I. Here was no combination of many
Ministers of diverse Churches; but only a few messengers sent from Antiochia
unto the Congregation at Jerusalem, about a controversy there specifyed. Hence
it is affirmed by many learned men D. Brid. page 1224.
that as this was an assembly of one only particular Church; so it binds D.
Whit. de Conc. qu. 2. p. 6. and 67
only but in a special or particular meeting. ANSVV. I. It is untrue which he
says, that here was no combination of many Ministers of diverse Churches;
because here were the Ministers of all Churches, even the Apostles that had the
care of all the Churches, of whom all Churches might say, these are our
Ministers. Act. 15.6.2. Cor. 11.28.1. Cor. 3.21, 22. Mat. 28.19. This was the
noblest combination of Ministers that ever was. II. It is without warrant that
he says, only a few messengers were sent from Antiochia, for besides Paul and
Barnabas, the deputies and messengers of that Church, which might stand for
many other, it is said, that certain other of them were sent, Act. 15.2. but
how many or how few it is not specifyed. III. That which he alleges from D.
Bridges is unsound, viz. that this was an Assembly of one only particular
Church. As it is expressly against the text, so I may oppose against in the
testimony of Iunius Page 68.
before noted, who speaking of them that judged in this Synod, reckons up first
the Apostles and Apostolic men; then the Elders that labored in the ministry
of the Word, as well them of the place in Jerusalem, as those of Antioch, and
if any moreover were come from other places, etc. IV. Whereas he cites D.
Whitaker, as if he affirmed of this Synod at Jerusalem, that it binds only
but in a special or particular meeting, he does herein falsify the testimony
of D. Whitak. for though he distinguishing Synods into Particular, Provincial
or National, and Universal, does in De Council Qu. 1. c. 2. p. 6.
that place, call this a Particular Synod, yet has he no such assertion as
though it should bind only in a special or particular meeting; and it had
been against the text, Act. 15.23. and 16.4. where it is noted that the
Synodicall Epistle was sent unto the Churches of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria
and Cilicia, that they might observe the decrees thereof. As for that Ibid. p.
67.
other place out of D. Whit. it is misalledged, there being no such matter at
all there mentioned. Instead of that mistaken place, let him consider what Mr
Cartwright says hereof, Confut. of Rhem. Annot. on Act. 15.6.
We will not strive whether the Council were General or Provincial: but it
may be counted a General Council in respect of the presence of the Apostles,
which were Governors of all the Churches of the world.

I. CAN. II. As Mr Cartwright says, Refut. of Rhem. on the place.
Paul and Barnabas went not up to Jerusalem, to submit their judgment to the
judgment of the Apostles; for that had diminished the authority of their
doctrine, then which there was no greater in the world: they being both
infallibly directed by the Holy Ghost. Only they went up to confer with
them, and for countenance of the truth, in respect of men, and for the stopping
of the mouths of such deceivers, as pretended they were sent by the Apostles.
verse. 24. In a word that no suspicion might remain in the minds of the people,
as if Paul in doctrine differed from the rest. ANSVV. I. Mr Can corrupts
and falsifyeth the words of Mr Cartwright, by adding unto them this word Only.
Though Paul and Barnabas went up to confer, yet the words of Mr Cartw. are
not, Only they went up to confer, as here they are alleged. Again, those
words that follow, which Mr Can sets down in such a letter as if Mr Cartw.
had spoken word for word in such manner, viz. for countenance of the truth in
respect of men, and for the stopping of the mouths of such deceivers as
pretended they were sent by the Apostles; v. 24. these are the words of Mr
Robinson Iustif. of Sepat. p. 199.
verbatim, and taken out of his writing, and therefore ought rather to have
been alleged in his name, then in Mr Cartwrights. II. Though Paul and Barnabas
went up for such ends as are here propounded, for countenancing of the truth,
etc. yet those ends do not argue that therefore the Synod at Jerusalem did not
exercise Ecclesiastical authority in giving definitive sentence touching the
controversy brought unto them; seeing those ends were more effectually and
fully obtained thereby. for by such judicial sentence the truth was
countenanced before men, and the mouths of deceyvers more effectually stopped,
and suspicion of difference betwixt the Apostles more clearly taken away. III.
Though Paul and Barnabas went not up to submit their judgment to the judgment
of the Apostles; yet this hinders not their going to procure that the judgment
of those deceyvers, which had troubled the Church of Antioch, and likewise that
the judgment of such as had been made to doubt by them might be submitted unto
the judgment of the Apostles, or that those deceyvers might be censured by the
Synod, if after conviction they should persist in their evil. IV. That which
Mr Cartw. speaks of P. and Barn. not submitting their judgment unto the
judgment of the Apostles, as if it would have diminished the authority of
their doctrine, etc. is to be understood (as I conceive) as spoken by way of
opposition to the Rhemists and other Papists against whom he dealt, who say as
well concerning Paul and Barnabas, as concerning the other deceivers, Rhem. on
Act. 15.2
that they did not stand stiffly to their own opinion on either side, but
condescended to refer the whole controversy and the determination thereof to
the Apostles, Priests or Ancients, etc. who hold from Jerome that Rainol. Conf.
with Heart. c. 4. div. 3. p. 133
Paul had not had security of preaching the Gospel, unles it had been approved
by the sentence of Peter, and of the rest that were with him. Such a submission
might have diminished the authority of their doctrine, and therefore is not to
be acknowledged. Otherwise there was even in the Apostles themselves a lawful
submissio^ unto the judgment of the Church. 1. Peter himself (as Iunius well
Animadv. in Bell. de Council. l. 2. c. 16. 5.
observes) judicio Ecclesiae subjicitur, atque ad came remittitur voce Christi
jubentis, Dic Ecclesiae, Mat. 18. and alibi. that is, he was subjected unto the
judgment of the Church and sent unto it by the voice of Christ commanding,
Tell the Church, Mat. 18. and elsewhere. D. Whitaker also Contro. de Council. Qu.
5. c. 3. p. 172.
affirms and confirms the same thing concerning Peter: and why may it not be
said of Paul and Barnabas as well as of him? 2. Seeing Paul and Barnabas were
certain that the Apostles did agree with them in judgment and could not err
in their sentence, they knew that the same should not diminish the authority of
their doctrine, but rather magnify and illustrate the same.

I. CAN. III. If Jerusalem lay northward 200 miles from Antioch, as I read
Itiner. N. Test. fol. 96.
it did: Surely then he has small reason to bring this Scripture, as the
ground and foundation of the Classical Assembly; yea and to tell us Page 88.
that it is a remarkable place of Scripture, to warrant the exercise of that
power which we deny. And a little after, This one allegation is sufficient to
evince the falsehood of their assertion. ANSVV. I. He mistakes and so perverts
the testimony of the Author whom he alleges, directly contrary to his
express words, who Itiner. N.T. p. 66. and 82. edit. 1624. and p. 82. and 101.
edit. 1635.
in diverse places of this book, as is to be seen in the several editions,
says not as it is alleged, that Jerusalem lay Northward from Antioch, but on
the contrary that Antioch lay Northward from Jerusalem. So uncircumspect is he
in his quotations. II. Suppose it had been written in his Author so as he
alleges it, yet then it was a great simplicity and want of judgment in him,
that could not of himself have corrected such a manifest and palpable error.
Had he had a very small measure of knowledge in the Geographicall descriptions
of the holy Land and the countries bordering thereupon, without the knowledge
whereof men cannot well understand the story of the Bible, there being so many
references which the H. Ghost has unto the different situation of several
places, then might he have known that Jerusalem lay Southward and Antioch
Northward from Jerusalem. for 1. The common Geographers, Cl. Ptol. Asiae tab 4.
Atlas Merc. etc.
old and new, of all sorts, do bear witness hereof in their Mappes and
ordinary descriptions of the world and those parts thereof. 2. Had he gone no
further but looked well on this story, Act. 15. where the messengers traveling
from Antioch to Jerusalem, are said in their way to pass through Phaenice and
Samaria, he might have observed that as those countries in the way lay
Northward from Jerusalem, so must Antioch also from whence in the right way
they came to those countries. Let others be admonished hereby, that they rashly
follow not such a guide, that will be a great master and teacher of the
Churches, and yet as the wise man notes, knows not the way to the City.
Eccles. 10.15. III. I do willingly grant that Antioch was 200 miles from
Jerusalem: those 70 Dutch miles which this Author mentions, according to
common account make 280 English miles, 80 more then Mr Can reckons. Now the
further that Antioch was from Jerusalem, the stronger is this our Argument from
Act. 15. The greater pains they took in travel, to come unto another
superior judicatory out of themselves, does argue the greater necessity of
Synods, and shows that the fruit expected thereby was the more precious in
their eyes. The Deputies of the Churches that came to the late Synod at Dort,
from Geneva, Zurich and Berne, traveled further then these Antiochians did.
And of old time they came more then twice so far unto Synods. Had this
combination of Churches and their authority in judging brought the Churches
into Antichristian bondage, as the Brownists call it, See before Page 32.
then might it have been said unto all these travelers, as once unto the
Idolatrous Jews, O ye swift dromedaries, etc. keep your feet from barenes and
your thoat from thirst. Ier. 2.23.25. IV. It is to be observed how he omitteth
the things that were specially intended by me, for the conviction of those I
had to deal with by the testimony and reasoning of one of their own fellows.
Whereas I grounded my reproof of them upon his confession, and the conclusion I
made did arise from the premises of his assertion; this is passed by, so that
the Reader cannot understand the force of my reasoning in that place, and yet
he cries out to me, teaching his client to say, But before you make such hasty
conclusions; have a little patience to hear us, to speak for ourselves. W.B.
should rather have said, to hear what a Brownist can say for us, and how Mr
Can can defend the matter. I desire the Reader to look on my Answ. to W.B. p
87. 88.
first Answer, and then to judge whether that was a hasty conclusion, wherein
the ancientest of themselves went before me. But let us hear how he proceeds.

I. CAN. Churches plea. p. 34.
I pray how can you prove that the Officers of these two Churches, being 200
miles asunder, were combined and met ordinarily together (as the Classes do)
to determine the cases of many Churches? ANSVV. I. Their combination is
manifest in this act of communion and coming together for the judgment and
decision of the controversy raised among them. II. That they met ordinarily
together I never said, neither do I affirm it; this being not a Classical
but a Synodall Assembly, according to the common distinction thereof, and
according to the practice among us. III. That they determined the cases of many
Churches I showed Page 69.
before, from Act. 15.23. and 16.4.

I. CAN. Orhow do you prove that there was any officer at all of Antioch, in
Jerusalem at this time? ANSVV. I prove it, I. Because Paul and Barnabas were
both special Deputies of the Church of Antioch, and likewise had such a
general calling as made them Officers of every Church. II. Because the
Apostles which then remained at Jerusalem, as Peter and James, were as well
Officers of Antioch as of Jerusalem, Apostles being Governors of all Churches.
III. For the other messengers sent from Antioch, seeing Elders are approved by
the Church as sit to manage the affairs thereof, therefore it was
reasonable that at least some of them should be sent about this business, and
thereupon Iunius (as is Page 68.
before noted) takes it for granted, that the Elders of the Church of Antioch
were among those that judged in this Synod.

I. CAN. Briefly, or how do you prove, that the brethren sent from Antioch
exercised authority in the Church at Jerusalem? ANSVV. That the Deputies sent
from Antioch, had authority and power of suffrages in the Synod at Jerusalem,
appears by the general and special commissions given unto them, as is
mentioned in the answer to his former demand. As Paul once answered for himself
and for Barnabas upon another occasion, when he was carped at by some in the
Church of Corinth: Or I only and Barnabas have we not power, etc. 1. Cor. 9.6.
so might he have answered for both in this case for let Mr C. show if he can
what public Ecclesiastical meeting could have been in those times, in any
Church, touching any controversy that concerned any general doctrine of the
Gospel, yea or the censure of manners in any other person, wherein Paul and
Barnabas might not exercise authority with others.

I. CAN. Yet all this you must make good, otherwise you are guilty of abusing
and perverting the Scripture, in affirming that the power which the Classis
exercises, was practiced at Antioch and Jerusalem, and by Apostolical
direction. This you have spoken: but it is untrue. etc. ANSVV. I. Suppose I had
not made good all that he required me to prove; suppose the Church of
Jerusalem alone had judged the controversy, and that no Officer of the Church
of Antioch had been among them, with any authority: yet this example of one
Church judging the controversy risen in another, does show that all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is not limited unto a particular Church within
itself, but that the causes of one Church may be submitted unto the judgment
of another. This is the substance of the Question betwixt us, and this being
granted it follows that Churches have liberty to appoint Classes and Synods
for the mutual judging of their causes, as occasion shall require. II. By
charging me with untrueth in such manner as here he does, he makes himself
guilty of double untrueth: for 1. This affirmation here mentioned was not mine
at that time, but his in whose name I repeated it, and that with condition, if
it were so, If the Churches here do practice, etc. as may be plainly seen in
the forementioned place of my Answer. 2. Though at that time I intended not to
dispute the cause, but first waited for the proofs of such as accused me; yet
had I then used such an affirmation, yet it had been true, as I show throughout
this Chapter, and therefore it was an untrueth in Mr Can to avouch the
contrary. And as for that place Ier. 23.31. which he misapplyeth against me,
the threatening contained therein is to be feared of him who hereafter abuses
and perverteth so many Scriptures for the subverting of Synods.

I. CAN. IIII. It is certain, that at Jerusalem not only the Apostles and
Elders met together; but as Luke expresses it, verse. 12, 22. the Church also;
being interested in the thing: And therefore gave sentence with the rest, to
the decree then made. Observe what D. Whitaker replies unto Bellarmine, denying
the multitude to be called: It was always (says he) De Co^c. Qu. 8. c. 3.
and Qu. 3. c. 3. p. 96. 97.
the practice of the Apostles in common cases, to call the whole Church
together: and no doubt but they did so here. Now there was no need to have it
mentioned, seeing it had been their constant custom formerly so to do. Mr
Parker Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 12. p. 108. 126. 334.
affirms the same: So the Authors of the Cent. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 9. p. 547.
548.
And it seems in Cyprians Lib. 4. Epist. 16.
time, the Church was not deprived of her right herein; howsoever the Papists
Bellarm. de Conc. and Eccl. l. 1. c. 16. p. 39.
in those days teach otherwise, and Mr Paget and others, do otherwise
practice. ANSVV. I. In that not only the Apostles and Elders, but other
brethren also gave sentence with therest to the decree then made; it follows
hence from the consideration of that which is here confessed to be done by each
kind of person here mentioned, that the use of Synods is not only for
counsel or admonition, but also to give sentence and to make decrees, which
are acts of authority and power. The error of Bellarmine and the Papists is De
Con. cil. l. 1. c. 15. and 16.
that only Majores Praelati, the greater sort of Prelates (such as are their
Bishops and Archbishops, and by privilege or custom, Cardinals, Abbots, and
Generals of Orders) have jus suffragii decisivi, that is, authority to give
definitive sentence; that Presbyters, Elders, and other Doctors or learned men
in the Synod have only suffragium consultivum, a voice in consultation,
liberty to give counsel, to deliberate and dispute, but not to give definitive
sentence in the deciding of any matter. Thus they take away the right and power
of judging from one half or more of those persons that are to appear in
Synods. The error of the Brownists and other our Opposites is that all the
persons in the Synod have only suffragium consultivum, only power to
deliberate, to advise and give counsel, that all jurisdiction is limited unto
a particular Church: and so they destroy wholly the authority of Synods, which
the Papists do in part. The Papists deprive one half of the persons of their
power, and these deprive all the persons of their power. But now in this case
Mr Can by his confession refutes both these errors, granting jurisdiction, a
power of giving sentence and making decrees unto the people as well as others.
Thus is he condemned out of his own mouth. Thus is he condemned by those whom
he alleges: when D. Whitaker says of Act. 15. De Co^c. qu. 3. c. 3. p. 97.
In hoc ergo Concilio quivis laicus and Presbyter definitivum suffragium
habuit, non minus quam Petrus; that is, In this Synod every layman and Elder
had a definitive voice, as well as Peter. Thence it follows that there was an
authority and jurisdiction in the Synod: it was not only for advise and
counsel. He says again, Ibid. c. 2. p. 85.
The end of Synods is to decide controversies, to prescribe Canons, to correct
abuses, to set Churches in order, etc. What plainer evidence of their power can
we seek for? This same authority of Synods is in like manner proved by that
which Pol. Eccl. lib. 3. p. 108 126. 334.
Mr Parker to like purpose witnesses together with D. Whitak. and others. II.
Mr Can here does yet blame our practice in depriving the Church of her right,
and the people of their interest, and is so eager in seeking to blame the
manner of our keeping Synods, that unawares he has yielded us the matter
itself about which we dispute, viz. an authority of giving sentence, and not
only a giving of counsel by Synods. His reprehension is that Mr Paget and
others do otherwise practice. But who be those others beside me? Why did he
not name them as well as me? Are they any other then all the known Reformed
and Orthodox Churches in Europe? He might well think that if he had mentioned
these, the very naming of them and my following of their practice, would have
been not so great a blame unto me, as an occasion of making himself suspected
and condemned for his unjust opposing of them. That it may the better appear
how unjustly he blames our practice, let us examine more particularly what he
has said, and withal set down some observations, whereby the peoples right
in Synods may the better be discerned.

I. To show the peoples interest, he alleges Act. 15.12, 22. where there is
mention made of the multitude that was present, and of the whole Church sending
messengers, etc. But by the multitude we may understand not the whole number of
the Church at Jerusalem, which consisted of many thousands, but rather the
multitude of such special persons as were met in the Synod. So Beza
interprets it, Annot. maj. in N.T. in Act. 15.12.
Multitudinis autem nomine intellige non totam Ecclesiam, etc. By the name of
the multitude understand not the whole Church, which was not yet wholly
adjoined, but the whole company of the Apostles and Elders, as appears before
from the 6 verse, etc. Piscator likewise Schol. in Act. 15.12.
approves this interpretation, and adds some further light unto it, from the
reference of the Greek article, though he also give liberty for another
interpretation. So for that phrase, the whole Church, mentioned verse. 22.
Iunius Animad. in Contr. 4. de Conc. l. 1. c. 15. n. 19. etc. 16. n. 1.
expounds the same of the Elders and Deacons, or the whole Clerus or Clergy
serving that Church: these says he are designed by the common name of the
Church. Calvine also Common. in Act. 15.6.
writes to the same purpose, Luke says not that the whole Church was gathered
together, but those that were men of learning and judgment, and which by
virtue of their office were lawful judges of this cause. It may be indeed that
the disputation was before the people, but lest any man should think that the
common people were promiscuously admitted to handle the cause. Luke expressly
names the Apostles and Elders, as more sit to take cognition thereof.

II. We grant that besides Ministers and Elders, other members of the Church
may have suffrages or voices, and give sentence in Synods as well as those that
are Officers; always provided, that they be lawfully deputed and sent
thereunto. Thus D. Whitaker explaines himself touching his allowance of laymen
to have voices in Synods, and says, De Conc. qu. 3. c. 2. p. 92.
Every man ought not to be admitted into the Synod nor to speak therein, but he
that shall be chosen of the Church and designed thereunto. Again he says,
Ibid. c. 3. p. 103.
Not only Bishops are to be chosen of the Church to be sent unto Synods, but
other godly, prudent, and learned men, which happily can dispute more
skilfully, and inquire into controversies better then the Bishops. Whosoever is
sent of the Church he represents the Church. And so p. 97. 98. 104.
often in other places. Iunius in like manner Animadv. de Co^c. l. 1. c. 15. n.
4. etc. 16. n 1. and n. 10.
requires of such as have voice in Synods that they be furnished with gifts and
calling, whether Officers or any others. And this also is the practice of the
Reformed Churches in these parts, where upon occasion diverse times some such
are deputed and sent unto Synods, which have no Ecclesiastical office: and
even in the National Synod at Dort diverse other members of the Church, which
were neither Ministers nor Elders, were sent thither and allowed to be
Delegates, and were to have not only deliberative but also definitive voices,
as well as any other; as appears Act. Synod. Not. Dordr. Sess. 4. Art. 3.
in the laws and orders prescribed by the Illustrious LL. the States General,
etc.

III. Even of those which by a lawful election and deputation are sent unto
Synods, whether they be Ministers and Elders, or other members of the Church,
there ought to be a limited and certain number: for if every Church in a whole
nation might send as many as they would or could; there might be thousands and
ten thousands gathered together into some Synods, whereby great confusion and
disorder in the discussing and judging of many causes would apparently follow.
D. Whitaker says, De Co^c. q. 3. p. 81.
Certainly confusion cannot be avoided, when too many meet together: And as for
that Synod at Jerusalem, he says, Ibid. q. 1. c. 6.
That assembly could not be great, because they were compassed about with the
Priests and Pharisees. And therefore also in the practice of these Churches
there is a certain number determined, of such as are to be sent unto Synods,
as appears likewise in Act. Synod. Not. Dordr. Sess. 4. Art. 3.
those laws before mentioned. If Mr Can will allow any limitation of number,
and can therein satisfy himself, that he does not deprive the people and
Churches of their right, he may thereby also satisfy himself for any thing that
he objecteth unto us in this behalf.

IV. We do further grant this liberty, even unto such as are no Delegates or
Deputies of the Church, that though they be not allowed for judges, yet many of
them Inn. Animadv. in Bell. de Council. l. 1. c. 15. n. 2.3. and 9.
as hearers may for their edification be present at the communication and
conference in the Synod, that they may profit in godliness. This also is the
practice of these Churches, both in Provincial and National Synods, so far
as the place will conveniently receive a competent number: and so also it was
observed in the National Synod at Dort.

V. This liberty of hearing in Synods is so moderated and restrained, that
though they which have no calling unto the Synod, may hear questions touching
doctrine and religion discussed, yet such are not allowed to be present and to
hear when personal matters of scandal and offense come to be examined,
because as Iunius says, Ibid. c. 15. n. 9.
contra charitatem fuisset. Nam veritatis cognitio ad omnes pertinet,
infirmitatum minime. that is, It had been against charity. for the knowledge of
the truth belongs unto all: the knowledge of infirmities not so.

VI. Touching the right and liberty of Synods there are many other things to be
further observed. When Mr Cartwright had spoken very much for the liberty of
the people in Synods, yet for prevention of mistaking, and by way of correcting
himself after a sort he says, Confut. of the Rhemists Ann. on Act. 15. V. 6.
n. 5.
Yet write we not this, as though the peoples presence, either in all Councels
where the doctrine is not in controversy, were The negative particle added
there. seems to be the Printers fault. being concrary to that which went
before and follows after, making no good sense in his words, and is therefore
to be omitted.
needful: or that in those Councels where they were present, they have like
right with those Bishops and Elders. For they (we mean Bishops and Elders) may
first by a several and foreset deliberation, take counsel whether it be
expedient to propound any such matter, as is in controversy in that Council
where the people shall be present. Whereby if they perceive any general and
obstinate opposition of them against the truth, they may hold that point of
doctrine back. This we see to have been done by Josias, who or ever he
assembled the people, first of all assembled the Elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
2. King. 23.1. Also by James, who at Paul's arrival to Jerusalem, first
assembled the Elders to debate of the matter, or ever he was presented before
the Church. Act. 21.18, 19. Secondly, if the people should bewray a wilful
stubbornness against the truth, not suspected by them: yet the Governors being
sound (without whom there can nothing be concluded) there should not follow any
prejudice of the Councels authority against the truth: albeit the number of
the people assembled were greater then of those Bishops and Elders. Hereupon it
comes that the Decrees of the Council are after called the Decrees of the
Apostles and Elders: leaving out the brethren, which Luke had first set down.
And upon the same ground in the decision of doubtful matters, Moses, Deuteronomy. 17.
commands that they should have recourse unto the Priests of the Leviticall
stock, for that they bare the principal sway in those deliberations. Lastly,
the case of Councels being as it has been declared, it is no marvel although
Augustine call a General Council in some respect, the consent of the whole
Church, considering that not only those Bishops and Elders, but some of the
people were (in all likelihood) there assembled.

That which Mr Cartw. says of the several and foreset deliberation, agrees
with that which Beza Ann. in Act. 15.12.
writes of a (...), or foregoing consultation. The same is acknowledged by S.
Theo. l. 7. p. 277.
Mr Fenner also. And hereunto accords that which Gersom Bucerus fitly notes
concerning the meaning of Cyprian, who writing unto the Elders and Deacons that
he had determined from the beginning of his government to do nothing by his
own judgment privately, Cyprian. l. 3. ep. 10.
without their counsel, and without consent of the people; Bucerus explaineth
his speech distinctly, on this manner Dissent. de Gub. Eccles. p. 145.
Behold, first he mentions the counsel which was to be borrowed from the
Presbytery: and then* the consent, whereby the judgment of the Presbytery was
publicly approved of the people. And this he applies also to the order of that
judgment described, 1. Cor. 5. But concerning the judgment of Cyprian we have
occasion to speak more hereafter.

I. CAN. V. Howsoever the Church at Antioch, sent some Brethren, with Paul and
Barnabas, unto the Church at Jerusalem: notwithstanding (and let it be well
observed) they did not this as being a dependent body, and standing under
another Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. For as Mr Parker Poli.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 20. p. 301. and 314.
excellently proves it, the Church at Antioch at this time, had absolute power
in, and for her self, to have ended the controversy; and might have done it: I
say, in respect of authority, without acquainting therewith any other
Congregation at all. To the same purpose another says, D. Whit. Conc. qu. 1.
c. 1.
The Church of Antioch sent not to Jerusalem, as being bound in duty thereto:
But in regard it was the chief place of Religion, therefore they made choice
freely of that Congregation, as knowing them to be best able to resolve the
controversy. True it is, the Hierarchy D. Whit. g. T. C. 3.
deny this: of whose opinion Mr Paget must either be; or else the Classes, (as
they now rule) must fall to the ground; for any relief that this Scripture,
Act. 15. will yield unto them. ANSVV. 1. Had Mr Can well understood the state
of the question, or what he says and whereof he affirms, he might easily have
known that we are of the same mind with Mr Parker, in this, that as Antioch
so every other particular Church has like authority to end their own
controversies, if they find themselves able. This condition, concealed by Mr
Can, is four or five times repeated by Mr Parker in the Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c.
20. p. 301, 302.
place alleged, speaking of Antioch and other particular Churches with these
express words, si modo possit, si modo vires suppetivissent, etc. if they
could; if they had ability; if they found not themselves too weak; in case of
impotency, etc. Mr Can hiding these conditions from the eyes of his Readers,
does hereby hood-wink them and keeps them in darkness from seeing the right
meaning of Mr Parker. 11. Besides the case of impotency alleged by Mr Parker,
there was another reason why this controversy at Antioch was to be brought unto
a Synod, viz. because it was causa communis, a common cause, that concerned
both many other Churches in regard of the matter, and in special the Church of
Jerusalem, because the authors of this controversy were not members of the
Church of Antioch, but came from Iudaea and from them of Jerusalem, Act. 15.1,
24. and therefore that Church of Jerusalem had more right and authority to
judge of them, then they of Antioch had. 111. Whereas he would have it to be
well observed, that the Church of Antioch sent to them of Jerusalem, not as
being a dependent body, standing under another Ecclesiastical authority out of
themselves: the right and well observing hereof stands in this, that we
acknowledge particular Churches to be dependent bodies, not by way of
subjection unto any one supposed to have more authority then the rest, but so
dependent that every one is equally and mutually subject to one another, as
occasion requires. The Churches of Jerusalem, of Antioch, of Samaria, and
others, were all of equal authority, and yet each standing under the authority
of a Synod compounded of them all: and this appears by the instance of this
controversy, referred here to the decision of the Synod at Jerusalem. IV. For
the testimony of D. Whitaker, Conc. qu. 1. c. 1.
that the Church of Antioch sent not to Jerusalem as being bound in duty
thereto: 1. It is misalledged by him, for in the Chapter mentioned by him there
are no such words to be found: the words are indeed Mr Parkers, and not of
another as he says, poynting at D. Whit. in his margin. He jumbles
testimonies together; that which one says, he sets down in another name, and
follows the mistake that is in Mr Parkers Pa. 314.
book through the Printers or Writers fault. And though in the De Co^c. Qu. 1.
c. 2. p. 6.
Chapter following D. Whit. says of Jerusalem, that there was as it were a
certain castle of Religion and the head of the Church; yet the other words are
none of his. So licentious and negligent is Mr C. in his quotations. 2. For the
thing it self, though in the combination of Churches into Synods, they are not
limited and simply bound in duty ( ex obligato, as Mr Parker says) to any one
Church more then another, yet this freeth them not from their duty of uniting
themselves to some Classes or Synods: even as particular persons though they be
not simply bound to one Congregation more then another, but may use a Christian
liberty therein; yet are they bound in duty to join themselves as members to
some Chuch: and further where no absolute necessity is imposed, yet godly
wisdom teaches men a duty in respect of circumstances and accidental
occasions, to make choice of one Church rather then another. V. He alleges D.
Whitg. so defectively that no man by his quotation can tell how to find his
words. But whereas he says of the Hierarchy, that I must either be of their
opinion; or else the Classes (as they now rule) must fall to the ground; for any
relief, etc. this consequence remains to be declared and proved by him.

I. CAN. VI. When the Hierarchy allege Act. 15. to prove their Diocesan and
Provincial Synods lawful, mark how they are answered by the Reformists,
Park. Polit. Ecc. l. 3. c. 20. p. 315, 316.
The particular acts of the Apostles, in cases alike, must alike be observed.
If this reason be effectual (as indeed it is) against them; then it is no
less effectual against the Classes: Now I have in part already showed, how
quite contrary their doings are unto the Example in Act. 15. unto which this
further may be added: that the matter carried from Antioch to Jerusalem, was
agreed upon by the whole Church; Page 338.
and sent thither by their mutual desire and consent; And hence our Divines
teach, that the power of bringing things from one Congregation to another,
belongs not to any one Officer, but to the whole Church. If this be true, by
what word of God then does Mr Paget, by his Thus he is accused by our Elders,
in the records of our Church, Oct. 6. 1631.
own authority, and without the consent of the Consistory, or any one of
them, carry matters to the Classis, and there he and they together, undo all
that, which the Elders, with the Churches consent, had before jointly
concluded. ANSVV. 1. That the particular acts of the Apostles, in cases alike,
must alike be observed, I do willingly grant, and thereupon ground our
Argument for the authority of Synods. To this end it is alleged of Mr Parker
in this very place which Mr C. does cite, viz. to show how controversies are to
be brought from particular Churches, not to one person, to a Bishop or
Archbishop, as the Hierachy would have it, but unto a Synod according to the
example in Act. 15. How Mr Can does imagine that this should be effectual
against Classes, he neither declares, neither can I conjecture. II. Whereas he
adds, that the matter carried from Antioch to Jerusalem was agreed upon by
the whole Church, etc. I argue thence; if a whole Church sometime be so
offended and troubled by false teachers, that they hold it needful to seek
help of a Synod; it is less marvel that sometimes one or two should be driven
to seek such help. Had there been but one person in Antioch troubled and
unsatisfyed in conscience about that point of justification and salvation by
the works of the Law, who could have forbidden him to seek help of the Synod,
either by way of counsel or judgment, when he could not find it at home? And
in matters of judgment, seeing justice is to be done to one person as well as
to a multitude; Ier. 21.12. and 22.3. Esa. 58.6. Amos, 5.12.24. therefore if
one person think himself oppressed by a particular Church, the liberty of
appeal is not to be denied him. III. Whereas they say, Hence our Divines
teach, etc. whom do they mean by this phrase, our Divines? Does W. B. mean the
Arminian Divines, unto whom he has declined, and is become one of their
disciples? Does Mr C. mean the Divines of the Separation? The communion of
other Divines is renounced by them. And these also are such, that if a whole
Church together should agree to refer their controversies unto the judgment
of a Synod, they hold it to be an Antichristian bondage. Do they mean Mr
Parker whom they alleged immediately before, and unto whom they seem to have
reference by that ambiguous quotation, so set down in the margin as if it
belonged unto that which went before? Yet he is but one, and none of theirs. Mr
Parker says indeed Pol. Eccl. p. 338.
there, that this delegation and power of delegating is not in one Bishop, but
in the Churches themselves. He speaks of that communication of Churches, when
some deal with others concerning any Ecclesiastical business, by sending their
delegates or messengers unto them, which power of sending delegates in
Ecclesiastical affairs, he proves to be in the Church it self, and not in any
one Bishop, in opposition unto the Hierarchy, who will have such businesses to
be done by themselves and in their own name. That which Mr Parker says is no
way contrary unto the practice of the Classes and Synods, where the Deputies
and Delegates of the Churches appear in the name of those several Churches
from which they are sent, acknowledging the power of their delegation to be
derived unto them from the same. Mr C. and W. B. confound these two things
which are to be distinguished, viz. the dealing in Church affairs in the name
of the Church, which they only are allowed to do who are chosen of the Church
and designed thereunto, and the propounding of personal grievances in case of
appeal or complaint touching any thing that is amiss, which, as we said
before, is free unto every Officer and member of the Church when he cannot
otherwise be satisfied, he doing it still in his own name. Now both these may
be understood by that their phrase of bringing things from one Congregation to
another: whereas Mr Parker meant only the former, as is plain by his whole
discourse in the place mentioned; though Mr C. and W. B. would feign apply it
unto the latter, as appears by the inference which thence they make against
me. But for this their opinion they cannot show any one word of God, nor any
one Divine, whereas I have the Page 37.41.
witness of both. IV. Touching the accusation of me in particular, that I have
brought matters to the Classis, without consent of the Consistory, or any one
of them, etc. how earnest soever they be both in the line and in the margin to
load me with double rebuke; yet their own words fall upon them, and while they
seek to accuse, they excuse me rather. for if it be as they say, then it
appears that the matter I took in hand was such as might stand firm upon
trial and examination by the Deputies, Ministers and Elders of many Churches,
when as the contrary proceedings were all undone and came to nothing. And yet
it is also false which they say of the Churches consent: the matter being never
propounded unto the Church, nor their consent required or asked,
notwithstanding all that was done by some particular persons. The complaints
and reproaches with which they make up their 6 Exception are not worth the
answering. The testimony of the English Church at Franekford is afterward to be
considered.

I. CAN. VII. The thing then and there concluded, was divine Scripture, imposed
upon all other Churches of the Gentiles, although they had no delegates there,
v. 22, 28. chapter 16.4. ANSVV. I. The Argument is not taken from the infallibility
of truth that was in the decrees of this Synod, but from the order according
to which they were made, and the persons determining the things that were then
and there concluded, being such as did not all belong unto that particular
Congregation, where the controversy was raised. II. Though the decrees in that
Synod were grounded upon the Scriptures, as I granted Page 66.
before; yet they could not be said to be divine Scripture, until they were by
Luke recorded among the Acts of the Apostles: neither was it manifest unto all
that they were according to the Scriptures, until it was concluded in the
Synod; for else it had been in vain to have repaired thither for this
resolution. III. He that would seem to say Page 69.
before out of D. Whit. that this assembly did bind only but in a special or
particular meeting, does now acknowledge that the thing then and there
concluded did bind all other Churches of the Gentiles, being imposed upon them
all, to be observed by them. It is true indeed that the decrees of this Synod
were directed and delivered unto several Churches of the Gentiles, where the
observation of them was judged to be necessary, not only because they were by
infallible direction from the holy Ghost, which reason is employed by Mr
Robinson (from whence this and the substance of most of the former exceptions
is borrowed) when he adds, Iustif. of Sep. p. 199.
and so imposed upon all other Churches, etc. but besides, because the Apostles
were chief judges in this Synod, who as I have showed often Page 62, 72.
before, were as Delegates from all the Churches; in which respect, as was also
noted Page 69.
out of Mr Cartwright, this Synod may be accounted a General Council.

I. CAN. VIII. It is observable, how Mr Paget stumbleth at the same stone, and
misapplyeth the very same place of Scripture, as the Papists Rhem. on the
place. etc.
have done before: For thus they write; Paul and Barnabas condescended to
refer the whole controversy, and the determination thereof, to the Apostles
and Ancients at Jerusalem, that is to say, to commit the matter to be tried by
the Heads and Bishops, and their determination in Council. And indeed such
application of it, better serves the turn of Jesuits and Priests, that seek to
set up the Popes Supremacy, and a Tyrannical Hierarchy, then those that
desire to stand for the Rights and Privileges, which Christ has given unto
his Church. ANSVV. There is nothing said here, but either it is refuted by that
which I have said already; or else it is a mere begging of the question, by
avouching that which remains by him to be prooved, and which I am to disprove
when I come to the examination of his Arguments. Though the Papists abuse and
pervert this place, yet that is no prejudice to our and others right use of it,
as I showed before Page 35.36.
touching the like exception about Deuteronomy. 17. How can I be said to misapply this
place as the Papists have done, seeing I do not apply it in such sort as they
have done, either to derogate from the certainty of the doctrine preached by
Paul and Barnabas, which their opinion noted in those very words of the
Rhemists which he cites, I have Page 70*
before rejected; or to prove that Councels have absolute authority, and that
their decrees are infallible, which error of theirs I have in like manner
disclaimed, both in my Ans. to W. B. p. 89.
former writing, and at the very Page 29. and p. 6, 67. See before. p. 63, 64,
65.
first entrance into this Dispute? In a word, seeing I have applied this place
no otherwise, then other Orthodox Divines have done before me, it is needles to
insist further upon this matter.

CHAP. V.
An Answer to the Allegations of Mr Davenport, touching the Authority of Synods.
HAving searched through Mr Day. his book for some special Arguments from the
Scripture, to show the undue power of Classes and Synods, whereof he with
others does accuse them, I do therein find my self deceived and frustrate of
my expectation. He speaks often of the warrant of the word, but he brings it not
where and when it most concerned him. I find only in one piece of a leaf
Apol. reply* p. 236.
a few testimonies of Scripture, but so loosely and ambiguously noted, without
framing any Argument from them or without applying them directly to the
Question, that men hardly can guess at his meaning. I find also the most of
the very same testimonies first alleged by Mr Can before Mr D. his book came
forth, and by him framed into Arguments; and therefore in answer to Mr Can. I
shall speak something of them in the next Chapter. That which he does most
largely insist upon, is the writing and testimonies of men: and of these he
says, Ibid. p. 238.
I will not stand to give a Catalogue of their names, though I might be
plentiful therein, but will content my self with the three Writers of this
kind, whom the Answerer pretended, in conference with me, to make for him. and
I shall show them to be strongly against him, Mr Cartwright, and Mr Fenner, and
Mr Parker, men of our own nation.

SECT. I.
His Allegation of Mr Cartwright answered.
FOr Mr Cartwright; His own words undivided are these: T. C. ^ Reply, p. 49 2
edit.
And if it should happen (which may come to pass) that any Church should
desire or choose, or consent upon by the most part, some that is unmeet, either
for doctrine or manners, then the Ministers and Elders of the other Churches
round about, should advertise first, and afterward as occasion should serve,
sharply and severely charge, that they forbear such election, or if it be
made, that they confirm it not, by suffering him to exercise any ministry.
And if either the Churches round about do fail of this duty, or the Church
which is admonished, rest not in their Admonition, then to bring it to the next
Synod, and if it rest not therein, then the Prince or Magistrate, which must
see that nothing in the Churches be disorderly and wickedly done, ought to
drive that Church from that election to another which is convenient. Now upon
these words Mr Dav. without any just explication or further declaration
thereof, makes this bold and unreasonable conclusion. Apol. reply, p. 47.
Thus Mr Cartwright. So that in his judgment, other Churches have no power of
hindering a faulty election, but by admonition, which power every Christian has
in another, for his good. But that Mr Cartw. gives more power unto the
Churches and Synod, then that which every Christian has, and more then the
power of admonition only, it appears thus:

I. He does in this place manifestly distinguish betwixt admonition, and a
charge or commandment, which implies a greater power and authority; when as he
says of the Classis, or of the Ministers and Elders of the Churches round
about, that they should advertise first, which notes their admonition, and
afterward sharply and severely charge, which implies a commandment and
authority therein. Therefore in Scripture one and the same (...).
word is usually and indifferently translated either to charge or command,
Matt. 10.5. Luke 8.29. Act. 1.4. and 4.18. and 5.28. 1. Tim. 4.11. with Luke
5.14. and 8.56. 1. Tim. 1.18. and 5.7. and 6.13, 17. thereby to express a
special authority of such as use the same. And the propriety of this word is
thus declared by Mr Cartwr. himself, when expounding those words of Paul, 1.
Tim. 6.13. he says, T. C. 1 Rep. p. 177.
It is to be noted that he says [I denounce or I charge] he does not say [I
exhort or give counsell] leaving it to the liberty of Timothy, And thus here
we are in like manner to understand him, when he tells how a Classis of
Ministers and Elders were sharply and severely to charge a Church, that they
used an authority more then of exhorting or admonishing and counselling, so
that the matter was not left in the liberty of them that were so charged.

II. He proceeds further, and after both admonition and a severe charge or
prohibition, he shows that the Classis has yet more to do in this business,
if their charge be not regarded, in respect of the unlawful election, viz.
that they confirm it not by suffering him to exercise any ministry. Whereas
ordinarily Ministers newly elected are confirmed and ordained by imposition of
hands by some Ministers of the Churches near unto them; this Mr Cartwr. would
have to be denied unto him. And this denial of his ordination after his
election, is to be esteemed a kind of censure, in some sort proportionable to
the deposition of a Minister already confirmed; seeing keeping out or casting
out from the Ministry, are actions of like nature. And this is that which Mr
Fenner, who was well acquainted with the meaning of Mr Cartwr. in these things,
poynteth at, when speaking of a controversy rising in a Church about the
calling of a Minister, he says; S. Theol. l. 7. c. 2. p. 244.
that the cause is to be referred unto the judges whom it concerns, (and who
are after mentioned) that they may either ratify the election or make it
frustrate. Now in the Ecclesiastical polity these judges are no other then
Classes or Synods, whereof he afterward speaks; and this their abrogating and
making void an unlawful election, is a power more then simple admonition.

III. Whereas Mr Cartwr. here says, that if either the Churches round about
do fail of this duty, or the Church which is admonished, rest not therein,
then to bring it to the next Synod, etc. hereupon Def. of Answ. to Admon. p.
173.
D. Whitgift calls for proof of Scripture, commandment or example to justify
this order. Mr Cartw. in his second Reply having first showed other warrant for
admonition by Churches, proceeds further and says, T.C. 2 Reply. p. 231, 232.
That from the admonition of the Churches, it is meet to come to Synods, if the
judgment of the Churches be contemned; may be showed by proportion from the
place of our Savior Christ in S. Matthew, chapter 18. for as when one brother is
not moved with the admonition of two or three, the matter must be referred
unto the Church, to see whether the majesty of it will moove him, whom the
authority of two or three would not: even so it is meet that the Church, that
makes light of the judgment of two or three Churches, should be pressed with
the judgments of the Diocese or Province, as shall be in that behalf advised.
From this proportion, seeing the rule, Matt. 18. was not only a rule of
admonition, but also a rule for the exercise of authority in censuring, it
follows hence in like manner, that many Churches combined in a Synod, have
power to censure as well as to admonish.

IV. Mr Cartwr. does further declare his meaning in the same place, when he
alleges the example of the Reformed Churches in this matter: If I were in
this point (says Ibid. p. 232.
he) destitute of the word of God: yet the naked examples of the Reformed
Churches ought to weigh down a Popish custom. Now it is undeniable, that the
Reformed Churches do allow the use of Classes and Synods, not only for
counsel or admonition, but also for the exercise of Ecclesiastical authority
and jurisdiction in judging of causes and censuring of offenders.

V. Mr Cartwr. speaking of the utmost that can be done by a Classis, or by
Ministers and Elders of neighbor Churches in time of persecution, wanting a
Christian Magistrate, against an obstinate Church that refuses to be
admonished, says, T.C. 1 Repl. p. 52.
If they excommunicate the whole Church, it is a hard matter, and yet if they
may do that; there is all they can do. To excommunicate a whole Church
together, is indeed a hard thing, and such a thing as I never heard of in the
practice of the Reformed Churches: yet this intimates that he thought they had
a power of excommunicating at least some, if not all, upon a just occasion. And
when D. Whitg. Def. of Answ. to Adm. p. 675
answering to a testimony of Cyprian alleged by Mr Cartwr. says, Who ever
denied but that the Synods might excommunicate? Mr C. Rest of 2 Rep. p. 89
replying again unto him, yet shows no dislike at all or difference from his
Opposite herein, which yet he ought to have done, if he had thought it an undue
power, and to have reproved him for giving this power of the greatest censure,
even of excommunication unto Synods. Hence it appears that he was far from
limiting all jurisdictio^ unto a particular Church; that he allowed Synods more
power then of counselling or admonishing.

VI. Mr Parker speaking of this very place in Mr Cartw. and vindicating it from
the opposition of D. Whitg. shows that he agrees with me in the interpretation
thereof, and not with Mr Dav. He says, Pol. Ecc. lib. 3. c. 24. p. 353.
Cum pressisset Thomas Cartwrightus Ecclesiarum Reformatarum morem, etc. When
T. C. had urged the manner of the Reformed Churches in correcting the faulty
election of Ministers, first by a Classis; if that prevayled not by a Synod; if
that failed also, by the Magistrate, etc. For if the example, custom and
practice of the Reformed Churches be urged herein, then does he not speak of
hindering an unlawful election by admonition or counsel only; then does he
acknowledge a further authority of judgment and censure in the Classes.

VII. The judgment of Mr Cartwr. touching the authority of Synods is manifest
by that right which he asscribeth unto them for the decision of causes, and not
for counsel only, as was showed Page 47. 48.
before: and this may further be seen by that blame which is imputed unto him
for Scottizing and Genevating, declared Chap. 7. sect. 5.
hereafter. Had he been of this new opinion, he could not have defended the
cause of Reformation so as he did, but should have opened the mouth of his
adversaries against him otherwise then he has done.

SECT. II.
His Allegation of Mr Fenner examined.
FOr Mr Fenner, in the allegation of his Testimony Mr Dav. has made himself
guilty of a threefold unfaithfulnes; 1. in the omission of such things as snew
his mind fully touching Synods: 2. in the mistranslation of his words: 3. in
the misinterpretation and false collections that he makes from them.

I. For his omissions: I. He omitteth that definition of Ecclesiastical
polity, set down in the S. Theol. l. 7. c. 1. p. 241.
beginning of that tractate, viz. that it is a divine polity, so far as it
is instituted of Christ, for the government of particular Churches, jointly and
severally. This definition being admitted, overthrowes that single uncompounded
policy, maintained by Mr Jacob; as also the assertion of Mr Dav. for
jurisdiction limited to particular Churches: because herein he allows a
compounded policy, not only for counsel, but for the government of Churches,
as well jointly as severally. Herein Ecclesiastical policy and jurisdiction
is extended further then the limits of one particular Church, even unto a Synod
or Classis; because there is no joint government of Churches perfectly found
but in such assemblies. The Scriptures also which Mr Fenner alleges for
confirmation of this definition, being many of them taken from the old
Testament, do undenyably lead us unto such a joint and compound government of
the Church. II. He omitteth the definition of a Ibide^.
particular Church, which Mr Fen. applies as well to the Churches and
Synagogues under the old Testament, as unto any since. This appears in diverse
of the Scriptures and instances which he brings to confirm his definition,
as namely, 1. Sam. 10.5. Psa. 107.32. and 111.1. Luke 5.17. Mat. 4.23. Hereby
it may appear how far different and contrary he is to Mr Jacob and those of
his opinion, Divine beg. and instit. of Chr. vis. Church. A 1. A 2. A 4. C 8.
etc.
teaching that the Churches of the old and new Testament and their government,
do differ one from the other in the very kind, nature and form; by a
specificall and essential difference, etc. Then could not both have had one
and the same definition, in such sort as Mr F. gives it unto them,
comprehending also under it such assemblies as stood under a compound policy,
and were subject to an Ecclesiastical judicatorie out of themselves. III. He
omitteth that which Mr Fenner writes touching the election of a Minister, where
the controversy of the Church, upon the peoples objecting against the same, is
to be referred unto such judges, who (as is before noted) may either S. Theol.
l. 7. p. 243, 244.
confirm or make void the Election: A plain acknowledgme^t of a lawful power
out of a particular Church to judge the cause thereof. IV. He omitteth that
which Mr F. writes in the description Ibid. p. 245, 246.
both of the Elders office in general, and of the Ruling Elders in particular,
where the warrant and authority of their office is derived from the Elders in
Israel, and from the government of the Jewish Church, as appears in those
testimonies of Scripture which he alleges for proof thereof, as namely these,
beside other, Lev. 4.13, 14, 15.2. Kin. 6.32. Ier. 19.1. Ezekiel. 8.1. Neh.
8.5.8.10. Act. 4.5. and 6.12. and 5.21. Now seeing he derives their offices
from that form of government, which is confessed not to have been a single,
uncompounded policy; this is an evidence, that he also did not hold
jurisdiction to be limited unto a particular Church. V. He omitteth that which
Mr F. writes in distinguishing the Presbytery or Eldership of many Churches
Ibid. p. 281.
into a Synod or a General Council. And not to speak of other things, he
omitteth that description of a General or Universal Council, viz. that it is
a Presbytery consisting of the deputies of many Synods, to determine and
compound those things that may be profitable for the whole Church or for the
greatest part thereof. The word which he uses to express the authority
exercised therein, when he says, ad ea statuenda, t.i. to determine, to make a
statute or decree, imports more then a bare admonition, or counsel: and
therefore it is manifest from hence that Mr F. did not allow of this new
Discipline, which denies the authority of Synods.

II. His unfaithful translation of Mr Fenner is also to be observed in diverse
points. I. When speaking of the Eldership of one particular Church, Apol.
reply, p. 238.
he tells how Mr F. says, it is properly called (...). The words of Mr F. are,
that it is S. Theol. l. 7. p. 279.
proprio nomine sie dictum, so called with the proper name: His meaning is,
that in common use of speech it had the proper name given unto it; even as it
comes to pass often times that a part is called by the proper name of the whole,
and one species or one sort receives the proper name of the whole kind, as
when in speaking commonly of the Ministers and Elders of a Church, the ruling
Elders are so called with a proper name that belongs to the whole kind, seeing
Ministers of the word are Elders as well as they: 1. Tim. 5.17. so when the
ruling Elders are called with the proper name of Governors, 1. Cor. 12.28.
though Ministers of the word are governors also as well as they. And unless
we thus understand Mr Fen. there should be no truth in his words; for as he
himself says, Ibid. p. 245.
there is a Synecdoche in the name of Elders when it is given to
Ecclesiastical Governors: and therefore there must be a double improper or
figurative speech, a double Synecdoche, when the assembly of some Officers in a
particular Church is called with the proper name of the Eldership, whereas but
some of them are elderly or aged men, and whereas the assembly of such men in a
Synod is an Eldership as well as the other. II. It is a notable falsification
of Mr Fenners testimony, when as he distinguishing the Ecclesiastical
Eldership into the Eldership of a particular Church and into the Eldership of
many Churches, and giving beforehand in the first place a general definition
of the Eldership, common to both those kinds, Mr Dav. comes and restraines
that general definition to one kind, and brings in Mr F. speaking on this
manner, The Eldership of the first sort, he says, is a compound office wherein
all the Elders do, in the name of the whole Church, administer all the
businesses etc. But this Mr F. has not said: I desire the Reader to look on
the S. Theol. l. 7. p. 276.
place, as also on that which follows in his Page 279.
transition, from the general unto the species and several sorts of the
Eldership, and there to behold how grossly Mr D. corrupts the words of Mr F.
and abuses the reader, and that in a point of maine consequence touching our
question: for while Mr F. gives the same general definition to the Eldership
of many Churches, viz. to Classes and Synods, which he gives unto the Eldership
of a particular Church, thereby the same authority and jurisdiction which he
gives herein unto a particular Church is also given by him unto a Synod, the
Eldership of many Churches: and then are not Synods for counsel only or
admonition, but they are to exercise a jurisdiction and power as well as
particular Churches. III. Another instance of his unfaithful translation, is
to be observed from those words of Mr F. Ibid. p. 278.
postea autem auditis and assentientibus, decernenda and pro decretis Ecclesiis
proponenda sunt; which he translates thus, Apol. reply. p. 239.
and afterward, the opinions and assent of all being declared, matters are to
be concluded. Those last words should have been translated thus; matters are to
be decreed and to be propounded unto the Churches for decrees: and being thus
translated they import an act of authority, and a power of jurisdiction, in
making decrees, which are more then counsel or admonition, especially when
those matters so decreed are propounded unto the Churches for decrees. But the
word of concluding which Mr D. uses is ambiguous, and is applied sometimes to
the reasonings of men, either in private or public, where there is no
authority to give definitive sentence, or to make decrees for the Churches. Mr
Can himself, though he condemn the Classes and Synods of the Reformed
Churches, yet does he allow Ministers and brethren of diverse Churches to come
together, Churches plea, p. 95.
to confer of things, yea and to conclude (if they can) what they judge meet
etc. This use of the word conclude serves to elude and frustrate this pregnant
testimony of their power. IV. Another mistranslation is, when in the same page,
those words of Mr F. leges maximi momenti constituendae, are thus translated by
him, orders also of the greatest moment to be made. This I do therefore note
the rather, because Mr D. keeps so great a quoile about the strict difference
betwixt orders and laws, and says Apol. rep. p. 257. 258.
that orders and laws are ill confounded by me, and is large in declaring his
mind therein. His friend also that made the Alphabeticall Table for him, and
prefixed it before his book, notes this as a remarkable matter therein, Letter
L.
Laws and orders differ. Now if these things be so, then has he done very ill
in confounding laws and orders, by translating the word leges, orders, when he
should have translated it laws, according to the right and proper
signification thereof. If he had disliked Mr F. for using the word leges, or
laws, and would correct it by putting in the word orders; this was more then
an exact and faithful Translatour might do. He should rather have translated
the word truly, according to the right signification, and then have given
warning to the Reader touching the fault of Mr Fenner in the ill confounding of
laws and orders, and putting one for the other. After these unfaithful
omissions and mistranslations, Mr Dav. has not been afraid to say confidently
of himself; Thus have I faithfully translated the words of this eminent light
in his time, Mr Dudley Fenner, who was joined with Mr Cartwright, etc. To his
commendation of him I do willingly assent: he was indeed an eminent light: and
why then has Mr Dav. gone about to obscure his light, by depraving his
testimony, and laboring to put this bright-burning candle under a bushel,
that men should not see his light? Whether he make strongly for him or against
me, let others judge.

III. Moreover after these omissions and mistranslations, come we to consider
his miscollections from him, which without any just deduction or inference,
upon the lame and imperfect recital of his words, he thus propounds: Ibide^.
The Reader may see how he leaves the wholl power of jurisdiction in the
particular Church, etc. How untrue this is it may appear, I. By Mr F. his
alleging those S. Theo. l. 7. p. 276.
Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 17.9. with 2. Chron. 19.8, 11. Matt. 18.18. 1. Tim. 4.14. to
show what authority there is in a Classis or Synod, comprehended by him under
that general definition of a Presbytery, as well as the Eldership of a
particular Church: thereby he confesses, that there is a power of judgment,
censure and jurisdiction in Synods; because those testimonies of Scripture
speak of such jurisdiction and judgment, of binding and loosing of imposition
of hands or ordination, etc. II. Though Mr F. speaking of excommunication and
absolution from it, says that they are to be done in the assembly, by the
authority of the whole Church, which last words Mr D. for special observation
causes to be printed in great capital letters; yet this does not prove that
he left the whole power of jurisdiction in the particular Church: seeing in the
same Pa. 277
place speaking of Ecclesiastical judgments administered by the Synod or
Presbytery in deciding of doubts, he says also, etsi authoritas communis sit,
ministris tamen and sententiam dicendi and eam exponendi maxima facienda
potestas: that is, though the authority be common, yet the greatest power of
giving sentence and declaring it is to be yielded unto the Ministers. Therefore
did he not leave the whole power of jurisdiction in a particular Church. III.
Mr F. a little after again speaking of Ecclesiastical judgments and
censures, and still of administering them by the Ecclesiastical Senate or
Presbytery, which contained the Synod as well as a particular Eldership, he
says of them, Ibide^.
In quibus, per omnes Ecclesias summa Ecclesiastica potestas Presbyterio
demandata est: that is, In which throughout all Churches the highest or
chiefest Ecclesiastical authority is committed to the Presbytery. And hereby
also it appears that he did not leave the whole power of jurisdiction in a
particular Church. But these passages Mr D. omitted, when he translated other
parts of the same periods: He thought it not to be for his advantage to have
his Reader take knowledge of them. IV. Whereas Mr F. requires, that in matters
of greatest moment, after the (...) or fore-consultation of the Presbytery,
comprehending both Classis and particular Eldership, their counsels be told
unto the Church; that thing ordinarily is thus performed in these Reformed
Churches, viz. after that in the Classical assembly of Ministers and Elders it
has been found just and requisite, that any persons should be excommunicated
or any Ministers called, these censures and elections are then first solemnly
propounded unto the particular Church, whom these things specially concern,
and so accomplished with their consent, and not otherwise: if the greater part
of the Church dissent and allow not the excommunication or election; then for
the avoiding of strife, the matter is again referred ad majorem Senatum, unto
a greater Ecclesiastical Senate, Classis or Synod, to judge thereof and to
compose the dissension. V. Mr F. in the same chapter, Page 278 279.
shows from the Scriptures that in these Presbyteriall assemblies there ought
to be a mutual office performed in the same in special manner toward one
another, not only for counsels, but also for the censures of such as are
members of those assemblies. And this is also agreeable to the order prescribed
both in the Kercken-Ordeninge, Art. 43.
National Synod at Dort, and in diverse others; for the censure of such faults
as are committed in those meetings, or by contempt of the admonitions of
inferior assemblies. Hereby also it appears that he allowed an
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in Synods and Classes, and did not limit all
jurisdiction unto a particular Church. VI. After Mr F. had spoken in general
both of the Presbytery of one and of many Churches jointly together, then he
comes to speak of each of them severally: and there again speaking of the
Presbytery of many Churches, that is, of Classes and Synods, he says, S.
Theol. l. 7. p. 280.
Hic autem leges Ecclesiasticae condendae sunt, Here are Ecclesiastical laws
to be made. This was a power of jurisdiction, more then of admonition or
counsel. This Mr D. passes over also; it was no policy for him to draw
collections from such testimonies. VII. That one testimony of Scripture which
Mr F. often Ibid. p. 280, 281.
alleges, 2. Cor. 8.19, 23. (not to speak of others alleged with it) is an
evidence of the authority of Synods. It is there specifyed that the brother who
was chosen to be a messenger of the Churches, was (...)
elected by saffrages: now this election was an act of authority, exercised by
sundry Churches in one business, touching one person; and hence it appears,
that a combination of Churches may exercise jurisdiction together touching such
as are no peculiar members of one particular Church. And if such election may
be made by many Churches, then may censures be decreed by many Churches
together as occasion requires. Lastly, Mr F. having spoken of the first part of
Ecclesiastical polity, touching such as administer the same both by a simple
and compound office in the Presbytery, both of one or more Churches, in Synods
or General Councils, he comes at last to speak of the duty of the Saints,
other members of the Church, which are not promoted unto any Ecclesiastical
office, and Ibid. p. 242 with p. 282.
sets this down for a common law unto them all, that they be subject in all
those things aforesaid, and further the same according to their power, with
their gifts, labor, and whatsoever way they are able. Hebr. 13.17. This
peculiar bond of special obedience and submission unto such Officers, even in
Synods as well as in other ordinances, is an argument, that he thought them to
have special authority, more then of admonition and counsel.

The judgment of Mr Fenner, this worthy Writer being thus cleared and
vindicated from those unfaithful omissions, mistranslations and miscollections
of Mr D. his demand is hereby answered, and hereby he may see why I referred
him to this book. As for those matters of fact which he adds, the untrueth
thereof is elsewhere to be declared. We will now proceed to Mr Dav. his third
allegation.

SECT. III.
His Allegation of Mr Parker examined.
IO. DAV. Apol. reply. p. 240, 241.
For Mr Parker. He largely and strongly proves this position, De Polit. Eccl.
l. 3. c. 1
Potestas Ecclesiastica essentialiter and primario in ipsa Ecclesia, tanquam in
subjecto proprio, residet. The power Ecclesiastical does essentially and
primarily reside in the Church itself, as in its proper subject. The sense
wherein he thus spoke, to prevent all suspicion of his pleading for popular
confusion, he declares out of Zanchy, who says, toti Ecclesiae dedisse
Christum claves, Zanch. in praecept. 4. qu. 3.
sed ita ut in Ecclesia certi essent, qui clavibus utantur ad salutem
Ecclesiae, honoremque Dei. That Christ gave the keys to the wholl Church, but
so, that there should be certain men that should use the keys to the good of
the Church and glory of God. For the proof of the former, that the right of
power is in every particular Church, he uses five Arguments; in the 6. and 7.
chapters, and then in the 8. chapter, he comes to speak of the exercise and
ordinary execution of this power, which is, he says, in the Church Officers or
rulers, yet with this moderation, that this dispensation of the Churches power
in the Officers be according to a well tempered form, partly Aristocraticall,
partly Democraticall, the Church committing those things to the Presbytery,
which it cannot commodiously perform by it self, and retaining that exercise
of power which belongs to the dignity, authority, and liberty which it has
received from Christ. Thus he wholly destroys that Democraty, or popular
Anarchy, which Beza justly condemns in Morellius, and is by some unjustly
imputed to those that plead for a due reformation of Churches, according to the
rules of the word, and the primitive patterns. Of the first sort of things,
which the Church commits to the Rulers, because it cannot commodiously
perform them by it self, he speaks in cap. 9.10.11. ANSVV. Mr Dav.
professed and promised touching Mr Parker and these other Writers, that he
would show them to be strongly against me: but though he make a long discourse
of his writing, and do allege in gross eleven chapters at once out of Mr
Parker; yet do I not find that he applies any thing to the question against
me. for I. Suppose it be granted (which yet some godly and learned men deny)
that all power Ecclesiastical is essentially and primarily in the Church, as
the proper subject thereof, and from thence derived and communicated to other,
either particular persons, or assemblies of Classes and Synods; what is this to
our question? does it follow from hence that Synods have no power to judge
Ecclesiastical causes, or that they are only for counsel or admonition? This
is the point of our question; but this neither Mr Parker affirms, neither does
Mr D. offer to conclude it by any just consequence from his words: and so all
that he alleges is not to the purpose. II. This very derivation of power from
particular Churches unto Classes and Synods, is an argument of the power of
judgment that is in them: for what great need was there of a derivative power
to consult or to admonish only? Mr D. confesses that Apol. reply. p. 47.
every Christian has power of admonition in another for his good. And shall
Synods have no more power then particular and private persons? III. Whereas Mr
Parker distinguishes betwixt the power of the Church and the exercise of that
power, and acknowledges that the execution of this power in the administration
of the Word and Sacraments is not in the whole Church, but in some special
persons appointed thereunto; it follows hence that in some things the
Ministers and Governors of a Church have a power which the Church cannot
exercise without them; and therefore in some respect a greater authority then
the whole Church beside them. This is confessed in the practice of the
Brownists themselves, who keep their children sometimes unbaptised for many
years together, while they want Ministers that have authority to baptize. IV.
The Authors alleged by Mr Parker, to show that Ecclesiastical power is
originally in the Church, did never draw any such consequence from thence, that
therefore there is no power of jurisdiction in Synods, but made the contrary
conclusion, that therefore there was a power of jurisdiction in them. And this
conclusion was made, not only by the Council of Constance and Basil, Ioh.
Gerson and Schola Parisiensis, but by D. Whitaker also, whom Mr Dav. Ibid. p.
237. 238.
alleges as if he made for him, who yet reasons strongly against him, saying,
De Co^c. qu. 5. p. 170.
If a particular Church have greater authority in judgments then Peter, or any
particular man, then much more the universal Church, which is represented in a
general Council or Synod. V. For Mr Parker himself, though he be very large
touching the original power of particular Churches, and the derivation thereof
unto Ministers and Synods; yet he never concludes from hence a want of
jurisdiction in Synods, but declares the contrary in many Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c.
20. and 23, 24. etc.
places, as is to be showed hereafter. In the mean time let us consider how Mr
Dav. proceeds in alleging Mr Parker.

I. DAV. Of the second sort of things, which the Church retains in it self,
because it can commodiously exercise them by it self, he speaks in cap. 12.
Wherein by 22 Arguments, he proves the Churches superiority over her Pastors
and rulers, in 3 respects, 1. of the end, the power which they have being given
them for her aedification, 2. in respect of the application of it to the
persons, 3. in respect of regulating the use of it, if it be abused. ANSVV. I.
If those 22 Arguments of Mr Park. be good and effectual to prove the Churches
superiority over her Rulers; then have we so many sound Arguments to prove the
authority of Classes and Synods. This is evident, because Mr P. applies those
22 Arguments to prove the jurisdiction of Synods as well as of particular
Churches. His affirmation is Poli. Eccl. l. 3. c. 12. p. 77.
that the superiorit of jurisdiction is retained in every Church, so that
neither the Pastor in the Prime Church, nor the Praesident in the Combined
Church, nor yet any Bishop is above the Church, but under the power of every
Church. This distinction of the Church is more plainly declared by him
afterward, where he says, Ibid. c. 13. p. 117.
Est itaque visibilis Ecclesia duplex, Prima et Orta, Prima, est collectio
singulorum fidelium in unam Congregationem, et generali nomine Ecclesia
dicitur. Orta, est collectio and combinatio Ecclesiarum primarum plurium in
unum coetum, and appellatur Synodus. that is, The visible Church is of two
sorts, The Prime and the Combined Church. The Prime Church is a collection of
several faithful persons into one Congregation, and is called by a general
name, the Church. The Combined Church is a collection of more prime Churches
into one company, and is called a Synod. Now the jurisdiction which he speaks
of, he makes common to both, and expressly applies it to both, to the combined
Church or Synod, as well as to the particular or prime Church. And further that
in the 12. chapter he spoke generally of both these kinds of Churches, he
manifests in the first words of the 13. chapter, where he begins thus, Ibide^.
Hitherto we have spoken of the Church in general, so far as it is the
subject of Ecclesiastical polity, now let us come to the diverse kinds
thereof. II. Notwithstanding the superiority of the Church, yet Mr Par. Ibid.
p. 77.
acknowledges the authority of the Pastor to be very great, as having it
immediately from Christ, and not only the authority, but also the exercise of
the same authority and jurisdiction; in which respect he says he is superior
not to men only, but to the Angels themselves, Gal. 1.8. as being in Christ's
stead, 2. Cor. 5.19, 20. so long as he uses this authority lawfully. And
repeating the same again, he proceeds further when he says, that if he do
not lawfully exercise his authority in the administration of the Word and
Sacraments, then he cease to be a Pastor, Ibid. p. 88.
quo casu solo, eum suae Ecclesiae subjectum esse dicimus: in which case alone
we say that he is subject unto his Church. If in this case alone (which I durst
not have said) then in other cases, the authority of many Pastors and Elders,
especially meeting together in a Synod, may exercise an authority superior
unto one particular Church.

I. DAV. And in cap. 18.13. making a comparison between a particular Church,
and Churches combined in Synods and Classes, he affirms that the difference
between them is, not in the intensive consideration of their power (which the
Congregation has, in reference to the Keys, within it self) but in the
extensive power only, wherein the Synod has a power extended to more objects,
viz. to many Churches (in things common) whereas the power of a particular
Church is confined, and limited within its own compass. ANSVV. In this 13.
chap. (for that number of 18. seems to be mistaken) Mr Parker does again give
diverse pregnant testimonies for the authority and jurisdiction of Synods. I. In
the place alleged his words are these: Pol. Eccl. l. 2. c. 13. p. 121.
I distinguish touching the power of the keys, which is intensive or
extensive. No prime Church, no not the least of them does want the intensive
power; but it wants that extensive which a Synod has, seeing the power thereof
is extended to many Churches; whereas the power of the prime or particular
Church is not extended beyond her own bounds. The power of the keys is a
power of jurisdiction, an Ecclesiastical power of binding and loosing; whether
intensive or extensive: this power he confesses to be in a Synod; and
therefore the use of Synods is not only for counsel or admonition, but for
jurisdiction also in the judgment of causes. Whereas according to Mr D. his
allegation, the difference betwixt the power of a particular Church and of a
Synod is in the extensive power only; therefore the Synod is also of greater
power and jurisdiction in extension unto many Churches. II. In comparing the
power of a particular Church with a Synod, he says expressly, Ibid. p. 129.
Major quidem potestas est Synodi, quam unius alicujus Ecclesiae primae and
parochialis. Greater is the power of a Synod, then of any one prime or
parishionall Church. But if Synods could only counsel and admonish, and a
particular Church besides that, could censure and use Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, then should a particular Church have greater power then a Synod:
and not only greater intensive power, but as great extensive; seeing a
particular Church, yea or a particular person may give counsel or admonition,
either to a Synod, or to many Churches, as occasion shall require. It is true
indeed which Mr P. says, that all the parishionall Churches are greater then
their Synods, seeing by a new Synod they may abrogate that which was ordained
amiss by their Deputies, without their consent, sentence and will. This he
proves by many arguments, and this we willingly consent unto; this is the
practice of all the Reformed Churches. But this is sufficient for the question
in hand, that a Synod has the power of the keys, and jurisdiction, and
greater authority then any one Church. III. This is another conclusion of Mr
Parkers. Ibid. p. 120.
We say there is one form of government instituted of Christ in all Churches,
both prime and combined: so that we may not dream there is in the prime Church
a different form from that which is in the combined Church: neither may we
imagine that in the combined Church there is another different from that by
which the prime Church is governed. If this assertion be true, then Mr Dav. and
those of his mind do dream, when they imagine so different a form of
government to be instituted in the particular Churches and Synods, which he
calls the combined Churches, that one sort of them should only give counsel
and admonition, and the other exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and censure.

I. DAV. Apol. reply. p. 241.242.
The same author, in the 20 chapter, speaking of the summity, or supremacy of
the power of particular Congregations, propounds the due limits of it,
wherein, he conceives, it is to be understood, and bounded, as that the power
of particular Churches is chief. 1. in its own matters, not in things common
to many Churches. 2. in case it be able to transact its own matters within it
self: as, if a doubt or controversy arise, the Church has power to terminate
it, if it can: as the Church of Antioch first disputed the matter among
themselves, and labored to compose the difference within themselves, but
finding (not a want of right to end it among themselves, but) need of more
help, they sent to Jerusalem freely for the help of their counsel, in this
matter. 3. In case of right and lawful administration. 4. In case of no evil
administration presumed by those, who, finding themselves wronged by an unjust
sentence, appeal to the judgment of the Synod. In which 3 last limitations,
other Churches (to whose judgment, or advice, persons injuried by an unjust
sentence appeal) do concur, in way of counsel, and declaration of their
judgment, to help particular Churches to exercise their power aright, P. 47.
P. 239.
in their own matters, as was before noated out of Mr Cartwr. and Mr Fen. and
out of the Author himself in the foregoing passages. which being so
understood, does not justify any undue power of jurisdiction, if it be
exercised by the Classis over that Church in the cases and manner complained of
by the Subscribers: and how fully it agrees with my stating of the question in
the beginning of this Section, will appear to the indifferent Reader, when he
shall have compared both together. ANSVV. The judgment of Mr P. is very
partially and corruptly described by Mr D. in this place. for whereas Mr P.
here describes 4 bridles of restraint, or 4 limitations by which the supremacy
of power in particular Congregations is to be moderated and kept within bounds,
lest it should seem to be absolute; by every one of these it is manifest, that
he acknowledged this authority, power and jurisdiction of Synods, and that they
were not only for counsel and admonition. He says, Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c. 20. p.
301, 302.


The first limitation is ad rem propriam, unto their proper business, for in a
common matter the Synod is chief, that is, the authority of Churches jointly
gathered together, is the chiefest. Hence it is confessed that Synods have
power of jurisdiction over Churches: for 1. In judging these common causes
particular Churches, though differing one from an other are overswayed by the
most voices; and each Congregation is subject to the sentence of the Synod. 2.
Let any Scripture be alleged by Mr Dav. to show the summity or sovereignty of
Synods in these common causes, and he shall find thereby the use of Synods
proved to be for jurisdiction in one Ecclesiastical cause as well as in
another being lawfully brought unto them. for, what reason is there, why the
counsel and admonition of a Synod, may not suffice for the help of particular
Churches in a common controversy as well as in other special businesses,
leaving the sentence and decision unto the prime Churches?

The second limitation is also in a proper business; to wit ad casum
sufficient is potestatis, in the case of sufficient ability: for if any Church
be found unable to end their own business: who doubts but that it is bound
to require the help of fellow-Churches? In this case Mr P. acknowledges the
superiority or sovereignty of power and authority in Synods: but if Synods were
only for counsel and admonition, what needed a supremacy of power; seeing
inferiors may give counsel unto their superiors, and admonish them also of
their duty? Mr P. shows well that in case of impotencie, or weakness, the
Church of Antioch sent to Jerusalem, etc. Act. 15. But this Mr D. seeks to
pervert by his gloss, when he says, they sent to Jerusalem for the help of
their counsel, as though they did not as well desire help by their authority
and sentence in determining the controversy. If counsel only had been sought,
why did not the Synod at Jerusalem content themselves to give counsel and
advise? why did they also make a decree, and this not only by authority of the
Apostles, but also by common authority of Elders and others that were in the
Synod? Act. 15.23. and 16.4.

The third limitation is in a proper business, and ability also, to wit in the
case of right and lawful administration. for we are to think the same of the
Church, as of every Pastor of the Church: now we have showed before out of
Gerson, touching the rectour, that he in case of right administration is
subject to none, yet in case of aberration is subject: so the Church which in
case of right administration is subject to none, yet in case of aberration does
now begin to be subject. Even as therefore the Pastor erring and offending
is subject to no one of his fellows, as to a Bishop, but only to many of his
Church: so also the Church that erreth and offends is subject to no one
Church, as to a Diocesan, but to many assembled together in a lawful Synod.
Hence it is evident that Mr P. asscribed unto Synods more authority, then a
bare counsel or admonition only: for 1. He often uses the word of
subjection, which implies an authority and jurisdiction in those to whom in
regard of their calling men be subject. This is passed by as unseen or
unregarded in Mr D. his allegation. 2. He speaks of being subject so as the
Pastor erring and offending is subject to many of the Church, that is to their
jurisdiction and censure. 3. He speaks of such subjection as is distinguished
from receyving of counsel and admonition: otherwise it should not be true
which he says of the Pastors and Churches subjection; seeing every Pastor
erring and offending is bound to receyve counsel or admonition from any one of
his fellows; and the Church erring and offending is bound to receyve counsel
or admonition from any one particular Church, though it be not subject to the
jurisdiction of any one in special, but only to many in a lawful Synod.

The fourth limitation is in case of right administration, when no evil
administration is presumed [or imagined.] for although the Church administer
aright, yet if any man thinking himself wronged, do appeal from it, the same
is now become obnoxious [or subject unto the censure of] her fellows and
sisters, so that judgment may be given in a Synod touching her administration.
That Mr P. here also speaks of subjection unto the jurisdiction of Synods, it
is evident, while for the allowance of appeals he alleges in the same place
the testimonies of the Synod of Sardica, of the University of Paris, and of D.
Whitaker, who do all speak of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction for the correction
and redress of unrighteous sentences and proceedings by inferior judges.
Again in the same chapter, he says, Pa. 31^
Christ would have every man to be judged of his own Church, Matt. 18. or if
the judgment of his own Church displease him, yet always of the Church, that
is, of a Synod of many Churches. Again in the same page, We certainly find
Mat. 18. that causes are to be ended by the Synods of the Churches and not by
one man, if any do appeal from the judgment of his Church. Thus we see, 1.
that he makes Mat. 18. a common ground for the jurisdiction of Synods, as well
as of particular Churches. 2. The very phrase of terminating or ending
controversies, shows that he spoke of jurisdiction; because counsel alone is
not sufficient to end controversies, unless there be authority and
jurisdiction exercised withal. And further, whereas D. Bilson had said, that
Synods have had more power then Elderships, Mr Parker assenteth, saying, Pa. 303
So truly it ought to have been done, that they should only have more: but
this more serves not your purpose, but contradicts it: for if they have had
only more, it follows that the Elderships always ought to have had some
power, though less. Thus expressly he acknowledges a power of jurisdiction
in Synods, as well as in Elderships: and many the like assertions (if need
were) might further be noted out of the same chapter.

Hereby it appears how vain it is which Mr D. says, that in the 3 last
limitations other Churches do concur, in way of counsel and declaration of
their judgment, as if that were all they did; as if the Synod consisting of
those Churches did not give definitive sentence of causes brought unto them.
And hereby it may withal appear, how the judgment of Mr Parker does agree
with the practice of the Reformed Churches, which do exercise Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction in their Synods, according to those 4 limitations specifyed by
him. There is no matter determined by them and judged in their Synods, but it
may be reduced to one of these 4 heads; it is either a common cause, or a case
of impotency, where there is need of help, or an unlawful administration in
some, or at least a presumption of evil dealing.

I. DAV. Apol. reply. p. 242.
Thus have we examined his own witnesses, and find them to be wholly for us
in this cause. ANSVV. Whether the forenamed witnesses, Mr Cartwr. Mr Fenner,
and Mr Parker, be wholly for Mr Dav. and those of his opinion, let the Reader
judge. His examination of Mr Par. inspeciall, is done by the halves; but before
we come to speak of other pregnant testimonies which Mr P. has given touching
the authority and power of Synods, omitted by Mr D. we will first examine
another allegation which he had set down before, Ibid. p. 226.227.
where he labors to prove that the lawful combination of particular Churches
in Classes and Synods, is by way of counsel or brotherly direction, and not
otherwise.

I. DAV. The reasons whereby it may be proved, are weighty. Mr Parker has
saved me the labor of this task, by laying down six Arguments, for the
proof of this, in those his learned and elaborate treatises, concerning
Ecclesiastical policy, as 1. From the ground of this combination of Churches,
De Eccl. pol. l. 3. c. 2^. p. 329.
which is love, not obedience. 2. From the form of it, which is communion and
consociation, etc. 3. From the matter of it, which are Churches, who are
aequall among themselves, as members in the body, which have a vicissitude of
offices mutually to be performed, among themselves. 4. From the object of it,
which is res communis, that which concerns all the Churches in common. 5.
From the outward manner of proceeding, which is collatione consiliorum, by
conference and communication of counsels. 6. From the end of this combination,
which is, not to receive the mandates of other Churches, but their consent,
counsel and approbation. ANSVV. In general, it is to be observed, 1. That the
scope of Mr Parker in this chapter is to show in what manner many Churches are
combined together in Synods, namely as equals in a mutual fellowship, and not
with subjection to any one Church above the rest. This he propounds in the
beginning, as the state of the question; when he savth, Pol. Eccl. lib. 3. c.
22. p. 327.
The Hierarchy will have this combination to be subordinate and joined with
subjection unto their Hierarchy: against the common opinion of all Protestants,
which affirm no consociation to be lawful, but that which is mutual, such as
is wont to be among equals. He thought not therefore of this new found out
combination, by such as maintain the single uncompounded policy, but of such
as is commonly received by all Protestants. His arguments are all directed
against the Popish and Hierarchicall combination, which we also disallow with
him. This he repeats again for conclusion after his six arguments, saying,
Ibid. p. 336.
By all which it is plenteously demonstrated, that the combination of Churches
is not Hierarchicall, with subjection unto any one among the rest, but rather
Aristocraticall, wherein equals are joined together. Neither could he call the
government of Churches by Synods, Aristocraticall, if they did only direct by
way of counsel; seeing an Aristocracy is such a government as exercises
jurisdiction in the judgment of causes. II. If Mr Parkers meaning had been
otherwise, viz. that Classical and Synodall combinations had no authority nor
jurisdiction, or that no Churches ought to be subject unto the same; then had
all his 6 arguments been of no force, neither could they prove any such
matter. We may see it plainly in the example of the prime or particular
Churches, where in the combination of many members together, though the ground
of it be love; though the form of it be communion; though the matter of it be
brethren, which are equal among themselves; though the object of it be res
communis, that which concerns all in common; though the end of it be, not to
receive the mandates of any one member, but the consent of many: yet does it
not follow hence, but that such a Church and society has power of censure and
jurisdiction, and that the members thereof are to be subject unto such a
combination. And thus also may particular Churches submit themselves to many,
combined together in a Synod. III. If Mr Parker did not mean thus, but simply
denied all jurisdiction of Synods and subjection of Churches unto them; then
should he be contradictory to himself, in that which he had so expressly and
so often acknowledged in other places before: as that, Greater is the power of
a Synod, then of any one prime or particular Church: and that the Church that
erreth and offends is subject to no one Church as to a Diocesan, but to many
assembled together in a lawful Synod.

Moreover, to come more particularly to each of his 6 Arguments, there is
something to be observed in his reasoning in every one of them, that may show
unto us how he acknowledged the jurisdiction of Synods.

I. The first Argument, P. 329.
taken from the ground of love and mutual help, is that which (he says) is
proved by Zepperus, l. 3. c. 7. (mistaken for c. 8.) who in the same chapter,
page 715. describes the authority of Synods in the exercise of Discipline and
the greatest censures thereof, even unto excommunication, and therefore not for
counsel only. Again, all those places of Scripture, Number. 32.6, 17. Eccl.
4.9. Romans 12.13. Phil. 2.4. 1. These. 5.11, 14. Heb. 10.24. and 13.3. 1. Cor.
10.33. which he together with Zepperus does allege for the warrant of this
combination of Churches in Synods for their mutual help, they are all of them
such as do equally, yea and primarily concern the communion and society of
several persons and members in a particular Church, where it is confessed by
our opposites that there is jurisdiction as well as counsel. If these places
would have removed jurisdiction from Synods, and condemned the subjection of
Churches unto a Synod; then would they also have done the like for particular
Churches, and have condemned the subjection of members thereunto. Seeing they
do not the one, therefore not the other also.

II. In prosequuting his 2d Argument, P. 330.331.
taken from the form of combination, which is consociation consisting in a
mutual obligation, he confirms it by the testimony of D. Whitaker, alleging
that Calvine said well, that by brotherly charity, Cont. 4. qu. 4. p. 448.
not by naked authority, but by letters and admonitions and other such means
Heretics were deposed in the time of Cyprian. Deposition of Heretics was an
act of jurisdiction in Synods. And again, alleging Mat. 18. as the fountain
of this combination, he says, Many Churches are combined after the same
manner, that the prime Churches grow together into one body in their members:
and therefore it must be confessed, that as Mat. 18. is a ground of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in particular Churches, so is it also for Synods.

III. Mr Parker for confirmation of his 3d Argument, P. 331.332.
taken from the matter of this combination, which are the several Churches,
equal members of one body, alleges the example of the Reubenites, who when
they would express their combination with the Tribes on this side Jordan, do
call it their part in the Lord, which was not unequal because of the distance
of place. Ios. 22.24, 25- 28. And from hence then it may appear, that as the
Tribes of Israel equally combined together were not subject to any one Tribe
apart, and yet were each of them subject to the whole society and body of
Israel: so the particular Churches having each of them equal part in the
Ecclesiastical consociation of Classes and Synods, though they be not subject
to any one Church apart, that is exalted above the rest, yet may be subject to
the whole society of many Churches concurring together in Synods.

IV. In the explication of his 4th Argument, P. 332, 333.
taken from the object, which is a common matter, concerning all or many
Churches, he alleges a distinction Conf. with Heart. c. 8. d. 5.
maintained by D. Rainolds, betwixt questions of the Church, requiring
knowledge only, and causes of the Church, requiring jurisdiction also for the
judging of them. Questions of the Church were sent unto them that had no
jurisdiction over those that propounded them: but the causes of the Church, not
so: They in Africa were Council. Carthag. Graec. c. 2^ and Milevita. c. 22.
forbidden to appeal unto them beyond sea; viz, for the decision of their
personal causes, which yet were to be judged by the Synods in Africa: whereby
it is acknowledged that Synods have a power of jurisdiction, which is more then
counsel. Whereas Mr P. adds, The first combination of Churches is in matters
of faith, etc. The second combination of Churches is in personal causes, yet
by accident only* for these properly belong unto each several Church, as they
are proper: yet when they become public by accident, then Churches are
combined indeed. but without subjection, as it fell out in Cyprians time in
causa lapsorum, in the cause of them that fell [in time of persecution] which
thereupon became public, because the offense was common in many Churches: Lest
any should stumble at these his words, it is to be considered, that as
personal causes and offenses are by accident the object of Classical and
Synodall judgments; so by like kind of accident they are the object of that
judgment and jurisdiction which is exercised by particular Churches. In that
maine ground of Ecclesiastical discipline, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. all the degrees
of admonition and censure are ordained to be used according to those 4
accidental ifs; If thy brother sin; If he will not hear thee; If he will
not hear the witnesses; If he will not hear the Church: And so in like
manner, those 4 limitations before noted by Mr Parker, are 4 accidental cases,
wherein the power of Synods is to be exercised, and wherein it is greater then
the authority of particular Churches, viz. if it be a common cause; if the
Church be unable; if the Church administer unlawfully. if it be so presumed.
Such kinds of accidents are properly the lawful and just object of Classical
and Synodall jurisdiction, by proportion from the same rule, Matt. 18. If one
member sin or suffer, it becomes a common cause so far as it is known, all
the members suffer with it and take care for the redress of it, in a
particular Church: 1. Cor. 12.25, 26. And if one Church sin and be in danger,
it becomes a common cause; all the Churches that are members of the same body,
especially those that are united by covenant in a Classical and Synodall
government are to take care for it, and to seek help according to the quality
of the danger. Thus the community of cause infers combination. And further,
for that which he repeats again, that this combination of Churches by
accident, is without subjection, it is still to be remembered that his meaning
is, without subjection to any one above the rest: for so he again largely
explaines himself in the same place, giving instance in the Church of Carthage
and in Cyprian the Bishop thereof, maintayning against D. Downam, that Cyprian
was no Metropolitan, that the province was others as well as his, that in the
Synod there held there was a parity, that the Churches were equally combined
without subjection to any one, that Bishops and Elders had equal power in
giving their suffrages.

V. In setting down the 5t Argument, P. 334.
taken from the outward manner of proceeding, which was by conference and
communication of counsels, he shows withal, that therein there was an
exercise of jurisdiction, when as in the words of Cyprian he shows the end of
those counsels, ut communi consens^ figerentur sententiae; that by common
consent firm decrees might be made. And the authority of these judicial
sentences and decrees touching those that were fallen, is further declared by
Cyprian, when he shows, that they were Cypria^. L. 1. Ep. 8.
tempered with discipline and mercy; whereby it is evident that there was an
exercise of discipline or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction therein: and that
Epistle of Cyprian contains in it sundry other sentences, which show that he
spoke of the administration of censure, and not of counsel only.

VI. In his last Argument, P. 335.
taken from the end of this combination, which was not to receive mandates, but
for consent, counsel and approbation; he says it follows hence that no one
Church was superior unto others, but all were equal among themselves. This he
declares by instance in the Church of Rome, which though in ancient time it was
of great estimation and dignity, yet had it no special authority and
jurisdiction above other Churches, as he shows by the testimonies of D. Rain.
Whitak. and Iunius. But he does not collect thence, that many Churches
concurring together in Synods do want authority to judge, and to give
definitive sentences in the causes brought unto them. Yea the contrary is
manifest: for whereas Bellarmine perverting the testimony of the
Magdeburgenses, who had said that the unity of faith might be preserved by the
consociation of Churches which mutually were to help one another, objecteth,
DeRom. Pon. l. 1. c. 9
Non sat est confilium: imperium requiritur; Counsel is not sufficient, but
authority is required: Mr Parker in this P. 327.
same chapter alleges, allows and commends the answer which D. Whitaker
DeRom. Pont. Cont. 4. qu 1. p. 49
gives unto Bellarmine, viz. Consensum multorum non minus habere imperii quam
unius voluntatem. Sicolim Haeretici per Synodos refutati, et alii in eorum
locum suffecti. Quid amplius postulas? aut quae melior ratio excogitari potest
conservandae pacis? etc. that is, The consent of many, has no less authority
then the will of one. Thus have Heretics been refuted of old time, and others
put into their places. What do you require more? or what better way of
preserving peace can be thought upon? etc. Or what plainer testimony can Mr
Dav. require for the jurisdiction of Synods? They do not answer Bellarmine
that counsel alone is sufficient, but plead for authority and power, arising
from the consent of many. Iunius also answers this objection of Bellarmine in
like manner, and says concerning the power of Synods, Anim. adv. in Bellarm
Contr. 3. l. 1. c. 9. u. 74.
Et est revera imperium Christi: qui primum jubet per Apostolum, ut spiritus
Prophetarum Prophetis subjiciantur; deinde vero remedium adhibet, 1. Cor.
11.16. quod si cui contentiosum esse videtur, nos ejusmodi consuetudinem non
habemus, neque Ecclesiae Dei. There is indeed the power of Christ, who first
commands by the Apostle, that the spirits of the Prophets be subject to the
Prophets; and then adds the remedy, 1. Cor. 11.16. that if any list to be
contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. And Mr Parker in
the same place, reasoning in like manner, confirms his answer and enforces
it, saying, What, I pray you, can be answered to this last reason? for the
Apostle Paul refers us from the contentions of any one Church unto many;
whose example if it prevail much, how much more their sentence, when they are
assembled together in a Synod?

HAving answered these Allegations of Mr Dav. we may now see what wrong he has
done to Mr Parker, in perverting his words and meaning, and making him a
Patron of this erroneous opinion that is so prejudicial to the Church of God
in the government thereof by Synods: and yet for the further clearing of the
truth and vindicating of Mr Parker, and for the help of the Reader, that he
may better understand his meaning touching Classes and Synods, (for many have
not his book, and many understand it not, being written in Latin) I will set
down his judgment more particularly, touching the diverse kinds and degrees
of consociation of Churches, with the special questions touching Synods, and
show withal how he applies the same to the practice of the Reformed Churches
for the defense thereof, in all which the jurisdiction of Synods is maintained.
And

Poli. Eccl. l. 3. c. 22. p. 336.
that some are more imperfect by way of Communication, and some more perfect by
way of Combination; The Combinations (he says) are of two sorts: for some
communicate among themselves by Letters only, and some both by letters and
messengers, or Delegates. These communicatory letters were called in old time
Pacificall and Synodall letters, and Formatae. And he P. 337.
alleges diverse examples both from the Scripture and from the primitive
Church, touching this kind of communication by letters. And howsoever he notes
from the Magdeburgenses, that this communication by letters did not proceed
from dominion and subjection, etc. yet this is to be understood, touching the
subjection of any one Church to another, and not of subjection to many
Churches: for so he expounds himself touching this particular of communication
by letters, as he had often done before in general. For whereas it is
objected, If all Congregations be equal, what shall be done in case of Schism
and Heresy, when there is no Synod nor Christian Magistrate? He answers, Ibid.
c. 21. p. 324.
The time scarsely falls out, when no Synods can be had: or if Synods be
wanting, yet Churches may communicate together by letters: and although there
be no authority in one Church above another; yet many Churches joined together,
either in a Synod, or by letters, have authority over one Church offending. And
in the next page P. 325.
again, always every one Church is subject to many Churches. And thus he
expressly avoucheth a jurisdiction of many Churches over one, even in their
communication by letters. And yet more particularly he applies this to the
present practice of the Reformed Churches, and highly commends the same,
saying, Ibid. c. ^2. p. 337.
And now in the Reformed Churches the necessary use of Elderships is
acknowledged, ubi communicatio per literas primaeva purissime floret; where the
primitive communication by letters does flourish in greatest purity.

Ibid. p. 338.
The second communication of Churches follows, when some deal with others
concerning any Ecclesiastical business, not by letters only, but by messengers
also. This consideration is of great moment: for unto whomsoever this handling
of Ecclesiastical businesses does belong, to them also of necessity does
belong the rest of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. This he often repeateth,
but most fully, when speaking of the authority of sending messengers or
Delegates, he says, P. 342.
The power of sending Delegates in Ecclesiastical affairs was not in any one
Bishop, but in the Church it self, and therefore all the other jurisdiction.
Now it is evident that the Synod at Jerusalem did send Delegates in an
Ecclesiastical business, Act. 15.25, 26, 27. and therefore according to Mr
Parker, did not only consult and admonish, but also exercised jurisdiction
therein, and had the power of all other jurisdiction. Thus the Reformed
Churches do daily practice: their Classes and Synods do upon occasion send
their Deputies unto particular Churches to judge, compound and decide the
controversies that arise in the same; and according to Mr Parker do exercise a
lawful jurisdiction herein.

Communication of Churches, he comes to speak Ibid. c. 23. p. 345. 340.
of their Combination, from whence arises a combined Church, derived from
other Churches. This combination he notes to consist either of two, or more
Churches. An instance of this combination of two, he gives in the Synod at
Jerusalem, Act. 15. and says. It was a Council and Synod, and that properly,
and that of two Churches, to wit, of Antioch and Jerusalem, for the Messengers
sent from Antioch were present, which represented the Church of Antioch, as is
usual in Councels. And notwithstanding an objection made against the Church of
Antioch, yet he says that Church was also judge in that Council, because
their Messengers brought the judgment of the same with them. Hereupon he
reproves two Spirits of error, the one of Grotius, who (...) said to reject
the use of Synods altogether: for who would write this (says Mr Part (...) be
that is bewitched with error? seeing the Church of God has always held, that
S^ are here instituted of God to endure for ever, etc. The second spirit of
error wi^^ ^he reproves is that of the Hierarchy, P. 347.
because they condemn the Reformed Synods, as if they were degenerate, quae
tamen ad hunc typum accuratissime efformantur; which are notwithstanding most
exactly framed according to this pattern. Hence it appears that Mr Parker
held the Synods of divine institution to be not only for counsel and
admonition, but for jurisdiction also: for otherwise he could not have said
with truth, that the Reformed Synods, all which exercise jurisdiction, do
answer exactly thereunto; otherwise he might rather have said, that the Synods
of the Reformed Churches, swarving from the primitive pattern, were indeed
adulterare and degenerate, usurping authority and jurisdiction which did not
belong unto them.

Ibide^.
and first that which is of many Churches into one Eldership. The reason of
this is, because some little Churches knowing their own weakness, do join
themselves unto the neighbor Churches, and so make but one Eldership only
among themselves. He gives an instance of this in those small Churches about
Geneva, which not being sufficient for themselves, do join themselves unto
the Church in the next City, so that they come together weekly into the
neighbour-Consistory of the City. This combination of lesser Churches into one
Eldership or Consistory, Mr Parker approves and justifyes, and declares his
judgment touching this kind of consociation. 1. He says, It is grounded upon
the communion of Churches, and derived from the wisdom of the Spirit; and
complains of the Hierarchy that do so virulently impugn the same. 2. P. 348.
Whereas nothing is more objected against the Reformation in England, then that
many Churches or Parishes are unable for it, wanting fit men to govern and to
exercise discipline in Elderships: Mr Parker answers hereunto; If it be so,
let them join themselves unto the next Eldership; or erect a common Eldership
among themselves; and so from common counsel and help let them seek remedy for
their weakness. Now it is recorded Calvin. Epist. 167.
that in the Discipline at Geneva, the right of Excommunication is in the power
of this Consistory or common Eldership: and hereby then it appears that all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is not limited unto a particular Church only; and
that Mr Parker allowing of this government at Geneva, is not against the
jurisdiction of many Churches over one. Again, whereas D. Bancroft and D.
Field object that the Churches at Geneva, and the villages of the Netherlands,
have not the power of Excommunication; and whereas my opposites complain, that
Churches are brought into bondage, and loose their liberty, when they may not
excommunicate without the consent of others; Mr Parkers answer is, P. 349.
that the power of Excommunication, ordination, and other jurisdiction remains
pure in them, saving that communion which ought to be among Churches; every
Church in greater matters uses the consent and counsel of her neighbors, as
of the Classis or Eldership in the City, quod ego Ecclesiis vel perfectissimis
non indig^um reor, which I judge (says he) not to be unmeet even for the most
perfect Churches. Thus he requires not only counsel, but consent of other
Churches in weightier matters; which is that we stand for. This does not, as he
says, P. 390.
import any Hierarchicall subjection in the parishes at Geneva, unless happily
any can be subjected unto himself; for these parishes, each for their part, and
that equally, are this very Eldership. What subjection is it, where all as well
City-churches as the Country-churches are equal? for the country-churches are
no more subject unto this Eldership, then are the city-churches.

Ibid. c. 24. p. 353. etc.
is when they are united into one Classis. And of these he gives instance in
the Churches of the Netherlands; and in Scotland, where the 52 Presbyteries, so
called by them, were nothing else but so many Classes. For the warrant of these
he brings both diverse grounds of holy Scripture, and the example of
antiquity. He there answers 10 Objections made by the Hierarchy against these
Classes. And it is to be observed that he does not simply speak of Classes in
general, but of these Classes of the Reformed Churches in these Countries, of
our Classes, as he uses to call them, not only for that he approved them, but
because together with us, he was a member of this communion, and lived under
the jurisdiction of the Classis with us. If he had not allowed their
jurisdiction, which he knew and saw to be exercised by them, how could he with
good conscience have praised them as he does? Speaking of the ancient
Discipline used in the Primitive Churches, he says, P. 357.
Omnia his in politeia nostra and in Classibus nostris similia. O quantum
peccat Hierarchia, quae hanc suavissimam Ecclesiarum combinationem eliminavit!
that is, All things in our government and in our Classes are like unto these. O
how much does the Hierarchy offend, which has banished this most sweet
combination of Churches! And as well might we cry out, O how much do the
authors of the single, uncompounded policy offend, who likewise seek to
banish and overthrow this combination of Churches in Classes; while they allow
them only for counsel, and regard not their consent; but allow the Churches
in combination to proceed in the weightiest affairs, without or against the
consent of Classes! Whereas it is objected not only by my opposites, but by
some of the Hierarchy themselves, that these Classes do take unto themselves
that jurisdiction which they seem to condemn in the Hierarchy; Mr Parker in
his answer shows the contrary: He says, P. 358. 359.
The superior power that is in Classes, arises from the Churches, that are
combined in Classes, etc. No Church has dominion or pre-eminence over another.
He says that in the Metropoliticall or Episcopal jurisdiction, Churches have
not their own government, but are spoiled of their Elderships and subjected to
the power of one, and to an external Church, namely the Cathedral. All which
things are contrary in our Classes. Every Church injoyeth her own government
by her own Eldership: the Classis, is no external Church, much less an
external Court: for it consists of these Churches that are combined: so that
here is no authority over many; the parishes do join their authority
together, and that equally.

Pol. Eco. lib. 3. c. 25. p. 362.
to speak of that combination of many Churches in many Classes, which is into
one Synod, and that either Provincial, National, or General; the National
containing under it the Churches of sundry Provinces, and the General
comprehending the Churches of many Nations. Touching Synods, he speaks of the
7 controversies about them, and first of the Necessity of Synods. He says, he
never knew any in the Reformed Churches to deny the necessity of Synods, before
Hugo Grotius, that was the great friend of Arminius. He shows from Bogerman,
that the Reformed do stand for the necessity of Synods more then any other.
Whereas D. Sutlive condemns such as would have status Synodos, Synods kept at
certain set times, and not only extraordinary, as he says that Synod of the
Apostles was, Act. 15. P. 364. 365.
Mr Parker refureth him, and argues thus from that place, This example of the
Apostles shows that Synods are to be called, as the necessity and edification
of the Church requires: but there fall out so many abuses, errors,
controversies, scandals and other such things; that set and frequent Synods are
necessary: for the neglect whereof the English Hierarchy does sin grievously,
which contenting it self with an extraordinary Synod only, does not call a
Synod after the example of the Apostles, so often as abuses, errors,
controversies, and scandals do arise, but contrary to the example of the
Apostles, commits all these things to the care of one Bishop alone. And
whereas he adds further in the same place, that the Hierarchy is crept in in
place of the Synod, taking violently unto it self those things which by divine
right do belong unto Synods: he does herein acknowledge the authority of
Synods to be of divine right; for what else or what more does the Hierarchy
snatch unto themselves, then authority of censure, and jurisdiction in the
judgment of Ecclesiastical causes?

authority and power of them, Ibid. c. 26. p 367.
he notes that as there is an Aristocraticall government in Elderships: so
there is an Aristocraticall government by Synods; and from this his assertion
it follows, that as the Consistories or Elderships have a jurisdiction and
power of government in them, and are not only for counsel, so the Synods in
like manner. When as he says further, P. 368.
that the Synods borrow that authority which they have from the prime Churches,
this argues that he confesses they have some authority; else how could they be
said to borrow it? To like purpose he argues there again, P. 370.
It appears by the very obligation that Synods have their authority from the
prime Churches: for otherwise Synods should not bind the prime Churches,
unless by sending their Delegates they did avow their consent; unless they
have just cause afterward of dissenting. Thus he acknowledges a bond of
authority and an obligatory power in Synods: and as for the exception which he
adds, it is as well to be added unto any judicatory, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical whatsoever; for there is no jurisdiction nor authority of the
highest Governors on earth, that ought to bind us unto the obedience of their
decrees, if we have just cause of dissenting.

Convocation of Synods, which is the third controversy, Ibid. c. 27. p. 371.
Mr Parker does maintain and much commend the practice and order observed in
these Reformed Churches, and declares at large what their manner is from diverse
acts of their Synods. He says, it is cum sapientissime tum saluberrime
instituta; a most wise and most wholesome institution. He shows, that the
Church has power of calling Synods; but where there is a Christian Magistrate,
P. 372.
this power is regulated of the Magistrate. He brings P. 373. etc.
10 Arguments to prove that this power of calling Synods is not in a
Metropolitan Bishop. He says touching Ecclesiastical persons, P. 375.
The power of convocating is in no one, but in many; therefore Synods are not
to be called by one, nor by the authority of one, but by the Synods themselves,
by the precedent assembly itself, as is usual in the Reformed Churches. And
speaking of Act. 15.6. he says, Does not this example bind all ages, that the
meeting in Synods be by common consent, even as the Acts in the Synod are by
common consent decreed? This decree of calling together is an act of
jurisdiction, more then counsel or admonition only.

Persons Ibid. c. 28. p. 379. etc.
whereof the Synods consist. Whereas Bellarmine distinguishes betwixt the
greater and lesser Clerks, and allows unto Hierarchicall Bishops to have a
deciding voice, and to the inferior sort to have only a consulting voice, Mr
Parker shows at large that whosoever is lawfully deputed and sent, whether
Ministers, Elders, Deacons, or any of the people, have a deciding voice, and
may give definitive sentence in Synods; and thereby he acknowledges the
jurisdiction exercised in them. He says, P. 387.
As the material foundation of Synodall right, is the excellency of inward
gifts, not the dignity of any office: so the formal foundation thereof is
delegation from the Church, from which whosoever they be that have receyved
authority (and therefore Elders also) they have power of decreeing and judging
in Synods. And many other testimonies thereof he gives in that chapter.

Praesident or Moderatour in Synods. Ibid. c. 29.
Mr Parker labors to prove that this presidency does not belong to an
Hierarchicall Bishop or Archbishop, but maintains the practice and order of
the Reformed Churches, where the President of the Synods is elected or chosen
by the Synods themselves. P. 402.
We argue first, says he, from the authority of the Church. for in Matt. 18.
Ecclesiastical authority is given primarily, and originally unto the prime
Church: so that no rectour without the election and designation thereof, may
challenge any authority unto himself. The Synod is a combined or secondary
Church, which receives authority from the prime Churches: and that under the
like condition, to wit that no rectour or Praesident be made without election
of the Churches, which are combined in that Assembly. This he declares at large
and refutes the contrary arguments. Now this Election of a Praesident is an act
of Ecclesiastical authority, a part of the Churches power; and seeing this is
confessed to be in Synods, it appears hence also that Synods are not only
for counsel and admonition, but also for the exercise of jurisdiction.

Execution of the Synodall Canons. Ibid. l. 3 c. 30.
Mr Park. holds that this belongs not unto any one Bishop or Archbishop, but
unto particular Churches and their Elderships. He argues on this manner, P. 428.
The execution of Canons, of what kind soever, whether they be those which are
published of Christ, in the Scriptures, or whether they be ordained in Synods
according to the Scriptures, is a part of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, a part
of the exercise of the Keys, as the Parisians call it. But the Keys and
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction are not given to one Bishop, but are promised to
the Church and Eldership, Mat. 16. and given unto them, Matt. 18. Therefore the
execution of Canons, belongs not unto one Bishop, but unto the Church which
imports many. Now if the execution of Synodall Canons by an Eldership or
particular Church be a part of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and of the Keys,
then much more is the making of these Canons in the Synod: and then Synods have
not only liberty of giving counsel and admonition, but power of jurisdiction
also, which Mr Daven. denies. This conclusion and inference is afterward noted
by Mr Parker himself also; when as he adds, P. 432.
Why should not he be judge in the execution of Canons, who has power of
judging in the sanction or decreeing of the Canons? etc. And again, If it be
not lawful for them to execute the Canons, neither will it be lawful to
ordain them: on the other side, if they have authority of making Canons, then
have they authority to execute them; and that much more.

Conditions Ibid. c. 31.
thereof. And among other conditions, Mr Parker P. 452.
requires this for one, that there be a common consent, or a community of
suffrages: and he complains of it as a great corruption when there is in
Synods a negative voice allowed unto Bishops or Archbishops. He notes P. 454.
that to be not without reason called an Oligarchicall Synod, when things are
not done by common consent, but one makes frustrate the consent of the rest.
Now if it be a violation of the Synods right and authority, when the general
consent of the greatest part is made frustrate by the dissenting of one or of a
few; then much more is the authority thereof violated, when as notwithstanding
the universal and entire consent of the whole Synod, both of the Praesident,
and of all the Deputies of all the Churches there assembled, yet by receiving
this erroneous opinion of my opposites, the definitive sentence of them all is
made frustrate and disannulled; as if they had no jurisdiction nor power of
censure, but were only to counsel or admonish.

AS that which Mr Parker has written particularly touching the combination of
Churches in Classes and Synods, does sufficiently show his mind touching this
controversy, and that Mr Dav does in vain seek to shroud himself under his
shadow: so that which he writes more generally in defense of the Discipline
practiced in the Reformed Churches, where the authority and jurisdiction of
Synods is maintained, does serve for a more full declaration thereof. He
labors to prove (q) by 10 Arguments, Pol. Ecc. lib. 1. c. 29. p. 84.
that the Church of England is bound to imitate the Reformed Churches in their
Discipline; which yet, (if Mr Dav. his opinion were true, they ought not to
do, but rather to avoid it and flee from it, as being an usurpation of
unlawful power, whereby their people are kept in bondage under the undue power
of Classes and Synods. In special, Mr Parker following Mr Brightman in his
exposition of the Revelation, Ibid. p. 84.85, 86.
says that in Philadelphia, which is the type of the Reformed Churches,
nothing is reprehended, but all things are commended, and among the rest, the
discipline which is noted by the key of David, Rev. 3.7. He says, that the
Angel of the Reformed Churches stands in the Sun, Rev. 19.17. as being the
natural son of the woman clothed with the Sun. Rev. 12.1. that the
Reformed Churches are as the beautiful mountain, the mountain of Christ's
delights, Rev. 16.16. and the hill of precious fruits. He says again, that
the Philadelphian Church is the type of the Reformed Churches; that it is
commanded to hold fast her crown. Rev. 3.11. Now if Mr Parker did judge this
rare and high commendation to be due unto the Reformed Churches, and that by
divine warrant, by the testimony of the holy Ghost foretelling their estate and
the purity of the Discipline observed by them; then was he not of Mr D. his
mind. for then he should have judged them not to be a free people, while the
causes of particular Congregations are judged and determined by another
superior authority in Synods: Then should he rather have judged that their
Churches wanted the key of David, and were deprived of their lawful and proper
privileges and prerogatives, being subject to an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
in the assembly of the combined Churches. And in sum, then should he
(according to Mr D. his opinion) have judged them to carry a yoke of servitude
and subjection, to be cast off with all speed, rather then a crown of lawful
liberty, to be held fast by them: then should he with Mr Can Churches plea.
p. 74.
have taught them to complain in the misapplyed words of the Prophet, Ier.
4.13. Woe unto us, we are spoiled; viz. by the authority of Classes and Synods.

TO conclude, for the judgment of Mr Parker in this controversy, there are few
that did better know, or at least had more means to know his mind, then I.
The truth is, when he came from Leyden, where he and Mr Jacob had sojourned
some while together, he professed at his first coming to Amsterdam, that the
use of Synods was for counsel and advise only, but had not authority to give
definitive sentence in the judging of causes. But after much conference with
him, when he had more seriously and ripely considered of this question, he
plainly changed his opinion, and professed so much not only unto me, but unto
sundry others upon occasion; so that some of Mr Jacobs mind were offended with
him, and expostulated not only with him, but with me also, as being an
occasion of altering his judgment. I had means to understand his mind aright,
and better then those that do so many ways pervert his meaning, he being not
only a member of the same Church, but a member of the same family and living
under the same roof with me; where we had continual and daily occasion to
talk of these things, and at that time when Mr Jacob published his unsound
writings touching this question. He being afterward also a member of the same
Eldership, and by office sitting with us daily to heat and judge the causes of
our Church, and so becoming a member of our Classical combination, yet did he
never testify against the unduepower of the Classis, or complain that we were
not a free people, though the Classis exercised the same authority then, as now
it does. Yea he being also for that time the Scribe of our Consistory, the Acts
of our Eldership and Church being recorded with his own hand, are extant to
show his agreement with us in the government of this Church. And it appears
hereby that he was of another spirit and judgment, then Mr Davenp. who has
published so many vain cavills against the government and discipline of these
Reformed Churches, and this under the cloak and pretense of his agreement with
Mr Parker. Yea and further it is apparent that the knowledge and experience
which Mr Parker got by this his living here in communion with these Churches,
has been a special help unto him in the writing of those learned treatises of
Ecclesiastical policy, which for the substance and maine are as a lively
Table wherein the government of these Reformed Churches is plainly pourtrayed
before our eyes; his discourse being as it were a narration and defense of
their practice; which discourse might yet have been more perfect, had he lived
to finish the same.

SECT. IV.
His Allegation of D. Ames examined.
IO. DAV. To these I might add D. Ames in that which he wrote, in his latter
time, wherein the Answerer pretends that he set down his judgment more
warily, in this matter, Casus co^sc. l. 4. c. 24. q. 4. etc. 25. qu. 5.
then formerly. See his Cases of Conscience, the 4. Book, where he speaks
clearly of this power, as essentially belonging to particular Churches. ANSVV.
Thus instead of Arguments from the Scripture for the confirmation of his cause,
Mr D. still leads us from one man's testimony to another, and thither I am
forced to follow him. And for D. Ames,

1. I may justly testify that I have found him wavering in his opinion,
touching the authority of Synods. For through the inward familiarity which I
had with him a long time, for more then 20 years together, while he lived in
these countries, having oftentimes had earnest conference with him touching
this question, and much complaining of the wrong done to many Ministers by that
book entitled English Puritanisme, which he had translated into Latin,
wherein there is such a peremptory restraint of all Ecclesiastical authority
unto particular Congregations; though he did never plainly retract that which
he published, yet he showed himself diverse times enclining to a change of his
judgment, yea and sometimes acknowledged that Synods had power to judge of
causes, and by their sentence to decree the excommunication of such as had
deserved the same.

II. For his writings; D. Ames when he Preface to Mr Par. book de Pol. Eccl.
anno 1616.
gave so great approbation of Mr Parkers work which he wrote of Ecclesiastical
policy, wherein he does so largely maintain the power of Classes and Synods,
might cause the Readers to think that he was of the same judgment with him,
seeing he gives such general allowance and commendation thereof, without any
exception about this question.

III. It is to be observed that in none of his latter writings he does use that
peremptory phrase, in limiting Synods, or Churches combined in Classes or
Synods, only to counsel or advise, in such manner as was done in that Engl.
Purit. c. 2.
first writing.

IV. And more particularly, in his Treatise of Divinity, he writes thus of
particular Churches, Medull. SS. Theol. l. 1. c. 39. th. 27.
that as their communion requires, the light of nature, and equity of rules and
examples of Scripture do teach, they may and also ought frequently to enter
into a mutual confederation and consociation among themselves in Classes and
Synods, that they may use common consent and mutual help as much as
commodiously may be done, in those things especially which are of greater
moment. Now as in particular Congregations the greatest acts of power and
jurisdiction which are exercised therein, receive their strength from common
consent, and do consist therein: so if in matters of greater weight the common
consent of Synods is to be used, then is a power and authority asscribed unto
them; then ought not particular Churches to proceed without and against the
authority of common consent in Synods. And that mutual help of other Churches
is then most effectual, when there is not only advise, but authority also to
confirm the same. Though D.A. add in the same place, that this combination
does neither constitute a new form of the Church, neither ought by any means
to destroy or empaire that liberty and power which Christ has left unto his
Church, for the directing and furthering whereof it only serves: this we also
willingly grant. When a particular Congregation is hindered and stayed from the
exercise of their authority in an unlawful business, in an unjust
excommunication or election their liberty and power is not hereby destroyed or
taken away, but rectifyed and preserved. Here is to be remembered that which Mr
Par. (as was noted before) says upon like occasion: when some objected that
the Churches of the villages in the Netherlands wanted the power of
excommunication, he replies, Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c. 23. p. 349.
Imo potestas excommunicandi, ordinandi, and jurisdictionis caeterae illis
illibata relinquitur, etc. The power of excommunication, ordination and other
jurisdiction, remains unto them uncorrupted, etc. though they do not proceed
thereunto but with common consent of the Classis.

V. After this, D. Ames in his Disputation against Bellarmine touching Synods
or Councels, does sundry times acknowledge that they have more authority then
only to counsel and advise. This is to be observed in diverse povnts: as first
in the Question whether the greater Prelates only have jus suffragii decisivi,
the right or authority of a determining or definitive suffrage; or whether the
same belong unto the Elders also, or inferior Officers, to whom Bellarmine
allows a consulting voice, but not a definitive. Here D. Ames according to the
receyved opinion of the Protestants, Bellarm. enerv. Tom. 2. l. 1. de Conc. c.
2.
allows unto them also the right and authority of suffrages, when they are
deputed and sent as the Delegates of their Churches unto Synods. This he often
repeateth. And although he say Ibid. th. 8.
that in matters of faith there is no judgment belongs unto men, but of
inquisition, discretion and consultation, and that therefore that whole
distinction betwixt persons defining and consulting is vain: yet it is
manifest and undeniable that in the censuring of Heretics that err in matters
of faith, there is an Ecclesiastical judgment belonging unto men, and a
definitive sentence to be pronounced against such. The matters of faith are as
little to be subjected or submitted unto the judgment of a particular
Congregation, as unto the judgment of Synods: and yet Heretics are not to be
exempted from the judgment and censure of either of them. D. Am. himself in
the same place does plainly acknowledge this distinction betwixt consultation
and definitive suffrage; when he says Ibide^.
Been consulere, majoris est virtutis, quam ex aliorum consilio been definire,
quamvis hoc sit majoris potestatis. To consult well is a matter of greater
virtue, then from other men's counsel to define well, although this be a matter
of greater authority. Seeing therefore he confesses that to have a definitive
voice is a matter of greater authority, then to counsel and advise; and seeing
withal that this power of suffrages and definitive voices belongs unto the
Deputies of Churches in Synods, and that by his confession; it is evident that
herein he asscribes more power unto Synods then he did in that book of English
Puritanisme.

Again, in the question whether a General Council be above the Pope, or the
Pope above the Council; although D. Am. in handling the same, does not so
fully and directly speak against Bellarmine, as D. Whitaker, D. Rainolds,
Iunius, Sibrandus Lubbertus, Chamierus, and other of our Divines, which
maintain that the Pope may be justly condemned, deposed and Excommunicated by
a General Synod; yet does he Ibid. de Conc. c. 7.
acknowledge the Council or Synod to be above the Pope, in the very
proposition of the question, and after takes upon him the defense of the
Arguments commonly used by Protestant Divines for the proof thereof. Would he
have spoken plainly, according to the positions set down in that book of
Engl. Puritan. and according to Mr Dav. his opinion, that limiteth all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction unto a particular Congregation only; he should
then have said, that as the Pope has no power over a General Council, so
neither has the Synod any authority over the Pope, either to depose,
excommunicate, or any way to censure him, but might only counsel and advise
him etc. and he should as well have refuted the Protestants, for giving too
much power to the Synod, as the Papists for giving too much power to the Pope.
Now this he has not done, but has set down his mind in such manner, that
neither the Papists against whom he disputed, nor the Protestants whose
receyved opinion he seemed to maintain, could easily observe any difference in
him from our common tenent.

VI. In another book after this, he acknowledges Cas. Consc. l. 4. c. 29. q
9. th. 23.
that it belongs unto Classes and Synods, when any difficulty is, to declare
by common counsel and to decree, who ought to be excommunicated. Now to decree
an excommunication is an act of power, whereby judicial sentences are
determined, and in all propriety of speech, does contain more in it, then a
bare counsel or admonition: and therefore herein he does apparently give unto
Synods more authority, then only to counsel and advise. And thus D. Burges
had reason to understand this speech of D. Am. which he alleges and
approves, and agreeably thereunto professes; that God has established the
use of Ecclesiastical Synods for Church affairs as well as the gathering of
Churches. Rejoyn. p. 206.
D. A. did either acknowledge the authority of Synods in this sentence, or else
was too blame for deceyving his Reader with ambiguity of speech.

VII. In his Fresh suit ag. Cerem. p. 90.91.
last book which he wrote immediately before his death, when he speaks of
representative Churches, though he dissalow that kind of Synod or Convocation,
which is sometimes kept in England, in respect of Hierarchicall Officers, and
in respect of their imposing humane ceremonies; yet does he not condemn the
Synodall assemblies of Scotland, before Perth, nor the Reformed Churches of
France, which have their association and combination without any Hierarchy. And
yet it is undeniable and most certain that those Synods of Scotland and France
have used Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in censuring of notorious offenders,
and were not only for counsel and advise, as is further manifested hereafter.
Had he dealt plainly and answered his opposite fully, he should have condemned
the Assemblies of Scotland for that jurisdiction which (according to Mr Dav.
his opinion and that book of Engl. Purit.) they unjustly usurped. Yea further
he does justify those Synods; for when as D. Burges Rejoyn. p. 206.
had spoken of such Ecclesiastical Synods, as have jurisdiction and authority
of censure, as appears by his opposing of them unto other Synods, which the
Separatists and Mr Jacob do allow, which have no power to control but by way
of brotherly admonition; D. Am. in his reply unto that place, confesses that
D. Burges did speak of Fresh suit, p. 183.
right Ecclesiastical Synods, and for the other Synods of Mr Jacob and the
Separatists, the same that Mr Dav. allows, he passes away from them, and
says not a word in their defense, which yet had been most pertinent unto the
question.

VIII. As for those places in particular which Mr Dav. alleges out of D. Ames
his Cases of Conscience: for the Cas. co^sc. l. 4. c. 24. q. 4.
first of them, though it be said there, that the power of remooving scandals
and excluding the wicked, for the right thereof, and in respect of the first
act, cannot be separated from a true Church, because it flows immediately and
necessarily from the essence thereof, etc. this is not against us. for 1. When
Synods judge the causes of particular Churches, they do not take away their
power, but only restrain and correct the abuse of their power; the authority
of particular Churches is not separated from them, but the corruption or fault
that appears in the exercise of their authority. They are still permitted to
use their authority and judgment in censures, elections, etc. when the Synod
perceives that they do not go astray therein. 2. Though there be a stream of
authority flowing immediately from the prime Churches, this hinders not, but
helps and furthers the authority of Synods, unto which that power by delegation
is immediately derived. And therefore as there is a fountain of authority
springing out of a particular Congregation; so there is a Sea of authority in
the Synod, where the waters of so many fountains, and the authority of so many
Churches does concur and meet together. As for that other place, Cas. Consc.
l. 4. c. 25. it is answered hereafter in the Allegation that is taken from D.
Voetius.

Lastly, for that Cas. consc. l. 4. c. 29.
place which Mr Can objecteth out of D. Ames, I acknowledge that there is
something more found against the authority of Synods, then in any thing that Mr
Dav. has alleged out of him. But all that D. Ames there writes is not easily
to be admitted. For in that chap. the Question being made, Ibid. qu. 11.
Whether whole Churches or members of another Church, may be excommunicated? He
answers, They cannot properly be excommunicated. He brings 3 Reasons. 1.
Because every Church has communion in it self, out of which it can no more be
cast, then out of it self. But this reason is insufficient, 1. Because, though
every Church has communion in it self, yet not only in it self, and with it
self, but with other Churches also: Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. 1. Cor. 12.13. and by
excommunication it may be deprived and cut off from that comfortable
fellowship, to the great grief, terror and shame thereof, for their
humiliation thereby, and for the warning of others. 2. Because an obstinate and
rebellious Church, by a sentence of excommunication may be cast out of it self,
and deprived of communion in it self either in the dissolution of that
unlawful society, while the Magistrate helps to execute the sentence; or
otherwise in making their communion abominable even unto their own
consciences, by the hand of God working with his own ordinance, in delivering
them to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, and depriving them of inward
rest, notwithstanding any pretended security of the obstinate.

His 2d reason is: Because the power of excommunicating flows from some
superiority; but all Churches are constituted of Christ with an authority
altogether equal. This is also a weak reason for 1. Though all Churches be
equal, and no one above another, yet many meeting together in a Synod, are
superior to one, as was showed before by Mr Parker; Pol. Eccles. 3. p. 129.
Greater is the power of a Synod, then of any one prime and parishionall
Church. 2. When two Churches only are by special covenant united together, as
it may fall out necessarily upon occasion, though this combination be more
imperfect, yet is this Ibid. p. 345. 346.
reputed for a Synod: and though these Churches be in themselves equal, yet
when one of them falls into error and offense, then it becomes subject to the
other, and the other has authority over it to rebuke and censure the same.
This is to be observed by proportion of two brethren, members of one Church:
though both of them be in their estate equal; yet he that offends becomes
subject to the other, who thereupon has power over him, in a degree of binding
and loosing, a power of loosing and forgiving him, if he repent, a power of
retaining his sin and binding him over to further proceeding, if he do not
repent. Luke 17.3, 4. with Matt. 18. On this manner that general commandment
of mutual subjection to one another (1. Pet. 5.5.) ought to take place in two
Churches as well as in two persons.

His 3d reason is, Because the members of one Church, are neither subject to
the government of another, neither do they belong immediately unto the
communion of other Churches, but by the communion of their own Church coming
betwixt. The first part of this reason touching subjection, is answered before:
and for the second part of it, there is no weight therein; for those that
belong unto the communion of other Churches but mediately, are not therefore
exempted from the jurisdiction and authority of them. And again, the covenant
of communion made at the first confederation of Churches for their mutual
government by a Synod, remains firm for the continuance and exercise of
authority, either for or against some particular members of any one Church in
that combination, although that Church unjustly violating their covenant,
should refuse to consent or communicate with the Synod in their acts of
Ecclesiastical judgment and censure of some scandalous persons among them.

Moreover, that which D. Ames writes in the same chapter, may justly lead us to
acknowledge the necessity of Synods, and their authority in the censure of
offenders.

1. He adds in his answer to the same question, touching whole Churches and
members of another Church, that though they may not properly be excommunicated,
Cas. co^s. l 4. c 29. q. 11. th. 26.
yet for manifest heresies or great faults, they may be condemned, forsaken,
rejected, which is proportionable to excommunication. If he grant this
authority unto Synods, thus to condemn whole Churches, then he confesses that
they have more power then only to counsel or admonish. If he grant this
authority unto any other Ecclesiastical persons, and not to Classes or Synods,
the warrant from Scripture ought to be showed. A censure proportionable to
excommunication, requires an authority proportionable to theirs, that may
excommunicate, for the exequution thereof.

II. In the same chapter, propounding this case of conscience, Ibid. q. 10.
What is to be done of the Pastor, where a fit Eldership is wanting, or where
the people do not consent unto ajust excommunication? His resolution is, The
solemn proceeding may be omitted: yet a good Pastor ought to give all
diligence hereunto with the rest of the faithful members, that the substance
of the matter be so far preserved, that holy things be not given unto dogs
and swine, Mat. 7.6. and that all public scandals be publicly reprooved. But
by this direction, neither is the peace of the Ministers conscience provided
for, nor yet the safety of the Church. For by what warrant may a Pastor by his
sole authority, determine and reject some members as dogs, and exclude them
from the holy things, from the Sacraments, and this not only without allowance
of the Eldership, but against the consent of the people and body of the
Congregation, or the greatest part of it? This is in effect an excommunication,
or as he calls it, the essence or substance of the matter: for
excommunication, greater or less, is the only Ecclesiastical judgment
appointed of God to keep holy things from being given unto dogs. To permit this
authority unto the Pastor alone, is to open a door for tyranny, and oppression
of the Church; and is condemned by those 4 reasons which he gives for
confirmation of his answer unto the 9th question immediately going before. It
is the denial of Synods, that drives unto such extremities.

III. That which he here says of public reproving all public scandals, is
again empeached by that which was said before, Ibid. q. 4. th. 12, 13.
that in those Churches which through want of discipline are troubled with
confusion, it is not always necessary for the person offended to admonish the
offendour, because he should oftentimes in vain begin that which he had no
power to finish: that the commandment of solemn admonishing of a brother
offending, does then only bind, when there is some hope that the same will
prevail to take away the offense, either immediately or mediately. for a
means is so far good, as it makes to the obtaining of his end. As though God
did not bless his own ordinance above our hope and reason, above all that we
can think: or as though we were not to use his means and leave the success
unto him. He that begins a good work and proceeds so far till he be stopped
by others, is accepted of God as if he had finished it.

SECT. V.
His Allegation of Mr Baynes examined.
IO. DAV. Apol. reply, p. 242. Dioc. trial. p. 13. and ^^.
To him I may add Mr Paul Baynes, a man of singular noate for learning and
piety, in Cambridge, where he succeeded Mr Perkins, who freely expresses his
judgment for the right of particular Churches, and their independence, in this
sense, in his Diocesans trial. ANSVV. As Mr Baynes was a man of singular note
for learning and piety, so is his testimony of singular note to show the right
use and power of Synods, not only for counsel, but for authority to censure
and judge Ecclesiastical causes; so that particular Churches may not do
within themselves, what they would without their consent.

1. After he had set down 4 conclusions, wherein we agree with the opposites,
he comes to speak of the point of difference, and says, Dioces. trial, p. 13.
That wherein we contradict one another, is, we affirm that no such head
Church was ordained either virtually or actually, but that all Churches were
singular congregations, equal, independent each of other in regard of
subjection. Secondly, we say, were there a Diocesan granted, yet will it not
follow, that Parish-Churches should be without their government within
themselves, but only subject in some more common and transcendent cases. As it
was with the Synagogues and that National Church of the Jews, and as it is
betwixt Provincial and Diocesan Churches. This do I willingly assent unto:
And this is no other thing then that which is practiced in these Reformed
Churches, with whom we are united. Here is no one head-Church, that has more
authority then another, all Congregations are equal, independent each of
other: here is no subjection to any one Diocesan: all are equally and mutually
subject to the Synod consisting of many: their dependency is not upon one more
then another, but it is only in regard of many combined; notwithstanding which
combination they have their government within themselves: being subject to the
Synod only in some more weighty and difficult cases.

II. As for that other place; when some had pleaded from the example of the
Reformed Churches, as if they had not been distinct Churches, etc. Mr Bays so
explaineth their estate and practice (as Mr Parker Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c. 23. p.
348, 349. etc.
more largely had done before) that therein he does not at all prejudice their
subjection to Synods. for speaking of the 24 Churches at Geneva and of their
combination and subjection unto one Presbytery, he says, Dioc. trial. p. 21.
They have power of governing themselves, but for greater edification,
voluntarily confederate, not to use nor exercise their power, but with mutual
communication, one asking the counsel and consent of the other in that common
Presbytery. Secondly, it is one thing for Churches to subject themselves to a
Bishop and Consistory, wherein they shall have no power of suffrage: Another
thing to communicate with such a Presbytery wherein themselves are members and
judges with others. After that again, he adds, Geneva made this
consociation, not as if the Prime Churches were imperfect, and to make one
Church by this union: but because though they were entire Churches, and had the
power of Churches, yet they needed this support in exercising of it, and that
by this means the Ministers and Seniors of it might have communion. Thus he
notes not only the counsel, but the consent of others required. And as at
Geneva a particular Church proceeded not without or against the consent of many
Churches concurring by their Deputies in a common Presbytery: so in these
Low Countries in weightier affairs they proceed not without or against the
consent of many Churches concurring in their Classis.

III. Mr Baynes having showed how every Church being an Ecclesiastical body,
and having Governors every way equal, there is yet no fear of confusion,
seeing Aristocracie, especially when God ordaines it, is a form of government
sufficient to preserve order; hereupon he propounds this objection, Dioc. tr.
p. 68.
But every Church might then do what ever it would within it self. And
hereunto he answers thus, Not so neither; for it is subject to the censure of
other Churches Synodically assembled, and to the Civil Magistrate, who in case
of delinquencie, has directive and corrective power over it. And thus we have
his express testimony and confession, that Synods have authority not only to
counsel and advise, but to censure; that particular Churches are subject to
the censure of other Churches; that consequently there is a double
Ecclesiastical Aristocracie, one in particular Churches severally, another in
many Churches Synodically assembled; that if a particular Church err in
matters of faith and religion, that it is subject, not to the power of the
Magistrate alone, but both to him and to another superior Ecclesiastical
jusridiction, arising from the combination of many Churches, contrary to that
assertion in the English Puritanisme, chap. 2.

IV. Speaking of Presbyters, that is of Ministers and Elders, and of their
government, he says, Ibid. p. 67.
There is nothing found belonging to the power of the keys in foro externo,
but the Scripture does asscribe it to them, power of suffrage in Council, Act.
15. power of excommunication, which is manifest to have been in the Church of
Corinth, etc. While he alleges Act. 15. for an evidence of the Presbyters
power in Synods or Councels, he does hereby acknowledge that in Synods there is
a lawful exercise of jurisdiction and of the power of the keys; and that
therefore they are not only for counsel and advise. To like purpose he says
afterward again, P. 82.
The Apostles did not offer alone to determine the question, Act. 15. but had
the joint suffrages of the Presbytery with them. Not because they could not
alone have infallibly answered, but because it was a thing to be determined by
many; all who had receyved power of the keys, doing it ex officio, and others
from discretion and duty of confessing the truth. And a little after, he
there adds, It is manifest by Ecclesiastical writings of all sorts, that
Presbyters had right of suffrage, not only in their own Presbyteries, but in
Provincial Synods, and therefore in Oecumenicall Synods, which does arise from
a combination of the other, to which their minds went in the instruction of
Bishops receyved from their Churches.

V. Whereas one error uses to accompany another, and commonly those that deny
the authority of Synods, do also in part deny the authority of particular
Elderships, as we see in the Brownists, and therefore after private admonitions
do in a popular order refer the judgment even of lesser matters unto the
public examination and decision of the whole Church assembled together, not
permitting the same to the judgment of the Eldership; Mr Baynes does also
impugn this practice. For he speaking of the rule of Discipline, Matt. 18.
where Christ does manifestly suppose the power of jurisdiction to be in many,
yet after some other observations touching the meaning of the word Church, he
further explaineth himself, when he adds these notes and says, Dioces.
trial. p. 80.
Thirdly, as Christ does speak it of any ordinary particular Church
indistinctly, so he does by the name of Church not understand essentially all
the Congregation. For then Christ should give not some, but all the members of
the Church to be governors of it. Fourthly, Christ speaks it of such a
Church to whom we may ordinarily and orderly complain: now this we cannot to
the whole multitude. Fifthly, this Church he speaks of, he does presuppose it
as the ordinary executioner of all discipline and censure. But the multitude
have not this execution ordinary, as all but Morellius and such Democraticall
spirits do affirm. And the reason ratifying the sentence of the Church, does
show that often the number of it is but small: For where two or three are
gathered together in my name, etc. whereas the Church or congregations
essentiallie taken for teachers and people are incomparably great. Again,
showing on the other side that Christ by the Church does not mean the chief
Pastor, who is virtually as the whole Church; and that the word Church does
ever signify a company, and never is found to note out one person; after other
reasons he pleades from the example and practice in the old Testament, saying,
Ibid. p. 81.
The Church in the old Testament never notes the high Priest virtuallie, but
an assembly of Priests sitting together, as judges in the causes of God.
Wherefore as Christ does indistinctlie presuppose every particular Church: So
he does here only presuppose the joint authority, and joint execution of a
representative Church, a Presbytery of Elders who were Pastors and Governors.
And thus he concludes from Mat. 18. that there is a representative Church of
one particular Congregation; as before from Act. 15. he acknowledged a
representative Church in the Synod, for many Churches.

VI. Whereas Mr Dav. alleges out of Mr Parker, that the power Ecclesiastical
do the essentially and primarily reside in the Church it self, as in its proper
subject: although this be no ground for the refutation of that power and
jurisdiction belonging to Synods, as I have showed P. 89.90
before; yet even this ground also is denied by Mr Baynes, who goes not so
far as Mr Parker Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c. 8. p. 28. etc.
touching the derivation of all Ecclesiastical authority from a particular
Church as from the fountain, but does (in some part) oppose that opinion,
especially in respect of that influence of authority per intuitum, viz. that
which is in Ministers called immediately of Christ, as the Apostles were, yet
in respect of the end and the whole, is said to be from the Church mediately,
etc. And therefore though Mr Parker was far from the opinion of Mr Dav. yet
was Mr Baynes far further from it. His judgment herein, as being worthy the
consideration of the Readers, I have thought meet to set down the more fully.
And first, speaking by occasion of the power of jurisdiction in the Church, he
says, Dioc. trial. p. 69.
Christ has committed it originaliter and exercitative to the representative
Church, that they might Aristocratically administer it. And afterward coming
to entreat of the third maine question in his book, Ibid. p. 98.
Whether Christ did immediately commit ordinary power Ecclesiastical, and the
exercise of it, to any one singular person, or to a united multitude of
Presbyters, he there sets down his judgment more largely, in diverse
conclusions P. 83.84
on this manner.

Conclus. 3. Ordinary power with the execution thereof, was not given to the
community of the Church, or to the whole multitude of the faithful, so that
they were the immediate and first receptacle, receiving it from Christ, and
virtually deriving it to others. This I set down against the Divines of
Constance; our prime Divines, as Luther and Melancthon, and the Sorbonists, who
do maintain it at this day. Yea this seems to have been Tertullians error;
for in his book depudicitia, he makes Christ to have left all Christians with
like power, but the Church for her honor, did dispose it as we see. The
proportion of a politic body, and natural, deceived them, while they will
apply all that is in these to Christ's mystical body, not remembering that
analogon is not in omni simile, for then should it be the same with the
analogatum. True it is, all civil power is in the body politic, the
collections of subjects, then in a King from them: And all the power of
hearing, seeing, they are in the whole man, which does produce them
effectually, though formally and instrumentally they are in the ear and eye.
But the reason of this is, because these powers are natural, and what ever is
natural, does first agree to the community or totum, and afterward to a
particular person and part, but all that is in this body, cannot hold in
Christ's mystical body. In a politic body, power is first in the community,
in the King from them, but all Ecclesiastical power is first in our King
before any in the Church from him. But to whom should he first commit this
power, but to his Queen? Answ. Considering this power is not any Lordly power,
but a power of doing service to the Church for Christ his sake: therefore it is
fit it should be committed to some persons, and not to the whole community,
which are the Queen of Christ. For it is not fit a King should commit power to
his Queen to serve herself properly: but to have persons who in regard of this
relation should stand distinguished from her. Secondly, in natural bodies, the
power of seeing is first immediately in the man, from the man in the eye and
particular members: In the mystical body, the faith of a believer is not first
immediately in all, then in the believer, but first of all and immediately in
the personal believer, for whose good it serves more properly then for the
whole, every man being to live by his own faith. The power of Priesthood was
not first in the Church of Israel, so derived to the Priest: but immediately
from Christ seated in Aaron and his sons. Object. Yea they were given the
Church intuitu ejusdem tanquam finis and totius. Answ. I but this is not
enough, that power may be said to be immediately received by the Church as the
first receptacle of it, and from it derived to others, as the power of seeing
is not only given intuitu hominis as the end of it, and the totum to whom it
agrees, but is in homine as the first subject from whom it comes to the eye.
But the power even of ordinary Ministers is not in the Church. For as all are
said not to have been Apostles, so not to have been Doctors. But if the power
of ordinary teaching had been given to every believer, all should have been
made Doctors, though not to continue so in exercising the power. Secondly, were
the power in the Church, the Church, should not only call them, but make them
out of virtue and power received into her self: then should the Church have a
true Lordlike power in regard of her Ministers. Besides, there are many in the
community of Christians incapable of this power regularly, as women and
children. This conclusion in my judgment Victoria, Soto and others deny, with
greater strength of reason then the contrary is maintained.

Conclus. 4. Fourthly, ordinary power of ministerial government is committed
with the execution of it, to the Senate or Presbytery of the Church. If any
fail in any office, the Church has not power of supplying that, but a
ministry of calling one whom Christ has described, that from Christ he may
have power of office given him in the place vacant.

Conclus. 5. Lastly, though the community have not power given her, yet such
estate by Christ her husband is put on her, that all power is to be executed in
such manner, as stands with respect to her excellency. Hence it is, that the
governors are in many things of greater moment to take the consent of the
people with them. Not that they have joint power of the keys with them, but
because they sustain the person of the spouse of Christ, and therefore cannot
be otherwise dealt with, without open dishonor in such things, which belong in
common to the whole congregation.

Afterward again, P. 88.
speaking of some derivation of power from the Church, in taking in Officers,
he shows that the Church does this only as an instrument, in taking that
person whom Christ describes and would have to be placed in this or that
office: but has not this power in herself either formally or virtually. And
from this Stewardlike power of the Church, he declares that Officers in the
Church are not to administer in the name of the Church, but in the name of
Christ: As a Butler taken in by a servant, does execute his office, not in
master Stewards name, but in his masters, who only out of power did confer
it on him. By these and sundry other assertions, it is apparent that Mr Baynes
was of a far different opinion from Mr Dav. touching the state of particular
Churches, and the authority of Synods. Let us hear his next Author.

SECT. VI.
His Allegation of the Replyer upon D. Downam examined.
IO. DAV. "(r)" Apol. reply. p. 242. Part. 2. l. 2. p. 104, 105. etc.
(i) With whom I might join the Replyer upon Dr Downams defense, who, not
only declares his own judgment herein concurring with the above mentioned,
but also joyneth with them the suffrages of diverse others, at the Centurists,
Illyricus, D. Andrews Bishop of Winchester, Dr Fulke, Willet, Thom: Bell,
Cyprian, Augustine, Gerson, Ferus. ANSVV. I. If this Author did in his
judgment concur with the above mentioned, and in special with Mr Baynes
next above mentioned, as Mr Dav. affirms, then did he allow the jurisdiction
and authority of Synods for the censure of things done in particular Churches;
then did he judge each Congregation to be subject unto the censure of other
Churches Synodically assembled.

II. This testimony of the Refuter of D. Downa. is alleged also, and more
plainly by Mr Can, who expresses his words, and says Churches plea, p. 86.
he often affirms, Lib 2. par. 2. p. 104
that the administration of all Church Matters, at first was in every
Congregation, the right in the Church, the execution in the Presbytery thereof.
And besides this, he alleges another place, where he says, For this purpose
he instanceth Cenchrea Lib. 1. part. 2. p. 22, 23.
, howsoever it was the Port of Corinth, and not far from it, as Radcliffe or
Lime-house to London, yet is was a distinct Church, from that of Corinth, and
alike endued with full power of Ecclesiastical government. But in all this,
the jurisdiction of Synods is not denied; as is manifest by a like instance
here in these Reformed Churches. The villages of Diemen and Sloten, this on the
one side and that on the other side of Amsterdam, and not far from it, and in
all apperance far less in comparison of Amsterdam, then Cenchrea was in
respect of Corinth, yet are these small Congregations, distinct Churches from
that of Amsterdam, and alike endued with full power of all Ecclesiastical
government. That which Mr Can by a Note in the margin would have specially
to be marked, may as well be observed touching these and many other little
Churches hereabout, that they have in themselves the administration of all
Church Matters, and the execution thereof by their Presbyteries, as fully and
as amply as the Church of Amsterdam, or any other of the greatest Churches in
these countries, being alike combined together in the Classis, and equally
subject to one another in the Lord for their mutual guidance.

III. Even this Replyer upon D. Downam, Mr S. who now rests in the Lord, has
been very careful not to prejudice the authority of Synods, as may appear
further if we consider what he answers concerning those whom D. D. calls
the late Disciplinarians, such as were of Mr Jacobs opinion. First, he says,
Reply. par. 1. l. 2. p. 106.
As for Synods, if they be lawfully called, well ordered, and their
constitutions by royal authority ratified; the Doctor can give neither more
honor nor obedience to them, then they do, as their Protestation shows,
Art. 8.12, 13, 14. Now as for the present Synods, such as are in these Reformed
Churches, they are such as he mentions here, called and assembled by
authority of the Magistrates, and their Acts approved, confirmed and ratifyed
by them. This may be seen in the Records of that National Synod holden at
Dort, Anno 1618. and 1619. where Act. Synod. Dordr. Ses. 138.
the Decree of the States General, which are the sovereign and supreme
Magistrates in these countries, is inserted among the Acts of the Synod, for
the ratification thereof. And this is not only observed in National Synods,
but in the Provincial Synods also, held every year, where the States have
also their Deputies, Civil Magistrates, which ordinarily are present in those
Assemblies, to see that all things be well ordered therein. Thus far
therefore, according to his relation, there is an obedience and subjection due
unto Synods. Again whereas he proceeds to describe their opinion, on this
manner; If they want Regal authority to assemble or to ratify them; they
think that by Divine or Apostolical ordinance, their decrees or canons ought
not to be imposed on any Churches, without their particular and free consents:
It is here to be observed how he notes only what they think, without
approbation thereof; he declares their opinion, but does not acknowledge it to
be his own judgment. Neither had he reason so to judge: for in the primitive
Church, when there were no Christian Magistrates, there was then a lawful use
of Synods, and that by Divine and Apostolical ordinance, as has been showed
before. And as for particular consents: if any Church walked disorderly and
offensively, there is no reason to think that the censures and decrees of
Synods against such Churches should be differed until they did consent unto
the censuring of themselves. It was sufficient that at their first combination
there was a general and free consent, to submit themselves in the Lord
mutually unto other Churches Synodically assembled. And yet more plainly, in
the same place he professes that he differs in judgment from them, when he
concludes, Thus much shall suffice to be spoken in defense of those later
Disciplinarians, from whom although in somethings I confess I dissent, yet I
cannot consent to the D. taking away of their innocence. Though in some things
Dr D. did unjustly charge them, yet Mr S. the Refuter of D. D. did also judge
that in some things there was just cause to dissent from them.

IV. Besides the foresaid Refuter of D. Down. there is also another learned
man, who besides his great learning having also as great experience in the
discipline and government of the Church according to the practice of the
Reformed Churches, has of later time written a complete and large refutation
of D. Downam. And in this refutation he has dealt more plainly and
circumspectly in this point, then Mr S. has done. For whereas D. D. relating
the opinion of these later Disciplinarians, as new and false, sets down their
assertion in these words, Sermon at Lambeth, p. 4.
That every parish by right has sufficient authority within it self
immediately derived from Christ, for the government of it self in all causes
Ecclesiastical; this assertion is not admitted but with sundry cautions. To
omit the rest, these are the two last, wherein the authority of Synods is
evidently acknowledge; viz. Gersom Bucer. Dissert. de Gub. Eccl p. 14.
The fourth caution is, that the authority given to a particular Church, is not
sufficient for the handling of all Ecclesiastical causes by their own
judgment, but for those only which are so particular, that they may be deemed
altogether proper unto it. For whatsoever case falls out belonging unto the
common order of neighbor Churches, we judge that the same is to be brought
unto a more general assembly, wherein these Churches do jointly meet
together. The last caution is, that both the institution and observation of all
things, especially if they seem to procure any discommodity or not to make for
aedification, be subjected unto the judgment of the next Churches meeting
together in one. For we do not permit, that the Governors of parishes should
dispatch all things as they list, but will have them to submit themselves to
the inspection of the Churches. For we think that of Augustine ought by all
means to be observed: Aug. l. 2. de Bapt. in Donat. ca. 9.
Semper universum partibus jure optimo praeponi; that by good right the whole
is always to be preferred above the parts, etc. Thus expressly has this
Author given warning, that the whole combination of many Churches united in
Synods is of greater authority then any part; that particular Churches owe a
subjection unto the same.

Lastly, as for those many other Authors, the Centurists, Illyricus, D.
Andrews B. of Winch. D. Fulk, Willet, Thom: Bell, Cyprian, Augustine, Gerson,
Ferus, whose names are here alleged by Mr Dav. without specifying their words,
they are all of them, except one or two, alleged by Mr Can, and in answer
unto him Chap. 7. sect. 1.2.4.6.
hereafter, it is showed that all and every one of them are against Mr Davenp.
his opinion, all giving a clear and plain testimony for the jurisdiction of
Synods.

SECT. VII.
His Allegation of D. Voetius examined.
IO. DAV. Apol. reply, p. 242, 243. Desp. cause. Pap. lib. 2. sect. 2. cap. 11.
p. 186.
To the same purpose, has a worthy and learned wrighter of these countries,
Voetius, Professor of Divinity in Vtrecht, whose words I thus translate. The
Church is the spouse of Christ, which is the proper and adaequate subject of
that power, to whom Christ has committed that delegate right, reserving the
chief to himself. Which ought to be and to remain so proper to the Church,
that it, neither may be snatched away by the authority of others, nor lost by
their voluntary concession, nor committed to the trust of any other; although
diverse acts belonging to the calling of a Minister may and ought to be
performed by certain members of the Church. ANSVV. All that is here affirmed
by this worthy Writer, being granted of us, yet is not Mr Dav. his opinion
justified, nor the authority and jurisdiction of Synods overthrown hereby. for,

I. Christ was the Bridegroom of his Church, and the Church was the Spouse of
Christ, and honored with this title under the old Testament, as well as under
the new: Sol. song. chapter 1. and 2. etc. Esa. 50.1. Ezekiel. 16.8. Hos. 1. and 2.
and 3. 1. etc. And yet it is confessed by my opposites that under the old
Testament, before Christ's coming in the flesh, particular Congregations and
Synagogues were subject unto the Synedrion, and that all jurisdiction was not
limited unto the several villages or cities in Israel, or to the Synagogues
therein. And therefore this title of Spouse and Bridegroom does not infer
any restraint of jurisdiction in the new Testament more then in the old.

II. As when the Church of Antioch sent their Delegates or Deputies unto
Jerusalem, and the controversy raised in their Church was decided and
determined by the definitive sentence and decree of the Synod, Act. 15. they
did not thereby loose their power, but it still remained with them, for the
judgment of their causes; so those Churches that now submit their causes to
the judgment of Classes and Synods, are not thereby spoiled of their power:
yea it is their own authority and power which by their Delegates is ^^^rcised
in those Assemblies. Moreover the Churches are herein so far from ^oosing
their power, that on the contrary they might be said to loose their liberty,
right and power, if they had not authority for their own help and others thus
to send their messengers unto such assemblies.

III. It is to be observed how Mr Dav. does mistranslate the words of D.
Voetius, by omitting a word of special importance, which both he and D. Ames
also Cas. co^s. l. 4 c. 25. q. 5. th. 26.
using the like speech, have expressly mentioned: for whereas their words
touching the power of the Church and the propriety thereof, are these, ut
alienae fidei plane committi non possit, that it may not altogether be
committed to the trust of others; he omitting this word plane, which signifyes
altogether, utterly, or quite and clean, does hereby corrupt the testimony
which he alleges. For though the Church may not utterly or quite and clean
commit her power to the trust of others; yet in some kind and in some measure
it may and ought to be done: For the kinds, D. Voetius gives instance in
diverse acts, belonging to the calling of a Minister, which may and ought to be
performed by some certain members thereof; and the same is to be considered
for diverse other acts of like nature: And for the measure, so (as he also
notes) that Christ the Bridegroom, reserve the supreme authority unto himself;
which is then acknowledged by his people, when they do not receive nor follow
the authority or sentence of any man or Officer, of any particular
Congregation, or of any Synod, further then they in their consciences find it
to agree with the sentence of Christ revealed in his word. As the Lord himself
by an immediate call committed power and authority unto the trust of his
servants, whose faithfulness is thereupon commended: 1. Tim. 1.11, 12. 1. Cor.
9.17. Gal. 2.7. so does the Church also, both in the ordinary calling of men
unto office, and in the occasional sending of them about particular works and
affairs of the Church; Phil. 2.25. 2. Cor. 8.19, 23. 1. Cor. 16.3. and
especially in communicating their power unto them, to give sentence in Synods.

IV. That D. Voetius does allow the authority and jurisdiction of Synods, we
have many testimonies our of this very book of his, which Mr D. alleges. I.
Though he show that Ecclesiastical power of judgment is first and immediately
in particular Churches, yet he notes withal, Desp. cause. Pa. l. 2. s. 1. c. 5.
p. 96.
that this power arising thence is by a certain fit proportion applied unto
many Churches united in some kingdom or kingdoms, or in the whole world. This
is done in National and General Synods. II. Speaking of a public
Reformation, which he calls authoritative, he shows Ibid. p. 62.
how it (being universal) may be done either in an universal Synod, or
without a Synod. Speaking of Reformation made by instruction, exhortation, or
invitation, he says it may be done of any one Preacher, yea and in some sort
of any one Christian: but for the Reformation wherein there is an actual
change of public worship, he says, it is necessary that the help and consent
of many, and those not of one order, do concur; and that one or a few are
not sufficient, unless it fall out that the authority and parts of those many
who are interested therein, be devolved unto them. Thus he allows the
jurisdiction of Synods, while he acknowledges that the authority of many may
be derived and communicated unto a few; which is the very thing wherein the
jurisdiction of Synods does consist. III. He defends P. 79.
Luther appealing from the sentence of excommunication given out by Pope Leo
the tenth, unto a lawful General Synod: he allows the like appeal made by
the Archbishop of Colen, and the appeal of the King of Navarre, and the
Prince of Conde, the form whereof was affixed or set up at Rome; in all which
the authority of Synods is acknowledged. IV. He allows P. 85.
the example of those Churches, which determined matters by a public, and
National or Provincial judgment. Speaking of the Reformers of Religion, he
says, P. 169.
Luther had the right of suffrage, and used the same in the University of
Wittebergh, as one of the Professors; in the Church, as one of the Pastors;
in the neighbour-churches of Saxony, as a member of them, in the name and by
commission from the Church of Witteberg, and not further. So did Zuinglius,
Farell, Viret, Calvin, and all the rest. A just pattern of the Classical and
Synodall jurisdiction exercised in the Reformed Churches in these countries at
this day. V. He avoucheth and maintains P. 201.
that a lawful Synod or Church by their sentence and authority may and ought
to depose Ministers that are Idolatrous, Heretical and the like. An express
testimony, that Synods have not only right of counsel and admonition, but
also of exercising Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the censuring of offenders.
He adds there, that the Western Churches ought to remove such Clerks or
keep them out from entering, either by a common, or each of them by their
particular judgment, either in a Synod or without a Synod. VI. Even in this
very page and place that Mr D. alleges, P. 186.
D. Voetius alleging the example of the Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15.3.4, 22,
23. to show that Ecclesiastical power is given to many in the Church, does
thereby acknowledge the authority of Synods. If he had thought they might only
counsel and admonish, then had this place alleged been insufficient to prove
the thing propounded by him, nor suitable to the other places alleged together
in the same place, viz. Matt. 18.17. 2. Cor. 2.6. with 1. Cor. 5.4. which are
to be understood of the jurisdiction and authority of the Church in censuring.
This power is also again P. 187. and 189.
poynted at by him in the same chapter.

Lastly, to come from his words unto his practice; Whereas this learned
Minister of Christ was deputed and sent Act. Sy. nod. Not. Dordr. sess. 2.
with others unto the last famous National Synod at Dort, and was reckoned
among those Worthies whose praise is so great in the Gospel, being the
messengers of the Churches and the glory of Christ; when as he there among the
rest did exercise the authority of suffrage for the decision of diverse
controversies, and gave sentence with others in the Ibid. ses. 138.
censure and deposition of diverse both Ministers and Elders, it appears
hereby that he did not think all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to be limited
unto a particular Congregation. If Synods might go no further then to counsel
and admonish, then had D. Voetius with the rest been an usurper of unlawful
power. Besides, this order of Classical and Synodall assemblies, together with
their jurisdiction and authority, in such sort as it was before, and is still
practiced in these Reformed Churches, was confirmed and established
Rercke^orden. Not. Syn. Dordr. Art, 22.52.
in that same National Synod, where D. Voetius appeared as a member thereof,
and according to which he was bound to practice both while he was Minister at
Heusden, and since also at Vtrecht, being not only Professor in the
University, but also Pastor of the Church in the said city. So that there is
no cause to doubt but that his judgment touching this controversy is the same
with that which I have here noted out of his writings, and for the substance of
the matter, no other then that which I maintain throughout this discourse.

SECT. VIII.
Touching the English Church at Franckford in Q. Mary's time.
IO. DAV. Apol. reply. p. 243. A discourse of the troubles in the Engl. Chur.
at Franckf. Art. 62. Art. 67.
And to conclude, thus it was ordered in the English Church at Franckford,
among the exiles in those Marian days, that if all the Ministers and Seniors
be suspected, or found parties; if any appeal be made from them, that then
such appeal be made to the body of the Congregation, etc. and that the body of
the Congregation may appoint so many of the Congregation to hear and determine
the said matter, or matters, as it shall seem good to the Congregation.
Again, If any controversy be about the doubtful meaning of any word or words
in the Discipline, that first it be referred to the Ministers, or Seniors: and
if they cannot agree thereupon, then the thing be referred to the whole
Congregation.

ANSVV. I. It is to be observed, that these two Articles of Discipline being
alleged against me by Churches plea, p. 36.
Mr Can as well as by Mr Dav. there is this difference betwixt them, that Mr
Can adds more words then he should, and Mr Daven. omits some words that
should have been added. That which Mr Can adds, is against himself, and
serves to condemn the practice of the Brownists, when he faith of the
Ministers and Seniors, that they have authority to hear and determine, etc.
That which Mr Dav. omits, and refuses to express, serves to reproove such as
complain unjustly of excepting against the Elders judgment. For when that 62d
Article speaks of appeal to be made unto the body of the Congregation, the
Ministers, Seniors, and parties excepted; this latter clause shows there is
just cause of excepting against the Elders judgment sometimes; and that they
are to be refused as incompetent judges, being parties. This brief clause being
of special use in our controversy, ought not to have been omitted by Mr Dav.

II. That which they allege for appeal unto the body of the Congregation,
does not overthrow the authority of Synods. This granting one kind of appeal
does not exclude or deny another. Seeing particular Congregations are subject
to error, and many of them daily do err, why should not appeal be granted
from them unto Classes and Synods, especially where there is no Magistrate that
can or will judge of such errors?

III. This appeal made unto the body of the Congregation was not usually
permitted, but extraordinarily in cases of special necessity, when the
Ministers and Seniors were not able to end the controversies brought unto them:
the express words of the Article are ^isc* of troubl in Engl Chapter at Franckf.
art. 57.
in case they cannot end them, then afterward to be referred to the whole
Congregation. Their ordinary practice was otherwise, as appears in other
Articles of their Discipline, where it is plainly ordained, Ibid. art. 59.
that the Ministers and Seniors shall have authority to hear and determine, on
the behalf of the whole Church all offenses (determinable by the Congregation)
committed by any person in the Congregation: unless the party called before
them have just occasion to take exception to the said Ministers and Seniors; or
to appeal from them as not competent judges. And afterward again there is
another strict and severe decree Art. 63.
If any person do unjustly take exceptions to any of the Ministers, or appeal
from the whole ministry: that then such persons, beside the punishment for the
principal cause shall also be punished as a contemner of the Ministry and a
disturber of the Church. This order, as it serves to condemn the practice of
the Brownists, as tending to the disturbance of the Church, while they give no
power of judging and deciding causes unto the Eldership; so it serves for the
reproof both of them and Mr Davenp. in denying the authority of Synods: for if
the Church may in ordinary cases commit their authority unto an Eldership, and
not deprive themselves of their right, then why may they not do so likewise
unto Classes and Synods?

IIII. This English Church at Franckford did commit and delegate the power of
judging controversies, not only to their Elders, but upon occasion even unto
other particular and private members of the Church, which had no
Ecclesiastical office; and this in diverse degrees, as 1. In case some of the
Eldership, though the lesser part, were excepted against as parties: 2. When
the greater part were excepted against: 3. When all the Ministers and Seniors
were suspected, etc. Thus they did erect as it were three several sorts of
Classes or Synods within themselves for the judicature of such causes as could
not be ended by the Eldership. Thus they ordained in these three several
Articles of their Discipline, which follow.

Of the first sort: Art. 60.
Item, if any have just occasion to take exception to some of the Ministers and
Seniors, and not to the more part: that then those of the Ministers and Seniors
to whom the exception is made, in this case shall not be judges, but in this
case for the time removed from the ministry, and that the rest of the
Ministers and Seniors to whom no exception shall be made, with as many of the
Congregation joined to them, as they be in number which shall be excepted,
shall be arbiters and judges in the said causes: and that the said persons so
to be joined to the Ministers and Seniors, shall be appointed by the
Congregation, the Ministers and Seniors not excepted, giving their voices as
others of the Congregation.

Of the second sort: Art. 61.
Item, if exception be taken to the more part of the Ministers and Seniors,
that then the Church shall appoint six more to be judges with the rest of the
Ministers, against whom exception is not made: the same rest of the Ministers
having their voices in the election of the six, as other members of the Church.

Of the third sort: Art. 62.
Item, if all the Ministers and Seniors be suspected or found parties, or if
any appeal be made from them, that then such appeal be made to the body of
the Congregation, the Ministers, Seniors and parties excepted. And that the
body of the Congregation may appoint so many of the Congregation to hear and
determine the said matter or matters, as it shall seem good to the
Congregation.

Now as in all these Co^missions the Church did not loose her authority, but
did rather exercise the same herein; this very act of delegation being a
testimony of her power: so in like manner (if the example of this Church
alleged against me may be followed of us) other Churches may also send their
Deputies and Delegates unto Classes and Synods, for the judgment and decision
of such causes as cannot be so well ended among themselves.

V. Lest any should object that in all these Deputations, the judgment of
controversies was referred unto such Officers or members of the Church as were
within the same Congregation, and that they did not submit their causes to the
determination of any other judges out of themselves; it is therefore further to
be observed that there was an order agreed upon by the English Church at
Franckford, that in the time of their contention Ibid. p. 37.38. and 41.48.
the matter should be determined by these five notable learned men, which were
of other Churches, to wete, Calvin, Musculus, Martyr, Bullinger and Viret. This
agreement was put in writing. To that all gave their consents. This day was
joyful. Thanks were given to God, brotherly reconciliation followed, etc. Yea
the holy communion was upon this happy agreement also ministered. This agreement
is often repeated, and laid down as a ground of comfort, and as a proof of
their equity that did most constantly cleave thereunto.

Afterward again, when more contention was raised in that Church, both the
opposite parties were content not only to hear the counsel and advise of men
in other Churches, but to submit unto their judgment, as far as men may
submit unto the sentence of any particular Church whatsoever. And for evidence
hereof it is recorded how the one part of the Church declared their mind by
this P. 100.101.
writing following:

We offer and permit with most willing minds (having the license of the
Magistrate as it may well be for this purpose) that all our controversies and
contentions whatsoever, which have been sown and brought in among us sithence
the beginning of this breach, and since the first day we began to strive,
until this present time and hour: to be debated, decided and determined by
Arbiters, being none of this our Congregation, and yet from among the brethren,
our country men, equally and indifferently, by the parties disagreeing, to be
chosen upon this condition, that not only the election of Ministers and
besides all other things done by the order of the said discipline, stand in
suspense, to be allowed or disallowed by the determination and judgment of the
Arbiters to be chosen as is aforesaid. written the 5. of April, Anno 1557.

The other part of the Church did in like manner witness their consent, by
their writing, the copy whereof was as follows:

We submit ourselves and are contented to commit all manner of controversies
that have heretofore risen amongst us in the Church, to such Arbiters as the
Magistrate has appointed, and to all such as they call unto them to the
hearing and determining thereof, according to Gods word and good reason. And
thus simply and plainly without any manner of exception or condition. In witness
whereof we have subscribed our names the 5. of April, Anno 1557.

Though there were some differences betwixt these parties in other particulars,
yet they all agreed in this, to commit authority and power unto some out of
themselves, whom they would set up as Judges over them. Hereby it does appear
that they did not confine and restrain the judgment of Ecclesiastical causes
within the limits of one particular Congregation only. And if a particular
Church might thus refer their controversies to the judgment of four or five
persons out of themselves, then might they as well or better be referred to the
judgment of many Churches united together in Classes and Synods.

VI. This English Church which sojourned at Franckford, for four or five
years in Q. Mary's time, was not a settled and established Church: they wanted
the opportunity of combining themselves with other English Churches. It was the
misery of this Church, that they wanted the help of ordinary Classes and
Synods: and it is unreasonable to make the special defect or want of some one
Church, a precedent for other Churches, to deprive them of that mutual help
which they may conveniently enjoy, and which God offers unto them. This English
Church Disc. of troubl. in Engl. Chapter at Franckf. p. 27, etc. p. 62, etc. p.
135, etc.
was exercised with great troubles and continual dissentions all the time of
their abode at Franckford, to the great grief and offense of many. The form of
their Discipline, and these Articles here objected by Mr Dav. and Mr Can. were
not fully agreed upon: the Pastor and the Elders with some of the Church
dissented from the greater part of the Congregation. And in such case, as Mr
Fenner, before mentioned, does testify, S. Theol. l. 7. c. 7. p. 278, etc.
the controversy ought to have been brought to a greater Senate, to a Classis
or Synod, which he calls a Presbytery of more Churches, for the deciding
thereof. The want of this was the cause of their woe.

VII. The English Church at Franckford in the want of a Classis might so much
the rather allow appeals unto the Congregation, because there were in that
Church many learned men, able to discern and judge of causes. In that Church
Disc. etc p. 60.
they set up an University, and chose several men for the reading of Hebrew,
Greek, and Divinity lectures. The learned men that repaired unto this Church
were also as famous for their piety and sincerity, enduring persecution for the
Gospel of Christ, choosing rather to live in banishment with their afflicted
brethren, then to enjoy the pleasures and promotions of Antichrist, which they
might have had in their own country, if they would have bowed their necks to
his yoke. In such a Church it was more tolerable to appeal unto the body of
the Congregation, then in many other that are far unlike. And yet if such a
Church, abounding with so many Worthies, could not well subsist alone, in their
want of a Classical government, but fell into so great contentions and
scandals; this may justly serve for the warning of other Churches, and teach
them to seek the help of neighbour-churches, and to submit themselves mutually
unto such combinations, as the Lord shall give opportunity.

Lastly, when as afterward it pleased God to visit his people, and to restore
the light of the Gospel and true Religion unto England by that gracious and
noble instrument of his goodness, Qu. Elizabeth, of ever blessed memory, then
these excellent and eminent lights of his Church returning again into their
country, did give a plain testimony unto this truth, that all Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is not limited unto a particular Congregation. Some of them being
promoted unto chief places of government in England, did by their practice
profess that particular Churches may submit themselves unto a superior
authority out of their own Congregation. Some of them became Ministers of the
Church of Scotland, and stood for the maintenance of that Discipline, which
from the beginning of the Reformation, acknowledged the authority and
jurisdiction of Synods. None of them (for ought I ever heard) that dreamed of
the single uncompounded policy. Though there were some differences among them
concerning the government of the Church, yet no one of them or of those other
exiles who had sojourned at Strasbrough, Basel, Zurick, Arrow, Geneva and other
places, in Q. Mary's days, that left behind them any monument of their
agreement with Mr Dav. and Mr Cann. in limiting Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
unto a particular Church. But of this story, we have occasion to speak further
hereafter, Chap. 7. Sect. 5.
where Mr Can. again brings more objections from thence.

SECT. IX.
Mr Dav. his pretense of agreement with Iunius examined.
BEsides the former Allegations, Mr Dav. pretends his agreement with Iunius
in this question: And after his vain excuse of H. Grotius for slighting the
authority of Classes and Synods, as he did in that treatise which he published
against Sibr. Lubbertus, he says, Apol. reply, p. 225.
thereupon Bogermannus published his Annotations learnedly and succinctly
penned, in defense of D. Sibrandus, wherein, for answer of that part which
concerned the necessity and authority of Synods, he referred Grotius to what
Iunius had written against Bellarmine de nceessitate and potestate Conciliorum,
wherein I fully agree with Iunius. ANSVV. Had Mr Dav. fully agreed with Junius,
then had it been meet that the should have brought at least some one pregnant
testimony out of Junius, to have manifested their agreement, which he has not
done. If he will constantly and fully abide by this confession of his full
agreement with Junius in that which he wrote against Bellarmine concerning the
necessity and authority of Synods, then must he acknowledge that they have
jurisdiction over particular Churches for the judging of their causes, and that
they are not only for counsel and admonition, etc. because Animadv. ad
Bellarm. Contr. 4. de Council.
Junius is plentiful in witnessing thus much of them: as appears,

First, Bellarmine complaining how the Protestants by the instigation of Satan,
did destroy Ecclesiastical judgments: Junius answers, In proefat. nota. 1.
We also complain of the deceytfull arts of Satan: but they are not to be
deemed to take away Ecclesiastical judgments, which with Paul, 1. Gor. 14.
do urge that the spirits of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets: but that
do we urge, etc. Junius applying this to Synods, does thereby confess that
they are for censure and judgment of causes and persons, and not for counsel
only. He acknowledges the Protestants justly desired such a Council, Not. 11.
in quo cognosci, decerni and confici omnia posse confiderent, that is, wherein
they hoped that all things might be examined, decreed and dispatched. This was
more then counselling, and employed jurisdiction and power of judgment. More
plainly, he says, we desire a Council, etc. N. 13.
after such a manner as we see to have been done of old, in the examples of
Synods, especially of the first Nicene, of the Chalcedon, etc. Now it is
manifest in the Histories, that in these Synods there was not only a giving of
counsel, but an exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the censure and
condemnation of Heretics: as is hereafter showed at large. Again, when
Bellarmine accuses the Protestants, that they desire a General Council, but
such a one as never was: Junius answers, N. 38.
It is false. But if we should desire such a Council as Mr Dav. describes,
such a one as should be for counsel and admonition, without jurisdiction; then
should the Answer of Junius be false: we should desire such a Synod as never
was. It cannot be showed that ever such a General Council was held. When
Bellarmine accuses Melancthon for requiring such conditions of a Synod, that
neither the persons nor causes of men should be condemned, and that so nothing
at all should be decreed in the Synod: Junius answers that this is feigned or
forged of him; and shows further that though it do not become the Church to
use a bloody cure, and corporal punishments, yet there is a more wholesome
order, and tells what that is, saying, N. 40.
What? Arius being overcome: -- and convinced, how was he punished of the
Synod? How was Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches, in those renowned Synods?
Silence was enjoined them, and their office taken away: nothing more. A most
express testimony of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction exercised in the deposing of
evil Ministers. This was more then counsel only.

After the Preface, when in the book it self Bellarmine complains of
Heretics, that they devise a new form of Synods, and then give almost no
authority unto them: Junius answers, Animadv. in Co^tr. 4. de Council. l. 1.
c. 1. n. 1.
As for us, we deny both; and will (God willing) confute the first affirmation
in the first book, and the latter in the second. But Mr Dav. cannot justly deny
either of those assertions: for first, the single uncompounded policy does
necessarily infer a new form of Synods: if it be not so, let him show when
and where such a form was ever used of old. And for the second, it is granted
by Mr D. his own confession, when he alleges Apol. reply. p. 47.
that other Churches have no power of hindering a faulty election, but by
admonition, which power every Christian has in another, for his good. Is not
this to give almost no power to Synods? Bellarmine to show the divine original
of Synods alleges Matt. 18. there am I in the midst of them. Iunius assenting
to him, says In cap. 3. l. 1. de Conc, n. 1.
It is also demonstrated in these words of the Apostle Paul, 1, Cor. 14.32. The
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Both places import an
authority whereunto subjection is required. When Bellarmine says of Bishops in
Synods, that they are not Counselors but Judges; Junius notes N. 2.
that they are neither Counselors nor Judges, but declarers and ministers of
the judgment of God in the holy Scripture: in which words he asscribeth as
much power and jurisdiction unto Synods as he does unto particular Churches.
His meaning for both (according to his use of speech) is that they are not
absolute but ministerial judges.

Whereas Bellarmine reckons up sundry sorts of persons that may be present at
Synods, some as judges, which have a deciding or determining voice; some for
disputation, which have a consulting voice; some as servitours or attendants;
some for the defense of the Synod, to maintain peace, etc. Junius denies not
this but shows that his enumeration is insufficient, saying, Ibid. in c. 15.
n. 2.
It is to be added, others as parties or persons accused, whose cause is to be
handled: for certainly it is inhumane that any should be condemned not cited,
or not heard: Others again to be Auditors, seeking their edification by
enjoying that communication of holy things. Hereby it is plain that he
acknowledged the jurisdiction of Synods, and that they were not only for
counsel; both because he allows a distinction of them in the Synod which had
the authority of a determining voice, from them that did only dispute or
consult; and because he intimates a judicial proceeding in the Synods, by
mentioning parties accused, their citing or calling of them, and the condemning
of them, which imports a further matter then only of admonition or counsel.
Whereas Bellarmine accuses us that we allow any learned men, though Laics, to
have a determining voice, let their office be what it will: Junius answers,
N. 4.
These things have none of us said or thought, as they are here laid down.
This is that which we say; such are to be taken into the Synod which are
furnished with gifts and calling; which for gifts are godly, honest, learned;
for their calling, which are either ordinarily appointed to teach, or
extraordinarily sent for and brought by just authority. Now this necessity of a
calling which he so See c. 16. n. 10. and 18. and 20. etc. 17. n. 1.
often urges and requires to be in the members of a Synod, does argue a
special power and authority belonging unto them, by virtue whereof they may
give sentence in the judgment of causes; whereas to admonish or counsel
requires no more power then that which every Christian has in another, for his
good, as Mr D. himself confesses. To the same purpose Junius shows against
Bellarmine, that the meaning of Theodosius and Valentinian was not to admit
Bishops only, but that Ibid. c* 15. n. 13.
those only might hear, examine, and give sentence in a Synod, which being
sent from the Churches unto the Synod, were reckoned up of the Bishops,
according to their letters of public authority which they were wont to
exhibit. Again he says, N. 15.
They which are present without the authority of the Church, of them some may
only hear, as the laics or common people: some may be used in consultations,
as the learned men, especially Ecclesiastical persons; but they may not give
definitive sentence. And thus still by distinguishing those that gave counsel,
from those that gave sentence in the Synod, it appears he acknowledged a power
of jurisdiction in Synods, and that they were not only for counsel. So when
Bellarmine says it was a fault in the Council of Basil, that Presbyters or
other learned men besides Bishops, were allowed to have not only a consulting
voice, but a deciding suffrage, and affirms that this was against the custom
of all antiquity, etc. Junius answers, N. 19.
This we deny: for it was the first institution, Act. 15. and not only the
manner and custom. Seeing therefore there was such an institution of the
Apostles, and in their assembly, what need was there to allege custom? etc.

When Bellarmine charge the Protestants as holding that a Synod is nothing
but an inquisition; and that Christ alone and his written word has a
determining voice: Junius says, Ibid. in c. 18. n. ^.
It is false. for Synods have both an inquisition of that which is true, just,
holy by religious communication, and also a ministerial giving of sentence.
Though he show there and in many annotations following, that it is not lawful
for Christians to obey them further then they agree with the Scriptures; that
their sentence of it self is but a persuasion, and not a constraint; a
ministerial judgment, not of absolute authority of itself, etc. yet he N. 3.
grants the Lord has commanded that we should obey the sentence of a lawful
Synod, assembled together in his name, etc. He says, N. 14.
Synods have true judgments, so far as they are of God according to the
tables of his truth and commandment: of themselves they are not judgments,
but declarations, publications, and ministerial pronouncings of the truth and
judgments of God. And more then this cannot be yielded to any Ecclesiastical
judicatory whatsoever. Herein he fully grants as much jurisdiction to Synods,
as belongs to any particular Congregation or Eldership, either apart or jointly
together.

When Bellarmine blames the Protestants for their exception against the
Council of Trent, Junius answers, Ibid. in c. 21. n. 1.
It is the ordinary way of right in every appeal, that the judgment of
Synods, and the exequution of their sentence be suspended and stayed so long
until the matter be again examined in another more free or greater Assembly,
etc. This answer had been needles and impertinent, unless Synods had more
power then of counsel and admonition only. He says, N. 7.
Certainly in every just Synod, Heretics being cited, heard, present, or
wilfully hiding themselves, have been condemned: etc. When Bellarm. objects
that Protestants will have nothing to be determined in Synods, and so strifes
to be never ended; Junius answers, N. 23.
that he perverts their meaning, and referres us to his preface, nota 40. where
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of Synods is plainly avouched.

IUnius proceeding to the examination of his second book touching Synods, where
Bellarmine repeats, that Synods of Bishops may judge all controversies both of
faith and manners, Junius answers, Animadv. in Bell. l. 2. deCo^cl. c. 1. n.
1.
We have granted it of those that are lawful Synods. When Bellarmine had said
that nothing is greater then a lawful and approved General Council; Junius
answers, Ibid. c. 4. n. 2.
It is false: for Christ is greater, and the Scripture is greater: seeing
Christ and the Scripture are great of themselves: the Church is great by them,
etc. But this answer had been insufficient and not direct enough, if my
opposites opinion were true. For then according to their opinion, he might more
fitly have answered: that the authority of a particular Congregation is greater
then the authority of a General Synod; because though the counsel and advise
of the Synod was more to be reverenced in respect of many excellently learned
and godly men from many Churches that were in it; yet seeing Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is limited to a particular Congregation, therefore the same is
greater in the power of censuring, and in the use of the keys for binding and
loosing of impenitent sinners; seeing Synods have no jurisdiction at all over
any other Churches.

Again, when Bellarmine sets down this insolent proposition, that the Pope
cannot commit, neither unto a Synod, nor to any man the coactive judgment over
himself, but only the discretive: Iunius answers, Ibid. in c. 18. n. 1.
The proposition is most true, he cannot commit: because God has committed it
to the Synod and lawful Council. Wherefore we say on the contrary, neither
can he commit it (for if he be the servant of God, God has committed the
judgment concerning him unto his Church) neither can he reject it: but though
he be unwilling, yet both the Church is bound to judge concerning him, and he
to undergo the judgment thereof, discretive and coactive, howsoever it please
men to call it. If Mr Dav. do fully agree with Junius, as he professes, then
must he acknowledge that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is not limited to a
particular Church; that lawful Synods have authority not only to counsel and
admonish the Pope himself, and so other obstinate offenders, but also to
censure the^, and to give sentence both of directive and coactive judgment
against them, as occasion requires. Junius to make this more plain, repeats it
again, and speaking of the Synods judging the Pope, says, N. 2.
Truly we grant that he cannot appoint judges in his own cause, because God
has already appointed them by the Apostle, saying, The spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets, 1. Cor. 14.32. and that he may appoint Arbiters:
but we add this withal, that the judges which God has ordained, may by no
right be rejected or refused of him.

When Bellarmine pretends that diverse Popes, as Sixtus the 3d, Leo the 3d,
Symmachus, and Leo the 4th being accused, were willing to have their causes
discussed in a Synod of Bishops, etc. Junius says, N. 6.
And this ought so to be done of them: for they are subjected of God to a Synod
of Prophets, by authority of the word. When Bellar. adds that yet the Bishops
durst not judge them, affirming also, that they left the whole judgment unto
God: Junius answers, N. 7.
This is a fallacy from that which is not the cause, as they call it. For they
did not therefore abstain from judging, because they wanted authority to
judge, but partly because they had rather that the Popes being guilty should be
first judged of themselves and their own conscience, partly because they
thought it better to have their cause examined in another more full Synod,
partly also because when they would examine it, the matter was not evident
enough, etc. Whereas the Popes that thus far submitted their cause to trial,
pretend that by this fact they do not prescribe a law to their successors,
whereby they should be constrained to do the same: Junius says, Ibide^.
The impudency of these men is so much the greater, who after they are
delivered from judgment, do after this manner mock their judges and such as
examined their cause, and will have their ambitious licentiousnes to be
esteemed for a lawful order, asscribing the lawful order of judgments in
their cause unto an extraordinary and voluntary dispensation, as they call it.
But had Junius been of my opposites mind, he should have answered after
another manner, and should have said, The Bishops in the Synods which durst not
judge the cause of the Popes, but left the whole judgment unto God did well
therein if they had known what they did, and the right ground thereof; for
they did indeed want authority to judge: Synods might advise and counsel, but
have no jurisdiction to give sentence in censuring either the Pope or any
other: Synods may only direct particular Churches to use their power aright,
but have no power themselves to judge other Congregations, or any member
thereof, etc. How far was Junius from giving such an answer?

Other examples and instances alleged to show the power of Synods in the
judgment of causes, are avouched, cleared and maintained by Junius against
Bellarmines exceptions, as appears in the cause of Ibid. in c. 19. n. 1.
Marcellinus, of the N. 3.
Donatists, and of N. 5.
Leo. Had he thought that all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction had been shut up
within the bounds of a particular Congregation, he ought to have reprehended
those Synods, rather then to have spent time in vindicating their practice from
the cavills of adversaries.

AS in these books de Conciliis, alleged by Mr Dav. Junius has plainly
showed his agreement with us: so in his disputations against Bellarmine de
Verbo Dei, he has likewise declared his consent with us touching the authority
of Synods. He writes there, that Animadv. in Bell. contr. 1. (...) Verbo Dei*
l. 3. c. 3. n. 9.
there be two kinds of judgments in the Church: one Private, which belongs to
all the faithful, universally and severally; the other Public, depending upon
a public calling and authority: the law and rule of both these judgments is
the holy Scripture; the author and guide is the holy Ghost, The public
judgment is either of a particular Church, or of many Churches meeting
together into one body, or of all; which body they call a Synod, a Council, or
an Assembly, etc. Seeing the Praesident and judge of the private judgment
(whereof the public is compact) is the Spirit of God, and the Scripture the
law, there can be no other judge or law appointed in the public judgment of
Synods, without most heinous blasphemy against God, and reproach to his Church.
And the Praesidents which are given to Synods, have not the dominion and
arbritement of the business, but the procuring of order committed unto them, to
determine matters by that one judge according to his law. It is here to be
observed that under the public judgment of the Church, he does in like manner
comprehend the authority of particular Churches, and of Synods consisting of
many Churches: he speaks no otherwise of one then of the other, as touching
the kind of power that they have: he does not attribute jurisdiction to one
and counsel to the other: he notes both to depend upon a public calling and
authority, for a ground of their proceeding. And though in both the Spirit of
God be the principal judge; yet (as he Ibid. in c. 5. n. 3.5.28.
afterward notes more plainly) he acknowledges a ministerial judgment
committed to them, for the denouncing of his judgment against such as are
guilty according to his word.

Afterward, Junius Ibid. in c. 6. n. 3.
showing how unlike the Council of Trent was to the Nicene Council, where the
Arian Bishops being present were heard, convicted by the authority of Gods
word, and being convicted were condemned: though he avoucheth the Bishops of
Trent to have been the enemies of the Gospel, yet he says, N. 4.
Otherwise as for lawful Bishops or Elders and Deacons lawfully called into a
Synod, and holding the same lawfully, we acknowledge all these things.

When Bellarmine alleges Basilius Emperor, who speaking of the judgment of
Ecclesiastical causes in a Synod, said, To try and search out these things, it
belongs unto Patriarchs, Bishops, and Priests who have an office of
government allotted unto them, who have the power of sanctifying, of loosing and
binding, who have obtained the keys of the Church, and not unto us which are
to be fed, which stand in need to be sanctified, to be bound or loosed from
binding: Junius answers, Ibid. in c. 7. n. 9.
We allow this testimony of Basilius touching the lawful order of Synods, as
before. Herein we have the express confession of Junius touching the authority
and jurisdiction of Synods, in the use of the keys, binding and loosing.

When Bellarmine sends us unto Damascene; who says touching the controversies
in the Church, To determine and decree of these things, it belongs not to
Kings, but to Synods. For where two or three, says the Lord, are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Christ has not given
unto Kings the power of binding and loosing, but unto the Apostles and their
successors, to Pastors and Teachers. Junius answers, Ibid. in c. 8. n. 6.
These things certainly are true, and nothing for that famous principality of
the Roman Bishop, etc. We also affirm the same thing, as before, cap. 3. nota
9. etc. 10. Another evident affirmation touching the jurisdiction and power of
Synods.

When Bellarmine says that Prosper does no otherwise prove the Pelagians to
be Heretics, but because they were condemned of the Roman Bishops,
Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius and Celestine: Junius answers, N. 14.
No otherwise? It is false. for Pelagius was first condemned by the Synod of
Carthage and of Milevis: but when he went beyond sea to Rome, where he so
craftily infinuated himself, that there was great fear lest he should inflict
a soarer wound upon the Church at Rome; the Africane Bishops did prudently and
religiously certify Innocentius by two letters, both concerning the sentence of
their Synods, and concerning the imminent peril of the Roman Church, unless
according to the example of them in Africa they did provide for the public
safety, etc. Another example of Synodicall jurisdiction allowed by Junius.

Again, in his disputations against Bellarmine de Pontifice Romano, Junius
does often allow the authority and jurisdiction of Synods, and shows his
judgment, that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is not limited to a particular
Congregation. When Bellarmine speaking of a certain decree made in a Synod of
Africa, mentioned by Cyprian, says, it was ordained thereby, that a cause
should first be judged, where the crime was committed, that it did not forbid
but that it might be judged again in another place: Junius answers, Animadv.
in Bell. contr. 3. de Pont. Romans l. ^. c. 23. n. 3.
Certainly this is not forbidden: For it is of common right. But that which is
of common equity in case of appeal, to have a cause judged again by another
judicatory, is denied by my opposites, in allowing no such Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. Whereas Bellarmine condemns the Magdeburgenses, as being
altogether absurd and ridiculous for their denial of appeals; Junius denies
the fact; and says N. 5.
his reasoning is inconsequent: that all appeals should be altogether
forbidden, because the appeals to them beyond the sea were forbidden.

When Calvine alleges a certain Canon of the Synod held at Milevis in
Africa, to refute the ambitious usurpation of the Pope, and manifests thereby
the jurisdiction of Synods in the judgment of causes, because it was decreed
that appeals should be made to the Africane Synods, and not to the Bishop of
Rome: Junius Ibid. in c. 24. n 2. etc.
maintains this allegation and vindicates it against the exceptions of
Bellarmine. And he N. 11.
alleges further to this purpose the epistle which the Council of Africa
wrote unto Pope Celestine in these words: After due salutation officiously
premised, we earnestly desire that hereafter you would not admit unto your
audience those that come from hence, and that you would not receive into your
communion those that are excommunicated of us, etc. This request Junius calls
a modest and brotherly prohibition, to wit, that the Pope should not receive
appeals from them: But if there were no superior Ecclesiastical power to
judge the controversies of a particular Congregation, then might these Africane
Synods have been accused of usurpation over particular Churches, as
transgressing the bounds of modesty and of their calling, for exercising the
power of the keys in excommunicating some, as well as the Pope for his usurped
authority of the keys in receiving appeals from the Synods. Then had both the
allegation of Calvine and the defense of Junius, been partial and unjust,
condemning that in the Pope which they allowed in Synods.

When Bellarmine acknowledges that the Pope is bound to keep the
Ecclesiastical laws made by Synods, but quoad directionem, non quoad
coactionem, according to the distinction of Lawyers touching the Prince;
meaning that the Pope may use their direction, but is not under their
correction or constraint; which is indeed the same thing in effect which my
opposites affirm of particular Churches, that they are bound to use the
counsel and direction of Synods, but are not subject to their censure, nor
under their jurisdiction: Junius Ibid. in c. 27. n. 6.
denies this distinction. for though (says he) we should grant that it take
place in foro soli, in civil courts, to wit, for the judging of Princes; yet
is it of no force in foro coeli et conscientiae, in Ecclesiastical
judicatories, because the reason of them is not alike, etc. And in the next
animadversion N. 7.
speaking still of those laws and canons made by Synods, he affirms, that as
every other Bishop, so the Pope also is subject unto them, according to the
order of the Church.

When Bellarmine says, the Council or Synod of the Greeks could not make a
law for the Latins, etc. Junius N. 16. See also n. 33.
denies the same, and gives a reason, because that Synod was Oecumenicall, or
universal. Therein he acknowledges that they had a greater authority then
only to admonish or counsel. Again, when Bellarmine answering the argument
of Nilus says that the Pope is not subject to Canons, viz. of Synods, etc.
that he is subject to Christ and not to the Fathers, that he does not contemn
the Fathers nor their Canons, but uses them for direction, though he cannot be
compelled by them, etc. Junius N. 40.
opposes him further, and says, N. 42.
that he ought to be subject both to Christ, and to the fathers by Christ, who
has so prescribed, 1. Cor. 14.29, 32. and adds further, N. 46.
If he cannot be compelled by the Canons, that he is therefore rightly called
by the Spirit of God (...), that wicked one or lawless person, 2. These. 2.
Whereas some now adays begin to speak evil of the jurisdiction of Classes
and Synods, as of an Antichristian authority, Junius is so far opposite unto
them, that he accounts the Pope even in this regard to be Antichrist and the
Man of Sin, because he refuses to be subject unto the authority of Synods in
their canons and decrees.

Moreover, in comparing of the Civil and Ecclesiastical estate, Junius says,
Ibid. in c. 29. n. 27.
Kings have their authority in Civil matters, Romans 13. and the Synod in
Ecclesiastical matters above the Pope, as it was defined in the Council of
Constance and Basel. And their authority is so certain, as it is certain that
he which by force repelleth force, is armed with public authority. He
distinguishes their jurisdiction in respect of the causes judged by them, and
repeats this their authority again in the N. 28.
next animadversion. And though these two kinds of government, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, do use a different manner of compulsion, he says, N. 29.
Nihil refert: nos de rei substantia agimus: coactionem uterque habet; sed hic
spiritualem, ille temporalem, etc. It skilleth not: we entreat of the substance
of the matter: both of them have a coactive power, or a compulsion: but the one
spiritual, the other temporal, etc. A most evident assertion of Synodall
jurisdiction, and that they are not to direct only by way of counsel, but to
correct also by way of censure.

To these I might add many other testimonies of Iunius: but these evidences
already cited may be sufficient to show that he was not of this strange
opinion, touching the independency of Churches; and that Mr Daven. therefore
has abused his Readers, and sought to blind their eyes, when for the credit
of his cause, he would have it thought that Iunius was of his mind, while he
professes that he does fully agree with him.

SECT. X.
His pretense of agreement with Dr Whitaker examined,
MR Dav. to color his opinion, as if it were no singular conceit of Mr Jacob
and some few others, makes mention of the Centuriatours, as if they were of the
same mind; yet he alleges not their words, to prove the same. But instead of
others he chooses out Dr Whitaker, as if he had been a favourer of this
opinion, which it is likely that he never heard of, and says, Apol. reply, p.
237. 238. Whit. de Co^ci. quest. 5. Argum.
To these I may add those who have handled the controversies concerning the
necessity, and authority of Councills, amongst whom I will instance in Dr
Whitaker, who speaking of the fullnes of that delegated power which Christ has
given to the Church, not to the Pope (which he applies to the Keys in binding
and loosing, shutting and opening, retaining and remitting finnes) says, that
this power belongs primarily, principally, and essentially to the Church, but
to the several Bishops only accidentally, secundarily, and less principally,
and explaineth himself by a rule in Philosophy, which is, that when any power
is in two, in one necessarily and essentially, in another contingently and
accidentally, it is more principally in him, in whom it is necessarily and
essentially, then in him, whose it is only contingently and accidentally. As
the heat is more principally in the fire then in the water, because it is in
the water by reason of the fire. So (says he) seeing this jurisdiction and
fullnes of power is given to the Church necessarily and primarily, but to the
Pope only secundarily, and by the Church it is manifest that it is more in the
Church, then in the Pope. What that learned wrighter says of the Churches
power in comparison with the Pope, holds in all other parallel instances.
ANSVV. First, had Mr Dav. repeated this Argument of D. Whitaker fully and
justly as it is set down by himself, then might the Reader have seen therein a
plain and evident testimony for the authority of Synods; but diverse things
being omitted in the beginning, middle and end of it, thereby the truth is
obscured and hidden from his Readers.

In the beginning of it, D. Whitaker propounds it thus, If the fullnes of power
be in the Church, not in the Pope, then it is evident, that it has more
authority then the Pope: but the first is true: therefore the second also. Now
by the Church in this place, he means the General Synod or Council, as
appears by the title of this Question noted in the beginning of it, viz.
DeConcil. Qu. 5. c. 1. with c. 3. Arg. 5.
Whether the Synod be above the Pope: and if he had not so meant it, this his
Argument had been beside the Question. And therefore while D. Whitaker here
directly concludes a fullnes of power in Synods, and as he further calls it
in this same place, that highest authority and jurisdiction which Christ has
left unto his Church; it is manifest hereby that he did not hold them to be
only for counsel and admonition; and so was far from limiting all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction unto a particular Congregation.

In the middle, in the confirmation of this Argument, D. Whit. says, For if
all this power were in the Pope, or in any one man principally and essentially,
then he dying it should perish, and so the Church should altogether loose it.
But it is not lost, though the Pope dye a thousand times, but it remains with
the Church, without which the Pope though living could have no part of this
authority. Now to argue on this manner against the authority we asscribe unto
Synods, by comparing them with particular Churches, as he does against the Pope
compared with Synods, would be inconsequent, unequal, and no parallel
instance; because the title of the Church is no where given unto the Pope, or
unto any one person, as it is unto an assembly of Ministers, Governors, or
Deputies of Churches met together in the name of Christ in Synods: because
though we asscribe unto Synods some jurisdiction, yet we do not say that all
power is in them originally, and so to be derived unto others as is said of the
Pope; and consequently because there is no such danger that the power of the
Church should be lost and perish by the death of such as are members of the
Synod, as might be by the death of the Pope, if all power were primarily and
essentially in him alone. And therefore it is a vain assertion of Mr Dav.
touching this argument of D. Whit. viz What that learned wrighter says of the
Churches power in comparison with the Pope, holds in all other parallel
instances.

In the end of this Argument prosequuted by D. Whitak. he concludes thus:
Wherefore seeing it is certain that this power is given unto the Church
primarily, and not unto the Pope but secondarily and by accident, and seeing
the Church is represented in the Synod: it is of necessity that the Synod must
be above the Pope. And thus most evidently he grants unto the Synod, as being a
representative Church, a power and jurisdiction above the Pope, a power which
consists in binding and loosing, shutting and opening, retaining and remitting
of sins, as himself here explaines it, and so is directly contrary to them
which allow no more unto Synods, but counsel and admonition. Why did Mr
Davenp. omit and refuse to name the Synod, which D. Whit. so expressly
mentions, applying and yielding unto the Synod that power which he there
pleades for?

Secondly, as for that similitude of fire and water, though it be granted that
heat is more principally in the fire then in the water, because it is in the
water by reason of the fire: yet hereby heat is not denied to be in the water,
but on the contrary acknowledged to be derived into the water; and experience
shows that by the heat so communicated unto the water many excellent effects
are produced for the service of man. And so when Ecclesiastical authority is
by the Church committed and communicated to Ecclesiastical Officers in calling
of them, then does it belong unto them, though secondarily and less
principally, as both D. Whita. confesses and Mr Dav. himself repeateth.

THat it may yet further appear how unjustly the name of D. Whitaker is
pretended and alleged both by Mr Dav. here, and by Mr Can hereafter, against
the authority of Synods, I will here set down diverse pregnant assertions and
express testimonies of his, gathered out of sundry of his writings for help of
the Readers. In them all may see how fully opposite he was to my opposites. To
begin with this treatise de Conciliis, of Counsels or Synods, out of which
Mr D. took this allegation abovementioned: This book comprehends 6 Questions
touching Synods; and in handling every one of these Questions, he speaks
plainly for the authority and jurisdiction of Synods. These 6 Questions are 1.
Touching the necessity and profit of Synods. 2. By what authority they are to
be assembled. 3. Of what persons they consist. 4. Who is to be Praesident in
them. 5. Whether they be above the Pope. 6. Whether they can err.


The third cause is, says he, Whitak. de Conc. q. 1. c. 3. p. 18.
that (...), or good order, and right and lawful discipline may both be
appointed and maintained, and that Canons may be made and confirmed. For the
Church has always had authority of making and enacting Ecclesiastical laws,
and of prescribing them to others, and of punishing those which did not observe
them. And this authority has always been accounted necessary. This was more
then counselling or admonishing. P. 21.
The eight and last, and that the chiefest cause of Synods is, that even as in
Politic and Civil judgments malefactors upon examination are accused and
condemned; so in the Church Heretics might be condemned and pronounced
anathema by public judgment, and that the truth might be vindicated from
their calumnies. But as there, judgment is not to be given according to the
will of the judge, but according to law: so here Heretics, enemies of faith
and religion, are not to be condemned but according to the public and
Imperial law, that is, the Scripture. For a Synod is as it were a public
Court, or Imperial Chamber, or Parliament, wherein the Judges hearing both
sides do give sentence, and decree matters of greatest weight. For although
Heretics may be condemned of several Churches apart: yet when they are
condemned as it were of the whole Church, the sentence is more solemn and of
greater weight. So Arius was condemned first of Alexander and the Council at
Alexandria, but afterward with greater authority by the Synod of Nice, etc. By
these words of D. Whitaker we may see what wrong they do unto him, which
pretend that he should deny the jurisdiction of Synods.

De Co^c. q. 2 c. 2. p. 42, etc.
repeats his 4th Argument, taken from an ancient Canon wherein it was
concluded, that without the mind of the Roman Bishop it was not lawful to
celebrate or hold Synods. D. Whit. answers that this Canon mentioned by Lib. 2.
cap. 8.
Socrates, is not rightly translated: he says, (...), does not signify
celebrare Concilia, to hold Synods, as Cassiodorus has ill translated it,
whose translation they abuse; nor yet Ecclesias consecrare, to consecrate
Churches, as Illyricus does amiss translate it, but leges Ecclesiasticas
sancire, et canones Ecclesiis praescribere, to ordain Ecclesiastical laws,
and to prescribes Canons unto Churches. And being thus translated, he says, We
acknowledge and approve this Canon, as most just. For reason itself teaches
and tells, that that which concerns all, ought to be approved of all.
Therefore it was meet that those Canons which should be general, should be
approved also of the Bishop of Rome, who was one of the chief Bishops. Now if
D. Whita. allow that Canon to be most just, which grants unto Synods an
authority of making Ecclesiastical laws and enjoining the Churches to keep
them, then it is manifest hereby that he confessed the jurisdiction of Synods,
and that they were not only for counsel and admonition.

And in the same place D. Whitak. P. 45, 46
relates how the Bishops of the Oriental Churches meeting together in a Synod
at Antioch, did by common sentence write unto Julius the Bishop of Rome, and by
way of rebuke said unto him, that they were not to be overruled by him, that if
they would cast any out of their Churches, (...), that such ought not to be
restored of him, even as those whom he cast out could not be restored of them.
Although D. Whit. acknowledge the errors and faults of some that were in that
Synod, yet he approves this their writing in reproof of Julius, and says,
they all did gravely rebuke his arrogance and insolence. Though that Synod
abused their power in censuring Athanasius unjustly, yet that they had a power
of censure, and casting out of their Churches, is not denied, but maintained
against the Bishop of Rome.

De Co^ci. Qu. 3. c. 1.
first describes the Popish opinion, and reckons up the four sorts of persons,
whom they allow to come unto Synods, namely, that Some are present as judges,
who have a determining voice: Others, to dispute and examine difficulties, and
these have a consultative voice: Others, to defend the Synod, and to see that
peace be kept within and without: Others, to serve as notaries, watchmen,
servants. Then he shows that they allow only the greater Prelates, that is,
all Bishops and Archbishops to have the right of a determining voice in
universal and particular Synods ordinarily, but that Cardinals, Abbots,
Generals of Orders, though they be not Bishops, yet by extraordinary
privilege may also have a determining suffrage: as for all others whatsoever
they be, they may be profitable, but not have a determining voice or suffrage.
After this he shows the opinion of the Protestants, that not only the greater
Prelates, but whatsoever learned and godly men are sent, being chosen by the
Churches of several Provinces, and judged fit for that business, ought to have
equal authority in giving suffrages, and so to be judges as well as any
others. But had D. Whit. been of my opposites mind, he should have condemned
each of these opinions, both of Papists and Protestants, and should have said
that neither one nor other sorts of persons were to be admitted for judges in
Synods, but only for counselors and admonishers: that none of them were to
have determining voices or to give definitive sentence, but only to show their
advise, and to have a consultative voice.

When Bellarmine alleges that the Prelates only, as being Pastors of the
Church are to have definitive voices; D. Whit. answering his arguments, says,
Ibid. c. ^ p. 85.
The end of Synods is not to feed, viz. by teaching as proper pastors, but to
decide controversies, to prescribe Canons, to correct abuses, to order
Churches, and to do other things, which belong unto the peaceable and quiet
state of the Church. Herein he yields unto Synods not only advise for
direction, but jurisdiction and power of correction, etc.

To prove this authority of Presbyters or Elders, he alleges Act. 16.4. where
there is mention of the decrees, ordained by the Apostles and Elders, and says
thereupon, Ibid. c. 3. p. 96. 97.
Who dare now deny the Elders to have had a determining suffrage? They did not
only dispute or consult, but did also judge and decree together with the
Apostles. For the word, determined, ordained.
(...) is equally applied unto both. These things are so manifest that no man
can gainsay it, To this end also he argues P. 102. 103.
that a General Synod represents the Universal Church: that whosoever is sent
of a Church, represents the person of that Church. And finally P. 103, 104, etc.
from ancient histories he alleges the examples of diverse Synods, as of
Chalcedon, Nice, and Constantinople, wherein this power and jurisdiction was
exercised.

Constantine professed himself to be subject unto the Bishops, and that he
ought to be judged of them; D. Whitaker allowing and commending that
profession, answers and says, De Co^c. q. 4. c. 3. p. 132.
What then? This hinders not but that he might be Praesident. For if a Bishop
had been Praesident, ought be not to have been judged of other Bishops? What
godly Prince would not have said so? Hereby he acknowledges, that jurisdiction
and authority of judgment is no undue power of Synods, and that even the
worthiest persons ought to be subject thereunto.

De Co^c. q. 5. c. 1. p. 146.
Seeing the Pope is the Bishop only of one Church, he is not only not
superior unto all Bishops assembled together, but not so much as superior
unto any of them apart. Therefore we say that a Synod may also decree against
the will of the Pope, may take cognition of the Popes cause, may judge the
Pope, and compel him unto order, may prescribe laws unto the Pope, which are
to have force against his will, and finally may condemn the Pope and deprive
him of his office, if he be worthy of such a punishment. Now if a Synod have
this power to judge, censure and depose the Popes, then has it as much power
to judge and censure other Ministers and members of other Churches, unless it
can be showed that they have more authority then the Pope, or some strange
privilege to exempt them from that jurisdiction of Synods, whereunto others
are in subjection.

Afterward Ibid. c. 3
he brings 10 Arguments to prove the superiority of Synods above the Pope. And
in them there be plenteous evidences touching the authority of Synods. Those
arguments which prove that the Synods have jurisdiction over the Pope and power
to censure him, do always prove that Synods have jurisdiction and power of
censure. Otherwise, though the Pope deserved censure, yet it should be an
usurpation in the Synod, to do that for which they had no calling nor warrant:
even as in the execution of Civil judgments, it should be a presumptuous and
unlawful usurpation, if private men being no Magistrates should take upon them
to punish malefactors, though they had justly deserved the same.

Not to insist upon many other things which out of those 10 Arguments might be
alleged for our purpose, I will only instance in one example that is there
Ibid. p. 195. 196.
urged by D. Whitaker, and taken out of Sozomen, lib. 4. c. 15, or as in some
editions, c. 14. who records that the Synod of Syrmium made an Act, whereby
Foelix the Bishop of Rome was appointed to admit Liberius to be his fellow in
the administration of the Roman Church. Hence D. Whitak. inferres, So it
seemed good unto the Synod: therefore the Synod was above the Pope and above
that Church. Bellarmine answers, The Synod did not command, but only exhort
Foelix by letters, that he would suffer Liberius to sit with him. D. Whit.
replies again, Touching letters of exhortation, Sozomen makes no mention of
them. He says only, (...), etc. They write unto Foelix, etc. And that these
letters were mandatory it appears, because otherwise Foelix would never have
yielded. Thus we see from hence, that Synods have power (at least in the
judgment of D. Whit.) not only to exhort and admonish, which every Christian
may do, but also to prescribe and injoyne that which is equal and just, and
so that others are to be subject thereunto.

(z) De Co^c. q. 6. c. 2. p. 216.
may err also. He says, (a) Though Christ be in the midst of them which are
assembled in his name, it follows not, that they do not err: For all are not
free from error with whom Christ is present. And truly two or three which
meet in the name of Christ, may be deceived, may err in many things, and may
ask those things which are not to be asked, and so be disappointed of their
hope, and yet Christ be among them. For Christ does not always exempt them
from error, with whom he is. Wherefore seeing every Ecclesiastical assembly,
every Eldership, and every particular Church, being subject to error, and
erring often, are not yet deprived of their jurisdiction and power in the
judgment of causes: so though Synods want infallible judgment, and err
sometimes, yet are they not therefore without jurisdiction and authority. But
further he avoucheth plainly that Synods have judicial authority, when he
says, Ibid. c. 3. p. 322.
A Synod is said to do lawfully, not only when it condemns and
excommunicateth those which are to be condemned and pronounced Anathema, but
also when it ordaines and maintains those decrees which agree with the
Scripture, etc. Had he been of my opposites opinion he should have said the
contraty, viz. that a Synod may not lawfully excommunicate or condemn those
that deserve to be condemned, but only admonish them, and so leave them to
others. Yea he proceeds further, and says concerning General Synods, that
Ibid. p. 270.
In them is a sovereign power, and they have the highest authority in the
Church. He does not only grant unto them jurisdiction, but greater then is in
any particular Church, or in any other Ecclesiastical judicatory.

Moreover, whereas Bellarmine maintains that Synods cannot err when they are
approved and confirmed of the Pope, and that all their authority depends upon
him; hereupon D. Whita. argues thus against him: Ibid. c. 1. p. 214.
If there be such weight in the Pope, that without him neither Provincial nor
General Synod have in them any force, it may worthily be demanded, what part
the Bishops have in a Synod, whether they be only admonishers or counselors,
or whether they be judges? for if they be counselors only, why are none but
Bishops admitted unto Synods? why not others rather who are more learned then
Bishops? etc. He notes it as a point of great absurdity, and as a great strait
whereunto the Papists are brought, against their will and against their
profession, that Bishops should have no other place in Synods but of
admonishers and counselors. For indeed what use is their of suffrages, of
definitive and determining voices, if in the end all be determined by the Pope?
why might not advises and counsels have sufficed in such case? This observation
D. Whitaker holds to be of special use, and worthy to be remembered, and
therefore repeats it often. Ibi. c. 2. p. 221, 222.
What place ( I pray you) do Bishops obtain in Synods? what do they? to wh^^
end do they meet? Is it that they may judge, or is it that they may only
counsel and admonish? Are they therefore judges, or are they only admonishers
and counselors? This indeed some of them think, that they may only admonish
in Synods, that they may move questions and dispute, but may not judge.
Naclantus Bishop of Clug (as we taught before) in his treatise de potestate
Papae and Concilii, says. The power of the Pope is royal, the power of the
Synod is consiliaria, by way of counsel; the power of the Pope is altogether
definitive, the power of the Synod is of ambulatory definition, that is, as I
interpret it, wandering and uncertain. Bellarmine indeed, and the Jesuits that
now are, hold that the Bishops are judges, but doubtless they mean an
ambulatory judgment, that is, none at all. For indeed they give all judgment
unto the Pope alone. Now this absurd opinion which he notes to have been the
conceit of Naclantus, expressed in plain words, and of Bellarmine and other
Papists by consequence, is even the same that is professed by Mr Jacob, Mr Dav.
and Mr Cann. for though they differ in respect of the power of the Pope, yet in
respect of the power belonging to Synods, they make the persons whereof the
Synods consist, to be no other then admonishers or counselors, not having any
jurisdiction at all. D. Whitaker yet leaves it not thus, but speaking again of
the Popes overruling of Synods, he does again record this observation,
saying, Ibid. c. 3. p. 267.
Certainly this is that which we said before, that Bishops assembled in a
Synod, are not judges, but only admonishers, that the Pope alone is judge of
all controversies, that the rest have no authority. For if Bishops were judges,
judgment should be done according to the greatest number, and the sentence of
the most judges should prevail. We may think that D. Whitaker was guided by a
special providence of God, and directed by his Spirit, thus particularly and
remarkably aforehand to point out and commend to our consideration this evil
consequent of making Synods to be only admonishers or counselors; that so we
might have his writing for a Testimony against this error, which within a
while after was to be broached and made common by Mr Jacob, and some others;
that which the Brownists had done before, being neither so commonly known nor
regarded.

Unto this his writing De Conciliis, we may add his treatise De Pontifice
Romano, in which controversy he discusseth 8 questions; and in the most of them
he gives testimony for the authority of Synods, against my opposites. The
Questions be these:

1. Whether the government of the Church be Monarchical. 2. Whether any
Monarchy of the Church was settled in Peter. 3. Whether Peter was Bishop of
Rome, and dyed there. 4. Whether the Bishop of Rome succeed Peter in a Monarchy
Ecclesiastical. 5. Whether the Pope be Antichrist. 6. Whether the Pope can
err in the faith. 7. Whether the Pope can make laws to bind the conscience.
8. Whether Ecclesiastical jurisdiction be given by Christ to the Pope
immediately.
In handling the first Question, whereas the Papists require a Monarch to keep
inferior Officers in order and unity, D. Whitaker says, De Pont. Romans q. 1.
c. 2. p. 19.
If any will not do their duty, and discharge their office, they are to be
admonished and rebuked, and except they obey, they are at length to be remooved
by the judgment of the Church, or the Synod, or the Christian Magistrate: and
there are known means enough of keeping Ministers in their duty, and the
Church in unity, without a Pope. He acknowledges that Synods have not only
power to admonish, which every Christian may do, but after admonition to
censure and remove or depose the obstinate.

When Bellarmine to prove the superiority of Bishops, objects 1. Tim. 5. Those
that sin rebuke before all. D. Whit. answers, Ibid p. 43.
This equals also may do. So of old, if any Elder or Bishop was accused, the
Bishops brought the matter unto an Ecclesiastical Senate or Synod, and if he
did seem worthy of it, they condemned him by a public judgment, that is,
they either suspended, or excommunicated, or deposed him. He declares P. 48.
and 49.
that the Church has been preserved in greatest tempests and troubles by
Synods, and commends them for their use of jurisdiction in judging of causes,
and shows how those that would not yield unto such authority, were removed
from their places, and others amended by their examples. He says, P 92.
Though one alone could not judge of another, yet a Synod, and as it were a
Senate or Session of Bishops has had the right and power to take cognition and
judge of their causes. He observes again out of Cyprian, P. 93.
No Bishop could be judge of another: of another (I say) not of others, because
a Synod of Bishops could always judge a Bishop: therefore the Monarchical
primacy of the Roman Bishop is of no divine right. As he does fully condemn
the usurpation of one Bishop above another, so by way of opposition he does
fully and plentifully avouch the authority of many, meeting together in Synods,
not only for counsel and admonition, but for jurisdiction in judging and
censuring of offenders.

to judge controversies: D. Whit. answers, De Pont. Romans q. 2. c. 7. p. 229.
What controversies? Of religion? But the other Apostles did that also as well
as he: and the Synods of Bishops and learned men can do this, even as we read
that it has often been practiced in the Churches for many ages, before this
principality of the Pope was brought into the Church.

Furthermore, D. Whitaker uses this argument to prove a superiority of power
in a company or assembly of the Apostles above one or two of them: Ibid. p. 260.
The Apostles send Peter to Samaria: therefore Peter was not the head of the
Apostles, but rather was in subjection unto their authority. Act. 8.14. He
says, A sending does always and necessarily imply a subjection in him that is
sent, if he be said properly to be sent. This manner of reasoning makes for the
authority of Synods, consisting of a company of Ministers or other Deputies of
Churches orderly assembled, whiles he argues that a College or company of the
Apostles had superiority of power over some singular persons among them, though
considered apart they were all equal in power. He says concerning Peter and
John, P. 261.
We read that both of them were sent by the College of the Apostles: from
whence we do justly conclude both that these two Apostles were equal, and
that the authority of sending was in the Apostles. He shows also P. 297, 297.
that the decree made in the Synod, Act. 15. was not confirmed by the authority
of Peter alone, but by common consent of the Apostles and the Church, for the
repressing of false Apostles, etc.

Ibid. qu. 4. p. 513, 514.
We acknowledge both of these, but we say there is no error here. For the
Bishop of Rome may be deposed, both by the Emperor, when there is cause, and
by a Synod of Bishops, and that not only General, but Particular of that
Province; whereunto Calvine most truly affirms him to be subject, and that
he may be judged of it: and those that persuade the Pope otherwise, we affirm
them to be flatterers and parasites, rebels to God and the Emperor. And many
the like assertions he has in the handling of that question, wherein the
jurisdiction of Synods is witnessed by him.

Ibid. q. 5. p. 674, 675.
he notes it to be an evidence of Antichristian pride in the Pope, that he is
by the Jesuits affirmed to be above the Synod.

Qu. 6. p. 797.805.812, 813.
he avoucheth the jurisdiction of Synods, by alleging many examples and
instances wherein they exercised this power; as in the condemning of Pope
Honorius, Gregory the 7th, or Hildebrandus, John the 23th, Eugenius, etc.

Qu. 7. p. 853.
The Church has authority of making laws concerning decency, and it is our
duty to obey, yet concerning the things themselves the conscience is always
free, etc. He adds, Whereas the adversary says, that all true laws have a
coactive or constraining force: if he so understand it, that they constrain
and burden the conscience, with respect unto the things themselves, it is
false: for certainly even these also do constrain after a sort, to wit, if
we have respect unto the general rule, so that if there come contempt or
offense or schism, the violation of them cannot be excused. Again he says to
like purpose, P. 867.
Whereas Bellarm. says, we can abide no laws, therein he does egregiously
slander: for we allow and much esteem of laws, even Ecclesiastical laws,
and do teach that they are to be obeyed, and do subject ourselves unto them:
but we will not that our consciences be bound or ensnared, nor the liberty
which Christ has give^, to be taken from us. How the Church exercises this
power of making laws, he explaineth De Co^c. q. 1. c. 3. p. 18.
elsewhere, namely in Synods. And seeing here he teaches obedience and
subjection unto them, it is plain that he allows unto Synods a greater
authority then only of admonishing or counselling. This he expresses more
plainly, even in this Question also, when he says, De Pont. Romans q. 7. p. 849.
It is lawful for Synods, both General and Provincial, to make laws and to
ordain certain rites which belong unto good order and the outward policy of
the Church; and they are to be deposed which do not keep the same: but our
consciences are not bound with those laws, except contempt and scandal be
added, as was said before.

SECT. XI.
His Allegation of Chamierus examined.
BEsides these Allegations set down in his Apologeticall Reply, there
remains yet to be considered of us the testimony of Daniel Chamierus, another
learned man, whom Mr Dav. had cited before any of these, to wit, in his letter
which he sent to the Classis, printed by W. B. saving, Book of compl. p. 2.
The power of every particular Church, is chief in its own particular matters,
(or in things which are proper to it self) as a Synod has the chief power, in
things that are common to many Churches, witness Chamiercont. Bell. lib. 2.

ANSVV. The quotation of this Testimony is imperfectly described, so that men
cannot find the same, by the direction he gives, there being many second
books in those 4 Tomes of that great work, each of them containing many
chapters, and none of them specifyed by him. It seems he took this testimony
from Mr Parker, who has also imperfectly cited the same: for though he mention
not only the second book, but also page 193. yet is not that testimony there
to be found. But wheresoever it is, he might have See before, page 92, 93.
found in Mr Parker sufficient answer and satisfaction for it, while he adds
three other causes wherein the authority of Synods is superior unto particular
Churches, wherein is expressed and contained as much power as we asscribe unto
Synods.

But that it may further appear how Mr Dav. is condemned by his own witness,
it is to be considered touching this famous light of Gods Church, that as he
Epist. Dedicat.
undertook that great work at the appointment and command of a Synod; as his
son Adr. Chamierus after his fathers death dedicated that work unto the
excellent and faithful servants of God, the Pastors and Elders of the French
Churches assembled in a National Synod, comparing them to the threescore
valiant men of the valiantest in Israel, compassing the bed of Solomon, all
holding swords, expert in war, every man with his sword upon his thigh:
because of fear in the night; Sol. song, c. 3.7, 8. and as again speaking of
the Synod, he applies unto them that which is said of the Tower of David, where
the shields of the mighty men are hanged up, etc. Sol. song, 4.4. so in the
book itself there are many ample and pregnant testimonies touching the
authority and jurisdiction of Synods.

And first of all, where he proves that the government of the Church is
Aristocraticall, by many, and not Monarchical, by one, he makes this
distinction, Chamie. Panstrat. Cath. Tom. 2. l. 10. c. 5.
The government of Churches is either of several Churches, or of many
together, viz. by Synods. In both he maintains an Aristocracie or jurisdiction
of many. He does not restrain jurisdiction to particular Congregations, and
allow only counsel or advise to Synods: but he uses the same words and
phrases to describe the power and government of one sort as well as of the
other, to note a like kind of authority in both.

For the government of many Churches together in a Province, he savth, Ibid. c.
7.
For the disposing and directing of public affairs, Provincial Synods were
appointed, that is, companies of Bishops in the same Province, which were
assembled so often as need and commodity required. For evidence thereof he
alleges diverse Canons, and commends Cyprian for observing that order.

Touching the administration of all Churches in the world, he says; Ibid. c. 8.
He that denies these to have been governed by Universal Synods, must be
either notoriously impudent, or ignorant of all antiquity. For in the very
beginnings, when a great question was raised about the rites of Moses, and some
would have those that were converted from heathenish Idolatry, to be subjected
unto them, Luke testifyeth that a Synod was assembled, Act. 15. The Apostles
and Elders came together to look unto this matter. And by the authority of
this Synod, that question was compounded; which authority that they might
signify to be the greatest, the decree is conceived in these words, It seemed
good unto the holy Ghost and to us. And that this was an Oecumenicall or
Universal Synod, he there maintains by diverse reasons against Ioverius, who
in regard of the small number that met together, affirmed it to be a particular
Synod.

It seems also that this was the place from whence Mr Parker took that which
he alleged out of Chamierus, because in these two chapters, 7. and 8. are
contained those testimonies which he cites. And here it is that he speaks of
causa communis, or the common cause, which Cyprian would have to be judged by a
Synod. And here it is that he speaks of some proper causes, belonging
peculiarly to some Bishops in their special charges, viz. c. 7. But these
things are not only misquoted by Mr Dav. by putting the 2d book for the 10th,
but the sense is altered, while Chamierus comparing Bishops with
Metropolitanes, restraines some things from Metropolitanes to such Bishops as
had diverse countries under them. And though he show how Cyprian brought a
common cause unto the Synod, yet he does not affirm that only such common
causes were to be brought unto Synods. Chamierus does not witness that the
power of every particular Church is chief in its own particular matters, as Mr
D. alleges him for witness thereof. And in c. 8. he brings many evidences to
witness the power of General Synods in judging the causes of all Churches.

Again in the Question whether the Bishop of Rome may be judged of any,
Chamierus shows the opinion of the Protestants, whom he calls Catholics in
opposition to the Papists, that Ibid. l. 13. c. 17.
No Bishop at all may by divine right be judged of another; but of many, to wit
in a Synod, so as it has most often been done. And when Bellarmine objected
the examples of some Synods, that refused to judge the Bishop of Rome,
Chamierus answers, that some of them were particular Synods, consisting only
of such as were under the Roman. Therefore they could make no general decree;
but could only ordain that the Bishop of Rome should not be judged of them
assembled in a particular Synod: which certainly they either did not speak
concerning a General Synod, or else they spoke falsely. A plain confession of
the jurisdiction of Synods: for had he spoken of counsel or admonition only,
why might not any one particular Bishop or Synod have admonished the Pope upon
occasion, and given their advise touching him?

In his dispute touching Appeals, he says, Ibid. l. 14. c. 2.
We do not take away all appeals. For they are of common equity: and truly
without them the Discipline of the Church could hardly or not at all subsist.
And he speaks there of such appeals as were made unto Synods. Afterward,
speaking of the imposture or coosenage of the Bishop of Rome in the sixth
Council of Carthage, where appeals denied to Rome, are yet expressly allowed
to be made unto the Synods of their own Province or to a General Council:
hereupon Chamierus cries out, Ibid. c. 3.
Immane! quantam crucem etc. O how unspeakable a cross is procured unto our
Papists by the sincere constancy of those good fathers! among whom were those
great men, Aurelius of Carthage, and Augustine of Hippo, etc. Now look what
weight and strength the testimony of those African fathers has against the
Papists; even so much authority has it against such as stand for the single,
uncompounded policy, which deny the jurisdiction and power of Synods, to
determine such causes as by appeals are brought unto them. For the
jurisdiction of Synods in receiving appeals is in the same place as plainly
confessed, as the jurisdiction of the Pope is denied by their prohibition of
appeals to be made unto him.

Again when he proves that the Pope is subject to Ecclesiastical judgment,
he does in the same question with one conclude that there is a superiority of
power and jurisdiction in Synods to judge of him. He instanceth Ibid. c. 10.
in Honorius a Bishop of Rome, who by the sixth Synod was not only judged, but
condemned as a Monothelite. This was more then counsel or admonition. He
shows in the same place that many laws were made concerning Bishops, both of
the Apostles and of Synods, which do certainly bind all Bishops. When
Bellarmine answers that the Pope is bound by Ecclesiastical laws in respect
of direction, not of coaction (which distinction is in effect the same which
our opposites use now, viz. that Synods may bind or be respected for their
counsel, not for their jurisdiction) Chamierus replyeth again and pleades
that the Bishop of Rome is subject unto those laws, not only for their
direction but for their coaction or constraint, viz. in regard of
Ecclesiastical censures. He says further, Even as particular Synods do bind
all the Bishops within their own jurisdiction, so Universal Synods have power
over all the Bishops of the whole world. Again, because particular Synods do
bind all the Bishops of their own Province: therefore the Bishop of Rome is
subject unto the laws, not only of an universal, but also of his own
particular Synod. Moreover he instanceth in diverse particular laws which the
sixth Synod prescribed unto the Church of Rome, by name touching the permission
of marriage, fasting, etc.

Moreover when Bellarmine and P. Auratus do plead for the Popes supremacy, as
being necessary to the unity of faith and the unity of the Church, etc.
Chamierus answers, Lib. 9. c. 13.
Of old, when many heresies sprung up, they never ran unto any one man, by
whose authority questions might be decided. When disputation was raised against
Paul and Barnabas touching Mosaicall ordinances, the Apostles called a Synod,
Act. 15. which remedy the Church thence-forth used most diligently, as often as
either heresies or schisms did break the unity thereof. He alleges diverse
examples thereof, in special of Constantine, and Innocentius in the question
about Chrysostom. And speaking of such Synods as used not only counsel, but
jurisdiction in censuring the guilty, such as was the Council of Nice, he
shows thence, they found no other remedy fit enough to preserve
Ecclesiastical unity in faith and love, except a General Synod. He says
again, We understand that the best and most certain means of nourishing
unity is a Synod, not one Monarch. And among others he alleges Aegidius
Viterbiensis, who disputed on this manner; Paul the glory of the Apostles, when
he would show the chief point of our salvation, says, Without faith we can by
no means please God: but without Synods faith cannot stand: therefore without
a Synod we cannot be safe. And afterward; Whatsoever has been done in the
Church worthy of praise, worthy of honor from the age of Melchiades, either to
resist the enemy or to settle the Commonwealth, that all sprung from Synods and
is again to be referred unto Synods. And many other things he there brings
to maintain the authority of Synods, without any show that he ever light upon
this dream, that they were only for counsel.

To conclude, whereas Chamierus was translated out of this life, before he had
fully finished that great work of his Panstratia Catholica; and therefore for
the finishing of it there is added unto his 4th Tome, a Supplement by
Alstedius; in that Supplement there is also a plain confession touching the
authority of Synods. Therein Alstedius treading in the steps of Junius and D.
Whitaker, De Co^c. c. 1. sect. 6.
does acknowledge that the original of Synods is from divine right, alleging
Deuteronomy. 17. Act. 1. and chapter 15. Mat. 18. Repeating the causes wherefore Synods
are to be called, he does not limit them to be for counsel only, but that
Cap. 4. sect. 2.
as malefactors in Civil judgments are tried, accused and condemned, so in
the Church obstinate Heretics are by public judgment to be condemned and
excommunicated. He allows unto those that are lawfully called unto Synods, C.
5. s. 2.
to have right of giving definitive sentence, and of determining matters
according to the Scriptures. He maintains that Synods have authority over the
Pope, and that C. 10. s. 21.
he is bound to subject himself unto their judgment, discretive and coactive:
not only to their counsel, but to their censure. And if these did not
suffice, there are yet many other clear testimonies which Alstedius there
gives touching the jurisdiction of Synods.

CHAP. VI.
An answer to Mr Cannes Arguments.
FRom the Allegations of Mr Dav. we come now to the Argumentations of Mr Can
and his client, against the authority of Classes and Synods: and here first we
will examine and consider their Syllogismes and Logical forms of reasoning.

ARGVM. I. Churches plea, p. 68.
If those Churches, planted by the Apostolic institution, had power fully in
themselves immediately from Christ, to practice all his ordinances: Then have
all Churches the like power now. But the first is true: Therefore the second.

The Proposition is clear and certain, by these Scriptures, 1. Cor. 5.2, 3.
Act. 14.23. 1. Cor. 16.2. Col. 2.5. 2. These. 3.14.

The Assumption is acknowledged by sundry of our best Divines, etc.

ANSVV. I. The first maine fault in this Argument, common to many that follow,
is, that herein is committed a foul fallacy, ab ignoratione Elenchi; that is
to say, the Conclusion is beside the Question. This whole argument being
granted, yet the authority of Synods remains still firm, and unshaken
thereby. When or where did I ever affirm that the Churches now have not the
like power to practice all the ordinances of Christ, as fully as those Churches
planted by Apostolic institution? The testimonies of learned men here alleged
by him, to prove that the ancient and first institutions are to be preferred
before later inventions, I do willingly assent unto. But what can he conclude
hence? Though Christ have committed power unto a particular Church, does it
therefore follow that if such abuse their power and go astray, either wholly or
the greater part of it, there is then no Ecclesiastical authority above them,
to censure them or to restrain them from proceeding in evil? This consequence
which had been to the purpose, he offers not to prove. It was confessed Chap.
5. sect. 1. p. 81.
before b^ Mr Cartwright, one of his own witnesses here alleged by him, that
if any Church should desire or choose, or consent upon by the most part, some
that is unmeet, either for doctrine or manners, then the Ministers and Elders
of other Churches round about, should advertise first, and afterward as
occasion should serve, sharply and severely charge, that they forbear such
election, or if it be made, that they confirm it not, by suffering him to
exercise any ministry.

II. A second extraordinary and gross error is to be observed in his Logic,
while in the prosequution of his Argument, he not knowing which is the Major or
which is the Minor proposition in his own Syllogism, that which should be for
the proof of his Minor proposition, that he applies for proof of the Major;
that which should serve for proof of his Major, that he brings for
confirmation of his Minor. The Scriptures which he alleges, he referres to
the proof of his mis-named Proposition: the Testimonies of Authors here
alleged, he referres to the proof of his mis-called Assumption. This error I
do the rather note. 1. Because it is no slip or oversight in him through want
of attention in this place, but an ordinary and frequent error, as appears in
that which follows. 2. Because of his insolent and arrogant boasting against
others, Churc. plea, p. 2. and 3. and 15. Necess. of Sep. p. 188, 189.
for want of art, and want of wit, of Logic, etc. Who can relate unto us such
an example of a man professing himself a Logical Disputant, with such
abundance of printed Syllogismes, with such contempt of others, and yet to be
so rude, as not to know the plainest things and the A. B. C. in Logic, the
difference betwixt the Major and Minor in a Syllogism? 3. Because of his
spiritual pride, not only in separating himself from the Churches of Christ,
as other Brownists do, but taking upon him to be their Pastor, their guide,
their champion for defense of their Separation against all men. O miserable
men, that follow so blind a guide!

III. A third error in the prosequution of this Argument is this, that
although the premises of this argument being rightly understood, are granted
to be true; yet the Scriptures alleged do not prove the same. Though the
Churches planted of the Apostles, had power fully in themselves immediately
from Christ, to practice all his ordinances; yet these places, 1. Cor. 5.2, 3.
Act. 14.23. 1. Cor. 16.2. Col. 2.5. 2. These. 3.14. do only prove their right
for the practice of some of his ordinances, that are mentioned and poynted at
in them, but not of all other. As for example; the administration of the
Sacraments, though a right belonging to the Church, and ordained in other
places of Scripture, yet is not specifyed in any of these allegations. The
liberty of appeals in case of oppression, the power of sending Deputies unto a
Synod for the decision of difficult and weighty causes, are ordinances of
Christ, and rights of the Church, as has been showed before, and yet not
specifyed in any of these Scriptures alleged by him: and therefore his proof
for all ordinances is defective.

IV. For the right understanding of this sentence; viz. that every Parish or
every particular Church has full or sufficient authority within it self,
derived immediately from Christ, for the government of it self in all
Ecclesiastical causes: I desire the Reader to look back unto the explication
thereof by Disse de Gub. Eccl. p. 14.
Gersom Bucerus, who laboring to make the best interpretation thereof, yet
shows that it is not to be admitted without diverse cautions, some whereof I
have expressed P. 117. 118.
before. He undertakes the defense hereof against D. Downam, but no further
then it may be so understood, and so expounded, as not containing in it any
denial or impeachment of the authority and jurisdiction of Classes and Synods,
judging the causes of many Churches. And indeed how can any Church be said to
practice all the ordinances of Christ, so long as they refuse and deny the
combination of Churches, or the jurisdiction of them being combined, which is
showed to be one of his ordinances?

ARGVM. II. Churc. plea, p. 69.
If Christ in Mat. 18.17. where he says, Tell the Church; does mean a
particular Congregation: Then has every particular Congregation, an entire
power, in, and of it self, to exercise Ecclesiastical government, and all
other Gods spiritual ordinances. But the first is true: Therefore the second.

The Proposition is clear and certain, maintained by the most Judicious
Divines, etc.

The Assumption is proved thus: That Church which Christ intends in Matt. 18.
has absolute power in, and of itself to perform all Gods ordinances: But
Christ intends in Mat. 18. a particular Congregation: Therefore every
particular Congregation has absolute power, in, and of it self, to perform
all Gods ordinances, etc.

ANSVV. I. Here is the same fault that was in the former Argument, viz. of
concluding beside the question. This argument being granted, there arises
hence no prejudice to the authority of Classes or Synods. The authority of
particular Churches and the authority of Synods may well subsist together. The
arrows which are shot by Mr Can are beside the mark of the maine question.

II. His argument is not only beside the mark, but as an arrow shot up into
the air, and falling down on his head again, so does his argument return
upon himself: for if a particular Church has entire power, in and of itself to
perform all Gods ordinances; then has it power to unite itself with other
Churches combined in Synods, and to submit unto the judgment thereof,
according to the divine warrant and ordinance. Act. 15.2, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.8, etc.

III. As before, so he blindely stumbles here again at the same stone, in not
discerning betwixt the Proposition and Assumption of his own Syllogism. The
Authors which he alleges for the maintenance of his Major proposition, ought
to have been applied to the proof of his Assumption, viz. to show that Christ
in Mat. 18.17. where he says, Tell the Church, does mean a particular
Congregation: for this is that which he assumes, when he says, But the first
is true. And all the show of help which he has from his Authors, tends to
confirm this Assumption; but their testimonies are no direct proof of his
Proposition.

IV. Another new gross error in his Logical dispute, is this, that whereas
he goes about to prove the Assumption of his first Syllogism, by framing a
second Syllogism, he does not therein according to order conclude that which
was his former Assumption, whether it be understood as it is indeed, or as he
miscalles it; but instead thereof he ridiculously repeates the Conclusion of
his first Syllogism, which Conclusion is neither the Proposition nor the
Assumption which he offers to prove; but the Question made by him in his maine
Argument. And thus entangling himself with his own Syllogismes, Propositions,
and Assumptions, he has brought himself into such a maze, that he knows not
where he is, what he says, nor whereof he affirms. Let Logicians tell how
often they have seen the like in print.

V. Whether all his Authors do affirm that by the Church in Mat. 18. Christ
meant a particular Congregation, I will not here examine: I shall have further
occasion in the next chapter to speak of many of them. But in the mean time
let it be granted, not only that they have all so affirmed, but that it is the
truth: Yet do they not all affirm, that only a particular Congregation was
intended by Christ, Mat. 18. For both the Eldership of a particular Church, and
the Synod arising from the combination of many Churches, are showed unto us in
Matt. 18. the one for the judging of lesser causes, without bringing them to
the whole Congregation; the other for the deciding of weightier matters, which
neither Eldership nor Congregation can so well end. And this is acknowledged by
sundry of his Witnesses, whose names he abuses in this controversy. Mr Parker,
touching Mat. 18. says, Pol. Eccl. l. 3. c. 15. p. 160.
The Church of the faithful is intended of Christ, not as it is simply
considered (as we said before) but as it exercises Discipline according to an
Aristocraticall temperament in the Eldership. For we do think that the Church
mentioned in the first place, in those words, Tell the Church, does precisely
signify the Aristocraticall part, that is, the Eldership: but that which is
mentioned in the latter place, in these words, If he hear not the Church, if
(as Downame teaches) it include the Church excommunicating for contempt, and
not only decreeing or examining, then it does also comprehend the
Democraticall part of the Church, forasmuch as the consent of the people is
necessary unto excommunication. And a little before he says Ibid. p. 159.
Almost all interpreters do agree, that those words [ in verse. 19.] If two or
three, do contain an amplification from the less to the greater, from a
less company to a greater: so that it is most plain, that under the name of
the Church he included as well the greater company, as that which consists of
two or three. How Mr Parker proved the Synod also from Mat. 18. is showed See
Chapter 3. p. 45. 49.
before; where D. Whitaker, Mr Cartwright and others also teach the same thing.

ARGVM. III. Church. plea. p. 70.
Whatsoever was commanded to the 7 Churches to be practiced by each of them,
apart, in, and for themselves; that no Church of God must now omit. But
Ecclesiastical government, was commanded to the 7 Churches to be practiced by
each of them, apart, in, and for themselves. Therefore no Churches of God must
omit the practice of Ecclesiastical government, apart, in, and for themselves.

The Proposition cannot be doubted of. For as Chytraeus, etc.

The Assumption is proved clearly in chap. 2. verse. 2, 14, 20. etc. Moreover Mr
Perkins, etc.

ANSVV. I. This Argument for the form of it, is a misshapen Syllogism, and
that in a double respect; both because the Minor terminus is superfluously put
into the Major Proposition; and because the same terminus is confusedly joined
with the Praedicate in the Minor proposition, when it should have been placed
with the Subject therein. But this is one of the least faults in Mr Cannes
reasonings.

II. For the matter of it, this Argument does also come short of the mark, and
reaches not home to the question. And that which he concludes (being well
understood) may be safely granted of us. That which Mr Can alleges from
Chytraeus, Bullinger, Brightman and Perkins, for the proof of his Proposition
and Assumption, I do willingly assent unto, and it was but an idle labor to
bring them for proof of that which is not denied. There be no Churches here
among us which refuse to practice Ecclesiastical government, apart, in and for
themselves. This they practice after a double manner; 1. There be many rebukes
and censures against sin administered in them without the knowledge of Classis
or Synod, apart, in and for themselves. 2. When as more hard and weighty causes
are brought unto the Deputies of other Churches, assembled in Classes, for
their advise and judgment, even then also when upon their consideration
matters are cleared, and there remains no scruple, they are then remitted
again and referred unto the particular Churches, so that the Eldership with
consent of the Congregation proceeds therein as they find cause, according
to the repentance or obstinacy of the persons with whom they have to deal: And
so the sentence is both determined and executed apart, in and for themselves,
without the Classis.

But if by government to be practiced apart, in and for themselves, he mean
such a solitary and separate government, as refuses combination with other
neighbor Churches, such as admits no liberty of appeal in case of greatest
wrong, such as excepteth a particular Congregation from the censure of all
other Churches, though it should err never so perniciously, and in sum, such
a government apart, as denies all authority and jurisdiction of Classes and
Synods; then is his Assumption most false: and all that he alleges for proof
thereof helps him nothing. for 1. Though the Angel of the Church of Ephesus be
commended for not bearing with the wicked, etc. and the Angel of the Church of
Pergamus and Thyatira be reprehended for suffering diverse enormities, Rev.
2.2.14.20. by what good consequence can these examples overthrow the authority
of Synods? There might be occasion at this day to write unto some Ministers
standing under the Classes and Synods in these Reformed Churches, and some of
them might justly be commended for their zeal in not bearing with the wicked;
others might justly be reprehended for their negligence in tolerating of such
as offend: now Mr Can according to this reasoning, might as well conclude,
against experience, and against the known truth, that these Ministers do not
stand under any Classical government. 2. The praise or dispraise which is
given to the Angels of several Churches apart, does not so much serve to argue
an independency or disunion in government in these Churches; but the very Rev.
1.16.20. and 2.1. and 3.1.
form of the vision, in the union of these Stars of the Churches in Christ's
right hand, does rather argue a consociation of them for their mutual help in
the government of his Church. They appear not scattered in the Firmament, but
gathered and drawn together. What is a Classis or Synod, but as a
Constellation of so many Stars of the Churches combined together, which by
their conjunction together do yield both a greater light of direction, and a
stronger influence of authority, for the confirmation of the truth and
conviction of error.

And as for the testimony of Mr Perkins, though he acknowledge, Upon Rev. 2.20.
and 3.7
God has given to every Church power and authority to preach the Word,
administer the Sacraments, repress evil men, etc. yet does he not thereby
exempt those Churches from the censure of others, if they be found to pervert
the word, corrupt the Sacraments, and judge unrighteously. It is not probable
that such a conceit did ever enter into Mr Perkins head, neither can it be
collected from his words.

ARCVM. IV. If the Church of Corinth, had power and authority within herself;
to exercise Ecclesiastical government; yea and did it, I mean the Ministry
and the rest of the Church there: Then ought not particular Congregations now,
to stand under any other Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. But the
first is true: Therefore the second.

The first part is unquestionably certain; and of this judgment was D. Willet,
etc.

ANSVV. That which he so boldly affirms to be unquestionably certain, viz.
that which is indeed the first part of this Argument, is on the contrary most
certainly false. This consequence of his Major proposition remains to be
proved. Scripture he alleges none at all, and for those eleven Authors
mentioned by him, there is not one of them that confirms his consequence. Why
did he not express their words, and apply them to his purpose, and enforce
the^ against us, if he thought they would have served his turn? It is said to
have been a stratageme of thieves, that to affright men they have taken many
hats and set them upon stakes afar of, that passengers imagining them to be
men, and partakers with those thieves that came unto them, might the sooner
yield. Thus does Mr Can, who sets down the names of many Authors and their
writings in his marginall quotations, as if they were of his mind or partakers
of his cause, when as there is no such matter to be found in them. Let us hear
how he proceeds.

I. CAN. Again whereas the Papists and Hierarchy do say (much after Mr Pagets
new doctrine) that the Church of Corinth had not sole and alone authority, in
itself to exercise Ecclesiastical government; our writers, viz. Ref. Rhem. 1.
Cor. 5.4.
Mr Cartwright, Pol. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4. p. 17. 18. etc.
Mr Parker and others refute them and prove the contrary by many reasons.

ANSVV. That which he says here of sole and alone authority, etc. is more then
he propounded in his Syllogism: I acknowledge that the Church of Corinth did
exercise Ecclesiastical government within herself; and I affirm as much for
our own and other particular Congregations here: and Mr Can with as good
reason might argue that we do not stand under Classes and Synods, if there
were any soundnes in his Syllogism. My opinion touching the Church of Corinth
may be discerned sufficiently by that which I noted touching the 7 Churches, in
answer to his former argument. And as for Mr Cartwright and Mr Parker, whom he
specially alleges, they help him not at all. I acknowledge Mr Parker does
justly oppose them that held, the Church of Corinth did not excommunicate the
incestuous person, but Apostle alone: But I do more fully assent unto Mr
Cartwright, who differing something from Mr Parker, and refuting the Rhemists
most effectually by many reasons, does yet withal show, that the authority and
power both of the Apostle and of the Church did concur in this
excommunication. Whereas the Rhemists would have the Corinthians to be only
witnesses, Mr Cartwright in his third reason against them, says, Conf. of
Rhem. upon 1. Cor. 5.4.
If the Church were assembled only to bear witness, and not to have
authority in this case: it follows that Paul's spirit was there also only to
look on and bear witness, considering that the personal presence of the
Church, and the Apostles spiritual presence, are associated in this affair of
the Church. Thus he joyneth both together: and so afterward again reasoning
from those words, Do not you judge of those that are within? 1. Cor. 5.12. he
says thereupon that the Apostle gives more unto the Church in
excommunication, then to be witnesses and lookers on: For he uses the same
(...) 1. Cor. 5.3.12.
word to declare the Churches interest, that he used before to note his own.
If then you will say, that the Churches judgment in excommunication is but to
bear witness: it follows that the Apostles then, and consequently their
successors now are only to bear witness of the excommunication. Hereunto
comes also that the release of this censure is asscribed in the same word of
forgivenes or absolutio^ unto the Church as unto Paul. 2. Cor. 2.10. Now to
have the same word in the same verse and the same cause to be understood
diversely, and referred to Paul to have the proper signification of remitting,
but referred to the Church to signify a witnessing of remission: needs more
learning for the defense of it, then falls unto the Jesuits capacity. Thus
he shows that neither the sole authority of the Church on the one side, nor
the sole authority of Paul on the other side did determine this business.
Again, had there a dangerous contention risen in Corinth, which by their sole
authority they could not end; what should have hindered them from following the
example of the Church at Antioch, in seeking help both by counsel and
authority of other Churches for the judgment thereof?

I. CAN. The latter part is proved before, in the Minors of the 1. and 3.
arguments. ANSVV. It it manifest that he did not know the Minor from the Major
in some of his former Syllogismes, and so in this place it appears he does not
discern the first from the latter part of his argument. But what he objected
before is already answered: it is vain and helples for him to rely upon his
former poofes.

ARGVM. V. Churc. plea. p. 71.
Such actions the Church may lawfully do, wherein no Law of God is broken. But
there is no Law of God broken, when particular Congregations do in, and among
themselves exercise all Gods ordinances. Therefore they may lawfully do it.

The proof of the Proposition, does arise from the definition of sin; which
as Co^t. Fan. l. 22. c. 27.
Augustine and Lib. de Paradis. c. 8.
Ambrose truly define it; is either a deed or word, or thought, against some
Divine Law. Lib. 2. did. 35.
Lombard, Th. 12. q. 71.
Aquinas; and other Schoolmen (as they are called) agree hereto.

The Assumption is manifest in our first Argument, the first part of it.

ANSVV. This Argument touches not the question: we grant his Conclusion; that
particular Congregations may in and among themselves exercise all Gods
ordinances; and among the rest this ordinance of combining themselves in
Synods, for the decision of their controversies. This may be said as well to be
in and among themselves, as the use of Synods for counsel, which my opposites
allow for an ordinance of God. And as particular Churches may refuse the
counsel of Synods if it be unlawful: so ought they to disobey the sentences
and decrees of Synods, if they determine any thing contrary to the word of God.

His Proposition being so manifest, it was needles to bring proof for it. But
the definition of sin which he brings needlessly, is insufficient: because it
comprehends not all sin under it. There is an original corruption and
depravation of nature, which is Sin, considered distinctly apart, beside
thoughts, words or deeds. The Law requires integrity of nature, and all
disconformity with that Law is sin, though not yet come so far as thoughts.
Deuteronomy. 6. with 1. John. 3.4. The saying of Augustine is to be taken rather for a
distribution, then for a definition: and for a distribution, not simply of
Sin, but only of Actual sins, as they are either thoughts, words, or
deeds. Ambrose is ill joined with Austine, seeing in the place alleged he has
not the same, but another more large definition, containing under it Original
sin also, when he says, Tom. 4. lib. de Paradiso. c. 8.
What is sin but a praevarication against the Law of God? etc. This
praevarication is as well in the nature and disposition of man, as in actual
sins. The judgment of Aquinas, and such Popish Schoolmen is not to be much
esteemed in this point, while they teach that original corruption in those
that are baptized and justified is not properly any sin at all, and therefore
are rejected herein of all Orthodox Divines.

ARGVM. VI. If the Apostle gave commandment unto the Eldership of Ephesus, for
the whole administration of all Ordinances in that Church: Then may the
Eldership of every particular Congregation administer among themselves all Gods
ordinances. But the first is true: Therefore the second.

The Major is proved two ways. 1. By Scripture, Act. 20. verse. 17.28.2. By the
testimony of the learned Whitaker, etc.

The Minor is undeniable. For as Mr Brightman says, there was one form etc.

ANSVV. I. Mr Can here again wanders from the question, and goes about to
prove that which I never denied, viz. that the Eldership of every particular
Church may administer all Gods ordinances among themselves. Even those solemn
acts of communion with other Churches both in things spiritual and corporal,
being the ordinances of God, are to be performed by the direction of the
Eldership. This hinders not but that any Eldership or Church it self, being
found in error or other unfaithful dealing, may be subject to the censure of
many Churches united in their Synods.

II. If it belong to the Eldership of every particular Church to administer all
Gods ordinances; then how can the ordinances of God be duly administered in
that Church of the Brownists whereof Mr Can is Bishop alone; where there is
no Eldership; where there is neither teaching nor ruling Elder beside himself?
Seeing there is no Ruler in his own Company but himself, and he denies all
other rule over him by Synods, does he not make himself a kind of
Ecclesiastical Monarch or sole Governor of the Separation?

III. Mr Can does here again bewray his notorious ignorance of Logic,
whereof he professes so great skill, in the framing of so many Syllogismes,
and yet like the children that know not the right hand from the left, cannot
discern betwixt the Major and the Minor of his Syllogismes. This appears
here, when he calls that his Major, which he proves by Act. 20.17.28. and by
the testimony of D. Whitaker, viz. that the Apostle gave commandment unto the
Eldership of Ephesus, etc. which is his Assumption, or Minor: and again by
calling that his Minor for which he cites Mr Brightman and other treatises,
which serve to prove one form of Church Government, common to all Churches; as
any Logician that looks upon his Argument may easily discern. When he
propounded Simple or Categovicall Syllogismes, then was he not so deceyved in
his guessing at a Major or Minor. But so often as he uses any Hypotheticall
Syllogism, so often he is as a man wandering in a wood or wilderness. And the
reason hereof seems to be this: whereas in a Hypotheticall Syllogism, the
Antecedent of the Major is assumed usually in the Minor, and that which is but
a part of the Major comes to be the whole Minor, he mistaking a part for the
whole, does therefore call that which is only the Antecedent of the Major, by
the name of the whole Major Proposition, when as indeed it is the whole Minor
Proposition, and so to be called. Had not W. Best been a Simplician, as the
Brownist noted him to be, he would never have placed his confidence in the
skill of this simple Logician, nor rested under the shadow of his Syllogismes.

ARGVM. VII. Churc. plea. p. 72.
Such Offices and callings, without which the Church of God is complete, and
perfect, for Government, are superfluous and humane. But the Church of God may
be complete, and perfect, for Government, without Classical and Synodicall
Offices and callings. Therefore these Offices and callings are superfluous and
humane.

This Argument the Protestants have used against the Pope: and the Reformists
against Bishops, Archbishops, Chancellours, etc. Now the same is every-way as
firm and good, against Synods and Classes; for without them, the Church of
God, is fully brought to complete perfection and unity. D. Fulke Learn. Disc.
Eccl. Gov. p. 10.11.
confidently affirms so much. That which D. Whitaker De Co^c. qu. 1. p. 22.23.
writes of General Councills, is by Mr Parker Pol. Ecc. l. 3. p. 133.
applied (and rightly) unto particular Synods. The Church of God (says he) can
well subsist without them, for she was sometimes without them: besides we are
not bound by any special commandment of God to have them.

ANSVV. I. This Argument concludes nothing against us, neither touches it the
Question. When did I ever speak of any Synodicall offices? And what are those
Offices that here he intends? The members of Classes and Synods, are no other
then the ordinary Officers or Deputies of particular Churches, considering
together and determining so as they judge best for the edification of their
flocks.

II. If he imagine or conceive that the Praesident which propounds matters in
Synods, or the Scribe that records them, be distinct Synodicall Officers; he
might as well think, and we might as well say, that the Brownists also had
other distinct Ecclesiastical Offices, besides Pastors, Teachers, or Elders,
namely Praesidents and Scribes; because heretofore in the days of Mr Johnson
and Mr Ainsworth, they with their Elders did by course propou^d matters in
their Church, and had also a Scribe to write down their special businesses:
and now in Mr Cannes time, when they have no Eldership, if he alone propound
matters and keep record of them in writing, it may then be said that he has
two or three Ecclesiastical offices, as well as so many Mechanical trades.

III. If propounding of matters as the Praesident, and writing them as the
Scribe, do constitute new offices; then many other members of the Brownists
Church, may be reputed for Ecclesiastical Officers; for Praesidents and
Scribes. For Mr Can being now their only Governor, if it fall out that any
among them shall make complaint against his doctrine or practice; then those
members of the Church that shall propound the same to the Church, and moderate
the action, or keep record thereof in writing, in behalf of the Church (he
being unfit to do it himself in his own cause) must then be accounted new
Officers, Praesidents and Scribes of the Church.

IV. That which he says of Classes and Synods, that without them the Church of
God is fully brought to complete perfection and unity, comparing them to Lordly
Prelates, Chancellours, etc. it is utterly false. He only affirms it, and no
word of Scripture is alleged or so much as pretended for it. Is this to go
unto the Law and to the Testimony?

V. The testimonies of men which he alleges are falsified and perverted by
him. D. Fulk shows the sufficiency of those offices mentioned by him, viz. of
Doctors, Pastors, Governors, etc. but he Disc. of Eccl. Gov. p. 111. etc.
shows withal expressly how these exercise authority in Synods, as well as
in the Elderships and particular Congregations. Though D. Whitaker and Mr
Parker say, that the Church of God may subsist without Synods; yet he corrupts
and falsifyes their testimony, when he makes them to say, the Church may well
subsist without them. The Church of God may subsist and be a true Church,
though it want some divine ordinances. Though they be not absolutely necessary
to the being and subsistence of a Church, yet how needful they are to the
well-being of a Church, both those Authors do show and prove from diverse
grounds of Scripture, noted before. If the want of every ordinance of God
should destroy the subsistence of a Church, the^ that Company of Brownists
under Mr Can, wanting the ordinance of an Eldership so long a time, must have
perished long ago.

ARGVM. VIII. Whatsoever Government cannot be found commanded in the written
word of God; ought not to have any place in the Church of God. But the
Government of Classes and Synods, over many particular Congregations, cannot be
found commanded in the written word of God. Therefore it ought not to have any
place in the house of God.

The first part is grounded upon these Scriptures, Esa. 8.20. Mat. 28. ult.
etc. Likewise this is the judgment of many learned men, etc.

The second part is also as manifest; for if we onee grant (as all learned men
have granted) that the Churches of the Apostolic constitution, were
independent bodies, and exercised Ecclesiastical government in, and of
themselves; then it must follow, that Classical Assemblies, etc. have their
rise wholly, from the pleasure and will of man,

ANSVV. The first part of this Argument, being of it self plain enough, needed
not such store of proof as Mr Can brings for it. The Reader may observe his
notable trifling, in alleging so many testimonies of Scripture, and
testimonies of men (though some of them be carelessly misalledged) for proof of
that which he had no reason to imagine that it would be denied by me.

The second part of this Argument is most false, and he knows it is denied by
me, and yet for proof of it he brings here neither word of God, nor word of
man, no testimony, neither Divine nor humane. He says indeed, most untruely,
that all learned men have granted, that the Churches of Apostolic
constitution, were independent bodies; but he names not one learned man that so
writes. The Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament, which show a
dependency of Churches in Ecclesiastical judgments, have been noted already,
in those Arguments brought for the authority of Synods, together with the
consent of learned men, such late opposites excepted as I my self first named
as parties in this cause. All other learned Writers do generally reject that
independency which he dreams of.

ARGVM. IX. Churches plea. p. 73.
That Government which merely tends unto the taking away from particular
Congregations their due power, is unlawful. But the Government of Classes and
Synods (as they now are) does merely tend unto the taking away from particular
Congregations their due power. Therefore that Government is unlawful.

The Major of this Argument may easily be proved by sundry places of Scripture;
viz. 1. These. 4.6. etc. the definition of justice, etc. the Etymology or
precise signification of the word, both in Greek and Latin. etc.

ANSVV. Here again he plays the trifler, in alleging so many Scriptures and
testimonies of men, to prove that which of itself is clear enough, and more
plain then the proofs that he brings for it. In special that definition of
justice which he brings, is not sufficiently confirmed by the Etymologies which
he speaks of. The Greek Etymon noted out of Aristotle, is not so current, but
that some learned men refuse the same, and Avenar. in praef. Lex. Ebr.
derive the word from the Hebrew, from whence the principal Etymologies of
that tongue are to be taken. And yet that Etymology which Aristotle brings of
justice, is not with Mr Can to demonstrate an entire definition of justice,
but to show in part one effect thereof; and Mr Can overspeakes himself, when
he says of the definition, so much is imported in the Greek word. The Latin
Etymology, which Mr Can brings, viz. jus a jure, as he sets it down in his
margin, is more strange. It is likely his Author whom he alleges, has no
such thing. If Mr Can should own it or approove of it, in such sort as it
stands in his book; it would thereby appear that his skill in Grammar is like
unto his skill in Logic. Who ever heard such an Etymology, that the Nominative
should be derived of the Ablative? But admit there should be such a ridiculous
Etymology, how does he or how can he apply this to confirm his definition of
justice? How does this prove the truth of his Major proposition? What is that
which he says is imported in this Etymology? And what is that precise
signification, which he vainly talks of, but does not express? But let us
now hear now he seeks to prove his Minor, which is most false.

I. CAN. The Minor is as manifest: 1. By Mr Pagets own testimony in page 66.
where he confesses, that they have concluded among themselves in their Synods,
that no particular Congregation without the leave and consent of the Classis,
shall proceed to the election of Ministers, excommunication of offenders, and
the like, etc. ANSVV. I. He does manifestly change and alter my words; for when
as I had said, that it had been agreed in Synods, touching election of
Ministers, excommunication, and the like, that the same shall not be proceeded
in Answ. to W.B. p. 66.
without advise of the Classis; instead of this Mr Can repeats it, without
leave and consent of the Classis. Now according to the State of the Question
betwixt us, there is difference betwixt doing a thing without advise, and
without leave; men ask advise of many, of whom they ask no leave for doing a
thing. II. Had I spoken more largely of the allowance and consent of the
Classes and Synods, yet would not my testimony have proved his Minor, viz. that
their government tends to the taking away from particular Churches their due
power: seeing the authority and help of Classes tends to the establishment of
their due power, by directing and regulating the same, and so preventing the
undue execution of their power. This order takes not away due power, but
hinders and corrects only the undue exercise of their power. Thus much is
confessed by such as Mr Can himself hereafter calls for to be his witnesses.
Mr Baynes speaking of particular Congregations at Geneva, which do not proceed
in weighty matters without consent of other Churches meeting together by their
Deputies, says, Dioces. trial. p. 21.
They have power of governing themselves, but for greater edification,
voluntarily confederate, not to use nor exercise their power but with mutual
communication, one asking the counsel and consent of another in that common
Presbytery. And a little after he says, Though they were entire Churches and
had the power of Churches, yet they needed this support in the exercise of it,
etc. Mr Parker also, whom Mr Can so often alleges, and seems to applaud as
being of his opinion, is very express in this point, as I have noted before in
answer to Mr D. He shows that the government of Classes and Synods as they now
are, does not take away the due power of particular Congregations. Touching the
Churches of the Villages in these Netherlands, with whom we are united in the
same government, he says, Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c 23. p. 349.
The power of excommunication, ordination, and other jurisdiction, illis
illibata relinquitur, is left pure unto them, saving only that communion which
ought to be among Churches: every Church uses the counsel and consent of her
neighbors, as of the Classis or Presbytery in the city, which I suppose not to
be unmeet even for the most perfect Churches. He judged the freest and most
perfect Churches to stand in need of this government, and that it was no
empeachment of their due power. But Mr Can labors to illustrate his
assertion with some instances.

I. CAN. For instance; say the Classes and Synods will not permit, that a
Congregation shall reject some convicted Heretics; then they must (if they
will believe Mr Paget) let them alone in their communion, against Gods express
commandment; Tit. 3.10. and so obey men rather then God. Again put case, some
Churches do want Ministers, yet notwithstanding, if the Classes and Synods
will not give them leave, to choose any, except unfit and insufficient persons;
then it seems by this Synodicall Canon, they must take such, or remain
destitute still. ANSVV. I. If such strange cases, and unheared of in our times,
should fall out, that then such oppression and tyranny, is not to be imputed
unto the Classical or Synodall order and government, but to the corruption and
personal wickedness of such men as should be members of the Classis or Synod.
Such accidental evils, not springing from the nature of an ordinance, are no
arguments to prove the unlawfulnes of an ordinance; when as the ordinance
itself and in its own nature serves for the preventing or remooving of such
evils in particular Churches. II. All the force of these objections, and all
the fear of danger and inconvenience pretended by these instances comes as
strongly, yea and much more heavily upon the heads of those that stand for a
single, uncompounded policy, and would have all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
limited unto a particular Congregation: for example, put case that the greater
part of a particular Congregation, and of the Eldership therein, will choose an
offensive and insufficient Minister, or will not permit that an obstinate and
convicted Heretic among them shall be rejected; what shall the other part of
the Church do, which is oppressed and hindered from the due exercise of their
power by the unrighteous proceeding of the greater part? What can follow here
according to H. Ains. Animadv. p. 39. Co^m. of Saints, c. 23. p. 470. 471.
the doctrine and practice of the Brownists, but separation, and dissipation of
the Church? But by the government of Synods, if particular Churches be guilty
of error, oppression and tyranny, their error is to be corrected by Classes;
if Classes err, Synods may correct them; and one Synod may be corrected by
another greater. And so many great evils may be redressed, and scandals
remooved. III. As for the rejection of Heretics, commanded Tit. 3.10. a
principal means for the accomplishment thereof, is the help of Classes and
Synods, by their discerning, convincing and judging of them. If that help
should fail, and those that have authority should neglect or refuse to do
their duty herein; the godly after testifying against evil, are to tolerate
that which they cannot amend: even as the Pharisees and Sadduces, convicted
Heretics, were tolerated by the godly, that remained in the Church without
separation. Lastly, suppose that the power of particular Churches had been in
some sort weakened, and not strengthened by the government of Classes and Synods,
as they now are; yet is it a gross falsehood, when he assumeth, or rather
lavishly presumes, that their government tends merely, or only, to the taking
away of the Churches due power; as though there were no other fruit or benefit
by them. This he shall never prove.

The second proof of his Minor is taken from the practice of the Classis. W.
Best is Church. plea. p. 74.
there brought in complaining of the authority which they take over us and our
Eldership too: yea in truth (says he) so much authority as any Lord can do
over his servant, etc. But this is a shameless and impudent falsehood, without
truth; for no Lords suffer their servants to sit with them in judgment, and
to have a voice for determining matters as well as themselves, so as the Elders
or Deputies of every Church are allowed in the Classis. Beside other manifest
differences, observe the unbounded and unmeasurable slander, in his speaking
not only of that authority which Lords do take, but of that which any Lord
can do over his servant. For what is it which the worst Lord cannot do to his
servant?

That insufficient reason which he brings for the declaration of this
authority, may as well and more truly, in his words be applied unto the
Democracy of the Brownists: for so long as any member among them does what that
imperious company will have him do, he is left alone; but if he meddle with
things against the others liking, he is immediately commanded to cease, and so
must not proceed further. Yea that Democraticall judicatory is far more
severe and ready to censure those that resist them, then is any Classis in
these lands. Had any member of them so behaved himself against them, as W. Be.
has done to the Classis in this scandalous and reproachful writing against
them, as well as against me, he had been long since delivered unto Satan: he
could not have exspected such lenity and patience from them, as the Classis
has used toward this W. Be.

My answer unto a writing, touching an action jointly concluded by them, as he
says, viz. that it did not belong unto them; is deceitfully and imperfectly
set down. The matter being such as had been already brought unto the Classis,
and there judged and decided against them: there was no reason that it should
be brought back to an inferior judicatory; being such as were parties also;
being such parties also as had been already censured about that controversy.
And see the dawbing between Mr Can and W.B. The conclusion spoken of, was not
the conclusion of the Congregation; and Mr Can himself allows not a
Consistory to make any such conclusions without the Congregation; and by his
profession, it does not belong unto a Consistory; and yet he helps W.B. to
exclaim for that, wherein he himself is of another mind.

Touching the words of the Prophet, abused and misapplyed by them to frame
their complaint, Woe unto us, we are spoiled, Ier. 4.13. I answer: 1. The
liberty of appeals unto Classes and Synods, is that which preserves a Church
and the members thereof from being spoiled by any faction. And by their help,
we enjoy our liberty and peace; and are established, and furnished with such
Ministers, as agree with us in the truth, and are endued with such gifts as
are meet for our edification. 2. On the contrary, for want of combination with
Classes, Mr Can. may justly take up the complaint, Woe unto us we are spoiled:
Since his coming unto them (beside former dissipations) their Church is rent
in the midst by incurable contentions, their people scattered, he himself
deposed, and rejected by the Elders and people; and they mutually one half
abandoning another, and avoiding one another companies as excommunicates. Lo
here a Spoil.

ARGVM. X. It is a sin against God, to add any thing, to that form and
manner of ordering Churches, which Christ our heavenly Prophet, has set forth
unto us in the New Testament. To subject particular Congregations, under any
other Ecclesiastical authority, out of themselves, is to add unto that form
and manner of ordering Churches, which etc. Therefore it is a sin to do it.

The Proposition cannot be excepted against; for the Scriptures herein are
evident, Deuteronomy. 4.2. etc. Many learned men, etc.

The Assumption cannot for shame be denied; only because the weight of the
controversy leans upon it, I will speak further of it in the next Section.

ANSVV. For the Proposition, I. If it be well understood, I do willingly grant
it: And Mr Can does again trifle, in alleging so many Scriptures, Ancient
fathers, and other later Writers for the proof thereof. II. Both the Scriptures
and other Writers alleged by him, do as well condemn such as take from the
word of God, as those that add unto it. And therefore they serve to reprove Mr
Can. that detracts from it by denying the authority of Synods, taught in the
forementioned Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament. The Kings coin is
adulterate, as well by clipping and diminishing the same, as otherwise. This
crime are they guilty of, that clip the authority of Synods. III. The Fathers
here mentioned do give express testimony for Synods by special and
particular allowance of them, and therefore they are doubly abused, being thus
alleged against their meaning.

For the Assumption, he incurreth a threefold shame. I. It is a bold and
shameless assertion for him to say, it cannot for shame be denied; when as it is
evidently false, and generally denied by the most godly and learned in all
ages. II. Another shame it is, that though he here confess, the weight of the
controversy leans upon it; yet here he brings nothing at all for the
confirmation thereof. This is his manner: where no need of proof is, there he
idly abounds with Scriptures, Fathers, and other Writers; where the point of
difference is, on which the weight of the controversy leans, there he leaves
his Assumptions naked and without proof. III. It is a further shame, to put us
off to the next Section, and to tell us he will there speak further of it,
where he only alleges the testimonies of men. Is this answerable to the
profession of the Brownists, that boast so much, To the Law, and to the
Testimony?

HAving thus examined his Arguments, which he has honored with the ornaments
of his Art, by propounding them in Syllogisticall forms; we will now proceed
to consider another sort of his Reasons, to which he does not vouchsafe so much
respect, but propounds them more carelessly and nakedly, without such complete
Logical attire. Of these he says, There are yet other reasons to prove our
Assertion; the which I will here lay down more briefly.

REAS. I. Church. plea, p. 75.
If every Eldership have a like and equal power, as Hierome, Cyprian, Bucer
and others affirm; then may not the Officers of one Congregation, seek by
authority to suppress the acts and decrees concluded in another.

ANSVV. I. The consequence of this reason is denied by us. Though every
Eldership be of equal power, yet the Ministers and Elders of one Congregation,
being joined together in a Classis or Synod with the Deputies of many Churches,
these may lawfully seek by their joint authority, to suppress any unlawful
acts or decrees of another Congregation. The reason is, because as D. Whitaker
De Co^c. qu. 1. c. 3.
reasons from Matt. 18.20. and Mr Parker Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c. 13. 4.
alleges again from him, Vis unita fortior, Power combined is the stronger.
The concurrence of power from many Churches is the ground on Synodall and
Classical authority over particular Churches, though otherwise in themselves
considered apart they be all equal. II. Note here again the trifling and
shifting of Mr Can. To prove the equality of Elderships, he alleges the
testimonies of Hierome, Cyprian, Bucer, and others: though I had before granted
it, and showed that in the Classis our Eldership had Answ. to W. B p. 86.
the same liberty and power in giving our voices equally with others, and that
our Elders Ibid. p. 90.
have exercised as much authority as any member of the Classis, by giving their
voices for deciding, judging and determining any controversy, etc. yet
needlessly he brings diverse Writers for proof of this confessed and practiced
truth; and for the confirmation of his most false consequence he offers not to
bring any proof at all, from any word of God or man.

REAS. II. It is against sense, that a Minister should undertake the care of
more Churches then one only: who reads in Scripture of a steward over many
families, a sheep heard over diverse flocks, etc. Nature has ordained ( says
Lib. 1. c. 2.
Aristotle) one unto one.

ANSVV. I. We read in Scripture of Jaacob that was a shepherd over diverse
flocks, both of his own and of Labans. Genesis 30.36, 40. II. We read in
Scripture of the Apostles that were stewards and shepherds over diverse flocks,
having the care of all Churches, 1. Cor. 4.1. with 2. Cor. 11.28. Ioh. 20.15,
16. Mr Can ought at least to have excepted extraordinary Shepherds. III.
Though ordinary Pastors or Ministers have the peculiar and proper charge of no
more then one flock; yet in regard of a common and joint care of many Churches
combined in Classes and Synods, we read in Scripture that the Elders and
Shepherds of the Church in Jerusalem did undertake the care, and exercise with
others authority in judging the cause of the Church of Antioch. It is against
sense, against nature, against Scripture, but that the members of the body
should have care one for another. 1. Cor. 12.25. etc. IV. The use of Classes
and Synods for counsel and admonition is allowed by my opposites, and yet the
care and labor therein, for traveling to meet in such assemblies, for
deliberation, for disputing, for convincing such as they admonish, and their
counsel given unto Churches for the rejecting of Heretics and other obstinate
offenders, more or less, is as great in effect as if they should give
definitive sentence therein. As little distraction arises from one work as
from the other. To counsel a Church to excommunicate a sinner, is as great a
burden and labor, for a Synod, as if they should pronounce the sentence
themselves. V. It does least of all become Mr Can to plead and reason on this
manner. If nature have ordained one to one, as he argues out of Aristotle
(though in his quotation he forgot to tell where) then must Mr Can be a man
against nature, above many other, in transgressing the law and ordinance of
nature. How durst he take the Pastoral charge of a Church upon him, and this
alone without assistance of an Eldership, and yet in the mean time undertake
the care and charge of diverse other trades, as of a Printers workhouse in one
place, of a Brandery or Aquavitae shop in another place, and specially of an
Alchymists laboratory in another place? Is this paragon of the Separation a fit
man to be an Advocate or Patron of the Churches, to write a book and entitle
it the Churches plea, whereas if his example were followed, it would bring
confusion upon all Churches and on all the Ministers thereof? What Pluralist or
Non-resident is there that will not think he has some color to justify
himself from this practice of Mr Can?

REAS. III. Is it a like thing, that the Classical power, should be of Gods
approving, and yet he never mention it in his word? This argument the Hierarchy
use against Popish Offices; and the Reformists against theirs. Now let the
discreet Reader judge, if it prove not the point in hand as well. Here I may
not omit Zwinglius his speech, speaking of Synods* Zwingl. Art. 8. expl.
We willingly believe (says he) that you are a representative Church; for a
true Church you are not. But I pray you show us, whence you fetch this name?
Who has given you this name? who has given you power to make Canons, impose
things on men's shoulders, grieve their consciences, etc.

ANSVV. I. This Reason is in substance the same with his fifth Argument before,
and therefore idly repeated. The grounds of Classical power are showed Chap.
2. and 3. and 4.
before from the Scriptures, and the cavills of Mr Can against the same,
refuted. II. Note his error of speech in distinguishing the Hierarchy from
Popish Offices, by opposing them one against the other; whereas according to
the common acception of the word, the Hierarchy does consist in the Popish
offices: and the corruption of offices which he intends, is but a fragment
thereof, and therefore ought not to carry the name rather then the whole, when
both are spoken of together. Otherwise in proper speech, the true Hierarchy
imports the lawful offices and government, prescribed in the Scriptures. III.
That which he alleges out of Zwinglius touching a representative Church, is
to be understood of the Romish Church, and of the Popish government; for
against them did Zwinglius then write: and against them there was just cause to
complain so as he did. IV. If any think that by representative Churches he
meant all Synods whatsoever, that exercise Ecclesiastical authority in the
judging of causes; then against the testimony of Zwinglius we oppose the
testimony of all ages, and of the learned Writers therein, old and new, Papists
and Protestants, that generally are against him. Mr Parker Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c.
26. p. 368, 369.
says well, All ages have called the Synod a representative Church: and beside
many other witnesses he alleges D. Whitaker, arguing thus against the
Papists, De Co^c. qu. 5. c. 3. p. 169.
The Church is represented in the Synod; therefore if the Church be above
Peter, then is the Synod also. Mr Parker argues further, Except the Synod did
consist of the Deputies of Churches, Synods could not represent the Churches:
and having there brought many testimonies of Scripture to show the power of
Churches in sending their Deputies or Delegates, he concludes in the words of
D. Whitaker, Qu. 3. c. 3. p. 103.
Whosoever is sent of the Church he represents the person of the Church. But
touching the judgment of Zwinglius, more hereafter, when he is again alleged
by Mr Can.

REAS. IV. Church. plea, p. 76.
Whosoever shall deny our aforesaid assertion, must of necessity hold, two
distinct forms of Church Government; one wherein particular Congregations do
in, and of themselves, exercise all Gods ordinances; the other where they stand
under another Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. Now to hold this, is
directly all one, as to hold two ways to heaven, distinct and opposite in
themselves, which is very scandalous in Religion, and that which cannot stand
with truth.

ANSVV. I. Whatsoever Mr Can here affirms, is but his bare assertion,
without Scripture or other proof to confirm his reason. But Mr Can. is not yet
come to such credit with us, that his ipse dixit, his bare word may go for
current. II. It is false which he says of holding two distinct forms of
Church Government, etc. The particular Congregations here in these Reformed
Churches do in, and of themselves; exercise all Gods ordinances, and yet
withal stand under another Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves;
Synodall authority being one of Gods ordinances. Though in regard of the local
and personal presence of all the members of the Church, this authority is
exercised out of themselves: yet in regard of their confederation and
combination with neighbor Churches, and in regard of their Deputies,
Ministers, and Elders or others that have place and suffrage in these Synods,
this authority is exercised in and of themselves. And though here be another
act of authority, yet is there but one distinct form of government. III. It is
as false which he says of holding two ways to heaven: and this not only in
respect of these Reformed Churches among themselves, having the same
government, both by Elderships at home, and by Synods abroad; but also in
respect of diverse Churches, having different forms of government. The Church
of England and of these Countries, though they have a different order of
Church Government, yet holding together the same fundamental trueths of the
Gospell^ they both do hold but one way to heaven, and so do both mutually
acknowledge one another to be in that way. IV. This company of Brownists
whereof Mr Can is the sole Governor, was formerly governed by an Eldership,
and now since their division they have no Eldership to rule them. Whether it be
because they think they have none among them fit to be Elders; or whether they
do wilfully refuse such as they cannot deny to be fit; or whether there be any
other cause, I leave it to themselves. Always this we know that there be some
Churches in remote countries, that want the benefit of Classical government,
because there be no other neighbor Churches near unto them, with whom they
may combine themselves for their mutual guidance and edification. But now if
the want of an Eldership among the Brownists, such as they once had, do not
warrant us to say, that they hold two distinct forms of Church Government to
be lawful, one with an Eldership, another without an Eldership; and
consequently that they hold two ways unto heaven: then much less can the want
of a Synod in respect of the different consideration of the times, places,
occasions and oportunities of several Churches, be any warrant for Mr Can to
object unto us two forms of government, or two ways to heaven, etc.

REAS. V. Let it be observed, that for this reason (among others) the Learned
Whit. Cont. 4. qu. 4. Chamier. l. 6. co^ject. 2.
say, the Pope is Antichrist; viz. because he will have men to appeal from
their own Churches unto him; and to stand under his sentence and decree. And
do not the Classical assemblies and Synods, take upon them an authority much
like to it, in subjecting many Congregations to them, requiring appeals to be
made to them, and that the Judicatory ( as Mr Pagets In his Letter etc.
phrase is) belongs to them; as if their power above all Churches.

ANSVV. I. Let it be observed how Mr Can speaking here against appeals made
unto Classes and Synods, brings no Scripture, no word of God to condemn them,
but only the testimonies of men: he needed not to have reserved hereafter a
peculiar Section only for humane testimonies, when he uses them so often before.
II. Let it be observed how notably he abuses even these testimonies also
against the meaning of his Authors. D. Whitaker DePont. Romans qu. 4. p. 470.
pleads for appeals, as being both of divine and natural right. Chamier (whom
Mr Can does misquote, without the title of the book alleged) says, that
appeals Panstrat. Catho. tom. 2. l. 13. c. 17
are of common equity: and truly without them the Church could hardly or not
at all subsist; speaking of appeals unto Synods. That which learned and
orthodox Writers blame in appeals made unto the Pope, is this, that they are
made unto one man, and not unto a Synod; asscribing unto him infallibility of
judgment; giving him power over Churches that are not combined with the Church
of Rome: and in special for this, that the Pope allows no appeals to be made
from him unto a Synod: This is the Antichristian pride that they condemn in
the Pope. And herein the Church of the Brownists does plainly resemble the
Pope; seeing their Congregation also, their Democraticall judicatory allows no
appeal to be made from them unto Classes or Synods, unto any Ecclesiastical
judges besides themselves. These are two of the most monstrous propositions of
the Papists, touching the Popes authority, viz. that Bellarm. de Conc. l. 2. c.
17. and 18.
the Pope is above a General Synod, and acknowledges no judgment on earth
above him: and again, that the Pope cannot commit the coactive judgment over
him, neither unto a Synod, nor unto any man, but only the discretive: and this
discretive judgment they expound to be such a kind of arbitrament, as does
not bind him further then it pleases him. Now so far as concerns
Ecclesiastical judgment, the Brownists, and the maintainers of the single
uncompounded policy, do likewise hold that there is no judgment on earth
above their particular Congregation; and that they may not commit any
controversy of theirs unto the censure and decision of any Synod. What stronger
reason could Mr C. have alleged against himself, to show their unlawful
government, then this their denial of appeals? III. Let it be observed how
foolishly Mr Can cavills at my speech touching Classical assemblies and
Synods, when he relates it thus, the judicatory (as Mr Pagets phrase is)
belongs unto them: for this relation is false; that was not my phrase; but I
said the judicature did belong unto them. It was the simplicity of his
informer, or of some ignorant scribe that put judicatory for judicature, as may
appear by the writing I made, which is yet to be seen. Note Mr C. his rashness
in receyving such things.

REAS. VI. What more meet and reasonable, then that every man's case be there
heard and determined, where the fault was committed? So says Cypr. li. 1.
Epist. 3.
Cyprian, It is not fit that they over whom the Holy Ghost has made us
overseers, should go too and fro. He speaks of carrying matters away from
their own Church unto others.

ANSVV. I. Though it be meet and reasonable that every man's cause be first
there heard, where the fault was committed; yet is it as reasonable, that if
either an unjust sentence be there given, the innocent may in the second place
have liberty of appeal from their oppressors; or if the case be difficult and
weighty, that the matter be at first brought unto Classical assemblies,
according to the order of Reformed Churches. II. For confirmation of this
reason he brings no word of God, but only the testimony of Cyprian, which
also according to his manner, he does most palpably abuse. For Cyprian does not
simply blame those that appealed unto Synods, but only such as did
inordinately run too and fro, such as were not content with the Synods in
Africa, but sailed over the sea unto the Church of Rome. Of such he there
speaks. And even in the same Epistle Cyprian she^wes both the use of Synods
allowed in the Churches of Africa, and the authority of Synods in censuring
offenders. He there gives Lib. 1. e. 3. 11.12.
instances of Privatus, condemned in an assembly of 99 Bishops, of Foelix, of
Iovinus and Maximus, excluded from the communion of the Church by a Synod, of
Repostus also, censured in like manner. Their Synods were not only for
counsel, but exercise a jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. And as they exercised
the power of the keys in binding obstinate sinners, so also loosing and
absolving those that repented, as appears in Lib. 1. Ep. 2. 1.
another Epistle going immediately before this alleged, and written by the
Synod itself. In the inscription of that Epistle are prefixed the names of
Cyprian, Liberalis, Caldonius, Nicomedes, and Caecilius, etc. as being special
members of that Synod, and writing jointly together that Synodicall Epistle.
Ibid. n. 6.
Goulartius also in his annotations thereon, observes that these Synods were
kept to this end that the purity of doctrine and the discipline of the Church
might be preserved entire; and that the disturbers thereof might be excluded
from their communion. And in many other places Cyprian is so pregnant in this
point, that whosoever shall allege him against the authority of Synods, must
either be a very ignorant reader of Cyprian, or else a wilful abuser of him.

REAS. VII. Note the effect, if it should be otherwise; which is that every
particular Congregation must hence necessarily loose her own proper right in
government, and so of a Mistres become a servant: instead of being superior,
wilfully vassal and enslave herself, which thing is contrary to Gods will
revealed in his word. Gal. 5.1. 1. Cor. 7.23. 2. Tim. 1.13. Heb. 4.14. Rev.
2.25.

ANSVV. I. This reason is the same for substance with his ninth Argument
before; and therefore it is here idly repeated. II. The vassallage and slavery
which he argues from Classical government, is upon a false consequence. The
liberty of innocent persons oppressed by wrong judgment in a particular Church,
is to appeal unto Classes and Synods. The Democraticall government that denies
this liberty of appeal, is no gracious mistress, but a Tyrannical virago,
resembling the Romish Lady, that by denying appeals from the Pope keeps many
in bondage. III. The Scriptures cited by him are all perverted and misapplyed:
for what force of consequence is in these reasonings? viz. Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, etc. Gal. 5.1. therefore stand fast
against appeals from particular Congregations. Be not the servants of men: 1.
Cor. 7.23. therefore be subject to no Ecclesiastical government, save only to
the Democracie of a particular Church. Hold fast the form of sound words, etc.
2. Tim. 1.13. therefore hold fast the independencie of Churches. Let us hold
fast our profession: Heb. 4.14. therefore hold fast the single uncompounded
policy. Hold fast that which ye have already, etc. Rev. 2.25. therefore hold
this fast, that Classes and Synods are only for counsel, and not for
authority to censure and judge. What unsound inferences and applications of
Scripture be these? Mr Can in his 9th Argument before, Churches plea, p. 73.
alleged also, 1. These. 4.6. 3. Ioh. 9. Prove. 22.28. Deuteronomy. 19.14. together
with Gal. 5.1. Mr Dav. also to like purpose Apol. reply, p. 237.
alleges some of these places, to wit, Prove. 22.28. Gal. 5.1. 3. Ioh. 9. But
they prove the Question as little as the other: for how vain are these
consequences? Thou shall not remove the ancient bounds; Prove. 22.28. therefore
all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is limited to a particular Congregation, and
he removes the ancient bounds that allows the authority of Synods. Or,
Diotrephes loved the pre-eminence; 3. Ioh. 9. therefore Classes and Synods have
no jurisdiction or power to judge and determine the matters of a particular
Congregation. What weight is there in such reasonings as these?

REAS. VIII. Seeing the Apostles, wheresoever they constituted any Church, with
doctrine, immediately established in it Pol. Ecc. l. 1. p. 20.
Ecclesiastical government; for without this (as D. Ames De Co^sc. l. 4. c.
24. p. 214.
says) there could have been no coupling of the parts and members together. It
must needs follow, that the primitive Churches were independent bodies, and
stood not under any other Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. Now how
Mr Paget will be able to prove a change of this government, I do not yet see:
especially, considering that the Learned (as I showed before) do hold that
there is but one certain, necessary and perpetual form, and manner of
ordering Churches, etc.

ANSVV. 1. The consequence propounded in this reason is false. Though the
Apostles in the constitution of Churches, did immediately establish
Ecclesiastical government therein; yet must it not needs follow, that they
were independent bodies etc. For proof of this consequence he brings nothing
but his bare assertion, neither Scripture, nor testimony of any learned Writer.
To prove an establishment of government in the primitive Churches at first, he
idly and needlessly alleges Mr Parker, and D. Ames; to prove the perpetuity
and unchangeablenes of that government, which needed no proof, he needlessly
according to his manner, heaps up testimonies of Calvin, of P. Martyr, of D.
Bilson, of the Churches of France, of the Low Countries, of Scotland, and of
Papists also: but to help his weak, unsound consequence, that needed
confirmation and support, there is no proof, nor show of proof. II. Though
particular Churches in their several assemblies be acknowledged to be distinct
bodies, yet in regard of the entire and full communion of Saints, they are all
members of one body: there is but one body, Ephesians. 4.4. And those that are
members of one body are not independent. The Scriptures that show this unity
and the duties arising from thence are justly alleged and laid down as the
ground of combination and consociation of Churches. And this foundation of
Classical communion being as ancient as the first constitution of Churches, it
appears hereby that the right of this confederation of churches was in them
from the beginning, with liberty to use and exercise the same as occasion and
opportunity should permit. Mr Cartwright being required to show Scripture for
the warrant of this practice of Churches, answers, T.C. 2. Rep. p 231. Romans
12. 1. Cor. 12.
The Scripture I prove it by is, that St Paul when he teaches that all the
faithful are members of one Mystical body of Christ, which ought to have a
mutual care one of another; laid the foundations of this polity. For as in
the body of one particular Church, every faithful man compared with another in
the same, is a member one of another: so in a more general body of a whole
Realm, every particular Church compared with other, is likewise a member of
them. Therefore as nature teaches my hand to help the disorder which is in
another part of my body: so the Spirit of God out of his word, through a
fellow-feeling teaches one Church, to stretch out her hand, to put away as it
can, the evil which it sees approach unto another. Romans 15.14 Heb. 3.13.
And therefore when the Scripture wills that one should admonish another, it
is not only a commandment to every singular man, toward his fellow: but also
to one whole company, toward another society. Mr Parker See before, p. 95.96.
alleges the same ground out of Zepperus, who from thence deriveth the
authority of Classes and Synods, in censuring and judging the causes of many
Churches, and cites many such places of Scripture for proof thereof. III. When
the Church of Antioch brought her controversy unto the Synod at Jerusalem,
there was no change of government. They had this right from the first, though
then especially it were manifested unto all for the actual exercise thereof,
upon occasion of the dissension. IV. It appears that the primitive Churches at
their first constitution by the Apostles, were not independent bodies, in a
special respect more then any in our times; because they were then subject to
the extraordinary government by Apostles and Evangelists, who besides that
which they did in ordinary course of judgment with the Churches concurrence,
as 1. Cor. 5. had also of themselves extraordinary authority and power granted
unto them over all Churches, for the correcting of the wicked therein, as
appears, 1. Cor. 4.21. 2. Cor. 10.2, 3, 6, 8, 10. Act. 5.9, 10. 3. Ioh. 10.

REAS. IX. Churc. plea, p. 77.
By the titles given to all particular Congregations, it appears evidently,
that Ecclesiastical authority is (or at least ought to be) in every one of
them, distinctly, wholly, entirely; viz. a Kingdom, Matt. 3.2. a Family, Ephesians.
2.19. a Body, 1. Cor. 12.20. a Queen, Psalm. 45. etc. For what more senceles,
then to say, a Kingdom, or family, standing under another Political, or
Oeconomicall government out of themselves; a body having all parts and members,
and yet may neither receive in, nor put out without another leave and consent;
many such absurdities follows Mr Pagets lately-devised Tenets.

ANSVV. I. That which seems senseles and absurd unto the transcendent
understanding of Mr Can. and W. Be. is not withstanding found reasonable in the
judgment of sober men. As for Kings and their kingdoms, we see in the story
of the new Testament, that the three King-Herods, and the fourth King Agrippa,
both they and their kingdoms did stand under another Political government,
under the Roman Empire, under the authority of Caesar to whom they paid
tribute. Mat. 2. and 14. and Act. 12. and 25. and 26. with Luke 2.1. Matt.
22.21. John. 19.12, 15. And in the old Testament, we read that Zedekias King of
Judah stood under the Political government of the King of Babel. Ierem. 27.12.
2. Chron. 36.13. And other stories show that this was no strange thing. The
Kings and Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary at this day stand under the command
of the Emperor. As for families and their Oeconomicall government, in regard
of that obedience which children owe to their parents, by virtue of the fifth
Commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother, Exo. 20.12. inferior families
owe subjection unto superior. Those families that descended from Adam for six
or seven generations together, and those families that descended of Noah, Shem,
Arpacshad, Shelah, and Eber, though in their habitations they were divided
after the Flood, did yet owe subjection unto these fathers and grandfathers,
and in matters of greatest moment and controversy concerning their families, as
about family worship, marriages, and the like, they were bound to submit unto
their censure and determinations in the Lord; those five Patriarchs being then
all alive in those corrupt times, after the confusion of languages. Genesis 11. As
for the bodies of men, it is not unreasonable or absurd to think that the
members of any man's body should not be cut off at his own will, without the
consent and approbation of sundry experienced and skillfull Surgeons,
according to the order appointed by the Governors of this City, and practiced
therein. II. Those Scriptures alleged to show the titles given to particular
Congregations, do not prove the matter intended. By the kingdom of heaven,
Matthew. 3.2. is not understood simply a particular Congregation; but the
abundance of grace revealed and exhibited either unto particular persons,
Congregations, or the whole Church of God throughout the world, etc. Thus the
kingdom of heaven or the kingdom of God is in every several believer, and
they are all Kings: Romans 14.17. Rev. 1.6. and now according to Mr Cannes
reasoning, not any one of them should stand under any other spiritual
government, under any Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves, because they
are kings themselves, and have a spiritual kingdom within them. By the
household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. may be understood the whole universal Church of
God, as well as a particular Congregation; and so by the one body, 1. Cor.
12.20. and so by the Queen: Psalm. 45.9. And therefore these places prove
nothing for the restraint and limitation of all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
unto a particular Congregation only; which is the late-devised tenent of the
Brownists.

REAS. X. The acts of the Apostolic Churches prove directly our assertion:
For it is without all contradiction, that they elected their own Ministers,
excommunicated, offenders, sent messengers, and performed all other Church
matters among themselves.

ANSVV. This reason taken from the acts of the Apostolic Churches is for
substance the same with the first, third, fourth, and sixth Syllogisticall
arguments before, and there answered; and here by him idly repeated, to
increase the number of his Reasons.

REAS. XI. Lastly, let it be observed, that Mr Paget in this accords with the
Bellar, de Eccl. l. 5. c. 5.
Papists; for they say (as he does) that particular Churches are not
independent bodies, but stand under another Ecclesiastical authority out of
themselves. The which thing our Writers deny, and prove the contrary.

ANSVV. I. The accord of Papists is no sufficient reason for refutation; seeing
they accord with us in many points of religion, against Arrians, Anabaptists,
Brownists, and others. II. See the partiality of Mr Can: in his eight Reason
before, he alleges for himself how the Papists do accord with him; to this
the Papists assent, says he; here in this place he alleges against me, their
accord and assent with me; presently after again, in the same and following
pages, he doubts not but to make it manifest, that the Papists are with him,
etc. Thus when they accord with him it must serve for the confirmation of his
reason: when they accord with me, it must still serve for confirmation of his
reason, and for the condemning of me. Whether it be their assent or dissent, it
is all one to him: he can ground his arguments upon one as well as the other.
Such are his reasonings. III. Mark his false allegation of Bellarmine, de Eccl.
l. 5. c. 5. when as there is no such fifth book extant, written by Bellarmine.
IV. How far we differ from the Papists, and Popish Hierarchy, in this
controversy about Synods, has been noted Page 29.30.
at first, in the State of the Question, and may be seen at large in manifold
passages set down before out of P. 125-132.
Iunius, and P. 133-141.
D. Whitaker, their disputes against Bellarmine, and out of P. 101-104.
Mr Parker his refuration of the Hierarchy in this particular; which to repeat,
in a case so clear, were to imitate Mr Can in his needles and superfluous
quotations.

CHAP. VII.
The Allegations of Mr Can examined.
AFter the former 21 Arguments against the authority of Synods, Mr Can falls
to flatter himself, and rejoices in himself to think what the Reader will
imagine when he sees his manifold Reasons. Churc. plea, p. 77.
By this time I suppose (says he) the indifferent Reader perceives, that the
Scriptures, are every way for us, and against Mr Paget, in this controversy
betwixt us. Now he should do well, seeing we dispute about a matter of faith,
appertaining to life and salvation; to rest in them as the only touch stone
for trial of all truth. But then further, to make way for his new troops and
legions of Humane Testimonies against me, and because this does not well suit
with his profession, that pretends so much warrant of Scripture, and to rely
only upon it; therefore he seeks to take occasion from my words, thereby to
excuse his vain oftentation in alleging so many Writers, and says,
Notwithstanding considering he makes so much a do, about the multitude of
learned and godly Ministers, being of the same judgment and practice with him;
( according as Festus knowing Paul to have appealed unto Caesar, did reasonably
resolve, saying, Unto Caesar shall thou go, so) I am well contented to hear
what reverend and judicious Authors do say herein: And if Mr Paget will stand
unto their Testimonies, I doubt not but to make it manifest, that (as the
Scriptures so) they are also with us; etc. Hereunto I answer, 1. In all my
former Answer I have not alleged against them the testimony of any one Author:
neither have I framed any argument drawn from their words. The words of my
writing which he alleges, are only a part of an answer unto a slanderous
accusation both of me and the Classis, in a matter of fact, wherein I show how
unconscionably and without proof they wrong both me and a multitude of learned
and godly Ministers, being of the same judgment and practice. I desire the
Reader to look upon the Answ. to W.B. p. 73.
place and to judge thereof. II. Whereas he thereupon brings forth an Army of
Papists and Lutheranes, Ancient fathers and later Writers, Conformists and
Non-conformists, etc. though it be with less reason then Festus sent Paul to
Caesar, seeing I made no such appeal, as Paul did unto Caesar; yet I am
content to follow him, and to hear what his Authors do say, and to show both
how idly and needlessly he alleges many of them, to prove that which is not
denied; and also how he perverts and falsifyes their meanings, alleging them
for that which is contrary both to their words and practice.

The several Bands of that Army, which Mr Can mustereth against us, are
these, as he reckons them, Churc. plea, p. 78.
The Allegations of the Learned, which I purpose here to set down, shall be
taken, 1. From Papists. 2. Lutherians. 3. Calvinists. 4. English Conformists.
5. The Non-Conformists. 6. Ancient Writers: And lastly the Confession of
Reformed Churches.

SECTION, I.
Touching the Testimonies of Papists.
HAving promised to produce the Testimonies of Reverend and judicious Authors,
as he calls them, he brings in the Papists and draws out the Popish band in
the first place against me. When Mr Spr. once heretofore had propounded diverse
Confiderations unto them of the Separation, and among other things the
testimony and approbation given to the Church of England by sundry learned men,
as Bucer, Martyr, Fagius, Alasco, Knox, Calvine, Beza, etc. Mr Ainsworth
answers, Counterp. p. 19.
Though you come against us with horsemen and charets; yet we will remember the
name of the Lord our God, etc. That which David speaks of his refuge against
the forces of the Heathenish Princes, Psalm. 20.7. he applies against these
Worthies, which were indeed the horsemen and charets of Israel: 2. King. 2.12.
and 13.14. But that might I much more justly apply unto Mr Can, that
alleges against me, and so unjustly, such a company of Romanists, the horsemen
and charets of Antichrist, the Locusts like horses prepared unto the battle.
Rev. 9.7.

And here first of all let it be considered what open wrong he does unto the
Papists, Bellarmine, the Rhemists, etc. in faining that they will not allow
that government now, which they acknowledge to have been used of old; while he
says, Howsoever Romes-Champions will have none now to meddle with
Church Government, but Priests, Bishops, Prelates, etc. yet they do
acknowledge that in the primitive Church, according to the precept of Christ,
in Mat. 18. offenders, after the first and second admonition, were brought to
the whole Congregation, etc. This which he faineth to be granted by them,
touching a diversity of Government in respect of times, cannot be justly
affirmed. For Bellarmine in the place DeVerbo Dei, l. 3. c. 5.
alleged by him, pleads for the same Government to be used now, which he
shows to have been ordained and confirmed by Christ and his Apostles, and to
that end he alleges 8 or 9 places of Scripture out of the new Testament, as
grounds of the same Government. And in the Ibid. c. 5
Chapter following he labors to prove that the same Government has been
still retained and practiced ever since, from the first age of the primitive
Church unto this present. The Rhemists also Rhem. on Mat. 18.17. and 1. Cor. 5.
derive the government which they now stand for, from the institution of
Christ, and practice of the primitive Church. And therefore it is untrue which
he says, viz. that the Papists acknowledge a difference betwixt the government
instituted at the first, and that which is now maintained by them. To prove
this general assertion he alleges a particular testimony of Scultingius. But
that which is said of one, cannot be asscribed unto all in such general terms
as he has done, saying of Romes-Champions, they do acknowledge that which
Scultingius says, whereas we see that the chief of them avouch the contrary.

This testimony of Scultingius, as it is absurdly fathered upon the Papists in
general; so it is unjustly applied against us. Though in the primitive Church
offenders being impenitent were excommunicated with consent and approbation of
all, by the Minister; and though this testify the power of the Church, for
which cause it is alleged by Mr Parker (from whom it seems Mr Can has
taken this testimony at second hand, together with his observation upon it,
touching the force of truth in a Papist) yet this proves not that the Church
was not subject to the censure of a superior judicatory, if they did abuse
their power. Mr Parker draws no such consequence from this testimony, to
exclude the authority of Synods. There is nothing said by Scultingius here, but
it has always been observed in our Church. Offenders are not excommunicated,
as being impenitent, before they have been denounced (as this Authors phrase
is) or complained of by giving notice of their estate unto the whole Church;
before whom also the sentence of excommunication is pronounced: and this our
manner was allowed by Mr Park. being sometime one of us, as I showed P. 105.
before.

As for Saravia and Schola Parisiensis, whom he alleges together in the next
place, observe, 1. How little Mr Can understands what the Authors be whom he
alleges, not knowing whether they were Papists or Protestants, placing
Saravia in the number of Papists: so well is he acquainted with the Authors he
alleges at second hand; such injury he does to his witnesses. So afterward P.
93, and 98.
again in this same book he wrongeth Saravia by setting him among the Popish
Writers, and making him of their profession and religion, by accusing me to
make the same objection and to use the same reason that Papists do, and then
giving instance in Saravia for one of them. What a blindenes and
inconsideratenes is this in Mr Can? 11. He perverts the meaning both of
Saravia and Schola Parisiensis; for what though they grant that all
Ecclesiastical authority belongs to the Church primarily, etc. does it
follow hence that the power of Classical and Provincial Synods is an und^^
power, as W.B. and Mr C. accuse them? does it not rather follow that there is a
due power, secondarily and by delegation, in Synods, where the Deputies of the
Churches meet together in their name? Mr Parker Pol. Eccl. l. 3. p. 29.30. and
42.
from whom he has both these testimonies, does not so allege them against the
authority of Synods. He might have seen these words in the same place cited by
Mr Parker out of Saravia, whereby authority is asscribed not only unto the
Church but also unto Synods, when he is Ibid. p. 42.
brought in saying, Bishops and Archbishops have no authority, but what is
conferred and bestowed upon them by the Church and Synods. III. He perverts the
meaning of Schola Parisiensis, which speaks not of particular Congregations,
but of the Universal Church, and specially as it is represented in a General
Council. This is plain and evident throughout that whole writing. IV. He does
deal deceitfully in his translation of that testimony of Schol. Paris. for the
Doctors of Sorbon do there say that all Ecclesiastical authority does belong
to the Church primarily, properly, essentially, but unto the Roman Pope and
other Bishops instrumentally, ministerially, and for execution only, etc.
instead of the Roman Pope and other Bishops, he puts in the word Officers
only to blind the eyes of the Readers, who if those words had not been left
out, might easily have seen that they spoke of such transcendent and usurped
authority as is exercised by the Pope and his Bishops etc. Hence it may appear
what is to be judged of that which he inferres from this testimony, to make it
serve his purpose in oppugning of Synods.

As for Alphonsus de Castro and Franciscus Victoria, 1. It is an error to
approve their testimony there Chapter pl. p. 78.79.
alleged, viz. that all Bishops do receive jurisdiction and power immediately
from God: for then should they all have an extraordinary calling, such as the
Apostles had, Gal. 1.1, 15, 16. whereas all ordinary Ministers have their
jurisdiction not immediately from God, but mediately by men, and from the
Church. How erroneously do W.B. and Mr C. put light for darkness and darkness
for light, when they avouch, that thus God ordered these men's tongues, to give
witness unto his truth? 11. All the show of help which they pretend to have
from this testimony is grounded upon that groundless consequence, whereby they
infer that Classes and Synods have no authority over particular
Congregations, because all Churches, Elderships and Officers are equal: This
their assertion remains yet to be proved; which we do expressly deny, as I
have P. 159.
showed in my answer unto his first Reason.

The testimonies of the three next Popish Authors, viz. Cusanus de concord.
Cathol. l. 1. c. 11, etc. Sanders de visib. Mon. l. 1. c. 6. Scultingius,
Hierarch. Anarch. l. 4. page 103. are all of them before alleged by Pol. Eccl.
l. 3. c. 1. p. 2. etc. 3. p. 11.
Mr Parker, from whence it seems Mr Can has taken them, but without
judgment, not applying them aright. for 1. When they affirm that Christ's
promise of giving the keys unto Peter, must be referred unto the whole Church;
as also that Peter in person presented the body of the Church: though these
speeches show the power of binding and loosing to be in the Church, yet can it
not hence be inferred that a particular Congregation ought not to be subject
unto the censure of Classes and Synods, or to stand under the authority of any
Ecclesiastical judicatory out of itself, when that Congregation is complained
of for error or wrong doing. It is a perverting of these speeches, and a false
consequence which is drawn from hence, that because a Congregation has power
to judge the members thereof, therefore no other have power to judge of it. 11.
When Mr Can infers hence that the power of electing Ministers is not in
Classes or Synods, he beats the air, and erres from the Question. When did I
ever affirm any such matter? or when did the Classis ever offer to obtrude a
Minister upon us? III. These testimonies touching the Keys given unto the
Church, show what power is in the Church originally and primarily; but yet they
do not import that the execution and exercise of this power is in the whole
Church. Preaching and administration of the Sacraments are a part of that
Ecclesiastical authority comprehended in the power of the Keys; and yet the
exercise thereof is not permitted to the whole Church, by the confession of the
Brownists themselves.

For his next witness, having alleged the words of Ferus upon Act. 11. that
the Church may not only exact an account of her Ministers, but also depose
them, and reject them altogether if they be not fit, etc. he insulteth hereupon
and gloryeth, saying, What can be more for us then this? I answer, This might
have been more for you, if he had said, that when a Congregation has deposed
their Minister, there is no other Ecclesiastical judicatory that may judge
whether they have done well or ill. This had been to the purpose: then had he
absolutely granted you the thing which the Brownists stand for: but this he
does not. When Mr Can was deposed from his ministry by them of the
Separation, and when they rejected him altogether, and left both his ministry
and the fellowship of all that took part with him; was it not his and their
misery that there was none to judge betwixt the^?

When he alleges the names of Gratian, Gregory, P. Aeneas Sylvius, Pope
Anacletus, Sixtus Senensis. Thomas of Aquine, Alexander of Ales, John Scot,
etc. some of them affirming that the greatest authority is in the Church, that
the keys were given to all the Apostles; others that all Bishops are equal in
power, and the like: these and the like speeches being alleged to prove the
undue power of Classes and Synods, they are all perverted, neither can the
question in controversy be ever concluded from hence against us. It is a most
false consequence, to infer that because all Bishops are equal in power,
therefore Synods have no power to judge: and as false it is to infer that
because the Keys were given to all the Apostles, therefore there is no
Ecclesiastical power to judge the actions of a particular Congregation.

In sum, Mr Can does most ignorantly and grossly abuse all these Papists,
against their words, their writings, and their continual profession and
practice. For though there be this maine difference betwixt the Papists, that
some of them do asscribe the greatest authority unto the Church, that is, unto
a General Synod, or Council, maintayning that they have infallibility of
judgment above the Pope, and power to depose the Pope; others of the^
asscribing more authority and infallibility of judgment unto the Pope, rather
then unto the Church or a General Council representing the same: yet do they
all agree in this, that there is a superior power above particular
Congregations to judge the same.

The University of Paris, and the Doctors of Sorbon have in special manner
from time to time maintained the authority of a General Council above the
Pope; they De Eccl. and Polit. Pot. page 1. etc. edit. 1612. Paris.
bring many arguments from Scripture and other reasons to prove the same. They
allege the sentence of Pope Ibid. p. 16.
Zozimus confessing himself to be inferior unto the Council. They avouch that
Ibid. p. 19.
the frequent edebrating of Synods is simply and absolutely necessary for the
better and more holy guiding of the Church. Whereas a certain Friar, Ioannes
Sarrazin, had by word and writing under his hand preferred the authority of the
Pope above the Synods, they Ibid. p. 46-56.
record at large and publish in print a most solemn decree made by the
Theological faculty of that University, whereby he was appointed to revoke his
opinion, and a form of recantation was prescribed, according to which he
confessed his fault, and acknowledged the power of Synods above the Pope.

The Acts and Monum. p. 546, and 547. An. D. 1414. etc.
Council of Constance did not only exercise Ecclesiastical authority in
condemning of John Husse and Hierome of Prage, but also decreeing the authority
of Synods and Counsels to be above the Pope, did actually depose diverse Popes,
as John the 23th and Benedict, who was likewise excommunicate by them: even as
the Council held at An. D. 1083. Act. and Mon. p. 164.
Brixia had in former time by their sentence condemned Pope Hildebrand, and
judged him to be deposed. So in like manner did the Clouncell held at Ibid. p.
632.634.
Bafile, depose Pope Eugenius, and put another in his place. By all which it is
evident what the Papists then judged of the authority and power of Synods.

As all these, so the other faction of Papists, and the Jesuits in special,
that maintain the authority of the Pope to be above all Synods and Counsels
whatsoever, and that their decrees are not of force, unless they be approved
by the Pope; these do evidently teach that the affairs and controversies of
particular Congregations are subject to the judgment of superior judicatories
out of themselves. This is to be observed in Bellarmine throughout his
writings, where he shows Tom. 2. Contr. 1. de Council l. 1. c. 9, 10, 11. and
l. 2. c. 2. etc.
the causes, the necessity, and the authority of General and Provincial
Synods, the Tom. 2. Contr. 2. l. 1. de Cler. c. 7, 8, 9, 10. and 14. etc.
power of elections, and the distinction of a Bishop from a Presbyter. The same
is maintained by him in his Tom. 3. Contr. 4. de Indul. l. 1. c. 11.14. and l.
2. c. 1, etc.
treatise of Pardons or Indulgencies, plenary or for a certain number of
days, for the living or for the dead. And the like is to be found in Tom. 3.
Contr. 5. de Sacr. Ord. l. 1. c. 11. Tom. 1. Contr. 1. de Verbo Dei, l. 3. c.
3, etc. Tom, 1. Contr. 3. de Sum. Pont. l. 4. c. 1, 2, 3, etc.
sundry other of his writings.

And to these might be added more then an hundred of other witnesses, of the
Romish Church, acknowledging that there is a due and lawful power of Synods
and of other judges to decide the causes and controversies of particular
Churches. Instead of many other, the Council of Trent, called by Council. Trid.
Bull. Indict. p. 8.
Pope Paulus the third, continued by Bull. Resumpr. p. 66.67.
Pope Julius the third, and confirmed by Bull. Confirm. p. 243, etc.
Pope Pius the fourth, together with the consideration of many conclusions and
decrees made in several Sessions of that Council, do give plenteous
testimony hereof throughout that whole book of their Acts.

Only to conclude this Section, let it be remembered how of old in our own
country, the like testimony has been given to show the authority of Synods.
We read Act. and Mon. p. 112. col. 2. art. 7.
of a Provincial Synod at Thetford in the time of Theodore, Archbishop of
Canterbury, Anno D. 680. where it was ordained that Provincial Synods should
be kept within the Realm at least once a year. Another Synod Ibid. p. 155.
was held at Winchester, Anno D. 1070. where Stigandus Archbishop of Canterbury
was deposed for receyving his pall from Benedict the fifth: And another P. 157.
was after held at London, where many decrees were made in the time of
Lanfranck, the Archbishop, etc. This being the continual and universal
practice of the Papists, what sense was there in Mr Can to allege their
testimonies in such a point wherein they are so full and pregnant against him?
It is the fault of Papists, that they give too much authority unto Synods; and
it is as gross a fault of these my opposites, to pervert their testimonies,
contrary to their meaning and practice, further then their words will bear.

SECT. II.
Touching the Testimonies of Lutheranes.
IN their first allegation taken from Lutheranes they say, It is affirmed by
the Centuries of Meydenburg, that from Christ's ascension, unto Trajans time,
which is about a 100 years, every particular Church was governed, by the
Bishops, Elders and Deacons of the same. Cent. 1. c. 4. To this I answer: This
allegation comes short of the question in hand, and is therefore insufficient
and perverted to prove that the Churches then did not stand under any other
Ecclesiastical authority: for it is not affirmed by them of Meydenburgh in
their Centuries, that the Churches were governed by them alone, or that there
were no Synods in those times to judge of the actions of Bishops, Elders, and
Deacons, in cases of controversy which could not be well ended in particular
Churches; but the contrary is expressly taught by the same Magdeb. Cent. 1. l.
2. c. 9. de Co^c. col. 5 46. etc. 7. col. 522. and 542.
Authors. Particular Churches among us also are governed by their own Bishops,
Elders, and Deacons, though not by them alone, especially in matters of greater
difficulty. Whereas they allege another place on this manner, Cent. 6.7. col.
591. there is a notable abuse therein. for, 1. What reason had they to allege
the history of the sixth Centurie to show what was done in the first Centurie,
from Christ's Ascension to Trajans time? 2. As for the Col. 4^4. etc.
7th chapter of that Centurie, there are more then an 100 or 200 testimonies
showing the power of Metropolitan Bishops, and of Archbishops, which they
exercised in many Churches, Antichrist being almost come to his height at that
time. 3. As for that place of the sixth Century poynted at by his marginall
quotation, viz. Col. 591. All that is there specifyed at large in the story
concerning Richaredus a King of Spain, converted from Arianisme, and
submitting himself unto the Syn. Tolet. 3.
Synod then assembled, is against them that include all Ecclesiastical
authority within one Congregation only. If these quotations be misprinted, it
was great negligence in Mr Can to look no better to his work.

Again it is alleged from the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 2. c. 7. p. 134, 135.
that from Trajans reign unto Serverus, from the year of Christ 100 to 195, If
any read the approved Authors of this age, he shall see that the order of
Government was popular: for all Churches had equal power, etc. This testimony
is also abused. 1. There is one falsification in mistranslating of the words:
for they do not say that then the government was popular, as Mr Can sets it
down; nor yet that it was like unto a popular government; but only this is
said, that it was almost like unto a popular government, propemodum (...)
similem fuisse: And how great is the difference betwixt these assertions? even
as much as there is betwixt being a Christian, and almost a Christian; so
plainly distinguished, Act. 26.29. 2. What though the government of the Church
was almost like a Democracie? Or what though all Churches had equal power
then? Could they not therefore stand under the authority of Synods? It is a
perverted reasoning so to argue. Even here all the Reformed Churches among us
have equal power, and are partly Democraticall, and yet are mutually and
equally subject to one another in their Synods. 3. There is another egregious
falsification in the alleging of this testimony, by omitting that which
principally concerns the Question: for when these of Magdeburg say here, that
all Churches had equal power of teaching the Word, administering of Sacraments,
excommunicating, ordination and deposition of Ministers, they add withal in
the same Chapter, and in the very same sentence and period, in the words
immediately following touching this equal power of Churches, that it was for
the gathering of Synods and Assemblies, and this not for counsel only, but
for the judging and deciding of matters doubtful and controverted. And not
only this, but after again in the same page, Col. 135.
this power of Synods in judging and excommunicating of Heretics, is further
declared and repeated, it being the very scope of that Section to describe the
power of Synods in the consociation of Churches. And further in this same Cent.
2. c. 9. de Co^c. col. 159.160, etc.
Century, as in others according to their order, they do rehearse diverse
Synods held in those times, as that at Rome, at Cesarea in Palestine, and
others in France, in Pontus, in Achaia, etc.

In the next place confounding the order propounded by himself, he brings in
among his Lutherane witnesses, OnRev. 12.1.
Mr Brightman, who as he says, comes down lower, even unto Constantines time,
and is of opinion, that the primitive purity of Church government, was not yet
defloured with the dregs of man's invention: Neither had Satan brought in
Prelaticall pride into the sheepfold of the Lord: but the Pastors looked every
one to the health of his own flock. Hence it appears (says Mr Can) that
for the space of 200 or 300 years after Christ, every visible Church had power
to exercise Ecclesiastical government, etc. Now to show how vainly this is
alleged, 1. Observe how far it is from the Question: for though the Pastors
looked every one to the health of his own flock, this prooves not that the
power of Classes and Synods is an undue power. Does he think that either I or
any Minister of these Reformed Churches will not acknowledge the same? Yea do
not Pastors then look the better to the safety of their flocks, when as in
needful cases they seek the help of Synods therein? 2. Let him consider his
Magdeb. Cent. 3. c. 7. col. 161. etc.
former witnesses what they say concerning this third age of the Church,
showing in what manner Pastors did then look to the health of their flock. If
any weighty questions, dissensions or Herefies arose, they did nothing by their
private counsel, neither durst they, etc. but calling together other
fellow-Bishops of the same Province, either all or many, by conferring their
judgments together, they decided the questions, compounded the dissensions,
refuted the Heresies, and excommunicated them that were obstinate, etc. And
this is further showed at large by many instances and examples in the same
place. And Cent. 3. c. 9. de Syn. col. 192, 193, etc.
after again they describe diverse Synods that were held in those times in
Asia, Europe and Africa, for the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in
deciding of controversies, etc. 3. That Mr Brightmans words are perverted and
wrested to a wrong end, against the authority of Synods, contrary to his
meaning, it appears by the rare and pregnant testimony he gives unto them in
the On Rev. 8.3, 4.
same book, where he teaches that the vision and type of the Angel standing at
the golden Altar before the throne with a golden censer full of incense, was
accomplished in Constantine the great, gathering together so many holy men in
the Synod or Council of Nice for the deciding of the controversy about Arius,
and shows that the wholesome conclusion and happy issue of that Synod,
effected by the care, labor, diligence and charges of Constantine, was
acceptable to God in Christ, and as a thick cloud of incense ascending out of
the hand of the Angel in the presence of God. And thus also he OnRev. 7.2, 3.
interprets a former vision of another Angel that came up from the rising of
the Sun, having the seal of the living God, to seal the servants of God in
their foreheads. This he expounds of Constantine and of the Nicene Synod, he
being the principal instrument to call that Synod. While the Godhead of Christ
coequall and consubstantiall with the Father was maintained in that Synod, and
the truth spread abroad by the authority of Constantine and of that Synod, and
many confirmed in the profession thereof, thereby they were sealed in their
foreheads, and the name both of the Lamb and of the Father was imprinted on
their foreheads, according to that in Rev. 14.1.

In the exposition of that mystical Song of Solomon, where there is mention
made of a fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from
Lebanon, this Mr Brightman does also Comment. in Cantic. c. 4. V. 15. p. 75.76.
interpret and particularly apply unto the Synod of Nice: The decrees of that
Synod are by him avouched to be the living waters to refresh and make fruitful
the gardens of God, which are the Churches of Christ. And while he alleges
such divine warrant to prove the fruit and benefit of Synods, how injurious is
Mr Can unto him in perverting his testimony? yea how injurious to the Church
of God in drying up these fountains of comfort, by his impugning the authority
of Synods?

Besides this, to omit other the like testimonies of Mr Brightman touching
Synods, even in that OnRev. 12.1.
very place mentioned by Mr Can, touching the purity of the primitive Church,
Mr Brightm. makes mention of Paulus Samosatenus and the Synodicall Epistle
concerning him, and so leads us to that story, which shows the power of
Synods in that primitive age. For there we read that about the year of Christ
280, there was a Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 26, 27.28. and 29. edit. Basil.
1611.
Synod held at Antioch, where many Bishops and others met together from many
Churches and out of diverse Provinces, who did not only give counsel about the
controversy, but gave sentence against Paulus Samosatenus, and by common
consent rejected and excommunicated him; Aurelianus the Emperor using his
authority to repress the insolency of that person when he would have resisted
the Synod. The same story is recorded also by the Cent. 3. c. 9. col. 206.207.
Magdeburgenses in their Centuries, showing that diverse Synods were held at
Antioch about that business before it could be finished.

Whereas they do here in their marginall note send me to see what Mr Jacob
says, Necess. of Reform. p. 57. etc. I have long since seen what he writes
both in that place, and in other of his treatises published of later time: and
though he went too far in this business, yet I find that he disallowes the
practice and judgment of the Brownists, and wonders at their blindenes, and
bewailes it. For speaking of Morellius and the popular government which he
strove for, he says, Attestat. c. 8. p. 249.
Some of the Separation, I grant, are too offensive this way: which I am
heartily sorry for. They take the words in Matthew. 18.17. Tell the Church, more
popularly then there is need, or then reason or good order would. Howbeit in
this yet they hold the substance of the true Church Government. They err but
in the circumstance of order, though it be too Beza, Annot. in Mat. 18.17.
foul That is, they will examine all scandalls, etc. whatsoever in the
presence and under the judgment of the whole multitude perpetually and
necessarily. I say perpetually and necessarily. Wherein I wonder they see not
the many very ill Consequents, which will and must ensue many times. And
afterward again in the same P. 280, 281.
chapter, he says, But to hold those popular circumstances in every Church
perpetual and necessary absolutely as the Separation does, it was neither
Cyprians meaning nor Christ's, nor any well advised Christians. Yea upon this
his testimony touching the disorder of the Brownists, he sets this note and
mark of his vehement dislike in the margin of that page, Separation itself is
no such error, as this is. And this ought seriously to be considered of Mr
Can and his client.

In the next place Chapter pl. p. 81.
he brings diverse allegations of Scriptures and other Authors to prove that we
may not change the Apostolic Government, nor leave their institutions, etc. In
all which he beats the air, and trifles, leaving the question that is betwixt
us, as I have noted P. 145. etc.
before: seeing they prove not that the authority of Synods is against the
Apostolic institution. Come we therefore unto his testimonies of Lutheranes,
and of such as he confusedly mingles with them, viz. of Zuinglius, Luther,
Chemnitius, Melancthon, Sarcerius, Brentius, D. Rungius, Hunnius, Osiander,
Salneccer, Pelargus, D. Mylius, Hegendorphin, etc. These all are notably
perverted by him. for to answer first in general: What though these teach that
the power of excommunication, of calling Ministers, etc. is in the whole
Church; does it therefore follow that Synods may not judge the actions of a
whole Congregation if they abuse their power? If Congregations call a Minister,
though never so vile or so unworthy, or if they would excommunicate an innocent
person; shall there be no liberty of appeal unto a superior Ecclesiastical
judicatory for the redress of such wrongs? Or do any of his Lutherane
witnesses condemn such an appeal? This he ought to have concluded from their
Testimonies by some just consequence, if he would have spoken to the purpose.
The insultation of Mr C. and W. B. upon these testimonies is most vain, and
contains many falsehoods. It is false that my opinion is a new opinion as they
call it: It is false that these Lutheranes are contrary unto me: It is false
that upon my grounds Officers how vile soever must be left alone, if Ministers
of other Churches judge them fit to continue: It is grossly false that the
power which I leave unto particular Churches is just nothing: It is an open and
foul falsehood, that these many Authors alleged do consent fully with them,
viz. with Mr Can and W. Best. But this will more plainly appear, if we take
a particular survey of the chief of those witnesses here produced, whose
testimonies he vouchsafes to set down.

The first of these is Zuinglius, who though he was no Lutherane, as Mr Can
notes in his margin, who had promised to set down his allegations taken from
Lutheranes, next after the Papists; yet here he is brought in with Luther. And
as he is misplaced in respect of the order which Mr C. propounded to himself,
so his testimonies both touching excommunication and calling of Ministers are
unjustly alleged against us. In the first sort of testimonies touching
excommunication, not to speak of Mr Cannes altering and transposing his
Authors words to make them serve his own purpose, Zuinglius reprooves the
abuses and enormities of the Pope and his Bishops, undertaking by their sole
authority to excommunicate those that were none of their Church. His words are
these, Art. 31.
No private man may excommunicate, but the Church wherein he that is to be
excommunicated does dwell, together with the Bishop. And in the explication of
that Article, having spoken of other abuses about excommunication, he says,
Can the Bishop alone excommunicate: Excommunication does not belong unto any
one man whosoever he be, but unto the Church. By these and the like speeches of
Zuinglius it appears that his testimonies are not prejudicial unto our
practice, nor unto that authority of Synods which we maintain: seeing we grant
that no one person alone can by right excommunicate any man by his own
authority; neither can any Church or Churches excommunicate those that are not
in communion with them. The other place cited out of Zuinglius, touching the
calling of Ministers, is so far from prooving any thing against us, that
being duly considered it may fitly serve to blame those popular courses which
Mr Can. pleades for, and to justify our practice in not performing this weighty
business without the advice and approbation of neighbor Ministers assembled
in the Classis, Zuinglius in that treatise called Ecclesiastes, having spoken
of the Popish tyranny, bereaving most Churches of the liberty of election, he
reprooves another extreme, saving, Eccles. Tom. 2. f. 54.
If there were any Church unto which election was yet left free, the common
people rashly, without all deliberation, and without all counsel of learned,
prudent and faithful men, did choose those whom they did most favor, and not
such as were endued with true virtues beseeming a Bishop. Therefore there is
nothing so agreeable unto the Divine ordinance and ancient institution, as that
the whole Congregation of a faithful people, together with some learned and
godly Bishops, or other faithful and experienced men, do make choice of a
Pastor. Thus he plainly disavowes the independency of Churches in such cases,
not allowing a Congregation to proceed unto the election of a Minister, without
the assistance of the Ministers of other Churches, and to this effect he
explaines himself further in the same place, saying, It is meet that the power
of election should be in the Church being furnished with the counsels of
faithful and learned men. For as that matter may not lie in the power of any
one man, so neither may the rude and unlearned multitude take upon them so
great a weight of election, etc. And in the same leaf speaking of Anabaptists
intruding themselves into the Churches of their own accord, he proves that
they are no lawful Ministers because they have not a due calling, thus,
Bishops they are not. for they are not chosen of any Church by lawful and
unanimous consent, the authority of other Bishops excelling in faith and
prudence, also concurring. Observe how that with the free consent of the people
he joins not only the counsel or advise, as he had called it before, but the
authority of the Officers of other Congregations.

Moreover that Zuinglius did not absolutely deny the authority of Synods,
though he speak much against Popish Synods, may appear if we consider the
reasons which he uses against them, viz. because they were not assembled in
the holy Ghost, because they did not judge of matters according to the
Scriptures, but according to the ordinances and customs of men, etc. Now this
is not to dispute against the thing itself, but against the abuse of it. And
therefore having spoken against such Councels, of the Pope, Cardinals, and
Bishops, in such sort as Mr Can had alleged him Chapter pl. p. 75.
before, he adds withal, Art. 8. expl.
I speak only of these that are such; my writings shall not hurt others, who
set themselves under the Scriptures, not above the Scriptures. And that these
conditions for the want whereof he opposed those Popish Synods, may yet be
found in other Synods which have made decrees for the deciding of controversies
raised in the Church, he acknowledges in these words, Paraenes. ad co^mun.
Helvet. civ. Tom. 1. f. 116.
If the Council of Gangra were assembled in the holy Ghost (which no good man
will deny, while he sees that the decrees thereof do agree with the laws of
the Gospel and with the doctrine of the Apostles) it was unworthily done of
those that came after, that have disanulled the decrees thereof, without being
moved by any authority of the Scriptures. Again in another place, speaking of
the four General Councels, though he justly blame those that accounted them
to be of equal authority with the four Evangelists, yet he says, Archeteles,
T. 1. f. 137.
Truly I would not have any thing to be detracted from them. He was not
therefore of Mr Cannes mind, who will have all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to
be detracted or removed from Synods. Besides, Zuinglius does not only approve
of these Synods held in former times, but he also shows himself ready to join
in the like practice, even in the exercise of the same Ecclesiastical
authority that was used in those Synods. For when the Magistrates of Zurich had
assembled together all the Ministers of the Churches both in their city and
country, and had procured the presence of diverse others, for the solemn
vindicating of the doctrine taught in their Churches; there Faber, Vicar of the
Bishop of Constance, having spoken of a General Council, that it only had
authority to determine these things, Zuinglius replies, Act. Disp. 1. Tom. 2.
f. ^10.
Whereas in this our assembly there be so many right faithful men, both of our
own country and strangers, and furthermore seeing here be so many godly and
learned Bishops present, who doubtless have a desire not only to hear and
understand, but also to advance divine truth: verily I see nothing to hinder
even in this place, whereby it should not be lawful for us, according to the
Vicars meaning, to dispute of these things, and to decree what truth teaches.
But other nations (he says) will never consent unto these our decrees: etc. By
these and the like Ibid. f. 621. etc.
passages it is evident that Zuinglius did allow the Ministers of several
Congregations, assembled in a Synod; not only to consult and dispute, but also
to determine, yea and to make decrees for the removing of controversies and
settling peace in the Church, while they did it according to the Scriptures,
which is the same that we maintain.

The words of Mr Luther, whom he cites in the next place, as they are to no
purpose alleged against us, seeing they touch not the question, as I showed
before; so being compared with other his writings, they make it appear that
these two propositions may well stand together, viz. that the Church has power
to judge, to call, to depose, etc. and yet that all Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction is not confined within the bounds of a particular Congregation,
but that Synods and Counsels have authority to judge of Church affairs and to
censure offenders: forasmuch as Luther does as plainly and as fully avouch the
one as the other. In the year 1518, having understood that they proceeded
against him in the Popes Court at Rome, and that an unjust sentence was likely
to be pronounced by them, Sleid. Comment. lib. 1.
he appealed from the Pope to a Council or Synod. The complete form of his
Appeal is recorded Tom. 1. f. 231. edit. 1545.
among his works, wherein he does plainly acknowledge the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction of Synods, both by the whole drift and substance thereof, and when
he says that a sacred Council being lawfully assembled in the holy Ghost,
representing the holy Catholic Church, is in causes concerning the faith above
the Pope, etc. This his Appeal was repeated and further urged in the year
1520, when the Pope had condemned and excommunicated him. Among other reasons
which he uses to reenforce his Appeal, he alleges this, Tom. 2. f. 52.
Sleid. Co^m. l. 2.
that the Pope most wickedly preferred his own tyranny above the power of the
Council, etc. and therefore he beseeches the Emperor and other Magistrates
that for the glory of God, and for the maintaining of the liberty of a
Council, they would admit of his Appeal, and repress the others tyranny,
etc. In the year 1539, he wrote a book in the German tongue de Conciliis,
concerning Councels or Synods, where though he inveigh severely, and not
without cause, against the Pope for his frustrating the desires of those that
sought a General Council, and admitting of none but where he might sway all
by his own authority and command; yet he does fully approve of that
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction which had been formerly exercised in Synods and
Counsels lawfully assembled and rightly ordered. A Council (says Oper.
German. Tom. 7. f. 260. edit. 1562.
he) is nothing else but a Consistory, a Court of justice, an Imperial Chamber,
or the like, where the Judge having heard the parties, pronounces sentence,
but with this condition, that it be according to Law* etc. Thus a Council
condemns an Heretic, not according to their own opinion, but according to
the Royal law, that is, according to the holy Scripture, as they profess,
which is the Law of the holy Church. Speaking of the right and power of
Counsels, having showed Ibid. f. 257. etc. Sleid. Co^m. l. 12.
that it is not lawful for them to make new Articles of faith, to command any
new work, to bind men's consciences to new ceremonies, nor to intermeddle with
Civil government; he declares withal that it is their duty to condemn new
doctrines contrary to the Scriptures, and to censure the persons, to remove and
condemn new ceremonies that are superstitious or unprofitable for the Church,
and to examine and judge of those things that are controverted as it is
prescribed in the word of God. Moreover demanding what the office or work of a
Council is, he answe^s, Ubi supra. f. 260.
Anathematisamus, [we pronounce Anathema] so is their office called.
Anathematisat Ecclesia, the holy Church condemns or excommunicates. So far
was Luther from denying the authority of Synods, that he allows them the power
of pronouncing this heavy sentence of Anathema or Excommunication.

To proceed unto his other witnesses, there is nothing in the words alleged
out of Chemnitius and Polycarpus Lyserus (who is the Author of that part of
the Harmony, quoted under the name of Chemnitius) that by any just consequence
can be opposed unto our doctrine and practice, touching election,
excommunication, examination of sentences, etc. Only observe how Mr Can here
abuses his Author and his Readers by his imperfect allegation, setting down
this testimony of Chemnitius in such manner, as if that which was said with an
express condition, had been uttered simply and absolutely without any such
restraint. Chemnitius says indeed that election or calling does belong unto
the whole Church: but how? that Mr Can leaves out, as unfit for his purpose,
which his Author adds immediately in the same period, saying that it belongs
unto the whole Church, certo quodam modo, in such wise that both the Presbytery
and the people have each their own share in the choice or calling. Chemnitius
in that Exam. Conc. Trid. par. 2. de Sacram. Ord. Can. 7.
learned discourse touching the calling of Ministers, intends principally to
prove, against the Council of Trent, that the consent of the people and of the
Christian Magistrate is requisite in elections: but withal he gives as full
and plain testimony for the judgment, examination and approbation of the
Presbytery; under which he comprehends the Ministers of other Congregations,
called Bishops and Clerks in the places alleged by him. And this kind of
election he shows to be agreeable unto the practice of the Apostolic,
primitive, ancient, and their own modern Churches. Besides Chemnitius does
sufficiently declare his judgment touching the authority of Synods, which is
our maine question, in diverse pregnant passages of that book which he wrote
against the Council of Trent. He Exam. Conc. Trid, par. 1. praef.
alleges and commends the words of Augustine, saying that most wholesome is
the authority of Councels in the Church, while they judge according to the rule
and square of the holy Scripture, etc. He says Ibid. Exam. Decret. 1. and 2.
that many have often wished and long waited for a true, lawful, free, and
Christian Council, as the right medicine for the curing of those manifold
errors and abuses that were crept into the Church. He does frequently allege
and approve the acts of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction exercised in former
Synods, throughout that whole book. He says indeed in one of the places cited
by Mr Can Ibid. praef.
that the decrees of Counsels are to be examined by the rule of the Scripture:
but this does no more empaire that authority of Synods which we asscribe unto
them, then it does the power of all Church-acts and sentences whatsoever,
concerning which Chemnitius Exam. par. 1. de bon. op. qu. 2.
says the same thing; and Mr Can cannot deny but that they are to be
examined and tried by the word of God, though they be made in such manner as he
himself Chapter pl. p. 95.
requires.

There is another allegation of Chemnitius touching the distinction betwixt
power and the administration of it, which Mr Can has taken at all
adventures, as it seems, from Mr Parker, or rather from the Scribe or Printer,
that caused that quotation [ Exam. c. 6.] to stand so defectively Pol. Eccl. l.
3. p. 26.
in his book; and as he is thus brief and obscure in the quotation, so he is
as sparing in the application of this testimony unto his purpose, bidding us
only observe what is attributed to the Congregation, what to the guides
thereof; to the first power, to the latter the administration of it. For the
thing it self, we grant that there is such a distinction alleged out of
Luther, and explained by Chemnitius, teaching Exam. Conc. Trid. par. 2. de
Sacram. in ge^. Can. 10.
that Christ has delivered and commended the Keys, that is, the ministry of
the Word and Sacraments, unto the whole Church; but not so, that every one
rashly and of his own accord should take unto himself and exercise that
ministry without a lawful calling: but that after immediate calling has
ceased, God sends the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, by the calling and
election of the Church, if it be performed according to the direction of his
word; so that the chief power of the Word and Sacraments is in God; secondly
that the ministry is in the Church, as by which God does mediately call,
choose, and send Ministers; thirdly in those who are lawfully chosen and called
of God by the Church, as in the Ministers, to whom is commanded the exercise or
administration of the ministry of the Word and Sacraments. Not to speak of
some difference, which the Reader may easily perceive, betwixt Mr Cannes
allegation and his Authors words; there is nothing here said that does any way
prejudice the jurisdiction of Synods, neither can he from hence infer any
thing against us. Moreover if that distinction be considered according to the
meaning of the Authors from whence it is taken, it does flatly contradict the
opinion and practice of Mr Can and others of the Separation, who will have
not only the power but also the execution or administration of it to be in the
people promiscuously, when all causes must be brought to the body of the
Congregation, there to be heard and determined. Thus Mr Parker Pol. Eccl. l. 3.
p. 26.
opposes this distinction unto the Democratie or popular government of
Morellius, whom Mr Jacob in this respect parallels with them of the Separation,
as was noted P. 176.
before. These maintain that the people are to exercise their power in judging
of causes, which the said Authors, both Chemnitius and Mr Parker, conceive to
be derived into the Aristocraticall part or Officers of the Church, for the
ordinary exercise of it; she still retaining her interest therein so far that
in matters of special moment nothing be concluded without her knowledge and
consent. That moderating and guiding of the action, which Mr Can and those of
his mind reserve only unto the Officers of the Church, in which respect he
does here call them Guides, cannot make that difference betwixt the judicial
exercising of power, as it is in the Officers, and the first receyving of that
power, which is said to be in the whole Church by those that maintain that
distinction. In a word, they say that the exercise of this power does not
ordinarily belong unto the people, he says that it does. Such is the agreement
betwixt Mr Can and his witnesses.

Melanchthon, whom he alleges for the same purpose with Chemnitius (as Mr
Parker had done Ubi supra, p. 26.
before) has not any thing in the place mentioned that sounds that way. He
speaks there [Loc. Theol. de Regno Christi] only of the spiritual kingdom
of Christ, against the Jews and some sorts of Anabaptists. Nevertheless
seeing he was one of special eminency among those with whom he is here joined,
it may be useful to observe how Mr Can is condemned by this witness also,
whom he has sought to produce against us in this controversy touching the
authority of Synods. Among other Articles propounded unto the Protestants to
ensnare them, this being also questioned, Whether the holy Oecumenicall and
receyved Synods have erred, Melanchthon answers, Respo^s. ad Artic. Bavar. Art.
7.
By this general demand they seek to kindle hatred against us, as if we seemed
to reprehend all Synods and all things that have been acted in Synods. But we
profess openly, that there ought to be judgments in the Church; and we
affirm that there have been many godly Synods and profitable unto the Church;
and we do greatly wish now in these dissentions that the judgment of the
Church might be rightly settled. If he had been of Mr Cann. mind, he should
have answered far otherwise, viz. that all those Synods erred that exercised
any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, that they were to be blamed for the making of
all those Acts wherein such authority and power was employed, such as were
generally all the Acts of the Synods of Antioch, Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, Chalcedon, Gangra, etc. which as he says in the same place, their
Churches do embrace; he should have said also according to Mr Cannes
principles, that though there may and ought to be judgments, that is,
Ecclesiastical sentences and censures in particular Congregations, that yet
they ought not to be in Synods, or Assemblies of Ministers of several
Congregations, that these have no such power to judge, that no such
determinations are to be desired. But Melanchthon we see, declares himself to
be an opposite unto such conceits: and lest we should think that by the
judgments of the Church he meant not such as are exercised in Synods, or that
by judgments he understood rather acts of consultation, inquisition and
deliberatio^, then of determination, and pronouncing of sentences; hear how he
explaines himself elsewhere, saying, Enarr. Symb. Nic. Tom. 1. f. 391.
There are in the Church judgments concerning doctrine, which are called
Synods. And again, Synods are ordinary judgments, which are pronounced
against the unwilling, as they use to say. And the Church is commanded to make
a lawful inquiry, which being done, if [sentence] be rightly pronounced,
obedience is to be yielded. And if any do not obey, he is justly punished. He
has also upon other occasions given plain and pregnant testimonies of his
judgment in this particular: among the rest, that especially is worthy our
observation, which he writes in a certain Disputation concerning Synods; it
being one of those Disputations which Luther by a preface thereunto prefixed
has commended unto the Readers, for which cause it seems, they are also
inserted among Luthers works, as being in special manner approoved by him.
Luth. Tom. 1. f. 444, 445.
There Melanthon intending to speak of Synods, reasons thus: It is most true
and most agreeable unto the nature of men that which Plato says, that the best
state of a Commonwealth is that which is the mean betwixt Tyranny and
Democratie, [or popular government.] This is to be framed and maintained, as in
all government so especially in the Church* Both these, Tyranny and
Democratie, are to be avoided and detested in the Church, as most noisome
plagues. It is Tyranny to constrain men to approve of manifest impiety, to
obey contrary to the clear word of God, etc. Again Democratie also must be
removed from the Church, that is, the common people without difference are not
to have license or power granted unto them to alter doctrines, or to give
sentence concerning doctrines, for the Multitude also, as Herodotus says, is a
most cruel Tyrant. But a middle state is to be sought, that is, Aristocratie
ought to be established, wherein by proportion the authority of the learnedest
and best men may be the greatest. This Aristocratie Paul requires, 1. Cor. 14.
Gal. 2. and it is most gravely written unto the Romans, that every one must
know the measure of his own faith. Romans 12. Therefore that tyrannical speech
is to be hissed at, which takes away this proportion in the Church, and
asscribes unto the Pope an unbounded Tyranny, viz. which affirms that greater
is the authority of the Pope then of the whole Council beside, etc. In the
choice of judges the best way is to follow that mean betwixt Tyranny and
Democratie, namely to choose the best and the learnedest. When by the consent
of both parties good and learned judges are chosen, and matters have been
examined in order, it is meet there should be an obeying of their judgment: for
every one ought to know the measure of his own faith. Thus Melanthon has
fully declared himself in this controversy touching the ground of Synodall
government, together with the power and use of the same: yet for further
satisfaction it may be observed how that in another place he applies that which
is here spoken against Democratie or popular order, unto that part thereof
which Mr Can so much pleades for, concerning election unto Church-offices,
when he says, Ibid. f. 442.
According to ancient custom the Church did choose, that is, these to whom the
Church has committed this business, and the judgment and approbation of the
Bishop ordaining did also concur. Contrary to divine right and to the ancient
Church is that Democratie, where the people do snatch unto themselves the
election, without the judgment and approbation of Pastors. By Pastors he
means doubtless the Ministers of other Congregations, seeing he speaks of them
in the plural number, and seeing it were unreasonable to think that in such
cases people should neglect the counsel and consent of the Ministers of their
own Church. He does therefore by this plain testimony justifye our course in
the calling of Ministers, by how much we do not proceed therein without taking
along with us the advice and approbation of the Classis, that is, of the
Pastors of neighbor Churches.

Forasmuch as we may easily discern from that which has been hitherto said in
this Section, what the judgment of the chief of the Lutheranes is in this
controversy, and what small credit is to be given unto Mr Cannes allegations
and affirmations touching the consent of others with him in these matters of
difference betwixt us; it may suffice to have examined the testimonies of these
Authors, whose words he has set down; and for the rest, to judge of them
according to the profession of their esteem of those already mentioned, which
are of chief note among them, and according to the public Confessions of
their Churches, of which we are to speak Sect. 7.
hereafter, as also according to their general practice. Concerning this it is
testified by some of them here named (not to speak of other evidences) that
they are so far from including all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the
bounds of a particular Church, that their Churches are governed by
Ecclesiastical Senates, or Consistories, as they call them, which are gathered
out of three ranks of persons, Poluticall, Ecclesiastical, and Popular or
Oeconomicall; that these Ecclesiastical Consistories are appointed and
directed by the authority of the chief Magistrate; that by these the Magistrat^
does exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and call Ministers; that the
election of a Bishop or Superintendent which of old was performed by all the
Bishops of the Province, in which a new Bishop was to be chosen, is now in well
ordered Churches rightly performed in the Consistory, where some principal
Divines together with Political men, do choose a Superintendent, who is
confirmed by the assent and approbation of the chief Magistrate. These are the
assertions of Mylius, Rungius, Osiander and others, as they are cited and
approved by Dise. Theol. de Potest. Ecc. th. 7.10.17.18. arg. 10. etc.
Vestringius, one of the same profession. Though these Authors do not accord
with us in diverse of the foresaid expressions; yet Mr Can had less cause to
boast of their consent with him, seeing they agree in this, that their
particular Churches are not independent bodies, but stand under Ecclesiastical
authority out of themselves, holding that their Churches in this respect are
well ordered. What truth is there then in Mr Cannes words, when speaking of
these men he says, they consent with us fully? As for his jesting at the
particular Churches, such as all the Reformed Churches are, in giving them a
title of noun-adjectives, that cannot stand without Classes and Synods, it may
be demanded of him, whether among all the Orthodoxe Churches in Europe at this
day, there was ever heard of such a staggering noun-substantive, rent with so
many scandalous Schisms, as is that Anti-Synodall Church of the Separation,
whereof Mr Can calls himself the Pastor. Let those that are wise consider
of it.

SECT. III.
Touching the Testimonies of Calvinists.
THus Mr C. and W.B. do (though as they say, for distinction sake, yet)
unjustly call those Authors whom here they allege: as if there were no other
fit and convenient speech to describe Godly and learned Ministers, of whom I
spoke, but the name of Calvinists. Though it be lawful to denominate men of
their errors and Schisms wherein they stand against the Churches of God, and
to call such Sectaries by names taken from them that have been their chief
ringleaders, as the Brownists of Brown, and the Nicolaitans of Nicholas; Rev.
2.15. yet is there no warrant so to style those whom we do not charge with the
like errors and offenses.

Mr Can Chu. pl. p. 81.
after an idle and impertinent declaration of his own surmise and imagination,
that these Authors, as he is persuaded, do not teach the doctrine maintained
by me, and after an unjust imputation which he implies, as if I should say,
that the whole Church (Officers and brethren) wants authority to perform in,
and for it self, all Church-services; he comes to name his Authors, and
alleges the words of four of them, and tells that the rest do agree with
them. His Authors are these, P. Martyr, Iunius, Musculus, Viret, Bullinger,
Danaeus, Gualter, Sybrandus, D. Mornaeus, Morell, Tilenus, Bastingius, Vrsinus,
Piscator, Calvine, Paraeus, Keckerman, Hemmingius, Tossanus, Polanus, Hyperius,
Praedirius, Munster, Oecolompadius, Beza, Bucer.

Having cited these witnesses to appear for him, he then begins to insult
and glory, saying, Chu. pl. p. 83.
And now Mr Paget what think you of these men? were they not learned and godly
Ministers, Reverend and judicious Divines? Are they not authentic witnesses?
If you confess it; then mark what follows: viz. your position that
particular Congregations must stand under other Ecclesiastical authority out
of themselves, is hence condemned, by a jurie of more then 24 men, of your own
choosing, for an error and untruth: The reason is; because these affirm (I
say all of them) that every particular Eldership, with the Churches consent,
may lawfully proceed among themselves to the excommunicating of offenders,
whenever there is necessary and just cause. Neither do they say a word; that
it is a Divine institution, that the Ministers of one Congregation, must first
ask the leave and consent of other Ministers, before they can lawfully
administer this ordinance of God. Hereunto I answer; The more Reverend, Godly
and learned these Authors were, the greater is his offense that shows so
little reverence unto them, in perverting and abusing their testimonies. If any
Advocate should so far wrong a Jury of 24 men, as to falsify their verdict
contrary to their meaning; might it not justly be counted a great forgery, and
worthy of exemplary punishment? Now that this is the fault of Mr C. the
Advocate and abettour of W. B. it may appear in the first place, by the
general consideration of their testimonies alleged. For though it be
generally affirmed by these Authors, that matters of great weight, as
excommunication, absolution, choosing of Ministers and the like, are not to be
administered without the common consent of the Church; yet this proves not that
it is unlawful to seek the counsel and help of a Classis or Synod beforehand
for the preventing of wrong, or that it is unlawful to appeal unto them in
case of wrong done. Though particular Congregations have power to judge, it
follows not, that they themselves are therefore subject to no other
Ecclesiastical judgment out of themselves. The error and absurdity of this
consequence may better appear by these examples: Though fathers and masters of
particular families have immediate authority from God, and power to use it in a
domestical way, to perform family duties, and judge of matters in the
family; yet this hinders not but that their family exercises and works may be
judged of by other authority in the city, where many families are co^bined
together for their mutual government. Though particular cities in and for
themselves have power to execute judgment, and to punish offenses committed
among them; yet this hinders not but that if they judge unjustly or abuse their
authority, that they themselves may then be judged of others.

To come more particularly unto his Authors alleged, and first for P. Martyr
whom he makes the foreman of the Jury; though he writing against the error of
the Romish Church, teaching that Councels cannot err, and preferring them
above the Scriptures, have just cause to show the errors of sundry Counsels
and Synods, especially about that time when so many wicked decrees were made by
the Council of Trent; vet he adds, that Loc. Co^m. Class. 4. c. 4. 11 de
Co^ncill
these things were not spoken, that the Authority of Councels should be wholly
cast away. For (says he) if they reprehend, excommunicate or absolve according
to the word of God, praying together by the power of the Spirit, these shall
not be in vain nor without fruit. And afterward again he brings Ibid. c. 6.
18.
divine warrant to show the institution and order of Synods, from the example
of the Apostles, Act. 15. By which it may appear how he held that there was a
superior Ecclesiastical power above particular Congregations, and
consequently that his testimony has been perverted by Mr Can.

The second Author alleged against us is Iunius, who notwithstanding is a most
pregnant witness for us, to show the authority of Synods. When Bellarmine
objecteth against the Protestants, that they reject Ecclesiastical judgments,
and refuse the authority of Synods; this he Animadv. in Bell. Controv. 4. de
Conc. in Praef. n. 1, 2, 11, 12, 13.
shows to be most false. And further Ibid. l. 1 c. 1. and 3. and 10. n. 1, 2.
and 11. n. 1.
he avoucheth both the just authority and necessity of Synods, and likewise the
divine institution of them, alleging often to that end besides other
Scriptures, that sentence of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 14.32. The spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Though no sentence, whether of a
particular Congregation, or of any other judge, is to be yielded unto and
allowed contrary to the word of God; yet according to that word he Ibid. c. 18.
n. 1.8. and l, 2. c. 1. n 1. etc. 16. n 1. etc. 18. n 1, 2, 6.
maintains that Synods are not only to make inquisition and to consult, but
that they also have under Christ a ministerial judgment touching the
controversies either about faith or manners. Iunius therefore is greatly abused
when it is pretended that he has brought in a contrary verdict against us.

The third man of the Jury, produced against us, is Musculus. And here it is
to be observed; I. That it is untruely affirmed by him in his words noted
before, touching the Jury of more then 24 men, that they are of mine own
choosing. For though I have a multitude of witnesses agreeing with me; yet as
none in particular were named by me, so Musculus in special should not have
been alleged, considering his different judgment and practice from other
Reformed Churches. For although he confess that the power of election and
deposition of Ministers, excommunication, etc. was exercised with consent of
the people in the primitive Church and in the Apostles time; yet he says, and
that Loc. Co^m. de Minist. p. 199, 204. de Eccl. p. 311 de Magist. p. 631. 632.
and 633.
often, that this order was to be kept while there were no Christian
Magistrates; and that the order which was then profitable to the Churches, is
not so at this time; that it now belongs unto the Magistrate to appoint
Ministers, either by choosing them himself, or confirming such as were chosen
by others at his commandment; that the Rule of Telling the Church, Matthew. 18.
was in force while they were destitute of Christian Magistrates. II. Though
Musculus differ from other Reformed Churches in this question of
Church Government; yet he also most evidently (even more then I do) condemns
the opinion of the Brownists and of my opposites, while he Ibid. de elect.
Ministr. p. 200.
maintains that particular Congregations are subject to another superior
power out of themselves in matters of Church Government; while he justifies
the practice of the Churches in Berne, where Ministers are chosen in the city,
and by the Senate sent unto the Churches in the country subject unto their
jurisdiction, as they thought best. If Musculus had been of Mr Cannes and W.
Bests mind, he should have forsaken those Churches and separated from them, as
not being a free people, while they wanted excommunication and power of
choosing their own Ministers. Who sees not here how notably they pervert the
Authors alleged by them? Come we to the rest.

In the next place he names Viret, but it seems he is mistaken in his
Allegation, there being no such book of Viret, as he has quoted in his
margin; he rather seems to mean Virell in the grounds of Religion: But
whether he mean Viret or Virell, neither of them can be justly alleged for
his witnesses in this cause.

For Viret, he is Beza, in vita Calv. and Calv. Epist. 25, 39.54, and.c
recorded to have been a special assistant unto Calvine in the work of the
Lord, for the settling of that form of Discipline, by which the power of an
Ecclesiastical Judicatorie over diverse particular Congregations, was
established at Geneva. That weed of Ecclesiastical government by Classes and
Synods (as Mr Can here Chapter pl. p. 94.
calls it) was planted by the hand of Viret, as well as of Calvine. And then
what reason is there to judge but that Viret did esteem it a plant of the
heavenly Father, not to be rooted out of the garden of his Church, seeing he
joined with him in that work?

For Virell, he writes touching the outward calling of Ministers in the Grounds
of Relig. b. 3. c. 1. p. 2. 7, 708, edit. 12.
place alleged, that it is the lawful choice of a visible Church met together
in the name of Christ; that there be three things required thereunto; first,
that there be a search and trial both of the conversation and learning of him
that is to be chosen, etc. Another is this, that men come not to it by any
corruption of gifts; but that it be free: so as they that have the power to
chose, should have only the glory of God, and the edification of his Church
before their eyes. Thirdly, that he which is chosen have a Church appointed
unto him for the execution of his office, whose duty it is to look unto it
diligently and carefully. And more then this he says not that can with any
color be thought to look toward this co^troversy. And in all this, what one
word has he against the authority of Synods? Nay it is the work of Classes and
Synods to see that all things here required, be accordingly performed in
particular Churches; and if any of these be omitted, to correct and reform the
same.

Bullinger, next alleged, though he say that the Church has power to elect
and ordain fit Ministers, yet he was not of Mr Cannes mind, to think that
the Church loses her right, and is bereaved of her due power, when it is not
exercised by herself alone, or in that popular way which he requires: for even
in the place Decad. 5. Ser. 4.
which Mr Can has cited, he says, It skilleth not much whether fit
Ministers be ordained by grave men chosen by the Church, or by the whole Church
itself, and that either by votes or by lots, or in any other convenient and
holy manner. For godliness does not contend about these things, so that all be
done holily and according to order. And afterward again he speaks to the
same purpose: It is well known that true Churches have the right of ordaining
Pastors, whether it be done by the votes of the whole Church, or by the
lawful judgment of them that be chosen by the Church. It appears by these
and the following words that he alludes unto the practice of the Helvetian
Churches, concerning which we are to make further mention Sect. 7.
hereafter, when we come to speak of their Confession. Touching the
Ecclesiastical power of Synods, Bullinger declares his judgment also in this
same book, when Decad. 5. Ser. 1.
speaking of the power of the Church in judging of doctrines he gives instance
in the gathering of a Synod, which says he, the Church of God does according
to the power receyved from the Lord, even as we read in the Acts of the
Apostles, that the Apostles of the Lord have done, etc. Again he Decad. 5.
Sermon. 10.
cites and approves the decree of Justinian the Emperor, for the yearly
celebrating of Synods, where matters arising might be examined and by due
correction healed. He urges this decree against the Bishops, and warnes the
Magistrates to take heed they do not connive at the others negligence, to the
destruction of the whole Church and of all the Ministers of Christ. Behold here
the difference betwixt Bullinger and Mr Can; that which the one holds to be
the sovereign remedy to preserve the safety of Churches and of the ministry,
the other rejects as an unprofitable weed, and that which tends to the undoing
and Chapter pl. p. 74.
spoiling of Churches.

Danaeus his testimony is likewise unjustly alleged against us, seeing he
speaks not in the palce mentioned, of the point in controversy betwixt us,
viz. the authority of Classes and Synods, or the total excluding of the same
in those things which belong unto elections. Only he does there In. 1. Tim.
5.22.
reproove the gross error of those that in regard of such popular
circumstances as Mr Can seems most to plead for, do bring, as he says, a
very great confusion into the Church, by asscribing unto the people more then
is due unto them: while he shows that the electing and presenting of the
person that is to be called unto any Ecclesiastical office, whereby he
understands the first taking notice of him, the examining of his life and
doctrine, and the publishing or propounding of him unto the whole Church, that
this belongs unto the Presbytery; and that the approving and accepting of the
person so examined and propounded does belong unto the people, they also having
a convenient time allowed unto them, that if there be just cause they may
testify their dislike and bring in their exceptions against him. This is the
course there described and maintained by Danaeus, and the same with that which
is practiced in our Church: And thus the Witnesses produced against us, do
still declare their consent with us. As for the authority of Synods and the
divine right by which it is due unto them, Danaeus gives his verdict, when in
the exposition of the fourth commandment, having spoken of the jurisdiction
and power of the Church, he says, Ethic. Christ. Lib. 2. cap. 10.
Here comes in the Question concerning Synods, which if they be right and keep
themselves within their own bounds, their authority is ordained by this
Commandment.

Gualter in the Homil. in Act. 13.2
first place alleged, having spoken of the due suffrages or voices of the
Church in elections, to prevent such a construction as Mr Can seems to make
of his words, adds presently, This place does clearly teach that some parts
are committed to the Church in this business. And again he says there, that
the election of Ministers does in some part belong to the Church, etc. He does
not therefore exclude that part which herein we asscribe unto the Classis, by
proceeding with their advise and consent. In the other Ibid. in cap. 14.23.
place (for Mr Cannes marginall quotation [13.22.] seems to be misprinted) he
says that by (...) may be understood not only the gathering of voices, but
also imposition of hands, and in his opinion the latter acception does agree
best. For, says he, it is not likely that the Apostles would depart from the
first order or course which we have seen to have been observed in the election
of Matthias, etc. And upon Act. 1.26. he labors to prove that this manner of
choosing is still to be observed in the Church, as most safe and convenient,
whereby certain men being found that are esteemed meet for the office unto
which the election is to be made, the event of our counsels may be referred
unto the judgment of God, by casting lots; in such sort as Matthias was chosen
unto the Apostleship. However, that he does not deny the matters of particular
Congregations to be subject unto the judgment of the Ministers of other
Churches, assembled in a Classis or Synod, may be gathered from those
testimonies which eve^ in this book here alleged, he gives concerning the
authority of Synods, and the Divine warrant upon which it is grounded. Speaking
of the authority of a General Council which many then so much desired, he
says, Ibid. in cap. 5.21.
To me also it seems to be a most profitable thing, if a free Synod could be
obtained, in which all controversies might be composed out of the word of God
alone: such as that Apostolical [Synod] was, of which we are to speak in chap.
15. and such as we know those of old to have been, viz. of Nice,
constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and the like, etc. And afterward again,
Ibid. in cap. 20.17.
entreating of Paul's sending from Miletus to Ephesus, and calling the Elders of
the Church, he calls it a Synod: By which example, he says, as the
faithfulness and industry of Paul does appear, so also we are admonished that
the assemblies of Ministers are altogether necessary, in which Church-affaires
may be handled by the common voices of all. This makes greatly for the
maintaining of Church Discipline, for the restraining of the ambition of
Church Governors, for the preserving of consent in true doctrine, and for the
repressing of heresies, which (if Ministers do not most faithfully join their
pains together) are wont often to creep in. This he declares again by the
example of that Synod, Act. 15. and he commends the piety and prudence of
Constantine the great, for his frequent assembling of Synods; as on the other
side he notes the wickedness of Licinius and of Antichrist, in resisting and
hindering the due exercise of this authority of Synods. How do these things
agree with Mr Cannes discourse, who yet alleges this Author, as one of the
Jurie, by which he says my position (as he calls it) is condemned, viz. that
particular Congregations must stand under other Ecclesiastical authority out
of themselves?

Touching Sibrandus, the order of electing Ministers in these Churches Sibra^d.
Lubb. Resp. ad Piet. H. Gr. p. 159.
approved by him, is the same that is used in our Church, and approved by me
also: and he has notably perverted it in opposing of it unto me. For that
order hinders not but that there may be another superior Ecclesiastical
authority in a Classis or Synod, to judge of the elections made in particular
Congregations, or of other controversies. This truth is so often and so
earnestly avouched by Sibrandus, that scarsely any have been more vehement in
this point. And in this very book alleged, he in his first entrance, in the
preface to the Senate of Gelderland, complains of Grotius for oppugning this
order of Classes and Synods; and in the conclusion of his preface he professes
that there was scarsely any other means then a National Synod to heal the
evils of that time, and desires them to persuade the calling thereof.
Afterward in the P. 140. 141, etc.
book itself he shows at large both from the Scriptures and practice of
ancient Churches, the use, the order, and the authority of Synods; not only in
deliberating, but in judging and deciding of controversies. In his Disputation
with Bertius he shows Epist. Discept. de Fide. p. 3.
that it is altogether needful to have a Synodicall judgment to heal the
wounds of the Church. In his book against Vorstius, after long dispute, Declar.
Resp. Conr. Vorst. p. 142, 143.144.
in conclusion he offers, yea he provokes and urges him to refer their
controversy and differences to the judgment of other Churches, which he there
nominates. And in the preface thereof unto the States General of the United
Provinces, he shows from the word of God and examples of the godly, the
necessity of Synods, he declares what confusion and distraction of Churches
ensues where they are neglected, and makes earnest supplication unto them for
the maintenance of this order in government. In another of his books against
Vorstius, Comment. ad 99 Errotes C. Vorst. pref. p. 45, Co^m. p. 503 504. and
p. 841.
both in the beginning, middle, and end of it, he harpes upon the same string.
His appeal unto the judgment of other Churches, and his willingness to submit
unto their judgment, with his desire of a National Synod, is plainly
declared therein. Speaking of the fruit of Synods, he says Ibid. pref. p. 34.
35.
that the holding of them in their Churches, has been next unto God the chief
sinew of preserving both the true doctrine and tranquillity of the Churches:
and that if any man acquainted with their affairs dare deny the same, he shall
manifest his impudency or make war with his own conscience. And thus by the
verdict of Sibrandus, if my opposites understand the Discipline and state of
these Churches, and deny the fruit of Synods, they must be held for impudent
and unconscionable persons. Moreover in his book against Bellarmine concerning
Counsels he gives diverse testimonies DeCo^c. Lib. 1. c. 1. and l. 2. c. 3. and
l. 5. c. 1, 3, 5, 8.
touching the profitable use of Councels for the determining of controversies,
their Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the exercise of it in making decrees
and censuring offenders. By all which it appears how injurious Mr Can has
been unto Sibrandus in producing him as a witness against the authority of
Synods, whereas he has so often testified his judgment to the contrary.

Mornaeus in the place Histor. Pap. p. 542, etc. edit. 1612.
alleged, has no such thing as for which he is quoted; unless he mean that
which is noted in one of the following pages, Ib. p. 545
that the Popes of Rome were chosen in public assemblies of the Priests, the
Nobility, the common people, the Senate, by the voices of all, etc. which if it
be explained and applied to the question in hand, may easily be discerned to
fall short of proving any thing against us. But this Author in the same book
shows plainly his approbation of Synods for the judgment of Ecclesiastical
causes: He alleges frequently and maintains against Baronius and Bellarmine
the judicial Acts and sentences of sundry Synods against the Popes of Rome. He
calls those decrees of the Council of Basile, P. 1218.
Catholic or universal trueths, whereby it was enacted; 1. That the power of
a General Council, representing the whole Church is above the Pope and every
other person. 2. That the Pope cannot dissolve a General Council without
their consent, etc. 3. That he that does obstinately oppose the foresaid
trueths is to be accounted an Heretic. He relates and co^mends the speeches of
P. 1010. etc.
Marsilius Patavinus, P. 1232 etc.
Petrus de Alliaco, and diverse others, showing the power of Councels in judging
and censuring the Pope, the necessity of them, both Provincial and General,
for the correcting of abuses, and amending of all sorts of persons and things
with greater authority. He approves and defends P. 1341.
the renowned Italian Martyr, Hieronimus Savanorola, for seeking that a
General Council might be called for reformation of the Clergy, and
degenerate estate of the Church, etc. Besides this, he being in his time a
principal favourer and maintainer of the Discipline in the French Churches,
where the causes of particular Congregations were judged and determined by
Synods, could therefore be no favourer of the Brownists opinion, which count
such government to be a miserable bondage and slavery of the Churches.

Tilenus, that is also called to be one of their Jurie against me, does most
expressly give his verdict on my side against the Brownists. He teaches
Syntag. Disp. Theol. par. 2. Disp. ^0. these. 1.
that the fourefold power of the Church is to be exercised not only in
Presbyteries, but also in Councels or Synods: that These. 4.
Synods according to the power granted of God unto his Church, may take
knowledge of Ecclesiastical causes, and by their judgments conferred together
according to the word of God, may define, etc. and Th. 19.
give ministerial sentence, etc. And further he says, Th. 38.
As it is not to be hoped for that the body of the Church militant on earth
shall be free from diverse diseases; so we may not think that it can want this
remedy of Synods, which we therefore affirm to be not only lawful but also
necessary.

Bastingius showing how Excommunication pertains to the whole Church, says
nothing but that which is practiced both in our and other Reformed Churches of
these countries, especially if it be marked how he explaines himself in the
leaf following, where he adds that Expos. Catech. Qu. 85.
Ecclesiastical discipline and excommunication itself ought to be administered
by them who are ordained thereunto of the Church; such as are Ministers of the
Word, and Elders, the rest of the Church consenting thereunto; yet with this
correction, that the multitude of the people do not rule the action, but
provide as watchmen, that nothing be done by a few as they list themselves.
Besides, he being a member and Minister of these Churches, and Regent of a
College in Leyden, there is no reason from these his words to conclude against
the authority of Synods in judging the causes of particular Congregations, if
they either could not agree among themselves, or should agree in evil. For
then he should have condemned his own estate and practice, which yet cannot be
inferred from this his testimony.

Vrfinus also, though he teach that the unrepentant are to be excommunicated by
the common consent of the Church, etc. yet does he not thereby deny or exclude
the power of Synods in judging of that which is done in particular
Congregations; but does plainly give testimony with me. For Tom. 2. Admo. Chr.
de lib. Concord. c. 12. col. 686.
having showed the conditions and necessity of Synods, he says of them, This
remedy for the healing of the wounds of the Church is not to be neglected,
which the holy Ghost has showed unto us, by the counsel and example of the
Apostles; which all reason of divine and humane right requires; which being
lawfully used experience has proved to be most wholesome for the Church in
many most grievous confusions of opinions. Neither was this his private
opinion, but Ibid. Tit. and Col. 478.
written in the name of other Divines and Ministers in the jurisdiction of
Prince Casimir, and approved by them.

Piscator says, Excommunication is a decree of the Church, and therefore ought
to be done of the Church, In 1. Cor. 5. Obs. 1. Art. 3.
or of the Eldership judging in the name of the Church. We grant as much or
more in the practice of our Church, while the Eldership never exercises such
power alone, without the knowledge and consent of the Church, by propounding
the same diverse times unto them. But it is a perverting of this testimony, to
gather from hence that the actions of the Church or Eldership are not subject
to the judgment of Synods, if they be complained of for wrong. And that
Piscator allows the authority of Synods, In Act. 15. Obser. in V. 6.
to judge the controversies of Religion, and to These. Theol. Vol. 1. Loc. 23.
de Eccl. th. 68. and 72.
make decrees by gathering of voices in order, it is evident from other of his
writings.

Calvine requiring the Instit. l. 4. c. 1. sec; 15.
cognition of the whole Church before any be excommunicate, requires no more
then is held and practiced by us. And this is no empeachment to his and our
opinion with him, that in case of doubt or controversy, Ibid. c. 9. sec; 13.
there is no better nor more certain remedy then that a Synod of true Bishops
meet together, where the controversy may be discussed. For such a definition
shall have much more weight, where the Pastors of Churches in common do agree
together, etc. And this he there confirms both by Scripture, and sundry
examples of ancient Churches, showing that from the beginning it was the
ordinary way of preserving unity in the Church, so often as Satan began to
attempt any thing. Besides this, not to speak of other testimonies afforded by
Calvine to this purpose, when as Mr Can Chapter pl. p. 94.
afterward notes the assertions of diverse pleading for the Hierarchy of
Bishops, and oppugning Ecclesiastical government by Classes and Synods, as a
weed of later growth, saying that at Geneva subjecting of Churches first began.
And before Calvine came there, every Congregation was free in itself: If these
assertions be true, and that none is able to disprove them, as Mr Can there
supposes, how comes it that he thus perverteth Mr Calvines testimony against
his profession and practice? Let the Reader observe that if these assetions
were sound, Mr Can might as well have written a book, to prove the miserable
bondage and slavery of the Church at Geneva, procured by the tyrannical
government and corrupt doctrine of Mr Calvine, as he wrote the like title of an
unjust complaint upon the like ground against me.

Paraeus on 1. Cor. 5.5. does thus interpret the words; Let such a one be
delivered to Satan; to wit, by the Church, or by the Pastors and Elders of the
Church, which are the mouth of the Church. For by these the Church speaks and
deals. Without this order there would be confusion, if in a public action
every one might speak and deal: which undoubtedly the Apostle would not bring
in. This we grant, and it is not against us, but against the confused practice
of the Brownists. But for the point in hand, that Classes and Synods have power
to judge of the actions of particular Congregations, Paraeus is a plain
witness for us in Colleg. Theol. Decur. Coll. 9. Disp. 8. Auccar. 1. and Co.
10. Disp. 22. th. 1-10. and Disp. 24. th. 9.
other of his writings. And again, speaking of a lawful Synod and the
authority thereof in deciding of controversies in the Church, he says that
therein Eirenic. cap. 5.
men renowned in regard of their learning, understanding and piety, whether
they be of the Laity or Clergy, have not only a voice of delibertion and
counsel, but also of judgment and power of defining. And hereunto accordes
his Act. Sym. Nar. Dordr. Ses. 98.
Epistle written unto the National Synod holden last at Dort, wherein excusing
his absence, that he could not come in respect of his age, as he much desired,
yet he shows his approbation of such a meeting, as being the ordinary medicine
for healing the wounds of the Church, and rejoices greatly in the spirit for
the benefit exspected from that Synod, which judged and censured the errors of
particular men in diverse Churches. What reason then had Mr Can thus to abuse
the words of Paraeus against his meaning and public profession?

Keckerman also agrees with the former witnesses touching the point in
controversy. For in the book alleged by Mr Can, when as the parts of the
government of the Church are there described; he shows that System. Theo. l.
3. c. 6. p. 401.402.
the convocation of Synods belongs unto Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and is
contained under the same.

Hemmingius, though more sound and moderate then other Lutheranes, yet being a
disciple and follower of Melancthon, there was no reason why he should not have
been joined with his Master in the foregoing rank of Testimonies, if Mr Can
had either known his Author, or regarded the order which he had set down to
himself. But for his judgment touching the jurisdiction of Synods, he has
witnessed his consent with the Writers mentioned both in this and the former
Section, and testified against Mr Can in this cause. For speaking of that
part of Ecclesiastical Discipline, unto which he referres the deposition and
excommunication of Ministers, he commends the order of the ancient Church,
where he says Enchir. Theo. Clas. 3. c. 11.
the execution of this discipline was chiefly committed to the Bishops, who
therefore sometimes twice, sometimes oftener in the year called Provincial
Synods, where the matter was handled, not by the censure of one Bishop, but by
the sentence of the whole Clergy assembled.

Tossanus, mentioned in the next place, has plainly declared himself to be of
the same mind with us, in allowing Synodall and Classical assemblies to judge
and determine the causes of particular Churches and persons. He Pastor. Evang.
p. 61 edit. 1603.
maintains against Thyraeus that which he had formerly written, in these
words, In controversies of religion we appeal from Luther, and from the
censures and judgments of private men, unto the judgment of the Catholic
Church and of a Synod. He proves this to be sound and orthodoxe from the
Apostles referring the decision of the controversy concerning Justification
and the Ceremonies of the Law, unto the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.
Speaking of somewhat that was wanting in most of the German Churches, about the
ordaining of Ministers, he says that P. 40.
godly Pastors and Overseers do daily bewail the scarsitie of faithful
laborers, and that the Presbyteries and well ordered Ecclesiastical Senates
do endeavor that both in Synods and yearly visitations, and in Classical
meetings the failings of Ministers may be amended according to their power. In
which words he has reference unto the practice of the Churches in the
Palatinate (concerning which we are to speak Sect. 7.
hereafter) where he joined with them in the exercise of the said government,
being D. Toss. Vita, p. 38.
at Neustadt a moderator of the Ecclesiastical counsels of the Consistory, and
sometime also President of a Synod; and afterward at Heidelberg Ib. P. 44.
a member of the Ecclesiastical Senate. How unjustly therefore and untruely
has Mr Can dealt with Tossanus and his readers, in reckoning him among those
who, as he says, Chapter pl. p. 83.
have condemned for an error and untrueth, that position touching particular
Congregations standing under other Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves!

As for Polanus, to grant Mr Can, that he was of the same mind with the
former Authors, touching the Churches power in excommunicating, though so much
can hardly be manifested out of the Synt. Theol. l. 7. c. 18.
place alleged; yet what is that to our question? The Churches power in
excommuncating does not exclude the authority of Synods in judging of a
particular Congregation. Polanus speaking of Synods, expressly confesses,
that Ib. c. 14
the liberty or power of those Ecclesiastical assemblies is a right given of
God unto his Church, etc. that An Ecclesiastical Synod is a public assembly
of godly men, lawfully sent and gathered together from diverse Churches, also of
diverse Provinces, that they may handle and determine according to the power
that is granted unto them of God, touching holy affairs, etc. He alleges
sundry Scriptures and examples of the Ancient Churches for declaration hereof.
And again in the same place, he notes it for a condition of a lawful Synod,
that those which are chosen and deputed of the Churches may have a deliberative
or consulting, and also a deciding voice or giving of sentence, etc. When he
requires another condition of a lawful Synod, that every one may have free
access and recesse; yet he adds this withal, that whosoever is convicted of
heresy or any crime, and remains obstinate, should undergo Ecclesiastical
censure, that is, deposition from his Ecclesiastical office, or Suspension, or
Excommunication. And to like purpose he writes in Ib. c. 16. Syllo. These.
Theol. par. 1 de Council.
other places. This being the judgment of Polanus touching the authority of
Synods, how uncircumspect was W. Best and his abettour, to call for a Jury of
such Divines as have given such pregnant sentence and so peremptory verdict
against them?

Hyperius, next alleged, though he deny not the power of particular
Congregations, yet in his writings it is evident that he holds the power of
Synods, consisting of the Deputies of many Churches, to be a superior power
above one particular Church, and that they may judge of the affairs thereof
and of the persons therein, either Ministers or people. This he declares at
large in a peculiar treatise touching yearly Synods, DeSyno. Annuis Opusc.
Theol. p. 768-870. Bas. 1570.
wherein after he had showed the necessity and use of Synods by many divine and
humane testimonies, he then describes their power, not for counsel only, as
the Brownists and my opposites do, but for the exercise of all kind of
Ecclesiastical censures, as Rebukes of offenders, Suspension, Excommunication,
and Deposition or deportment of Officers from their ministry. Of all the men
of the Jury before mentioned, there is none that gives a more full and clear
verdict against Mr Can, then this Hyperius does.

Oecolompadius, another of his Authors, has declared his judgment touching
Synods, and the authority exercised in them, to be such as argues his thstimony
alleged by Mr Can to be perverted, while it is produced against the same.
For in his answer to Luther, inserted among the works of Zuinglius, Tom. 2.
fol. 491.
he does highly commend the Council of Nice, and specially for decreeing that
none should afterward attempt to add any new articles unto that Confession of
faith which they had set down. Which Nestorius being found guilty of,
Oecolompadius approves of that Act of the Council of Ephesus, whereby he was
excommunicated, saying, For which cause being condemned of the crime of
heresy, he was by common consent shut out of the Church, which was sensible of
peace restored unto her by this means. Hereby it appears that the
acknowledged Ecclesiastical jurisdictio^ and censure to be a power due unto
Synods, and that which may lawfully be exercised by them.

Beza. next alleged, upon 2. These. 3.14. though he there call Excommunication,
an. Ecclesiastical judgment, yet does he not thereby infringe the authority
of Classes and Synods, neither can any such thing by any just consequence be
gathered from his Annotations on that place. But on the other side he shows
Epist. 83. De Ministr. gradib. c. 23 p. 155. etc. 24. p. 176. 177.
elsewhere that Synods have their Ecclesiastical judgments grounded upon the
word of God, and a profitable use in the Church of God; and that the fanaticall
opinion of Morellius (much like unto the Brownists) has been worthily
condemned in many Synods. And according to his writing, so was his practice;
both at Geneva, where he was one of them that had their voice in the government
of that Church by a joint Presbytery or Classis; and in France, where he
himself was President of that famous Harmo. Confess. p. 112. edit. 1612.
Synod at Rochell, where the Confession of their faith was subscribed by diverse
Princes, and many Ministers and Elders assembled together. And therefore if Mr
Can and W. Best their accusation of me were sound and just, they might as
well complain of Beza, for bringing the Churches of God into miserable slavery
and bondage by his tyrannical government and corrupt doctrine.

Bucer, last alleged, accordes with the foregoing Authors, and his words in
commendation of Synods may serve to close up this kind of Testimonies, being
an advise unto King Edward the Sixth, for the constant celebrating of them. In
his Admonition given to the King for the restitution of the Kingdom of Christ
in his dominions, amidst other wholesome counsels out of the word of God, he
says, De Regno Christi. Lib. 2. c. 12.
It shall be the duty of the Bishops of each Province to celebrate two Synods
every year, as it is ordained by so many Canons, and Laws of godly Emperors.
At which Synods must be assembled and heard, not only the Bishops of the
Cities, but also inferior Bishops and other Presbyters and Deacons, that are
endued with a larger measure of knowledge and zeal for the kingdom of Christ:
that so the more effectually both the faults crept into the Church may
becorrected, and the piety of all repaired. He had also spoken before of other
inferior and more frequent assemblies, like unto our Classes, requiring that
all the Ministers within the compass of about 20 Parishes, should often meet
together, for their mutual assistance in removing offenses and advancing the
kingdom of Christ. Touching Synods, he speaks also in De vi and usu S. Min.
tit. de Disci. Cler. Opuse. f. 582.
another place to the same purpose, approving the ancient constitution, whereby
it was ordained that the Bishops of every Province should assemble together
with the Presbyters and Deacons, as often as the need of the Churches should
require, but without fail twice in the year; that they might inquire
concerning the doctrine and discipline of Christ, how it were administered and
did flourish in several Churches; that where any default was discovered they
might correct it; and where they found things in good state, they might
confirm and promote the same. By that correction spoken of here and in the
former testimony, he understands not only counsel and admonition, but the
judicial exercise of authority in Ecclesiastical censures: For he does
plainly distinguish betwixt admonition and correction, when in the following
words concerning Metropolitanes he says, If any thing were done amiss by the
Ministers of the Churches, or by the common people, which by their admonitions
they could not amend, that then for the correcting of it they should call a
Synod of Bishops: for there was no [power] of judgment allowed unto them,
which by their own authority they might exercise in the Churches, etc. Thus
Bucerus also, as well as the former, has condemned Mr Cannes position, viz.
that particular Congregations must not stand under other Ecclesiastical
authority out of themselves.

And these are all the Authors here alleged by Mr Can, except only Morell,
Praedirius and Munster, either not seen at all, nor to be procured for the
present, as the two former; or not seen to touch this controversy in the
writings at hand, as the latter.

Having now heard what these chosen men of the Jury, all nominated by W. B.
his Advocate, have testified concerning Classes or Synods; let the Reader judge
whether they have given verdict for or against Synods: whether every one of
these Authors alleged had not just cause (if they were living) to complain of
great abuse done to them in perverting their testimonies, and making false
consequences from their words contrary to their meaning. And forasmuch as all
these witnesses here examined are so far from testifying ought against us,
that they have on the other side witnessed the truth of that which we
maintained against Mr Can; hence it is evident that I had just cause to say
that which he would seem to disprove by alleging these Authors against me,
viz. that there were a multitude of learned and godly Ministers of the same
judgment and practice with me. For further proof whereof it were easy (if
need were) to produce another Jury of approved Authors, more in number then
those he has specifyed, and not inferior for learning and piety unto some of
those that he has named, all which in their several writings, Common places,
Commentaries and other Treatises, have in like manner as the former, described
the use, the necessity and the authority of Synods, not only for counsel, but
for judgment and decision of controversies; diverse of them alleging not only
examples of ancient Churches, but the holy Scriptures also for the warrant of
that which they teach, and therefore showing that they maintain them lawful
jure divino; and that their tenure of them is from the grant that Christ has
given unto his Church. But the truth of that assertion touching the multitude
of those that consent with me, will most plainly appear when we come to speak
of the public and general testimonies of whole Churches and most solemn
assemblies of learned and godly men, touching this controversy. In the mean
while let us follow Mr Can, according to his own Method.

SECT. IV.
Touching the Testimonies of English Conformists.
IN the next place they proceed, and in an homely phrase, they say, Touching
the English Conformist, the formablest of them are for us, in this point. And
here they allege B. Whitgift, D. Bilson, Whitaker, Bell, Willet, and Tailor.

Touching these I answer: First for B. Whitgift, though he confess that in the
Apostles time the state of the Church was popular, See Def. ag. T. C. p. 180.
182.
because the Church had interest almost in every thing; yet this proves not
that he thought particular Congregations to be independent and uncontrolable by
the Deputies of other Churches assembled in Synods. The ordinary practice of B.
Whitgift, in judging the causes of other Congregations, showed that he was
far from the meaning of the Brownists in this point. His words are wrested by
an unjust consequence to prove independency of Churches, and the undue power of
Synods.

For D. Bilson, there is notable wrong done to him, in clipping his words, and
defacing his testimony, by omitting that which is most material in this
controversy. For when D. Bilson had said, Perpet. Gover. c. 15 p. 360.
Though the Presbyters had more skill to judge, yet the people had as much
right to choose their Pastor; and if the most part of them did agree, they did
carry it from the Clergy; Thus far Mr Can recites his words, but here in
the midst of the sentence, before the period be ended, he breaks off and
leaves out this exception that is added, viz. so the persons chosen were such
as the Canons did allow, and the ordainers could not justly mislike. In this
exception D. B. acknowledges, that there may be just cause to disanull the
election of the people, if it be found worthy to be misliked. And his meaning
is yet more evident by the story which in the sentence immediately preceding he
alleges out of Lib. 7. cap. 35.
Socrates, touching the election of Proclus, who being chosen by the greater
number was yet refused, because the election was said to be against the Canon
of translating Bishops, and so the people were forced to hold their peace. That
which is practiced in these Reformed Churches, is in this point the very same
thing that D. B. testifies of the Primitive Church: for Classes and Synods do
not use to impose or choose Ministers. If particular Congregations do choose a
Minister, neither Classes nor Synods can disanull the election, if there be no
just cause of exception against the person elected. And if upon just exception
the election be hindered yet then also is the new election of another permitted
to the free choice of the particular Church; neither does the Classis deprive
them of their just power and liberty therein.

That it may more plainly appear how unjustly and unreasonably D. Bilson is
alleged as agreeing with my opposites, let it be further observed, that in his
Dispute against Beza and such as approve the Discipline of these Reformed
Churches, he does not as my adversaries, complain of the undue power of
Synods, that judge and determine the causes of particular Congregations. He
acknowledges that Perpet. Gover. c. 16 p. 370.
the necessity and authority of Synods is not so much in question betwixt us,
as the persons that should assemble and moderate those meetings, etc. He would
have P. 378, etc.
Metropolitanes to be the Moderatours and rulers of Synods: he would have P.
387, etc.
Lay Elders thrust out from assembling with Ministers in Synods: he complains
P. 386, 387.
of the intolerable charges and expenses of having frequent Synods, etc. Herein
he differs from us, and we from him. But that there is a superior
Ecclesiastical authority in Synods, to decide the causes of particular
Churches, which is the point in question, herein he agrees with us. He says
of such Synods and their power to judge, as follows. P. 372.
Their warrant so to do is builded on the maine grounds of all divine and
humane societies, strengthened by the promise of our Savior, and assured unto
them by the example of the Apostles and perpetual practice of the Church of
Christ. Afterward he says of their meetings in Synods; P. 374.
This has in all Ages, as well before, as since the great Council of Nice
been approved and practiced, as the lawfullest and fittest means to discern
truth from falsehood, to decide doubts, end strifes, and redress wrongs in
causes Ecclesiastical; yea when there were no believing Magistrates to assist
the Church, this was the only way to cleanse the house of God, as much as
might be, from the loathsome vessels of dishonor: and after Christian Princes
began to profess and protect the truth, they never had, nor can have any
better or safer direction amongst men, then by the Synods of wise and godly
Pastors. And many other things to like purpose are written by him, complaining
that the denial of this order is P. 376.
an heathenish, if not an hellish confusion, etc.

That which they bring out of Scultingius, a Papist before alleged, is idle
and impertinent: until they hear me avouch such things as he does for change
of the order of Christ, let them refrain their surmises and conjectures of
imaginary arguments which they guess that I will use.

Having brought such Authors against me, mark how Will. B. or Io. Ca. for him,
does triumph against me before the victory; in these words, Chu. pl. p. 85.
To say that this superior power of Classes and Synods, is Jure Divino, I
think he will not any more do it: there being in the Scriptures no proof
(yea I may boldly say) nor show of any proof for it. I confess indeed it is
boldly spoken of him. for who so bold als blind B.? But whether there be at
least show of proof in the Scriptures, for the superior authority of Synods
in judging the causes of particular Congregations, let us see what his own
witness says.

D. Whitaker that is next alleged by him, does by many arguments show the
profit and necessity of Synods; and to this end he cites many DeConc. qu. 1.
c. 3. p. 15.16. and q. 2. c. 3. p. 55, 56.
places of Scripture, both from the old and new Testament: he alleges at
large P. 17. etc.
7 or 8 causes for which they are profitable, and of great use and fruit. He
speaks also of such Synods as are not only for discussing and concluding of
matters by way of counsel and advise, but of those that have power to P. 21.
judge and condemn obstinate offenders by a public judgment, and as occasion
requires, to anathematise or exclude from the fellowship of the Church: he
maintains that those which are lawfully called unto Synods, have authority of
deciding and determining controversies by Ibid. q. 3. c. 3. p. 95.96. etc.
definitive sentence or suffrage: he says that DePo^tif. Romans qu. 4. p. 470.
appeals are of divine and natural right, and cannot be denied in
controversies about Ecclesiastical causes and persons. And thus by the
testimony of their own witness my adversaries do offend both against the law
of God, and the law of nature, in denying appeals, and in not allowing the
actions and judgments of a particular Congregation to be judicially examined
by a Synod or Classis. The several testimonies of D. Whitaker to this purpose,
are alleged P. 39. and 133-141.
before and applied at large, to declare his judgment in this controversy.

Though D. Whit. do DeCo^c. q. 5. p. 178.
grant (as is here alleged against me) that Ecclesiastical authority is in
the Church principally, primarily and essentially, etc. he does not hereby
contradict himself, or deny the power of Synods, where Ministers do judge by
virtue of their calling and deputation from many Churches. The authority of
Churches is manifested in them, and by their service therein. The like
testimony alleged from Saravia and Schola Parisienfis is P. 170.
before answered. Yea the School of Paris does sufficiently Schol. Paris. p.
1, 2.
explain this matter by a fit similitude, showing that Ecclesiastical
authority is in the Church primarily, and instrumentally in the Ministers: as
the power of seeing is in man principally, but instrumentally in the eye: As
man sees by his eye, so the Church exercises Ecclesiastical authority by the
Ministers and rulers thereof; and so judges of all crimes and offenses.

The testimony of Bell next alleged, is in like manner to be understood.
Whereas from Regim. of Chur. chapter 2. sect. 4.
him they object that Excommunication precisely and chiefly pertains to the
Church; and that she has authority to commit the execution thereof to some
special persons, for that purpose, and chosen for that end: this does no way
condemn, but rather illustrate our practice agreeable thereunto. And that the
meaning of this Author was not repugnant unto us, it appears more plainly
by another of his writings, Bells motiv. l. 2. c. 4. concl. 3. etc.
where he evidently declares his mind, that Synods have power to exercise
Ecclesiastical authority, and to proceed judicially with delinquents, even to
depose and excommunicate, though it were the Pope himself, upon due conviction.
And to this end he alleges the confession of many Popish writers, and far
more truly and uprightly then Mr Can has done in this controversy.

As for D. Willet, if he speak but to the same effect with Bell, as they say,
then the same answer may serve. But for the place alleged [ Synops. cont. 4.
qu. 4. p. 2.] I find no such matter there. They allege p. 2. when as there is
no second part of that question. But in the same book he gives plain evidence
against them; he acknowledges Synods to be Synops. Papi. Co^t. 3. qu. 1, p.
105.
an wholesome means for the repressing and reforming both of errors in
religion and corruption in manners: he alleges the consent of antiquity to
prove that our opinion is grounded upon truth and Scripture, namely that those
which are lawfully called unto Synods, Qu. 3. p. 109.110.
have determining voices, and power to give sentence; and gives instance in
the Council of Antioch, where Paulus Samosatenus was condemned and cut off as
an enemy to the truth, etc. he avoucheth that Qu. 7. p. 123.
they have authority to judge, examine, suspend, punish and depose, etc. And
thus D. Willet fully accords with us in this point, that there is a superior
power to judge the causes of particular Congregations.

D. Tailor next alleged, affords them no help. Whereas he says, that Com. on
Tit. 3.10. p. 712.
Excommunication is the common action of the Church, and not of any private
person or persons: we also affirm the same thing. Our profession and practice
always has been, never to excommunicate any without common consent of our
Church; but had we done unjustly at any time therein, we might justly have been
subject to the censure of a Synod or Classis: and yet then also the Ministers
and Deputies assembled in the name of many Churches, could with no reason be
accounted private persons. And though we think ourselves bound to ask counsel
of the Classis, according to the order of these Churches, before we proceed to
cut off any member of the Church by excommunication, this proves no deprivation
but a direction of our power.

Now whether I have just cause to blush for denying to the Churches of God that
due power which the Learned of all professions do grant unto her, as Mr Can
and Will. Bdoe without blushing Chapter pl. p. 86.
charge me, let the judicious and impartial Readers judge.

SECT. V.
Touching the Testimonies of English Non-conformists.
Under the title of this kind of witnesses, they allege against me, the
Replyer to D. Downame, Mr Parker, the Author of the English Puritanisme, D.
Ames, Mr Baines, Mr Bates, Mr Fenner, Mr Udall, the English Church at Franck
ford, and Mr Hooker. These are Chapter pl. p. 86, etc.
here produced: and in another P. 23.
place, unto which he referres us for the same purpose, he cites also the
Protestation of the Kings Supremacic, D. Fulke, and our Countrymen in
New England.

For answer hereunto; First, concerning some of these that seem to be of Mr
Cannes mind, in denying the authority of Synods in the government of the
Church, observe how idly and superfluously he alleges them against me; when
as he knows that I my self did acknowledge and note so much before, as namely
the judgment of Answ. to W. B. p. 74.
Mr Hooker, Ib. p. 27
D. Ames, and the Author of the book entitled English Puritanisme, by whom
also the Protestation of K. Supremacy is said to be written. These I have
confessed to be opposite unto me in this controversy, and have long since
professed unto them how much I have disliked their opinions in this point.

Secondly, though these witnesses have testified their particular judgment,
yet did they never deny but that they differed herein from many other godly
Ministers in England, which desired a reformation of the Church as well as
they. When as I expostulated with D. Ames long since, touching the publishing
of that treatise of English Puritanisme, and complained of wrong done unto many
silenced Ministers, who did not hold such opinions as are contained in that
book; his excuse was that they did not assirme those to be the opinions of
all, but only of the Rigidest sort of those that are called Puritanes, and
that so much was specifyed in the Title of that book. And again in the preface
of that book, those opinions are said to be the worst that the worst of them
hold: and the persons that do hold those peculiar opinions, are there again
distinguished from others by the title and name of Rigid Presbyterians. Now
though these expressions be not without some offense, yet from hence it may
appear that the Authors and Publishers thereof were far from that slanderous
disposition of Mr Can, in charging those of different opinion to have changed
and altered their judgment; when as he says, Chu. pl. p. 86.
Time was when Mr Paget did esteem them to be a multitude of godly and learned
Ministers; and was (or at least made show he was) of their judgment and
practice. An unconscionable insinuation against me. And afterward again he
says, Ib. p. 88.
Mr Paget has left the way of Non-conformitie, yea and shows himself to it a
great adversary, etc. A gross slander. Whereas Mr Can says further touching
the Protestation of K. Supremacic, that this book was P. 23.
set out under the name of all the unconformable Ministers in the Realm; this
is a notable falsehood: for neither is the word All used in the title of that
Protestation, made in the name of afflicted Ministers indefinitely; neither can
it ever be proved that all those Ministers did ever consent unto that opinion
there specifyed, and alleged by him, viz. We confine and bind all
Ecclesiastical power within the limits only of one particular Congregation,
etc.

Thirdly, as for Mr Bradshaw that wrote the forenamed Protestation, and that
book of English Puritanisme, if he were such an one as Mr Can reports him to
be now after his death, then were his testimony and his writing the less to be
regarded. For he says of him, that Necess. of Separ. p. 217.
his proofs are always beggarly I says, or Ifs, and may be soes; and does
not in all his writing, either directly or by sound consequence from the
Scripture, confirm any one thing whereof he speaks. He accuses him there
also of great hypocrisy in pleading for many evils, of which his judgment was
well known to be wholly otherwise. And in the same place upon an if and a may
be so, which he had immediately condemned in others, upon a report which he
judges probable enough, he compares him to Baalams Ass, etc. What meant Mr
Can to allege such witnesses against me, whom he himself (though indeed
very unworthily) has so described as if they were not worthy to have any
credit given unto them?

Touching D. Ames, and his judgment in this controversy, somewhat differently
expressed in his several writings, I have spoken at large P. 106-111.
before, in answer to Mr Dav. his Allegations.

As for Mr Hooker, his argument Chapter pl. p. 88.
annexed to his Testimony, is of no force against us, seeing he concludes
beside the question, which was not of every particular Church, but of such as
stood already in combination with a Classis.

Concerning the Churches in New England, Mr Can says, Ib. P. 23.
This may not be forgotten. Whereas there are many hundreds of our Countrymen
in New England, they have not erected there any Classical Government, but
every particular Church exercises her own, I say, within herself wholly; which
is a sure argument to prove, that the foreward professors in England approove
not of this kind of government here pleaded for; although he would feign have
his Reader to think so. Hereunto I answer: 1. What the Government of the
Churches in New England is, and whether they refuse the help of Classes and
Synods for the judgment and determination of their controversies, according to
the order of Reformed Churches here in Europe; I know not: neither can I
receive the testimony of Mr Can and his bare word for a sufficient evidence
herein, without some more authentic witness. Diverse books have been
published touching the nature of that soil, the fruits of the country, and
the manners of the wild people: but touching the Ecclesiastical government
and discipline there practiced, I have as yet seen no monument thereof. It is
probable enough that those Separatists which had been of Mr Robinsons company
here at Leyden, in their plantation would observe their old order, as near as
they could: and for some particular persons beside, I have heard of their
inclination that way; but that there should be a general agreement and
resolution against Classical Combinations, I hear not; and ought therefore to
suspend my judgment for the present, touching their practice. 11. Suppose
every particular Congregation in New England were independent, and subject to
no other Ecclesiastical government out of itself; yet is this no sure
argument to prove that the forward professors in England (as Mr Can calls
them) are generally of the same opinion also; seeing these in England may be
ignorant of that which is done so far of. Yea, so far as I can hear, even
such as have been diligent to enquire, cannot yet get any certain information,
what order of government is resolved upon in New England.

As for Mr Bates, I can say nothing touching his assent or dissent in this
point, seeing I have not seen his writing alleged against us.

For the rest, they are all notably abused. For the Author of the Reply unto
D. Downame, though he affirm that the administration of all Church Matters, at
first was in every Congregation, the right in the Church, the execution in the
Presbytery thereof; this does neither exclude the Classis in censuring of the
Presbytery if they abuse their power, nor hinder the Presbytery from seeking
the help of the Classis in the exercise of their power, in matters of doubt and
difficulty. The testimonies out of the Centuries, D. Whitgift, Thomas Bell,
there Repl. par 2. l. 2. p. 104
alleged by the Replyer, are answered already in the several places which Mr
Can has assigned unto them in his writing; where it has been showed that in
this controversy they are impertinent, and do not prove any thing against
us. Besides Mr Can had the less cause to allege this place in the foresaid
Reply, seeing the Author in the very next page does approve of that order,
which for election of Church Officers is practiced at Geneva, saying Ibid. p.
105.
that it is religiously and prudently observed. Mr Can might there have seen
himself condemned under the name of Morellius, even by this Replyer also, as
well as by Beza; seeing it is as true of him, as of the other, that which is
there said, that he has presumed by word and writing to reprehend that order,
etc. our course being in substance the same, and opposed by Mr C. in like
manner as theirs was by Morellius. Again, in the P. 106.
next page the said Author does expressly reject and detest that popular
government, practiced among the Brownists, and pleaded for by Mr Can, when
having said that the peoples consent is not to be neglected in causes of
greatest moment, according to that which we teach and practice, he adds
withal, Notwithstanding a mere Democracie, wherein all matters are handled of
all (aequato jure) by an equal right; we do no less detest, then that
usurped Monarchy of Lordly Prelates, which other reformed Churches have
abolished. And afterward P. 113.
when he allows a pre-eminence for orders sake, unto some one to be the mouth
of the rest, in executing that which was by the whole Presbytery decreed, and
then explaines that one to be the President of the Presbyters, that is to say,
in each Congregation the Pastor, and in a Synod or assembly of the Pastors and
Presbyters of many Churches, that one which with the consent and choice of his
brethren moderates the action; there is no reason why we should not hence
conclude his approbation of Synods, such as are and have been celebrated in
well ordered Churches; even such as do not only advise, but also decree what
is meet, as he had said of the Presbytery in general. As for the other places
alleged out of this Author, I refer the Reader unto that which I have said
P. 116.117.
before touching the same, in my answer to Mr Davenport.

Mr Parker, next alleged, speaks down right in this thing, says Mr Can.
The words cited out of Mr Parker, are these, All Ecclesiastical power is
always in the whole Congregation, from hence it flows, as from the fountain,
and to the same it returns as to the Sea. For answer hereunto, 1. This
Testimony here alleged by Mr C. is not only cited amiss, viz. Pol. Eccl. l.
3. c. 6. instead of c. 8. p. 28. and some words also unjustly added by him unto
the testimony, to make it seem more full for his purpose; but being taken as
he sets it down, it does not infringe the authority of Classes and Synods. For
though all Ecclesiastical authority be said to flow from the Church, as from a
fountain; this hinders not, but rather shows how power may be and is derived
unto Classes, when particular Churches as fountains do by deputation and
delegation send forth a stream of authority and power in Classical and
Synodall Assemblies, in such manner as Mr Parker himself does afterward Pol.
Eccl. l. 3 c. 13. etc. 23, 24, 25, etc.
often show unto his Reader. II. For the downright speech of Mr Parker,
wherein Mr Can glories, I desire the Readers that understand, to review
those passages which I have P. 89-105.
before noted at large out of Mr Parkers book, and them that are able, to
look upon those places in the book itself, and then to judge whether Mr Can
be not either very blind in alleging the testimonies of learned men, when he
knows not what they say; or else very impudent and dishonest, in corrupting and
perverting their testimonies contrary to their meaning.

As for Mr Baines, he is confusedly alleged, viz. Dioces. Trial, Conclus. 4.
for whereas in that book there is often mention of Conclus. 4. who can tell
what place he means? The truth is that none of those fourth Conclusions in
any part of his book, do by any word empeach the authority of Classes or
Synods. But on the contrary, in that his writing he gives plain and evident
testimonies of his agreement with us, as I have P. 111-116.
already sufficiently declared.

Come we now to the testimony Chu. pl. p. 23.
alleged in the name of D. Fulke, whom Mr Can praises to be a man famous
and of rare learning. They object unto me that he says Learned Discourse. of
Eccl. Gov. p. 84.
There ought to be in every Church an Eldership, which ought to have the
hearing, examination and determining of all matters, pertaining to the
Discipline and Government of that Congregation. Hereunto I answer, that such
authority is to be exercised by the Eldership, yet so as that the judgment and
consent of the Congregation in weightier matters be not excluded: and so also
that the judgment of the Classis or Synod be not refused or denied. This
Author will have the Eldership to determine all matters, if they be able to do
it; and so he expounds himself, showing afterward that there be diverse matters
which the Eldership is not able by themselves to finish without help of a Synod.

And because Mr Can in the margin of his book sets his mark over against
this place, desiring us to Note this: so I desire both him and others to note
well what this Author writes concerning the authoriy, necessity, and use of
Synods. I am glad to hear Mr C. to give so great commendation unto this indeed
Learned Author, who is so pregnant a witness for me and for Synods against the
Brownists. This is that which he Ibid. p. 82.83.
says:

Seeing our Savior Christ promised his presence and authority to every Church
indifferently, Matt. 18.19.20: None may challenge any such prerogative before
other: but as the Churches are limited out for order and conveniencie, so is
every one of them of like authority in itself: but because they make all but
one Church, and one body of Christ, therefore there is but one authority in
them, to determine of matters concerning them all. By which there appears to
be a double authority of the Pastor: one with the several Congregation, in
which he is Pastor, the other with the whole Synod or assembly, whereof he is
a member, and both these authorities, we find sufficiently authorized in the
Scripture, etc.

Again, Ibid. p. 111. 112.
There is a double authority of the Pastor, the one joined with the Elders of
the Church whereof he is Pastor: the other with the Synod or holy assembly,
whereof he is a member. There arises oftentimes in the Church, diverse
Controversies, which cannot otherwise be expressed, pertaining to the state of
the whole Church, then by a general assembly of all the Pastors of that
Church, which is called a Synod or General Council. Also there be diverse
cases, wherein the several Churches, are driven to pray the aid of the Synod,
where matters cannot be determined among themselves. For this cause the Holy
Ghost has ordained these Holy assemblies, with promise that they being
gathered together in the name of Christ, he himself will be among them. With
the Synod the Pastor has authority to determine, concerning regiment of the
Church.

Again, P. 115, 116. 117.
Let us return to the authority of the Synod, which consists in deciding and
determining such matters as cannot otherwise in particular Churches be
concluded, either because they concern the common state of all Churches, or
because they lack sufficient authority in some one Church. First therefore the
lawful Synod has to consider, if any controversy of doctrine do arise, that
it be determined by the word of God: etc. Secondly, it has to determine of the
use of the ceremonies, not of will without reason or ground of Scripture, but
upon necessary causes of avoiding offense and similitude of superstition, of
bearing with the weak, of order and comeliness and edification. So did the
Synod of the Apostles and Elders, command for a time abstinencie from meat
offered to Idols, otherwise lawful in it self, for offenses sake, etc. Also
for order and comelines, and best edification, the Synod has to determine,
what shall be observed in particular charges: as of the time, place, and form
of preaching and praying, and administering of the Sacraments. For who should be
able to know what order, comelines and edification requires according to Gods
word, but they that be teachers and preachers of the same unto all others? For
it is absurd, that they should be taught by such in these small things, as
ought to learn the truth of them in all matters, etc. P. 118.
It is out of all controversy, that before there were any Christian Magistrates
( --) this authority was proper unto the Synod. Which authority we know to be
granted to the Church by our Savior Christ: practiced by his Apostles:
continued by their successors three hundred years, before there were any
Christian Emperors ( --) and long time after there were Christian Emperors,
even as long as any purity continued in religion, until both Emperors and
Synods were thrust out of all lawful authority, which they ought to have in
the Church, by the tyranny of Antichrist.

In the same learned Discourse of Ecclesiastical Government, it is further
added: P. 122. 123. 124.
The Synod has further authority concerning Discipline, to reform and
redress by Ecclesiastical Censure, all such defaults and controversies, as
cannot be determined in the particular Churches: as for example: If the Pastor
himself, have need to be severely punished, where there is but one Pastor in
a Church: or if Elders, which should be reformers of others, have notoriously
misgoverned themselves: or if they have been led by affection to condemn an
innocent, or to justifye the ungodly: in these and such like cases, all
contention is to be concluded, by the authority of the Synod. Some example we
have thereof, Act. 15. where those contentious Schismatiques, that withstood
Paul and Barnabas at Antiochia, were constrained to yield by authority of the
Council, and Paul and Barnabas restored to their credit. For which causes
Synodes ought oftentimes to be assembled, though not general of the whole
Realm, but particular of every Province or Shire, as it may be most
conveniently, that such things as are to be reformed, may be redressed with
speed.

These and many other such like assertions in allowance of Synods and their
authority, has this learned Author, whom yet they have alleged against me.
Had Will. Best but had so much wit or conscience as to have duly looked upon
these English Authors, being but small treatises, and perused them diligently,
he might easily have learned hereby what order God requires in the Government
of his Church. But taking so much upon trust, and presuming blindely upon the
fidelity and skill of a Brownist, therefore is he run into Scandal, having
published many slanders against the Churches of Christ, and wrested so many
witnesses against their meanings.

In the next place the Testimony of Mr Fenner does fitly offer itself to be
examined of us: for seeing he took upon him the Defense of the former Author
against Bridges, who impugned that learned Discourse of Eccles. Gov. we have
reason to exspect that he also will defend the authority of Synods in like
manner. As for the two pages which Mr Ca. Against Bridges p. 15, 16.
alleges, he neither specifyeth his words, neither do I find in either of
those pages any one word against the use of Classes or Synods amongst us, but
on the contrary a clear testimony which he gives unto them. For speaking there
[ in page 16.] of the form of Discipline appointed of God, and of the several
points thereof particularly set down in the word of God, with other he
reckons up these, the joint care of Elderships and Synods. Afterward he
speaks more fully in praise of this government, and says, Def. of Ecc.
Disci. ag. Bridge. p. 105.
The nature of this order itself, which admits no Minister but learned, nor
any decision of weight, but by advise of many, and with appointed conferences
and Synods of learned men for such purposes: besides the assurance of Gods
favorable blessing of his own ordinance, and the experience of the Synodes of
the Reformed Churches, the comparison of their judgments, Canons, and other
constitutions, with the like of the other in any part, bears witness,
whether the want of learning and piety both, must needs be greater in it,
then in the other. Whereas D. Fulk had given unto these Churches which have a
Classical and Synodall government, the title and praise of Learn. Disc. of
Ecc. Gov. p. 7.
rightly reformed Churches; when D. Bridges was offended therewith, Mr Fenner
maintains that praise to be due unto them, and commends (k) their entire and
whole obedience which they yield to God, in receyving all the holy doctrine of
our Savior Christ, both concerning things to be believed, and also concerning
the spiritual policy, Discipline and order, for guiding of his Church. And
further, in the same place he repeats and undertakes to defend D. Fulkes words,
persuading to embrace that most beautiful order of Ecclesiastical regiment,
which God does so manifestly bless and prosper in our neighbors hands. Hereby
it may appear how far Mr Fenner was from that erroneous and slanderous
spirit of Mr C. and W.B. And here by the example of W. Best all simple and
ignorant men are to be warned of publishing such false things as he has done,
upon the credit of other men that are strangers from the Churches of Christ.
Moreover, the judgment of Mr Fenner in approving this use of Synods for the
government of Churches and judgment of causes, may be clearly seen in sundry
other testimonies which he has given to this purpose, and which I have P.
84-88.
before noted: where among the rest, when having maintained the right of Synods
to be jure divino, alleging many Scriptures for the warrant thereof, he
infers from hence this common law that other members of the Church which
have no Ecclesiastical office, are to be subject to this government, and ought
to advance the same according to their power, etc. it is thereby evident that
he could not like the course of W. B. or any such other schisming from the
Church for this cause, and complaining that they were not a free people, if
they were subject to Classes and Synods.

Mr Udall in the Demonstration of Discipline, page 24, 25. in that edition
thereof which I have, has no such matter as is alleged before out of that
treatise of English Puritanisme, against the authority of Classes and Synods:
neither is it to be found in any part of that Demonstration, that Christ has
not subjected any Congregation unto any other superior Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, then unto that which is within itself, etc. And therefore it is
untruely affirmed of Mr Can, that there is nothing there said, but Mr Vdall
with others above mentioned, has said the like. On the contrary, in that
writing asscribed to Mr Vdall, there be sundry testimonies showing the
authority of Synods to judge the causes of particular Congregations. As it was
P. 204.
before noted out of D. Fulke that there is a double authority of the Pastor;
one with the several Congregation in which he is Pastor, the other with the
whole Synod or Assembly whereof he is a member, and both these authorities
sufficiently authorized in the Scriptures: so says Mr Vdall to like purpose,
Demo^st. of Discip. c. 1.
The word of God has described sufficient ministers and ministeries for
doctrine, exhortation, overseeing, distributing, and ordering of every
particular Church or general Synod. And again, he says of Bishops or
Pastors, that Ib. c. 10
they are of equal authority in their several charges, and in the general
government of the Church. And in the same chapter he alleges the decrees of
diverse 2. Council. Carth. tom. 1. c. 10. and 3 Conc. tom. 1. cap. ^.
Councels, showing how the causes of one Church or Congregation were judged by
many Bishops of other Congregations meeting together. In special, when some
Demo^st. of Disc. c. 14
objected that there would be so many Elderships, so many diverse fashions,
seeing one may not meddle with another: Hereunto he answers, The Government
desired is uniforme for every Church and admits no change, no not in outward
ceremonies, without a Synod of the choice men of several Elderships. Hereby he
plainly declares his meaning, what he judged concerning the power of Synods,
for alterations to be made in particular Churches.

The Agreement of the English Church at Franckford in Queen Mary's days, is
also alleged as a proof of the Non-conformists dissenting from me; whereunto
I answer: I. Those three Articles of their Discipline objected; the one, that
the Ministers and Seniours, severally and jointly, shall have no authority to
make any manner of Decrees or Ordinances to bind the Congregation or any
member thereof: But shall execute such ordinances, as shall be made by the
Congregation, and to them delivered: Another, that none shall be
excommunicated, until the matter be first heard by the whole Church: And
further, that Ministers and Seniours, and every of them, be subject to
Ecclesiastical discipline, as other privae members of the Church be; these do
not at all concern the question betwixt us. For these things being granted, it
does not follow that then the authority of Synods is overthrown, that they may
not judge of any ordinances made in such a Congregation; or that such a Church
where these Articles are agreed upon, has thereby denied and condemned such a
Classical government, as we submit ourselves unto. II. These Articles of their
Discipline are not rightly, and plainly, but darkly and confusedly cited. In
the quotation of the first, the page 115. is put for page 125. The two next are
alleged without any quotation at all, either of page, or number of Article
specifyed in the book; and both are joined together as if they were but one
Article. And in the second Article there is omitted that disjunction, which
affords an exception touching the strict observation thereof. For whereas Mr
Can alleges it simply thus, None shall be excommunicated until the matter
be heard by the whole Church; the Disc. of troubl. at Frankf. p. 129.
book itself admits the liberty of a different practice by adding this
clause, or by such as it shall specially appoint thereunto. This falsification
is so much the greater, in that Mr Horn objecting against this Article, and
arguing that thereby P. 163, 164.
the authority of the Pastor and Seniors is all wiped away; for every thing is
referred to the confused multitude of the Congregation: Mr Whithead in the same
book answers him on this manner, Where he says, all things is referred to
the confused multitude, it is manifestly false. For it is always added, by
such as the Congregation shall appoint thereto: as it is also in the 54 Article
added in plain words. Let the Reader observe this deceitful allegation, both
against the express words of the Article, and against the plain explication
thereof by Mr Whit. in the name of that English Church at Frankford.

Whereas Mr Can Chu. pl. p. 36.
objecteth further from Art. 26. and 67. that in some cases the forenamed
English Church agreed that appeals should be made unto the body of the
Congregation; I answer, that in such cases as are there specifyed, If the
Ministers and Seniours which have authority to hear and determine, etc. (as it
is elsewhere specifyed, though not in this Article) be suspected or found to be
parties, that then they had reason to appeal rather to the body of the
Congregation, then that parties should be suffered to be judges in their own
cause. And no marvel, considering what I have noted P. 121-125.
before touching the state of that Church; where the Reader may see a further
answer unto these objections. But then he asks me what I say to this, and
hopes I will not say that they were Brownists: I answer, His hope is right in
this point, I may not say they were Brownists, nor their practice the same with
the Brownists: 1. Because they made this agreement through necessity, when they
wanted a Classis, whereas the Brownists wilfully oppugn and refuse Classical
combinations. 2. Because the Brownists deny authority of judgment unto
Ministers and Elders, in such cases where they are no parties, which this Art.
59.63.
Church at Frankford did not. 3. Because the English Church at Frankford did
not teach the doctrine of Separation, as the Brownists do, but when they could
not obtain the reformation desired, did Disc. of troub. Fra^kford, p. 187-191.
still hold one another brethren in the Lord, though greeved for the defects
among them.

But it is wonder that Mr Can is not ashamed to allege the example of this
English Church at Frankford: for whereas G. Johnson in a peculiar Disc of
troub. in the banish. English Church at Amsterd. p. 21-73.
treatise which he wrote against his brother Franc. Johnson, and that Church of
the Brownists whereof he was Pastor, has compared the troubles of these two
Churches together; in the first part of this treatise, which is entitled, The
agreement between the banished English Church at Frankford in Q. Mary's days,
and some troubles in the banished English Church at Amsterdam in Q. Elizabeth's
days; he brings more then an 100 several instances to show that where any
disorder, scandal or offense was in the English Church at Frankford, the like
evils, scandals and offenses were also to be found and observed in the English
Church of the Separatists in Amsterdam. And in the second part of this
treatise, entitled, Ibid. p. 73-93.
Differences between the Pastor, Elders and people in the troubles at Frankford
in Q. Mary's days, and the Pastor, Elders and people in the troubles at
Amsterdam in Q. Elizabeth's days; he brings more then 20 several instances to
show that the English Church of the Separation was worse then the other, and
that where diverse good orders and practices were in the English Church at
Frankford, the same were wanting in the Church of the Brownists at Amsterdam.
And in particular, let this be observed, that concerning the English Church at
Frankford G. Johnson P. 74.
alleges, that there was agreement among them, that the matter should be
decided by learned men. But concerning those at Amsterdam he says, These
differ far from them herein, they will not consent hereunto, they will not be
persuaded, or entreated to let the Reformed Churches hear, try, judge, and end
the controversy between them and us. For proof hereof he notes in his margin,
This is witnessed by the testimony of the Dutch Preachers, given to the Pastors
father. Now instead of pleading from the orders of that Church at Frankford, it
had been fitter for Mr Can to have taken warning from these unparalleld
offenses of his predecessors, not to maintain the like disorders; or else to
have answered these parallels and censures of G. Johnson, and so to have
removed (if he could) the scandal and blame which has so long lien upon his
fellows for not answering this book.

HAving considered the particular testimonies of Non-conformists, and how they
have been perverted by Mr Can, in applying them against the authority of
Synods; it shall not be amiss to add yet further a threefold Testimony, to
manifest this point more clearly and fully, and so to conclude this Section:
namely by the Petitions of Non-conformists to Qu. Elizabeth, and to the
Parliament; the opposition of the Prelates to the Non-conformists; and the
scorn of the Brownists against Non-conformists.

First, when as the Ministers have made request unto Q. Elizabeth for
reformation of things amiss, showing how controversies may be compounded, they
say, Petit. to the Q. most excel. Maj. p. 3.
that a free National or Provincial Council at home were much to be wished,
etc. And in a treatise annexed thereunto, entitled, Opinions of such as sue for
Reformation, among other things which they hold and sue for, this is one, Ibid.
19. p 57.
That if any dissension grow or cause of grievance be given in any particular
Church by the Minister or Officers, the party grieved might appeal to a
particular Synod; from the particular Synod to a Provincial Synod; from a
Provincial Synod to a National Synod. Which Synods should be appointed at set
times: the more particular the Synod is, the more often: for the time to be
moderated by some fit man changeably by election, that might write, speak. and
pray in the behalf and at the direction of the rest, etc. And a little after
again, 21.
they do profess and protest, that they can and will avow this Reformation
which they desire, to be most agreeable to the Scriptures, to have the
testimony of the best and most learned men that have been since the Apostles,
etc. If Mr Ca. will not wink with his eyes, he may here see what reformation
has been sought and held needful, and that Iure Divino.

In like manner Mr Travers testifies of these conferences, or Classes and
Synods, Eccles. Disc. p. 98. with p 103. 104. reprin. 1617.
that nothing could be more profitable then these Assemblies, being so used as
they are appointed to be used by the word of God, and used by other purer and
better reformed Churches, etc. and concludes that his treatise of Discipline
with an humble supplication unto Qu. Elizabeth of happy memory, for the
establishing of such a Discipline in her dominions.

To like purpose do they write which were the Authors of the Admonition to
the Parliament, holden in the 13. year of Q. Eliz. begun Anno 1570, and ended
1571. They Admon. to Parl. p. 51 52. ed. 1617
describing the platform of 2 Church reformed, and presenting their desire to
the consideration of the Parliament, do therein commend the use of
Conferences, and of Synods Provincial, National and General, for determining
the weighty causes which could not be ended in particular Churches. And they
require that men should stand unto these determinations, unless they can be
showed to be contrary to the Scriptures.

Secondly, such as have been special maintayners of the Prelacie do confess
and testify that the Ministers which sought for reformation, did therein seek
for government of the Church by Classes and Synods; and that not for counsel
only, but to judge the causes of particular Churches, and to censure such
persons as were found guilty. It is by one of them manifested in a special
Danger. Positio. for Presbyteri. Governm. l. 3. c. 2-15
Record, that when diverse Ministers not conforming were cast into prison, and
some of them brought into the Star Chamber and examined upon their oaths,
they declared the earnest endeavors of many Ministers for the obtaining of
Classes.

And there among such as gave pregnant testimony in allowance of Classical
government, are nominated these following; Mr Chark, Mr Travers, Mr Gardener,
Mr Barber, Mr Chester, Mr Crook, Mr Egerton, Mr Field, Mr Wilcox, Mr Standen,
Mr Iackson, Mr Bonham, Mr Crane, Mr S^inctloe, Mr Edwards, Mr Cholmeley, Mr
Wright, Mr Gifford, Mr Gelibrand, Mr West, Mr Brown, Mr Knewstubs, Mr Wight,
Mr Walker, Mr Cartwright, Mr Fen, Mr Oxenbridge, Mr Perkins, Mr Allen, Mr Dike,
Mr Culverwell, etc. And about Northamptonshire alone are Ib. p. 77
recorded more then 20 of this mind. About Northampton; Mr Snape, Mr Penrie,
Mr Sibthorp, Mr Edwards, Mr Litl^ton, Mr Bradshaw, Mr Lark, Mr Fleshware, Mr
Spicer, etc. About Daventrie; Mr Barbon, Mr Rogers, Mr King, Mr Smart, Mr
Sharp, Mr Promdlos, Mr Elliston, etc. About Kettring; Mr Stone, Mr Williamson,
Mr Fawsbrook, Mr Patinson, Mr Massey, etc.

The laws, rules and order, both in Classes and in Synods, described in that
Ibid. p. 109, 110, etc.
book, and approved by these Ministers, are most of them and generally the very
same that are observed in the Classes and Synods of the Reformed Churches in
these United Provinces of the Netherlands where we live, and where our English
Church is combined with them in the same Ecclesiastical government. The
agreement and consent of these men in their desire of Classes and Synods,
according to the order and practice observed also in Scotland and at Geneva, is
therefore by the Recorder thereof noted and styled over the head of many pages
in that book, English Genevating for Reformation: And again, English
Scottizing for Discipline by practice. Even these reproaches do justly serve
for the reproof of Mr Can, who denies that which other opposites do
willingly acknowledge.

Thirdly, the very Brownists themselves were wont of old to acknowledge that
the not-conforming Ministers in England did stand for Classes and Synods.
Though with great skorne and reproach they speak of Synods, yet that very
skorne and reproach is a witness against Mr Can. and W. B. to show the consent
of former times with me. Hen. Barow speaking of the censures of evil, and
condemning both Conformists and Non-conformists together, he says; H. Bar.
Discov. of False Chur. p. 165.
Yea all the Priests of the land, both Pontifical and Reformists agree in this
point, and conclude that the lay people (as they term them) ought not to
intermeddle either with the deposing their Minister, or reproof of his
doctrine. The one sort (says he) sends them to their Lords these Bishops,
the other refers them over for these and many other cases under hand, to a
Provincial or Classical Synod or permanent Council of Priests, etc. Amongst
whom all these affairs must be debated, and after they are agreed upon the
point, then their decrees to be brought forth, solemnly published and
pronounced to the people, who must attend upon, wait, and receave these Oracles
as most holy and Canonical. They have no remedy if they also be contrary to
the truth, but to appeal to a Council, etc. And this he calls a devilish
forgerie, etc.

After that to like purpose he says, Ibid. p. 169.
These Priests, they will not only not submit their persons and doctrine to
the censure of the Church where they administer (for they must have a Jurie of
Clerks, a Classis of Priests to go upon them) but they bind their poor
Church to their lips and build it upon themselves, and with their blazing
light strike all the rest of their hearers and followers stark blind. Again,
P. 169, 170.
By their Prophetical Conventicles and Classical Synods they assume into
their own hands the key of all knowledge, and shutting up the Scriptures, yea
all Gods graces, even the Holy Ghost itself among themselves in these their
Schools of Prophets: as also into their Classes of select Priests the scepter
of Christ and absolute government of all Churches, to whom it is left but to
receive and execute the reverent decrees of this famous Classis of Priests.

In another place, having told how the Pontificals have opened their mouths
unto accursed blasphemy, then he returns unto the Reformists, and speaks on
this wise, P. 189, 190.
The Pharisees of these times, I mean these your great learned Preachers, your
Good men that sigh and groan for Reformation, but their hands with the sluggard
deny to work. These counterfaites would raise up a second error, even as a
second Beast, by so much more dangerous by how much it has more show of the
truth. These men instead of this gross Antichristian government which is now
manifest and odious unto all men, would bring in a new adulterate forged
government in show, or rather in despite of Christ's blessed government, which
they in the pride, rashness, ignorance and sensuality of their fleshly hearts
most miserably innovate, corrupt and pervert, etc. The thing itself they
innovate and corrupt, in that they add new devises of their own; as their
Pastoral suspension from their Sacraments, their set continued Synods, their
select Classes of Ministers, their settled supreme Council, etc.

That which Mr Johnson and others with him do require, is more general and
ambiguous, viz. Apol. of Brown. Pet. 3 pos. 9. p. 64.
that the Church be not governed by Popish Canons, Courts, Classes, Customs,
or any humane inventions, but by the laws and rules which Christ has
appointed in his Testament. But that which H. Barow writes is more plain, and
more particularly applied to the Ministers of England, whom he calls the
Reformists. Of them he says, Discov. p. 191.
Their permanent Synods and Councels also which they would erect (not here to
speak of their new Dutch Classes, for therein is a secret) should only consist
of Priests or Ministers as they term them; people of the Churches be shut out,
and neither be made acquainted with the matters debated there, neither have
free voice in those Synods and Councels, but must receave and obey without
contradiction whatsoever those learned Priests shall decree. These Synods, and
Councels shall have absolute power over all Churches, doctrines and Ministers,
to erect, ratify or abrogate, to excommunicate or depose at their pleasures:
Their decrees are most holy without controulement, unless it be by the Prince
or the high Court of Parliament: Not here to speak of their solemn orders
observed in these Councils and Synodes, as their choice by suffrage amongst
themselves of their Archisynagogon, or Rector Chori, their President (as they
call him) propounder or moderator of their Council; about which their
predecessors have had no small stir, until their holy Father the Pope put an
end to the strife by getting the chair. This stuff they would bring in again
under color of Reformation, these and many more their leavened corrupt
writings of Discipline, and their supplications unto the Parliament, declare:
etc.

Again he says, Ib. P. 193
These Reformists, howsoever for fashion sake they give the people a little
liberty to sweeten their mouths, and make them believe that they should
choose their own Ministers (for further right in the censuring their
Ministers, or in the ordering the affairs of their Churches they allow not, as
has been said) yet even in this pretended choice do they coozen and beguile
them also, leaving them nothing but the smoky windy title of election only;
injoyning them to choose some Universitie Clarke, one of these College birds
of their own brood, or else comes a Synod in the neck of them, and
annihilates the election whatsoever it be. They have also a trick to stop it
before it come so far; namely in the ordinatio^, which must (forsooth) needs
be done by other Priests: for the Church that chooses him has no power to
ordain him: And this makes the mother Church of Geneva and the Dutch Classes
(I dare not say the secret Classes in England) to make Ministers for us in
England. And these Ministers when they are come over, are esteemed and received
as Angels in hell, and shine as bright stars in these smoky Egyptian
fornaces, wherein the miserable people of the land are kept in most hard
servitude, etc.

These skornfull and reproachful speeches of H. Barow do sufficiently testify
what the Brownists of old thought of the Dutch Classes and Synods, and what
they thought of such Ministers in England as desired a Reformation, and therein
a Classical government. Though H. Barow according to his manner do overlash,
and utter much falsehood; yet he is not guilty of so great fallhood as Mr Can,
in denying what the Ministers and forward professors in England (as he calls
the^) did heretofore seek, and sue for. It is certain and evident that the
Non-conformists have Demo^st. of Disc. c. ^. pr. 3. and p. 24, 25. Mr Travers
of Ecc. Disc. p. 19. 20. Admon. to Parl. p. 15. edit. 1617.
held that unto the just calling of a Minister there is required the calling of
a particular and certain Church where he is to administer: Yea so much is also
confessed touching them by the Dang. pos. l. 3. of Engl. Scoti. c. 3. p. 46.
etc. 14. p. 114. 115.
Prelatists, when by them it is recorded as a decree of the Synodicall
Discipline, that none should take upon him an uncertain and vague ministry,
though it be offered unto him; but such as be called to the ministry by some
certain Church, etc. And again, that none is to be accounted a full Minister
until some particular Congregation had chosen him, etc. For though as in these
Churches, after due examination and approbation by a Classis, men are allowed
to preach and to exercise their gifts occasionally, yet are not such esteemed
Ministers, until they be called by some Church, and confirmed therein. But H.
Bar. as in diverse other things so in this, speaks slanderously of the Classes,
and of the Ministers approoving them, when as he says, Discov. p 175.
Both sides, both Bishops and this new Classis take upon them to make Ministers
without the people, without any charge, place, or office certain. Though the
falsehood of H. Bar. be manifest herein, yet Mr Can goes a degree beyond him,
when he shames not to deny the approbation which the Nonconformists have given
to the Dutch Classes and Synods, which H. Bar. could not deny for the fact,
though he impugn them as erring therein.

Let the Reader now observe here the palpable untrueth of Mr C. and of W.B. in
their Apish imitation of my words, which they so falsely apply against me,
saying, Chu. pl. p. 88, 89.
As Herod to kill one infant spared not to kill a multitude of other infants:
so he, that he might undermine us and blow us up into the air, he cared not,
nor spared not with the gunpowder of his fiery contention and reproaches to
blow up with us a multitude of Godly and learned Ministers being of the same
judgment with us. I desire the Readers to look upon my former Answ. to W.B.
p. 71, 72, 73. and 18, 29.30, etc.
writing, and then to judge whether I had not just cause to complain of their
wounding the Classis through my sides, and of their reproaching the Ministers
of these Reformed Churches under my name, in regard of their consent and
practice agreeable to mine. I desire that the testimonies, confessions, and
petitions of the ancient Non-conformists above mentioned, in allowance of a
Classical and Synodall government, may be duly pondered; and then let any
indifferent Reader judge, whether I undermine them and blow them up into the
air, etc. while I confirm their testimonies both by word and practice. But
these opposites, Mr Can and his client have so little conscience of truth,
that they have not cared to utter the grossest falsehood, so that they might but
contradict me. Let them remember, Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord.
Prove. 12.22.

SECT. VI.
Touching the Testimonies of Ancient fathers, Councels, and Emperors.
THe Advocate of W.B. not content with the testimonies of men in later times,
leads us back to the testimony of Antiquity, and to the Ages long before. And
though he Chapter pl. p. 89.
confess he had done it already, in mentioning some testimonies of the most
ancient times; yet notwithstanding to show that he stands not for any Novelty,
he professes again, he will show that the best approved Authors, after the
Apostles, are directly with them, in this thing, etc. Those which he alleges
are these, Ignatius, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Eusebius, Athanasius,
Epiphanius, Jerome, Ambrose, Cyrill, Hilarie, Greg. Nazianzen, Augustine,
Chrysostom, Basil, Socrates, Isidorus, Bernard. And with these he also makes
mention of some Counsels and Christian Emperors.

For answer hereunto, First in general it is to be observed, that the thing
which he here pretends to prove, viz. that every particular visible Church of
Christ, has power to exercise Ecclesiastical government, and all other Gods
spiritual ordinances, in and for itself immediately from Christ; this comes
short of the question betwixt us. For this being granted, it does not follow
hereupon that the power of Classes and Synods is an undue power, or that
particular Churches may not therefore stand under the authority of another
superior Ecclesiastical judicatory out of themselves. This their inference
will never be made good from such a ground. This beggarly consequence I have
often P. 145, 146, 149. etc.
refuted before.

To come more particularly unto the testimonies of these Authors, which he
promises to set down according to the times in which they lived: And to
begin first with Ignatius; from him he alleges that it was then the manner
of visible Churches Ad Philadelph. ad Magnes. ad Trall.
to come together in one place, to worship God* having Bishops, Elders and
Deacons unto their Officers, whom the people freely chose by voices, or lifting
up of hands. I answer: 1. All that is here said being granted, it follows not
that they were independent, and refused to submit their controversies to the
judgment of other Churches assembled in Synods. Ignatius being Minister of the
Church of Antiochia in Syria, which had of old submitted their controversy to
the Synod held at Jerusalem, Act. 15. what reason is there to think they
forgot their old practice, approved by the Apostles themselves? 11. Though it
be probable, and we injudgement of charity are bound to think that the
Officers, Bishops, Elders, and Deacons of this Church were chosen with the free
consent of the people, according to the direction of the Apostles; yet is not
so much specifyed in any of those three Epistles here mentioned in the margin,
and therefore are they vainly alleged for the proof thereof. III. Ignatius
laboring for the peace and establishment of the Church of Antiochia after his
death, desired the Church of Philadelphia Epist. ad Philadel. p. 76. edit.
Paris. 1562.
to choose a Bishop, which being sent thither as an Ambassador in the
Embassage of God, it might be granted unto them to glorify God in their meeting
together. He speaks there not of choosing a Bishop to minister in their own
Church, but of choosing one to be their Deputy, to travel unto the Synod or
meeting in Antiochia for settling of order in that Church. And in the same
place to moove them the more, he shows what was the practice of the Primitive
Churches in such cases, viz. that always the neighbor Churches did send
Bishops, and some of them Elders and Deacons. Again, writing upon the same
occasion unto Polycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna, he says Epist. ad Polyc. p. 97* 98.
It was meet to gather a Synod comely in the Lord, and choose some dearly
beloved and diligent person, which might be called Theodromos, [or one that
should run for God,] who might travel into Syria, and thereby celebrate
their diligent love to the praise of God. And using many arguments to commend
that business unto him as the work of God, he entreats Polycarpus that he
would write unto other Churches, that they would do the same thing; that they
which were able would send men to travel on foot, that others would send their
letters to be conveyed by such as Polycarpus should send thither. From these
testimonies of Ignatius, Mr Parker Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c. 24. p. 356.
concludes that in those times, according to the practice of the Reformed
Churches with us, neighbor Churches were combined together as it were
Classically, for the mutual communication of offices. And whereas D. Bilson
Perpet. Gov. c. 7.
confesses that it was the manner of that time, if any Church was tossed with
waves of discord, that neighbor Churches round about did send a Bishop, Elder
or Deacon for appeasing that tempest: Mr Parker inferres justly thereupon, If
neighbor Churches had right or authority in compounding of strifes, why not
also in moderating of elections? His conclusion in the same place is, Let this
very right in compounding strife be a sufficient authorization for our Classes.
Thus then it is apparent that Ignatius was not directly with Mr Can, as he
boasts, but his meaning has been manifestly perverted contrary to his words.

Tertullian, that is next alleged (though misalledged, c. 29. being put for c.
39.) relating the manner of Christian assemblies in his time, says in effect,
Apol. c. 39.
They came together into the Congregation [it is not said into one
Congregation, as Mr C. alleges it] for to pray unto God, for to rehearse the
Divine Scriptures, and with holy words yo nourish faith, stir up hope, and
fasten confidence. And they used exhortations, reproves and divine Censure. I
answer: I. Though particular Churches met together for such end, this hinders
not but that the Deputies of those same Churches might meet together in Synods,
for their mutual assistance in the judgment of more weighty and difficult
causes. It follows not because several Congregations have their due power,
that therefore the power of Classes is an undue power. II. that Tertullian
himself intended no such thing, it appears evidently by the great approbation
and commendation which he gives unto Synods, in saying, De Jejunus advers.
Psychi. c. 13
The appointed Synods are kept through the countries of Graecia in certain
places out of all the Churches, whereby both the deeper or more difficult
matters are handled in common, and by that representation of the whole
Christian flock they are celebrated with great reverence.

He alleges the words of Origin, writing much to the same purpose, In Jos.
Hom. 7.
Such as were brought in the third place, for sin unto the Congregation; if
they stood obstinate, by the judgment of the whole Church were excommunication
from the body, the Elders of the Church pronouncing the sentence. And then in
his own words he says, Chapter pl. p. 90.
Observe here, he says not that the matter was carried to a Classis, and there
first determined, etc. but names only the Congregation, and Elders thereof;
notwithstanding had there been any such superior judicatorie Assembly, it is
likely he would have omitted it, and mentioned a subordinate and inferior one.
ANSVV. I. The words which they allege in another letter in Origens name, as if
they had been his speech verbatim described, are not his words. He neither
speaks of men brought unto the Church, nor of the judgment of the Church, nor
of Elders pronouncing the sentence: he shows how all the people might be
polluted by the sin of one man, when the Briefts which rule the people being
unmindefull of priestly severity do not rebuke, nor take away evil from them,
nor make him as a Publicane and Heathen which has despised the admonition of
the Church; but not in such words and form of speech as Mr Can faineth. II.
All that Origin there speaks is not repugnant to Classical government: all
that he there requires is daily performed by the Churches among us, which
stand under the government of Classes and Synods. Obstinate offenders having
their names and offenses diverse times published before the whole Congregation,
are with the consent thereof excommunicated, by the judgment of the Eldership
going before. III. If Origin in his writings had expressly denied the
authority of Synods, it had been of no great weight against the general
judgment of other ancient Fathers; the rather, seeing his writings are
rejected and condemned by so many, especially by Epiphanius and Hieronie, the
Authors hereafter alleged by Mr Can. And see how vain many of his glosses
were even touching this point. Speaking of the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
Mat. 16. he there tells us of many keys to open several gates in heaven^
that Orig in Mat. 16.
Temperance is one key to open the Gate of Temperance in heaven; that Justice
is another key to open another Gate, and so for all other virtues. And
afterward expounding the promise made Matt. 18.18. touching binding and
loosing in heaven, and comparing it with the promise made unto Peter Mat.
16.19. because a word of the plural number is used in the promise to Peter,
(...), in coelis, and to others a word of the singular number, (...), in coelo;
Origin from thence Idem in Mat. 18.
teaches us this Doctrine, that Peter did bind and loose in all heavens,
whereas some others did but bind and loose in one heaven. And therefore he
concludes, Look how much better he is that binds, by so much is he that is
bound, bound in more then one heaven: and by how much better he is that
loses, by so much the more blessed is he that is loosed, because he is loosed
in all the heavens. Such are many of the interpretations of Origin. IV. As Mr
Can misalledgeth Origin to impugn the authority of Classes and Synods; so
other more learned and judicious Writers allege him on the contrary for proof
thereof. D. Whitaker to vindicate the authority of Synods against the Papists,
and to prove their power above the Pope, argues De Co^c. qu. 5. p. 183.
from the greater assistance of the Holy Ghost, and of Christ governing his
Church, to wit, in Synods: and for declaration hereof brings the testimony of
Origin, noting upon Romans 15. that it is said to none of the Apostles
singularly, and to none of the faithful, I will be with thee; but unto a
multitude of Churches plurally, I will be wish you. And Mr Parker Pol. Eccl. l.
3. c. 12. p. 89, 90.
from him repeateth again the same Argument, taken from the testimony of
Origin. And besides this it is noted by the Cent. 3. c. 9.
Magdeburgenses how Origin himself was employed in diverse Synods in Arabia, for
the conviction of sundry heresies.

Cyprian is in like manner perverted: for when as he Lib. 3. Epist. 14. and 10.
reprooving those Elders that without consent either of the people, or of their
Pastor, had rashly received unto the Communion again such as were fallen and
become Apostates, before their due confession of fault, does show that such
things ought not to be concluded without common consent of the Church; and
confesses also that L. 1. ep. 4
the people chiefly have power to choose worthy Ministers, and to refuse
unworthy ones; this we also assent unto, while that power is used aright. But
in the same place he gives a clear testimony for the warrant of Synods in
deciding of weightier causes, when in that Synodall Epistle written by Cyprian.
Caecilius. Primus. Polycarpus, and many others, in the name of the Synod then
assembled together, it is said, that Art. 6, 7.
it is to be observed and held by divine Ordinance and Apostolical
observation, which is also kept among us, and almost through all the Provinces,
that for the right performing of ordination, all the next Bishops of that
Province are to assemble together unto that people to which an Overseer is
ordained, etc. And of this practice he there gives an instance in the
ordination of Sabri^^, and in the deposition of Basilides, and shows the
reason thereof, that by the suffrages of the whole b^^therhood, and by the
judgment of those Bishops, which were presently assembled together, the office
of a Bishop might be conferred upon him, and that hands might belayd upon him
instead of Basilides. And besides this, we find there many Cypt. L. 1. ep. 2.
and 5 Firmil. ad Cyp. Ep. 75. p. 236.
other pregnant evidences of the use, necessity and authority of Synods in
those times. From thence S. Go^^^^tius in his answers to Pa^dius his
annotations on Cyprian, does P. 243. ad annot. 14
confirm the liberty of Churches in maintayning yearly their Provincial
Synods, etc. From thence also Mr Parker confirms the use of Classical
government in these Reformed Churches, and concludes, Pol. Ecc. l. 3. c. 24. de
Classib. p. 356, 357.
Why do I spend time? There is nothing more evident to him that is acquainted
with the ancient monuments of history, then that neighbors (even besides the
Synod) did eftsoone meet together for deciding of strifes, for ordinations, for
dissolving of doubts, and in sum, for every meighty business. Of which
assemblies the Epistles of Cyprian are full. And these assemblies what are they
else but Classical assemblies? And again in the same place; Hereof we have
examples every where in the Epistles of Cyprian. A little after, Who sees not
here the lively portraiture of our Classes? And, Oh how does the Hierarchy
offend which has banished this most pleasant combination of Classes? Hereby
the Reader may judge whether it be not an absurd and senseles boasting of Mr
Can, who oppugning this Classical government, is not ashamed to say of
Cyprians testimony in these Epistles, What can be more full and absolute to our
purpose then this? With what judgment does this man read the writings of the
Fathers?

It is said in the Chapter pl. p. 90.
next place, Eusebius testifyeth that the Churches of the most famous Cities
were in their constitution first, but one ordinary constant Congregation, as
Jerusalem Eus. l. 3.11.
, Ephesus L. 3.28.
, Alexandria 3.13.
, Hierapolis 4.1.
, Corinth 3.32.
, Sardis 4.22.
, etc. This being so, then it follows, that primitively they were independent;
and stood not under any other Ecclestasticall authority, out of themselves. In
the allegation of these testimonies out of Eusebius, there be diverse mistakings
and faylings of memory or attention; Hierapolis with reference to L. 4.1. where
it is not mentioned, but in L. 3.32. Corinth with reference to L. 3.32. where
it is not found, but after in L. 4.22. Sardis alleged with reference to L.
4.22. where there is no mention at all thereof, but there is such a mention of
Athens as is intended for Sardis. These slips of memory are to be noted for
help of the Reader that would examine the places, but may well be excused in
such a number of quotations. To leave them and to come unto the great abuses
here to be observed; I. In all the places here alleged, Eusebius does not
testify that the Churches of these Cities, were in their constitution first,
but one ordinary constant Congregation; he has no such words. He gives unto
them the name and title of a Parish; but it is not proved that in every Parish
there was but one ordinary constant Congregation. Whether they were so or not,
this title of Parish proves is not. II. The consequence made from hence is more
evidently false: for to admit these Churches were at the first but one ordinary
constant Congregation, yet does it not at all follow that therefore primitively
they were independent, and stood not under any other Ecclesiastical authority
out of themselves. Both our English Church here, and generally other Reformed
Churches in these countries were in their first constitution, and for the most
part still are but one ordinary Congregation; and yet from the first stood
under the Ecclesiastical authority of Classes and Synods, in which they were
combined. III. Suppose some of the Churches either in Eusebius time or in later
times, did not at their first constitution stand under the authority of Synods,
when Churches being so few, and so far distant, they wanted opportunity of
combining themselves together for their mutual assistance; this hinders not
but that upon the increase of neighbor Churches they might afterward submit
themselves unto this order. IV. That the Primitive Churches whereof Eusebius
writes in his history, did stand under another Ecclesiastical authority out of
themselves, and were subject unto their censures, he makes it evident by sundry
instances. He Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 14.
records how the error of Montanus was judged and condemned by many Synods in
Asia: how L. 6. c. 42.
Novatus and the Catharists were excommunicated by a Synod holden at Rome,
consisting of 60 Bishops, with many Elders and Deacons: how L. 7. c. 29.
Paulus Samosatenus was deposed and excommunicated by a Synod holden at
Antioch. He declares De vita Constable. l. 3. c. 6, 7, etc.
at large and celebrates the piety of Constantine, the great friend and
maintainer of Christian religion, for assembling the Nicene Synod, wherein
Arius was condemned. And in like manner he shows the Ibid. l. 1. c. 44.
impiety of the Emperor Licinius, the enemy of God, who by a mischievous
devise sought to ruinate the Churches of God by depriving them of their liberty
in meeting together in Synods, for deciding of their controversies. So
expressly and clearly does Eusebius give testimony unto Synods.

That which is collected out of Athanasius, viz. that elections,
excommunications, etc. according to the Apostles precept, ought to be done in
the public Congregation by the Ministers, they taking first the peoples voice
or consent; is such as I do willingly assent unto. Neither was there ever any
election, either of Minister, Elder, or Deacon, nor any excommunication of any
offender among us, but that the matter was first solemnly communicated with
the Church, and declared several times in the public Congregation, and the
consent of the people required and obtained before any such act was confirmed
and finished among us. But what is this to the purpose? Athanasius
notwithstanding this does witness unto us, that the causes and controversies
of particular Churches, were in his time submitted to the censure of other
Churches, and to another superior Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves.
This Athanasius shows in these very places here alleged against me: And in
the first of them, having Tom. 1. Epist. ad ubiq. Orthodoxos.
made a lamentable narration of the miseries procured to the Church of
Alexandria by the intrusion and cruelty of an Arian Bishop, he then most
vehemently supplicates unto those that were members of the same body with them
in other Churches, that as the former year their brethren at Rome were willing
to have called a Synod, but that they were hindered; so they having greater
occasion to vindicate the Church of God from new evils, would [(...)] by their
suffrages condemn, and reject the Authors of such mischiefs. And more
plainly in the 2d place, he declares Epist. ad Solit. vitam agentes.
at length that in the Synod holden at Sardica, where Hosius was President, and
whither the accusers of Athanasius were cited, the cause being heard, the Synod
did not only advise and counsel what was meet to be done, but did give
sentence touching the matters of controversy, absolved Athanasius, and deposed
the Bishops that were found guilty, such as Stephanus, Menophantus, Acacius,
Georgius, Vrsacius, Valens, Theodorus, Narcissus. As for the third allegation [
Epist. cont. Nicae. c. 9. Ecc. Hist.] it seems to be misquoted: I find no
such Title in all the works of Athanasius. Instead thereof therefore, let us
see another testimony of his, wherein he teaches what the government of the
Church was in those times, namely ruled by authority of Synods, where the
weightier causes were judged and decided. Of this he Tom. 2. Epist. ad Rusinian.
gives instances in the Synods of Alexandria, Greece, and Spain, where
Euzoius, Eudoxius, and such principal offenders were deposed from their
offices, and other upon their repentance retained. And the like Ecclesiastical
authority is in many other places throughout his writings by him commended unto
us. Let us hear how Mr C. proceeds.

I. C. To these we will add Epiphanius, Jerome, Ambrose, Cyrill, Hillarie and
Greg. Nazianzen; writers in noe age. Touching Ecclesiastical Government, these
to this purpose speak: Particular Churches may lawfully ordain their own
Bishops, without other Presbyters assisting them; Epiph. cont. Haer. 73. and
among themselves excommunicate offenders. Id. l. 1. Haeres. 30. Tom. 2. Haer.
5. ANSVV. I. Here be three places at once misalledged: In the two latter, viz.
Haer. 30. and Haer. 5. there is nothing at all spoken touching this point. In
the first of them, viz. Haer. 73. he does but catch at a shadow, and pervert
the words of Epiphanius, and falsify them, by changing some and adding other,
and omitting other that might give light unto the question. His words upon
occasion of Meletius his confession and suffering for the truth, are these;
There are many people of this order of this Synod, which setting Bishops over
themselves, do make a mavelous confession touching the faith, and do not
reject the word Coessentiall. Yea and say they are ready, if there were a
perfect Synod, to confess and not to deny it. Here is no mention of particular
Churches or Congregations; nor of lawfully ordayning, nor of doing this without
other Presbyters assisting them. But that which is recorded touching the
acknowledgement of a lawful or perfect Synod, that is omitted. Thus he varyeth
from the Latin translation of Epiphanius: the Original Greek in diverse Copies
is further from the matter; having this beside other differences, (...), which
made themselves to be Bishops, instead of lawfully ordaining their own
Bishops. Such are the Allegations of Mr Can. II. Suppose the words Epiphanius
had been the same that Mr C. relates, yet had not the authority of Synods been
any thing diminished thereby. Is it not the common and ordinary practice in
these Reformed Churches, that where two or more Ministers are in one
Congregation, there the newly elected Ministers are ordained and confirmed
without any other Presbyters from other Churches to assist them? Yet this is no
good argument to prove they want Classes and Synods. And though also they do
among themselves excommunicate offenders; yet this hinders not but that Classes
or Synods may exercise their authority in judging or censuring such as have
unjustly excommunicated any, or proceeded contrary to their advise therein.
III. That Epiphanius did approve the authority and jurisdiction of Synods, it
is manifest by his practice. It is Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 9.
recorded of him that he being Bishop of Salamis or Constantia in Cyprus,
procured a Synod to be called in that Island, wherein the books of Origin were
condemned, and a decree made that none should read his books. IV. Epiphanius
did not only approve the lawful authority of Synods; but he went further and
did maintain the unlawful authority of particular persons over diverse
Churches. This appears in his Epiph. Haer. 75.
condemning of Aerius of heresy, that held Bishops and Presbyters to be the
same by divine institution; whom D. Whitaker De Pont. Romans q. 1. p. 104, 105,
106.
does justly defend against Bellarmine and others, and shows that Hierome and
other ancient Fathers were of the same mind with Aerius therein; and says
that we are not to regard the absurd men that do so often object Aerius unto
us: he says Epiphanius does foolishly and childishly answer the testimonies
produced by Aerius, and wonders that such a Divine that took upon him to
refute all Heretics, did not see his own foul error. Yea it is further
Soc. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 11.13.
recorded of Epiphanius, that he disorderly intruded himself into the charge of
Chrysostom, contrary to the Ecclesiastical Canons observed in those times, by
celebrating the Lords supper and ordaining a Deacon in the Church at
Constantinople. And thus we see Mr Cannes witnesses are in extremity opposite
unto himself.

Another of his witnesses is Jerome, from whom he alleges, that Jer. ad. Gal.
q. 10.
In every Congregation there ought to be a Senate or assembly of Elders. To
this I answer, I. This is nothing against the authority of Synods. The Reformed
Churches have in every Congregation such a Senate of Elders: and yet this
hinders not but that they have and ought to have Classes and Synods also, both
for direction and correction of Elderships, and for decision of the
controversies arising in particular Churches. II. Though every Congregation
ought to have a Senate of Elders; yet Jerome does not avouch so much in the
place alleged. His words are falsified: for in the place which they misquote (
ad Gal. instead of ad Alg.) the words of Jerome are these, Ad Algas. qu. 10.
How great the traditions of the Pharisees are, which at this day they call
(...), and what old wives fables, I cannot express. For neither does the
greatness of the book permit: and many of them are so filthy, that I blush to
tell. And yet (says he) I will tell one of them, to the ignominy of that
envyous nation. They have Rulers in their Synagogues, of their wisest men,
deputed unto a filthy work, etc. What this filthy work was, though Jerome
express it, yet I think it shame to publish. And this which he says in
detestation of the Jews, without approbation of their order, is all that he
there says for an assembly of Elders. So vain and insufficient are the
Allegations of Mr Can. III. That Hierome allowed the authority of Synods
above particular Churches, it may appear by that he says, Ad Euagriu ep. 85.
Si authoritas quaeritur, orbis major est urbe. If we seek for authority,
greater is the world then the city; that is, as D. Whitaker expounds the same,
the Churches dispersed through the world: he says, De Pont. Romans qu. ^. p. 9^,
99.
All the authority of the Church of Rome, is not so great as is the authority
of all Churches every where. And thereby he acknowledges the authority of
Synods arising from the deputation of many Churches, to be greater then the
single authority of any one particular Church. Besides, whereas Damasus, Bishop
of Rome, was a zealous opposite to the Arian, Macedonian, and other heresies,
and in diverse Synods furthered the censure and condemnation of such as
persisted in those errors, and wrote diverse Synodicall Epistles which witness
the exercise of that authority by Synods, Hierome Ad Gerontiam.
confesses that in the writing of those Synodall letters he did assist and
help Damasus, which he could not with good conscience have done, unless he had
allowed the authority of Synods. Lastly, if Hierome wrote that in every
particular Congregation there ought to be a Senate or assembly of Elders; then
is Mr Can and his Congregation condemned by Hierome, because they have now
for many years had no Senate nor assembly of Elders, to govern them; Mr Can
being sole governor of them, without an Eldership.

In the next place, touching this assembly of Elders, he adds, that The power
of choosing them is in the people. And for this he alleges three Authors
together, Ad Rust. Hill. ad Co^st. August. Cyr. in Ioh. 20.21.
Hierome, Hilarie, Cyrill. I answer: For Hierome, ad Rusticum; there is nothing
at all spoken touching the matter, but he is falsely alleged. For Hilary, I.
He is also falsely alleged: he says nothing touching the Senate or assembly
of Elders, of which Mr C. speaks. II. Though he entreat Constantius the Arian
Emperor, who had banished many worthy Bishops, that he would permit the people
to hear those Teachers and Ministers of the Sacraments, whom they would, whom
they thought good, and whom they had chosen, that they might offer up prayers
for his safety and felicity; yet does he not hereby prejudice the authority and
jurisdiction of Synods. This hinders not but that Synods might censure and
judge of the elections made by the people, and of other controversies of
particular Churches. III. Hilary also Cent. Magdeb. Cent. 4. c. 10 col. 1134,
1135.
wrote a peculiar book touching Synods, exstant among his works, which he had
translated out of Greek into Latin, wherein the Acts and decrees of diverse
Synods that censured and condemned the Arian heresy, are recorded. Had he
thought with my opposites, that this jurisdiction of Synods had been an usurped
and unlawful power; he ought not to have given so much approbation of them, in
alleging their authority for defense of his opinion, without some
testification against their power. Besides, what color of reason has Mr C. to
show that Hilarious should vary from the judgment of Orthodox Bishops, who in
that age Ib. Cent. 4. c. 7. col. 519. and 528 etc.
ordinarily used to meet together in Synods for the exercise of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction?

For Cyrill in Ioh. 20.21. whom he also brings to prove that the Senate or
assembly of Elders, ought to be chosen by the people, he is in like manner
abused and falsely alleged by him. For I. Cyrill upon those words of Christ,
As the Father has sent me, so send I you: says that Christ in those words
ordained the Teachers of the world, and Ministers of the divine mysteries, etc.
That therefore Paul is true, saying, No man takes this honor unto himself,
etc. Heb. 5. etc. He shows how Christ called his Disciples, but has not a
word, neither touching an assembly of Elders, nor of their choosing by the
people. Such falsehood and forgery there is in the Allegations of Mr C. And yet
if he had spoken as much as is here pretended, it had been no empeachment unto
the authority of Synods, as was showed before. II. That this Cyrill, Bishop of
Alexandria, did acknowledge the use of Synods, not only for counsel and
admonition, but for censure and judgment of causes, it appears evidently by
his practice, while in the Euagr. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 4.
Synod holden at Ephesus, in the time of Theodosius, he being a principal
member of that Synod, did together with others give sentence against Nestorius,
and deposed him from his office, for his obstinacy in refusing to appear
before them, and for his heresy whereof he had been convicted.

The next witness abused by him is Ambrose, who is alleged to show what the
Senate or assembly of Elders is to do, viz. Amb. Offi. l. 1. c. 1
These with spiritual bridles order men, etc. I answer: I. In the place
alleged, there is not a word to be found, either touching a Senate of Elders,
or touching spiritual bridles, or any thing to like purpose. II. If a Senate
of Elders be spiritual bridles, then the Brownists with Mr C. that now want
such a Senate, are an unbridled company, wanting order, etc. III. What though
an assembly of Elders order men with spiritual bridles? Is there therefore no
other spiritual bridle in the authority of Synods? What consequence is this?
IV. That Ambrose did allow the authority and jurisdiction of Synods, it
appears, both by his practice, he Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 9.
himself being present with Damasus, Britto, Valerian and other Bishops at the
Synod holden at Rome for the censure of Apollinaris and Timotheus his disciple;
and by his Amb. Tom. 3. epi. l. 10. ep. 78. ad Theoph.
exhortation given unto Theophilus and others, to judge the cause of Euagrius
and Flavianus, being deputed thereunto by the Synod of Capua: and again by his
Ib. Epi. 79. ad Theoph. and Anys.
exhortation given unto Theophilus and Anysius, that they being chosen by the
same Synod of Capua, would give sentence touching Bonosus and his accusers,
forasmuch as the Synod had give^ this authority unto them, and they did now
supply the place thereof.

With Ambrose he joins In orat. fun. de patr.
Nazianzen, to testify also that a Senate or assembly of Elders do with
spiritual bridles order men. But in the place alleged I find no such
testimony as is mentioned: and therefore the three first answers made before
unto the testimony from Ambrose, may also serve for Nazianzen. And further that
Gregory Nazianzen did not limit all Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction unto
a particular Congregation only, it may appear, if we observe, I. How Soc.
Hist. Ecc. l. 4. c. 21. Sozom. Hist. Ecc. l. 6. c. 17.
he himself was made Bishop of Constantinople, by the suffrages of many Bishops
met together, which is a further degree of Ecclesiastical authority then that
which is exercised in the Classes or Synods of these countries. II. How he
pleads Nazian. Epist. 1. ad Clidon.
from a Synodall law, touching the receyving of those that were fallen. III.
How he allows the order of convocating and assembling neighbor Bishops about
the creating of a new Bishop, affirming this to be Epi. 30. ad Caesarie^.
right and according to the Ecclesiastical law. IV. How he in his counsel and
exhortation unto the Synod at Constantinope, Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 8.
asscribes unto them authority and power for his own dimission and
translation, for the setting of another unblameable Bishop in his place, and
thereby withal for the deposition and abdication of Maximus, which was
accordingly performed.

That which might with more color be objected out of Nazianzen against the use
of Synods, and which is also alleged both by Mr Can and by Mr Davenp. though
not directly against the authority of Synods, is yet so brought in by the way
as might cause a simple Reader to stumble thereat. The words of Nazianzen, as
Mr Can Chapter pl. p. 93.
alleges them, are these, Ep. 42. ad Procop.
I am minded (says he) to shun all assemblies of Bishops, because I never
saw any good event in any Council, that did not rather increase then diminish
our evils: Their contention and ambition passes my speech. ANSVV. I. Observe
how Mr C. mistranslateth those words of Nazianze^, (...), which he renders, as
signifying, passes my speech; whereas they signify: prevayled more then
reason, as Apo. tep. p. 225.
Mr Dav. does rightly translate them. But it is no wonder that Mr Can should
mistake that which some more learned have done before. Grosser faults are more
common with him. II. As for the testimony of Nazianzen, the answer of D.
Whitaker may give sufficient satisfaction; who says, De Co^c. qu. 1. c. 3. p.
13.14, 15.
It may seem strange that Nazianzen denies he had seen a good issue of any
Synod. For in those two Synods, [viz. of Nice and Constantinople, which had
been mentioned before,] truth got the victory, and heresy was put down. And
though it be certain, that Arianisme was increased and grew strong and
troubled the Church after the Synod of Nice, more then before, yet that is not
to be imputed to the Synod, but to the contention and ambition of men. For as
our corrupt nature does more vehemently resist the known law of God, and
rusheth headlong unto sin: so falsehood opposed itself more boldly unto the
truth then explained and openly defended, whereupon after that Synod, which
none excelled, greater inco^modities did arise from the wickedness of men, etc.
When Nazianz. saw so wicked dispositions of men, he was wholly turned from
Councels. Although without doubt he disallowed not the thing itself, but the
wicked endeavors of men. Now if any will reason after this manner, The issue
of Synods is not good, or more evils follow thence; therefore Synods are to be
avoided: that man shall dispute deceitfully from a wrong cause, from accident,
and from the fallacy of consequent. But Nazianzen was to be pardoned, because
he lived in the worst and most turbulent times of the Church, when by means of
Valens the Emperor that degenerated from the Catholic faith, Heretics did
more prevayle, etc. Again he opposes Augustine unto Nazianzene, and says, It
is most true which Augustine says, Epist. 118. that the authority of Synods in
the Church of God is most wholesome, which certainly he would not have said, if
he had been of the same mind with Nazianzen. And further he opposes unto the
speech of Nazianz. the testimony of Christ, saying, Christ himself pronounces
and promises, Matt. 18.20. Where two or three are assembled together in his
name, there he will be in the midst of them. In which words he signifies that
the assemblies and Synods of godly and religious men, undertaken and appointed
for godly causes, are not displeasing unto him. III. The testimony of Nazianzen
is as much against the opinion of Mr Can and Mr Dav. as against that which we
hold touching Classes and Synods. For seeing they allow such meetings for
counsel and admonition, though not for exercise of any jurisdiction; and
seeing the testimony of Nazia^. does extend itself to all kind of assemblies
of Bishops, [(...)] whether for counsel or censure, without exception of one
sort more then another: therefore he no more condemns our Synods, then those
which my opposites allow.

Augustine, his next witness, is in like manner perverted as the former.
Though he in the place DeDoct. Chr. l. 1. c. 17.
objected, do write that the keys were given to the Church; yet does he not
thereby exclude Synods gathered together in the name of Christ, from having a
keye of power in the judgment of Ecclesiastical causes. Had he proved that
the title of the Church belongs only to a particular Congregation in the full
assembly thereof, and not at all unto a Synod, then had it been something to
the purpose; in the mean time, nothing. And that the mind of Augustine was
otherwise, it appears by the great approbation which he Epist. ad Ianuar. Ep.
118. De Bapt. cont. Don. l. 2. c. 3.
gives unto the use and authority of Synods, as being most wholesome in the
Churches of God. D. Whitaker DePont. Romans q. 4. p. 484. and 497
alleges often the presence of Augustine at diverse Synods. And it is recorded
in the Acts of the third Council of Carthage, where Augustine was both
present, and subscribed with the rest unto the decrees which were then agreed
upon, Magdeb. Cent. 4. c. 9. co. 866, 867.
that there should be kept a yearly Synod, unto which they were to repair out
of diverse Provinces; that those which having controversies with others, being
called unto the yearly Synod, did refuse to come, should be held guilty, and
be excluded from the communion, or excommunicated. And it is Ib. Col. 870, etc.
noted further that the like decrees were made at another Synod held at Hippo,
the place where Augustine lived, and that the same decrees were again
confirmed by another Synod at Carthage. Hence it appears that Augustine as
well as others in his time, did hold that the causes of particular
Congregations were to be judged and decided by another Ecclesiastical
authority out of themselves.

After Augustine he alleges Chrysostom, whose name is also abused for
confirmation of this opinion. For, I. Chrysostom in the place alleged, viz.
De Sacerd. l. 3. c. 4. speaks of no such matter as he pretends. In that whole
third book I find no one word against the authority of Synods. And for the
fourth chapter, which Mr C. alleges, there is in the best editions of
Chrysostom no such chapter; they are not at all distinguished into any
Chapters: and where there is a division of Chapters found, yet there is no such
matter to be found in that fourth Chapter. Mr Can, it seems, never read the
Authors he alleges: for would he then have so falsely cited them? II.
Chrysostom is plain for the authority of Synods. For speaking of the honor
due unto the Deputies or messengers of the Churches in Synods, he says the
Apostle, In 2. Cor. 8.24.
makes his speech more terrible, saying in the sight of the Churches. He says
it for the glory of the Churches, for their honor. For if ye honor them, ye
shall honor the Churches which sent them, etc. And then he concludes, This
shall be no small matter, for great is the power of a Synod, that is, of the
Churches. III. When as a wrongful sentence had been given against Chrysostom,
being unjustly procured by Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, he then Tom. 5.
Epist. ad Innocent.
appealed unto a Synod of many Bishops, both before and after the sentence was
pronounced. The sum of his defense afterward was this, that he was willing to
be judged by a Synod. And he complains that his adversaries dealt with him,
contrary to the Ecclesiastical Canons. In those Canons it had been often
decreed, that there should be liberty of appeal unto Synods. IV. When
Bellarmine pleading for the Popes authority, alleged the request of
Chrysostom unto Innocentius, Bishop of Rome, desiring him to write for him,
that those things which were unjustly done against him, might not prevayle,
etc. Chamierus expounding the words of Chrysostom, Panstra. Cath. Tom. 2. l.
13. c. 23
distinguishes betwixt admonition and giving of sentence; and shows that
Chrysostom desired an admonition should be given by Innocentius, but that he
exspected sentence from a Synod. Chamier says, this is confirmed to be his
meaning, because he appealed to the Synod, etc. And hereby he expressly and
distinctly confesses that Synods have jurisdiction to give sentence, and not
only a liberty of admonishing. V. When after this, Chrysostom Socr. Hist.
Eccl. l. 6. c. 14.
having been both deposed from his place, and banished out of the city, was yet
called back by the Emperor from his banishment, and was by the people desired
to enter upon his ministry again, he professed he might not do it, until
his cause was further examined, and he proved innocent by greater judges, or in
a greater judicatory, Edit. gr. R. Steph. l. 6. c. 16.
(...); wherein he acknowledged a power of Synods, not only above a particular
Congregation, but also of one Synod above another, as of a General Synod above
a National or Provincial, etc. VI. The mind of Chrysostom touching
Church Government, may further be known to us by this, that he In Matt. 18.
will have those words, Tell the Church, to be understood of the Presidents or
Governors of the Church. And again, speaking of Priests or Bishops, the
Ministers of the Gospel, he thus describes their special power, De Sacerd.
l. 3. Col. 508. Edit. Basil.
It is granted unto them to dispense the things that are in heaven: power is
given unto them, which God would not have to be given either unto Angels or
Archangels: For it was not said unto them, Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall
be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
Earthly Princes have also the power of binding, but of the bodies only. But
that binding by the Priests whereof I speak, remains unto the soul, and
comes up to the heavens: so that whatsoever the Priests do below, that God
ratifyeth above, and the Lord confirms the sentence of his servants. What else
can you say this to be, but that all power of heavenly things is granted unto
them of God? For the says, Whose sins ye retain, they are retained. What
power, I pray you, can be greater then this one? The next perverted witness is
Basil, touching whom observe, I. Their threefold false allegation, in citing
three several books of his; viz. Constit. Monach. l. 4. 14. and 6.2. and 7.
c. 35. whereas Basil wrote only one book with such a title: and as for the
4th, 6t, and 7th, here mentioned by Mr C. there be none such. What gross
dealing is this? II. Suppose it was the Printers fault that these books were
thus misalledged, and that it was but Mr Cannes oversight to let them pass
without correction: yet even for that one book of Monastical constitutions,
which Basil did write, therein also is nothing to be found against the
authority of Synods, nor any such matter as Mr C. pretends. It is a great
forgery and abuse of the ancient Fathers, thus to pretend the veil of their
authority for covering of error, when as the places pretended have not a word
sounding to such purpose. III. That Basil allowed the authority of Synods for
the judgment of Ecclesiastical causes, it appears both by the praise which
he Basil. Magn. Epi. 60. and 78.
gives unto the Nicene Synod, and that for the censuring of Heretics, which
was an act of jurisdiction, and not of admonition or counsel only: and again
in that he complains unto his great friend Nazianzen, touching the
intermission of Synodall assemblies, and says, Ep. 33.
If we had yearly met oftener together, both according to the ancient Canons,
and according to that care and solicitude which we owe unto the Churches,
certainly we had never opened a door unto slanderers. And again, writing
unto Athanasius touching such meetings, he calls them, E^. 48.
the way of help for troubled Churches. Thus also do the Centurists Cent. 4.
c. 7. col. 522
understand him, and allege his testimony to show the consociation of many
Churches in Synods, in that age.

The Author next objected, is also misalledged: The letter of reference in the
line, leads us unto a book in the margin which was not written by Socrates:
and what place he therefore intends in Socrates, he must tell us another time.
In the mean time, let it be remembered that this Ecclesiastical
Historiographer does plainly and plentifully record against my opposites, that
the causes and controversies arising in particular Churches were judged by
another superior Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves, to wit, by the
authority of many Churches concurring by their Deputies in Synods. This he
shows in the Hist. Ecc. l. 1. c. 5
condemnation of Arius by the Council of Nice; in the L. 2. c. 24.
deprivation of Photinus by the Synod of Si^mium; in the L. 7. c. 33.
deposition of Nestorius by the Council held at Ephesus; and in many other the
like instances. If happily he intended those places misapplyed unto Basil in
the former quotation; he is not thereby excused: seeing in the first place,
viz. l. 4. c. 14. there is nothing at all spoken of this matter; and in the two
latter, viz. l. 6. 2. and 7. 35. Socrates again declares the authority of
Synods in those times.

Isidorus, it seems must own the quotation [Lib. de Offic.] which by the
marginall note is assigned to Socrates; he having written two books concerning
Ecclesiastical Offices. These Mr Can cites at large without specifying
either book or chapter. But in those books of Isidorus, as there be many
things, which Mr C. would not be bound to approve; so there is nothing that
with any show of reason can be applied against the authority of Classes and
Synods. On the contrary, we may justly infer that he did not there restrain
all Ecclesiastical power unto a particular Congregation, as from many other,
so especially from these his words, De Offi. Ecc. l. 2. c. 6
Moreover that a Bishop is not ordained of one, but of all the Bishops of the
Provinces, this is acknowledged to be appointed because of heresies; lest by
the tyrannical authority of some one ordaining, they should attempt any thing
against the faith of the Church. Therefore they all concurring, he is
confirmed, and no less then three being present, the rest consenting by the
testimony of their letters. Again, for other of his writings, to show his
judgment in this point, this Isidorus is Cus. de Conc. Cath. l. 2. c. 3. etc.
said to have made a collection of all the Synods that were before his time;
which book is Council. Tom. 2. p. 146, 147.
alleged in a Synodall Epistle of the Council of Basil, to prove the
authority of Councels above the Pope. For his practice, he is Magdeb. Cent. ^.
col. 261-287. and 513.
recorded to have been President of a Synod at Sevill in Spain, were he was
Bishop, and as some relate, of two other at Toledo, wherein appear diverse
acts of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, in the exercise whereof he joined with
others, after the manner of Synodall proceedings.

Bernard is in like manner misalledged through want of attentio^ and diligence:
not only by a wrong note of reference, but by a defective mention of his
writing, Ad Eugen. For Bernard having written 5 books of Consideration. Ad
Eugen. and besides them more then 30 Epistles Ad Eugen. he does not specify
which of these books, or which of these Epistles he means. But whether we
consider those books, or Epistles, we find Bernard in extremity opposite to
Mr Can, giving power not only unto Synods, as the Ancient Fathers before
mentioned, but even to the Pope himself, to judge the causes of all Churches.
For living in a time of great blindenes, and height of Popery, when the smoke
of the bottomless pit had darkened the Sun and the air, he was led aside
through ignorance to exalt Antichrist; and writing unto Pope Eugenius that had
been his disciple, he gives him these most ambitious titles, and De Co^si. ad
Eugen. l. 2. c. 8.
calls him the great Priest, the supreme High Priest, the Prince of Bishops,
the heir of the Apostles, Abel in primacy, Noah in government, Abraham in
Patriarkship, Melchisedek in order, Aaron in dignity, Moses in authority,
Samuel in judgment, Peter in power, Christ in unction, etc. the only Pastor
of all flocks and of all Pastors themselves, etc. the Vicar of Christ, etc.
And though otherwise he gave many lively testimonies of a godly mind that was
in him, yet not without cause is he Whit. de Pont. Romans q. 4. p. 425.426.
taxed for blasphemy in these unrighteous titles given to the man of sin.
More particularly, in his first Epistle which he wrote unto Eugenius, after he
was created Pope, upon occasion of the controversy that was betwixt the
Archbishop of York, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, he puts this Pope in
mind that he Bernar. ad Eugen. Epist. 237.
has authority to judge the controversies that arise in other Churches, and
wishes him to use the same, and to give unto them according to their works,
that they might know there is a Prophet in Israel. And writing again Ep. 238
of the same matter, he calls the Archbishop of York, that Idol of York, in
regard of his intrusion (he might better have entitled Eugenius the Idol of
Rome)* and provokes the Pope, as having the fullnes of power, to cast his dart,
to give peremptory sentence of deposition against the Arch B. and as the phrase
of Bernard is, to lighten or strike with the thunderbolt of his power. The like
exercise of power over those in other Congregations is often elsewhere Ad Innoc.
Epist. 189, and. 190.
allowed by him. And hereby it may appear how grossly Mr Can has alleged
these ancient Writers, quite contrary to their meaning, and Bernard in
special, that subjects Congregations not only to Councels and Synods, as the
Fathers before alleged have justly done, but does unjustly subject them to one
person, even to the man of sin.

With these testimonies of ancient Fathers Mr Can alleges for his opinion,
that some Councels have granted so much, and Christian Emperors by their Laws
confirmed it. Two of these, viz. the Council of Nice and Constantinople, he
alleges at large, and specifyes no Canon which he intends for this purpose.
And as for the 3d Council of Carthage, whereat Augustine was present, I have
showed Pa. 223.
before that it makes directly for us. That 22th Canon which he alleges, viz.
Magdeb. Cent. 4. c. 9. col. 868.
that no Clerk be or dained without examination by Bishops, and testimony of
the people, empeacheth not the authority of Classes and Synods, but confirms
the order established by them. And that Christian Emperors have by their laws
confirmed the authority of Synods, it is plain and undeniable. The Sulp. Se. v
S. Hist. l. 2
Council of Nice that condemned Arius, was authorized by Constantine the
Great. The Sulp. S. Hist. con^in. ex Sleyd. p. 162.
Council of Constantinople that condemned Macedonius, was authorized by the
Emperor Theodosius the Elder. The P. 164.
Council of Ephesus that condemned Nestorius, was authorized by Theodosius the
younger. The P. 170.
Council of Chalcedon that condemned Eutyches, was authorized by the Emperor
Martianus. And as it was in these first General Councels, so may it be
observed in many other. Instead of the rest, let the Codex Canon. Ecc. Univ.
edit. Christ. Just.
book of Canons suffice, confirmed by Justinian the Emperor; there being
contained in that book many Canons, which ordain that the causes of particular
Churches should be Can. 5* 80, 83, 85.
judged by Synods, and so decided by another superior Ecclesiastical
authority out of themselves. At the end of these Canons there is added the
sanction or decree of Justinian, Novella consti. Just. Imper. 131.
by which he does not only allow them, and give force of laws unto them, but
with an excessive and far greater honor then is due unto them, would have
the four Oecumenicall Councels to be received even as the holy Scriptures. Now
though he offended greatly in this his esteem of them, yet this may serve to
show what little reason Mr Can had to allege the decrees of Councels for his
opinion.

SECT. VII.
Touching the Testimonies of Reformed Churches.
FRom ancient times they come back to the later times of Reformation, and say
Chapter pl. p. 91.
Touching Reformed Churches; if we may take the Confession of their faith, for
testimony, then surely we have their consent also with us. The Churches
consenting with them (as they vainly imagine) are these, according to their
order in alleging of them: The Bohemian Churches, Churches under the
Palsgrave, the Helvetian Churches, the French Churches, Churches of the
Auspurge Confession, of the Low Countries, of Nasovia. But the truth is, both
these and other Reformed Churches, do condemn my oppisites, in allowing of
Synods to judge the causes of particular Congregations.

The Confession of the Bohemian Churches (say they) has these words, Harm.
Conf. c. 14.
The keys (that is, Ecclesiastical Government) are given in trust, and
granted to the Pastors, and to each several Ecclesiastical society, (that
is, ordinary Congregation) whether they be small or great. I answer: I. This
testimony is clipped by Mr Can, who leaves out the words of order, which show
their opinion touching the original and derivation of this power: The words of
this Bohemian Confession, are that the keys of the Lord, or this
administration and power of the keys is granted and delivered first unto the
Governors and Ministers of the Church, and then unto every Christian
Congregation, etc. Therein they do not consent with Mr Can, but with the
opinion of Mr Baines, noted P. 114, 115.
before. And they do there also apply these words unto absolution given by the
Priest of the Church, as they call him. To this end they allege those places,
Ioh. 20.23. and Luke 10.16. Their meaning is declared more fully before, where
they Harmo. Confess. Art. 5. de Poenit. p. 241. edit. 1612.
teach that the poenitent are to come unto the Priest, and to confess their
sins unto God before him, etc. and to desire absolution of him by the keys
of the Church, that they may obtain remission of sins by such a ministry,
so instituted of Christ. This order seems to agree with that form of
absolution described and appointed in the English book of Common prayer, at
the visitation of the sick. 11. It is acknowledged by the Ministers of the
Church of the Picards (so called) in Bohemia and Moravia, in the P. 219.
preface to the forementioned Confession of their faith, that their fathers had
appealed unto a Synod etc. where if any thing should be found dissonant from
the Scriptures, they were willing from the heart and lovingly to be subject and
obedient to the censure and appointment of the Synod in all things. This shows
their dissent from Mr Can and his people. III. The Combination of the
Christian and Orthodox Churches in Bohemia and Moravia, called by themselves,
The Unity of the brethren in Bohemie, does give a clear testimony unto the
truth touching the authority of Synods, for the government of particular
Churches, and judgment of their causes by a superior Ecclesiastical
authority out of themselves, as appears in the book of their Discipline;
where they Ratio Discip. ordinisq. Ecc. in Unitate frat. Bohem. c. 2. p. 33.34,
and 38.
profess that for weighty causes, in providing for the necessities of the
whole Unity, or some Diocese therein, they use to hold Synods, either
General or Particular, etc. They allege these 5 ends: To confirm brotherly
love and concord: To strengthen them in the work of the Lord: To preserve the
vigor of Discipline: To exclude scandalous persons out of the number of their
Ministers, etc. To ordain Ministers, etc. and for the Ib. p. 41.
examination of Ministers before they be confirmed. The exercise of this
authority is also declared in their Ib. cap. 6. p. 87, 88. etc.
Visitations of the Churches which are in their Unity or consociation. This
example of these brethren of the Unity, is so much the more to be regarded of
us in respect of the singular providence and blessing of God, in preserving
them to this day, in the midst of so many persecutions as they have endured,
being more ancient then other Reformed Churches, having continued from the
days of John Husse, and being helped by the Waldenses that were scattered into
those parts; so that they Ib. pref. p. 2, 3.
were increased to almost 200 little Congregations in Bohemia and Moravia,
about the year 1500, before the time of Luther. Their piety, love, concord,
and zeal of religion, notwithstanding some imperfections, appears by their
orders to be very great; in special, their care of sanctifying the Sabbath,
bestowing it wholly in divine and religious exercises, resorting Ib. cap. 3. p.
54. and 72, 73.
four times a day to the public assemblies of Gods worship, even in the
Winter time, and in Summer, five times a day, etc. The bond of that perfection
which they seek for, and have in some measure attained unto, seems to be their
combination in Synods, and that unity therein whereupon they are denominate.
Their government and the fruits thereof have been such, that many of the
special lights of Christendom, since the time of Reformation, have admited
and commended the same, and sundry of them have wished for the like Discipline
and order in the Churches where they lived; as appears by the testimonies of
Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, Pet. Paulus Vergerius, Beza, Zanchius, Olevian,
Vrsinus, Chytraeus, Pet. Martyr, Calvin, Polanus, Bucholcerus, which
testimonies are P. 106-122.
affixed unto the end of that book of their Discipline. Yea the printing of
this book of their Discipline (according to their common order in such cases)
was not done without the Pref. p. 8. and 16.
authority of a Synod, and namely of that which was celebrated at Lessna in
Poland, anno 1632. they being by the present troubles dispersed abroad into
those parts.

Unto that which he had alleged out of the Bohemian Confession, Mr Can says
the Churches under the Palsgrave likewise consented: and to this end he cites
their Public Catechism in the end of part 2. For answer hereunto; 1. If these
Churches consent unto that which the Bohemian Churches have professed, then
they do not agree with Mr Can. as appears by what has been said in the
foregoing Answers. 11. The place here alleged has nothing touching the
persons to whom the Keys are given, which is the thing for which it is
produced; it speaks only of the use of the Keys, and the ordinary exercise
of Discipline in the Church, without restraining the same unto the sole
jurisdiction of a particular Congregation, or excluding the authority of
Classes and Synods, either for advise and consent before hand, or for the
correcting of abuses committed in the administration of it. And that the power
of a superior Ecclesiastical judicatorie, exercised in such cases, is
agreeable unto the doctrine and practice of the Churches in the Palatinate, may
appear from the testimonies P. 191.192.193.
before noted out of Vrsinus, Tossanus, and Paraeus, Divines of special
eminency in those Churches. III. Whereas it is said in this Catechism, Qu. 85.
concerning Ecclesiastical discipline, that offenders after other admonitions
persisting in their errors and wickedness, are to be made known unto the
Church; lest this should be understood of the whole multitude, it is added
presently, or to them that are appointed for that matter and purpose of the
Church: and if neither then they obey their admonition, are of the same men, by
forbidding them the Sacraments, shut out from the assembly of the Church, etc.
The meaning is, as it is explained Explic. Catech. ad Qu. 85.
by Vrsinus (who also yielded special help for the compiling of that
Catechism) that when any is to be excommunicated, the matter be first heard,
tried, and judged by the whole Presbytery, and that their judgment be
approved by the Church; that it be not undertaken by the private authority of
one alone, or of the Ministers alone. This serves to justify what we teach and
practice, and to condemn both the tyrannical and popular courses of others.
IV. Moreover for the judgment and practice of the Churches in the Palatinate,
concerning the authority of Classes and Synods, which is the point in
controversy, it is to be observed, that all the Ministers which according to
order are there confirmed in the Ministry, are as a Jurie of so many sworn
men, bearing witness against the Independencie of Churches. For at their
ordination they do not only testify and promise by subscription and giving of
of the hand, but withal they do bind themselves by a solemn oath, among the
rest, Churf. Psaltz Kirchendi. bestall. punct. Art. 16.
to obey the Political and Ecclesiastical Laws, the Officers and Inspectors,
there appointed, etc. to refer or submit Church-affaires unto the
Ecclesiastical Senate set over them, etc. and also according to the
appointment of their Inspector, to frequent the Classical assemblies, in
whatsoever place or quarter they are held; willingly and freely to subject
themselves unto the censure of their brethren, to deal faithfully, uprightly,
and quietly in their censures and votes, to do nothing neither for fear nor
favor of any, but what they judge to be profitable for the edification of the
Churches and Schools.

The Confession of the Churches of Switserland or Helvetia, is notably
falsified by Mr C. They confess in the place Confess. Helvet. Art. 16.17.
alleged by him, that the power of the Keys ought to be committed unto select
and fit persons, either by divine or by certain and required suffrage of the
Church, or by the sentence of those to whom the Church has delegated this
office; in which latter disjunction (omitted by Mr C.) they acknowledge another
Ecclesiastical authority besides that of a particular Congregation, about the
election of Ministers. And a little after Art. 19.
this is further declared, when they acknowledge that the faulty are to be
admonished, reprehended, restrained, and those that go further astray, by a
godly agreement of such as be chosen out of the Ministers and Magistrates, to
be excluded by Discipline, or punished by some other convenient means, so long
until they may repent and be saved. Such an Ecclesiastical Senate, it seems,
was among them for the government of particular Churches. And further, the
authority of Synods for such purpose, is likewise specifyed and justified in
the larger Cap. 18. p. 63.
Helvetian Confession. Besides this, we have a particular story hereof related
by Walaeus out of Beza, who records that Ampt der Kercke^dien. p. 214 out of
Bez. Apol. pro Justif. ex sola fide. p. 263. etc.
when a controversy arose at Berne, betwixt Huberus and Abrah. Musculus, the
son of Wolfg. Musculus, touching the doctrine of Praedestination, the Rulers
of Berne, following the order of the Apostles, did appoint a Synod out of all
the Classes within their jurisdiction, who together with the help of other
excellent Teachers, called from Zurich, Basel, Schaphuysen, and Geneva, did
take cognition of the differences, and after due trial according to the word
of God made a conclusion; so that thereby the Churches were brought unto their
former peace.

That which is next alleged by Mr C. from the Confession of the French Art. 30.
Churches, viz. the equality of all true Ministers and Churches, so that none
may arrogate dominion over another, is not at all hindered by that authority
which is exercised in Synods; seeing all the particular Churches united in
Synods, are in like manner and equally subject unto one another, and unto that
which is concluded by all. Yea this equality is confirmed by the Synodicall
decree in this very Article. Whereas there be many evidences of the Reformed
Churches in France, which show what their judgment and practice is touching
the subjection of particular Congregations unto a superior Ecclesiastical
power; yet instead of many, one for the rest may suffice, which is from the
Oordeel en uyrsprake, met den Eed va^ Approbatie va^ het Synod Nation. der
Gereform. Kercke^ van Vrancrijck, gehoude^ tot Ales in de Cevennes, besloten
en^ gearresteert den 6. Oct. 1620.
National Synod of Ales, translated and published in diverse languages,
containing a most pregnant testimony touching this point of our controversy.
Mr C. and W. B. do falsely tell me of a Jury of more then 24 men, which
condemn my position for an error and untrueth: but as we have seen before in
the Ministers of the Palatinate, so lo here again a Jurie indeed of more then
twice 24 men, and of the most choice Ministers and Elders of all the French
Churches, and all sworn to submit unto the resolution and sentence concluded
by authority of that Synod. After a proposition P. 3.^.
made in this Synod by Monsr Turretin, touching some means to hinder the
Arminian Errors: etc. the Assembly liking well of that motion, and much
commending the Synod of Dort, as an effectual remedy to purge the Church, and
to root out the heresies touching the point of praedestination, etc. after
invocation of the name of God they agreed that the Canons of the forenamed
Synod of Dort should be read in their full assembly: which being done, and
every Article seriously weighed, they were then by universal consent approved,
as agreeable to Gods word, etc. Hereupon all the Ministers and Elders deputed
unto this Assembly, did each of them severally swear and protest, that they
consented and accorded with this doctrine, and that they should maintain and
defend it with all their might unto the last breath. And to P. 4.5.
make this concordant agreement the more authentic, and to bind all the
Provinces thereunto, the Assembly ordained that this present Article should be
printed and joined with the Canons of the mentioned Synod, and that the same
should be read in the Provincial Synods, and in the Universities, that there
it might be approved, sworn and subscribed unto by the Ministers, Elders and
Professors of the Universities, as also by those that desired to be admitted
unto the holy Ministry, or unto any Academicall profession. And if P. 5.
any man should reject, either in whole or in part, the doctrine contained in
the foresaid Synod, and defined by the Canons thereof, or should refuse to take
the Oath of consent and approbation, the Assembly ordained that the same should
not be received unto any ministry in the Church, or unto any office of
Schoolemaister.

The form of oath taken first in the National Synod, and afterward to be
taken in the Provincial Synods, was P. 6.
this,

I N. swear and protest before God and this holy Assembly, that I receave,
approve, and embrace the whole doctrine taught and decided in the Synod of
Dort, as being wholly conformed unto the word of God and the Confession of our
Churches. I swear and promise during my life to continue in the profession of
this doctrine, and to defend the same according to my utmost power, and that I
neither in preaching nor teaching in the schools, nor in writing will ever
depart from this Rule. I declare also and protest that I reject and condemn
the doctrine of the Arminians, seeing it does hang the election of God upon the
will of man, diminishes and disannulleth the grace of God, exalts man and the
strength of his free will to cast him down from above, brings in again
Pelagianisme, excuses Popery, and overthrowes the certainty of salvation. So
truly let God help me and be merciful unto me, as I do before him swear
that which is aforesaid, without any equivocation, or evasion, or inward
mental reservation.

After this follows the P. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
subscription of the names of the principal lights and stars of the French
Churches, the Ministers and Elders deputed and sent unto that National Synod
from the Churches in the several Provinces of France, as of Picardie,
Champagne, the French Island, Normandy, Bretagne, Dauphine, Burgundy,
Languedoc, Guienne, Poictou, Aniou, and many others. Hereby the Reader may
perceave what power and authority is exercised in the Reformed Churches of
France; that they do not observe their Synods for to conclude matters by way
of advise and counsel only, but by their decrees and ordinances do bind men
to submit unto their sentence and judgment, excluding those from the
ministry, and professions in Universities or Schools, that refuse to consent
and yield unto their resolutions. Hereby it appears how vainly Mr Can
alleges their Confessions, and perverteth them quite contrary to their
meanings.

That which is alleged out of the Confession of Ausburgh, comes not near the
question betwixt us. For what though it be there affirmed Confess. August. Art.
14.
that no man ought to teach publicly in the Church, or to administer the
Sacraments, unless he be lawfully called? This proves not that calling to be
unlawful, which is directed by an Ecclesiastical authority out of a
particular Congregation; or that Classes and Synods have no right to hinder the
disordred callings of unfit persons, when particular Churches do offend
therein. And that the Authors of that Confession did approve of the authority
of Synods, for the judgment of Ecclesiastical causes, it appears both by
Syntag. Confess. par. 2. p. 7.
their Appeal unto a general, free, Christian Council, which they humbly
request and seek in their preface unto the Emperor, Charles the fifth: and
afterward again, speaking of the means to purge the Church from abuses, they
say that Ib. p. 28.29. Confess. August. Art. 21.
now long ago all good men in all nations do desire a Synod: And further,
This is the usual and lawful way to end dissensions, namely, to refer
Ecclesiastical controversies unto Synods. This manner the Church has observed
even from the Apostles. And the most excellent Emperors, Constantine and
Theodosius, even in matters not very obscure, and in absurd opinions, would yet
ordain nothing without a Synod, that they might preserve the liberty of the
Church in the judgments of doctrines. And it is most honorable for the
Emperor to imitate the example of those the best Princes, etc. And therefore
as in the times of Constantine and Theodosius, particular Churches were subject
unto another superior Ecclesiastical power, that judged their causes and
censured offenders; so they of the Ausburg Confession, desired the like of
Charles the fifth.

The public order set forth in these Low countries, is in the next place
alleged against me. But the Art. 31.
Article of the Belgic Confession which is poynted at, has nothing that
serves their turn against me, neither do they show what clause therein they
intend for their purpose. And what seems most to accord with their former
allegations, I have answered before. But for the Synods of these Countries,
whereas Mr C. says, Chapter pl. p. 91.92.
What those Synods were of whom Mr Paget speaks in page 66. who decreed that
particular Congregations should not practice among themselves, all Gods
ordinances; I do not yet know: but this I know, that no Reformed Church has
made this an Article of their faith. And therefore it is certain, if such a
thing be, it was only the invention of some particular men. It is here to be
observed, 1. That Mr Can falsifyeth my words: that which I said, was this,
Answ. to W.B. p. 66.
When the business is so weighty, that by former general consent of Churches,
testified by their Deputies, meeting together in their Synods, it has been
agreed, that the same shall not be proceeded in without advise of the Classis,
such as is the election of Ministers, the excommunication of offenders, and the
like: that in such cases ordinarily matters are brought unto the Classis, etc.
Now this voluntary agreement, not to proceed without advise of the Classis,
before matters of so great weight were determined, was not to hinder particular
Congregations from the practice of all Gods ordinances among them; but only to
prevent and restrain abuses in the manner of doing, and to direct them for the
better performance thereof among themselves. 11. What those Synods were,
wherein such agreements were made, it had been easy for Mr C. to have known,
if he had used diligence in enquiry and search for them. To help him herein,
let him consider these Kercke^-Ordeninge^ der Gerefo. Nederla^tsc. Kercke^,
Nation. Syno. tot Embde^. An. 1571. Art. 13, 14. and 33, 34. Not. Syn. tot.
Dordr. An. 1578. Art. 4.8. and 99.100. Not. Syn. tot Middelb. An. 1581. Art.
3.4. and 62.63. Not. Syn. in's Graven-Hag. An. 1586. Art, 3.4.5.36,
47.69.70.72. Not. Syn. tot Dordr. An. 1618, and 1619. Art. 3, 4, 11, 12, 76,
77, 79.
plain evidences recorded in diverse Synods; viz. that men shall not proceed to
election or deposition of Ministers, or excommunication of offenders, without
the advice and judgment of a Classical assembly. And besides the decrees of
these National Synods, the like agreements and resolutions have been made in
sundry Provinc. Syn. tot Dordr. An. 1574. Art. 12. Prove. Syn. tot Middelb. An.
1591. Art. 3, 4, 9, 58, 68, 69.
Provincial Synods: so that from time to time, after ripe deliberation and
long experience, these Acts of their Synods have still been renewed and
confirmed, from the beginning of their Reformation even unto this day.

III. Besides these general acts and agreements of several Synods, we have
their practice also for confirmation hereof, to declare that the causes of
particular Churches were judged by another Ecclesiastical authority out of
themselves. Thus it is witnessed, Trigla^d. van de Mother. p. 56.57.
that Caspar Coolhaes was excommunicated by the Provincial Synod of Holland,
holden at Haerlem, Anno 1582. that the cause of Hermannus Herberts was judged,
and he suspended from his Ministry by a particular Synod of South-Holland,
holden in the Haghe. Anno 1591. November. 6. that Cornelius Wiggertsz. was also
judged and excommunicated by a particular Synod of North-Holland, by reason of
the errors holden by him: that Act. Syn. Not. Dordr. An. 1618. Ses. 22.
Nicolaus Grevinchovius, Minister at Rotterdam, was removed from his ministry
by the sentence of the South-Holland Synod holden at Delph: that Ib. pref.
Adolphus Venator, Minister at Alcmaer, that Ioannes Valesius, Ioannes
Rodingenus, and Isaacus Welsingius, Pastors of the Church at Horn, were
suspended from their ministry by the North-Holland Synod. and that diverse
others in Gelderland, were in like manner censured by the Synods holden in that
Province at Arnhem, is also recorded in that historical preface, prefixed
before the Acts of the last National Synod at Dort. And in the Ses. 22, 23.
book itself it is likewise testified, that Simon Goulartius, Minister of the
Gallo-Belgick, or Walloens Church at Amsterdam, was removed from his place by
the Gallo-Belgick Synod. By these and sundry other like acts and sentences that
might be noted, it is evident that the Synods held in these Reformed Churches,
are not only for counsel and admonition, but for the exercise of jurisdiction
in censuring offenders, and judging of controversies; and that their meaning is
perverted, when their Confession of faith is objected against me.

That which Mr Can Chapter pl. p. 91.
alleges from the Synod of Middelburgh, An. 1581. is also mistaken by him;
there being no such thing found in that Synod as he mentions, touching
election done by voices publicly in the Temple. And if it had been there, yet
should not that prejudice the authority of Synods or Classes, in allowing or
censuring such elections, either before or after they were made.

Again it is objected, The Synod of Tilleburgh in Nasovia, determined the
like, as Zepperus Pol. Ecc. p. 831.
writes. ANSVV. The determinations of this Synod being like unto those before
mentioned, are therefore directly against my opposites, as the former were.
Zepperus in his preface to the Articles agreed upon in this Synod, tells us
how the Earl of Nassau having seen the Articles of the Synod held in
Middelburgh, Anno 1581. he took such liking thereof, that in the year
following he called the special Ministers of his country together unto a Synod
in Tilleburgh, requiring that the agreements of the aforesaid Synod might be
applied unto the use of the Churches under his dominion, so far as they well
could. Hereupon the principal conclusions thereof were received and confirmed
among them, and so far as does show their full consent in the point of our
controversy, viz. that particular Congregations are to be subject unto an
Ecclesiastical authority of Synods and Classes. Therefore it was agreed, Ib.
p. 833 Art. 4.
that the calling of Ministers should be made by the judgment of the Classis,
etc. That P. 834.
where diverse examined of the Church, or of it and the Classical assembly
together, were judged to be fit, then the election was to be in the power of
the Church, and to be done by suffrages publicly in the temple: and if they
were equal, then to use lots, etc. This seems to be the Article which Mr C.
stumbled at before, as if it had been so written in the Synod of Middelb. 1581.
which yet does not exclude the precedent allowance of the Classis in such
elections. Moreover it was there agreed, P. 837. Art. 23.
that if any complain of wrong done in a lesser assembly or Synod, he may
refer the matter by appeal unto a superior Synod: P. 843. Art. 61.
that no man be excommunicated without the consent of a Classical assembly:
Art. 63.
that the deposition of Ministers be done by the judgment of a Classical
assembly, and consent of the Magistrate. These and the like Articles there
concluded, do show how far the Nassovian Churches were from that opinion of
the Brownists, and some other, in denying the subjection of particular
Congregations unto any Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. Where could
Mr C. find more pregnant testimony against himself, then in such resolutions
of Reformed Churches as these be?

With the former Reformed Churches alleged by Mr Can, do agree all the
other, so far as I can learn by any enquiry. For the Church of England, B.
Jewel testifveth, Def. of Apol. of Chapter of Engl. par. 6. c. 17. div. 1. and 2.
that we have had ere now in England Provincial Synods, and have governed our
Churches by home made laws: and he maintains that without waiting for a
General Council, it was rather thought good to do that which both rightly
might be done, and has many a time been done, as well of other good men, as
also of many Catholic Bishops, that is, to remedy our Churches by a
Provincial Synod. And besides other examples, there is a Syntag. Confess. p.
125, and 136
special monument recording the Acts and Articles agreed upon in the Synod
holden at London, Anno D. 1562. and again of another Synod, Anno 1571.
confirming the Articles of the former Synod; ratifyed by the approbation of Qu.
Elizabeth, to be observed through the whole Kingdom, etc, Now howsoever there
be great difference in diverse Churches, touching the manner of celebrating
these Synods; yet herein (which is the point of our present controversy) they
do all agree, viz. that there is a superior Ecclesiastical authority of
Synods, to judge and determine the affairs of particular Congregations.

The testimony of the Church of Scotland for the authority of Presbyteries and
Synods in judging the causes of particular Congregations is most clear. In the
admission of Ministers to their offices there was First book of Discipline, p.
29. ed. 1621
required not only the consent of the people and Church whereunto they should
be appointed, but also approbation of the learned Ministers appointed for their
examination. Touching all sorts of Synods among them it was concluded, that
Sec. b. of Discip. chapter 7. p. 80.
they have power to execute Ecclesiastical discipline and punishment upon all
transgressors and proud contemners of the good order and policy of the Kirk,
and so the whole Discipline is in their hands.

Touching Provincial Synods, which they call the lawful conventions of the
Pastors, Doctors, and other Elders of a Province, gathered for the common
affairs of the Kirkes thereof, etc. they Ib. p. 81.
say,

Their assemblies are institute for weighty matters, to be entreated by mutual
consent and assistance of the brethren within that Province, as need requires.

This Assembly has power to handle, order, and redress all things committed
or done amiss in the particular assemblies.

It has power to depose the office-bearers of that Province for good and just
causes deserving deprivation.

And generally their Assemblies have the whole power of the particular
Elderships whereof they are collected.

Besides these Canons and rules of their Discipline, there be also diverse Acts
of their General Assemblies prefixed before the foresaid First and Second
books of their Discipline, which by many instances do show how that power of
Synods was exercised and put in practice in the Church of Scotland. For
example; we read P. 14. Edinb. Iul. 5. 1570.
that there was an Excommunication directed against Patrik, called B of Murray,
to be executed by M. Robert Pont Commissioner their, with the assistance of the
Ministers of Edinburgh. We find there in another Assembly, P. 15. Edinb. Aug.
6. 1573.
that Alexander Gordoun, B. of Galloway, being accused of diverse offenses, it
was concluded, that he should make public repentance in Sackcloth three
several Sundaies, first in the Kirk of Edinburgh; secondly, in Halyrudhous;
thirdly, in the Queens College, under the pain of Excommunication. We find
in another Assembly, P. 16. Edinb. Mar. 6. 1573.
that the B. of Dunkell was ordained to confess his fault publicly in the
Kirk of Dunkell, for not exequuting the sentence of the Kirk against the Earl
of Athol.

For the confirmation of this Synodall authority, there is added in the same
place an Act of Parliament, P. 19. 20, etc. The 12 Parl. at Edinb. Iun. 5. 1592.
prefixed also before the said books of their Discipline, having this Title,
Ratification of the liberty of the true Kirk: of general and Synodall
Assemblies: of Presbyteries; of Discipline, etc.

The Confession of faith made by the Church of Scotland, both for the Doctrine
and for the Discipline thereof, is yet further confirmed unto us both by
general Subscription, and by a most Solemn Oath. The formal words of that
Subscription and Oath, are thus recorded unto us: Syntag. Confess. p. 158, 160.
We believe with our hearts, confess with our mouth, subscribe with our hands,
etc. promising and swearing by that great name of the Lord our God, that we
will continue in the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church, and that we will
defend the same according to our calling and power, all the days of our life,
under pain of all the curses contained in the law* and danger of body and
soul in the day of that dreadful judgment of God. Hereunto is annexed in the
same place the Mandate of the Kings Majesty, whereby he enjoyneth all
Commissioners and Ministers of the Word throughout his kingdom, that they
require this confession of all their Parishioners, etc. And so far as I can
learn, even unto this day, there is still observed this substantial and maine
point of Discipline, namely a power in Synodall assemblies to judge the
controversies that do arise in particular Congregations. Here Mr Can instead
of a Jury of 24 men to condemn my position for an error and untrueth, as he
Chapter pl. p. 83.
speaks, may see a Jury of more then thrice 24 Congregations in Scotland,
maintayning my position, and condemning his error by their example.

The Reformed Churches in Savoy, as that of Geneva, Kerckel, Ordon, der
gemee^te van Geneven, p. 9, 10* etc.
and the Churches in the villages thereabout, standing under the jurisdiction
of the Magistrates in Geneva, were combined together for their mutual
guidance, and the Ministers of those Churches meeting weekly together were
subject to the censure of such Ecclesiastical assemblies, and the affairs of
those Churches judged therein. The knowledge of this, is so common a thing,
that in appearance hereupon grew the reproach, reported by Mr Can himself,
that Chapter pl. p. 94.
at Geneva subjecting of Churches to this order first began.

The Evangelicall Churches in the greater and lesser Poland, in Lithuania,
Russia and Samogitia have likewise showed their consent with us in this point
of subjecting particular Churches under the Ecclesiastical authority of
Synods, and have witnessed the same in diverse solemn assemblies. They profess
Syntag. Confess. par. 2. p. 294. Syn. Posna. 1570. Art. 19
that when controversies arise which cannot be compounded among themselves, the
judgment and decree of a general Synod of all their Churches is then to be
required, and to be submitted unto. They agreed Ib. p. 300 303. Syn. Crac.
Xans. Wlodisl.
that diverse kinds of Synods were to be held among them, some greater and some
less; that their Synodicall constitutions were to be put in execution; that
the violatours thereof were to be subject unto the censures of deposition and
excommunication, etc. They ordained P. 320-326. Syn. Toru 1591 Art. 2*3*7.14*17.
that every Evangelicall Minister was not only to have and to read the Canons
of their Synods, but also to carry himself, and to govern the Church
committed unto him according to the prescript thereof, and that under pain of
Ecclesiastical censure: that the censure of exco^m^^^^ation was to be
administered publicly, either in the Congregation, or in the Synod, etc.

Moreover it is worthy to be remembered, how the Churches of the Netherlands,
even at that time when they were scattered abroad in High-dutchland, and
Eastfriestand, in that time of most bloody persecution, under the government of
Duke d' Alva, did then in their banishment, and with danger of their lives at
home, combine themselves in Classes for their mutual guidance, and submitted
themselves unto the judgment of such assemblies. The distribution of these
Churches into several Classes Synod. Embd. An. 1571. Art. 10.11.
recorded publicly, as follows. I. Classis: The two Churches at Franckford,
the Church at Schoenau, at Heydelbergh, at Franckendael, at S. Lambert. II.
Class. The two Churches at Collen, the 2 Churches at Aken, the Church at
Maestricht, at Limburgh, at Nuys, in Gulick-land. III. Class. The Church of
Wesel, of Embrick, of Rees, of Goch, of Gennep, and other in Cleveland. IV.
Class. The Church of Embden, with strangers of Brabant, Holland,
West-Friestland. V. Class. The 2 Churches at Antwerp, the Church at
'sHertoghen-bosch, at Breda, at Brussel, and others in Brabant. VI. Class. The
Church at Gant, at Ronsen, at Oudenard, at Comen, and others in East and
West-Flanders. VII. Class. The Church of Doornick, of Ryssel, of Atrecht, of
Armentiers, of Valencienne, and other Churches of Walloens. VIII. Class. The
Church of Amsterdam, of Delph, other Churches of Holland, of Over-Yssel, of
West-Friesland. The faithful Ministers and people of these primitive Reformed
Churches, the Martyrs and witnesses of Christ, like the woman that fled into
the wilderness from the rage of the Dragon, have given special testimony unto
this Classical government, whereunto they submitted themselves even in those
hard times, when it was difficult and dangerous for them to meet together.

As the Dutch Churches practiced among themselves of old, so they in the
forementioned Synod by common advise agreed Synod. Embd. art. 12.
to exhort the English that they would combine their Churches into a Classis.
And accordingly this order of government was approved by them, as appears in
that book of their Discipline, framed for the use of the English Churches in
these countries; where it is said in the end, Form of Comm. prayer, Administr.
etc. printed at Middleb. 1602, the 4. edit.
This may be sufficient for particular Congregations: for the visitation
whereof and decision of causes which cannot be ended among them, and such like;
Meetings, Conferences and Synods of Minister and Elders, chosen by particular
Churches and meetings, are to be held, as the Ministers for time and place and
other circumstances shall think meet. With Ibid. p. D 7. b. and 8. a, b. and F
3. a.
consent and allowance of these Ministers of such Classes or Conferences,
together with consent of the Eldership, were the Pastors and Teachers of
particular Congregations to be elected: and then the names of such being
signified to the Congregation, for inquiry after their fitnes, warning was
given that if within twenty days no just exception were taken, then their
silence should be accounted as the free consent of the Congregation, etc.

To conclude, beside the testimony of Reformed Churches severally and apart, it
shall not be amiss to behold the Harmony of their joint consent in the
Deputies of the said Churches, assembled together in the National Synod of
Dort, then which it is rightly judged, that Molin. Anat. Armin. praef. A 3.
there has not been for many ages past, any Synod more renowned, or more holy,
or more profitable to the Church. When as the Remonstrants upon pretense of
partiality and schism in their judges, sought to decline the Authority and
sentence of this Synod; the Divines of other nations, deputed from several
Churches, have given such judgment thereof, as shows a plain condemnation of
my opposites opinion.

The judgment of the Divines of Great Britain, who alleged the perpetual
practice of all Churches, was this, that Act. Syn. Not. Dordr. Sess. 29. p. 97.
the highest power of determining controversies in every Church is in the
National Synod lawfully called together and framed etc.

The judgment of Divines out of the Palatinate, was like unto the former: They
Ibid. p. 98.
allege the practice of the Church both in the old and new Testament, for
confirmation thereof; and show their own practice to have been such, that some
authors of novelties being admonished first of their Classis, and then of the
Ecclesiastical Senate, and being refractory were then dismissed, that is,
deposed from their places.

The Divines of Hassia agree with the former, and upon the like grounds. They
Ibid. p. 100.
show the practice of their own Churches; that for the repressing of the
error of the Vbiquitarians, diverse National Synods had been held by authority
of the four brethren, Princes of Hassia; and that since again the Prince
Maurice, Landgrave af Hassia, had called another general Synod of Hassia,
wherein the former Synodicall decrees were confirmed, and sentence pronounced
against such as maintained contrary errors.

The Divines of Switzerland or Helvetia, consent hereunto, and Ibid. p. 102.
allege the perpetual practice of ancient and later Churches, together with
the practice of those in Berne, in the cause of Huberus, in their own
country; and testify that by such means peace was obtained.

The Divines of Geneva also Ibid. p. 102. 103.
avouch, that in the Church, the supreme power of judgment is in a Synod
lawfully called, etc. That God has established this order and sanctified it by
the example of the Apostles and all ages of the Church, according to the saying
of Christ, Tell the Church, etc.

The Divines of Breme Ibid. p. 104.
maintain the same thing, and hold that if his order of Synods may be refused
by such as deserve Ecclesiastical censures, that then a door should be opened
to all heresies and sects, and all the judgments of the Church whereunto
Christ sends us, should be subverted, etc.

The Divines of Embden Ibid. p. 1^7.
accord with the rest, and besides other reasons for confirmation of Synodall
Authority in the judgment of Ecclesiastical causes, they allege that very
place of Scripture, Act. 20.28. which my opposites pervert to a contrary end
against me.

Neither have they only in general showed what the authority of Synods is,
and also what this Synod may do; but the Synod goes further, and proceeds unto
the exercise of this power, and pronounces sentence against those that
persisted in their errors. In the Copy of that Sentence Act. Syn. Not. Dordr.
Sess. 138. p. 280.
there be diverse acts of their power to be observed in the several expressions
and forms of speech used therein: as for example; This Synod of Dort does
seriously, instantly, and according to the authority which it has by the word
of God over all the members of their Churches, in the name of Christ require,
exhort, admonish, and enjoyne all and every one of the Pastors in the Churches
of the United Provinces, Doctors, Rectours, Masters in the Universities and
Schools, etc. The Synod, after invocation of the holy name of God, being in
conscience well assured of their authority from the word of God, following the
steps of Ancient and late Synods, etc. P. 281.
Does interdict the persons cited unto this Synod, from all Ecclesiastical
charge, and deposes them from their offices, and also judges them unworthy of
Academicall functions, until by earnest repentance, etc. For the rest, whose
cognition is not come to this National Synod, it commits unto Provincial
Synods, Classes and Presbyteries, according to the order received, that with
all care they procure, etc. That they diligently take heed unto themselves,
that they admit not any man to the holy ministry, which refuses to subscribe
unto the doctrine declared in these Synodicall constitutions, and to teach the
same: that they also retain no man by whose manifest dissension, etc.

This judgment and Sentence of the Synod was afterward in most full and ample
manner Ibid. p. 282.
approved and confirmed by the Illustrious Lords, the States General of the
United Provinces, acknowledging also the business of this Synod to be agreat
and holy work, such as heretofore the Reformed Churches never saw, etc.

Besides this Sentence pronounced against those twelve or thirteen of the
Remonstrants, that by authority of the Synod were Ibid. p. 16, 17.
cited to appear before them; there is also another special sentence, P. 204,
205.
of suspension from their function, concluded and pronounced against Everhardus
Vosculius, and Johannes Schotlerius, Ministers at Campen, because of their
contumacy in not appearing before, the Synod, being lawfully cited thereunto.

Moreover it is memorable, that the members of this Synod, the Deputies of
several Churches, did all and every one of them take a most solemn oath, in
testimony of the good conscience which they had in the exercise of this
authority: The form of the Oath was Act. Syn. Not. Dordr. Sess. 23. p. 61.
as follows;

I do promise before God, whom I believe and reverence as the present searcher
of the reins and hearts, that in this whole Synodall action, wherein shall be
undertaken an examination, judgment and decision, both touching the five
known Articles and the difficulties thence arising, and also touching all
other matters of doctrine, I will not take any humane writings, but only the
word of God for the certain and undoubted rule of faith; and that in this
whole cause I shall propound nothing to my self, but the glory of God, the
peace of his Church, and in special the conservation of the purity of
doctrine. So let my Savior Jesus Christ be merciful unto me, whom I most
earnestly beseech that he would continually assist me in this purpose with the
grace of his Spirit.

This oath being first taken by the President of the Synod, all the other
Professors, Pastors and Elders of the Netherlands, deputed unto the Synod,
and then all the Divines of other nations, standing up in order, did with a
loud voice every one of them declare, that they did holily promise and swear
before God the same thing: and testified that they came with such mind unto
the Synod; had hitherto sit down therein; and would hereafter by the grace of
God continue.

Having now such a cloud of witnesses consenting with me, I have reason in this
place again to put Mr Can in mind of his vain boasting Chapter pl. p. 83.
touching a Jury of more then 24. men condemning me of error. Here may he see
a Jurie of more then thrice 24 sworn men, and of the most excellent servants
of God in so many Reformed Churches and Universities, the lights of
Christendom, the flower of the Churches, and the select crown of learned men,
as they of Geneva do Act. Syn. Not. Dordr. Sess. 3. p. 12.
style them, all testifying both by word and practice against him, and against
the opinion of Mr Dav. touching the jurisdiction of Synods.

A Supplement, annexed by the Publisher, for answer unto that which follovveth
in Mr Cannes book.
THus far, good Reader, the Author has traveled through those tedious
ways, which Mr C. though with less trouble, yet with more prejudice to his
own cause, has first opened unto him. The sum of all is, that wading
through those streams of Arguments and Reasons which Mr C. had let out upon
him, he has found such as were of any depth, to run another way; and the
other too shallow to hinder the passage of truth in this controversy. And
marching through those several ranks and files of learned Authors, which Mr
C. had mustered, and brought into the field for his defense and assistance in
this conflict, he has found them all (excepting those that were to be
excepted) to be friends instead of enemies, testifying plainly in their own
words, and in the words of sundry others with them, that against their wills
they were forced to appear under his banners. And therefore in the same order
that he marshalled them against the Authority of Synods, they now stand in array
against the Independency of Churches. There remained yet one part of Mr Can.
opposition in this cause to be encountered, wherein he pretends to disappoint
and conquer such forces as might seem to be used in defense of that Classical
and Synodall government which he has hitherto oppugned. To this end he Chur.
plea, p. 92.
undertakes to answer certain Reasons or Objections, picked out of diverse
passages in the Authors Answ. to W.B. etc
first book, supposing by this means to have fully acquitted himself in this
Dispute. Now though there be nothing in these his Answers, for which an
intelligent Reader might not easily satisfy himself from what has been said
already in the foregoing Treatise: yet lest Mr C. should plead there was ought
left untouched, that with any show of reason required an answer; and for their
help to whom such directions may be useful, I have here briefly noted what he
has said, and to what purpose.

The Reasons or Objections which in this latter part of his book he assayeth
to answer, are 1. Concerning the evil consequents of Independency: 2. The
ancient exercise of the power used in Synodall combinations: 3. The liberty and
freedom hence arising unto Churches and the members thereof: 4. The
determinations of Synods, and consent of Reformed Churches in this matter: 5.
The Authors alleging the former practice of the Church where he was Minister.
In the sixth place he mentions some objections, of which he Church. pl. p. 100.
says he will not stand to make any particular answer thereto; but refers
us in general to the writings of others, which whosoever shall compare with
the Authors words against which they are applied, and duly weigh the several
circumstances on both sides, may easily discern that this his general answer
needs no reply. In the end lest we should doubt with what affection all the
rest was written, he graceth his book with this Conclusion, and disireth it
may be noted, when out of the abundance of his charity he says, Mr Paget would
feign have the Classical Discipline advanced, that he by it might have
worldly credit also: These are his last words, ushered with others of the same
stamp; that he seeks to disgrace Christ's government, and to have his own
honored and embraced, etc. A vile slander, and not worthy to be answered.

For the other objections which Mr Can pretends to answer, it is to be
observed that the Author in his former writing has not framed any Reasons for
proof of this point in controversy, as he has often Page 40, 73. 168.
before noted in this Treatise. It was not his purpose at that time to propound
any Argument, first or last, but being the Defendant or party accused, to wait
for the Arguments of his Accusers. And so much was also signified in his Answ.
to W. B. p. 71. 88.
other book, which Mr C. had read, and from whence those Reasons or pretenses,
as he calls them, are taken, unto which here he shapes his Answers. Yet
notwithstanding he will take no notice of this, but runs into two contrary
extremes: before he affirmed that he brought no proofs, because he had none to
bring; intimating Chur. pl. p. 15. 16.
that he has not left this point unprooved, out of forgetfulness; but rather of
mere poverty, as not having any authentical records, etc. Here again he
makes him to bring Reasons and Arguments, when as he professed that at that
time he intended to bring none: not out of forgetfulness, or want of ability;
for he had said in the place before mentioned, that he had to this purpose in
his Sermons diverse times alleged sundry evidences and grounds of holy
Scripture, etc. And Mr C. knew that he was able to produce such evidences, by
the occasional mentioning of those two places, Deuteronomy. 17. and Act. 15. which he
has also undertaken to answer. Come we now to the particulars.

If particular Congregations should not stand under any other Ecclesiastical
authority out of themselves, manifold disorders, confusion and dissipation of
Churches would follow. Thus he perverts the Authors words, which were not set
down by way of Argument, but merely as a declaration of his judgment touching
the benefit of Classes and Synods, against the contrary accusation of his
opposites. His words are these, Answ. to W. B. Pref.
That single uncompounded policy (as Mr Jacob calls it) whereby particular
Congregations are made to be independent, not standing under any other
Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves, that I conceive to bring with it
manifold disorders, confusion and dissipation of Churches. That which the
Author thus set down as his own opinion, which he held concerning the safety
of this government, for the maintaining of order and settled peace in Churches;
that Mr C. transformes into an Argument, and calls it his first reason. The
Author had just cause to mention that consideration in such manner as he did,
to show the importance of this point in controversy, by which he there also
hoped that others would be warned, to take heed what new forms of Churches and
Church Government they frame unto themselves, or commend unto others.
Experience has taught, not once, nor twice, that in the matter of framing
Churches, for want of taking such advice, some have become like Vtopian
Commonwealths men; going to work according to their own Idaeas, they have
begun a work which they were not able to finish; not unlike unto that builder
of whom our Savior speaks, Luke 14.28, 29, 30. And therefore, as before more
briefly, so now Page 32, 33.
at his entrance into a more full and professed handling of this question, the
Author has hereby declared of what importance this controversy is, and given
instance in the disorders, confusions and dissipations which have happened unto
that Church of the Brownists at Amsterdam, the rather because of their neglect
and contempt of such remedies, as from Classical and Synodall government might
have been afforded unto them. If those that pretend such accurate exercise of
Discipline, have fallen into so great and manifold scandals, such rash and
offensive excommunications, schisms, and depositions, as are there mentioned;
how can it be expected that others, in outward appearance more unable to
manage such a kind of government, should be free from running into the like
or greater offenses? If some few single Churches, within a few years, have
bewrayed to their loss and shame, the great want of a combined government, for
the establishment of peace and order among them; how many instances and
examples of the same kind might we look for in process of time, where many
Churches together should be erected according to this model of Independent
polity? To this purpose the Author has applied that observation touching
these evil consequents of Independency; not by way of argument, as Mr C. has
set it down. If he had intended to propound an Argument, he would have framed
it after another manner, for the aggravation of their error; as thus for
example: That independency of Churches, which not being prescribed of God, does
occasion manifold disorders, etc. that is so much the more to be avoided: But
such is that Independency which is required of these Opposites: Ergo. Or thus;
That Independency of Churches, which not by accident only, but in the very
nature thereof, is a proper cause of manifold disorders, is to be condemned:
But such is that Independency taught by these Opposites: Ergo. The Argument
thus propounded, and understood principally of more Churches of this frame
seated together (where the disorders ensuing would be more apparent, and the
neglect of the remedy more culpable) has sufficient grounds, both of Scripture
and Reason, to uphold it. First, there being required a communion betwixt
Churches, as well as betwixt members of one Church, as has been noted Page 109.
before; and seeing God is not (...), the author of confusion, or of
unquietness, but of peace; and will have all things done decently and in
order, specially in the Churches of the Saints: 1. Cor. 14.33, 40. hence we may
conclude that such forms of government as do unavoydably tend to disunion and
disorder, are not the Ordinances of God. Secondly, the principles of nature and
common equity, as they may be read in the practice of all times and places, do
teach that no humane societies can subsist together without these bonds of
combination and confederacy; whereby it comes to pass that families unite
themselves and grow together into greater Corporations, Cities, Provinces,
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms, for their mutual peace and safety in the way of
government. The subordination of Courts in Civil government, while they are
framed according to an Aristocraticall temper, is not repugnant unto the nature
of Ecclesiastical polity. These things thus premised, and applied unto
Classical and Synodall combinations, it may hereby appear how Mr C. has
played the trifler in so many idle and impertinent answers which he has made
unto his own frame of reason obtruded upon the Defendant. But for further
satisfaction, behold the substance of his Answers.

I. C. ANSVV. I. When God has established an order for the administration of
his own house, what presumption of man dares change it? Thinks he that he is
wiser then the Almighty? etc. REPL. I. This answer says nothing to any part of
the proposed argument, even as he himself has framed it; unless it be a
denial of the Conclusion. For of changing an order that God has established,
there was no mention, nor color of any such meaning, in the Authors words
which he undertakes to refute. Only the question is whether Independency be
that form of administration which God has appointed unto his Churches: This
Mr C. with vehement asseverations affirms, and complains of them that deny
it. If this reasoning were good, he might easily beat down all objections that
are made against his Tenet. II. Observe with what insolent language he
inveigheth against those that oppose his opinion, as if they did set themselves
point blanck against that which they saw to be the ordinance of God. Did he
think the Author or others of his mind, meant to plead in such manner for
their judgment and practice touching Classes and Synods? Sure Mr C. knew it to
be otherwise; at least by those places of Scripture, which he saw mentioned in
their defense. But herein also he shows himself to be a disciple and follower
of H. Barrow, who for the same thing reproaching the Reformists, says Discov.
p. 189. 190.
they would bring in a new adulterate forged government in show, or rather in
despite of Christ's blessed government, which they in the pride, rashness,
ignorance, and sensuality of their fleshly hearts, most miserably innovate,
corrupt and pervert, etc. Mr C. does here in like manner multiply words to the
same purpose.

I. C. ANSVV. II. Be it well considered, that God always abhors all good
intentes of men, that are contrary to the good pleasure of his will, revealed
in his word, etc. REPL. I. There is no mention made of any intentes in the
supposed Reason: it is only said that Independency will be attended with
disorders and confusion, etc. Mr C. therefore disputes with his own intentes
in these his impertinent answers. II. How can God be said to abhor good
intentes? Or how can those be said to be good intentes, that are contrary to
the revealed will of God? III. Intention notes the purpose of the will, with
reference both unto the end at which it aims, and the means by which it
endeavors to attain that end. If both these be good and lawful, the
intention also is absolutely good. Yet if the end be good, though the means be
unwarrantable, the intention is not presently abhorred, but sometime commended
of God himself; as in David, when he purposed to build an house for the Name of
the Lord, 1. King. 8.18. with 2. Sam. 7.7. But in this case, on their part that
maintain Classical and Synodall combinations, not only the end they aim at,
to wit, peace, order, and the establishment of Churches; but the means also,
or the practice of such combinations, is allowed by the word of God: neither
does Mr C. prove ought to the contrary.

I. C. ANSVV. III. This objection taken up here by Mr Paget, is the very same
which the Papists, and those that way affected use, etc. REPL. I. If Papists
use the very same objection, that is, if from the same Premises they make the
same Conclusion, rejecting Independency and Anti-Synodall courses, because of
the confusions and disorders which do follow the same; then herein they are no
Papists, forasmuch as Protestants have reasoned in like manner, as may be seen
in sundry Testimonies before Chapter 7. Sect. 2-7.
alleged. II. When Papists dispute against any lawful form of government,
with the same argument which we use against that which is unlawful; this can
no more prejudice our reasoning then it does Mr Cannes, while both he and they
reason against lawful Synods, as taking away that right and power which they
pretend to be due unto others; he asscribing that to the body of the
Congregation, which they do Bellar. de Romans Pont l. 4. c. 1. and de Verb. Dei.
l. 3. c. 5.
to the Pope, viz. the supreme Ecclesiastical judgment of all controversies;
and both pleading from the same grounds of Scripture, Math. 16, and 18, etc.
Men may use the like arguments, and yet their conclusions be far unlike and
contradictory.

I. C. ANSVV. IV. If particular Congregations must loose their right and power,
because of the offenses, which some men have committed in the exercise thereof.
Then surely by the same reason (if Mr Pagets reasoning be worth any thing)
ought Classes and Synods, to lay down that superior authority, which they
have taken over many Churches; because they in many things, many times have
offended, in and about the execution. REPL. I. The reason here mentioned by Mr
C. is a mere fiction and forgerie of his own. The Author never reasoned on
this manner: he never said, never thought to say, that particular Congregations
must loose their right and power, etc. There is no shadow of any such thing in
those words which Mr C. has here set down for himself to answer. II.
Particular Congregations do still retain their due right and power, even
while they are subordinate unto the superior authority of Classes and Synods,
as has been often showed Page 156. 157. etc. 164. etc.
before. III. If he would have spoken to the purpose, he should have showed,
that particular Congregations, standing under no other Ecclesiastical
authority out of themselves, are not thereby exposed to manifold disorders,
confusion, and dissipation: Or if he would have retorted this argument upon the
Defendant, he ought to have prooved that Classical and Synodall government, of
its own nature, brings with it manifold disorders, confusion, and dissipation
of Churches. But instead of this, he mentions only the offenses which in
many things, many times have been observed, in and about the execution. And
behold what he says for proof hereof.

I. C. And this I am sure no good Christian will deny, I could give diverse
instances for it; but it needs not: Only it is not amiss to set down
Nazianzens Epist 42. ad Proc.
words; who was an Elder or Bishop: I am minded, says he, to shun all
assemblies of Bishops, because I never saw any good event in any Council, etc.
Whither things are better carried now, then they were in his time. I will not,
nor am able to judge. ANSVV. I. If he will not nor cannot judge whether the
same abuses be now committed which Nazianzen complained of; it follows that he
ought not to have the will nor ability to conclude that this government should
now be remooved, as it seems he would infer from such a reason as was used
by Nazianzen for his dislike of the Synods of his time. II. This testimony of
Nazianzen has been sufficiently answered P. 222. 223.
before out of D. Whitaker, where it has been also showed, that it makes as
much against those Assemblies of Bishops which Mr C. himself allows, as
against any other. But to make it appear that this is no new objection, and
that we need not seek any further answer unto it, lo here what others have
said touching the same testimony. Beza, among other counsels to the Emperor
and States of Germany, for the settling of the peace of Christian Churches,
does specially give advice for the celebrating of a Synod: and seeing he does
not only answer the foresaid exception, but withal notably declare the
lawful, ancient, and profitable use of Synodall authority, I have here set
down his words at large, as worthy our observation for this purpose.
Churches, Cons^l. ad Caes. and Stat. etc. Tract. Theol. vol. 2. p. 111. 112.
says he, cannot be rightly governed by their Pastors, unless beside the
sowing of good seed, they do also by the word of God, as with a sickle cut
down evil herbs, yea and root them out according to their power. But because
that cannot oftentimes be performed by the authority of one or a few, neither
happily were it meet: therefore since Churches began to be settled, the Bishops
of the Provinces did meet together as often as there was need: and that
according to the example of the Apostles, lest any should think this has been
the device of man. The Synod of the Church of Jerusalem and Antiochia,
celebrated in the Acts of the Apostles, is well known. Afterward followed
that first Oecumenicall Synod of Nice, where Ecclesiastical Provinces being
more accurately then happily divided, this also was ordained, that every year
two Provincial Synods should be gathered by the Metropolitanes: which custom
if it had been diligently observed, certainly it is likely that many and most
great calamities of the Church might have been prevented. But here some do
object unto us, that for the most part dissensions have been rather kindled
then quenched by these Synods, insomuch that the famous Bishop Nazianzene by a
certain sentence of his has as it were, condemned all those assemblies. But
we make no doubt to oppose unto this opinion, partly that Apostolical example,
and partly also the history of things done. Indeed the Nicene Synod has not
quite allayed the furies of Arius, no nor some that followed after. But who
shall therefore judge that there has been no fruit of that Synod, which even
at this very time we do abundantly reap? Yea that Apostolical Synod has not
altogether restrained Cerinthus and those obstinate maintainers of
Circumcision. But who would therefore deny that it was necessary for the
Church? Therefore every one sees that that sentence of Nazianzene does not
concern Synods rightly ordered, unless we think that he would detract from
the Synod of Nice: which indeed is very absurd, seeing it is well known how
great a defender he has been thereof. If nevertheless Arians ceased not to
rage through the world, how much the more may we think that they would have
done it, if the authority of that holy Synod agreeing whith the word of God, so
often objected against them, had not repressed their renewed endeavors? The
same we avouch concerning the Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and their
issue, whom as many Oecumenicall Synods, if not with one wound, yet with
reiterated blows have by the word of God stricken down, insomuch that they
do afford us arms against the same, springing up again in this our age. Yet
when we say these things, we do not hold that the Church is grounded upon the
authority of such Assemblies, or that all Conventicles, by whatsoever name they
be called, are to be accounted Synods: but this one thing we say, that God is
to be entreated by us in these calamities of the Church, that we may duly and
holily use these remedies also which are given unto us of God. Thus far Beza.
The same objection out of Nazianzene is to like purpose answered by Vrsinus,
when he says, Admon. de lib Concord. c. 12. Op. tom. 2. col. 686.
The complaint of Nazianzene, that he saw no good issue of any Synod, we make
no general rule; unless we would condemn the Orthodoxe Oecumenicall Councels
of the ancient Church, to have had an evil event; which Nazianzene does not
say, who speaks of the Synods of his time, whereof some were Arian [Synods,]
some perhaps confusedly undertaken and governed. Sibrandus Lubbertus speaks in
like manner touching the same testimony of Nazianzene, saying, De Council. l. 1.
c. 1.
This unhappines of the events must not be asscribed unto the Councels
themselves; but to the ambition and desire of command in those that assemble,
as the same Nazianzene does also testify.

I. C. ANSVV. V. If the infirmities of the people, be a good reason to take
away their liberty, in practicing among themselves all Gods ordinances: then
the contrary virtues, which oftentimes have been found in them (as in staying
the rage of the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 21.26. Act. 3.26.
; in preferring sincere Christians before Arrians Zezom. l. 7. c. 7.
; and being themselves sound in the faith Theod. l. 2. cap. 7.
; when their Ministers have been Heretics:) is a good reason to maintain
their liberty still. REPL. 1. This answer is beside the question, which is not
here touching the peoples liberty, as they are distinguished from their
Ministers; but concerning particular Congregations and their subjection to
Ecclesiastical authority out of themselves. Though Mr C. and some others that
now strive for the Independencie Churches, do also affect a popular way of
government in the Church; opposing not only the power of Classical
Presbyteries, but also of particular Elderships; yet Popularity does not
necessarily follow upon Independency, neither have they always both the same
Patrons. Mr Jacob, though he pleaded for a single uncompounded policy, in
opposition to Synodall authority; yet he utterly disliked those popular
circumstances held by the Separation, as has been noted Page 176.
before. Again, the Anabaptists, though they maintain and practice those
popular ways of judging causes among them, and Protoc. Embd. Act. 101. n. 1.
q. 7. Cl. Cl. Bekent. p. 218. Cloppenb. Cancker der Weder-doop. p. 535.
oppose the Elderships of the Reformed Churches, as exercising an undue power,
in deciding matters apart from the Congregation; yet they allow and practice
diverse things, contrary to the nature of Independencie, so as Mr C. pleades for
it: seeing, 1. They have Faukel. Babel der Weder-doop. page 166, 167, 190.
their Bishops, as they call them, distinct from their other Preachers, by them
termed Vermaenders, that is, Admonishers; and by some of them Protoc. Embd.
Act. 78. n. 4. and Act. 80. n. 2.
held to be Deacons: these acknowledge themselves Gesprec to^ Zierickz. p. 21.
to be inferior to their Bishops in the ministry. The Bishops belong to some
more eminent Congregations of that Sect, do at certain times visit the other
lesser Congregations, and administer the Sacraments among them. 2. The
Anabaptists Protoc. Embd. Act. 99. n. 1. Fauk. Babel der Wederd. D a. and p.
215.
use to excommunicate whole Congregations at once, when having been of the same
profession with them, they witness their dissent from them in such matters as
for which particular persons are excommunicated by them. 3. The causes that
cannot be determined in their particular Congregations, are by them sometimes
Babel der Wederd. C4. a. and C6. b.
referred to the judgment of Arbiters, men of several Congregations, chosen
by both parties, with promise to stand to their sentence, and sometimes also to
the meetings of the Officers of sundry Churches. This shows that though they
plead for Popularitie, yet they do not simply allow of Independencie. 11.
Suppose that consideration had been alleged by the Author against Popular
government also, as justly it might, in regard of the manifold disorders,
confusion, and dissipation of Churches, which it is known to bring with it;
yet this answer cannot prove it to be insufficient, because it runs upon a
twofold false supposition; 1. That this appertains to the due liberty of the
people, to have their judgment sought unto for the determining of all
controversies that arise in the Church: 2. That this liberty is acknowledged to
have been taken from them, as if they had been once in full possession of it;
or that this is the maine reason for denying that pretended liberty to the
people, because of their infirmities or miscarriages in the use of it. These
things as they are untrue in themselves, so they are unjustly obtruded upon the
Defendant, who had given no occasion to such pretenses. We maintain on the
other side, that this is no part of the peoples privilege, because it is not
due unto them by any divine warrant: and herein we are further confirmed,
seeing such an order is in outward appearance, and according to undeniable
experience, in the Anabaptists, Brownists, and others, attended with manifold
disorders, confusion and dissipation of Churches. 111. Though it were granted
that the people have been oftentimes wiser in their choice, and sounder in the
faith then their Ministers (which yet three of those places Act. 3.26. Zozo. l.
7. c. 7. Theod. l. 2. c. 7.
here alleged do not prove, there being nothing in them to that purpose for
which they are cited;) yet that is not enough to disprove the foresaid
assertion, unless he could show that ordinarily they are so qualifyed, and
endued with such abilities as are requisite for the orderly exercise of
judiciary power in the Congregation. This is not only contrary to experience,
but also to the revealed will and wisdom of God, in dispensing his gifts
severally unto the members of the mystical body of his Church, appovnting some
to be of meaner use, and in subjection to others. 1. Cor. 12.14-31. Heb. 13.17.
We must either straiten the limits of the Church, further then Christ himself
has allowed us, by shutting the weak and feeble out of his fold; or else
acknowledge that all the members are not fit to be used in the judicial trying
and determining of causes.

Chur. pl. p. 94.
pretends to answer, is touching the Antiquity of Classical and Synodall
government, from those words of the Author, that the power which the Classis
exercises is ancient, etc. that he names it the old beaten path, etc. The
Author indeed had used these words, upon just occasion; not as any reason or
argument, to justify the lawfulnes of this power, as Mr C. seems to insinuate;
but to declare the truth in the matter of fact, rather then in the
controversy of right: and this may easily appear to those that look upon the
places Page 72. and 105.
alleged out of the Authors book. When an unjust complaint was made, that he
had subjected the Church under an undue power of the Classis, that he brought
it under, etc. he answers, That power which the Classis exercises is
ancient; the same power which they had long before I either knew them or they
me; etc. Again when there was mention made of those of his side, he answered,
For my part I abhor this siding; I desire to walk in the old beaten path of
that discipline and government, practiced by these Reformed Churches, and
established in their Classes and Synods: etc. Was not here just cause to use
these words to this purpose for which they are applied? He speaks chiefly of
the antiquity of this government, in regard of the state of that particular
Church, and of those with which it is combined; concerning which Mr C. himself
cannot deny but that he has spoken the truth. But suppose it were uttered in
general, with reference unto the joint consent of the Churches in all ages,
giving testimony unto the exercise of this power; might not this be a weighty
and profitable consideration, to be commended unto the serious thoughts of
those that offer to oppose it? Let us hear what Mr C. says to this.

I. C. ANSVV. I. Sundry errors are as ancient as the Apostles time, etc. REPL.
1. This does not prejudice the constant practice of this or any other truth,
nor the regard that is to be given unto the custom of the Churches of God,
according to the direction of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.16. To what end else are
those manifold proofs and Allegations, which Mr C. has taken from Authors of
all times, to show, as he Chapter pl. p. 77-81-89. etc.
pretends, their consent with him, and that his opinion may not be thought a
Noveltie? 11. The due power of Classes and Synods is not grounded upon the
ancient exercise of it; neither is this made an argument to prove the lawfulnes
thereof: It is only alleged to show that others also, professing subjection
unto the Ordinances of Christ, have in like manner understood the divine
warrant for the exercise of such government in the Church. The Antiquity
whereupon the lawfulnes of this combined polity does rest, is that which it
claims from the Law and the Gospel, as has been showed Chapter 2.3, 4.
before.

I. C. ANSVV. II. Housoever Mr Paget for the credit of his cause, names it the
old and ancient Discipline; yet sure I am, to prove it so, he never will nor
can. There are many (and I think he knows it) which do affirm that the
Ecclesiastical government by Classes and Synods, is a weed that grew many
years after the Apostles, A late devise Bilson perp. gov. c. 16. p 387
, and that in all antiquity there does not appear any one step thereof
Sutclif. Discipl. c. 8. p. 138.
; Also that at Geneva, subjecting of Churches to this order first began
Bancrost surv. c. 22. p. 353. Comp. Chapter p. 91, 93, 94.
. And before Calvin came there, every Congregation was free in itself Hook.
Ecc. Polit. Pref.
. REPL. 1. These testimonies do not speak of Synods, and the Ecclesiastical
authority exercised by them. What truth is there then in Mr Cannes words when
he says, they affirm that the Ecclesiastical government exercised by Classes
and Synods is a weed, etc. 11. The distinction which these Authors make
betwixt Classes and Synods, as it is ungrounded and insufficient to prove the
one less lawful or ancient then the other; so it can least of all serve Mr
Cannes purpose: seeing the chief cause why they disallow Classes, is because
they exclude Hierarchicall authority; not simply because they exercise
Ecclesiastical jurisdictio^, which is the maine ground whereupon Mr C. does
oppose them. III. The place quoted out of D. Bilson, where he objecteth unto
some their own device, is not properly directed against Classical government;
and he seems to intend it principally against Lay Elders, as they call them,
as appears by that which follows Perpet. Gov. p. 388
in his book. But to show how far he was from uttering any thing, that might
either disprove the ancient use of Synods, or favor independent
Church Government, and the pretended antiquity thereof, mark what he says
elsewhere; Ibid. p. 376.
There is no Christian Realm nor Age, wherein the use of Synods has not been
thought needful, etc. as appears by the Councils that have been kept in all
kingdoms and countries since the Apostles times, when any matter of moment
came in question, which are extant to this day; and likewise by the Synodes
that every Nation and Province did yearly celebrate, according to the rules of
the great Nicene and Chalcedon Councils, which cannot be numbered, and were not
recorded, etc. And unless you give the Pastor and Presbyters of every Parish
full and free power to profess what religion they best like, to offer what
wrongs they will, to use what impiety and tyranny they themselves lift,
without any restraintor redress, which were an heathenish, if not an hellish
confusion; you must where there is no Christian Magistrate, etc. yield that
liberty to the Church of Christ, which every humane society has by the
principles of nature, to wit that the whole may guide each part, and the
greater number overrule the lesser, which without assembling in Synod cannot
be done. Again he professes his judgment touching the danger and noveltie of
Independencie, when he says, Ibid. p. 378.
In questions of faith, matters of faction, offers of wrong, breach of all
order and equity, shall each place and Presbytery be free to teach and do
what they please, without depending on or so much as conferring with the rest
of their brethren? Call you that the Discipline of Christ's Church, and not
rather the dissolution of all peace, and subversion of all truth in the house
of God? I think you be not so far beside yourselves, that you strive for
this pestilent kind of anarchie to be brought into the world. Our age is
giddie enough without this frenzy to put them forward. Howbeit we seek not
what new course you can devise after fifteen hundred years to govern the
Church; but what means the ancient and primitive Church of Christ had, before
Princes embraced the truth, to assemble Synodes and pacify controversies, as
well touching Religion as Ecclesiastical regiment, etc. IV. The words cited by
Mr C. out of D. Su^cliffe, against Classes, are expressly answered by Mr
Parker, when having fet down the objection here mentioned, viz. that in all
antiquitle there does not appear one step of these Classical assemblies, he
says, De Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 24. p. 355.
What, not so much as a step (...) there is a step at least extant in the
Canonical law throughout, but specially (that we be not altogether silent)
Decret. par. 2. cap. ^ 1. q. 3. c. 4. and in the Councils every where, in that
of Sardica, Can. 17. of Africa, C. 127. of Laodicea, c. 12 whence it appears
that according to ancient custom neighbor Bishops were always wont to come
together, in all sorts of difficult cases: which the Presbyters at Rome judged
to be so necessary, that a firm decree could not be made in the farre-spread
cause of those that were fallen, without the assembling of those that were near
unto them. Cypr. L. 2. Epist. 3. which course Cyprian himself also followed, L.
1. Ep. 8. and Cornelius Romanus, L. 3. Epist. 11. Why do I spend time? There
is nothing more evident to him that is acquainted with the ancient monuments of
history, then that neighbors (even besides the Synod) did est soon meet
together for deciding of strifes, for ordinations, for dissolving of doubts,
and in sum^^^, for every weighty business. Of which assemblies the Epistles of
Cyp^^an (...) full. And these assemblies what are they else but Classical
assemblies? The exceptions that might be made against these things are further
answered by Mr Parker in the same place. It had behooved Mr C. to have refuted
Mr P. herein, if he would have us give credit to this assertion of D. Sutcl.?
V. The testimonies next alleged touching Geneva, as they are untrue in regard
of the state of those Churches, so they are unjustly applied against Classes
and Synods; seeing as Mr Par. says, and acknowledges with D. Sutcl. that
Ibid. p. 361.362.
Geneva has neither Classes nor Synods, because their territory is so small
that it is not capable of them. Yet that they of Geneva do allow the use of
Classes and Synods, Mr Parker has there manifested from their writings, and
the confessions of their adversaries; and it does also appear by their
practice, while their joint Presbytery does not greatly differ from a Classis.
But to speak properly, it is not a Classis, and to speak truly, they are not
the first that have approved and practiced such kind of combined government.
But lest Mr C. should seem to urge us with the testimonies of these Authors,
behold what proofs he adds to this purpose.

I. C. Touching these Assertions: I cannot see how Mr Paget, or any other is
able to disproove them. It is acknowledged, on all sides, that in the first
hundred years after the Apostles, Ministers and Brethren of sundry
Congregations, met sometimes, to confer mutually together of common
Church-affaires; yet so as every particular Congregation, had always ( as the
Centuries Cent. l. 2. c. 4. p. 391.
write) power and authority in themselves, to choose their Officers, reject
Heretics, excommunicate offenders, and the like. ANSVV. 1. There is nothing
here said to prove the foresaid assertions, but what is grounded upon a false
supposition, which the Authour-hath before Page 30.156, 157, 164, etc.
often discovered; viz. that particular Congregations have not still their
power and authority in elections and censures, when they are combined with
others, and subject to the power belonging to such combinations, for their
direction, and correction, in case they offend. Mr C. leaving this without
proof, the assertions which he offers to maintain, are in like manner left
without defense, for ought he has here said. II. The Magdeburgenses never
understood that the consociation of Churches, in such sort as it is maintained
by the Defendant, is inconsistent with that power which they have in
themselves; as has been showed P. 173.174, 175.
before out of other places of the same Authors, according to which the place
here quoted must be explained; where they speak only of the Apostles times,
and of particular Congregations considered in themselves, without excluding
their confederacy with others, for their mutual help in judging and deciding
of causes.

I. C. So again, for a hundred years next after; we read in Eusebius L. 3. c.
22. L. 5. c. 16. L. 3. c. 19.
, Iraeneus L. 3. c. 1.2.3.
, Nicephorus L. 4. c. 23.
, and others, that neighbor Ministers came often together, when there was any
dangerous error broched, or weighty points to be determined, serving for
general good: but this they did of liberty, not of duty; partly to preserve
mutual society; as Zipperus L. 3. c. 7.
says) and partly that they might hereby be the more able, to resist
adversaries as, Mr Parker Eccl. Pol. p. 329, 330.
says. ANSVV. His quotations here, as they use to be, are either misprinted or
impertinent: howbeit the things themselves for which they are alleged, may
easily be granted. But the question is, whether the Synods or meetings of
Ministers, held in that age did not exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in
determining of weighty points, and deciding of controversies. If so be they
did, which cannot be denied, seeing (as has been Prof. Leyd. Censur. Confess.
Remonstr. Pref. 14. Vedel. de Arcan. Armin. l. 2. c. 6. p. 186.
noted against the Arminians) such a deciding of Ecclesiastical controversies
was used in all the Synods of the ancient Orthodox Church: then it must needs
follow that those times have given testimony unto such Synods as are here
maintained. But to avoid this Conclusion, Mr C. puts in this shift, which we
must take upon his own credit, saying, this they did of liberty, not of duty.
But to what purpose is this evasion? 1. The opposing of dangerous errors, the
preserving of mutual society, and seeking help for the resisting of
adversaries, the things here spoken of, are necessary duties; and therefore to
be done of duty, and not of liberty. See before, p. 78.
Men are bound to the performance itself, though there may be liberty used in
the choice of the circumstances. 11. Mr Parker says expressly in the very
place here cited by Mr C. that De Pol. Eccl. l. 3. p. 329.
the ground of the combination of Churches is the duty of maintaining mutual
society, etc. and that bond of mutual help which Moses mentions Number. 32.6.
where the Reubenites and Gadites are urged to their duty, not left to their
liberty.

In the next place he tells us his opinion touching the limits of Synodall
actions, to wit, that Chapter pl. p. 95.
Ecclesiastical Officers may conclude what they judge meet and good, but not
make a Church-act or sentence, unless the Church first know it, and give their
free consent unto it. As if to any effectual purpose weighty points could be
determined, mutual society preserved, and adversaries resisted, when dangerous
errors are broched (which are the reasons he himself has allowed for
assembling in Synods,) while every Church is left free to itself, to approve or
reject what is so concluded. His reason is, because the power and authority to
make Church-acts is in the body of the Congregation. The proof hereof, as it
is understood and applied by him, is yet to be expected. (...) Coming down to
the next hundred years, he seems to acknowledge the practice of those times
to be against him: but to excuse the matter, he alleges Casaubon, D.
Whitaker, Mornaeus, Brightman, yea and Cyprian, Eusebius, and Ambrose,
testifying that in those times men began to devise a new order and manner of
governing Churches, etc. Observe here a notable fallacy, in his insinuating
that to be the cause of such speeches which indeed was not. It is true that
these and other Authors have complained of changes and corruptions crept into
the Church in those times; but not because of Synodall authority then
exercised: nay this has ever been accounted the happiness of those times, that
the Churches had more liberty to assemble in Synods, then they could have
before, in the times of persecution under Heathen Emperors. Constantine is
every where commended for his religious respect unto the welfare of the Church
in assembling the Synod of Nice. On the other side the wickedness of Licinius is
noted by his forbidding the use of such Assemblies. Though Episcopal dignity
grew to a greater height in those times then before, yet Synodall jurisdiction
was the same that had been used formerly, save only that the favor of the
Emperors, public liberty, and the increase of offenses together with the
enlargement of the Churches are Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 10. c. 3. Iun. Animadv.
in Bellarm. de Council. l. 1. c. 10. n. 2. Camerar. Hist. Syn. Nic. p. 212.
edit. Niceph.
observed to have made the Assemblies more general and frequent then in former
ages. And therefore whatsoever Mr C. affirm, there is no reason why we should
dissent from what was before P. 204.
alleged out of D. F. whom he had cited for his witness, who speaking of the
authority of Synodes, says, Which authority we know to be granted to the
Church by our Savior Christ; practiced by his Apostles; continued by their
successors 300 years, before there were any Christian Emperors.

Afterward falling again to the point of Popular Government, he says, Chapter
pl. p. 95.
Mr Beza is very streyt to the people, hardly granting the liberty which the
very Jesuits do: he should have showed wherein; for the Jesuits are known to
Bellarm. de Verbo Dei, l. 3. c. 5. Mariana and Em. Sa, in Mat. 18.17.
expound the word Church by Prelates, in the place whereunto he sends us in
Maldonate. To evince the late rising of Presbyteriall authority in elections,
he argues from the 13th Canon of the Synod of Laodicea, mentioned Respo^si. ad
Tract. de Ministr. Evang. grad. c. 22. p. 154, 155.
by Beza, where it was ordered that the election of Ministers should not be
permitted to the multitude or people. but 1. He does not rightly interpret the
Canon, when he says that this Synod prohibited the body of the Congregation,
from using that liberty and power, which they before always had in
Ecclesiastical government. For as Beza says in the place by him quoted, the
manner of election here forbidden was not essential but accidental:
Chemnitius also Exam. Council. Trident. par. 2. p. 411, 412. ed. 1606.
shows that the people were not thereby excluded from the election, but that
their consent was still required; that this Synodall decree was occasioned by
the peoples abusing their right unto tumults, seditions and diverse confusions.
2. By a like inference he might conclude that other erroneous opinions and
disordered practices, condemned in the Councils and Synods of those times, were
before allowed and used in the Church.

That which some will have to be the slavery and bondage of a Church, that I
esteem to be the liberty, safety and preservation of Churches. That which they
count a Tyrannical government, that I believe to be a Sanctuary against
Tyranny* and afterward in the book itself, Page 83.
If I should in doctrine oppugn, and in practice deny unto the members of this
Church, this liberty of appeal unto the Classis, as they do here condemn it
in me, then might they justly complain of tyrannical government and corrupt
doctrine, then had they cause to bewail their slavery and bondage. Thus he
declared his judgment touching the benefit of this kind of government in
opposition to the Title prefixed unto the printed Complaints, which Mr C. knew
best who framed. The matter of Argument couched in these words is sufficiently
explained and vindicated P. 36- 41.
before, where the liberty of Appeals, suitable to common equity, and
instituted in the Law, is prooved to be agreeable unto the doctrine of the
Gospel.

I. C. ANSVV. I. It is a strange course, when there arises a controversy
touching two contrary opinons, which of them is true, and to be embraced; to
draw the resolution hereof, to the consideration of the usefulnes of the
opinions, or practices questioned. As if because a thing is useful, therefore
it is to be concluded it is true: etc. REPL. 1. It is strange Mr C. did not
discern, that there is no other course of reasoning in the Authors holding
Classical government to be a Sanctuary against Tyranny, and the denial of
Appeals a matter of slavery and bondage; then in Mr Cannes and others,
accounting Independency to be the liberty and freedom of a Church, and
subjection to Classical government slavery and bondage. What is here said unto
the one, may as fitly be applied against the other. If his answer be found, he
does plainly overthrow his own Chapter pl. p. 71. and 76. Arg. 9. and Reas. 7.
Arguments, built upon the same foundation which here he seeks to destroy.
There was no usefulnes mentioned in the Authors words, nor any other to be
understood, then such as is employed in the said and other the like expressions
and reasonings of Mr C. 11. Though it be certain that every truth of God is
useful, and to be used without gainsaying, when it appears to be such; yet
when this truth is denied, and the point controverted, it is no strange course
to prove it to be law by the agreement which it has with that which is
confessed to be law. This the Author has done in the place above mentioned.
And besides, seeing according to that Salus populi suprema lex esto.
law of laws commonly received, the safety of the people is the highest law;
and that Appeals are Luth. Tom. 1. f. 231.
for the relief of the oppressed, and a remedy against wrongs and injuries; why
may we not conclude that such a government where they are in due manner
admitted, is a Sanctuary against Tyranny, and in this respect rather to be
embraced then Independency, where the same are denied?

I. C. ANSVV. II. The Papists and Hierarchy for their Discipline give the very
same reason; viz. that there may be no Tyranny and oppression among brethren,
etc. REPL. And so does Mr C. for Independencie, Chapter pl. p. 76.
that a particular Congregation may not of a Mistres become a servant; instead
of being a superior wilfully vassal and enslave herself, etc.

I. C. ANSVV. III. I do deny that this government by Classes and Synods serves
better for the Churches welfare, then that which the Apostles instituted, etc.
REPL. And so will we, when he has prooved that Independency is the government
instituted by the Apostles.

I. C. ANSVV. IV. If it should be granted that particular Congregations by this
kind of government, shall have peace, profit, credit and other worldly
respects: yet this is no sufficient reason, etc. REPL. The Defendant never used
such a reason: this is a skarrecrow of his own setting up, and therefore we
must give him leave to please himself in that fivefold shot which he makes as
it.

determinations of National Synods concerning the power exercised by the
Classis, and the consent of all Reformed Churches. Hereunto he answers, I.
Councils may err, etc. II. These testimonies are all human, etc. III. This
reason is the same which the Papists use, etc. REPL. I. The Decrees of Synods
were not alleged to prove the lawfulnes of this government, but to show the
established exercise of it before the Author either knew the Classis or they
him, and that therefore he has not subjected the Church to this power. II.
Though Cou^cils may err, yet it does not therefore follow that they do always
err and that they may not make decrees for the deciding of controversies, as
Vedelius De Arcan. Armin. l. 2. c. 6. p. 183.184.
shows against the Arminians. III. Though the decrees of Synods have no
absolute authority, yet being framed according to the word of God, they do
specially bind the Churches that are in combination with them: as when a
Church-act or sentence is made so as Mr C. would have it, he will not deny but
that the Congregation is bound to observe it. The other exceptions here added
are already answered.

given to this pretense, which W.B. probably never dreamed of till it was
suggested by Mr C. is when he makes him say, The thing specially, which induced
me so to think was his own words, written to Mr Ainsworth; reporting how he
was first made our Minister: he says, Arrow ag. Separ. p. 116.
The Dutch Eldership in this City being desired, both for their counsel and
help in his ordination; deputed three of their brethren to assist us in this
business, etc. this they did not as assuming authority Note.
to themselves over us: but in our name, and by our request, etc. If the
Classis assumed not then any authority unto themselves over us, how comes it to
pass that they do it now? Or how will it hang together, that their power is
ancient; and yet 20 or 30 years past, they used it not. This to me seems
gross contradiction, etc. REPL. This his conceit of a gross contradiction,
which he is so taken with that he spends almost a whole page of his Rhetoric
upon it, is no better then a gross mistake of his own, which he has blindely
run into by not discerning betwixt things that differ. 1. He confounds these
two things as if they were one and the same, viz. the Dutch Eldership of that
city, and the Classis; which being two distinct assemblies, there can be no
contradiction in affirming that of the one which is denied of the other. The
Dutch Eldership is not the Classis, no more then the English Eldership of the
same city. They are both members of the Classis, together with other
Congregations of the neighbor towns and villages. Now the Elderships of
particular Churches are not subject one to another, neither does one exercise
authority over another, as has been showed Page 29, 30, and 159.
before. It is the Classis, or combination of more Churches or Elderships,
sending their Deputies thither, to whom is asscribed the power of determining
the matters of particular Congregations. And this is so evident that if Mr C.
had but consulted hereabout with W. B. in whose name he pleades on this manner,
he might have been sufficiently informed of this truth. Yea he might easily
have learnt it out of the Authors former book, where he says of the same
Dutch Consistory, Answ. to W. B. p. 70, 71.
Though they had no power to judge and determine the matter by their sentence,
yet they refused not to give their counsel etc. 11. Though it had been spoken
of the Classis, which was said of the Dutch Consistory, yet there had been no
contradiction in the Authors words, saying that they assumed no authority to
themselves over them in his Ordination, and yet avouching that the power which
they exercised of later times, is the same which they had and practiced long
before, for 1. The power which the Classis exercises, is not by them assumed,
but given unto them and acknowledged to be their due by the Congregations that
either at first or afterward enter into this confederacy for the submitting of
themselves unto such an assembly in all requisite cases. 2. The orders
according to which the Classes do here exercise their authority, Kercke^.
Orden. Not. Syn. Dordr. Art. 4.
do not in ordinary cases require the manifestation thereof in the Ordination
of Ministers; which being only Ames. Medul. l. 1. c. 39. th. 34.
the solemn introduction of the Minister already chosen into the free exercise
of his function, the Classis does leave it to the Congregation itself, after
they have consented to the choice of the Minister. 3. When a Congregation
destitute of fit men for the solemnising of an Ordination does seek unto a
neighbor Classis, Consistory, or Minister, for their counsel and help herein;
they that in such cases do yield unto their desire, do not exercise authority
over that Congregation where the Minister is ordained: seeing they perform
that work in the name and at the request of the said Congregation. Whatsoever
power and authority is therein exercised by a neighbor Minister, is not by
him assumed, but received from the desire of those that seek his help, for the
performance of this service unto them in a time of need, as the Author had
before explained himself in the Arrow ag. Separ. p. 111, 112.114.
same book. And therefore he has herein no way contradicted himself, neither
can this excuse W.B. from that which was objected unto him.

But by the conclusion of this plea it seems Mr C. did not so much intend
thereby the defense of his client, as the casting of some disgrace upon the
Authors book, called An Arrow against the Separation of the Brownists, which
he loves to have a fling at upon all occasions: but his beating of the air is
apparent to those that observe his blows, and mark where they light. From what
is now said it is manifest how vainly he has here applied against the said
book, what the Author had said touching Mr Robinsons Justification of
Separation, viz. that it was sick of King Iehorams incurable disease, etc.
which Mr C. himself has Stay against straying. p. 142.
elsewhere in his wonted language, acknowledged to be true. But to hasten to an
end, and to oppose somewhat unto this censorious and the forementioned
slanderous conclusion of Mr C. that the Reader may partly understand what
entertainment that Arrow against the Separation has had among the godly
learned, and what they have judged of the Authors pains therein; I have here
set down the testimony of that worthy servant of Christ, From Bunb. Iul. 8.
1619.
Mr Hy. as it was written by himself to the Author in these words. I thank
you for the Arrow of your own Quiver, which now of late I have received,
according to your letter. You have fashioned and feathered it so well, headed
and poynted it with such diligence and care, drawn it up to the head with such
strength, directed and discharged it with such and so sure aim and skill, that
it has pierced, not only the head, but the heart of the Brownists cause, and
Rabbines fancyes and forgeries; wherein I profess you have given me better
satisfaction both of your own sufficiency for polemicall employment in the
Lords service (whereof notwithstanding I ever held a very good opinion) and of
the weakness and vanity of all their forces and fortresses, raised and
advanced against either Gods Church, or Gods word, then hitherto I ever had, or
could ever by any thing that I have heard or seen, attain unto. Which if I
might not speak as truly, as freely; or did not think as unfainedly, as I
write it willingly, I should fear this might savor of some spice of flattery,
which I have, and (I know) you neither love, nor look for at my hand. The
substance of this his judicious and unpartiall approbation, has been confirmed
by sundry others, in like manner eminent for learning and piety, and shall
doubtless be further verifyed hereafter, according to His gracious disposing,
who has said, Prove. 10.7. Psalm. 112.6.
The memory of the just is blessed: and, The righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance.

The Contents of THE FIRST PART, Touching a Particular Eldership.
CHAP. I. The occasion of this writing, and the State of the Question. PAGE 1.
CHAP. II. Arguments to prove the power of the Eldership in judging, and ending
some cause without the knowledge of the Congregation. PAGE 2. CHAP. III. A
Refutation of sundry Errors, whereupon Mr Ainsworth grounds their Popular
Government. PAGE 7. CHAP. IV. Whether the people be bound to be present at the
proceedings against offenders. PAGE 19.
THE SECOND PART. Touching Classes and Synods.
CHAP. I. The State of the Question, and the importance thereof. PAGE 29. CHAP.
II. The first Argument, taken from the words of the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.8-12. PAGE
34. CHAP. III. The second Argument, taken from the words of Christ, Math.
18.15-20. PAGE 42. CHAP. IV. The third Argument, taken from the practice of the
primitive Churches, in the Apostles times. PAGE 61. Mr Dav. his Exceptions
touching Act. 15. answered. PAGE 66. Mr Cannes Exceptions touching Act. 15.
answered. PAGE 81.
CHAP. V. An Answer to the Allegations of Mr Davenport, touching the Authority
of Synods. SECT. I. His Allegation of Mr Cartwright answered. PAGE 81. SECT. II.
His Allegation of Mr Fenner examined. PAGE 84. SECT. III. His Allegation of Mr
Parker examined. PAGE 88. SECT. IV. His Allegation of Dr Ames examined. PAGE
106. SECT. V. His Allegation of Mr Baynes examined. PAGE 111. SECT. VI. His
Allegation of the Rep^^^ upon Dr Do^man examined. PAGE 116. SECT. VII. His
Allegation of Dr Voetius examined. PAGE 118. SECT. VIII. Touching the English
Church at Francford in Q. Mary's time. PAGE 121. SECT. IX. Mr Dav. his pretense
of agreement with Iunius examined. PAGE 125. SECT. X. His pretense of agreement
with Dr Whitaker examined. PAGE 133. SECT. XI. His Allegation of Chamierus
examined. PAGE 141.
CHAP. VI. An Answer to Mr Cannes Arguments. PAGE 145. CHAP. VII. The
Allegations of Mr Can examined. PAGE 16^. SECT. I. Touching the Testimonies
of Papists. PAGE 169. SECT. II. The Testimonies of Lutheranes. PAGE 173. SECT.
III. The Testimonies of Calvinists. PAGE 184. SECT. IV. The Testimonies of
English Conformists. PAGE 196. SECT V. The Testimonies of English
Non-Conformists. PAGE 200. SECT. VI. The Testimonies of ancient Fathers,
Councels, and Emperors. PAGE 213. SECT. VII. The Testimonies of Reformed
Churches. PAGE 227.
A Supplements, for answer unto that which follows in Mr Cannes book,
touching the evil consequents of Indepudency, the Antiquity of Classes and
Synods, etc. PAGE 240.
FINIS.

